

C. OF A.


way
fe
,0
BIN
-6acfe
/i
place binder on desk, pbih
BACK TOP COVER WITH LEFT
HAND AS SHOWN.
Ths material and workmanship
in this article ara of tha highest
quality and ara guaranteed by
the Manufacturer.
*
ALWATS USE FLY.SHEET
REMOVE OR INSERT
CORRCtFONOENCE
TO
MADE
IN AUSTRALIA
A
A


r JI Aj ,-JUjA. -~jl* {itMiid *4ifUs if '■ i/ H
AUSTRALIANS
SEIZE
GERMAN NEW GUINEA
NO OPPOSITION.
ADMIRAL’S MESSAGE.
T 1 , r . . - AIR r-HOl RNE, Friday,
iae Minister for Defence has re-
!-( ‘ n Cd . from V ice-Admiral Patey, the
to bowing wireless, via Thursday is-
land.— J
“froops under my command occupied
Raiser \\ dhelm’s Land on September
7•. opposition. The flag was
am? 11 Proclamation issued,
1.0 Principal officers were absent.
our offi, - ,,a1 « ;l »<i 13 other Gormans
surrendered. All subscribed to the
oi> Mi o 1 neutrality. The officials will
. temporarily engaged to assist in ad-
ministration. The others are planters,
missionaries, and business men.
lorty German fighting men left i
Friedrich Wilhelmshafen a fortnight
a s° to reinforce the German troops at
Xew Britain, but arrived after capitu-
lation. 1 hey are now prisoners at
Simpsonshafen.
Phe health of the troops; is excel- i
lent,”
j|
i
GERMAN OCCUPATION-
*oI lowing upon the announcement of the
taking of German New Britain, which wa*
accompanied by regrettable loss of life, a
fortnight ago, comes the news of the taking
of Friedrich Wilhelms Hafen, which ip to-
day reported to have surrendered without re-
sistance.
Friedrich Wilhelms Hafen is the onginak
capital of German occupation in the Pacific,
although the German flag was first hoisted
In 1884 at Finsch Hafen. It is an excellent
a; hour, and capable of accommodating a con-
siderable fleet, and of being heavily fortifier.
Nothing of this description, however, has beei
attempted, for the reason that the place, as
indeed is the case with nearly the whole of
| the coast ol German New Guinea, has a most
evil reputation with the white man—a verb-
able death-trap. “Black water fever’ is a
Peculiarly malignant type of malaria, which
was found to kill off a very largo percentage
of the white men who went there. In the
early days of the settlement it earned for
Itself the stigma of “the white man’s grave, ’*
and it used to be recognised by trade-3 and
others that every time a ship’s company
called, they were received by a new set of
I officials.
i After hoisting their fl a gat Finsch Hafen,
.the Germans established the scat of govern-
iment at Friedrich Wilhelms Hafen, bu; the
* apital was quickly shifted to Steph i isort.
This, however, wa3 found to he just as uu-
jhcadthy for white men as Finsch Haven had
(proved. No more attempts were made to
I establish a seat of government on the Aew
| Guinea mainland, and the officials removed to
I Herbertshohe, ni German New Britain tNeu
| Pommern), which remained the capital until 5
j y ear s ago, when the seat of government was
I transferred to the beautiful town of Rabat;-.
1 Kaiser Wilhelm’s Land, which is the official
j German name for German New Guinea,, ad-
j joins Papua. It has an area of 72,000 squaro
imiles, and a native Population of over a quar-
ter of a million. There are several good hat-
hours and some fine rivers, the chief of which
is known as the Kaiserin Augusta. Tula
river Is navigable for more than .800 miles.
New Gumea came into Germany’s hands in
11883.


■'yru-Cdi. CUdULM- *"
BACK FROM EGYPT.
A CHAT WITH SISTER A. C. JENKINSON.
By
i
On August 24 the Huroruta reached
Melbourne with the second contingent of [,
returned wounded soldiers. The charge u
nurse on Hie boat was Sister A. C. Jen-.j
kinson, who in December went from j
Adelaide to Egypt under engage- it,
ment to the Indian Government, a
bister Jenkinson was the sister in n
charge of E section of the surgical divi-
sion, No. 5 Indian General Hospital at St.
Stefano, Alexandria, and she has much to
i relate that mav be of interest to readers si
iof “The Mail.” ti
“Where was your hospital situated?” 1 j a
Disked. 11l
j “Right at the wharf at Alexandria, so tl
jas to bo on the spot when the wounded C
| wore landed. In our hospital we had 250
of the first men who returned from Galli- AA
poli. and of lOO were in my section.” tl
“Ift the organisation of the hospital all
that could be desired?” k
“ft is wonderfully organised, and it is k
an interesting fact that at 24 hours’ notice 0
it ivas converted from an Oriental into p I AA
European hospital. This meant, of j n
course, that everything had to be altered ■ 0
—food supply and utensils, bedding, and j a
the like. The Indians, who were for the s T 1
most nart convalescent, were removed I><
tents.” ‘ ! H
“What was your general impression as j 1
to the wPunded soldiers?” 1 ,
“They showed marvellous fortitude al
1 all times, and what struck me most was c
the spirit of self-sacrifice. If one man
: saw that his neighbour was suffering
more than he, he begged the nurse® to
attend to him first. This leads me to
think that whilst, when fighting the
enemy, all that is worst in a man is
roused, when he is wounded and m Hos-
pital the best and temlerest feelings come
to the surface. Major McCarrison, in u
letter to mo, said, 1 shall always con-
sider it a higei privilege to have had the
opportunity to minister to these men from
Australia, who "ere wounded in the Dai-
danellee.' ” .
“Was there much Red t rose work done
by the women of Alexandria.'
“Yes. indeed, they were splendid, and
one only had to make a suggestion for it
to be carried put—ft seemed as though
they cduld not do too much."
“What about letters from home. Arc
the arrangements for their delivery
good?” . , . .
“Well,” said Sister .Temdnson, this m
a matter which calls for comment. For
some reason unknown, the mails are Kept ■
back at ‘headquarters, and some of the
poor chaps become desperate. One man 1
had not had a letter from home since
February 4, although he "'as positive lus
people had written to him every week.
To try in some small way to cheer the dis-
appointed ones, the more fortunate soldiers
share their home letters with them.
Queensland and New Zealand are sending
a virian "’ith postal experience to take)
charge of the mails at headquarters, and]
it would be «i good thing if South Austra-
lia would do the same. It is quite pa-
thetic to see the disappointment of the
; convalescent soldiers, when they go down
■ to the wharf to meet the pinnaces coming
I from Lemnos. From a distance the
bundles in the boats look like mailbags,
bnHavhcn, as they draw nearer, it Is seen
that Thread is the only freight, the men
are most despondent.” ~
“Did you see anything of the Gurkhas.
“Oh yes; they are fine fellows, and they
have a great respect for the Australian.
They think his word is law. and, as a
high compliment, 'all our own 1 orrunies
j ‘the white Ghurkas.’ The hast of feeling
prevails aniongst them, and you "’ill sec a
Gurkha handing an Australian a
betel nut in exchange for cigarettes.
“Do they speak English at all.'
“Very little, ami wc had to learn Hin-
dustani in order that we might under-
stand them more thoroughly. At first' the
hospital orderlies ivcro all Indians, but
when we called for volunteers for this
work several men from the (fight Horse
Regiments offered their services. and
they were as gentle and tender as
women.” ,
“I must speak of the wonderful work
done by the stretcher bearers#” wont on
Sister. “They displayed the greatest gal-
lantry, and saved hundreds of lives at
: the risk of their own. One officer told
me that every one of them deserved the
“Cousin Kate.”
, \ ictona l ro?s. As a rule tux men are
■ attached to each stretcher, but often and
often, when they were diet down, three
brave follows would go on with the work
unflinchingly ”
•‘Did you go out of Alexandria at all.
“Vi's. I was* one of those who volun-
teered to take the wounded by train from
A lexandria to Cairo, and we spent two
nights travelling thus.”
“Your husband Cjd. C. P. Jcnkinson,
is on active service, is Id not?”
‘‘Vos; he is in "haT-go of the water
supply from Alexandria. He to the
testing and distribution of it. and he is
j also studying ways and means of combat-
; ing the fly nuisance. He is attached to
the 4ih Held Ambulance, Array Medical
Corps.”
“Have you any suggestions to make
with regard to the garments sent out by
the Red Cross workers’?”
“Yes, I should like to say that it would
be a boon if all socks could be made
bigger in the leg. and also if tapes instead
of buttons could he sewn on pyjamas it
would be a good thing. Sometimes a
man has to have his pyjama coat put
on back to front, and he suffers torture if
a button prods him in’ the back. Air
cushions, hot water bags, and other rub-
ber goods are greatly needed, also mos-
quito nets —which should not be white,
but green or khaki —and stationery.”
Sister Jenkinson has brought back with
her some empty shrapnel cases, both of
the percussion and time variety, and'
these will shortly be exhibited in the
city.


SISTER A. C. JENKJN6ON AND HER HUSBAND CTE. C. F. JEN K INS 0N. .1


JAsl O d/9 /<r-
News from Our Chaplains.
Anzac, Gallipoli, Turkey,
17th July, .1915.
Dear Dr. Rentoul,—lt would have been a
pleasure to give the Presbyterian public oi (>i
Australia more information and more new's of )r
the chaplaincy work abroad, but for the pro-
hibition of communications from the front to
the Press. 1 hope that our people understand
this, and we must leave to our correspondents
the propriety of giving our letters a wider cur-
rency. My last to Vou was'Written from the
front, as this also is. lam thankful to say
that all our Presbyterian chaplains here pro
well, although so many of the officers (and
chaplains) have been affected by ill-health and
wounds. It speaks well for oui stamina so
far; but we must beware of boasting, for none
of us knows what a day may bring forth. 1
have been recognised as senior chaplain to the
Division to which the Australian Light Horse
belongs—viz., the New' Zealand and Australian
Division (under General Godley). Mr. McPhee
is acting senior chaplain to the Australian Divi-
sion, now under General Legge (in succession
to the late General Bridges). So at present
both senior chaplains on the field are Presby-
terians. Mr. Gillison is still with the 14th Bat-
talion, and is well. He has been on duty at
Lemnos among the sick and wounded soldiers
there for a week, but is expected back to-day.
Mr. Miller is with the 2nd L.H. Brigade. 1
retain my attachment to the Ist L.H. Brigade,
in addition to my duties as senior chaplain. VV>
have two Presbyterian N.Z. chaplains here—
Mr. Grant and Mr, King—so our Church is
well represented at the front. The work goes
on favourably under conditions that are often
sad and trying, although radiant with the
splendid heroism of our men. The chaplains
>hare the hardships of the campaign, as well
as many of the perils from shell and bullet.
The services are well attended, so far as work
in the trenches and “on fatigue” will permit ; <
And those who have been here longest arc most
alive to the importance of spiritual things. It
is a moving sight to see our informal services
near the trenches and in valleys which, 1- may
say, are not shell-proof. For the Communion
the men kneel round the Red Cross pannfer
that serves for a Communion table, and the
chaplain moves among the kneeling forms and
offers the bread and wine to the soldiers, who
accept it with a deep reverence and thankful-
ness. In the twilight the men gather in still
larger numbers for the evening service, and
lift their hearts and voices ifi the grand old
psalms and hymns of the Church, above the
screech and “burst” of shrapnel and the crack-
ing of the bullets. The their trenches
must catch the sound sometimes in the inter-
vals of firing. How appropriate these hymns
are under such circumstances, only those on
the field can fully know. “The Old Hundredth,’’
“Our God, our Help,” “Stand up for Jesus,’'
“Lead Kindly ' Light” (always sung tenderly
by the men), “Nearer, my God, to Thee,”
“Abide with me,” and others have a meaning
here which many of us will never forget in days
to come. A few men gather round the chap-
lains’ dug-out each night for Scripture and
prayer, and some of these have now reached
the perfect state whereof w'e read, prav, and
sing. The burials form an important part of
the chaplain’s sphere, and how deeply do they
write their meaning on his heart and soul.
These noble wounded heads, these cruelly shat-
tered bodies, I cannot write of them ; but, al-
though there is much that is sad and gruesome
in the burials at dead of night, these prone
bodies are full of an indescribable nobility.
Their faces bespeak the contentment of the
supreme sacrifice made for God and our coun-
try’s right. Then there are the wounded soon
borne from the shore to the hospital ship; and
how nobly are the sufferings endured! How
cheerfully are wounds borne! You in Austra-
lia now know something of the extent of our
hisses in this glorious and heroic field, and we
would have you know' that the same valour and
heroism and glory are refl 'cted from the
of those’who suffer'and die, 'as well as
who live and work and fight. “This is the
victory . . . even our Faith.” —Yours faith-
fully, ‘
ERNEST N. HERRINGTON,
Senior Chaplain N.Z. and A. Division.
P.S. Sunday, 18/7/15 —Mr. Gillison and 1 -
have just conducted, service with the 4th In-
fantry Brigade, in the presence of G.M. Godley
and staff. I am delighted to learn that Mr.
Gillison has been mentioned in the first
despatches that have just come out. He re-
turned from Lemnos this morning. Mr. Miller
is there now.
21st Halt., (ith lnt- Brigade, A l t'.,
Egypt, 10/o/10.
\K dear Dr k’cnto'ai, Our Brigade has ht-cn
over two months in Egypt under strenuous
training, and I think you will be glad to heat
something of how things are going. 1 tic
voyage over was full of interest. We had twe
battalions on the “ and, with 2,300
men on board, there was always enough to do,
and something .was constantly happening to
give a chaplain his opportunities. For the first
three days most of our fellows were wholly
occupied in trying to put themselves into,satis-
factory relations with Father Neptune, but by
the fourth day the ship’s life became normal,
and from the weather point of view we had
a fine and very delightful voyage. Along with
my ordinary duties, I had, with some assist-
ance, to do the work of censor; it was rather
exacting, especially in tropical latitudes, but it
put me at once into a jrosition that made it easy
to get into close and kindly relations with both
officer., and men. Ihe kindness and
of all the officers towards myself was unfailing.
There were two church parades every
Sunday morning one for each Batta-
lion. Conditions of space on shipboard made
this arrangement necessary, but, on other
grounds, it was entirely the best. One had little
difficulty in making oneself heard when speak-
ing to a compact mass of about 1,000 men in
the w-ell of the ship. Most of us look back
upon these ship-board church parades as'
among our most impressive memories. The
men were touchable, partly, because they were
sailing every moment farther away from home
and out into an enterprise of uncertain issues,
partly because w'e were having sharp sickness
and quiet death among our experiences. By
the time we got to tropical latitudes, the hospri
tals, holding about 50, were full. Our first
death occurred while we lay anchored off ——,
and for a week or more there was one, at least,
added to the roll every day. One day I had
three burials. Our men were beginning to be
visibly touched, and to waken to the fact that
hey had come out on serious business. Few
things can be more impressive than a military
funeral at Sea; the sounding of the Fast Post
would thrill the hardest heart. On shipboard
men sought me out for quiet talks about things
deep and intimate in a way that I had never
before experienced. Men get to be frank ,and
natural when they are on active service; they
don’t deal in evasions, and, if they are taken in
the same spirit, will tell you everything about
themselves. Every Sunday morning, at 6.30, I
had communion in the library. Men of all
Churches.-joined in i r r,ly Comnjnuicn, and
that made the little services peculiarly touching
and impressive. It was necessary to alter some-
what the form so dearly familiar to Presbyte-
rian worshippers. That for two reasons.: First,,
because the communicants were drawn from
different Churches, and, second, because the
small vessels in use made it essential that each „
communicant should come up separately to the
table and receive the sacred - elements directly
from the chaplain’s hands. We used to have
from 30 to 40 every Sunday morning at Holv
Communion. Since coming into camp th ■
same practice has been followed. 1 have had
a communion service every Sunday mornin ,
without exception since we left home.
Our brigades camped near Heliopolis at the
edge of the desert. For over two months the
officers and men have been under training, and
therp are indications that we shall very soon
be counted ready for the front. Before this
reaches you 1 'expect we shall be in the tren-
ches. There are four chaplains—one to each
battalion; the chaplain of the 24th, although
attached to a battalion, is doing duty for the
Roman Catholics of the whole Brigade. The
rest of us are rigorously keeping to
our compact to act throughout not as
sectarians but as Protestant chaplains for
our own Battalions. We all use the approved
“Order of service,’’ have chuf-ch parade for
each of our battalions separately at the same
hour. 7 a.m., and hold a celebration of Holy
Communion each at 7.45. The commuijioiuser-
vices are all intimated at each church parade,
but, as a matter of fact, there is no discrimina-
tion. Men of all churches in the 21st come to
communion with me; in the 22nd, with Chap-
lain-Captain Bennett (Anglican) ; in the 23rd
* with Chaplain-Captain Bladen (Meth.). The
24th men, who have no chaplain of their own,
generallv come to me because they know me
best, as I travelled with them on the “ .”


S rt^hapWn
mand? I interviewed Chaplain-Colonel - ■
who is in charge ol all ch: J l)l;linr> J
Kgvpt Col. Little congratulated us warmly on
been able to carry out so effectively thi
1,., -iilded “at a time like this. to), intix is.
Iff course, an Imperial Officer and an AngUcam
He is going to get together all the ns
in and about Cairo next week, and, 1 dare say,
we may get a chance to put forth our views in
favour of the catholicity of the 6th Infantry-
Brigade'.
Every afternoon I go in, with my colleagues,
to the hospitals in Heliopolis or Cairo. Primarily
we look for the men who have been sent in
through sickness from our own battalions, but
a great part of our time is given to the sick
and wounded who have come back from the
Dardanelles. In the last few days hospital
trains have been arriving every few hours, and
tnat makes us sure that an advance is in pro-
gress. Some day 1 hope, if- I am among the
returned, to tell some hospital stories grave and
gay, but 1. don’t think it would be wise to lay
too much stress on the hospital facts just at
present; they could easily lead to heart-break.
One, of course, gets a little accustomed to the
scenes, but it is terrible to see bovs in scores
and even hundreds, maimed, disfigured, and
>iir,dea. \\ iicn Picsby icfian iaus die in the
hospitals, they send for Major Smith-Macßain,
Captain Stevens, or myself, to conduct the
burial services. I take about two each week.
In addition to our own work on Sundays, the
battalion chaplains take afternoon services in
the hospitals whenever they are asked to do
so. I could say much about the hospitals and
the work they are doing, hut shall have to wait
for other opportunities. This, at least, let me
say : \\ hen the final honour rolls are made out
the names of the nursing sisters should appear
at the top engraved in letters of gold.
W ith kindest regards to you and yours.
Yours ever.
i V»U4 J V, V 1 j
13. MACRAE STEWART.
Some day you might let me have a line or
two. Letters here are as the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land.—l). M. S.


JLAx 19 f 6
LIFE ON A TRANSPORT
SOLDIERS’ JOYS AND SORROWS
TYPES OF MANHOOD
An officer on his way to the war zone send?
the Sun a few interesting particulars of th(
dally routine on board a transport. He
writes:—
The Australian as'w’e know him on boarc:
this ship s a strange being. With most of our
men nothing seems to, matter. Last nighl
it lained hard, and the ship's officers or
watch were wearing their oilskins. While on
his rounds in the small hours of the morning
one ol them found on the poop deck 60
soldiers fast asleep, absolutely soaked with
the ram, but quite oblivious that they w r ere
wet. As rain had been expected, orders were
issued that no men would be allowed to sleep
on deck. Accordingly these men will be up be-
fore the O.C. troops this morning. That is
to Say, all men who have wet blankets will
be crimed.”'
This case of indifference to personal com-
fort is not by any means isolated. I was
awakened one night by an unusually heavy
woosh of a wave, and knowing men were
sleeping on deck I went out to see whether
the waves were washing over the deck. They
were, and had been for some time. About a
dozen men had been sprayed by wave after
wave as the boat rolled; but they still slept
on. A\ hen awakened and ordered to go be-
low they were quite indignant, and, wet
though they were, they would have preferred
to stay on deck and submit to the spray.
Some of them got influenza and pneumonia,
but nothing really serious, for the pneumonia
was only slight.
INDIFFERENCE TO PAIN
Another instance of this indifference oc-
curred at our sports. A tug-of-war had been
arranged, but the difficulty was to find room
for the teams to pull. Eventually it was de-
cided that by passing the rope through pul-
leys round the deck forward of the
saloon, one team could pull from
the port side and the other from the
starboard side, each team pulling against an
unseen opponent. During the second pull
the rope holding one of the b.ig iron puKeys
broke and the pulley came away and hit a
soldier (about 20 years old) on the ahkle. He
fell down without an oath or a word of any
kind. Presently, someone noticed he could
not get up, and that he could not move his
foot, and it appeared that the leg was bro- j
ken. The doctor came along, and after ex-
amining it said that it was fractured Just
above the ankle. A stretcher was brought
and the lad was taken to the hospital. But
all the time he said nothing except to an-
swer yes or no to the doctor’s questions, and
kept on chewing something in his mouth. He
refused chloroform and his leg was set with-
out it. Luckily it was a simple fracture,
and be will soon be about again.
In the afternoon we had a splendid ob-
stacle race, but it was spoilt by what might
have been a nasty accident. One obstacle
was the passing through of lifebuoys hung
over a sail bath. One runner, leading easily,
slipped just as he got to the obstacle and
fell heavily on the back of his head. He
seemed a little stunned, but with an effort
got up and through the buoy. His head was
badly cut and he bled freely. Still he came
up the stairs and went under the last ob-
stacle, a and won his heat, collapsing
immediately afterwards. He told me after-
wards he remembered nothing after he fell
until he came to, after the finish. These
little incidents are, of course, nothing com-
parer! with the incidents likely to occur on I
service; still ,they indicate that our men are
probably little if anything behind the first
division in their powers of endurance.
ONE-LUNGED MALINGERER
One of the special joys (?) of the soldier’s
life on board ship is guard duty. Most
men hate it exceedingly, and every dodge
possible is used by some men to get marked
sick” to avoid being .told off for guard The
doctors, however, are well up to their work
and few and clever are the men who beat
them. One man early in the voyage re-
pented his enlistment and tried
very hard to get discharged as
medically unfit. His story was
that he had only one lung, and was far too
delicate to stand active service. Consump-
tion, too, was in his family. From his point
or view his case seemed an excellent one.
But unfortunately his appearance was
against him. About sft. 10in., and weighing-
something over 13st., he did not look a cim
sumptive subject.
His story did not go down with the medical
officer, who thumped his chest and sounded
him, and sent him back to duty. He persist-
ed in attending every sick parade, but with-
out success. One day he had an inspiration,
and told the R.M.O. he had been spitting
blood. “Very well,” said the doctor. ‘‘Bring
along a specimen the next time it happens.”
And so he did. This appeared to clinch mat-
ters, and the poor consumptive one-lunger
was taken into the hospital and put to bed.
His case was treated quite seriously, and he
was subjected to treatment so severe and
strict that he began to feel sorry for himself.
His diet* was kept low, but to his great an-
noyance no chicken or other little delicacies
came his way. He protested, but it was no
use—R.M.O.’s orders. The blood-spitting
continued, much to the surprise of the doc-
tors, for the man had no other symptoms.
Meanwhile the poor sick man was being
watched very carefully, and one morning the
orderly noticed him with a pin pricking his
gums to make them bleed. His discharge
soon followed, and though he was not pun-
ished by his C. 0., his pals in his
eection made his life very miserable
for some time after. He became
a marked man, and his half lung became a
proverb. It did not, however, prevent his
friends giving him a few baths, because he
did not take his shower regularly. However,
he is now a reformed man, and sings in the
padre’s choir.
DRESSING FOR GUARD DUTY
Malingerers, however, are few, and most !
men wishing fo get free from guard use the j
legitimate means of trying to “get the stick.”
“The stick” is given to the best-turned-out |
man on guard mounting parade. He is not ,
actually given any stick, nor does he receive
a beating. But he is made the Command- .
ing Officer’s orderly for the 24 hours, and as 1
such has a comparatively easy time. Only
30 men are needed for guard duties, but 31
are paraded for the best-dressed man getting ,
the stick. The competition is becoming
very keen indeed.
It is quite a common sight to see half a
dozen soldiers dressing their man up for
guard, and reminds one of nothing so much
as the preparation of a debutante for her
first dance. This interest is not all disin-
terested. Many of the men back their fancy,
and odds as high as 30 to 1 have been of-
fered and taken about a man. Last night at 1
guard-mounting the adjutant brought down I
his selection to six men, and one of these was
passed out because he had sewn the edges of
his overcoat together after he had rolled it.
Before he could make his final selection the
adjutant had to examine every detail of each
man’s dress most minutely. The existence of
this keenness is a splendid thing, and every-
thing possible is being done to encourage it
and increase it.
We put in at Durban. While the boat was
getting close to the wharf the men thronged
the side of the ship and hailed the niggers
on the wharf with cries of delight. They
excelled themselves when the rope was
thrown ashore and being hauled along the
wharf to the post to make fast. The wharf-
laborers dragging the rope drove the niggers
before them, and some of our men at once
shouted. “Gee up, Darkey,” “Come back,
Curly,” “Whoa, there. Ginger.” As almost
all of our men are New England farmers and
graziers and timber-getters, it was not long
before the whole of the #hip took up the
chorus, with many bullock-driving phrases
w hich have slipped my memory.
In tln> afternoon the men went for a route
march. litre, again, the sight of the Zulu
rickshaw men was too much* for them. As
they passed the rickshaw ranks our
men tossed the niggers pennies
Just for the joy of seeing the scramble. That
joy increased when the native police got to
the rickshaw men with their batons and
drove them off. Not because of law and
order, but that they themselves might col-
lect the pennies.
Next day the men had leave for the morn-
ing, and they enjoyed themselves immensly.
After leave was up a few of the men broke
leave by getting on the top boat deck near
the coal shoots and getting into the empty
bucket and being hauled up by the crane
on to the wharf, where they landed on the
other side of the coal trucks and got away
unseen. They are indeed full of all sorts and
conditions of tricks.


Mi 9 -lift
TRUE TO TYPE
How Cpl. Tallon Lost His Hand
AND GAINED THE D.C.M.
t AWARDED DISTINGUISHED j
{ CONDUCT MEDAL {
i No. 316—LCE.-CPL. J. TALLON, ?
I Ist Battalion. ?
For conspicuous bravery on August •
f 7, 1915, -at Lone Pine (Dardanelles). ?
| Throughout several determined at- I
? lacks by the enemy, Lance-Corporal ?
t Tallon threw bombs with great effect, •
• •
f exposing himself freely when neces- •
I sary regardless of all personal danger. ?
? Finally his ami was blown off and he t
* •
f was compelled to retire. His courage •
I and devotion to duty gave a line ex- I
I ample to all ranks with him. I
:
I The above was the official promul- ?
? gation in Australian Military Order ?
i No. 99 of 1916 of the reward accorded i
I one of the finest among the many fine I
T feats on Gallipoli. ?
c x »
Among the New South Wales contingent of
wounded men lately returned to Australia was
Corporal Tallon. Like all who have done
things, this Australian soldier is eloquent about
his mates’ actions and reticent about his own.
When he cares to speak out, this is, briefly,
the story he will tell.
“Crowded boats dashing, and the flash of
shells; tearing shrapnel and water splashing:
a rush through the shallows, and then the shore
—Gallipoli !
We lined up under fire, and, taking off our
packs, carried the boxes of extra ammunition
through shrapnel and machine-gun fire to the
dug-out that the Australian Engineers had
already prepared—3oo yards away. Back and
on with our packs again. There were none to
pick up some of them. We waited one thing
only—just to get quits—and later on we did.
“Still under fire, Colonel Dobbin led us into
Shrapnel Gully. Half our battalion went
straight on towards the enemy; the rest of us
crossed the next ridge to reinforce the sth
Battalion occupying the ground, now, but not
then, known as Lone Pine. They were en-
gaging the Turks, and we soon joined in the
game.
"The enemy gave us a warm welcome from
the ridge in front. We had only rifles and
machine grins, for 1000 yards back—half-way
from the beach—our mounted Indian battery
had been wiped out. Then we made trenches
—some of the first dug by Australians on the
Peninsular—and we held them until the evacua-
tion was ordered.
CAPTURING A SPY.
“It was here I captured my spy. He wa*
right in our lines, in private clothes. I had
gone behind the trench to clean my rifle. The
breech-block was out, and the pull through
half-way down the barrel, when a pair of black
boots, shabby and unlaced, protruded from
some bushes higher up the bank. I knew a
stranger was there, for we all wore .tan boots.
I levelled the empty, half-cleaned rifle at him
and shouted, ‘Hands up !’ Up they went, with
a sheet of notes clutched in one hand. My cry
of ‘Sniper !’ brought a couple of our fellows
with fixed bayonets, and we had him. He was
quite terrified, and evidently thought death was
close at hand. It was, too. However, we
took him prisoner, and later on handed him
over to Headquarters, where some valuable in-
formation was obtained from him or his notes.
THE PREMATURE BOMB.
“Soon after this came the Lone Pine attack.
What a time we had ! I threw bombs from
August 6 to the 9th. Then one of our own
bombs went off too soon, and took some of us
with it. It was as simple as it was sudden.
At first we used to light the bomb fuses and
hold them .until they burnt down close to the
explosive. This was guesswork and slow. We
improved on it by cutting notches at intervals
through the fuse to the powder. As the fire
leached these notches, the spurt of smoke and
sparks told us what we wanted to know. We
could then estimate the bursting time of a
bomb to a nicety. This enabled us to throw
five bombs where previously we threw two.
The last one beat us. I was holding the torch
fuse at which we lit the bomb fuses. Private
McShane was throwing the bombs, when a
break or gap in the powder core allowed the
fire to reach the explosive prematurely. The
fuse, which should have lasted 20 or 30 seconds
longer, did not last two. The explosion killed
Private McShane and shattered Bob Grant's
right thigh. Fragments buried themselves in
my leg, and one pierced the muscle of my arm,
and my left hand was gone clean. I stopped
the bleeding by crushing the artery with my
right hand and I made for the Turks’ old trench
whence we had driven them a few days before.
First aid was given there, and I walked down
to the beach—about a mile and three-quarters.
Without much delay an operation under chloro-
form fixed up my arm. Six hours later I woke
up aboard the lighter alongside the hospital
ship, and was greeted by my mate, Bob Grant.
His thigh was badly shattered. I never saw
him again until I met him in Sydney, in the
Convalescent Home—with one leg only.
“Through the Red Cross Association both of
us are getting artificial limbs at the same time,
and, strange to say, from the same maker. We
are very thankful to the people of Australia
who have so generously supplied the funds that
make it possible for the Red Cross to help us.”


oZA. ' 7 / 6
STORIES OF GALLIPOLI
SERGT. MURPHY’S EXPERIENCES
LUCKY IDENTIFICATION DISC
Sergeant T. Murphy, recently returned
from England, where his eye, put out ol
action by shrapnel splinters, was being
treated at the military hospitals, has many
a tale to tell of Gallipoli, and of that first
awful day of the first landing, when many
a brave soul made the linal great sacrifice
for Empire and freedom, and of the stirring
events and harrowing days that followed.
Ho has seen many a Jack Johnson shell find
its billet, and has often heard the melan-
choly whistle of the Weary Willie shells as
they flew over the dugouts where the cheer-
ful Australians In their hours of relaxation
wore playing cards and not paying the
slightest attention to anything which at any
instant might bring death, swift and hor-
rible. Certainly, playing and conversation
would cease when the Queen Lizzy sent her
19501 b. shells screaming through the air, till
one of the boys would say, “Never mind,
our side’s batting.’’
Sergeant Murphy, who in civil life was con-
nected with the musical trade, is a methodi-
cal soldier and a humorist of the first water.
He has a diary of everything that happened
anywhere, in peace or in battle, from the day
he enlisted in Sydney, till his return here,
and it has been his delight to collect me-
mentos of every city he visited, from Gaba
flepe to Dublin —where his people originally
came from—and of every people with whom
he came Into contact during his campaign-
ing days. Crests, badges, and buttons of the
Imperial regiments and also of the Allied
soldiers he has gathered in abundance, and
i*.s for the mementos of our enemies collected
on the field of battle, he has everything ex-
cept the fingers and toes of the Turks, for,
though the sergeant has seen horrible sights
cut of number, and has done his full share
of killing, he is still a humane man with a
natural repugnance against the horrible. A
keen observer and a naturally light-hearted
man, he has, like Mark Tapley, been most
cheerful when fate was as a sea without a
shore.
GOING TO MASS
“Yes,” said Sergeant Murphy, “funny
things used to happen even when shot and
shell came fast and death and destruction
were in the very air we breathed. One day
J went to early Mass at the Gallipoli Cathed-
ral-made of biscuit boxes—whdn a shell
came plump into our trench, too near for
comfort. Father M'Auliffe, who was vest-
ing, turned round and said, ‘Strange, such a
thing never happened here before,’ at the
same time fixing me with his eye as much
as to say, ‘You’re probably the cause.’ An-
other day Father M'Aullffe got parted from
•his box in whiuh were kept the vestments
and utensils used in the service, so he sent a
big Queenslander along to Father Fay to ask
for the loan of his box. Father Fay handed
the Queenslander the box and also a glass of
altar wine, which the soldier at once raised
to his lips. ‘What on earth are you doing?’
said Father Fay. ‘Why, Father,’ replied the
Queenslander, T thought you were giving me
a wet!’ However the box and the wine were
brought to Father M'Auliffe, but they were
useless, as the key of the box had been left I
behind.
THE LANDING
A star shell from the Turks bursting
over the beach discovered the landing of the
Third Brigade. The First Division was
supposed to land near Gaba Tepe fort, but
through a, fortunate mistake on the part of
the middies and others in charge of the cut-
ters the actual landing was further north j
Afterwards we discovered that there was
barbed wire under the water, and had the
landing been made there one of the bri-
gades would have been wiped out, as the
fort had the beach enfiladed. Shells fell
fast among the boats as they were being
pulled to the shore, and many were killed
some falling overboard and being drowned
because of the weight of their kits, each
man carrying 601 H., including 250 rounds or
ammunition. The hills and gullies were
rushed, and here and there could be seen
the bodies of the bluejackets and the Aus-
tralians lying side by side. I made the
landing with Captain (then Lieutenant)
Shout, who gained the M.C. two days after
landing, and the V.C. at the battle of Lone]
Pine in August. We were conveyed in a
destroyer to the boats, some men of the
party beirtg killed before we stopped. How-
ever we got into the boats, and when near i
enough, jumped waist deep into the water;
and waded to the shore, wasting no time,
and not sparing language. Reported imme-
diately to Captain Christian, who was killed
along side me on the following Sunday, at
his depot on tho beach near the wireless
station, run up by the bluejackets.
...
VALLEY OF DEATH
“The men whose water bottles were shot I
away fared badly, because there was no j
other- water available, the orders being that
the water bottle should be made to last out
with the three days’ rations supplied to the
men. Soon men were dropping on all sides,
and the narrow Shrapnel Gully, afterwards
called the Valley of Death, was packed with
dead Australians and Turks. This track
was later made Into a road by the Engineers.
Captain Christian ordered his party, which
also included Corpora! Nicholls, who is now j
a lieutenant and holds the D.C.M., to ad- I
vance up the gully with ammunition for
the men who were holding the ridges. All
night the fighting was very severe, but the
men hung on to the positions they had
gained. The Fourth Brigade landed in the
early hours of Monday morning and rein-
forced the line.
LIZZY’S SHELLS
“At daylight the Triumph stood off and
irtflicted great damage on the enemy’s de-
fences. I saw her torpedoed on May 25 j
as I was having a swim. On the second i
day the Queen Elizabeth stood at 10 miles
off the coast and brought her 15in. guns into
action. These guns are supposed to blow
up an acre of ground with each shell. I could
see the shells travelling at a terrific pace i
overhead, and with a peculiar sound some-
thing like a succession of moans and sobs. ,
The noise of their explosion was something j
Indescribable. I saw one explode among 1
a large number of Turkish reinforcements.
I don’t suppose that there was anything left
of the Turks afterwards except small pieces.
Water was landed on Tuesday and rushed
up to the men on the ridges. Tobacco, I
cigarettes, and a few hams were sent as a
present to the men by the boys of the navy, i
We took them up as well as we were able,
but getting the ammunition through was
the main thing.
TENDING THE WOUNDED
“Before leaving the transport I heard Major
Swannell. the well-known Sydney footballer, j
say to Lieutenant Shout, ‘Alf, I shall be a;
dead man in a few hours!’ ‘Don’t look at it
in that way, Major; cheer up,’ replied Shout.
Major Swannell was shot about two hours
afterwards. On Tuesday morning we were
busy giving bovril and oxo from kerosene
tins to the wounded as they we're being car-
ried down the gullies. Finer men than the
stretcher-bearers did not land on Gallipoli. I
saw Private Simpson one day carry down as
many as 30 men. Simpson had a pet donkey
(goodness knows where he got him from), a
very small animal, which was christened
Murphy, and which was very useful in carry-
ing some of the wounded from the ridges to
the beach, two at a time being placed on
his back One of the saddest experiences I
had was at the roll-call after the first fort-
night, when many a good man never answered
his name. One day I saw a sergeant talking
to his mates in the trenches. A bomb came
over, and somebody shouted ‘Look out!’*The
sergeant dived into his dug-out, but it seem-
ed as if that bomb was meant for him, as
,it got him square in the back.
Very often the beach was more dangerous
than the trenches. On the second week after
'landing I saw 72 mules killed by the shells.
The Indians who had charge of the mules
were very much put out. Another day when
I was on the beach I saw a doctor walking
along, when a piece of shell smashed his arm.
He walked coolly to the dressing sta-
tion, where he fainted frpm loss of blood.
Again, I saw six stretcher-bearers and the
wounded which they were carrying in three
stretchers killed outright by a shell. I saw
General Bridges shot as I was walking down
the gully. Dr. Thompson, of the Ist Bat-
talion, rushed out of the dressing station and
picked him up, and several stretcher-bearers
*ilso rushed to his assistance, He actually


wanted to walk to the beach, but, of
Dr. Thompson would not allow him. \
BURYING THE DEAD
“On May 18 there was a Turkish night at-
tack,” continued Sergeant Murphy. “About 3
o’clock in the morning the order was made
to stand to, and about 3.15 the Turks arrived,
the fight continuing till 9. When at last the
Turks retired they left about 3000 dead on
the held. An armistice was granted the
Turks on May 24. so that they could bury
their dead. Eight hours were allowed, and
our burial party went out to assist them.
| While the armistice was on I saw a
Turk crawl from his lines and drop into one
of our trenches. He would not go back, as
lie was full up of the hardships endured by
the soldiers of his side. A water barge ar-
rived at the beach one day—a very welcome
event—but three Turkish shells got her, and
S she went to the bottom. Another day I saw
a German officer brought in as a prisoner.
Our officers had to protect him
from the fury of our fellows, who,
because of the news of certain atrocities com-
mitted by the Germans in Belgium and else-
where, wanted to deal out some of his own
Sergeant Murphy.
medicine. The Turks played the game all
the time, respecting the Red Cross just as we
respected the Red Crescent. At another time j
a high-explosive shell came over in Lone >
Pine, demolishing the cookhouse, scattering |
the food, but sparing the cook. Cook swore I
a good deal at having his food spoiled. In
Gallipoli every man had a duty to perform, |
and no man's life was safe for a single mo-
ment. One of our officers used to say: ‘A
man who can't work 24 hours out of the 24
hours does not desrve to go to heaven,’ Still
j our men kept up their peckers wonderfully, j
1 singing and swimming when they were not
fighting.
“I was constantly going between the beach!
and the ridges with my ammunition party,
and though men were dropping all round me
I never got a scratch. My identification disc
once stopped a bullet. No consideration !
could part me from that identification disc !
now. However, on August 7, second day of I
the battle of Lone Pine, when the Ist Bri-
gade led the charge, I was hit in the eye by ,
! a piece of shrapnel shell. I did not report |
j at once, as 1 thought the wound was not '
j serious. Nine days afterwards 1 left the pen-
| insula, and my eye has never given me a
; moment s rest sinco ”


“THE SUN”
WEDNESDAY, JULY 26, 1916
POZIERES AND BROKEN HILL
Midnight came at Pozieres aft or the guns of the British forces had ended their
furious bombaniment o f the German linos; and “almost immediately,” writes Captain
Bean, in his splendid story of the assault, “the Australians went over the parapet.’*
Captain Bean saw it; we in Australia, who have seen nothing of the lurid magnificence
of war in France, can only guess at it. Our men moved rapidly, and went straight
through the storm from shrapnel and machine-gun “as thougli the pellets were rain-
drops”; and so they tool: the first German trench. The fire of all the guns revealed
the landscape under “a single band of quivering light.” Death spurted from machine-
gun and rifle in the farther German trenches while the Australians hastily dug deeper
into the earth they had just gained.
It may have been at that moment that the men of Broken Hill wont to sleep on
the oath that they would never bo sent to the aid of the armies in France.
******
In the first trench the Australians did not delay long. The British shrapnel,
which had covered their advance, lifted further ahead, and our ynen swept on to the
second lino of the German defences. Here there were deep arid well-built trenches,
with many Germans still waiting. They were "mostly bayoneted or taken prisoner.”
The curtain of fire rose and advanced once more, to let the Australians move again,
and hurrying by the light of the shell-glare, through clumps of wood beside the vil-
lage, they came into the street of the village itself, to light in a desperate hand-to-
hand conflict from house to house. “The officers,” says Captain Bean, “sacrificed
themselves with sheer carelessness of anything but duty.”
Other officers of a civil body in Bathurst-street had just then determined that
come what might they would continue to organise opposition to the levying of
reinforcements from the men of Australia.
The Australian army came to a halt in the position it had won in that tremendous
midnight rush, and lay face to face with the enemy. There the story of the great
battle had left them up to the moment when fids was written. The Germans hold the
north-western corner of Pozieres village. In the ruined houses and in special posi-
tions they have their machine-guns. “Undoubtedly,” says Captain Bean, “the Aus-
tralians will have to withstand tremendous shelling during the day, and a quite cer-
tain counter-attack.” Having driven “through the wild night, through shrapnel
shell, past machine-guns, with extraordinary coolness and success,” they wait only for
the test to become more terrible.
Such were Saturday night and Sunday morning in Pozieres. At Broken Hill
there was the oath, “I. being fully convinced that the conscription of life or labor in
Australia will be a deathblow to organised labor, do hereby pledge myself to the
working class of Australia that I will not serve as a conscript industrial or military.”
4 ******
Broken Hill cannot be Australia's reply to Pozieres, nor can its message be the
one which our statesmen will send to the men who lay at Sunday’s dawn under the
German guns. There is no need to talk long on the theme; the facts are there. This
country and its leaders must choose between Pozieres and Broken Hill.


THE SUN. WEDNESDAY. JULY 26 1916
THE GREAT EVACUATION
HOW IT WAS WORKED
AS REMARKABLE AS LANDING
(By
in the London Daily Mall)
O. AVard Price,
Anyone landing at Suvla or Anzac on the
7uisty morning of December 18 would not
have noticed that anything special was going
on. Two battleships, with a hospital ship and
a few trawlers and storeships, lay in Suvla
Bay. Around the lopsided jetty made of
ships stranded on their sides the normal
amount of movement was proceeding; ashore
1 the dumps were still piled high with im-
i posing, apparently solid, masses of packing-
-1 cases; Indian mule carts, motor cycies, and
people on foot were going about as usual on
their several occasions, and from the line ol
trenches which lay at a distance ranging from
a few hundred yards to a couple of miles
inland came the desultory reports of bomb,
rifle, machine gun, and artillery that made up
the daily tale of fighting in the peninsula
when pushes were not being made.
To such a newly-arrived stranger it would
have ali seemed a comparatively uneventtul
scene of war, and indeed it was just that
uneventfunless which was the chief cause of
the tension in which the spirits of the British-
ers at Suvla and Anzac were just then held.
For on that morning of December 18 the last
stage of the difficult and dangerous process
of evacuation had begun, and none knew
whether the enemy might not he aware of it
and only waiting for the favorable moment i
to launch a determined attack upon our i
weakened force.
This evacuation was an operation unpre-
cedented in war, an exploit as remarkable ;
as the original landing had been. Many ex- |
perienced soldiers at the peninsula doubted
at first the possibility of its success, except
at the price of heavy loss. Sir lan Hamilton
had estimated the probable cost of the opera- |
tion at 40,000 casualties. High military au-
thorities who were directly responsible
thought that it might well involve 15 per
cent, of our strength in casualties. Lord
Kitchener, on the ether hand, though it was :
not until he reached the Dardanelles himseif j
that he fully adopted the idea of evacuation,
was more optimistic. “We shan’t have much
difficulty in getting away from here,” he said
when he had seen the positions at Suvla and
Anzac. “If the Government decides upon
evacuation, we will just slip quietly away.”
General Birdwood, the commander of the |
Dardanelles army, was also sanguine. “I
fee' quite confident about this,’ he said some
time before the final stage was reached.
“The two principal conditions of success are
fine weather and the provision of enough
transport.”
A SOUND DECISION
What ought to have been done at many
points of the Dardanelles campaign will no
doubt be the subject of discussion for a gene-
ration to come, but, much as the wisdom of
some of the earlier operations in the penin-
sula is disputed, there seems no doubt that
the decision to evacuate Suvla and Anzac was
a sound one. .
The situation there had been seriously
altered to our disadvantage by the opening of
direct communication from Germany to Tur-
key by railway and the Danube. By the con-
quest of Northern Servia an unhindered road
I had been provided for the supply of mum-
; tions of war to the Turkish army in the Gal-
! Upon Peninsula. They came by train as far
as Uzrun Krpru, in Thrace, and thence by
road. . . ,
The formidable extent to which the equip-
ment of the Turkish army was being rem-
I forced in this way is shown by the figures of
j a consignment. It consisted of:
Nine 9in. long guns.
Four 12in. howitzers.
Twelve railway waggonloads of machine
i guns.
, Eighteen railway waggonloads of grenades.
Forty-three railway w'aggonloads of cart-
ridges. ,
One hundred and sixteen thousand Russian
and Mauser rifles.
Mr. Ward Price describes in some detail the
increasing difficulties and dangers of the
British position. Both in quality and quan-
tity there was a great improvement in the
Turkish gun-fire, while the vagaries of the
weather and the presence of enemy sub-
marines were a growing menace to our supply
service. Both at Suvla and at Anzac our
positions, especially as regards artillery, were
! dominated by the Turks, “who, if they had
cared to concentrate the fire of their artil-
lery upon them, would soon have made our
tenure of the fragment of the peninsula that
we occupied practically impossible.”
A FORLORN HOPE
The waiter incidentally points out that:
“The main object of the Suvla landing had
been lost at the start. It had not been found
possible to take advantage of the surprise
that had been effected there, and in which
alone lay the hope of forcing a way across
to the objective of the operation at Maidos,
opposite Chanak, upon the Narrows.
even if this, by some military miracle, could
still have been achieved at the time when
evacuation was decided on, it is to be doubted
whether it would have carried us very much
farther towards the aim of all the operations
at the Dardanelles— Constantinople.” Even
if w'e had got to the Narrows, Mr. Ward
Price points,out that there would have re-
mained 25 miles of a channel 40 miles long


to force. “It was quite clear last autumn
that we had come to a stalemate at the Dar-
danelles, but despite the fact that we were
getting ‘no forrarder’ we were losing at Suvla
heavily', and the evacuations through disease
during the late summer had been at a heavy
rate. There is no doubt, therefore, that the
right thing was done in ‘cutting our losses’
and getting away. If it had been done ear-
lier we might have been in time to help the
Servians more effectively.”
The decision to evacuate was taken at the
beginning of December, and plans were at
once made accordingly by the Corps Head-
quarters and the divisional commanders.
“The keynote of this complicated and delicate
operation was ‘normality'.’ It was the watch-
word you heard on every side during those
last days on the peninsula, and never was
stratagem more fully justified by its results.
To steal gradually away under cover of dark-
' ness while doing everything possible all the
time to keep up the appearance during day-
light hours of every-day conditions, with
desultory sniping and bombardment, landing
of stores, movements of transport, and all the
other routine happenings which the Turks
for eight months at Anzac and four at Suvla
had had daily before their eyes—that was
the method by which it was decided to bring
away these men, with their guns and as
much as possible of their material of war.”
THREE DISTINCT STAGES
Three distinct stages were observed in the
process of evacuation —first, getting rid of
wdnter and surplus stores in view of a pro-
longed campaign; second, reduction of
strength to a minimum by the gradual em-
barkation of men and supplies; and third,
getting off the last men and the guns. The
last was the most critical stage, for it was
the stage in which the Turks were likely to
attack if they found out what was going on.
The stores left were chiefly bully-beef, bacon,
and jam, and the hollow piles of packing
cases were filled in with hay and tins of
petrol, so that they could be easily set on
fire at the last moment.
The whole operation lasted from December
10 to 4.30 on the morning of December 20.
The merit and extraordinary' success of the
elaborate process of shipping all the men
and guns and animals and material without
a hitch and from a shore accessible only to
lighters lay in the fact that it was carried
out without arousing the suspicions of the
Turks, who were within easy view of all that
was going on. None of the transports or
storeships used in the evacuation was allowed
to approach the peninsula in daylight. . . .
They lay at Imbros or Mudros, and left there
only in time to arrive after dark.
The last guns went on board during the
night of the 19th, eight going from Suvla
Point and eight, with two mountain guns,
from Lala Baba. The first gun started at
6.30 and the last at 8.0, after its normal even-
ing shoot.
The beach parties (embarkation officers
and naval transport officers), with the rear-
guard and details of the R.A.M.C., were the
last to leave, and Sir Julian Byng, the com-
mander of the 9th Army Corps at Suvla, him-
self stayed to see the piles of stores set alight
soon after 4 o’clock on the morning of the
20th, when the whole operation was com-
pleted.
THE LAST DITCHERS
The most delicate part of the whole pro-
cess was, of course, the last night, when an
appearance of normal conditions had to be
kept up to the last moment, while the troops
were falling back in relays on the beach. The
system by which the men were withdrawal
was this: Each brigade selected a few who
were to remain in the firing trenches, keep-
ing up the habitual amount of sniping and
| bomb-throwing till 1.30 a.m. These picked
men were known as the “last ditchers.”
The “last ditchers” were left alone in con-
tact with the enemy from 8 p.m. to 1.30
a.m., when the first line was finally evacu-
ated. In most brigades they were one man
to every seven yards of front instead of the
usual strength of three men to every yard.
Up to the last moment there was move-
ment among the empty dug-outs and silent
roads of Suvla, for the men who remained
had been ordered to show themselves as
much as possible so that the beach might
retain its customary appearance of activity'
to Turkish observers in the hills. “It ought
to be well done,” said a sarcastic general.
If there’s one thing the men are fonder of
than another it’s showing themselves on sky-
lines.”
Some went about with bay'onets, ripping
up the sandbags of which the dug-outs were
built, so that they should be of no use to
the Turks; others were collecting stray picks,
lanterns, braziers—anything that might have
been of service to the enemy. Sailors had
landed from the transports with wheelbar-
rows. and were helping themselves at the
great piles of stores that were to be coni-
S tte d to the flames in a few hours time
me bih of fare in many a forecastle mess
vas varied for days afterwards with tins of
condensed milk, sides of bacon, and vegetable
rations redeemed from the reserves that had
to be destroyed because there was neither
time nor transport to remove them.
_Now and then one of our last guns thuddevl
oh the final round of all those that it had
bred cay by day for four months, and at
Anzac the constant tap-tap of rifle fire was
f-.i mg on, broken into by the smarter rattle 1
hL^ Chne » UI ? S - The Australians were
burning up their last ammunition.
SURVIVORS OF SUVLA
And then one suddenly became aware of a
sl ? adow f m °ving silently down the
hillside along the narrow paths marked out
with whitewashed stones. They were the
mam body from the trenches, filing down to
the beach or to their positions in the reserve
lines. Survivors of Suvla. who had come
unhurt not only through the shells and
bombs and bullets of the Turks, but through
the heat and thirst and flies and dysentery
of summer and the deadly cold of the No-
vember blizzard. It was a heavily loaded
procession, each man hung fore and aft with
tins and buckets and sacks, with 220 rounds
of ammunition and entrenching tools and
picks and shovels as well.


And now nothing remained in the front
trenches but a skeleton line of one man each
j seven yards, but still the work of embarka-
j tion went on undisturbed. The sloping
ground down to Suvla Pier was thronged with
men. The last guns were being man-hauled
up the ramps on to lighters; men were squat-
ting on the ground b.y companies, waiting
their turn to embark.
At 3 a.m., on board a man-of-war, lying
about 1000 yards from the beach, the com-
parative silence of the night was suddenly
broken by the terrific roar of an explosion
from Anzac, and on the shoulder between
two hills there, known as the Neck, a tongue
of yellow flame shot up into the sky. This
was the last kick of the Australians, a fare-
well “strafe” of their congenial enemy the
Turk. It happened that for some time be-
fore the evacuation the Australian sappers
had been driving three broad tunnels forty-
five feet deep beneath the Turkish trenches.
The mines were detonated by electric wires
from the beach, and the explosion was like
the eruption of a small volcano. It was
thought that it must have killed two hundred
Turks. Those who remained broke into a
panic of rifle-fire, as if they expected the ex-
plosion to be followed up by an attack, and
several Turkish batteries started shelling the
now empty trenches at Anzac and kept it up
for an hour.
Soon after four o’clock in the morning the
sudden flicker of flames at several points
along the beach at Suvla was the sign that
the evacuation was over. Fed by the oil
hidden among them the stores were soon all
ablaze. It was a pity so much good food had
to be burnt, but the choice between doing
that and letting the Turks have the benefit
of it, and they, judging by the fierce appetites
their prisoners displayed, would have been
only too glad to have it. One prisoner a few
days before we left ate three tins of jam in
succession without any bread or anything to
qualify it.
THE HERO OF ANZAC
By six o’clock the abandoned stores at
Suvla had welded themselves into one great
flaming pyre a hundred and fifty yards long.
With the earliest streak of dawn the Turk-
ish gunners got to work. They first dropped
several shells in the heart of the fire and
close around it, as if they thought that our
men might be gathered round trying to put it
out. Then they fired at the deserted beach,
and then, as if at a loss for a mark, they
turned on to their habitual target. Hill 10,
just north of the Salt Lake, where, until it
came away the day before, there had always
been a hard-working and much-shelled Eng-
lish battery.
One last and rather melancholy duty re-
mained to be done on our side. The two
battleships, with their 6-inch guns, opened
fire at a thousand yards on the hulks that
formed the pier at Suvla, the water-tanks,
and the hospital tents, of which the last were
i soon ablaze. Then at nine o’clock they got
! under way the last ships to leave Suvla, fol-
lowed by a few spiteful shells from the Turk-
ish batteries.
And so the evacuation that might have cost
so much was over with no more than two
killed and four wounded at Anzac and one
killed and two wounded at Suvla. Then
guns, most of them on the tops of mountains
| at Anzac, were also left behind, and were
blown up at the last moment.
General Birdwood was constantly going
round the trenches at Suvla and Anzac to
decide difficult questions connected with the
evacuation on the spot. On the very last
day, while he was at Anzac, fifty shells fell
there, and he was covered with the flying
mud thrown up by the explosions. “New
stuff of very big calibre,” was all General
Birdwood said. And two days after the
evacuation of Suvla was over he was having
the flake of a bullet taken out of his forehead
from a wound made some months before. A
soldiers’ general, and at the same time the
organiser of one of the most remarkable
operations in the history of military stra-
tegy.


a-
TAKING OF POZIERES
AUSTRALIANS’ FINE CHARGE
THROUGH GERMAN SHRAPNEL
Captain C. E. Bean.
Australian Press
(From
Representative with the Commonwealth Forces.
Copyright by Crown.)
BRITISH HEADQUARTERS, FRANCE,
July 23.
After midnight, in a splendid night attack,
the. Australians took the greater portion of
Pozieres. The attack was a complicated one,
and was carried out in several stages.
After several days of steady, slow bom-
bardment, our artillery, shortly after dark,
increased to a very heavy fire. Other sec-
tions were attacking besides the Australians,
and the bombardment was spread over a
fairly large front.
I never before had seen such a spectacle.
A large sector of the horizon was split up,
not by single flashes, but by a continuous
band of quivering light. A mile away you
could catch the sweet heliotrope scent of
the tear-shells, wljth which the Germans re-
plied to our batteries, and one passed through
areas thick with a heavy chloroform-scented
gas from the gas-shells. Towards the end of
the time the torrent of artillery fire was sud-
denly turned on to the lines in front of Pozi-
cres village, and almost immediately after-
wards the Australians went over the para-
pet. The first trench across the wide
stretch of grassy flat was taken immediately.
The men went straight through the German
shrapnel as if the pellets were raindrops.
Even at this stage, in spite of all the bom-
bardment, machine-guns were sweeping the
ground.
The first line consisted of a miserable
trench, much of it recently dug. A few live
Germans were found m it, and they were
mostly cowed. The fire was coming from
the further trenches. The line dropped into
the first trench, digging furiously, while our
shrapnel continued to rain overhead.
Presently the fire was lifted still furthe,
and the Australians swept on to the second
trench. This was very different, being deep
and well built, but in parts it was so smashed
by the bombardment that some of the men
have told me they went past it not knowing
it to be a trench at all. This line in general
seems to have been just beyond the tramway
which runs just under the fringe of the vil-
lage. In many parts of this line the Ger-
mans were fairly numerous. They were
mostly bayoneted or taken prisoners.
The Australians again started rapidly to
improve this trench, and after another short
interval swept onward through the small
woods at the back of the village street and
on into the heart of the village itself. As
they passed through the trees they saw
against the shell glare the outline of two
heavlly-constructcd mounds, which they re-
cognised as gun emplacements. Beside one
gun could be seen the figures of four men
shooting with rifles. These quickly were killed
or wounded. The line swept past the guns,
which, when last I heard, were still in our
hands.
In order to understand what follows it is
necessary to explain that Pozieres was a very
strong point, just in front and forming part
of the original German second line. That
line consisted of two strong trenches running
nearly north and south behind Pozieres, which
itself was also surrounded by the trenches.
The British a week ago captured the German
second line south of Pozieres almost up to
the town, but meantime the Germans had
built what the Canadians call a switch line,
running across from the second line to the
third, just north of the British new positions.
This line runs roughly from near Pozieres
due east to Flers. Pozieres, therefore,
forms practically the angle of this new line
with the old second line, but portion of the
old second line still projects from the south-
eastern corner in possession of the Germans.
This, though torn to pieces by shellfire, Is
still strongly held by the Germans, and the
right of our attack' bends away from the
village to this point.
The British troops who attacked at the
same time against the switch-line running east
from this point took portion of the switch,
but were forced later to withdraw. There
were continual bomb encounters at the switch-
line junction between Australians and Ger-
mans. That was the position at the time
when I left the battlefield.
The troops drove through the wild night
through shrapnel-shell, machine-gun fire, and
fought around difficult angles and through
complicated stages with extraordinary cool-
ness and success. They had a famous corps
in front of them but these Australian troops
showed a discipline and capacity for being
controlled intelligently amidst awful sur-
roundings of a night attack, which only those
who saw them in tight places in Gallipoli
would have suspected. Australian officers
sacrificed themselves with sheer carelessness
of anything but duty.
The battle is still very fierce. The Austra-
lians will undoubtedly have to withstand a
tremendous shelling during the day, and a
quite certain counter-attack. The shelling
was fierce from the first, and seemed to grow
fiercer at dawn. If any men could with-
stand that trial these troops will. The army
commander has already thanked them for
their “splendid” attack.
As I left the scene two ever-attendant
aeroplanes were flying most dangerously low j
through the morning mists in order to carry |
back to the authorities the latest informa-
tion from the patch of shredded brushwood
on the brown, shell-scorched uplands on
which our boys are at this moment making
their great, steadfast sacrifice for their ideal
of the world. ,


r J C yX (O (9 ( h
FROM HOUSE TO HOUSE
ANZACS’ FIERCE BATTLE AT POZIERES
GALLIPOLI WAS CHILD’S PLAY
Village a Fortress Bristling With Machine Guns
724th Day of the War
(Reuter’s Telegram)
_ LONDON, Tuesday Night
General Sir Douglas Haig reports:
An attempt to attack on our right flank yesterday at noon was frustrated, and
two infantry attacks against the centre of our line were fruitless. Further ground
was gained north of Pozieres, despite strong opposition.
An earlier message mentions that the Australians participated again in the fighting
at Pozieres, General Haig continues:
The enemy was recently further reinforced on the Somme front with infantry,
and guns.
The bombardment has been continuous, and occasionally very heavy. Yester-
day's infantry attacks, which were preceded by an especially violent bombardment,
were stopped by our concentrated fire, the enemy in no place reaching our trenches.
His casualties must have been severe. <
There v/as much hand-to-hand fighting in other parts of the line, where our
infantry in places worked their way forward.
The greater part of Pozieres is now in our possession. Prisoners taken here in-
clude two battalion commanders.
A later report by General Haig this afternoon says:
The Germans attempted infantry attacks at Pozieres, and to the north-east.
They were repulsed by our artillery fire.
Boches Must be Blown Out of the Ground
(From Our Special Representative)
LONDON, Tuesday Night.
The advance of the Australians is generously appreciated in London, but is naturally
overshadowed by the whole gigantic battle. Newspapers display bills and headings such
as: Australians’ Bravery—Skilful Defence in Pozieres’ Cellars, but Anzacs March On.
An officer writes;
People in Australia cannot have the slightest conception of what the fighting
was like. Gallipoli, after the landing, was child’s play in comparison. We are
pushing them back slowly, thank goodness, but every yard gained means hard fight-
ing. The Boches have to be absolutely blown out of the ground before a yard is
gained.
The correspondent in Paris of the London Central News Agency says that the struggle
at Pozieres on Monday was as fierce as on Sunday.
"The Germans,” he adds, “hold only a few of the houses in the streets. The Austra-
lians. on the north-eastern side, scored a fine success. They seized a strong, organised
position in which were two guns and some machine-guns, and took 100 prisoners.”
Another correspondent says that the Anglo-Australian advance, in and around
Pozieres, continues, and is threatening the Thiepval plateau.


Germans Drugged With Ether
LONDON, Wednesday Morning.
The correspondent of the Paris La Liberte describes the counter-attack at Pozieres.
He says that the assailants hurled themselves at each other with terrific fury. The Ger-
mans. stimulated with ether, attacked resolutely, but the defenders, and particularly the
Australians, covered themselves with glory, resisting with heroic tenacity. Rifles were
not used in the awful melee, but only knives and bayonets, revolvers, and hand-grenades.
The Germans used an Apache-like weapon, in the shape of a long bludgeon studded with
nails. .
“The Australians bayoneted, to the last man, a detachment that was trying to gam
shelter in a ruined house. A British lieutenant had a desperate duel with a Bavarian
captain in the middle of the field. It was a sword versus revolver fight. The Britisher
was shot in the abdomen, but he pierced his opponent through the chest. Both were
“Reinforcements on the German side compelled both the British and the Australians
to give ground at first, but they soon resumed their vigorous offensive. They occupied
three-quarters of Pozieres and consolidated their positions during the night. The German
counter-attacks at dawn partly drove them out again, but two hours later the Germans
were driven back, and latest reports show that the British and Australians hold the ad-
vantage.”
(Published in the Times)
The Times correspondent in Paris writes:—'“The struggle in the Pozieres theatre Is
very keen. The Australians are gaining, but the village is so powerfully organised that
they have to besiege each house under the fire of cleverly-concealed machine-guns which
gunfire cannot reach. These guns are in cellars connected with the communication
trenches and covered with armor-plating. The advance is thus rendered very difficult
and slow.”
Battle Now Most Critical
H
LONDON, Wednesday Morning.
It is reported that the Australians have worked round the eastern side of Pozieres,
and are now holding a position north of the houses.
A stringent order has been issued to officers and men not to divulge military infor-
i mation that might be turned to use by the foe.
National attention in Great Britain is concentrated on the Anglo-French front at
the River Somme. The battle is now at its most critical stage, the more formidable re-
sistance indicating that the Germans are straining every nerve for a further expansion
of the offensive. ...
They are bringing up men and guns without ceasing, and are persisting in massed
attacks, regardless of the human cost, while their artillery fire is steadily gathering
weight, acd is excellently directed. The terrific death-struggle is dwarfing even the
operations at Verdun.


SYDNEY. SATURDAY. JULY 29. 1916
SPIRIT OF AUSTRALIA
THE GALLANT MESSENGER
WRONG WAY “STRAGGLERS”
(From
Captain C. E. W. B«*an,
A antral lan I'rm
Keprmrntollre with the (ommonwraith Forces,
Copyright by Crown.)
BRITISH HEADQUARTERS, FRANCE,
July 26.
Last night a further advance on a smaller
scale was made by the Australians to the
north-west of Pozleres. Pozieres is now com-
pletely in our possession. In some ways the
fight has been the hardest the Australian
troops ever fought, but the spirit of the
men and officers made it Irom tho first Quite
certain that- they would be successful, if
success Were humanly possible. For ex-
ample. a signaller was sent from the brigade
headquaiters with an urgent message to a
terrain battalion. On the way he had to
pass through the enemy’s barrage, which
caught him and flung him wounded on the
ground, with both let i paralysed. He no-
ticed an officer standing some distance away,
and dragging himself with his hands over an
almost unbelievable distance, he handed
over the message, which the officer took on.
Two hours later the messenger was found
lying where he was left with a piece of shell
across his spine, which was the cause of the
paralysis. As assistance reached him the
first question he asked was, “Did that mes-
sage get through?” Six men had to be
stopped as stragglers to-day. They heard
that there was fighting, escaped from the
base camp, and were making for the front. I


ij k i 9 / h
THE AUSTRALIANS
AS THE FRENCH SEE THEM
“STRONG AS CENTAURS”
(From Le Journal. Paris.)
The British Government having officially
announced the arrival of Australian and New
Zealand troops at the French front, there 's
no indiscretion in bidding Welcome! to these
wonderful colonials, who, at Gallipoli, were
the admiration of the Allies. The Anzacs, as
they have been baptised since their campaign
in the Dardanelles, have arrived, in part, on
the British front. If the inhabitants of the
villages they passed through were astonished
and delighted to be present at their coming
it appears that they themselves were not less
so, to come and fight beside us.
Their marching was both warlike and gay,
when we saw them marching through
in orderly array, their felt Boer hats web
over the ear and with rifles slung in the
British manner.
“It is wonderful to come here to fight,”
one of them said to us, with his curious
Melbourne accent, “Look at that shop with
the notice in English: ‘Here we sell fried po-
tatoes.’ That reminds me of my childhood in
London! And what we like, too, are the
sweets and cakes. Believe me. pastry and
sweets are rare in Gallipoli, or on the sand
dunes of Egypt; and one gets tired of eating
every morning beef and biscuit and every
evening biscuit and beef.”
The battalion marched off. It was an in-
spiring sight to see these men whose alert
step, whose strong chests and powerful bodies
had been developed in the Australian steppes
and under the healthy shade of the eucalyp-
tus. On horseback they are elegant and strong
as centaurs, on their strenuous, nervous
“walers.”
“The contribution of Australia to the cause
of the Allies,” said one of their officers, “is
not negligible. It has been enthusiastically
accepted from *.he beginning by all my com-
patriots of Australia and New Zealand. To
give you an idea of their patriotism I will
give you a curious fact. Do you know Camp-
bell Island?”
“Alas! not at all!”
“That does not surprise me. This little
island of the Pacific Ocean is situtaed more
than 400 marine miles from New Zealand and
is only about four miles round. It is colon-
ised by a family of seven brothers. Now,
would you believe it, these seven brave colo-
nials, who, in their terrestrial paradise, could
have remained quite ignorant of the war in
Europe, enlisted to come and fight in France!"
“This stirring example should be told to
our brave soldiers.”
“Well,” added Captain X. “our men have
tasted enough with the Turks. We wish to
have a try at the Germans. The enemy has
taken the best method to stimulate the vin-
dictive ardor of our men. It appears that
the first battalion who went into the trenches
were greeted by the Germans with various
insults, such as- 'To the devil with the sav-
ages’; ‘Back with the sons of convicts. &c.,
&c. Believe me, the athletes of Tasmania and
New South Wales undertook to reply suitably
to these politenesses.”
The column left the villages and halted.
While strolling along the road some of the
Australians entered into conversation —half
French, half English—with a squad of old
territorials who were mending the road. Our
territorials were greatly interested in these
men bronzed with the Egyptian sun.
“Then you are almost Australians?” said
one of the Territorials, and he added, shaking
his head, “you fellows come from far.”
“Not so far," said another; “Australia is
only on the Red Sea.”
“No, further: from the Kangaroo Coun-
try.”
“You are the Kangaroo boxers, remarked
a big, ungainly Territorial.
The Australian, much amused, took the
kepi off the Territorial and planted it on tne
back of his felt hat. and putting his heels
together, called out. laughingly, “Come on,
George!”
They exchanged some blows, much to the
amusement of the spectators; then a broth-
erly shake, and this friendly bout finished
with a round of white wine into the empty
bottles of the Territorials.


go L a T-G u'C oZ'7 /9/ fa ,
THE RED TRIANGLE
AN OUTPOST OF EMPIRE
Y.M.C.A. War Work
BY
R. O. CLACK
(Australian Y.M.C.A. Supervising Secretary
in Egypt)
An outpost of Empire, a mere pin-point in
a world-wide war. But a link in a far-flung
contracting chain, and therefore vital. A
living shield to an artery of the Empire.
There the “exigencies of the military situa-
tion” had unavoidably halted the establish-
ment of Y.M.C.A. operations. Now at last
the way seemed to clear a little. Obstacles
there were still, but they had to be got under,
over, round, or through.
The major-general had said: “I’d like you
to go wherever you can with the boys.” By
hook or by crook, within the little link of the
mighty Empire chain, Red Triangle radi-
ance had to sparkle inside 48 hours. Up
4.30 a.m. and off by boat across the canal to
, and before breakfast we had loaded
several trucks with equipment and sent them
off. Back to mainland for a snack, and
across the canal again by 9.45, we had load-
ed another train and despatched it. Already
it was swelteringly hot. We were in for a
roaster. /
Back once more to our base for needed
stores, then finally off to our battle-ground.
From the small port where we landed to our
objective we hoped to secure some kind of
transport, but —no train, no mule, no horse,
no camel, “no nothink.” It was a case of
Shanks’s pony. Shall we ever forget that
trek through the desert? Right in the worst
part of the day (12.30 to 3 p.m.) no soldier
was stirring; officers and men, horses,
camels, and mules were all under cover. By
all that was sensible and selfish, we ought
to have been there too. But that hut had
to be working in 48 hours!
Away out there on the Sinai Peninsula,
where the sands of the desert don’t grow cold,
final arrangements were made that meant a
cool shelter for sweltering troops, a cold
drink where drinks are mostly laodicean—
neither hot nor cold, but irritatingly and un-
satisfyingly lukewarm; comfortable chairs in 1
which to sit down and talk to “Choom”;
magazines, newspapers, and a library; tables
furnished with stationery where the soldier
can sit down and write that letter home; I
platform and piano for concerts and for those I
sing-songs (hymn feasts), which remind one
of the old moorings—ideals, hopes, and vows,
whereto it is well to keep one’s little barque
tied. All over the Canal zone the trail of |
the troops is a road leading to the Y.M.C.A.
THE FOLKS AT HOME
Out to the railhead and there within a few
hundred yards of our front trenches, a large
marquee, with all the well-known creature
comforts for Tommy, the Y.M.C.A. Back t >
the base, where a cool, clean building is, filled
with dust-covered, parched troops. One of
these base huts the soldiers have christened
the Zepp shed. A long building, it certainly
j appears to be the home of one of our huge
army birds. The Turks have evidently
i thought so, and several of their bombs have
landed uncomfortably close. These were but
Two of six such points we visited that day.
The difficulties surrounding all this de«
i velopmental work are very great, as well as
incessant. Only those acquainted with the
problems of pushing camps of men forward
into hostile territory and having only the
minimum of transport facilities at their dis-
posal can understand them. Next day a
similar task. Six more points, each on'e a
clean, comfortable reminder of the kind
thought of the folks at home- Surely those
same folks never chose a better method for
the expression of their unceasing care of the
boys away from home than the Red Tri-
angle?
Splendid equipment these huts are! Roomy
airy structures over 100 ft. long by 35ft. wide,’
the matting increasing the suggestion of cool-
ness. At one end a counter, over which
passes an almost endless procession of lime-
juice drinks and preserved fruit serves. A
few other items are there to vary the mono-
tony of active service diet. On the other
side of the partition, the concert and writing
room. Here are run the organised and im-
promptu concerts, lantern lectures, and
cinema shows. Here, too, a mid-week ser-
vice with an average attendance of 300 men;
on Sunday afternoons, a Bible class, and in
the evening a sing-song—this last being al-
ways crowded out. The Bishop of the Canal
Zone (C. of E.) held a confirmation service
here a few days ago, when 70 men were con-
| firmed.
I Here is the customary Sunday programme:
6.30 a.m., Mass (R.C.); 7.30 a.m., Noncon-
formist service; 11-12, refreshments sold; 2-3,
Bible class; 4-5, refreshments; 6.45-8, song
service; 8-9, refreshments.
FURTHEST EAST.
Rail-head furthest East. The big Y.M.C.A.
marquee crowded with soldiers crowns the
small hill-heart of that widespread camp.
Several outpost camps spray out from this
rail-head. We follow the sprays, and since
light trains, horses, camels, and mules have
all fulfilled their morning schedules, and are '
taking it easy through the mid-day heat, !
| there is nothing for it but our overworked
shanks’ ponies. Over the dunes of yielding
sand we plough, plough, plough, and there in
a great hollow near the Mediterranean are
the S H . Centrally set amidst the
precisely pitched white bell tents rises a
shapely five-pole marquee. Splendidly pitch-
ed and well equipped, this Y.M.C.A. is the
pride of the camp.
Back to the railhead on good old Shanks’,
and for a while on lurching, loping camels,
whose drivers din into one’s'ears the famil-
iar cry—“Gibit bakshish!” A hurried lunch
i (four sardines and a cup of tea), and then
: out to see some of the most resourceful sol-
| diers of the Empire—Australian Light Horse.
Blithe, bonny, and blistering amidst sur-
roundings fit only for a handful of Bedouins!
i Distantly ahead of us is a sandy eminence
with watchful Australians perched on its glit-
i tering summit. At its base (half a mile from
i us) are the horse lines. Sweeping away to
I the right is the main body of the camp, its ex-
! tremity dipping into a few palms which seem
to burrow away under an immense hummock
of sand. Two other groups of tents complete
the circle of occupation round this great am-
phitheatre. Fair in the centre is one of the
Melbourne-made marquees of the Australian
National Committee.
Over in the horse lines a worn-out neddy
drank two big bucketsful of water without
lifting his head. And in the Y.M.C.A. tent
his rider pictured himself stooping to drink
at a Nile of limejuice in flood, with the
mouth of a whale, the throat of a giraffe, and
the numberless stomachs of a camel! The
secretary here is mightily proud of his mar-
quee—he points cheerily to Turkish bullet
tracks through its heaving roof. On more
than one occasion enemy airmen have bombed
this inviting mark, but without success.
Would that our bonny men had got off as
scot free as their much-loved Y.M. After
a brief visit we hurry back to railhead and
board the troop train, and are soon at the
great base. Next day two more camps are
visited, and two secretaries are introduced
to new jobs. That night we reached the
headquarters of the Canal Zone work, and the
following day. just after midnight, are back
again at the general headquarters of the
Y.M.C.A. in Egypt. An inspection covering
425 miles—292 by rail, 2 by horse, 3 by camel,
12 by foot, 42 by motor bike, and 74 by motor
boat.


HiLcL C\. I 1 b
V.C. AND D.C.M.
LIVERPOOL SOLDIER’S HEROISM
Fought Turks Singlehand
BOMB THROWER’S DEADLY
WORK
(By
W.J.)
Back from the death-strewn hills of Gal-
lipoli, Sergeant Hugh Brennan finds himsel;
to-day in the peaceful seclusion of Liverpoo
camp, the possessor of the V.C. and the
D.C.M, Modest almost to shyness concerning
his great honors, he does not like to talk
about himself or of the noble deeds that won
the approbation of his officers and his King,
hut e\en the bald facts of his experiences
during those days when Australia entered
upon the first chapter of its national history
are thrilling, and must compel admiration in
the light of what we know of our own grand
soldiers.
Sergeant Brennan enlisted in November,
1914 * but as the result of an accident he broke
both an arm and a leg. Being laid up for
three months, he was discharged, but re-en-
listed in March, and left Australia on June 24
with B Company of the 20th Battalion, reach-
ing Gallipoli on August 22.
Brennan did not know a bomb from a
potato, and when he was put in charge of
the battalion bomb-throwers he felt a little
funky at first, but in a few days was regard-
ed as the most dexterous and daring man
with a bomb that had ever taken part in a
w'ar. Brennan told his men that he would do
the bomb-throwing himself. And he did it.
They were within eight yards of the Turkish
trenches, and unless the enemy was turned
back nothing could have saved the battalion.
Brennan, single-handed, kept up the bomb-
throwing all that night and the following
day. That was the first feat that secured for
him mention in despatches. After that the
men w'ho were inexperienced at first became
experts, and some of them exceeded the skill
of them tutor. Having saved the position
alone. Brennan was able to advance with his
men and drive the Turks further back. Bomb-
throwing is like playing cricket with a loaded ■
ball, while the batsman is firing at you, and
it requires a certain amount of sporting in-
stinct to become proficient at it. That is
Sergeant Brennan’s opinion, and that is why
sportsmen make such good fighters.
The Turks, becoming more firmly estab-
lished, were giving our men a rough time,
fine night they set fire to the Australian
shell-proof shelter by means of a kerosene
Hare, and Brennan reported the matter to the
officer in charge. He ordered a retreat failing
the putting out of the fire; but Brennan was
not on for giving up ground that he had won,
and set to work to beat the fire out with a
shovel. He was under fire from the enemy
side, but succeeded in saving the shelter. But
to do it he had to crawl over dead bodies and
through barbed wire entanglements. The only
wound he got was a bullet through the flesh
of the right arm. but his life was saved about
20 times by his cigarette case and whistle,
Cor they were dinted and battered with bullet
marks. He came out of it all right, and the
position was saved. His heroism on this oc-
casion also brought him under the notice of
the authorities, and he was granted the
j D.C.M.
! Later on the bombing party was ordered
to take another line of trenches, and Brennan
initiated the scheme. A number of the party
| was lost, and some serious accidents re-
sulted through the untimely explosion of '
their own bombs, but the Turks were hunted !
! “ ut - and the trench won. When the trench I
had been almost completely captured a i
young lellow who was anxious to develop his i
accuracy in throwing begged to be allowed I
to have another shot. Brennan pointed out 1
that he had only two bombs left—one a pit-
cher grenade and the other a high explo- I
sive. He asked his mate which one he would i
have, and he selected the pitcher. When
the cap was taken off to fire the fuse the
bomb exploded and blew the poor fellow I
to pieces. Brennan did not recover from the !
shock for two days.
PLAYING WITH DEATH
The Turks were being beaten so frequently],
that they went off on to a different tack, an.
threw bombs into the Australians’ s ,
from a direction that could not be locate*
and as a result our men were being kille*
every day. It was arranged that fire on
our side was to be suspended for half an |
hour while Brennan went out to discover
what game the enemy was up to. He left
c£bmp, on the understanding that if he did
not return within half aif hour firing would
be resumed. He was armed only with a
revolver, and when a little waj r from the
camp he heard Turks talking within five
yards of him. It was a critical time for
him, and to make matters worse, one Turk
was lighting a bomb. To fire his revolver
under such circumstances might have been
considered madness, and tantamount to
committing suicide. But Brennan did fire,
as fast as he could pull the trigger. The
bomb exploded in the trench, killing a large
number of the enemy, and blowing Brennan
some distance away. When the Australian
came to he was lying near the Turk he had
shot. Both had been blown in the same
direction when the bomb exploded. Only
15 minutes of the half-hour remained, but
he could not move until the flare died down,
otherwise it would have been certain death
So he remained still until the light began
to wane, and then crawled back to his lines
to direct the fire on to the Turkish position.
He was only just in time, however, for he
heard the Australians saying that poor old
Brennan had been killed. The Turks were
routed out, and Brennan again got into
despatches.
When Brennan’s battalion was relieved by
the 26th he and ten men were left behind to
continue the bomb-throwing. It was neces-
sary to mix some experienced men with the
new hands, so that the continuity of the
work would not be interrupted. Brennan
was still in charge, and there were several
positions to be bombed and a lot of under-
ground galleries to be protected. The Turks
drove through in one place, and the new men
gave way. A terrific battle resulted, and it
took half an hour's solid fighting to get the
enemy out. The whole crater was lost, as
well as a part of the fire trench, but the real
work commenced when the attempt was made
to rout the Turks out of their position. Lead-
ing up to the stronghold was a tunnel 30
yards long, and there the great difficulty oc-
curred. There was only room for four men
in the tunnel, and every yard of it had to be
contested. Brennan’s method of winning
through was to pile up sand-bags in front of
himself and his three assistants, and move on
as they drove the Turks back. But this was
not an easy matter, as the bags were blown
down as quickly as they were put up. When
the bags were in position there was room for
!only one man to fire, and Brennan shot as
. nany Turks as he could from the top of the
barricade before it was destroy* d each time.
*Che enemy blew the top off the tunnel, and
Lft themselves exposed to our fire. The four
l ombed and fired at such a rate that the
5 urks thought that the whole battalion was
work, and retreated. This was considered
-1 fine feat, because a very valuable position
das in danger of being lost. Once more
orennan secured official notice.
: FUNNELLED TO AUSTRALIAN LINES
H The Turks were determined on driving the
\ustralians into the sea, but failing to dis-
jdge them by surface fighting, they com-
menced burrowing underground. Here was
Brennan’s chance again to distinguish him-
self, tout his advice was not taken seriously,
hnd the Turks almost succeeded in their
’plans. An Australian reported that some-
; hing strange was going on, and, on making
nvestigations, Brennan found that the Turks
had tunnelled through into the Australians’
Position, and the first shell they fired blew
•aim up into the sky. He came down un-
conscious, and that finished his fighting
career on the Peninsula.
At this time a new experience came to
Brennan. For the first time in his life he
found himself running from the enemy. It
happened like this:—After being blown up
he was placed hurriedly on a stretcher, and
the bearers ran for shelter with him. While
being carried along ho regained conscious-
ness and told the men to put him down and
he would try to walk. He was assisted to
his feet, but could not stand up. The shells
from the enemy were falling close behind
the stretcher-bearers. The two men
stumbled and let their wounded comrade fall
to the ground. A shell exploded close by,
and the stretcher-bearers attempted to
draw the sergeant into the shelter of a
rock, but Brennan pulled himself together
and ran for his life away from the fire, the
bearers pursuing him and calling on him to
stop. He, however, ran 500 yards before they
caught him and put him on the stretcher
again. He was taken to Beach Hospital for
treatment. Brennan now claims to hold the
record for a long-distance sprint restricted


to wounded competitors who cannot stand on
their feet. , ,
It seemed that wherever Brennan happened
to be shells would find tlheir way to him,
for when he was in the Beach Hospital it was
shelled with shrapnel and six wounded men
were killed. Brennan was carried out and
put into a sap for protection, and was left
there all night. Being taken hurriedly out
of bed. he had no boots on, and was feeling
very uncomfortable in his hiding place. He
longed to be taken inside, but nigjit fell, and
no one came for him. To make matters \yorse
a heavy snowstorm set in, and it was all he
could do to keep his head from being buried.
The snow piled up round him, and when he
was found late next morning only his face
was visible. Both his feet were frostbitten,
and one doctor said they would have to be
amputated. But he still has them, and he
says they are going to carry him back to
the war. From the beach he was taken to
the hospital at Cairo, and thence invalided to
Australia. The happiest day of all his event-
ful life was when the hospital ship came into
Sydney, and he heard the band playing
“'Home, Sweet Home.”
Sergeant Brennan is 28 years old, and is a
French-Canadian, being born in Victoria,
British Columbia. He came to Australia seven
years ago and followed the occupation of an
engineer. H© loves this country, and claims
it as his own. He likes the Australians, too,
and says they are great fighters. They faced
death like super-heroes. One of our poor
chaps had been wounded beyond all hope, and
was lying in the trench. Brennan, quite by
accident, touched him with his foot when
passing by, and the dying man remonstrated
by saying: ‘‘Blime me, mate, can’t you let a
man die in peace without putting the boot
in?”
Sergeant Brennan is now doing important
work in the Liverpool camp, but is looking
forward to the time when he can return to
the war. To use his own words, he is anxious
to have another crack at the enemy. He does
not know for what deed he was awarded the
V.C., but concludes that the honor is the out-
come of his general conduct at Gallipoli.
Sergt. Hugh Brennan, V.C., D.C.M.


The Sun Sept 3rd 1916
ON ACTIVE SERVICE
THE FEELING UNDER FIRE
DIARY OF A SOLDIER
Private J. R. Hawke, of Helensburgh, wh(
is now somewhere in France, has sent to hi:
mother a diary of events, which gives a mosi
interesting idea of the life of an Australian
in the firing line. He says:—
i We are billeted in a two-story house, which
, also has a couple of attics. These formed a
tip-top grandstand, from which wo viewed a
bombardment. The position in front of us
was shaped like a horseshoe, and we could
three-fourths of the shoe on a front of
two miles. The night was ideal for a good
view it was pitch dark. The uncanny silence
vas broken by a salvo (four guns firing to-
gether) from one of our 18-pounder batteries.
Then immediately every gun was brought to
bear on Fritzs front line 1 , and the air quiver-
ed like a harp-string. The vicious hiss of the
18-pounders mingled with the rat-tat-tat of
the machine guns and the crackle of rifle fire.
Now and again a heavy howitzer coughed—
there is no other word to adequately describe
it a huge shell over to Fritz, and its easy,
careless sort of dawdle was heard above all
the others. A clump of trees would suddenly
show up, as one of the shells burst behind
Fritz’s line, and illuminated the vicinity.
Stark and clear the ruins of a battered farm-
house appeared for an Instant, and were then
merged again in darkness. Rockets curved
up into the air, and burst in a cluster of stars
—lighting the place for a minute and then
falling, falling into darkness. Then there was
a crash quite close to us, and a shell from
one of our batteries set off with a flash on
its journey. A searchlight from the German
side thrust a finger of light athwart the hea-
vens, hung steadily for a minute, and then
faded away. As each shell burst a cloud of i
dust and smoke arose and appeared irides- i
tent against the flash of the exploding shell, i
The air vibrated, and was filled with a con- i
tinuous rumble like thunder, intensified by
the vicious crash of the guns nearest to us. •
Me were about three or four miles from -
where the shells were bursting, but our billet 1
was shaking. i
v>e h ave learned that two of our
battalions sneaked over and raided the Ger-
man trenches. One of the parties from a
New South Wales battalion killed 43 Ger-
mans, wounded seven, and brought back six
prisoners and two machine guns. How the
other party got on I do not know, but this
is the seventh Anzac raid which has proved
an absolute success. None have been failures.
What do you think of that for a record?
God knows what it was like on the Ger-
man side; but it must have been awful. I
can remember how I felt when I was first
under fire, and I can assure you my experi-
ence of a bombardment was puny compared
with last night’s din an! racket,
By the way, did I ever tell you how
I did feel on that day? It was, I think, on
April 29. I was doing my first spell on
dinkum active service. The first intimation
of a shell was a shrill whistle, which in-
creased in intensity as it neared us. For
about four seconds I held my breath and
said more prayers than I had done for some
years. This shell made a “good” hit. It
crashed into the kitchen, where the cook
and another chap were at work, and mortally j
wounded one and seriously wounded the
other. We were in an emergency dugout.
Our nerves, strung up to concert pitch seem-
ed to tighten. The waiting for the shell to
explode was the worst part of it. Those
four seconds were like an eternity. My
stomach seemed to contract, and I felt as if
I had a piece of ice in my inside. In the
intervals between the shells we discussed
the chances of the resistance of the dugout,
and joked—yes, joked— m our dugout, while
in the next dugout the doctor was bandag-
ing the wounded. About five shells landed
in a paddock five yards from our dugout,
and as they burled themselves in the ground
we could feel the place lift up and settle
I down again after the explosion.
y What will it be like when we start to
j move? I verily believe we will be moving |
r before many weeks are over. I guess when
we move Fritz will move. We fire far more
n shells than he does—which looks significant
. to me
a
June, blessed June! It has been raining
11 for a week or two, and no sign of it clearing
9 U P- • • Our party has just passed en route
n for Fritz’s trenches. May they make a suc-
a cessful job and give Fritz the biggest shock
1 he has had for some time. , . .
- This is my military birthday. On June 29,
i 1915, I wapdered into Liverpool a “rookie”
f or a “marmalade.” I can stand on the van-
- tage ground of 12 months army experience
. and review my wanderings. From Liverpool
-to Melbourne, then back again; and then
r weary months of waiting in Egypt. In easy
. stages I worked my way into the firing line,
i and have now been in it and in the vicinity
; for about three months. ... it took me
nine months wandering to find the firing line,
I I hope it won’t take me the same time to
find my way out of it,
. . . Our raid came off last night, and in !
exchange for about 20 dead Germans and a 1
I couple of prisoners we had a man killed and
nine wounded. The man who was killed was
a sergeant—an old Gallipoli Bill. He was
shot by a German officer. Our fellows tried
to fetch, him back; but he got entangled in
the barbed wire and had to be left behind.
A couple of prisoners were taken, and as
they objected to coming along quietly they
had to be encouraged. . , , When captured
or threatened the Germans blubber, and
whine “Kamerad! Kamerad! Mercy, no !
shoot.” According to a reliable authority, if
they are spared they hate worse than ever.
So the game goes, on, this front. As General
; Birdwood says, “Worry him, raid his tren-
ches, and break his heart.”
• •••••
We have done our three months active ser-
vice now, and go for a rest. We were sud-
denly relieved last Monday. We leave some
time to-day for an unknown destination. My
| experience in France has been this: Four
j weeks in the firing line, 3V 2 weeks in sup-
ports (under shell fire at odd times), and 3V 2
weeks in reserves (about five miles behind),
and I haven’t fired a shot.
Single men of military age cannot be found
outside of the ranks of the army in France-
The old woman with whom we are billeted
has five sons at the front, two of whom are
at Verdun, and another expects to be called
up. at any minute. She has a soft spot in
her heart for all soldiers. When we were
leaving her to go into the trenches, her eyes
were full of tears when we bade her au re-
voir. When we came back she jabbered to
us in French, and shook hands all round.
We are now going into training, physical
exercises, route marches, musketry and bayo-
net fighting. So evidently we are wanted
for a special job. Time will reveal.


lll <a P
NEVER-CEASING VIGILANCE
FRITZ AS A FIGHTER
EFFECT OF BOMBS ON NERVES
Private J. B. Walker, waiting to his father,
!Mr. David B. Walker, the well-known jour-
nalist of Melbourne, says:—
“We have been here for some time; long
enough to enable us to appreciate the diffi-
culties that the Allied troops had to con-
tend with in the earlier days of the war. The
innumerable litt’e wooden crosses and metal
tablets that mark the resting-places of the
fallen British soldiers everywhere you go,
are. silent witnesses of the fierce fighting that
took place before the German advance was
stemmed.
“The Australians, are playing their part
well and are earning a good name through-
out France. Steel helmets and gas helmets
are now included in their equipment. ‘Fritz,’
as the Germans are collectively nicknamed
by the British, is too good a shot and too
adept in the use of deadly gas for us to
neglect any precaution against his wily ways.
The beauty of the land is overshadowed by
ruthless devastation. Bare brick walls
mark where fine farmhouses and buildings
stood a couple of years ago. Fertile fields
are ploughed up by shells and traversed by
trenches. Hedges have been smashed down
to make way for the passage of troops.
“At present our platoon is billeted in a
ruined farm-house which was tenanted when
we arrived by the house cat, which, cat-like,
stuck to its home. The Germans are pouring
over their big shells too close to us to be
pleasant. Two or three weeks in the firing
line has taught us the necessity for making
the road to the front trenches as safe as pos-
sible so that the supports can be rushed
forward when the pressure becomes too se-
vere on the defenders ot the front line. The
position gained at the cost of many British
lives must be held at any cost. Our
trenches are about 300 yards from the Ger-
mans, and the fire at times becomes very
hot.
TOOTING OF GERMAN HORNS
“Early in May, just as twilight was merg-
ing into darkness, we were subjected to a
very heavy bombardment. It was hell let
loose for a couple of hours. Shrapnel bombs,
high-explosive shells, and machine-gun fire
mingled together in a splitting tornado of
sound. It was pleasant to hear our artillery
replying. For the observers on duty to keep
their heads above the parapets for any length
of time was out of the question. All they
could do was to take quick glances across
the level space between the British and Ger-
man trenches. Our casualties were small,
considering fhe severity of the fire. Judging
by the tooting of the horns used by the
Germans to call stretcher-bearers, the enemy
suffered heavily. We all expected that they
would attack along the line, but apparently
the accuracy of our artillery fire held them
back. Our stretcher-bearers wmrked like
Trojans carrying away dead and wounded
under heavy fire. Our bays, as the divisions
of the trenches between the traverses are
termed, were damaged here and there, with
the consequence that fatigue parties in the
task of impairing and strengthening were
necessary' next day and night.
“The Germans rnav not be the equal of
British troops in attack, but they are un-
doubtedly dogged and determined in trench
•warfare. Those opposed to us possess a num-
ber of fine snipers whom we regard with
respect. The Huns are decidedly experts in
the use of bombs which, in my opinion, have
the worst effect on one’s nerves of all the
explosives used. They inflict horrible in-
juries. There is much to interest the soldier
in the trenches throughout the day. The
manoeuvres of the aeroplanes of both sides
overhead never fail to attract attention, and
the constant watch for the deady gas de-
mands never-ceasing vigilance, and sniping
affords excellent practice for efficiency in the
use of rifle. At night there are patrols of
working parties to fix up the wire entangle-
ments in front of the trenches, and occasion-
ally listening post.
FIRST NEWS OF KUT
“The Germans one morning displayed before
ns the message: ‘Held up by the scum ot
the earth.’ In answer to this our lads made
a most offensive remark concerning the Kai-
ser per medium of a board. We heard of the
fall of Kut from the Germans long before we
received the newspaper accounts of it.
“From the glimpses I have caught of our
foes they appear to be big fellows who will
be awkward in a rough-and-tumble: but as
we are all hard and trained by reason of con-
stant work, we should give them some troub e
when we do come to close quarters. The
Prussian Guards we were led to believe were
our first opponents, and they were respon-
sible for the severe bombardment we were
subjected to. Business was much quieter
when the Saxons took over the trenches, and
they are believed to be still there. Letters
and papers from Australia are warmly wel-
comed.’’ , _ „ .
Since writing this letter Private Walker has
been wounded, and is now in hospital.


THE EVENING NEWS, SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 1916.
THE NATIONAL
QUESTION.
CASE AGAINST COMPULSION.
BIG MEETING AT TOWN HALL.
j Four thousand persons crowded Into the
j Town Hall last night, when prominent mem-
i bers of the Political Labor League and the j
i Anti-Conscription Committee opened the tam-
-1 paign against the Referendum, to be held on
I October 28, on the question as to whether
compulsion should be applied to the 'manhood
of Australia for active service abroad.
It was a men’s meeting. There were women
■there, too, but not in the proportion of more
than one to 3. That was the outstanding dif-
ference between it and the gathering held by
Mr. Hughes, when there were fully three
women to every two men present. And it was
a strange blending of social classes. Hun-
dreds there were whose dress proclaimed them
to be men holding good positions in the com-
mercial life of the city, if not owning busi-
nesses of their own: workmen ranging from
young fellows to grey beards; women wearing '
frocks of the newest fashion side by side with
girls whose toilet indicated plainer than any
words could do that they had come straight
from their work In the factories, shops, or of-
fices.
It was a grave crowd. Demonstrative —very
much so at times. —Yes! But in the main
intent on hearing the arguments of those who
had openly and publicly ranged themselves
in opposition to the great national question
the greatest question that had ever been raised
in their lives, in fact in the whole history of
this island continent.
There was no singing before the meeting
started, but a few selections were played on the
organ. There was this difference, however, as
between the meeting on Monday night and that
of last night. When the first strains of the
“Marseillaise” floated through the great hail
the mass of humanity stood as one. No one
rose on Monday night.
To an insistent demand for "Australia’s Na-
tional Air” the organist struck up “Rule Bri-
tannia,” and it won salvo after salvo of cheers,
given with the utmost heartiness. There were
a couple of attempts to disturb the meeting. 1
but the waring elements were given short shrift ;
by the hefty men near them. One man was
put in his scat with such firmness that he could
not, bo induced to rise again, while another,
who wanted to air a private grievance, was
passed out of the hall from hand to hand as
though he were some inanimate parcel.
Mr. Doyle, president of the New South Wales
Political Labor League, presided, an’d was ac-
corded a great reception when he rose to speak
and every time he mentioned Mr. Hughes tnere
wan a volley of hooting.
"Tyet me put one chain question to you,” he
raid, “Are there- any industries in this State
to-day languishing for want of being kept go-
ing? No. There is no surplus unemployed
on the market to-day, and that means that if
conscription is brought into Australia you
know the results that will follow. Mr. Hughes
said the war might end in June or July next,
yet he proposed to conscript young Australians,
who could not be made soldiers in less than six
months.”
Mr. Frank Anstey, M.P.. had the place of
honor. He was the principal speaker of the
evening, and his address was dramatic and
telling. The White Australia policy, he said,
was in danger from the natural corrollary of
compulsory service entailing the sending out of
the country the young and virile manhood,
and was paving the way for the
introduction of cheap colored labor. It
was proposed to draw 200,000 men out of this
country within the next twelve months. This
number, it was declared, would turn the bal-
ance. They had said It before. And yet Rou-
manla had put in more men In one day than
Australia could in three years, with existing
transport facilities. If 16,000 men a montn
could turn the scale, surely 000,000 in one day
could do it. The position of \ustralia was
different from that of any other Dominion or
nation. If 100,000 men were taken from Canada
100,000 others could be brought from the United
States to replace them on the following day.
But if this number of men were taken from
Australia, the cry would at once go up that
there was a shortage of labor.
Mr. Finlayson. a Brisbane member of the
House of Representatives, told what had oc-
curred during the passage 0 f the Bill. He
spoke with great earnestness, and declared
that Mr. Hughes had said there were certain
things which were important, but secret, and
that it was because of these things, as well
as others, that he was asking for the support
of the people. Before the fight went on much
further, he, and others with him, would take
the risk of telling the public the secrets that
Mr. Hughes had referred to.
Mrs. Kate Dwyer made an appeal to all wo-
men to weigh with the greatest, gravity the
question that involved the sending of their
men folk to the front. If the referendum were
carried, she declared there would not be one
able-bodied man in Australia at the end of
two years.
Mr. Burns, M.P., announced his intention
of carrying on a platform campaign against j
the referendum, and by the time he had finish- j
ed speaking there was a gradual thinning out 1


in the hail. Mr. J. H. Cans wanted to know
why the exemptions that Mr. Hughes said
would be made were not embodied in the Bill
Parliament had just dealt with.
The chairman then put the following reso-
lution, which was carried without dissent and
amid scenes of wild enthusiasm:
That this meeting of citizens, represen-
tative of all classes, declares its emphatic
hostility to the conscription of human life
for military service abroad, and pledges
itself to use the best efforts at its disposal
to defeat the referendum.
Other speakers were Mrs. M'Mahon, Mrs.
Burns, Mr. Peter Bowling, Mr. A. Rosa, and
Captain Toombes, M.L.A.
Outside the hall about 8000 persons, who were
unable to gain admittance, were addressed by
various speakers. There was considerable
cheering and shouting, but no rough play.
FOR AND AGAINST.
The Parke-s P.L.L. 'Federal Council, including
delegates from ‘Ashfleld. Burwood, Campsie,
Canterbury, Hurlstone Park, Drumraoyne, Dul-
wich Hill, Five Dock, Haberlield, Summer Hill,
and Leichhardt, resolved, by a three to one ma-
jority, to endorse the action of the P.L.L. Cen-
tral Executive in carrying out the instructions
of the 1916 Conference in the matter of com-
pulsory service.
The Arncliffc branch of the P.L.L. (St. George
electorate), resolved by 17 votes to 12, to con-
firm its previous acceptance of the ruling of
Uie Central Executive in the matter of with-
drawing endorsement from the sitting member,
Mr. Bagnall, M.L.iA,
The N’.S.W. branch of the Federated Liquor
Trades’ Employees’ Union, decided against
compulsory military service, in a secret ballot,
by fet>2 votes to 125. Subsequently, a meeting of
the Sydney district resolved to endorse the ac-
tion of the P.L.L. in the campaign.
Captain S. Toombs, Mr. R. J. Stuart Robert-
son, and other members of the State and Fed-
eral Parliaments, will address a meeting at
Newtown Bridge to-. night iat eight
o’clock against compulsory military service.
1 Mr. Lamond, who is in Melbourne, has ten-
i dered his resignation as manager of tha
; “Worker,” to the board of management of that
I paper.


qLJ\JL /C(i& j 'tda.j cj cl <2 £*V?/ 6 ,
ARMY IN EGYPT.
GENERAL MURRAY’S PRAISE.
General Murray’s despatch of Ist
Jun e details the reorganisation of the
Dardanelles army, and re-equipment
of the Australians and New Zealand-
ers, and the training of Australian re-
inforcements at Tolelkebir until the
Anzac training depots were transfer-
•ed to England The Turks, prior to
March, had 250.000 trops ready t 0 at-
tack the Canal, but after the capture
of Erzerum the garrisons in Syria
were reduced «to 60,000 A second
Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps came into existence on th e - 27th
March, under command of Major
General Godley, and consisted of Ma-
jor-General Cox's fourth division.
McCoy’s fifth division, and Chauvel’s
Anzac Mounted. A division of the
Army Corps assisted patrolling on .the
western front. The 9th Australian
Horse, under Major Scott, made a
most successful reconnaisance at Jiff-
jaffa from the 11th to 15*th April, and
th e operation was most creditable to
all ranks. The sth Australian Light
Horse assisted in the pursuit of the
Turk s at Quaqtara on 23rd April.
During May reconnaisances on the
east front were fequent, where three
brigades of Anzac mounteds, including
New Zealand Mounted Rifles, “proved
the unit on which I could absolutely
depend to display energy, resource,
and endurance.’’
General Murray recommends the
following Australians for notice, by
the staff of General Birdwood, viz.:
Major-Generals Godley, Cox, McCay,
and Chauvel.
Colonels Antill, Delavoy. and
Qoynn.
Lieut. W. Inglis, 32nd Battalion
bridging train.
Lieut.-Coramander Bracegirdle, L.H.
Regiment.
345 Shoeing Smith Ranahran.
Lieut. Wearne, 6th. Light Horse.
1534, SergL-Major Berry, ■engineers.
Lent. J. Coghlan, infantry.
Major G C Elliott.
Lieut. E. Sawyer. •
1188, Sergeant Liddy.
2617, Private Wilson.
Captain Langly.
842, Sergeant Edwards.
1237, Sergeant K. Major Linford.
2nd Lieut. Cresswell, Army Serivce.
Major White.
Also, Lieut.-Coloncl C. Richardson
of the New Zealand Staff, was recom-
mended for good service in the Sa-
I lonika Army.


l9 i h
ATTACK ON ROMANI.
HOT CORNER WITH THE TURKS.
WAGGA BOY’S GRAPHIC
ACCOUNT.
A graphic description of the battle
with the Turks for Romani, near the
Suep Canal, is contained in a letter
by Lindsay Rich, written on August
Bth, to his parents, of “Richland,”
Wagga
The Ist A.L.H. Brigade, he states,
arrived at Romani on May 17th, after
having spent four months’ work
against the Senussi in Upper and Mid-
dle Egypt. The 2nd Brigade of L.H.
were here first, having come out to
help the Yeomanry when they were
rut up in April (27th), and were here
a month before being relieved by us.
Some New Zealand regiments were
. here also, and left with the 2nd Bri-
gade. Our work consisted of a series
of stunts or patrols from time to time,
sometimes taking us over 20 miles out
into the desert, and very tiring work
it proved for horse and man; On
June 2nd we had our first air raid. A
German plane dropped nine bombs on
our camp, killing men and w-ound-
many others, some of w'hom have
since died. A number of horses, too,
were also killed, and a lot perished
from thirst and exhaustion, they hav-
ing stampeded during ithe raid, it w'as
a very exciting time, and all will re-
member the Taube. Nothing exciting
happened after that for some time.
The days were taken up in stunting
and collecting in of all the Bedouins,
numbers of w’hom were still scattered
about in the many clumps of palms.
About the middle of July w r e were all
looking forward to being relieved, and
having a good time in Port Said, when
on 0 evening our aeroplane scouts
dropped a message to say that a large
force of the enemy were advancing
on a road about nin 0 miles distant
from Romani. Of course w r e were all
pleased, as we were tired of w’aiting
f° r the Turks to come, and the stunts
were getting very monotonous, so
though it meant farewell to our spell,
we didn’t mind, so long as we were to
get ago a>t Abdul. Things w r ere more
interesting now. We w r ere continually
on the move, watching the enemy
One Brigade would go out to-night and
return the next night, and the other
would go out the following night, etc.
It was very exciting work, as the
Turks would have their patrols posted
out among th e scrub and hillocks of
the desert, and our men would ride
out on to them before they would
open fire. Then iti would mean turn
tail and ride for cover, and then open
up. We lost a few' men like this, and
also captured a number of prisoners.
ell, this work lasted for nearly two
weeks, and the strain was beginning to
tell 0 n us. We only had about eight
hours sleep in the 48 hours, so when
we received the news that the Turks
w r eie going to attack on the night of
the 3rd and morning of the 4th of
August, you can imagine how r pleased
we were that we would be given a
chance to fix things up so that there
would be no more stunts. The night
before the attacks the Turks took a
Mod about 5 miles from Romani, so
that meant we were to keep to our
own lines, excepting, of course, the
ratrols, who had to keep in touch with
th e enemy day and night. Nov/ this
is where the Light Horse came in.
Romani was wonderfully fortified !
with guns, barbed wire entangle-
ments, redoubts, and heavily
manned with Tommy infantry, but
the L.H. were always out in front
watching the enemy’s every move-
ment, and as a result w e were well
prepared for the attack. The differ-
ent Brigades of the L.H, along with
artillery and some infantry, has
charg e of the right wing of the de-
fences. and when the Turks attacked
about 1 a.m. on the 4th August we
were there t G give them a good re-
ception There is a tale about the
I urkish patrol coming up to ours,
and asking in perfect English. “Are
you the L.H. ’’ and immediately the
battle started Until dawn only rifle
fire was used, but with the appearance
of daylight machine-guns and artillery
began to open up. When the Turks
first charged they came on in hun-
dreds, shouting “Allah,” and though I
had heard it on the Peninsular before
it made one’s blood run cold for
awhile. However, we never said a
word, but just opened up on them,
and very soon sought cover. Di-
rectly they found where our horses
were they shelled them cruelly, and
when word came for us to retire, so
as our own artillery could open up
they shelled and turned their machine I
guns on anything they could see. It '
was a fearfully hot place. They were
advancing fast, and we had to travel
a long distance on foot, and bring ..nr
tvounded with us, our horses having
been taken back under cover. How
so many got back without getting hart
ia marvellous. In retiring we passed
a battalion of Scottish infantry busily
digging themselves in and they had
very anxious looks on their faces
when they saw us, what seemed to
them having to retreat from the en-
emy. i suppose they never knew it
was because of our own artillery, '
whose fire we would be masking if we
had stayed where we were. We got
right back under the muzzle of our
°wn artillery in a clump of palms, and
the noise w-as deafening—have had a
headache ever since. We kept with-
in the shelter of the palms until about
- pm., when w r e moved away out to
the right and took up a fresh position,
joining up with other brigades of the
L.H., N.Z., and Yeomanry division.
All day our position w r as being shelled
by big gun and smaller canon by the
enemy, and their planes were very
busy dropping bombs. Early the next
morning the whole of our troops j
started to move on to <th e Turkish
position We met no resistance what-
ever, and the Turks surrendered
everywhere. Our brigade captured
2000 in a very short time, the others
having retreated the w r ay they came.
Austrians and Germans were among
%


the prisoners, including a German
macmue-gim crew, wonder it was
so warm the morning uetore. Some)
oi them could speak English, and
said they weren’t sorry Jme war was
over lor them, 'they end not go much
on the Turks, and said they let them
down, but old Abdul will do me tor a
lighter. The mounted troops pursuing
the retreating enemy was a wonderrui
sight. As tar as you could se e there
wa s a line of horsemen steadily press-
ing the enemy back, until in the
evening they reached , and
the order was given to fix bayonets
and charge through the palms on
horseback. The L.H. proved irresist-
ible everywhere. Our brigade fell out
alter having been all night and two
days fighting, with very little to eat
or drink. All were very tired. I was
out over the battlefield next morning,
and it was a gruesome sight to see
all the dead and wounded lying about,
and the desert covered with equip-
ments. Their retreat was very hur-
ried, a s they left nearly everything
behind, -id some of the guns were
captured. Prisoners state
they were told that they would meet
with very little resistance, and that
they would pave inside two
hours. All our tents were only dum-
mies to mislead the aeroplanes and 1
that only -too Australians were hold-
ing the place. What a shock for poor
Abdul! They must hav e wonderful
organisation, as they were well equip-
ped In every way, though food seemed
a bit scarce; but they travelled on
.'oot over 80 miles in the hot sand,
with two pints of water per man.
Wonderful! 1 know what it would be
like on tw Q pints of water, and would
not like to go through what they did.
There are many rumours about a land-
ing party cutting the remainder off.
Our lads are still pursuing them, but
cannot go much further. Our Colonel
thanked us on behalf of the General
Commanding, Grigadier-General Che-
vual, and himself after the fight. He
appeared very proud of us, and we 1
indeed feel very proud of ourselves.
Would like to see the Sydney papers
just now. Well, I suppose we will get
our rest now, and move on to some
other front. I have been engaged on
three fronts now—the Peninsula.
Western or Senussi, and the Suez
Canala front —and very pleased I Am
to have come through so well. Per-
haps We may go ifo France now, or
oosslbly may assist in settling the
East African affair. For my part, 1
would be satisfied to go home, having
seen enough of war. Hope that love-
1y Censor of ourg passes this, as it
has been a big effort on my part to
write all this. Trust you are all well.
I’m feeling O.K. myself, as are most
of the boys here.


Mj~ e t^Ko
OZANNE OF COLLIE
STORY OF A ROUGH DIAMOND
(By
Senator Allen McDougall.)
One of the many lessons to be learned irom
this war will be that the strict red-tape |
methods are not the sum total of military
efficiency, although it must bo admitted that '
strict discipline is absolutely necessary in j
such a big movement as “The Great Push”
on the western front in France.
Many of the best Australians are (it must |
be admitted) by no means subservient to the ,
strictest disciplinary methods as earned out ;
to a red-tape routine, laid down in printed
black and white. Countless instances might
bo quoted and illustrated as showing the
restlessness of Australians under routine dis-
cipline; and experiences in this groat war, ]
both in Gallipoii and France, show, that,
many Australians who have been “hard
doers” In ordinary life, make, when the!
critical time arrives, good soldiers, to. take a
certain difficult position by storm such as
Suvla Bay and Pozieres.
An instructive illustration of this is afford- j
ed by the sad and pathetic history of a Wes-
tralian in Egypt and Gallipoli. Ho w;as well
' r V 4i *J -
known in his brigade as “Ozanne of Collie,”
and this story concerning him has been fur-
nished to me by the cblonel of his brigade,
who has just returned to Australia.
Ozanne of Collie (the place where Westra-
lian coal is raised) joined up. to the reinforce-
ments of the Battalion in June, 1915. Be-
ing Imbued with the usual independent dnd
“devil-may-care” spirit of most Westralians
he made no headway at all in the ranks under
the usual disciplinary methods adopted uni- j
versally in training camps; he refused to do
anything in the nature of smooging to his im-
mediate superiors with whom he came in
hourly contact. 4
He experienced a rather rotten time in
Egypt, and always seemed to be up against
his junior officer in immediate control of j
him, or else the aforesaid officer was up j
against Ozanne, Unfavorable‘reports con-j
cerning him w’ere conveyed to the colonel in 1
command of the battalion, with the result
that when reinforcements were sent to the!
Peninsula Ozanne was left behind—much to |
his chagrin and disappointment. Further
reinforcements were urgently and immediate-
ly required, and Ozanne, in company with
others, was sent over. As soon as he
got over and into the real business of that
fell stage of the war, Ozanne at once emerg-
ed from his shell, and with great avidity
dived straight into the rush q.nd turmoil of
the fight. He was here, there, and every- j
where, and soon was promoted to the position I
of sergeant.
In the big push on Gallipoli of August 16
he surprised his officers by his dash, his
courage, and his deeds. In the words of
the colonel, he covered himself with glory.
His bravery so impressed the colonel that he
was to bo recommended for distinction but,
alas, that was not to be.
I
In his spare hours in the trehchcs Ozanne
busied himself making a little cross to mark
the resting place of a brave yorfng lieutenant j
who had succumbed to the bullet of a Turkish
sniper. During the afternoon spell Ozanne |
went down to fix the cross on the officer’s I
grave. While engaged in fixing the mark of
esteem for his superior officer, a British regi-
ment was practising bomb-throwing from a
catapult. One bomb mis-fired and dropped
80 yards short of the Turkish lines, and with-
in a yard of Ozanne of Collie, and one of the
! bravest soldiers was, in the words of his
colonel, blown to pieces; and so passed away
by accident he who had borne a charmed life
under shot and shell, and had never faltered
in his duty w’hen faced with the real work
of actual battle.
Not long before this sad and fatal accident
in the Peninsula a little incident occurred i
between Ozanne and the colonel (with whom |
this Australian had become a great favorite) j
which has a most pathetic interest. The j
colonel one mail day asked him, “Any news ■
from home?” Ozanne of Collie replied, “Yes, i
sir,” and proudly drew from his pocket a
carefully-wrapped photo of lovely’twin babies
who had been born to him since his departure j
from Australia.
This hitherto unpublished history of Ozanne
at Gallipoli deserves placing on record lest it
should become lost amidst the larger issues |
involved.
When the little twinnies grow up they will 1
he able to point with pride and love to the
deeds of their father.
Many cases of a pathetic nature will doubt-
less come to light, and many other individual
Australians are often sadly misunderstood
until they have a real opportunity of show-
ing themselves in their true color.


V cJD I I i 6
ATTACK ON THE CANAL
HOW THE AUSTRALIANS FOUGHT
OFFICERS' BRAVERY PRAISED
The part the Anzac mounted division play-
ed in the recent big victory against the
Turks in Egypt is told in a letter by the
last mail from Trooper lv. M. Beilis, of
Corowa. “We have,” he says, “been doing
man's work and taking our share in the
scheme of things. By this I refer to the
attack on the Canal. Different versions have
no doubt been related, out I am now going
to give you my opinion, as one who took part
in the battle, on the bold enterprise of the
enemy. The attack was a failure, and for
this tiie Anzac mounted division must claim
a fair share of praise. They did excellent
work in holding up the attack during the
most critical period. The dash shown by
oup men delayed the enemy in giving full
scope'to his attack. Then, later on in the
brittle, our flunking move disturbed the plans
of the attackers, who became disheartened,
anil gave the job best. Another note —I must
take.ofT my l)at to. the enduring qualities of
the Australian horses, which had to go on
without water and feed for 48 hours in a :
temperature varying from about 110 to 120 |
degrees. During this trial they had to carry
men whose average weight must be 12st., j
while galloping over loose sand, trudging
through the desert, and, when resting, stand-
ing under u blazing sun. And. when coming
home, they pricked up their ears and put
their shoulders to it' with a will. Of course,
a few knocked up, but only a few. Now,
after two days spell, they appear to be as !
fresh as ever and ready for anything. Yes;
the Australian horse will do here!
“August 3 was really the start of the
fray, when we found that the Turks had en-
croached to within tour miles of our strong-
hold. This discovery was made w'hile w'e
were out on the usual patrol during which
we hrid a day of exposure to a good Egyp-
tian summer sun. We arrived at the camp
at 10 p.m., and were called out at 1 a.m., 1
after which we saddled up and provisioned j
—.an hour’s sleep followed, and then the j
alarm! We were sent to line a ridge about j
a mile from the camp. The Turks soon
spotted our position, and the Are became hot-
ter and hotter. We had about three bat-
talions opposed to about 150 of our men, and
we retired gradually, while a machine-gun
on our right flank did excellently against the
enemy, the gunners shifting- right in front of
the advancing forces. A man named Oliver
was wounded, but he was immediately pick-
ed up by his officex-, who started to carry I
him to shelter, but the wounded man was j
again hit in the head and killed.
“The officer in charge of the machine-gun
crew is one of the finest men I have ever
seen. As cool as the proverbial cucumber,
and t,he last word in efficiency. And brave!
—of course, all of our chaps were game, but
he stood out like a giant gum in a pine
scrub. Our retirement was carried to a spot
where our horses were concealed in a de-
pression sheltered by palm trees. Then came
the hottest corner of all. Wo had to gallop
out from our shelter across an open space
of three hundred yards which separated us
from the next ridge. The bullets were buz-
zing past like bees and hitting the ground
like hail. A mate of mine had his leg broken
by a 'bullet, and his horse was hit in no
fewer than six; places. Thank God there
wore only two bursts cf shrapnel. If the
enemy had got his battery on to that open
space correctly it would have been the finish
of us. As it was we had a good few casual-
ties. After reaching the ridge we waited
under shelter while another brigade, which |
had taken up an excellent position in the
rear,, held up the enemy. Now it was up to
the Turks to cross that open space, but they
could not do it—our machine guns were too
effective. At this stage our artillery got
right on to them, and quickly wiped out
their mountain battery and two machine
guns. Our troop was next ordered to take
up a position on another ridge, with a view
to putflanking the enemy, but to reach the
goal we had to climb a soft sandhill about
100 feet high under heavy rifle fire. We dug
ourselves in on reaching the ridge, and com-
menced to harass the enemy. There were
about twenty Turks opposed to us, and
though they dug in, our lire soon settled
their activities, with the exception that one
Turkish sniper worried us by his attention
for a long time. Another friend of mine,
Suttor, suffered a good Christmas wound —
a bullet through the flesh of the arm. The
whole scheme of battle was unfolded from
the position we held on the ridge. Our right
flank was closing in on the rear of the Turks.
Also the great scourge o* the desert —Thirst
—(we write it with a capital T, as we know)
—was getting him in the vitals. At 4 o'clock
I noticed a white flag go up on a ridge—then
another. At 5 o'clock our infantry support
came up, and the Turks threw up the sponge I
in all directions. An hour later we got the
general advance order. The attack had fail-
ed. Just a word of praise to our Brigadier,
lie rode about all day under the hottest Are
directing operations. Even when wounded in
the leg he refused to leave the lines, telling
tb© doctor that he was too busy to have the
injury attended to. He will do me.
“At daylight the following morning we
were off again collecting prisoners and
scouring the desert. On August 5 we made
an advance against the main oasis which
was reported to be lightly held. It was not,
and we had to advance across an open flat
of 600 yards. As soon as we started a solid
wall of rifle fire and machine guns fell on
us. The enemy confined his shrapnel offer-
ings to the horses, but he could not find
them. The Light Horse officers have re-
duped the hiding of horses in the desert to a
fine art. The enemy did not even get a
(horse. Anyway) to get back to the story-
We got across the flat. At 400 yards we had
to halt, as the left flank was held up by
heavy Arc, and when they retired we had to
follow' suit. Our machine guns came to the
rescue, and the Turks were forced to retire
from the oasis. His retreat was pressed by
two fresh brigades of infantry, who had the
final task of clearing the invader from Egypt,
“Do not think this attack was a weak
affair. It was launched in force, well plan-
ned, and, from the Turkish viewpoint, was
, expected tu bring success to their arms.”
I


Q ot I .
ANZACS IN TRAINING
SCENES AT SALISBURY
THE RECRUIT’S FIRST SHELL
(From Our Special Representative)
LONDON, August 6.
Nothing impresses one about our Austra-
lian troops at the front so much as that they
have become soldiers. There is a world of
meaning in that term “soldiers.” Our men
in the trenches and behind them are strong in
the physical and moral strength of the fight-
ing man. Surrounded with accoutrements,
tanned and weather-beaten, they look cap-
able of giving and taking a blow, of enduring
hardship, of using their weapons with ruthless
aim, of showing as little mercy as they ex-
pect to get. Those left at home could not
see them at their daily duties in the trenches,
working cheerfully and industriously as men
with a purpose, without feeling that for the
time being they are different men. In a re-
cent wander along our firing line, not far
from Armentieres, I saw battalions changing
—a new battalion, fresh from Egypt, moving,!
in—an old battalion of the glorious Ist Divi-
sion, moving out to God knows what fate fur-
ther south. And in the contrast was all the
difference between the soldier and the civilian
—the man who has endured and the man who
has not yet seen blood on the battlefield nor j
felt the world throb about him as missiles
fall thick, and go back as heavily in reply, j
There was one young soldier of our Ist Divi- (
sion with all the knacks of many generations
of soldiers already learnt. His heavy iron
hat was set with just a suspicion of jaunti-
ness. His tunic was open at the collar,
showing full, strong neck. His pack and wea-
pons were so well carried as to appear of
little weight. Hound his waist was a belt
covered with the bright brass badges of many
British regiments, and he sang as he marched.
Doubtless a real mother’s son when at home,
but here a campaigner of resource and zest.
Many such I noticed, all clean, for cleanliness
is a characteristic of the Australian fighting
man; and all self-reliant units skilled in war.
British Generals on our front say it takes an
incredibly short time for a versatile Austra-
lian, mother’s son though he he, to become
a hardened soldier. Certainly, they soon
look real craftsmen at their new trade.
SALISBURY PLAIN TO BERLIN
From Salisbury Plain, in green, undulating
Hampshire, the road for our new Australian
soldiers is going to stretch through all the
stages of soldiering to Berlin. It is a far
cry, but the organisation exists, and the
army means to see it is used. The men:
are being landed at Plymouth, Devonport.
and southern harbors —ten shiploads with a
full division arrived this last fortnight, and |
as many more are on the seas —and they go
direct to their Australian camping-grounds
on the old British soldiers’ fields, within j
sight of Stonehenge, and amongst little hihsi
containing still the ruins of English sol- j
diers’ encampments of King Alfred’s days. J
Here the life is not unlike Liverpool or;
Br'oadmeadows. Hard training abounds.
There are canteens, cinema halls, detention
camps, stores, mock trenches, and bomb
schools. Trains bring crowds of friends on
slack days, and a great city of pleasure is
within easy distance for leave.
The distinctive feature of our Salisbury
Plains training grounds, distinguishing them
from the Australian camps, is the hutting.
Great townships of low iron and wooden
huts have been erected on hills, and in val-
leys of the plains. Each group of huts—
there are long streets of them, stretching
in monotonous straight lines for hundreds
of yards—can hold a brigade or more. It
is a complete little city in itself, with its
own system of transport, sanitation, food
supply, and entertainment. Somewhere in
one of the is a recreation hall, some-
where a canteen, somewhere a military police
office, somewhere a centre for divine wor-
ship. And all around Is open country,
wTierein non-commissioned officers labor
with their men until the day ends with
physical exhaustion. It may be too much
to say that the men like the work, but visits
to the camps have convinced me that they
are very happy, that the country interests
and delights them, that their food is good
—infinitely better than on some of the
transports—and that they are settling down
with earnest purpose to be soldiers.
AFTER SALISBURY
Many of our battalions at Salisbury are
“training battalions,” and from these drafts
continuously go forward to the fighting lines
in France. While our losses have been so
heavy in the great push, we have had to
rush forward all the reinforcements ready
for warfare. The fighting has not had many
points of similarity with the Dardanelles
except in losses and in the sudden need for
rSrcements. From Egypt we sent men.
ill-fitted for the work. Ur , ait . s . 1 f e l f e 1 r
across btfore even bayonet drill had been
taught. On the Somme the need has become
just as pressing, and officers at present arc
busily employed in going backwards and fo
wards with drafts of a hundred men each,
but every officer agrees that these reinforce-
ments are ready for anything. Most have
been in training for more than six
We have not had to interfere with the ne
formations; ali requirements have come fro
the training battalions.
Much is done by senior officers to interest
the men in tne country. Ixmg route marches
are wide through the most beautiful tracts
of Hants and Devonshire, and amidst the
landmarks and ruins of earliest England. A 1
men get their occasional four days leave in
London, or five days in Scotland with free
railway passes. Those who are lucky, and
are kept long enough at Salisbury, get a
second turn of leave, and most manage
‘final” leave before going to the front, yet
they are intensely glad when they pack thei
kits and march out with a few comrades to
some mid-station on the Exeter-London rail-
wav; for at last, and in incredibly few hours,
they will be at grips witli the Germans.
The journey is short, because its organisa-
tion has become as smooth and regular as an
express passenger service. From London
trains go at regular intervals to meet cross-
Channel boats at the south-east ports—Dover,
Folkestone, sometimes Southampton. the
i boats are met on the other side by more
trains These trains run to timetable to the
inside bases of each army—Munro s First,
Plumer’s Second, Allenby’s Third, Kawli
son’s Fourth. The distribution of the men
on this fan-shaped area, with its pivot in
London itself, is methodical. At the army
bases more trains are met. and the drafts
again subdivided. They, pass on to the rail-
heads; and then by motor or on foot to the
division they are intended for, and thence
to the brigade and battalion and company.
THE FIRST SHELL
And so the Australian sees little on his
passage. The attention of the line of commu-
nications officers is concentrated on getting
him to his objective. He passes through
Calais or Boulogne without knowing the ex-
traordinary efforts being made in these quiet
seaports to keep armies supplied with bread
and meat and boots and munitions; without
noticing that huge remount depots are
choked with horses, awaiting the great ad-
vance; or that thousands of French and Bel-
gian women are mending the clothes and
disinfecting the gas-helmets and linen of his
comrades, while a corps of men of his own
nationality is making the bread he is to eat
to-morrow in gigantic factories. He i
plunged into the wonderful coloring of rural
France, and experiences fcr a moment the
light-hearted joys of the new traveller. He
cannot help noticing the beautiful domes-
ticity of the countryside, the industrious,
thrifty mothers, the clean and vivacious chil-
dren; unfailingly, he thinks of another coun-
try, as lovely, as sunny, as calm and peace-
ful. He thinks of some of the people there.
During these days of heavy fighting at
Pozieres and Fromelle the draft may go
direct from Salisbury Plains to the actual
firing line. His company may be holding an
outer entrenchment, perhaps preparing for
an advance that very night. I am told there
Lave been cases of men back in London
hospitals within three days of their depar-
ture from Lark Hill camp. But the average
draft is more lucky. His battalion is in bi -
lets behind the lines, resting, licking its
wounds, waiting for these very dra«s. Or
he belongs to a set formation, a brigade or
division, which moves up slowly from tne
back, learns its way, takes over gradually
from those it is relieving, and may have few
casualties for a month or so.
In any case the arrival of the first shell
is a never-to-be-forgotten incident. It is like
a man’s marriage or 21st birthday, or like the
death of his mother or the birth of his son.
It is considerably more than the first time
he kissed a girl. It startles his very soul.
It may be only shrapnel, with which the
Germans rake the roads leading to the
trenches. You have been half-expecting it.
You have seen great curtains of sacking
hung across the road, with just room for ycu
to pass under them, and you have learnt
that these are screens to prevent the enemy
observers in their sausage balloons, from
directing hidden artillery upon you. The
Germans fire a shell more readily than a rifle
bullet, and you are far more likely to be
under fire first from artillery. It is a curious
sensation. The shriek of the shell is hardly
over before the burst comes beside you. For
the first few minutes the knees of the best
of men knock together, his heart shakes, and
his tongue requires careful control. Bpt
thereafter, if he be worthy of his race, he
is fearless. And even when bombardment is
, fierce and sustained, and “heavies” are burst-
ing around, and the earth is shaking, and
’ pals are dying, and the aw’ful fumes of Ger-
’ man shells are suffocating him, he will pull
( himself together when the German infantry
’ comes, or he lacks the lusty xed spirit of the
Australian soldier.


JJU. Ctt'Z- ~ 111 t - P'f
PRAISE FOR SIEGE BRIGADE
COMES FROM ITS COMMANDER
“NOT A MAN FELD OUT”
BENDIGO, Thursday.
In a letter to his father in Bendigo,
Gunner J. H. B. Gribble, of the Aus-
tralian Siege Brigade, enclosed the
following copy of a message which the
commander, Lieutenant-General Sir
Aylmer Hunter-Westori. K.C.8.,
D. 5.0.. had distributed among his
forces: —
‘‘ln so big a command as an army
corps of four divisions (about 80,000
men) it is impossible for me to come
round all front line trenches and all
billets to see every man as I wish to
do. You must take the will for the
deed, and accept this printed message
in place of the spoken word. It is
difficult for me to express my admira-
tion for the splendid courage, deter-
mination, and discipline displayed by
every officer, N.C.O. and •man of the
battalions that took part ip the great
attack on the Beaunion-Hamel-
Sierre position on July I.' ,
“All observers agree in ‘slating that
the various waves of me* issued from
their trenches and movedlforward at
the appointed time in order,
undismayed by the heavy artillery fir#
and deadly machine gun tire. There
were no cowards nor waverers. and
not a man fell out. It was a magni-
ficent display of disciplined courage
worthy of the best traditions of the
British race. Very few are left of
my old comrades, the original ‘Con-
temptibles,’ but their successors in the
4th Division have shown that they are
worthy to bear the honors gained by
the 4th Division at their first great
fight at Fontaine-au-Pire and Ligny
during the great retreat and greater
advance across the Marne and Aisne,
and in all the hard fighting at Ploeg-
steert and at Ypres. ,
Though but few of my old comrades,
the heroes of the historic landing at
Cape Helle-s, are still with us, the 29th
Division of today has shown itself
capable of maintaining its high tradi-
tions, and has proved itself worthy of
its hard-earned title of ‘The Incom-
parable 29th.’ The Slat ', New Army
Divisions, and the A’lth Territorial Divi-
sion, by the heroism and discipline of
the units engaged in this, their first,
big battle, have proved themselves
worthy to fight by the side of such
magnificent regular divisidns as the 4th
and 29th. There can be no higher
praise. We had the most difficult
part of the line to attack. The Ger-
mans had fortified it with skill and im-
mense labor for many months. 'They
had kept their beat troops here, and
had assembled north, ea*t, and south-
east of it a formidable collection of ar-
tillery and many machine guns. By
your splendid attack ypu held these
enemy forces here in the north, and
so enabled our friends in the south,
both British and Frenc-JJ, to achievq
the brilliant success that they have.
Therefore, though we did not do all we
hoped to do, you have - more than
pulled your weight, and you and our
even more glorious comrades who have
preceded us across the Great Divide
have nobly done your duty. 1
“We have got to stick it out and go
on hammering. Next tjme we attack,
if it pleases God. we wlty not only pull
oiw we-phi* but will pull off a big
Jbin g - VN&th; su«*b troops as you, who
are delermirfed to stick' it out and do
your duty, we- are certain of winning
through to a glorious victory. I
salute each officer, N.C.O. and man of
the 4th, 29th, and 31st divisions as a
comrade-in-arms, and I rejoice to have
the privilege of commanding such a
band of heroes as the Bth Corps have
proved themselves to be. —Aylmer Hun-
ter-Weston, Lieut-General, 4th July,
1916.”
ONE OUT OF SEVEN ESCAPES
FIVE KILLED BY SHELL
BENDIGO, Thursday.
Lance-Corporal W. Pethard, in a
letter to his father at Bendigo, tells
of a remarkably narrow escape which
he experienced while in the trenches
in France.
‘'Seven of us who were together,"
he says, ‘‘were cruelly surprised. A
large shell landed in the centre of us,
killing five and wounding one, but I
got off with a partial covering of dirt.
I struggled out rather stunned, but
could not find my whereabouts on ac-
count of the dense cloud of smoke
caused by the explosion. In my en-
deavor to gain the pure air (so near
and yet so far), I toppled against sev-
eral of the dead men. Rut, thank
God I was soon free again, and did
not forget to offer up a few words in
thankfulness for my spared life.”
GALLANTRY SHOWN
PTK. R. J. JONES, D.C.M,
*
In a letter to his father, Mr J. Jones.
King street, Bendigo. Pte. Robert John
Jones, who has been awarded the t>is-
tinßulshed Conduct Medal, mentioned
that he had been recommended for the
honor, but. with true modesty, requested
that nothing should be said about it un-
til the official announcement was made.
No details of the incident’ which had
earned for him the medal were given
but the official account states that af-
ter his gun team had been all killed or
wounded Private Jones took the gun
alone and, advancing to a shell hole,
remained in action, working it under a
heavy and continuous shell fire. A few
days ago Mr Jones was notified that his
son had been wounded. Private Jones
was in the Rh Battalion. Before enlist-
ing he was apprenticed to the boiler-
making* trade, and was also prominent-
ly associated with the Salvation Army.
In fact, he was about to enter the train-
ing home in Melbourne to qualify as
an officer when the war “broke out and
he decided to enlist


GAVE LIFE FOR THE NATION
GUNNER F. G. L. BIRKIN
Mrs Birkin, of Danks street. Albert
Park, has been notified of the death in
France, on August 8, of her second
son. Gunner F. G. L. Birkin. He
served In Gallipoli, and was sent to
France last May. He was a native of
Kyneton, and was 20 years of age.
JACKA’S BROTHER WOUNDED
ONE OF A FIGHTING FAMILY
Among those notified as wounded in
the official casualty list, published to-
day, is 2nd-Lieutenant W. Jacka, of
Wedderburn, who was previously re-
ported on two occasions as having
been 111.
He is a younger brother of Lieu-
tenant Albert Jacka. the first Austra-
lian to receive the Victoria Cross in the
present war. This he won as a
Jance-corpora 1 by killing seven Turks
single-handed -in a trench at Court-
ney’s Post, in Gallipoli, on the night of
May ID. 1915. He was afterwards
wounded at Pozieres, where his g.-U-
Ilantry was such as to ensure his re-
commendation for an additional
j a"ward. Second-Lieutenant W. Jacka
also took part in the Dardanelles cam-
paign, and is now in France., A third
brother, Sydney, is a member of the
Australian Imperial Force.
“WHAT WAR IS REALLY LIKE’
HORROR OF IT REALISED
hnv * something of what war
really is. and although being under fire
is a little exciting at any time, it was
not quite so had as T imagined.” says
Private J. At. Hoard man, of the Aus-
tralian Army Medical Corps, formerly
Scoutmaster rtf the First Brighton
Proop, in a letter from France to hig
brother, .Mr Ralph K. Boardman. acting
general secretary of the Young Men’s
Christian Association.
( )f course there is some noise,” he
writes, “with all the things going off at
once, but if a big gun goes off close
to me now it docsn t even wake mo up,
and it certainly would not keep me
awake. Shrapnel is not pleasant stuff)
neither is high explosive: but 1 don’t
like machine guns. They are beastly
things. I cannot tell you where we
were in action or much about it, but I
know now what an awful thing war
really is. The only bright patch is the
wonderful heroism and grit of the fel-
lows who were hit. Some of them even
go so far as to apologise for giving you
the trouble to dress their wounds. You
know how iodine stings, and I have
seen it poured into big, gaping wounds
that you could put a fist Into—never a
suspicion of a groan or a complaint.
*T think France is a pretty place, hut
I have two things to object
water supply and the drainage system
Drainage system’ is somewhat ‘of a
misnomer, as it consists of allowing
the drainage of all kinds from dwell-
ings to run out’into ditches beside the
roads, whore it remains stagnant- the
only way It is got rid of being by
evaporation. Needless to say the smell
is decidedly obnoxious.
“Summer in this part of the world is
a funny sort of affair. We would not
recognise it as summer unless we were
told. We see the London papers here
the day after they are published, but
Pr « tty terTns - ‘Serious
charge. ‘magnificent bayonet work •
and so on, they cloak over the real
thing—the awful horror of it ali.
“I was talking to a chaplain In a
-emetery Just after he had conducted
i burial service, and he said 'Th's
sort of thing must make every’ parson
To home determined to do his very ut
towards getting difference
lettted in some other wav"


a x. u / c f/k~ p- /
MACS ON THE PLAIN
THEIR SOLDIERLY BEARING
IMPRESSES CAMP VISITORS
FIRST SHELL UNFORGETTABLE
(From Our Special Representative,
Keith Murdoch)
LONDON, August 6.
Nothing impresses one about our
Australian troops at the front so much
as that they have become soldiers.
There is a world of meaning in that
term “soldiers.”
Our men in the trenches and behind
them are strong in the physical and
moral strength - of the fighting man.
Surrounded with accoutrements, tan-
ned and weather-beaten, they look
capable of giving and taking a blow,
of enduring hardship, of using their
weapons with ruthless aim, of show-
_ijig_AS. little mercy as they expect to
get. J hose left at home could not
see them at their daily duties in the
trenches, working cheerfully and in-
dustriously as men with a purpose,
without feeling that for the time be-
ing they are different men
BATTALIONS CHANGING
In a recent wander along our firing
line not far from Armentieres, I saw
battalions changing—a new battalion,
fresh from Egypt, moving in—an old
battalion of the glorious First Divi-
sion, moving out to God knows what
fate further south. * And in the con-
trast was all the difference between
the soldier and the civilian the man
FOR AUSTRALIA’S SAKE
PTE. RICHARD HAWKINS,
Killed July 23.
who has endured and the man who has
not yet seen blood on the battlefield,
nor felt the world throb about him as
missiles fall thick, and go back as
heavily in reply.
There was one young soldier of our
First Division with all the knacks of
many generations of soldiers already
learnt. His heavy iron hat was set
with just a suspicion of jauntiness. His
tunic was open to the collar, showing a
full, strong neck. His pack and wea-
pons were so well carried avS to appear
of little weight. Round his waist was
a belt covered with the bright brass
badges of many British regiments, and
he sang as he marched. Doubtless, a
real mother’s son when at home, but
here a campaigner of resource and
jsest.
Many such I noticed, all clean, tor
cleanliness is a characteristic of the
Australian fighting man, and all self-
reliant units skilled in war. British
generals on our front say it takes an
incredibly short time for a versatile
Australian, mother’s son though he be,
to become a hardened soldier. Cer-
tainly they soon look real craftsmen at.
their new trade.
I
SALISBURY PLAIN TO BERLIN
Prom Salisbury Plain in green, un-
i dulating Hampshire, the road for our
i new Australian soldiers is going to
| stretch through all the stages of gol-
| Tiering to Berlin. It is a far cry but
i the organisation exists, and the army
! means to see it used. Th* men are
being landed at Plymouth. Devonporl
and southern harbors. Ten shiploads!
,"' 1 ' h . a J 1! U division. arrived within the
last fortnight, and they are going direct
camping grounds on
r f : ntls! ' soldiPrs ’ fields. Within
suht of Stonehenge, and among little
co Vi ;uni . n - 81,11 thc ruins of Eng-
h-sh .-vo Idlers encampments of Kin-
Alfreds days Here the life is not „n-
-( hke Liverpool or Broad meadows. Hard
training abounds. There are canteens
mocS‘ a tr h e a,lS h dPtGntion cam P s > stores,'
Tr.in. renche8 ' a "d bomb schools.
I r [ls crowds of friends on slack
wtfhi’n a 1 f reat cit V of pleasure is
within easy distance for leave
The distinctive feature of our Sails-
bury T Jan, training grounds, distin-
guishing them from the Australian
jeamps. is the hutting. Great township,
of low iron aful wooden huts have been
Sr anJ in , ViUlevB of the
,™ n ; f .ach group of huts—there ore
lon,, roots of them, stretching in nm-
vard« * US 1 * lines f or hundreds of
yards can hold a brigade or more. it
is a commote little ci.vy in itself, with
its own system of transport, sanitation
food supply and entertainment. Some-
J a h n rf ' ( ! 1 '' ,ni Z of the ,ln «s is a recreation
hal! somewhere a canteen, somewhere
a military police office, somewhere a
centre for divine worship. And all
around is open country, wherein non-
commissioned officers labor with their
men until the day ends with physical
exhaustion. It may be too much to
say that the men like the work, but
visits to the camps have convinced me
that they are very happv. that the
country interests and delights them
that their food is good—infinitely bet-
ter than on some of the transports—
and that they are settling down with
earnest purpose to he soldiers.
NEED FOR REINFORCEMENTS
Many of our battalions at Salisbury
(are ‘‘training battalions.” and from
drafts continuously go forward
to the fighting lines in France. While
our losses have been so heavy in the
Push, we have had to rush for-
ward all the reinforcements readv for
warfare. The fighting has not' had
many points of similarity with the Dar-
( danelles—except in losses and In the
sudden need for reinforcements. On
fhe Somme the need has become just
as pressing as it was on Gallipoli, and
omcers at present are busily employed
in going backwards and forwards with
dra.ts of 100 men each; but every offi-
FOR THE CAUSE OF JUSTICE
i*TE. C. HANLEY,
Killed in Action in France.
cer agrees that these reinforcements are
ready for anything. Most have been in
training for more than six months.
'We have not had to interfere with the
new formations; all requirements have
come from the training battalions.


Much is done by senior oincers to
interest the men in the country. Long
I rovite marches are made through tne
most beautiful tracts of Hants and
[Devonshire, and amidst the landmarks
and ruins of earliest -England. All
men get their occasional four days
leave in London, or five days in Scot- j
1 land, with free railway passes. Those j
| w ho are lucky, and a.re kept long
• enough at Salisbury, get a second turn
; of leave, and most manage to get final
leave before going to the front. Yet
' they are intensely glad when they
pack their kits and march out with a
I few comrades to some mid-station on
■ the Exeter-Lcndon railway; for. at
last, and in incredibly few hours, they
will be at grips with the Germans.
DISTRT BUTTON METHODICAL
The journey is short, because its
organisation has become as smooth and
regular as an express passenger service.
From London trains go at regular in-
tervals to meet cross-Channel boaWs at
the south-east ports Dover, Folke-
stone. sometime P l cutha.mr»ton_ The
boats arc met on the other sjde Ty
more trains. These trains run to time-
table to the inside bases of eaoh
hrmy—Munro's First. Plumer’s Second.
Allenby’s Third, Rawlinson’s Fourth.
The distribution of the men on this
fan-shaped area, with its pivot in Lon-
don itself, is methodical. At the army
bases more trains are met. and the
drafts again subdivided. They pass on
to the rail-heads, and then by motor
or on foot to the division they are
intended for, and thence to the brigade
and battalion and company.
And so the Australian sees little on
his passage. The attention of the line
of communications officers is concen-
trated on getting him to his
He passes through Calais or Boulogne
without knowing the extraordinary
efforts being made in these quiet sea-
ports to keep armies supplied with
bread and meat and boots and muni-
tions; without noticing that huge re-
KILLED ON 11™ BIRTHDAY
I'TK. URKDERICK G. CURTIS
On his nineteenth birthday,
in July, Pte. Frederick Gillman
Curtis' was killed in action in
France. He was the second eldest
son of Mr. Matthew H. Curtis, of
Balaclava, and brother of Pte.
Herbert Curtis, on active service
in France.
within three days of their departure"
from Lark Hill camp. But the aver-
age draft is more lucky. Hi? batta-
lion is in billets behind the lines, rest-
ing, licking its wounds, waiting for
these very drafts. Or he belongs to a
set formation, a brigade ior division,
which moves up slowly from the back,
learns its way, takes over gradually
from those it is relieving, and may
have few casualties for a month or so.
In any case the arrival of the first
shell is a never-to-be-forgotten inci-
dent. It is like a man's marriage or
twenty-first birthday, or like the death
of his mother or the birth of his son.
It is considerably more than the first
time he kissed a girl. It startles his
very soul.
It may be only shrapnel, with which
1 the Germans rake the roads leading
to the trenches. You have been half-
expecting it. You have seen great
curtains of sacks hung across the
road, with just room for you to pa.ss
under them, and you have learnt that
these are screens to prevent the enemy
observers in their sausage balloons
from directing hidden artillery upon
you. The Germans fire a shell more
readily than a rifle bullet, and you
are far more likely to be under fire
first from artillery. It is a curious
sensation. The shriek of the shell
is hardly over before the burst comes
beside you. For the first few minutes
the knees of the best of men knock
together, his heart shakes, and his
tongue requires careful control. But
thereafter, if he be worthy of his race,
he is fearless. And even when bom-
bardment is fierce and sustained,
“heavies” are bursting around, the
earth is shaking, pals are dying, and
the awful fumes of German shells are
suffocating him, he will pull himself
| together when the German infantry
I comes, or he lacks the lusty red spirit
I of the Australian soldier.
mount depots are choked with horses,
i awaiting the great advance; nr that
thousands of French and Belgian
women are mending the clothes and
disinfecting the gas-helmets and linen
of his comrades, while a corps of men
of his own nationality is making, in
gigantic factories, the bread he is to
eat tomorrow. He is plunged into the (
wonderful coloring of rural France, i
and experiences for a moment the
light-hearted joys of the new traveller.
He cannot help noticing the beautiful
domesticity of the countryside, the in-
dustrious, thrifty mothers, the clean
and vivacious children: unfailingly, he
thinks of another country, as lovely, as
sunny, as calm and peaceful. He
thinks of some of the people there. . . .


o2VU tcL C' (Uz-dtJ- /-z “ /?/*> - P /
THE TROMMELFEUER
TERRIBLE FIRE OF ALLIES
LIKE ROLL OF KETTLE DRUM
MEN BROKEN MENTALLY
Prom
Capt. C. E. W. BEAN,
Official
Press Representative with the Aus-
tralian Imperial Forces. Copy-
right by Crown.
BRITISH HEADQUARTERS,
FRANCE, Aug. 21.
The Germans call it trommelfeuer
—drum fire. I do not know of any
better description for the distant
sound of it. We hear it every day
from some quarter of this wide battle-
field. You will be sitting at your tea,
BRAVE SOLDIER KILLED
SERGT. G. D. A. GALLAGHER
One of the 22nd Battalion
(Vic.), Sergeant Godfrey David
Albert Gallagher was awarded
the, military medal. He died of
wounds in France.
the normal, spasmodic banging of
your own guns sounding in the nearer
positions, five, 10, perhaps 15 times in
■the minute. Suddenly, from over the
distant hills to left or right there
breaks out the roll of a great kettle-
drum, ever so far away. Someone is
playing the tattoo softly and very
quickly. If it is nearer, and especially
if it is a German, it sounds as if he
played it on an iron ship’s tank —.
That is trommelfeuer - what we
call intense bombardment. When it
is very rapid—like the swift roll of a
kettledrum —you take it that it must
be the French seventy-fives down
south preparing the way for a French
assault. But it is often our own guns,
after all. I doubt if there arc many
who can really distinguish between
the distant sound of them.
I>ong afterwards —perhaps in the
grey of the next morning—you may
see outside of some dugouts, guarded
by half a dozen Australians with fixed
bayonets, a group of dejected men in
grey. The cold Scotch mist stands in
little beads on the grey cloth. The
bayonets shine very cold in the white
light before the dawn; the damp,
slippery, brown earth is too wet for
a comfortable seat. But there is
always some Australian there that
will give them a cigarette. A cheery
Melbourne youngster or two step
down into the crowd and liven them
with a little friendly chaff.
The blue dky begins to show through
the mist. The early morning aeroplane
hums past on its way to the line, low
down, half hidden in the wrack. The
big bushman from Gippsland at a
neighboring coffee stall—praise heaven
for that institution—gives them a drink
of warm stuff; and I verily believe
that at that moment# they emerge for
the first time out of a frightful dream, i
For they are the men who have been
• 'rough the trommelfeuer.
STRONG MEN SHAKE
Strdng men arrive from that experi-
ence shaking like leaves in the wind.
I have seen one of our youngsters—a
boy who had fought a great fight all
through the dark hours and w r ho had
refused to come back when he was first
ordered I have seen him unable
to keep still for an instant after the
strain, and yet ready to fight on till ;
he dropped, physically almost a wreck. •
but with his wits as sharp and his
spirits as keen as a steel chisel. I have .
seen others who. after doing glorious
■work through 30 or 40 hours of un- j
imaginable strain, buried, and buried,
and buried again, and still working like i
tigers, have broken down and collapsed,
unable to stand or to walk, unable to
move an arm except limply as if it
were string, ready to weep like little
children.
It is the method which the German
invented for his own use. For a year
and a half he had had the monopoly of
it —our men had to hang on as best they
could under the knowledge that the
enemy had more guns and more shells
than we, and bigger shells at that. But
at last the weapon seems to have been
turned against him. No doubt his ar-
maments and munitions are growing j
faust, but ours have for the moment
overtaken them. And hell though it
is for both sides —something which no
soldiers in the world s history ever yet
had to endure —it is better for us at
present than for the Germans. I have
heard men coming out of the thick of it
say, “Well. I’m glad I’m not a Ger-
man.”
WHAT IT MEANS
There is no gtood done by describing
the particular horrors of war God
knows those who see them want to for-
get them as soon as they can. But it
is just as well to know w'hat the work j
in the munitions factories means to
your friends—your sons and fathers
and brothers at the front. The normal
shelling of the afternoon, a scattered
bombardment all over the landscape,
which only brings perhaps half-a-
dozen shells to your immediate neigh-
borhood once in every 10 minutes, has
noticeably quickened. The German is
obviously turning on more batteries.
The light field gun shrapnel is fairly
scattered as before. But 5.9 howitzers
are being added to it.
Except for this small field gun the
German makes little use of guns. His
work is almost entirely done with
howitzers. He possesses big howitzers
—8 inch and larger-as we do. But the
backbone of his artillery is the 5.9
howitzer and the 4.2.
The shells from both these guns are
beginning to fall more quickly. Huge
black clouds shoot into the air from
various parts of the foreground and


slowly unit away across the hilltop.
(Suddenly there is a descending shriek
drawn out for a second or more, com-
ing terrifyingly near, a crash far louder
than thunder, a colossal thump to the
earth which seems to move the whole
; world about an inch from its base; a
! scatter of flying bits and all sorts of
under noises, rustle of a flying wood-
splinter, whirr of fragments, scatter
of falling earth. Before it is half finish-
ed another exactly similar shriek is
coming through it. Another crash—
apparently right on the crown of your
head, as if the roof beams of the sky
nad broken in. You can just hear
through the crash the shriek of a third
and a fourth shell as they come tear-
ing down the vault of Heaven crash,
crash. Clouds of dust are floating over
you.
A swifter shriek and something
breaks like a glass bottle in front of
the parapet, sending its fragments
) slithering low overhead. It bursts like
a ra nstorm. sheet upon sheet, smash,
smash, smash, with one or two more of
, the heavier shells punctuating the
shower of light ones. The lighter shell
is shrapnel from field guns, sent, I
d^r^ sa >’’ to keep you in the trench
whole the heavier shells pound you
there A couple of salvos from each,
perhaps twenty or thirtj shells in the
minute, and the shrieks cease. Tire
dust drifts down the hill. The sky
I pleais. Ihe sun looks in. Five minutes
later down comes exactly such another
shower.
evening brings change
j As the evening wears on the salvos
become more frequent. All through the
ght they go on. The morning
the intervals are becoming: even less.
Occasionally the hurricane reaches
such an intensity that there seems no
interval at all. There is an easing in
the afternoon which may indicate that
the worst is over, or merely that the
guns are being cleaned or the gunners
having their tea. Towards dusk it
swells m a wave heavier than any that
. has yet come. All through the second
i night the inferno lasts. In the grev
I pawn of the second day it increases
j* n a manner almost unbelievable. The
! . r,f covers everything, so that
it is quite impossible to see. The earth
shakes and quivers with the pounding
~n Ks J ust th en that the lighter guns
join m with the roll as of a kettle-
drum—trornmelfeuer. The encmv is
throwing out his infantry, and his
shrapnel is showering on to our lines
m order to keep the heads of our
men down to the last moment. Sud-
i aen ‘>' the whole noise ceases. The
enemy casts his shrapnel and big shell
further back.
The chances are that most men in
t.iese racked lines do not know where
the enemy even delivers that attack
„ ° ur ar tiUery breaks the head
of it before it. crosses No Man’s Land.
1 figures on the skyline hopping:
from craper to crater indicate what
ruil ef f l ° f lt- As soon as th ey find
ntle tire and machine guns on them
the remnant give it up as hopeless.
And what of the men who have
been out there under that hurricane
mght and day until its duration al-
most passed memory? I was out
there once after such a time as that.
They were there—Sydney boys, coun-
trj f eHows from New South Wales,
our old friends just as we knew them
heavy-eyed, tired to death as after a
long fight with a bush fire or heavv
work in drought time—but just doing
their ordinary Australian work lii
their ordinary Australian way. And
that is all they had been doing.
WAY POINTED TO FRIENDS
But what are we going to do for
them. The mere noise is enough to
break any man’s nerves. Everyone of
those shrieking shells which fell night
and day may mean any man’s instant
death. As he hears each shell cross-
ing he knows it. He saw the sights
around him. He was buried by earth
and dug out by his mates, and he dug
them out in turn. What can we do for
him I know only one thing. It is the
only alleviation that science knows of.
We can force some mitigation of all
this by one means, and one alone —if
we can give the Germans worse. The
one anxiety in the mind of the soldier
is: Have we got the guns and the
shells? Gan we keep ahead of them
with our guns and our ammunition ?
That means everything. These men
have the nerve to go through these in-
fernos provided their friends at home
do not desert them. If the munition
worker see what I have seen he
would toil as though he were racing
against time to save the lives of men.
I saw yesterday a letter picked up on
the battlefield. It was from one of our
men, “Dear mother, sisters, brothers,
and Auntie Lill,” it said, “As we are
about to go.into work that must be
done, I want to ask you, if anything
should happen to me not to worry.. You
must think of all the mothers that have
lost ones as dear to them. One thing
you can say that you have lost one do-
ing his little bit for a good cause. I
know you will feel it if anything does
happen to me, but I am willing and pre-
pared to give my life for the cause.”
Such lives hang from hour to hour on
the work that is done in the British
factories. ______
MILITARY CROSS GAINED
CAPT. I. G. FULLARTON
Although wounded. Captain lan G.
Fullarton, 30th Battalion (N.S.W.), (he
was then Lieutenant). refused to go
back, but assisted his commanding offi-
cer in the front trench for fifteen hours,
until he was again wounded. He was
awarded the Military Cross. A native
of Orange, New South Wales, he was
a student at Duntroon College, and was
21 years of age on September 2. His
brother. Gunner Gordon Fullarton, and
brother-in-law. Private Valentine C.
[Davies (wounded), were fighting in the
same battle as that in which he dis-
tinguished himself.


jjuu '
POZIERES VISITED
SOMME BATTLEFIELD DESCRIBED
SOMBRE AND AWFUL SCENE
Where Australians Fought
THE RUINED VILLAGE
(From Our Special Representative}
BEHIND THE SOMME, Nov. 3. " •
Grimness enshrouds the battlefield of the
Sornme. Trench warfare is grim enough at
the best of times, and death always lurks
behind the parapet; but trench warfare bears
little comparison with the Somme. Here it
is as if the grim god of war has been let
loose in a very tempest of fury. The impres-
sion is one of devastation, desolation, and •
shrieking Insanity, and yet through it all
myriads of brave men go coolly and cheer-
fully, and human laughter and the normal
kindly words of men are heard in surround-
ings most sombre and awful.
Tributes have been paid to the men who
go in and out of this inferno. But no writ-
ing can explain what they do. It is torment
of mind and body to every one. They go
voluntarily into a perfect hell. To see them
march in with heads up is one of the sub-
lime sights of the world. To see them storm-
ing forward in the distance over their simple
earthen parapets is to realise the infinite
heroism which can be called forth in men of
British race by a cause that touches them.
Our reservoirs of sound, human stuff in
khaki extend far behind the lines. All the
roads are busy. Brigades and battalions are
on the march, going in or coming out.
Streams of motor waggons, mostly the
green, efficient-looking monsters which have
seen easier days in French cities, are grind-
ing their way along in deep columns. Perch-
ed high over their engines are the solid,
placid forms of the French drivers —born
mechanics —and their assistants, usually
Senegalese. They wear bear-like coats of
thick fur, capped by their pale blue “kepis.”
Every man to-day in France is in uniform. ;
Even if he were not, you could not fail to 1
recognise him as a soldier.
RADIANT HEALTH AND GOOD CHEER
Miles of heavy British waggons wind
along the country roads, but it is in the
French waggons chiefly that one sees the i
pleasant faces of British and Dominion
troops. They are going into battle' or com- j
ing from it. Bui Invariably they look fit and 1
healthy, and I have seen none looking de- j
pressed or sad. British soldiers are the re- 1
verso of temperamental. Their spirits and '
resolution are as tough as their bodies, and 1
these, after a year or so or army training,
are like steel.
I Men march to the Somme with swinging
'stride, stoical, ready to endure, and cleter-
. mined to conquer. They go forward as bri-
gades in full marching kit, with all their
simple belongings on their back, and little
sections ox transport trundling behind each
line. One realises how moabe the army is,
and how well supplied we are with all the
necessities for rapid advance. Sir Dougias
Haig has maintained his vast army as an
army of advance; the Germans well know
' it to be a much more mobile army than
I theirs.
rne tougn cneenumess oi me unusn sol-
dier is more and more revealed as one gets
near to the scene of battle. As I reached
the Somme zone a Canadian brigade was
marching out. It had done great work.
Carrying on from the lines pushed towards
Thiepval and Courceilette by the Australians,
it was one of the Canadian brigades which
had figured in the great advances of Septem-
ber. Men were laden with trophies, German
helmets and the like. They bore the dust
and mud of severe battle. Their ranks were
thinned. But they marched as victors, and
had the confidence of real achievement. They
had hit so hard that they thought the battle
already won.
Having met the German face to face, and
fought and beaten him, tne Canadian knew
himself to be the better man. The same
knowledge has come clearly and convincingly
to every Australian and British soldier in
France. For the German artillery—respect;
for the German infantry—contempt. Such
is the accepted fact. Our armies have the ;
confidence of victory, although victory has
not come to them yet.
Absence of wounded is always noticeable
during a visit to Northern France. Along
the British line the organisation of dealing ■
with sick and injured men is one of the best
bits of work in the war. One passes trim
hospitals, with the Red Cross Hag and Union
Jack above them, their neat, low huts edged
with white paths ana plain gardens. Motor
ambulances are encountered on the road-
one I saw with the imprint, “From the State
Schools of Victoria.” But of wounded men
one sees little, except actually in the
lines, and even then they are quickly
passed from advanced dressing station to
clearing station and back to hospitals. All
traffic, on roads and truck-railways, pushed
up persistently into almost the front line
trenches, yields to the wounded. Devoted
medical men work where shells are thick.
Beyond Pozieres I saw dressing stations in
conspicuous places, where there was never
rest from the Germans’ artillery.
The little Red Cross flag flutters far in ad-
vance of our own artillery. It is the one
bright color in t’.u drab plateaus of churned
brown earth, as if challenging these elements
of war in the name, of its emblem. On the
roads the Red-Crossed waggons go slowly.
I have seen tough veteran officers, accus-
tomed to w'ounds, grow angry at the sight of
! an ambulance travelling faster than a snail’s
pace. “The one thing that makes me nerv-
ous is the thought of rny wounded being
jostled on the roads,” said a general com-
manding Australians. A plain red cross on
white background will still fly in soldiers’
i memories when many of their fights are for-
-1 gotten and the blurred landscape of the
1 Somme has been so softened in men’s minds
| by time that its harshness will have disap-
peared.
A map will show that Albert is in the centre
of the northern half of the British section
of the Somme battlefield. It a junction
of many roads, and ruined houses abound.
Here the statue of virgin and child bends at
right angles from the top of the church spire,
and the local superstition is that when the
statue falls the war will end. As it has been
firmly secured in its seemingly perilous posi-
tion, one hopes that the superstition will not
be verified.
Through this section of the front swung
i divisions of Australians. Men from our own
i country, who had sweated and worked in
j training camps and trenches for more than
a twelvemonth felt that the hour for which


all else had been a preparation was approach-
ing. In long, apparently e n d!ess lines they
went, battalion after battalion, , into
hind all the outside world and plunged
the inferno called the Somme.
A NEVER-ENDING SHRIEK
Noise of guns so battens upon the ! b ™.in
that it becomes a physical factor to <
kerned with. Some men's hearing is affected,
others are not normal for days afterward ,
but the soldier learns to disregard it.
guns are always going. Sometimes f
stretches they are like the patter of a weak
sun shower, when clouds are trying to
and can scarcely manage it; at otheis, when
a “stunt” is on, they are like a sharp fall, at
others, when the heaviest possible ban ag •
being sent across before or after a great a -
tack, they are like a severe hailstorm. 1’
ill positions of advantage, in long and open
lines, they belch out their messages to the
enemy. Shells fall about them, but guns and
crews seem wonderfully to escape. I passed
one magnificent battery of heavy guns, fed
by giants who laughed at little things as thev
worked, accustomed to sending 20 Germans
to eternity with one pull of their lanyard. It
was being angrily “felt” for by German bat-
teries, which, being blinded through lack of
aerial observation, could only guess the bat-
tery’s posse. Our gunners disdained the
shelter of their dug : ouls and returned the
German shells with interest.
• ••»••
One comes upon hills covered with guns,
some of enormous size. They speak to some
purpose. Around them is the levelled ruin
they have caused when the Germans were
on this spot and they themselves were far
back. Climbing the hill above Pezieres, and
mounting the ruins of the W indmill carried
by the gallantry of one of our most famous
Australian divisions, I saw beneath the Ger-
man trenches upon which these British mon-
sters were pouring their fire. They were pre-
paring for an attack —oie of the minor opera-
tions always necessary ifter main enterprises
to straighten the new fine and clean up the
leavings. Shells were vhistling overhead like
the shriek of an irregijar wind. And there
beneath they were falling with such accu-
racy that the line of epuntry which we were
attacking seemed to b 4 burning with an ever-
lasting fire, smoke a»d dust rising steadily
in a regular cloud, as if a long line of damp
scrub were smouldering.
POZIERES
Climbing up the gentle slope of the Albert -
Bapaurne-road, the Australian will ever walk
with lighter tread because of the achieve-
ments accomplished on this plateau. Half-
way up the hill can now be seen acres of
splinters, blanketed still on its western side
with the stumps of a little wood- One scrap
of wall is left. It can no longer be called
walling, for it is merely a few bricks heaped
together over a German strong post, which
gave a brave Victorian battalion infinite
trouble. All else is sheer flatness, save for
the deep shell holes pitting the whole battle-
field. Earthquakes could not accomplish
greater ruin, for there could not be ruin on
a completer basis. Houses and their be-
longings had disappeared into fine dust,
shells into fragments, woods into little splin-
ters. 1 found what seemed to be the last
stick of furniture —a broken keyboard of a
piano, with seven smashed keys still
suspended. What had become of the piano
—what of the pleasant Pozieres cottages, and
ironwork, and pathways? They had been
smashed into dust. And under a great part
of this shelling our men had stood, for the
devastation had come not only from our own
artillery before our advance, but from the
German artillery in anger and hate when we
had become the occupiers.
The priest of La Boiselle is unable to find
even the site of his church; in Pozieres he
would probably find it difficult to recognise
an atom of any of its edifices.
If one went to Pozieres with heavy heart
one would see much to be sad ab.out. For
our Australian trenches, battered and cut by
shell tire, are there, and it is simple to pick
out the marks of our men, and see where their
struggle was hardest. The poor saps lead-
ing here and there can be followed, and one
sees the German trenches—called the Old
German Line, or O.G.L.—where our heaviest
casualties occurred. The depth and finish
of the Australian trenches, cut under awful
shell fire and in face of strong German
forces, were surprising. They were only
jumping-off places for the next advance, and
no time could be taken to build serious para-
pets; but they were much more secure for
shelter than the shell holes which pit the
whole countryside be-tween Pozieres and the
Windmill deeply, and with scarcely walking
room between. In trenches and shell holes
is evidence in plenty of our bitter struggle,
i But the Thiepval plateau is a joy to Aus-
tralia, as the open battlefield on which we
met and signally defeated the braggart Ger-
man army. And-as such one sees much
that cheers and elates. 1 traced the fine
advance of the first Australian division sent
into this battle, saw where its worst fighting
occurred, saw how men had gallantly
stormed strong posts, and how advance after
advance was made until the village was ours.
Broken German helmets, scrapped German
equipment, even German dead lying face
downwards with heads towards Germany, as
though shot when routed, testified to the
completeness of our victory. And going fur-
ther afield I saw the poor trenches in which
“the relieving division had come, and traced
its work; saw how the next had passed
beyond the toughest work of all—the storm-
ing of the windmill—and how the whole Aus-
tralian victory had then gone on step by
step. One got a clear idea of difficulties
of advance over these shell-holes, torn con-
tinuously by further shells as though the
earth’s surface were boiling; the condition
of the trenches showed what men had en-
dured under the fire, and what the Germans
were endeavoring to endure under our fire,
which is worse than theirs. One saw, too,
how mixed and strange the fighting in such
regions must become in advances, where
marked objectives are wiped out by artil-
lery, and all communications with artillery
and with commanding officers—and even
with battalions on right and, left—becomes
a perilous matter of runners and pigeons
moving through the zone of fire.
Many good Australians went down on this
ridge. Many lie down the hill in little ceme-
teries with crosses above their heads. But a
visit to the battlefield will always comfort
their friends and satisfy their countrymen.
For standing here on the Windmill, though
German shells still come fitfully in barrages
to disturb the working parties still consoli-
dating the Australians’ gains, the fruits of
the fighting of these Australian divisions are
to be seen. And to every observer it is
patent that our men carried a crucial part
of the Germans’ battle-line, thrusting British
positions up to the high ground overlooking
all, and driving the enemy far down the hill
into such positions that he has never since
been able to make a strong stand.


XLI 7 ' 9/7
THOUGHTS IN BATTLE
A SOLDIER’S SENSATIONS
“The Bravest Thing God Made”
Corporal H. T. Bryant, who was wounded in
the Somme battle, has written from Loudon
the following graphic letter to his
brother-in-law, Mr. G. E. Clark, of Waratah-
street, Haberfleld:—
Mail in to-day; you state that your cousin
Percy stopped one on July 22. How well 1 re-
member that date. Many a good la I went
under fighting his way across No Man’s Land
to the German lines. On paper that doesn’t
look a very hard thing. Well, it is a stu-
pendous task. You cross the top of your
t parapet, and are met with a terrible tornado
of lead, and Fritz sends up his very lights
which turn day into night. The charge was
made on Sunday morning, at 12.30 after- a
bombardment on the German first bne. On
i the 22ud we dug communication saps out to-
i wards the enemy's line in preparation for the
coming onslaught, whilst others were recon-
noitring the position. Perhap,* it was in
one of these stunts that Percy got hit.
The Gallipoli campaign was an awful strain
; on one’s nerves, but this Somme affair sur-
passes all imagination. The enemy threw
j everything in the shape of munitions at you,
from a hand grenade to a 15-inch howitzer,
i and the whizzes come so quickly that you
would think a fly couldn’t live in the awful
, hail of lead. Yet amidst all this there is a
! certain calm, and you oecome quite indifferent
:to all noise and danger. The worst part of
the whole affair is if a comrade falls you can-
not stop to help him until the attack is over,
and so he has to take his chance whether
his mates trample him to death or not.
I will give you an instance. When I was
I acting as corporal in the second stunt —it was
i on a Friday in August—we were in supports
Uo A, B, and C companies of our battalion, i
The order came that we would have to move
closer up to render them immediate assis-
tance; that meant going up a mile through a
winding sap about two feet wide and five
feet deep, and the floor was slimy and mudejy
and a few dead bodies lying there. Previous
to going up poor old Joe , a man about
42 years of age, and full of grit—came up to
me and said, “Corporal, I am feeling weak,
and I jm afraid I’ll not last the distance.” I
could only say, ‘‘Well, Joe, the best I can do
for you is to let you bring up the rear so that
if you feel dene up you can crawl into one
of the deep dug-outs.” Away we started,
I and we had to go across some open country
first before entering the sap, and the Ger-
mans were pretty nasty. When we were
well up the sop word was passed that a man
; had fallen. We couldn't turn back just then,
but I found out later on that Joe had fallen
and that a party up a cress sap had walked
over him. He is alive, I believe, poor fellow,
but horribly mangled. So, you see, it’s a
young man’s game. Then there are nights
and days of sleeplessness, especially in the
taking of a village.
It is often asked in civil life, “I wonder
what a soldier’s thoughts are during a
battle?” Well, you live your life over in a
few hours, thinking of your people and
friends, and never thinking of death. We
never think v/e are going to get killed. In
our billets we are always talking of going
home, and what we are going to do. A
chap becomes very simple in the trenches
| under heavy fire. He is as gentle as a lamb
to his comrades: nothing is a trouble; he
shares his last match, reads each others
letters, and many other things that help to
make life happy, and last, but not least, he
is a humorist, rough though his jokes may
be. He is a brother and a hero, and when the
word is given to ‘‘stand and prepare for ac-
tion” he sees to every detail, despite the fact
j that his mates are falling around him. When
: he is let loose he goes forth like a raging-
lion, and nothing daunts him. He is the
; bravest tiling that God has made—the Aus-
i tralian soldier. He is shown his objective,
and is told that it is to be ta.ken, and doesn’t
need officers to lead him. If I come through
this awful turmoil, I hope to smoke the pipe of
peace for years to come. If I fall, you can
say to yourself that I did my duty, and
helped to rid the land of this awful pest.
I can see these brave lads now who accom-
panied me up the Bapaume-road, swinging
gaily up that hill with full battle order and
tunic sleeves turned up on their brown fore-
arms. singing the songs that were nearest to
i their hearts—“My Little Grey Home in the
West,” ‘‘Down on the Farm,” &c.—some of
them not knowing whether they would return
or not. It was a hill something like Taver-
ner’s Hill. We never felt the exertion in
climbina it. and when we reached the top
before halting, a London regiment broke into
a cheer, and were glad to see us, and told us
they had every faith in us and were sure
| we should take the village. We were the
j first Australians on the Somme, and great
things were expected of us. I was wearing
; the red band of a runner, and they told me
my life was only worth two minutes.” I
! them ‘ it was all in the game, and I f«it
ready.” How I fared in that first stunt you
well lenow. That's where my football train-
ing came in; how I slipped, slided, ducked
and side-stepped, &c.
Whilst we were in the village of Pozierss
the mail corporal brought some mail up but
unluckily a shell hit him, and all went up In
smoke. That is another big risk taken bv
our boys.
An incident which happened hag Just run
through my mind about some Egyptians who
'ame over to Anzac as a working party,
you recollect the old fat lamps we
used in Gallipoli, a jam tin full of fat and a
Piece of bag or rag for a wick. A party of
these intelligent darkies saw some jam tin
bombs-hve-second explosives they were.
They sneaked off with some of these “'amps"
when no one was looking, gathered around
whilst one of them lighted the wick. Well
you can guess what happened. Several of
them passed into the great unknown.


r /Cil {UiCjCL / UJoui Oj b/O I3 l * / 7 ,
WITH THE TROOPS IN EGYPT
THRILLING DESERT EXPERI-
ENCES.
A newsy letter has just reached
us from Egypt from Trooper Norman
Can. of Bribaree, The Bland.
Writing from No, 14, General Hos-
pital, Abbassia, Cairo, he states he
has been having a very rough time
of late, suffering from rhematism and
sciatica —two of the worst complaints,
he says, one could have in that country
and on the job they are at. “I got
the first attack last June,” he goes
on to say, ‘‘but hung on with the re-
giment for about a month, but had
to give in at the finish and went into
hospital. I w r as boarded for Austra-
lia. but begged my way out of it. in
spite of the doctor saying I could
not carry on. But as they said as I
was determined to have another try
they would let me. I went from here
to a rest camp at Alexandria —was
there for a fortnight. Then went
back to our own base. When I got
there they marked me permanent
base —that meant I had to stop there
for the duration of the war. I said
to myself, ‘This is no good to
Gundy,’ so when the first reinforce-
ment was asked for 1 presented my-
self, only to hear that I was a B
class man, and so had to remain at
the base. But I made up my mind to
go—and I did. After the boys had
been examined medically fit, and fully
*qu pped, they were marched off to .
T:c railway station Just at dawn, and
I picked up my kit and followed them.
When I got to the station I was bea-
iten again, as I had no equipment. I
went to a canteen guard and the cor-
poral of the guard gave me his gear,
-.o I was on a fair way again. I
went back to the train, got in with
the mob and got out to the regiment
without being questioned. yWhen I
got there I reported to our Adjutant-
Captain White, aim! he fixed up every-
Ming for me, so I was once more back
with the boys and as happy as a
king. But it was not for long. I
was only there a fortnght when 1
was seized with a worse attack than
eyer and was carried righ't from
the regiment to this Hospital on a
stretcher,, and my word I suffered
some for a few days. Many a time
I wondered what was going to happen
next. After being here for a week
I vas boarded and marked perman- ,
ontly unfit for active service and to
be sent home —and I was not then
sorry. I knew I could not s’and the
exposure with the regiment. I waited
r month for a boat home, when the
Hospital staff changed, and they re-‘
bearded all the old patients and I <
was one of the unlucky ones; so now'
don’t know what they are going to
do with me. They won’t let me go
back to the regiment. It’s hard luck
to have to leave the boys. I had to 1
leave some of the best mates that
ever left Australia. I would like to
have got right out of Egypt. They
will put me on some cold-footer job,
and that is not what I enlisted for. I
want to be in the front line among
the boys- there is where you find |
the bestmen and the best mates. I
mksed the Romani battle, as I got
back a few days after it was all
over. We were the extreme outpost
that front, ever since the Tom-
mies got cut up at Katia and Ogratina.
Those two places were an awful sight
when we first went out. Dead men,
horses and camels were everywhere.
We used to patrol the desert between
our camp at Romani to Bir-el-Ab. We
had several skirmishes with Turk-
ish outposts, but nothing sensational,
ever happened. One Sunday morn-
ing we had a bit of excitement. We
got into about 200 Turks. We lost
r our horses, but no men. It is won-
derful how close bullets can come
without doing any harm. With four
others I was talking to our Major
when a bullet went through the leg
of his trousers. We left them at mid-
day with the positions unchanged, ap-
parently our officers did not think it
worth while going on with it. We
were very short of water, so made
for our camp. We had about 25 miles
to go, and got home about 2 a.m. and
stood to arms till sunrise. This was
a bit early, as the regular stand to
was 3.30 ; but coming in as wc di l I :
suppose they thought if they let us go
to sleep they would never wake us,
for we had no slerj for practical* - (
four days and nigh's. Just as we got :
mr horses on the lines and got to J
• • tents a German aeroplane came t
over. It was the first visit we had
had from them, so we were new to the
ame. We got the order to stand to
—every man standing by his horse,
fully eqyipped and ready for action at
a moment’s notice. Then we got the
order to scatter, which we did quick
and lively, but not too quickly. We
ere only just scattered when our
machine guns opened fire, and we
knew the consequence then. The
next thing we heard a whizzing sound
and then the crowd called out ‘Here
she comes,’ and sure enough he had ,
dropped a bomb. It landed on the
wireless station, but did not do much
damage, and the wireless was got
going again in a few minutes. The
’ext one landed right in the lines
of the 3rd Regt., killed 11 men, seri-
ously wounded 22, and killed 42
horses. This regiment held him toe
cheaply and only stood to their hor-
ses on the lines. They came in for
all the fire, as they were such a good
arget. He went on and dropped six
more bombs, but did not do any more
damage, only to camels. When he
finished his bombs he-put a machine
gin on us. He ran one line very
"lose to me, and I thought he was
ng to play ‘Good-bye Australia.’
There was great excitement but no
ne was frightened. They all took


it as a huge joke. When we would
hear a bomb come—they make an
Awful row—everyone thought it was
oming fair on top of him. Our
-sf.iment was lucky ; only one had one
horse's ear shot off with the machine
i. I would not have missed it-:
day for a fortune. Three of the
2nd Regiment and myself had a mar-
vellous escape from being trampled
o death by the 3rd Regiment horses.
I \fter they had been bombed thev
stampeded, and we never saw them
{ miing until they were right on top
'f us, and it was too late to get out
of the road. There were about 300
horses galloping in savage forma-
tion, so we had to stand our ground.
We all got off scot free, only one
hep having his hand broken. Luck
is a fortune.’”
The Interesting letter concludes
hat he was heartbroken at having
to leave the regiment. He had had
the best of health in every other way,
and would have been alright if he
could only have another hip.


o2Vuo Xj oi /*T /9/7 - f 1
A USTRALIAN LIGHT HORSE IN LONDON.
AT THE LORD MAYOR’S SHOW.


oZ'/ut mj /T~ /9/7 - P‘l
Airmen trained at the State Aviation School Richmond
n SnfallJood*' (rCading from lcft t 0 right): A. Woodwood Gregory, Norman Clark*. J. R. Favicll*. G. H. Potts*, H. K. Tiddy, E. P. Coleman. N. B. Love*, C. Dagg, Hugh Cleary, J. H. Weingarth*.
Front row: J. p. Sutherland. C. R. Burtin*. A. F. Weaver*. R. Clark*. J. Francis. L. M. Sampson*. V. W. Burgess.
bv th^> f mUlta^ry Bt aV^offieerJVn v 'iiai'rSn»n c-ku _^ v, ® tion s °bo ol at Richmond 19 succeeded in obtaining pilots’ certificates Ten of the successful candidates hare now been selected
tion into the Imperial Air Service. Aust a F >ine <-orps, one has been retained at the school as assistant instructor, and the remaining eight are to proceed to England, for absorp-
work wafT J.f °a °!cn b!n° one Tnstructor ° f four m ° nths constitutes a record Certainly it is a most satisfactory result, in view of the fact that the
a v» ,1. r ,ulPI *’ new icniurc, wun out one Instructor and only two machines for practising purposes
The 10 men selected by the military for absorption in the Australian Flying Corps arc marked *. The remainder will be despatched to England direct by the State Government.


A'ft* /7 /?/7 P
TWO LETTERS.
MOTHER AND SON.
ADVICE TO THE STAY-AT-
HOMES.
Here are two letters—one from a mother,
and one from her son:—
“Sir,—l hope I will not be taking a liberty
in asking you to publish this enclosure, as
'at this stage of affairs when Australia seems
,to be sinking into apathy o r er the war, and
, seems quite content to let our dear sons over
| here be killed or wounded and patched up’
[ Kngland and sent back again to the tren- 1
! be finished the second or I
'(•’0 hiS 1S fr ° m my youn boy
-0 next March), who has been through Gal-
poli and after being blown up at Lone Pine
was six months in hospital, and then eight
™ the ■•«■><«• Z°l.ouS
-g. PL Although he was promoted to corporal
,he threw in the stripes’ 1 to get to France.
, nea v rl7 tUrDPd back in En « la ° d aa his
, left ankle had all the back blown away and
h.s right thigh was torn out. but as he’says
the doctor was 1 a sport and passed him. His
mu m r ’ xT 18 ,D 8 Div ieional Ara-
P D ** ,' Wh ° haB beCD throu « h all the
Hlg Push in Prance, saw him In Egypt
0 W ° Uld DeVer S6C a trcm ' b
got °7 80D determ!ned otherwise and
got there. lam a widow with only one girl
• left me. and I gave my two only sons proudly
(and am prouder still of them when I look
at those able-bodied young njcn with no tip-
who are quite unashamed now to Vay ” et the
other fellows finish it.” Perhaps the con
tempt conveyed in my boy’s few ° J
the way he dismisses the subject as too mea^f
r, , P . l,id r. e m 8 , on e r, >ou "“ '«»<•*
| ~p q ~ “KATE DOHERTY. Manly.
hpnfp 3 ' u SO r rp tusod two offers of furlough
home, as he thought he could not go back.”
“PLAY THE GAME. 11
horS U r Com P an h y. SluaHom
Division, to his mother at Manly;
•<r am c ,|«• .. “France, Nov. 1. 1916.
I am still alive and kicking, bat don’t
know for how long. It’s quite interesting
n^tr Ul »> t nS Whcn F,rt/ heav cs his ‘heavys*
over, how many of us will g 0 up and how
many pieces you will come down in. Serl-
pp6Ly ’ * t K°, Ugb ’ no ono worries over It here
as death loses all its terrors. You see too
” UCb of '■ They have a jolly good thl£g
on top of some of the paper the Y.M C A
gives us. and if you only live up to it you
are al right. It is, Talk clean. live dean
fight clean, and play the game. 1 What more'
can any chap do. So what’s the good of
worrying. I wrote to Dick telling him I
and , l suppose ho will be wild, but
t can tbe helped. He was always writin"
E°“® telling me to stop at the “school” in
Dgypt, or try and get home, but I never
could see the good of it till 1 saw a bit
, i »., k lhe ‘ ol j “ w b *u.
lion—the same Company and all—and wo
vonp U f\ the of il * Yon can count on
>our finKers now many of us are whn
wh| Z n d ° U . Gallipoli - an d waited for ihc
whistles to blow that day of Lone Pine, f
£®r tain,y have variety in my weather for
1 *tl, lot ‘hot aS COld as tl,c otll ' ;r
hmg domg shortly. The sooner the better
as sitting down throwing heavy weights at
i WOD Ido Tfe tS cotd
s stiff, believe me, and one’s hands and
feet are number most of the time. Where
fip°ia are , UOW J S nothin S but bare,
fields of mud, up to our Knees, and the guus
are always going keeping us side-stepping.
„ * E coupl f of Manly boys a few days
fr g nnt d XV B ° M MaQ,y WaS Well to the
w ’ ere saying it would be safe
h B * ha th f Same ‘' irds were d °lng the
old beat up and down tho Corso, how
many girls they could talk to. I suppose
de 8 a D o°f h o fe d bl r amiDg them - as It Is their
f Vm ’ 1 BU PP° se the result of the
voting will be known long before you get
hnt T U had no v °te as I was not old enough,
but i have been old enough these two years
to fight for those who have got it. I would
, have . v °t ed anyway, as if a man hasn’t
got the heart or the stomach for this came
let him stay at home, as this is man’s work
or l wfli mC K Thiß 'rl S DO p,ace for cold feet
jor Willy boys. They would soon lose in-
terest in the set of their clothes or the
gloss of their brush-backs. Anyhow, why
waste time writing about them, when I look
around and see the chaps here Well i
must dose now. This will reach you about
Christmas time the third away from you
now. I may put in Christmas in ‘Blightv’ if
lam winged. One never knows.’’


JXt "/V/7 - P- 7
SNAPSHOT LEAGUE.
PHOTOS FOR SOLDIERS.
A Y.M.C.A. WORK.
Since the Y.M.C.A. Snapshots from Home
League was started less than nine months
ago, thousands of photographs of loved ones j
at home have been sent to men at the front,
and the scheme has been so much appreciated
that the demand for workers among amateur
photographers Is greater than ever.
At present there are some 1200 application
forms at the Sydney Y.M.C.A. waiting for
amateurs to execute. Over 200 branches have
now been established throughout the Com-
monwealth. with a membership of about 2500.
and with headquarters in each State, but
thousands of amateurs will have to come for-
ward- If the Snapshots* from Home League is
to keep faith with the boys at the front.
Snapshot applications are arriving by every
mail from the troopships, hospitals, and j
camps in England, and from the men in
France and other parts. One troopship the
other day sent 700 applications.
Mr. H. K. Riley, the local secretary, says
ithat the amateur photographers of New South
I Wale* have not yet fully realised that this
'is their particular “bit of war work.” and
unless they do it the Y.M C.A. will have to let
some of the soldiers go without the glimpses
of home they have written for. Splendid
work has been done by the present members
of the league, but the fringe of the move-
ment has* only been touched. The Y.M.C.A.
field secretary on board every troopship leav-
ing the State carries an ampl'' supply of
snapshot applications and literature. One
secretary, writing from Durban, says; Thesfe
boys are willing to bank on the Y.M. now,
and I am certain you would be greatly en-
couraged in your work could you have been
with me and heard the flattering remarks
about the Snapshots from Home League and
Y.M. generally ‘God bless the work.* I con-
sider it to be one of the association’s finest
pieces of service, especially so when I know
that many of these brave lads will never s’ee,
their dear ones again”
The navy has not been neglected. Every
warship has be.en provided with application
forms. Amateurs, young and old, can help.
The Mosman Superior Public School has en-
rolled members ranging from 8 to 14 years.
The young people are already doing splendid
work. In the past the Y.M.C.A. has not ap-
pealed in vain for support of their war ser-
vice work, and now feel confident that the
amateur photographers will rally round the
league and help it to achieve great success
in this worthy movement.
Mr. Riley states that a pathetic incident
came under his notice recently. A boy at the
front filled in an application for a snapshot
of bis home folk. There was* delay in getting
an amateur to do the work, and when a mem-
ber of the league eventually called the father ,
stated it was too late. “I had a letter from
the dear lad telling me that you were coming |
to take a snapshot of the old home, and how
glad he would be to receive it; since then
we have received a message that he has been i
killed, so he won’t want the snapshot now,”
said the father.
Amateur workers are required in the follow-
ing centres: —Annandale, Arncllffe, Carlton,
jclty, Carlingford, Cabramalta. Drummoyne.
1 Enmore, Fairfield. Guildford. Granville. Glebe.
Haberfleld, Hurstville, Kogarah, Longueville,
1 Newtown, Penshurst, Paddington, Rozelle,
Smithfield, Sutherland, Armidale, Adaminaby,
Aberdeen, Browarrina, Blayney, Blacktown,
Burrlnjuck, Boorowa, Braldwood, Bcllingen,
Blanket Flat, Berry, Bega, Barellan, Crook-
well, Cobar, Campbelltown, Coreen, Caloola,
Cowra, Colo Vale, Cumnock, Coolamon. Lake
Cudgelllco, Dorrigo, Dudley, Dubbo, Dunedoo,
Emmaville, Emu Plains, Griffith, Grahamstown,
Grafton, Gunning, Gunnedah, Horsham, Her-
midale, Holbrook, Kurrajong, Katoomba.
Lyndhurst, Manilla, Mildura, Mudgoc, Mill-
thorpe, Morrisset, Muswellbrook, Molong,
Moama, Nelligen, Narrandera, Macleay River,
Mount Victoria, Newbridge, Neville, Oatley,
Portland. Peak Hill, Parkes, Penrith. Peak-:
hurst, Queanbeyan, Richmond River district, i
Richmond, Rydal, Riverstone, The Rock, St. j
Marys, Sprlngwood, Tweed Heads, Tumbar-
umba, Tenterfield, Tarana, Tullamore, Tumut,
Trangie, Toronto, Uralla, Werris Creek. Wya-
long, Wyong, Weston, Warren, Wellington,
Wentw'orth Falls, Yass, Yerrauderie.
Mr. Riley Invites all camera users to send
I in their names’ to him at the Y.M.C.A., Syd-
( ney, and he will fully post them up on what
to do and how to do It.


cXAjC -At /J Jio L l*l Ill*7 ~ P* 7
ENGLAND TO-DAY.
THROUGH AN ANZAC’S EYES.
A RESOLUTE NATION.
(BY
C.G.P.)
Like many other of my countrymen, I was
lucky enough to secure the coveted leave to
i “Blighty,” and accordingly found myself one
afternoon in the busy little town of Boulogne,
waiting for the Channel steamer. “Blighty,”
as you know, is the soldier’s familiar terra
for England; it originated 1n India, where our
English regiments found that this word —or,
rather, that this Anglicised corruption of
the word —meant “home.” It has been spread
abroad In this present war, and so “Blighty”
it is now, and henceforth to the soldier a
“blighty wound” is a wound that will neces-
sitate your removal to England, and “Blighty
leave” is leave to take you there.
So presently I stood on the deck of the
cross-Channel steamer, a larger and faster
edition of our Manly ferry, and drew near to
the chalk cliffs of old England. And, as
I gazed at them I felt not as a stranger go-
ing to a strange land —as had been the case
in Egypt—but rather as one returning to I
the land of my father's, and the home of my
forefathers. The subtle Influence of “home"
—as we in Australia always term it— was at
work within' me. From Boulogne to Folke-
stone. and from Folkestone to ondon. With
what expectancy and thrill wc drew near to
i this huge metropolis c/ the '••orll. and, hay-
ping reached it. with wnat pr. Ic ■ >. d we peal
| ise that we were Ftrit rh. and belong'd to
• this great nation.
1 It was late at nisrM * hen wo ran Into-
, Victoria Station, ar.d the first impression was
t one of utter bewilderment. It was a huge
-1 city In semi-darkness; the street lamps were
j few and shaded; the windows emitted no
lights; the toot of motor horns was inces-
sant; and the rattle of trams and motor
’buses, and traffic constant. The throb of
London’s traffic by day, and its unnatural
semi-darkness by night, and its flashing
searchlights overhead thrill one.
THE ANZAC AND THE TOMMY.
The Anzacs are well-known in London and
many parts of England, with their sun-tanned
cheeks, their Jaunty step, and, above all, their
broad-brimmed hat. wheih seems to have
captivated the hearts of both England and
France—they rarely fail to attract attention,
and without doubt, they are behaving wonder-
fully well, and living up to the high reputa-
tion they have won. A notice put up at
i Horse-fcrry-rd. the Australian headquarters,
jhas had a remarkable effect. It records that
soldiers neglecting to salute will immediately
have their leave -cancelled, and be sent back
to their regiment. And so. Instead of the
sudden attraction of a shop window as an
officer passes him, you will sec yeur Anzac
scrupulously paying every compliment. The
moral effect of this has been, and always
will be, considerable. Around Horseferry-
road itself there has sprung up quite an Aus-
tralian settlement. It is the centre of at-
traction to the constant stream of Anzacs
into London, and here you may buy Aus-
tralian tunics,' badges, boots, boot polish—
we scorn all other varieties, I might add-
end, in fact, everything thdt is or purports
to be Australian.
From being in England, one can under-
stand the British “Tommy” much better.
His rigid discipline and respect for superior
strikes our boys almost as sevllity. But
you are not in England very long before you
sense all around you the innate feeling of a
kingdom contrasted with a republic. With us
it Is w’hat you are yourself which counts for
most. Here it is what your father is which
counts for more. The Feudal system, as such,
is practically dead, but its traditions still
live on in the customs and outlook on life of all
ranks.
This appeal, loyalty, patriotism —call it what
you will —Is but an outward and visible indi-
cation of the tremendous sway past conditions
still exert in the lives of the present-day
people; and so, as I say, you can understand
and appreciate the Tommy better. His dis-
cipline and respect are as natural and innate
as his dislike of route-marches. All stories of
daring, dash, and originality in England are
now being woven round the magic name of
Anzac. His doings are gleefully recorded, and
his eccentricities gloated over. Thousands of
people in their time have fed the pigeons
that flock round St. Paul’s Cathedral; but the
fact that three Anzacs did so one bright morn-
ing immediately merited notice in the papers
and an accompanying snapshot. I overheard
an amusing conversation in Westminster]
Abbey Several Anzacs, fresh from Madame!
Tussauds. where the lifelike figures are allj
nameless unless you pay 6d for a guide book.j
I were looking at the time-honoured statues of 1
| England’s greatest men. “Gee!” said one.
with a sweeping gesture and ordinary gaze, “I
like this place. You can tell who all these
blokes are without buying a programme.”
True son of Australia, admiring yet unabashed!
“ALL OUT ”
The contrast between France and England
which a passing trip through both gives is
immense. I omit, of course, those parts of
France where there is actual fighting. In
England It is evident that there is a war on,
from the vast predominance of khaki. the
women tram and ’bus conductors, railway
porters, the multiplicity of hospitals, and
blue-suited hospital patients, etc. But one
does not get the ‘ all-out” impression that Is
so strong in France. There is not the same
absence- of young men, the same predomin-
ance of mourning, the same striking lack of
male labour. P'rance fights for hearth and
home, and on French territory, but England
fights for Franco and Belgium, for honour and
Justice, but not on English land, for English
hearths and home, and therein lies the differ-
ence. But the heart of the nation is stead-
fast and resolute, and one cannot but feel
that this is the bulldog type that will never
relax its hold till victory is assured.
The trip to England, the glimpse of Lon-
don, that very many of us now have had. has
been of immense interest and value. It has
opened our eyes, broadened our minds, made
ns realise more earnestly what a huge struggle
this war is, and how much it means to the
Empire as a whole, and to Australia as a
part, of such an Empire. It is not alone
France and Belgium, honour and Justice, that
wc are fighting for, but our own existence.


SAju Jaw 1 7 ” -P 7
THE ANZACS.
VIEW OF BAPAUME.
NEW ENTRY IN SOMME
BATTLE.
BY
CAPTAIN BEAN.
BRITTSH HEADQUARTERS. FRANCE. Nov 9
f W " e . k an Australian force made its at-
T'! •**•">« or .ho
rieht • Th * New Glanders had pushed
ght through to the comparatively green
rount ry just here-and so had the British
north and south of It. 0
Ve were well over the slope of the main
Z’L7.Z Ch »«»'« r ZZtlr
!* “ r « tO r eo month.. Posler,.,. tho hlgh ,
l.r m,7 Australians Orst po, P r d „„„ R
lay miles away to our left rear
British 1 T lOUr ° f the co,lntry on the
Brltieh side is brown-all gradations of it-
from thin sloppy grey brown mud trampled
IT .TV* feet ° f a "< horses lo
r ** U . tty ’ llk * brown mu <l so thick that when
Tou get your foot Into it it is a constant pro-
? l Ut aSaln ’ U ‘ S the countr y over
which the fight has passed.
HERE HEAVEN IS SMILING
i ust ahcad of a »«• 0^
am d h ° German lin *«. there is heaven
g you can Be * 14 quite clearly in this
Part. Just up the opposite slope of the wide
©pen valley.
There ig the green country on which the
'r™ a !!, are always behj « driven back, and up
hlch this monstrons engine of war has not
yet begun his slow, gi aesome climb. There
are the beautiful green woods fading to soft
autumn brown and yellow—the little red roofs
in the trees, an empty village in the fore-
ground—you can see the wet mud shining in
its street, and the white trickle of water
down the centre of the road, the countrv
roads behind the hedges, the clock tower of
a church just beyond the far crest—with the
dock—through the telescope the clock
hands are Just at the hour; if it i s going it
must be ten o'clock over there, for it is
nine in the morning here. and that
country keeps its clocks an hour ahead of,
ours. '
It is the tower of Bapaume Church.
the line goes over.
There was a fair amount of scattered she]
'"I ’r r :‘l' a " the landscape-
about 9 o clock it suddenly burst out into a,
uproar from behind us. A line of light khak
unlea ,s climbing out of the mud down
the lower edge of the valley on our slde-you
cannot see the bottom of the valley, which is
over the edge of the knuckle. The line clam-
ors up on to the surface with its rifles and
then goes forward at a slow pace, picking its
ng ,tS am,dBt th *
A few minutes we could see ,
SxZFf?-
i a bayonet h«re and there as
after shen 'h nothins raore except shell
SOMME AWARDS.
The number of awards for gallantry in the
field gazetted for the period from July 1 to
November 25 is as follows;
V.C 77
D.S.O 333
M.C 2,339
DC.M 1,576
M. Medal 1° 430
M.S. Medal '«si
17,376
In addition, bars for subsequent deeds have
been awarded as follows:—To D. 5.0., 9; to
M.C., 55; to D.C.M., 36; to M. Medal, 67;
total, 167.
Many other awards have been given, bui
not gazetted (adds the “Daily Express”), and
the number of "immediate awards” is ver
large.


IN A TANK.
A MIDNIGHT DASH.
AUSTRALIAN’S GRAPHIC STORY.
A young Australian soldier has recorded
hour by hour hla experiences in a tank during
a night attack on the Somme front. The
following are extracts from the “Manchester
Guardian":
S p.m.—Worse than the fog of war. Out in
it. Only able to crawl at snail's pace. Grop-
ing after Fritz like in a game of blind man’s
bluff. Suddenly a great glare in the skyi
P lash of guns everywhere. More fireworks
than ever dreamt of. Infantry rush forward.
General vote of thanks to old Fritz for his
thoughtfulness in lighting our erring foot-'
steps towards his lair.
9 p.m. Ball in full swing. Infantry rush
forward. Sudden commotion. Ground sod- 1
den. Worse than an Irish bog. A shell j
bursts in the water, sending a great spout |
into the sky Just like at sea. Then bullets
begin to strike the water. “Land at last!"
calls out a cheery voice.
“HARBOUR LIGHTS."
lh p.m. Lnemy's fire more furious. We come
In for some of it. It is not very effective. In-
fantry keep pressing on. Unable to say
where we are, but think enemy’s trenches
must be near at hand. Suddenly a great flare
appears. Harbour lights.” cries someone.
“Land ahead," calls another. More laughter.
Through the mist and drizzle we can make
out the barbed wire close to the enemy’s
trench. Me take our bearings to sec what
chance there is of getting through. Infantry
wire-cutters help. Way s'oon made, and we’ 1
b-ar down. Out of the fog and the blackness I
scared faces peer. We swoop down on them
before they realise what is happening. They
set m to be new troops, who have never on - ;
countered a “tank.” Spitting devils in full
j blast. Enemy quickly disappear.
"HORRIBLE SENSATION."
11 p.m—Off beyond the first line. Devil’s:
own time. Every step we take in the mist
and drizzle we seem to run Into the enemy.
Party after party is swept away under our
hro. Rest fly.
Midnight.—General assault on second line.
Me sweep the trenches* right and left. Mist
and drizzle make it difficult to see what we
are doing. Into the fog we charge. Horrible,
jolts and jars. M’o have crashed into ter-
ror-stricken foe. and arc careering over the
dead. Horrible sensation. Infantry have
shot ahead in haze and seized trenches.
1 a.m. Tide of battle rolls' back towards us
through the fog. At every step we seem to
run into ghostly figures. Huns all the time.
Guns going like fury. Party of enemy crash
into us, we into them, and then comes the
end, preceded by shrieks and curses and
moans*.
Parties dash hither and thither through the
mist. They rush right up to us. Discover
their mistake. Double back and find them-
selves up against infantry. Cut and run again,
only to be headed off by us. General sur-
render.
HIGH GERMAN OFFICER.
- a.m. Out in the wilds. Don’t know where
wj arc. Stray figure appears out of the fog.
Doesn t know what to make of ps, nor we of
it. Turns out to be high German staff officer.
Has lost his way, and lost the troops he was
directing. Greatly astonished to meet us.
Bring him into trenches, and hand him over
to infantry.
3 a.m.—Off like Children of the Mist once
more. Seem to have acquired art of smell-
ing out the Germans wherever they are.
4 a.m.—Fog begins to lift. Terrible scenes
of havoc everywhere. Our troops pressing
forward all along the line. Furious gunfire
all over the field. German guns at work.
Enemy shelling their own troops in retreat,
Shells begin to burst around the ‘ tank."
wonder at first if we can weather the storm
Soon convinced we can,
5 a.m.—Desperate rally of the enemy. Large
body of best troops on our right front, sup-
ported by machine-guns. Go full tilt at them
Hake them through and through. Our gum
get a fine target, and cut their ranks to rib
bons. Enemy break and flee. Our big gum
open on them. Only a handful of survlvon
reach the third line, and comparative safety
THE LAST KICK.
6 a.m—Gathering up the fragments
Prisoners streaming in from all directions.
Pitiable plight.
7 a.m.' —Last kick of the dying Huns. Scratch
troops brought up in vain effort to regain
lost ground. At two hundred yards we give
them hell with interest. Infantry and “tank"
go at the enemy full tilt. The day is won.


cZtU. t <1 i ~r
THE NEW DRAFT.
OUR LATEST AUSTRALIANS.
A FORCE TO BE PROUD OF.
AUSTRALIAN WAR CORRESPONDENT,
C. E. W. BEAN.
(Copyright Reserved by the Crown.)
BRITISH HEADQUARTERS, FRANCU,
Dec--".her 11.
A fair-sized shell recently arrived In a cer-
tain front trench held by the Australians In
France. It exploded, and an Australian found
himself struggling among some debris in No
Man’s Land. He tried to haul himself clear,
but the tumbled rubbish kept him down, and as
often as he was seen to move bullets whizzed
past him from a green slope near by The
green ran like a low railway embank-
ment along thj other side of the unkempt pad-
dock between the trenches. It was the Ger-
man front line. Finally one of bis mates, lam
told. Jumped over to his help, and dragged him
clear. When he got in ho asked to be put
into the very next party that should ever visit
the German trenches. He wanted to get his
own back.
He was one of the newest Australians. That
is exactly the sort of request that would have
been made by the oldest ones. We have seen
the newest Australian draft In France, and the
verdict from first to last amongst those who
know them is "they will do.” There is a cer-
tain amount of chaff thrown out by the oldest
Australians at the latest arrivals. The sort
of Australians who used to talk about our "Tin-
pot Navy” libelled the Australians who rushed
at the chance of adventure the moment the re-
cruiting lists were opened, “the slx-bob-a-day
tourists.” Well, the tourists made a name for
Australia such as no other Australians can ever
have the privilege to make. The next ship-
ment were the "Dlnkums” —the men who came
over on principle to fight for Australia —th£
real fair dlnkum Australians. After them
came the Super-dinkums, and next the
“War Babies,” and after them the “Cho-
colate Soldiers,” then the “Hard Thinkers,”
who were pictured as thinking very hard before
they came. And then the “Neutrals.” “We
know they are not against the Allies,” the oth-
ers said, when came news of the latest drafts
still training steadily under peace eruditions.
“We suppose they aro Just neutral.”
There has always been some chaff thrown at
the latest arrivals —and It is a mistake to think
that there was never any feeling behind the
chaff. I remember long ago at Anzac when a
new draft was moving up past some of the
elder troops, past men who were thin with dis-
ease and overworn with heavy work,
there was a cry of, “You have,
come at last, have you?” flung
In a tone of which the bitterness was unmls-
takeable. There has always been a feeling
amongst the older troops that they have been
holding the fort —hanging on for Australia’s
name until the others have time to come along
and give them a hand. There Is a tendency to
feel that men who are still at home are getting
all the limelight—probably live to reap most
of the glory at the end of it all.
TITLES THEY ARE PROUD OF.
If so, there was never a feeling that melted
so quickly the moment each new draft arrived
and was really tested. The moment it goes
Into the whirl of a modern battle and acquits
Itself through a wild night as every Australian
draft has always done In Its first fight, and al-
ways will do, every sign of that old feeling
melts as if It had never existed, and the new
draft finds Itself taken Into the heart of the old
force on the same terms as the oldest and
proudest regiment there. Ages ago, “pre-
historic ages,” “The Dlnkums” became a title
for men to be Intensely proud of. Men who
went through the first fortnight at Pozieros
need never be ashamed to compare their experl-;
ences with those of any soldier In the world;
for it is the literal truth that there was never
In history a harder battle fought. The “choco-
late soldiers” became veterans In one terrible
struggle. The “war babies” were old soldiers
almost before they cut their teeth. It is one
of the pities of the censorship, but a neces-
sary one, that the Australian public cannot
know, until the story of this is fully told at
the end of It, the famous Australian battalloas
which wllj most assuredly go down to history
as household names.
*111(1 it l.'icro aro hoc Dciccaiioiio amjur
newest troops which will go down to history
with some of the very best Australia possesses
—then Aam a German. They have had a won-
derful training of late —a training which can
only be compared in thoroughness with that
of Menu Camp in Egypt, where dur first troops
trained, and with the full experience of this
war to back it. The British authorities are '
equipping the now Australian drafts generous-
ly. The discipline of Australians, once they
come to understand their work, has never
given the slightest real anxiety to those re-
sponsible for them. The newest men have
Just exactly the same straight, frank look and
speoch of those of every other batch that I
have seen. If there is any difference between
them, first and last, I will be bound that It is
bejond the keenest eye to detect it.
SIMPLY A MATTER OF OFFICERS
Indeed, If there Is a difference between one
Australian Infantry battalion and another, it Is
and has always been a matter of officers. A
commander who can make all bis subordinates
feel that they are pulling in the same boat’s
crew; that they are all swinging together, not
only with their own, but with ©very other bat-
talion and brigade; who can make them look
upon themselves as all helping In the one big
cause, not fighting for themselves or regiment
hut for the same great main object; who can
make them report back the true situation at
cnee, however unfavorable, because it Is the
only way in which they can help those above
them to mend it; who can make
them look upon the difficulty of another
battalion merely as a chance for freely and
fully assisting It —a commander who can do
these things with his officers can make a won-
derful force of his Australians, whether a bat-
talion, a brigade, or a division. It can be
done, because I have watched it being done,
and wondered at its perfection. This may
sound abstract and vague, but it Is real to such
an extent that It is the main reason of all dif-
ferences that exist between Australian units.
Vague or not vague, it is the most Important
factor in building an Australian army.
The reinforcements which the Australian
forces have been getting and are still getting
have their value to prove. Having seen
them In their camps and In the line, I do not
believe that a pennorth of difference exists be-
tween the men. Australian units have, lljce
the Scots, a wonderful confidence In each other.
They have been found to fight by the side of
grand regiments and divisions; but I fancy they
would rather fight beside other Australians or
New Zealanders than beside the most famous
units In the world. Chaffing apart, that Is the
feeling of the oldest units towards the new-
est.


The Evening news Jan 24th 1917
STRAPPED TO GUNS.
HOW GERMANS FIGHT.
AUSTRALIANS AT POZIERES.
“I was fighting six months in Flanders and
Belgium before I got hit,” writes Sergeant
Reg. Cowan, in an interesting letter from Hare-
field Hospital, to his father, who resides at
Homebueh-road, Strathfield.
"Our last place was fairly ‘hot,’ ” continues
the soldier. “I had the luck to have charge
of a team of bombers. They were the hard-
est nuts 1 have ever met. They were fright-
ened of absolutely nothing, and fought like
‘one thing.’ We had the Job of Tagging’ Fritz
—that is, we would go over in the middle of
the night, and bomb him out of his happy
home, and pinch everything we could get our
hands on. But when we got down to the
Somme it was absolute hell. We marched
through a town fro® which all the people had
cleared out. It was like a city ot the dead.
Most of it is blown to glory. We went on
from there into the line, and had to hang on
for three days, with Fritz blowing us about
all the time.
“Subsequently wo received instructions and
places in the advanced firing line, a gutter
which we had dug the night before, and which
Fritz had nicely ranged. W’e had to wait
‘Zero’ was passed along, and our ob-
jective set. At last it came to me. ‘Zero’
was set for midnight. It was the limit wait-
ing down in the earth with Fritz’s machine
guns clipping the top of the parapet, and
knocking the dirt down upon us. Every now
and then a whiz-bang would drop in, and a
few of the fellows would go to Heaven. One
landed in front of me, and for a few minutes
I did not know where I was, but It was a miss.
My worry was how to get over the fence with-
out the machine guns getting me.
ARTILLERY BOMBARDMENT.
‘lAt 11.35 p.m. the artillery started to con-
centrate on Pozieres, and kept getting fiercer
until midnight. It was awful then, but as
soon aa the second hand reached one minute
past It was absolutely inconceivable, every gun
for six miles having a cut. Have you ever fell
how the air quivers and shakes when a s big
boat lets her siren go in your ear? If you
have, just imagine it a hundred times worse,
and you will have some idea of what It was
like. The small trees behind me were amov-
ing about with the air just as if it was blow-
ing, only with this difference. Instead of a
steady movement, as it would have been with
wind, It was Just a shiver. Our eyes were
painful with the vibration. We were only 300
yards away. The 75’s and 18-pounders were
Just skimming our trenches. If we had had
hats on instead of steel helmets they would
have been lifted off. Do not think this is ex-
aggeration; because it is not. If you take a
stiff stick, and make smart cuts above another’s
head you will have the thing just as it is, ex-
cept for the wind that they make.
“It was possible to pick out every size of
shell that passed over (the note is so high
that it can be heard above the din of the burst-
ing shells). The whole enemy line was lit up
with a steady red glare, and behind their first
line, and in front of the reserves, there was
another line of light in the sky (our barrage of
shrapnel to stop him bringing up supports). All
this time Fritz was doing his bit, and pounding
the life out of ua, and our machine guns kept
playing “Rule Britannia” up and down bis
parapets. The bombardment was only for ten
minutes, and at eight minutes past twelve my
orders came. I told the fellows to come on,
took a deep breath, and dived straight over
and dodged the machine guns nicely. I was
in the front line, and passed on the left of the
machine gun, and when our fellows got It, the
gunner was strapped to the gun. When I
saw him he was dead, but there were plenty
more left in the front line.
NOT WORTH A BULLET.
“My job was further on past his second line,
a wood on the right of Pozieres. This had to
be bombed clear of Germans, and I can toll
you it was exciting. I was wandering through
in front, when & big Prussian jumped up, to
surrender I found out late, but I was so
scared that I shot him just above the nose
with my revolver, and blew half of his face
off. I saw three others jump out of a shell |
hole, and start to yell, ‘Mercy, comrades.’ We j
cleared the wood. There were two 6-inch siege '
guns and one B.2in howitzer in it. We then
had to go Into the village, and chase them out
of the houses and dugouts. That is where
the bombers got it. Anyhow, those
ivuo were not killed, hid so well that we
could net find them In the dark, and as It was
getting light 1 got back to our new line. It
was right in the centre of Pozieres, and when
it was light enough the scouts and bombers
rounded up what was left of the Fritzs. Oh, it
was ITm, and as soou as one was found away
he would go, with our fellows after him with
pick handles, and entrenching tool handles. In
the stale they (Fritz) wore in, they were not
wortu a bullet. They were all cleared out by
10 0.m., and then their 77’s got busy. You
must remember we were only dug in to hold
on until we could advance again. They were
blowing In our trenches, and burying men
everywhere. At 1.30 one hit over my head,
and buried mo. It took me above five minutes
to get out, and then I moved up about five
>ards, and settled down again. Then the bruto
knocked that one In on me, too. That nearly
Axed me. It Is awful to hear the bursting
of the shells just above your head, and thou
feel the earth pushing you down. About an i
hour after that I gut hit under the right
shoulder with a lump of high explosive shell
east. I thought a 9.2 naval gun had dropped
on top of me. It made me rub my nose in
the dirt. My colonel was alongside me, and
he lied the wound up. I hung on for two
boars after that, and had the job of digging my
colonel out.
When things got a bit quieter, I started to !
get out. I was walking along the communi-
cation trench, when the Germans put a big
shell fair and square in the trench behind me.
It lifted me about three (eet off the ground,
and sent me forward ten feet. I was dressed
at the battalion station, and then started to
walk to the clearing station, about three
mike away, dodging shells, all the way. When
I had gone about a mile a big gas shell dropp-
ed almost at my‘feet. My right hand was
tied across my chest, and I could not get my
gas helmet out, so I started to run. I was
blinded with the gas, and went flying into a
shell hole, but had the luck to get 'my helmet
free as I fell, and used it as a pad. I was like
that when they found me.”


jij ~ , 9
INHUMAN DOCUMENTS
GERMAN WAR POSTERS
HISTORIC COLLECTION
i Something of the grim, inhuman “fright-
! fulness’’ of war as waged by Germany is
} brought home to one by a perusal of the
i thirty German war posters which Mr. lan
Malcolm, M.P.. has collected and is exhibit-
j ing in the new tearoom at the House of
I Commons (says the London “Evening Stan-
dard’’).
| Chiefly they consist of proclamations,
i warnings, notices which have preceded or
! followed outrages upon the peaceful inhabi-
! tants of the Hun-invaded cities, towns, and
j villages.
“A series of inhuman documents,” is Mr.
! Malcolm’s description of these placards, and
[ an a foreword to a booklet reproducing most
i of them he localises and enforces the moral.
“.Let the reader imagine himself to be study-
ing any one of these, when he suddenly finds
it affixed to the door of his private house
or his church, or his town hall.”
Take the sickly humbug of the very
! earliest, signed by von Emmich on August
j 4, 1914, the very day Belgian. neutrality was
violated.
“It is to my very great regret that the
German troops find themselves compelled to
cross the Belgian frontier. They act under
the constraint of an inevitable necessity, Bel-
gium's neutrality having been violated by
French officers who crossed Belgian terri-
tory in motor cars and in disguise in order
to make their way into Germany.”
A more nauseating document it would be
' difficult to imagine, for it proceeds with a
loving appeal to “Belgians”—“Belgians'. Re-
member the glorious days of Waterloo, when
Gorman arms helped to consolidate and es-
tablish the Independence and prosperity of
I your country!”
TERRORISING ORDERS
There are terrorising orders addressed to
the population of Liege warning them to
j avoid the fate of Andenne, where 110 people
| had been shot and the town reduced to
ashes.
And an interesting sidelight on the matter
of German personal requirements is shown in
the order which Luneville woke up to see
on August 29, 1914, signed by von Wokesben-
der.
By September 1 the town had to provide—
best quality throughout:—
1. cigars or 200,000 cigarettes, or 5000
kilos of tobacco.
2. —50,000 litres of wine.
3. kilos of sugar.
4. —lOOO kilos of tea or cocoa.
5. —lOOO kilos of roasted coffee.
6. —lOOO woollen stockings.
7. —A quantity of soap, of toilet paper or
cut paper, a great number of pocket hand-
kerchiefs, and of knives.
8. 10 kilos of glycerine.
B.—lo kilos of grease.
PUNISHED WITHOUT MERCY
Here is a grim hint to dwellers near rail-
roads: —
PROCLAMATION
In future the inhabitants of those locali-
ties situated near railways and telegraph
lines which have been destroyed will be
punished without mercy (whether they
have been guilty or not). For this pur-
pose hostages have been taken in all locali-
ties in the vicinity of railways menaced by
similar attacks; and at the first attempt to
destroy any railway or telegraph or tele-
phone line they will be shot immediately.
The Governor, VON DER GOLTZ.
Brussels, October 5, 4914.
THE LILLE TRANSPORTATIONS
The famous Lillie transportation proclama-
tion is also shown: —
AVIS
(Texte Francais)
All the inhabitants of the town, with the
exception of children under fourteen and
of their mothers and old people, must be
prepared for transportation in an hour and
a officer will definitely decide which
persons will be taken to the concentration
camps. For that reason all the inhabi-
tants of the house must assemble in front
of it. In case of bad weather they may
remain in the passage. The door of the
house must remain open. All complaints
i will be useless. No inmate of the house,
even those who will be transported, may
leave the house before 8 o’clock a.m. (Ger-
Everyone has a right to 30 kilogrammes
of luggage: if anyone’s luggage exceeds
that weight ae will not be allowed any
! luggage at all under any consideration. All
packages must be separately made up for
each person, and bear an address le.giblj*
written and’firmly fixed on. This address
must include the surname and the Chris-
tian name and the number of the identity
disc
It is absolutely necessary to provide one-
self in one’s own interest with eating and
drinking utensils, as well as woollen rug,
strong shoes, and linen. Everyone must
wear his identification disc. Anyone evad-
| ing this deportation will be punished w ith
out mercy. .
etappen kommandantur.
. Lille, April, 1916.
nurse cavell
There is a sad interest in the Nurse Ca\ell
proclamation, announcing the condemnation |
of six to death and four to fifteen years
hard labor.
PROCLAMATION
Le Tribunal de Conseil re Guerre Imperial
Allemand siegant a Bruxelles a prononce
les condanations suivantes:—
Sont condamnes a mort pour trahison en
nande. organisee.
Edith Cavell, Institutrice a Bruxelles.
Philippe Bancq, Architecte a Bruxelles.
Jeanne de Belleville, de Mqntigmes.
Louise Thuiliez, Professeur a Lille.
Louis Severin, Pharmacien, a Bruxelles.
Albert Libiez, Avocat a Mons.
Pour le meme motif, ont ete condamne
nuinze ans de travaux lorces.
(For the same offence the following are
condemned to fifteen years hard labor.)
Herman Capian, Ingemeur a Vi asmes.
\da Bodart, a Bruxelles.
Georges Deveau, Pharmacien a Patur-
na vmrv de Croy, a Bellignies.
1 The proclamation proceeds to add that
i Edith Cavell and Bancq have already been
! executed. It is dated Brussels, October 1-,
1 if. 15, and signed General von Bissingp


0
OUTPOST OF EMPIRE
TAX-COLLECTING VOYAGE
AUSTRALIANS TAKE CHARGE
NO. 1.
MFjLBOURNE, Saturday.
Writing from Lorengau Manus, in the Ad-
j miralty Islands, on December 20, 1916. War-
rant .Officer Harold Ryan gives an interesting
account of an expedition through the Witu
Group of islands on a lax-collecting mission.
The first portion of the article is appended, |
and the second will appear at an early date.
I had spent a week in hosnital with a severe
Lout of malarial fever, an# the,military au-
thorities thought fit to allow me a change of
scene in the shape of an expedition with Cap-
tain Webster, tax-collecting through the Witu
| Group of islands.
Our destination lay to the south-west,
about 180 miles toward the coast of New
Guinea from Habaul, midway between there
and Madang (formerly Wilhelmshaven).
After a calm trip we reached Peterhaven,
the lonely little station of the German New
Guinea Company’s plantation, and were hos-
pitably received by the manager and his as-
; sistant, also their wives. These German
people have been on this station for more
than six years, and have taken the oath of
neutrality. Prom their conversation it is
apparent they would like to see a speedy ter-
mination to the war. Peterhaven is merely
a small deep harbor, with deep, water right
up to the sandy beach, and only about room
: to saving a decent-sized ship in. A coral reef
j run. 4 } all round the island, b,ul curiously
enoygh there is a splendid passage through
exactly opposite the inlet.
Gorowe contains only about three or four
hundred natives, nearly all subject to the
Government head tax of 10s a year. About
700 .recruits are employed by the New Guinea
Company, chiefly to work on two industries,
copra and codoa. They are splendidly or-
ganised and cared for by the four or five Ger-
man officials of the company,
j Several inches of rain fell on the first night,
but we w-ere out at five in the morning to in-
| sped the employees, for this also is the duty
|of the tax collector. Any complaints are re-
I ceived and duly investigated. Afterwards a
j walk of about a mile along a well-laid-down
tramline through the cocoanut plantation took
us to the cocoa grove. The first greeting
on entering a cocoa plantation is the presence
of an unfamiliar subtle perfume not in the
least unpleasant, but rather cloying if one
stays there overlong, The seven foot high
kunai grass does not exist op this island as
in New Uritdih, and beneath the trees is a
beautiful green sward. To prefect the cocoa
trees »om wind and sun heavily foliaged
j rubber trees are interspersed. These have
not been tapped for some years, as the price
of rubber at the present time is not sufficient
to satisfy the money-making instincts of the
present holders.
PROPOSITION ATTRACTIVE
Alter looking over the drying house heated j
by burning in the furnaces the waste husk
and shell of the cocoanut and Inspecting the
copra dried and ready for export, we were
conducted to a store in which was stacked
rows of bags containing the cocoa bean which
had been extracted from the nib or outer
covering. These had been dried and were
also ready for export. This cocoa growing
appeals to me as a very attractive proposi-
tion, for the trees reach the bearing stage in
about four years as against six to eight
yeafs for cocoanuts.
The hospital erected for the use of all the,
company’s plantations in the group is a com-
modious building and is fitted up with a
splendid assortment of instruments and
drugs. The storekeeper is doctor and to ob
serve the professional manner in which he
disposed' of about 14 patients with divers
complaints, from -ordinary cus cus sores on
the skin to an operation on the knee, and
a case of pleurisy, was really enlightening.
It is indeed a good record that out of 700
boys employed on the island .only 14 were
inmates thd day we arrived.
The following day was devoted to collect-
ing taxes from the kanaka population. In-
dentured laborers are, of course, exempt from
taxation, and in this case they were all re- 1
cruited from New Guinea and New Ireland, j
The local kahaka*is rather lazy and indolerlt. j
He can grow plenty of taro, cocoanuts, ana
poultry or pigs for his own consumption, but
rarely has the energy to barter more than
will bring him in the required Government
head tax of 10s a year.
RACE PROBLEM SERIOUS
The, race problem , on this island is in a
serious stage. The mqles --outnumber the
females by about 10 to T;’ and ar;e a healthy,
vigorous type, while the women are, almost
without exception, lapoon (old) and childless.
We did our best to impress on the men the
fact that unless they went away to the main-
land and married young women of other
tribes, their population would shortly be ab-
solutely extinct. The Germans take no in-
terest in them whatever, being concerned
only with the welfare and working powers
of their own plantation employees. Very few
of the island population work on the planta-
tions at all. The next day being Sunday, we
walked a good many miles observing the care
and organisation with which the Germans
obtain every ounce of value from the marvel- I
lous resources of the island. They have picked j
the very eyes out of the place, and any land I
marked native reserves is practically use- !
less for the purposes for which it should be I
utilised.
Next day we held court under the sha'de of
a palm tree, and dealt with an alleged mur-
der case. The accused was sa;d to have
killed his brother. The facts elicited by the
captain were that the boy, who had been very
sick for some time, wandered into the bush
and died. He was discovered five days later I
partially eaten by dogs, and (as, kanaka i
fashion, someone is always responsible for a
death) the brother was accused of killing
him with a knife. We .found the whole thing
was a tissue of lies, and deposed a tul tul
(sub-chief) over the matter, and raised an-
other man to that dignified position. It mere-
ly goes to show how cheaply life is held
among these people, for his accusers would
cheerfully have lied him to his execution or
lifelong imprisonment.
Rowed by four stalwart police boys, next
morning we crossed the reef, and after a
three-mile row round the coast Inspected
the company’s station Lamp, where about 100
splendid boys were lined up. They were
clean-skinned and in good condition, and
appeared happy and well content. On the
return trip we crossed 'coral and sand
patches, and on looking down through the
clear water many curious marine creatures
could be seen, also a large amount of
irepang or beche-de-mer, a kind ,of sea
slug, which when dried commands a very
high price, and is largely exported to China
for the making of soups, &c.
BLEND MAKES CURIOUS CATTLE
Shortly after our return we v/ere roused
by a perfect fusillade of rifle-shots, and look-
ing down to the beach we discovered all our
police boys blazing like fury .into the waters
of the bay. They had located and bagged
a fairly big crocodile, which sank in deep
water, but, later on, floated up and smelt
like a dead whale. , v
In our honor prime veal was on the menu
for a day or so. A herd of Australian cattle
was introduced some 13 years ago and blen-
ded with Javanese cattle, and now there is a
mob of curious-looking humpy-shouldered
beasts wandering about. They are only for
killing, and there is no fresh milk obtain-
able. As we never travel without a fair
stock of dynamite, fresh fish is generally on
the breakfast table. Occasionally Igo out,
but fight shy of the short fuses the boys
use, for only lately an old native friend of
mine blew his hand off, and was blinded in
both eyes. During the night tremendous
thunderstorms prevailed, and many inches
of rain were recorded. The production of
cocoa and copra requires copious rains, and
ipparently they get a fair share in these lati-
tudes.
(To be Continued.)


(y / s- *" ( 9 / 7
STORIES OF WAR
STRANGE DEATH ATTITUDES
THE UNFELT WOUND
Bashful V.C.'S and Worshippers
You are in the convalescent ward at Rand-
wick Military Hospital. It is not yet noon,
and the sister of the ward is putting brisk
finishing touches to the decks the
white enamelled table at the foot of each
man’s lied. From the far end of the ward
comes an incessant gabbling, that rises every
now and then to an indignant shout. It is
the voice of a soldier who has been into the
operating theatre, and has not yet recovered
from the effects of the anaesthetic. Sitting
up in bed or strolling about the room are
his mates, who grin now and again as the
gabbling increases in volume.
With this accomi anlment the voice of
Private Barnett, of the 13th Battalion, goes
on, quietly telling you, much as If he were
discussing some worn topic, incidents of war
that make you wonder dt the possibility of
men in the firing-line keeping sane and
balanced. ,
Private Barnett was in the Gallipoli land-
ing, and fought on the peninsula for 30 days
before receiving the wound that has kept
him ever since in one hospital and another —
London, Weymouth, Randwick,
DID NOT FEEL IT
“I had been on fatigue duty all night, the
quiet voice continues, “going backwards and
forwards through a pass which was pro- (
hibited to «s during the daytime* It was
breaking dawn, and we were just finishing
up, when a sniper got me. He got 32 of us
that day. But our chaps got him for good
the next day. I was carrying a case of pro-
visions on my right shoulder, and had my
left hand on my hip. The little finger of that
hand hud the top shot off, and I fell down. I
told the others.
“ ‘Well, walk down to the beach,’ said they,
'and have it dressed.’ I tried to get up, and
finding I could not stand examined my leg.
There was a hole in it yo»f could have put
your fist in. Funny, I didn’t feel any pain
in that leg for three days—and then it gave
me glp.
“The main sensation when you get a shot
into you is one of surprise. ‘Why should I
have got it?’ 1 wondered.
"We saw some strange sights, I can tell
you. D’you remember when the Turks
threatened to push us back into the sea? The
night of May IS and the morning
of May If, was the time 1 men-
tion. We killed 40c0 of the beg-
gars. Well, alter that charge of theirs it
was so queer to see some of the positions in
which men had died. I saw them on their
hands and knees gripping their rifles. Some
had stiffened in the act of trying to scale a
parapet. An Australian and a Turk Jabbed
each other simultaneously rwith their bay-
onets and fell dead that way. gripping the
butts. We had to bury thorn together.
THE SEATED SOLDIER
“Ono of our own chaps wa« shot In the
b;uk ef the head. He staggered to a stump
Hiio sat down with his ride across his knees
and his head on one hand. Next morning
" ! ,cn peeped over the parapet there was
this chap sitting quietly in the middle of
No Man s Land. 1 raid to an officer, ‘I think
that fellow must have gone mad to he sit-
ting out there.’ The officer me <1 his glasses.
J he back of his head’s shot away,’ he said,
the dead man sat on the stump until
he fell to pieces,
’’Gruesome? Tes. but after a week of war
you become quite used to such things. The
lirst tew days everything sjekens you. Later,
you seem to got so callous that you can eat
your dinner hve minutes alter seeing your
t-esl pal killed.
‘Talking of strange death attitudes, I was
at a listening post one night, and through my
my periscope I saw a Turk crawling toward
me with a bayonet. I chucked a bomb at
him, and then lound out he had been dead
some time!
WAITING FOR A CHARGE
The tiling that gets on a man’s nerves Is
the time spent waiting for the signal to
charge. I remember once we were going to
charge at 8 p.m. We were given our orders
at 6 p.m. What do you do in the meantime?
Veil, you hddle round your rifle and equip-
ment to see that everything’s right. You
light a cigarette, and after a puff or two
chuck it away. Your pal speaks to you. and
iou snap his head of. You think home
people, and wonder just what they’re doing,
i .a fumble with the letters in your pocket,
and have another read of them. Then you
light another cigarette and chuck it away
a ga.n You’re all on edge. And when you
near the whistle you just go clean mad I
dont rememoer anything of the first two
days at Gallipoli. I don’t fancy anyone re
members much. We were ail
the time, you know/*
When Private Barnett was in Weymouth
Hospital he suffered with gastritis, and was
on a milk diet. ”1 was about fed up.” he
ea>s, and one bitter cold evening I said to
vou ?hink h ° " aS aHuWed t 0 WUlk about ’ 'Do
you think you could order oysters, and ham
road-> H. th r'’ at the shop acros s the
mad. He thought he could, and went off
Ihen the sister left the ward. J whipped
into another fellow’s overcoat, and out into
the street. I had my oysters and ham and
eggs before Sister got back, and she could
not understand why my temperature was 102
the next morning!”
In the tt.onuon Hospital Private Barnett
had on either side of him Sergeant Bassett
V.l’., and Corpora Keysor. V C No one
Knew of their military honors for a month
7hSi* n iat? out through addresses on 1
the £v c -a 8 ’ h/ flrst they stou tty denied 1
itieir \ .c. s, because they said that thev
would, get no peace. “Poor beecars ” !!!! I
Private Burnett, -‘a!/ soon us it was’ known'' I
they were so bombarded with attentions from 1
visitors that it puiied them buck a month' i
ihe morning after Jack Hamilton’s V.C was
'" no n u " c , ed he Sot 300 letters from people he
bIX wri ® tlet watches followed
and 14 fountain pens. So he says if he’s ever
Oh VV them.” lS ,UCk he ’ n be üb,t ' tu raise money
An/e a H„2 a / llton ’ & C ” Was at the London
An/ac Buftet one afternoon, when Ladv
sent her autograph book round for
all the boys to sign. Hamilton was not
known by anyone there. When Private Bar-
nett saw the signature he asked quietly
Haven t you got the V.C.?” 1
"Vos,” said the hero, “but for God’s sake
don t let it ait, or I’ll have all these women
taking liberties with me.” women
Pfl'rnatt° U ‘• y m BOt U on . you> ” said Private
Barnett, Id \ery much like to have a look
u I 11,
"Come over here.”, said Hamilton, leading
r be / n y adat 'k corner. He took the cross
tom the depths of his trousers pocket, held
it under coyer oi his coat Map and gave Pri-
vate Harnett a fleeting view of the coveted
trophy. Then he hurried back to his place.


Captain Fred W. J. Tinkler,
Mr. Percy Tinkler. of “Portnahinch,”
Strathfield, has received a cable saying his
son Fred has been mentioned in despatches,
awarded the military cross, and promoted to
captain in France. Captain Tinkler held a
commission as lieutenant in the 25th Engin-
eers prior to the war, and enlisted on August
14, 1914, leaving on October 18 with the Ist
Battalion, attached to Headquarters Staff as
signalling officer. He was at the landing at
Gallipoli on April 25, and went through until
the evacuation. Whilst at Gallipoli for a
time he temporarily held the position of aide-
camp to a general until recalled by the i
brigadier-general. Later he was transferred
to the engineers again. He is an old Cleve-
and-street boy, and from there he went to
the Lands Titles Office, where he was em-
ployed until he enlisted. Captain Tinkler
ho ™ ln . East Maitland on March 23.
isy-l. ibe photo was taken while he was a
sergeant in the Sydney Scottish Rifles.
■ i i .


-P-i
HAIG PAYS VISIT TO OUR ARMY
GATHERING OF MEN AND GUNS
HOW THE ANZACS GO RAIDING
199th Day of the Third Year of the War


3 2: £ ° H S’ p £ a x o o p «> a a a o cl g o a> a
■sl»^g'i=^“§s»« s §3is|a tl) ss|SS-gti.
?Bg|is 3-«3^|»si ! S S=„S'
~- CD n>“o'a < g'£ 3 S‘~. w 3 E^-„ 3^-ti
■„Ss_33s.>a~3 s g=-g|sgs;g2-52.-Sa*g-|
° f »sa» ?sg!]fSf a a s°»» :»-?.sa, 3
3i‘si3 = 3 i“?='>*«»Sss jsss?" =s E* o
sS &^ I, o^^ 3 ffP^®s2.p ft ®a; 5 S2g c
aa®wpSE,wo>P' PCQ.r*-gEE._.vTS- o' j ~£ 3 CO
p_. x s o- s: S'ps‘ > — 'Pa'O ' -^' a 2 O a> 3 ct> 13
?S 3 vj P3®sp’ l 2. o o ,o 2. 2“ 2gs' 3 *1 o
s'* l E p ? 2 2 o I cl 3 M a 3 w . ff S p 3 OT S 2-
• a- 3 aS.S» o i, - ! /3 5wS - ppE 3 'oß or s: B«c
o® <S ;a S- - S 3 a a 2 B W 3 <0 a S P« B a a
a»£<*S« 8 “ •< 0 (g5 , 883-a'p« 3 ' ®po» a 3]
® £ *llQ,W w3 p' p3 ®pr^B 3 s3 B1 <»“ p o « 3 a S* g »
0(D x 0 p 3 xarlxS‘. SO 3 JPsW 3 mP'2E.^
P r Jpoffgsrjs® - g»?8 I? * • 3 ® 2
SSS-& o, *tf«o?|6 S9-8g -
Si<®pac| g-^gg-Si'
go E.Pw 5,3 52. r^S-<::>o s‘'^'
1 _ rr IT 1 h CT rj- o
»3 opE.^ 3 £- 3. #.fl3»«
pp'S2S2. !j, 2p ,1 b“ BSo.a'gS- 3 ’ S. *< p
SrtSsrsoir'Sfflvx xp.xcdt.o> n>T , ’rxoS-
, c p p : ® £. E 2 3
“ It 'iß3ft®.'”a'3SP' < op‘ 3 ? p cl o 2 £ m
? • -°* a 3 I M i *
£2Sr««5° ft p - M e s 9 I a^c
t3 ‘g-'®^. < -08-r-»o2^s , E 3 * 3 9 S, -i o
pgpMtro 3 Es: o ?a£, a3 [R o*a3c
r a 8 S-
O ® 2. ? §■£ 3fl* " g 3 a«o 3 »
s*ls*^ 5 * 15 *^ ° o ~£ P 'p 3 ‘b2“K
S ==? ? = X °«E2 ®s 3 ;a 3 2 £•
& .»h & ? k§pS a I S w
?2; 1 "
r* 7* - X r* . £■ O <-*■ m O S' S' X
a PB«i°®.22aß’ 5 ~, 5' « E~ ® £ 3
a 'P S Pa* 3 2 O 3T 7T P o
x a _o* P^aS^^gE o
t^ag^S-E^^** 3 - 3 ,, § 2oS a -o s: 3^E
•g§l§ a- 2- 5- p §- 3 a:-§| I-o ? 3 s
’^gos'^.r’ 3 313 p a g p u3 3^ c:: p>' o '2ls'
3 3 O 2*3 5 3.
Sf■" a po « , a | »o®® p ® ®
“ B » e P SBE & B „ o-
I»§ S? ►’g?! -B O ,♦ £p=(E'-’Hs:g. 3 £
c “ a* a* a* a 3 a!* ,-> a - P S H m
?P , d>“?9w¥r?¥r t( ?'tD® a (5 » <- 2, ® s ro E. a.
99 g g■§S-£csß i 3 3 3 2. £ £ g 3S>g* £ * I
3S " » ® 3 3 g~0£.0s' 3 5g‘*s:2- 3 »~o;2 1 2->-
.^^ (a ' D'S.aS;3; !:rcl, 3 ?* 9 r* 50 co
S^o®’®r»oras:3oK* j! o'g <r *g‘S !0 0-2 o _ g *x
ss*t §3l s If-
i“II :s|g ? s|||M?SJ ,|ll"|g
r*- PS' £ S- -< (t? P 3 S S' g
£ s. „ ? 8 “ s a ® 11
•“ a g g '?o®§^^& n £ o g g * p ® 5 •
•|l* sS^§p|e|*^®pS.gS s sS§■ g- g g-
§■■ g? (t a *> g. * 5 g
V! • P c/3 3* P* P £L o - j—- P 5 £ra * 3 <-♦■ S - 2 3 rr*
a , £3-,2 p - fl*oa ®oq- S B S
P H O 3 P P- P- O ° «-*»-*?* CD ? S. P
3d I* °‘® o » §.* «B® R® p, «§B § 3 w
i"b •a ass si f 53.5
w o « 5* ?3 ab 2 ?« SS ® crq £ S 'C' 3 x
<-cr f = “ s ro <! o^2,(Sg2w^' :;^£:L ®s?a 2 > „
Pj? - 3 w - i 3 i 3
c2(t> 3 o' s' 3 2 2 g;
& B p- m x a r F 1 ? P


19/7.
STORIES OF WAR
EFFECT OF TRENCH LIFE
KILLING YOUR FIRST MAN
SENSATIONS OF THE SHOOTER
Corporal Carnegie sits beside his bed at
Randwick Hospital, and uses it as a table.
He is so intent on an autograph book, in
which he has painted the colors of each
Commonwealth military unit, that he does
not look up when the sister ot the ward
brings you forward. Corporal Carnegie is
putting the finishing touches to the last page
of the book, which bears a rising sun above
a crown. The workmanship Is fine, and you
take him for a practised draugntsman. But
no; this is his first flight into the realm of
art. Beside the colors of the various units
are signatures of boys who have the right
to wear the colors. The story of how they
gained the right can be guessed ny the shakl-
ness of some of the autographs. Right hands
being out of commission, left hands have
had to fill the breach with trembling unwil-
lingness. Borne of the names have been
signed by boys who had to hold the pen be-
tween (heir wrists.
The owner of the book endurea all the
trials of the Gallipoli campaign, saw the
and passed on to Prance, where
Pozieres brought him the wounds that are '
responsible for his being in hospital. Shrap-
nel wounded him in head and shoulder, tear-
ing away the top of his sleeve, and leaving
the badge of the rising sun hanging by two
threads.
Pull that off, will you?” asked the corpo-
ral of the stretcher-bearer, “it’s been through
many a fight with me, and I wouldn't lose it
for anything.
“Everyone is attracted by that badge,” he
tells you. “In Cairo we used to buy brass
ones at about twopence each. We’d take
the good copper ones off, and when the little
I* rench ladies asked for a souvenir we’d give
them the brass, and take another out of our
pocket to slip into its place,
I lie Tommies in the trenches were just
as keen as anyone for a rising sun. In fact,
they ajjked so often that it became quite a
joke with us, and Australian regiments pass-
ing other would call out, ‘Got a badge
yer can give us, chum?’ Some of the Tom-
mies asked for ‘kangaroo feathers,’ meaning,
I suppose .the emu feathers in the hats of j
Eight Horsemen.
THE FIRST SHOT
'T’ll never forget,” says Corporal Carnegie,
my first feeling after killing a man. I took
aim and that, all right. 1 fired and he fell
dead. I shook all over and felt as if I had
murdered him, and then 1 heard myself say-
ing to my neighbor, ‘There, now, I’ve killed
him, the poor beggar!’
“You soon get that, though, and after
a short time become as deliberate and callous
possible. ,
It is marvell(/us how short a time war
takes to change the make of you. When I
airived in Gallipoli I fancied the men 1 saw
must be a different kind to myself. They
paced up and down the trenches looking like
wild beasts. You.never saw anything like the
look in their eyes—wild and staring. And
when, after the evacuation, I got back to
Cairo, the chaps who had not yet been into
action remarked the same expression in my
own eyes! So there you are!”
Corporal Carnegie looks at his beloved auto-
graph book, and now his expression is the
mildest ajid cheeriest in the world. You can-
not imagine that it was ever wildly staring.
He, like others found waiting for the order
to charge the most nerve-racking of all war’s
trials.
“Five minutes to go!
“Three minutes to go!
“Over!
“And then men who have been trembling
and fearful leap to the parapet with shouting
and laughter.
THE KID WHO COWERED
“I saw a bit of a kid cowering in a corner
when the order was given to fire. I took
not a bit of notice of him, and my mate
said, ‘All right, leave him alone; he’ll be at
it presently.’ And, sure enough, in a little
while the youngster got up and took his
ride. His face was white as death, but I
saw him lean right over the parapet and
take aim. His gun was hot before he stop-
ped firing, and the enemies’ bullets were
kicking the dust up all round him.
“There was another youngster I shan’t
forget in a hurrv. It was his first experi-
ence of bombs. \One burst in the trench,
and he ran just as hard as he could lick to
the e nd of the sap. Yes, he came buck again
very ashamed of himself, until I told him,
It's all right, laddie, I’ve felt that way my-
self.’
“During a bombardment you don’t feel in
the least excited or nervy. It’s the next
day or when you try to sleep that it gets
you. Dream? I should smile’ But they
generally give you rum after heavy action,
so that you fall into a sound sleep without
any trouble.
“1 used to duck like anything when first
I saw actio i, but it was not long before I
laughed with the rest when a sniper took
off the branch of a tree above my head.
Funny, when you’re going into the firing-
line you never feel it’s yourself won’t come
back again. You are quite sure you’ll get
through all right, and you feel sorry for the
others when you look round during the ser-
vice beforehand, and consider that never j
again will this complete set of men stand ;
1 round while the chaplain reads.
“Once at Gallipoli we saw a young Turk |
lying dead in the most beautiful position for |
firing. He was prone with his rifle sighted. ;
Our fellows waited till night to drag him in
and go through his papers. He was only 19, ]
and there was a half-written letter in his i
; pocket to his mother. It was in Arabic. In i
| his kit bag we found a nice* clean suit of
pyjamas, a tin of roast beef, and clothes
nicer than our own. His mother must have
been fond of that kid. We ate the roast
beef, and my word it was a treat after Galli-
poli bully beef!”
A man arrives \.ith something that looks
like the box of a telephone, and you have to
say good-bye to Corporal Carnegie, while the
masseur gets to work. ' W


-l/u i - 90 7 - /*.
OUR LIGHT HORSE
WORK IN THE DESERT
CHIVALRY OF TURKS
(From Our Special Representative)
1 LONDON. January 2.
I wonder if the really excellent work of our
Light Horse is fully understood? It is no
exaggeration to say that the men are famous
throughout the Mediterranean countries, and
stand highest amongst all the fighters in
those regions. The pettifogging meanness
that prevented an expert recorder being at-
tached to General Chauvel’s four brigades
will some day be recognised as a gross in-
justice to the greatest body of horsemen pro-
duced by this war. The brigades have shown
a dash and initiative that have left other
horsemen and camel corps in the Eastern
Mediterranean far in the rear in reputation,
and their bravery and endurance have been
proved in many battles and outpost en-
counters. I hear from British generals who
have been stationed near our Light Horse
that the 1 urks on several occasions have
shown their honest admiration of our horse-
men, and that their treatment of our wound-
ed and the few prisoners they secured has
been a pleasing reflection of this good feel-
i ing. It Is a strange contrast that during all
cur months on Gallipoli, and dining the fight-
ing in ( Eastern Egypt, the Turks have taken
less than Australian prisoners, in-
cluding the wounded men whose surrender
has been imperative, and including those of
our first division who ciuring the lirs£ two
days at Anzac went far behind and were cut
off. Of course, we know that pearly all these
brave fellows, who can be posted only as
•'Missing, believed dead,” sold their lives as
dearly as they could, in preference to sur-
render. But the contrast between the hun-
dred prisoners taken by the Turks, and the
thousand taken by lire Germans, remains a
striking illlistration of the difference in the
fighting on the different fronts. A British
General tells me some interesting stories of
the honest fighting methods of the Turks.
On one . occasion recently a Turkish
aviator drrjvped a message, signed
with a Turkish name, asking us to
put )iig red crosses over oyir hospftaTs,-
because the enemy airmen were finding it
impossible-to distinguish hospital tents from
ordinary camps. The writer suggested that
the Australians should paint red crosses on
the- hospital roots—suggestion that /was
adopted at once. Another aerial message
delivered was—“ Don’t worry about Captain
A . He is a prisoner, but a gentleftnan,
and dined In our mess last night.” When we
advanced beyond Romani we found a big
placard above one green little camp ground
—“Warning.. We had cholera here.” Fur-
ther on, we found another warning that the
p ace had been very bad'y infected with cho-
lera, as the Turks had had their main cho- !
lera hospitals there. These stories are cor-
roborated by General Chauvel and Colonel
Ryan, the* veteran Melbourne Turkophil. A 1
distinguished Australian said to Mr. Aiquith
the other day that the Turks had played the
game against the Australians. “You ask
the Armenians,” was the Prime Minister’s
retort. The religious persecution of the Ar-
menians has led to the unparalleled slaugh-
ter of harmless people; but I don’t think it
will he regarded as a disparagement of the
Australian soldier to say that he, will be
ready to shake hands with the Turk after
he has thrashed him. No one wants to
shake a German hand.
Boyd Cable,
War correspondent, formerly well known in
Australia.


J_yCt ii'" l<U7
“A LOVELY SCRAP”
’PLANES FIGHT ON HIGH
Australians on Somme Field
MELBOURNE. Saturday.
“About the most exciting thing we ever see; i
is. occasionally, an aeroplane duel.” writes
Dr. Henry Hagenauer, of the my Medical ,
Corps, from “somewhere in France,” to hU|
brother. Dr. G. A. Hagenauer. of Sale.
“We saw a beauty the other day. Iwo
Fritzs came over, and our machines came up
and had a love y scrap. One of our ma- ,
chines dived right down at a Fritz, m front ;
of him. appeared to loop the loop round h m -
.and opened fire from beneath him. at the,
back We were disappointed not to see the b
* end of it. as the Fritzs were going like |
greased lightning for home, and got out o ,
! ! ‘? m now in a safe place, right back from
the trenches, and in a lovely forest. Have
a lot to do; but that’s all the better. An
supplied with a car. and do a round every
morning, taking me from B.JU to about U.V, j
1 visit various units, ammunition dumps, fcc
I also attend the civilians, and as most ol
them do not understand a word of Kng
ft’s made-me buck up mmy French At UrU
i wiis very tiiiiusingi cinci 1 mife * . •
barrassing to try to find out wnat was tne
' notice of my transfer.
We were shitting from one section to an-
other when a wire came, say.ng I was
ferred to the 2nd Anzac Headquarters, aßd
ear would cail tor me and my batman ina
•m hour s tune. I’d never forget the comum
out of the trenches the night
Had to come a*ong a road which was s <P
b/ machine-gun nre. The bubets were ip-
ziouing in the grass in front, and behind,
ana as though we’d never get out
of the danger zone.
SHELTER IMPOSSIBLE
“1 gaw it under the beat —or, rather, the
worst —conditions, for it was teeming with
rain, and Ihe ground was just a slush mud
and water. To add to the awfulness <bf the
scene- there was the continuous
rZr of our tug guns, for we wern right im
•imonast them. They were wheel to wheel
J d °r upon line, simply hundreds of them.
We were deaf for days after it; for we were
only a few yards from the guns. My old bat-
taiion was at the front at the time, only a
fpw hundred yards away. The men were up
to their knees in water, and no sh ®
not a chance of shelter when they got to the
1 el " The British Tommy is a marvellous man.
Hero they were trudging along soaked to the
skin and covered with mud from head o
1 foot, and probably going to death, and cer-
| tainly, if not death, going to a stretch of
; three days Hell; and yet they were whistling
and singing. 1 heard one chap say 11 ‘
| ne ver well smile again till I m dis-
charged from the army,' and then start sing-
ing again. My goodness, I wish I could de-
scribe the scene better; but it simply beg-
gars description. , . ,
“We also went along the French front, and
saw that. Heavens! it was marvellous,, and
1 now it seems like a dream. German shells
were dropping occasionally, but doing no
I damage. We have tlherp so beaten in the air
. 1 that their observation is not good. Ihe next
| pav was beautifully fine, but I did not go
1 out: another officer went in my place, and 1 1
looked round Amiens instead.”
“SUICIDE CORNER”
“Of course, my party, the Army Medical
Corps Detail, is always the last [0
in this case I had gone ahead witn two ol
my orderlies, as 1 was full up of "a.ting
about for the relief to come aiong.
know what position made one-the Bmal ‘
target to came to the conclusion that wa K
lug" straight on. as though nothing woimd
you, was the best. Just as we got to a pass
load called Suicide Corner two chaps man
another transport each ‘stopped one; ’ 9o \
was just in time to do something, but cleaicd
out as soon as possible. The most exciting
tiling we t-ver see is, occasionally, an aeio-
* “After being here some time I began to
have a longing to get back to the trenches,
for there’s a great fascination about the
singing of the thtvs and the whistling of the
bullets. Last week I went for a look round
the Somme batLefield with an officer from
here, who was asked to go down and inspect
the woods there. It w-as about the mos
interesting trip of lour days it was possible
to have. First I visited the Army Headquar-
ters of the five armies. 1 don’t suppose many
have had that privilege.
“The picture of the Somme is one that can
never be forgotten. It is absolutely impos-
sible to describe, or to Imagine, the utter de-
solation of the place. We went through vil-
lages without knowing it, for not a brick
remains. The on y sign of a building we saw'
lor miles was a small heap of tangled iron
and brick. Some of the woods were blown
to pieces, and only a stick or two left stand-
ing. Over miles of country not a square yard
between shell-holes!


-BEST WISHES r»oM RUHLEBEN 1
[ 1 CHRISTMAS 19! 6. I
-Christmas Card From Ruhleben
This card has been received by Mr. Ivor Bowles (Australian representative of Holzap-
fels) from Captain Coates, of the steamer Juno, which used to carry passengers between
I Newcastle-on-Tyne and Hamburg. Captain Coates unhappily was in Hamburg when
war broke out. The card was published by the ; Ruhleben Camp Magazine, and the
| two prisoners in the picture appear to be enjoying such little comfort that it is remark-
' able the German censor passed it.


/*?n
THE IRON CROSS
CAPTURED BY SYDNEY OFFICER
An Iron Cross was taken from a German
officer at the great battle of Loos by Lieut.
Merlin Foster Loxton, son of Mr. Loxton,
K.C., Sydney. xt is the first officer’s Iron
Cross which has found its way to the Com-
monwealth.
Lieutenant Loxton is the second son of
The Iron Cross
Mr. Loxton. K.C., Sydney. He was twice
mentioned In despatches for gallantry, at the
battle of Loos, and for gallantry in the
Somme offensive. He is attached to the
Royal Field Artillery, having enlisted with
the British Expeditionary Forces early in
Lieutenant Loxton
the war. His colonel Is a near relative of
the late Lord Roberts. At the battle of
Loos the young artillerist displayed much
gallantry and, with his own hands, took from
a German officer the much prized and much
vaunted Iron Cross.
Prior to his going to the war young Lox-
ton was in his second year of Arts at the
Sydney University. He had been a stu-
dent at Barker College berore taking up bis
udies at the University.


The Sun Feb 25th 1917
AUSTRALIAN POET
CAPTURED BY GERMANS
A New South Wales soldier, who Is now a
prisoner of war at Mjjfden, Germany, has
composed the following lines, which are sung
by the Australian prisoners at church ser-
vice to the tune of “Son of my Soul.” The
verses were forwarded to Mrs. Sargent, of
Rose Bay,- by Corporal Hartley Sargent, who
has been in the hands of the Germans for
some months.
Oh Christ, my help and comfort be
In this, my long captivity.
I will not pine: I will not sigh.
For well I know that You are nigh.
Far, far from Home, and those I love.
Pray guard them, Christ, dear Friend above
And keep them safe that we may be
Joined in Holy Thoughts of Thee.
The Fight rolls on, the days are dafk.
There is no light; there is no Ark
Save Thou, Oh Christ, with Heaven in sight.
To guide us as Thou thlnkest right.
To God, dear Christ, pray Intercede,
In this our hour of trial and need,
That He may grant to Earth once more
That peace may reign Instead of War,


&xihA.S~ !<Ut
The Hun Gas Helmet
The unlovely gas helmet used by the Huns
not that those used by the British soldier
are any prettier-ls shown in this photograph
vr- a^ Vrtnta £ e -* It was sent from France
to Miss Daisy Lees by Private W. Bethel, of
Newcastle. ?#e helmet is In two parts, which
screw together. The bowl at the bottom
is used to contain chemicals, which purify the
gas, and render it harmless.
the helrT ] et Private Bethel has for-
warded a complete belt of copper-coated
German machine-gun cartridges, a piece of
h«m 6rrn ,f n ; shell wh,ch burst within 6ft. of
bl a a Hnn a f«r f f agme " ts of a bomb dropped
Sgou2 aer °P lan ® close to the Australian


o 7JU. *.*•''llll
A NIGHT IN FRANCE
First Week in Trenches
STRAFE AND COUNTER=STRAFE
AN AUSTRALIAN’S IMPRESSIONS AT THE FRONT
(By J. W. M.)
Whiz! Bang! Whiz! Bang! and an Instinc-
tive ducking of heads, as Fritz begins his
evening strafe.
“Another doll over,” yells some Austra-
lian wag. as a shell, missing the parapet by
inches, crashes into the cookhouse playing
havoc with dixies and mess tins. Our feel-
ings can be better imagined than describe
as we see visions of a tealess meal before us.
and we heartily agree with the forcibly-ex-
pressed feelings of our worthy cook as he
emerges from the depths of a dug-out an
proceeds to curse the whole house of Hohen-
zollern, gazing ruefully upon the mang e
remains of his cherished cookhouse.
Whiz, bang! Whiz, bhng Exit cook to the
security of his retreat, and a further due
cn our part, as we sit well back on the fire-
step, and kill time and suspense by smoking
innumerable cigarettes, trying all the time to
(conceal emotions by assuming ■be v ~
pression of veterans, who have “been out
since Mens,” instead of what iye really are,
a group of New South Welshmen, experi-
encing our first week in the muddy, rat-
ridden trenches of France.
Our corporal speaks up, making an heroic
ittempt to cover his obvious alarm, by in-
’orming us jocularly that “the first seven
y r ears of this is the worst. You get used to it
then.’’ Before he has time to note the effect
af his feeble joke another “prash-bang” has
arrived, the shell bursting in front of out
parapet, sending up a shower of <sarth,
empty beef tins, and pieces of barbed wire.
Our trench sways and quivers, as though suf-
fering internal convulsions. We recover
ourselves, and gaze round sheepishly, won-
dering vaguely whether it is only an earth
tremor or a genuine ’quake. We find the
Corporal (who, to give him credit, was al-
ways earnestly bent on living up, to the dig-
nity of his rank by setting an example to
we humble privates) remonstrating with the
nervous sentry on watch, who is
unsuccessfully trying to locate and estimate l
the damage done to the wire entanglement, j
by gazing vacantly into a piece of broken
mirror, tied to his bayonet with an old boot-
lace—an improvised periscope of his own
Australian ingenuity.
“Don’t be frightened,” says the Corporal
bravely; “put you head over the top like
this, and keep a good look-out; those square-
heads may be charging.” He then proceeds
to set a glowing example of courage and
utter disregard for German ‘ hate to an ad-
miring audience by slowly elevating his head
till it is level with the top of the parapet.
He takes a lightning peep, and drops down
again. "See!” says he, “you don’t want to j
let ’em bluff you”—then philosophically—“and
if theyfdo hit you, you won’t know anything
about it. and we’ll tell ’em at home you did
your duty like a hero, for your King and
country.” A sudden series of crashing ex-
plosions on our right, as though two run-
away trains had met head-on, definitely
settles any doubts that the unfortunate sen-
try may have had on the matter. Im no
candidate for yer ’Ero Stakes,” says he, as
he reminds the Corporal that his relief is
due.
THE “EMU ACT”
• * )
The next to go on duty is a young Corn-
; stalk, who has developed an unholy fear of
shells. He is discovered by an unsympathetic
N.C.O. doing “the emu act” by crouching
under the fire-step, with a mud-strewn
olanket pulled over his body, the explanation
of his conduct being that “he didn’t mind
how many shells were sent over, providing j
!he shut his eyes and plugged his ears up.” |
But we fail to be convinced. He takes his i
post disconsolately at the prospect of the !
two dreary hours fraught with much prob- ;
able frightfulness from Fritz.
Dusk has now fallen, and after the advent
of a tealess meal of bully beef and biscuits
we light up fags and prepare for the night’s
vigil. Our platoon commander passes
through on his visiting rounds, sees that
ut things are all correct, cautions us to be on
. e , the alert and passes on. An hour passes.
,• slowly; darkness has set in, and the, night
1_ pas fairly begun. Double sentries are at
their posts, watching and waiting, bright |
ddzzling flares go soaring skywards. Ihe
silence which has become oppressive is sud-,
denly broken by the sharp staccato crack of
the German -rifle—ah! their snipers have be


gun. Pljgr-phut! bullets thump into the
sandbags .nd scatter dirt in our eyes. We get
annoyed, and a fierce sense of retaliation
that presents itself—the flash from
the smpjr’s rifles. As if in answer
comes tie distant rat-tat-tat! of an
enemy Machine gun, the sound ap-
proaching rapidly nearer, warning us to be-
ware, and we lower our heads as a stream
of hissing bullets sweep the parapet. A fur-
ther alarming rat-tat-tat-tat! louder and
more voluminous takes up the chorus oh our
right, and we smile as we realise it is our
own Lewis and Maxim gunners paying FrlU
back for his show of frightfulness.
PHILOSOPHY AND INTERRUPTION |
A new feeling of excitement ’and exulta-
tion fills us, as we man the parapet and
bang avray at the flashes of the enemy’s
rifles, and now and again, in a moment of
enthusiasm, pour five rounds rapid into his
trench in the hope that we shall catch some
unsuspecting Boche napping. An officer ap-
pears out of the night, “Get ready, lads, I’m
sending up a flare.” The “sub” raises the
pistol. There is a deafening report in our
ears, as the star-shell shoots upwards, and
well over towards our opponents’ trencfi,
where it bursts and descends slowly, giv-
ing forth a brilliant light, which illuminates
the whole weird scene and silhouettes the
wire entanglements, broken trees, and great
shell-holes, against the dark back-ground,
before it finally drops to earth and fizzles
out. During the transit of the flare, we
have all gazed across “No Man’s Land” sep-
arating the rival trenches, to catch a move-
ment of the enemy—but no luck! It is as
though you were looking at the surface of a
dead planet. A deathly stillness broods over
all, no suggestion of life is to be seen, except
from the silent-looking trenches opposite,
and grim shell-craters, which we know are
occupied by men, lurking out there, crouched
into the earth like savage animals, ever
ready to spring and kill at first opportunity.
We pause for fleeting reflection as we give
our smoking rifles a clean with a dirty "pull-
through”; we think to ourselves what a con-
tradiction is this to our alleged civilisation.
When men —living in the 20th century, prid-
ing themselves on their progress in art,
music, literature, and Christianity—can in
the twinkle of an eye cast off the cloak of
culture and convention and emulate the
primitive examples of the men of the Stone
Age. As we stand here ready and eager
to kill our enemy, we realise how the warring
instinct clings to us, right down the centuries
of time, and though wo know, we possess
that wonderful gift—a soul—we
Ping-phut! Rat-tat-tat!
“I’ve got it,” screams a sentry, as he falls
back into the trench.
Our philosophy and moralising is cut short
by this tragic turn of events. Anger and
defiance fill us, as we fire rapidly at the
enemy’s parapet, stumps, shell-holes, and
anything that might harbor a Boche. Bang!
Bang! We shoot wildly at everything,
to relieve the feelings that rage within us at
the sight of a comrade down and out. We
inquire anxiously of the Corporal, who in-
forms us cheerfully that “it’s not so bad, only
a flesh wound!” Much relieved, we devote
further attention to Fritz, who is apparently
nervous to-night, firing viciously with rifle
and machine-gun. He evidently anticipates
a raid, and a raid on their trenches by
Australians is a source of perpetual night-
mare to them.
“COMPARATIVELY QUIET”
Despite the persistent fire from the enemy,
things are what is called “comparatively
quiet on our front to-night,” That is, there
is a delightful absence of artillery fire. Both
sides have quietened down as though mutu-
ally. But this is not so on our t flanks. Away
down the line on our left our brothers-in-
arms, the New Zealanders, are engaged in
“straightening out the line”—that is, assault-
ing the enemy and wresting two or three lines
of trenches from him. A terrific bombard-
ment is proceeding, preparatory to the in-
fantry attack, and the continual mighty roar
Mr. Catts,
Who came back from America last week.
of the guns suggests great discomfiture and
general smashing-up of all things German.
We glance in the direction of the uproar, the
sky is rent with flashes of fire and streaks
I of flame, star-shells fill the air with mag-
nificent light, we hear giant explosions like
the crash of fierce thunder, and the crescendo
of massed machine-gun fire. It reminds us of
a pyrotechnic display we have witnessed at
home, but this is on a grander and more awful,
scale. There is tragedy in this, because
men’s souls are passing out as we gaze upon
the sight. Such is twentieth century civilisa- i
tion and Kultur!
And so the long night passes. Our patrols
have reported back safely, after cutting a
respectable length of the enemy’s wire, which
will bring him out the next night to repair
the damage, and so offer a possible target
for our bullets. The men occupying the list-
ening-posts have been recalled. “Stand to!”
has gone, and we man the trench till the
likelihood of an attack is dispelled by the
beauty of a glorious sunrise,' triumphantly
announcing the birth of another day. Fresh
t sentries are posted, and we are free to crawl
1 away, to enjoy a well-earned sleep, our last
prayer before sinking into the Land of Nod,
' that Fritz will not rudely disturb our slum-
' bers with his early morning edition of “The
Hvmn of Hate.”


AUSTRALIAN HORSES
GENERAL CHAUVEL’S PRAISE
GOOD WORK IN THE DESERT
MELBOURNE. Monday.
Senator Pearce, Minister for Defence, made j
available to-day the following extracts from i
a letter received from Major-General Sir
Harry Chauvel, the G.O.C. Anzac Mounted
Division. Egypt:
“With regard to the horses you have sent
over here, I think I am in a position to ex- i
press an opinion, as so many thousands have j
passed under my ken one way and another;
and all I can say is, I have never ceased j
wondering how Australia has continued to
produce such a splendid lot of horses. The
work they have been called upon to perform
in the last 12 months has been most strenu-
ous, what with brackish water, sometimes
short rations, heavy weights, always the
softest sand (which is more often than not j
steeply undulating), and long hours without |
water; and their endurance and recuperative
powers have been beyond all expectations.
“During the fighting at Romani, in the
hottest month of the year, the horses of one
regiment were without water for 52 hours.
During the raid in Mazar in September, some
of the horses were without water for 30 j
hours, under the saddle all the time, j
land did 40 odd miles; and during j
the raid on Magdhaba in December most i
of them were without water for 36
hours, having done nearly 50 miles and been j
under the saddle all the time. In all these op- i
erations we have had a very few die of abso- j
lute exhaustion. As a general rule we have ;
| got a very good lot. I only once had any oc- J
cr.rj‘ to refuse to accept any horses from I
remounts, and these were Issued to the New j
Zsr.'.v'l Brigade, and were, I think, returns
Horn hospital. The scale and quality of
forage are better than in any previous cam-
paign, and the system of evacuation and
treatment of sick is most excellent, though
perhaps somewhat expensive, and the actual
losses in horses other than from wounds
have not, I think, been great.”
He saw the horses forwarded in recent
shipments and adds: "They were all excel-
lent horses, and they arrived in good condi-
tion.”


JL J t AS-~ (9 n .
HOW OUR SOLDIERS VISIT THE BOCHES
AUSTRALIANS WAITING FOR GREAT BLOW
Most Cheerful Spot on the Whole Front
ANZACS GREET THE WINTER SUN
206th Day of the Third Year of the War


LONDON, Saturday.
Mr. Russell. Reuter’s correspondent at Bri-
tish headquarters in France, wrote the fol-
lowing article for the "United Service” on
February 20: —
. “Sir William Robertson, the Chief
of the General Staff, is credited
with the remark, ‘Whenever I want
cheering |up I visit the British
front.’ Living as I do permanently at the
British front, I ought be pretty cheerful,
according to Sir William Robertson’s for-
mula, but whenever I want to court an out-
burst of higher spirits I go to see my old
friends the Anzacs, with whom, I was at
Gallipoli.
“Yesterday I indulged in this tonic visit.!
The weather was cheerless, a bare thaw,
and a heavy grey mist combining to pro- !
sent the Somme landscape at its worst. But j
nothing which the most outrageous conspi- 1
racy of the thermometer and the barometer
accomplishes damps the contagious cheer-
fulness of the warriors from down under.
‘Cold? Yes. Blooming uncomfortable!’ they
admitted, and added immediately, ‘The
health of the A.I.F. is‘never better than
during a hard frost.’ Trench feet are scarcely
known, and pneumonia and bronchitis not
above normal. The explanation, surely, lies
in the hardiness of the race, the excellence
and sufficiency c>f ‘grub,’ the abundance of
warm clothing, and the skill In applying the
lessons of experience.
"The momentary appearance of the sun.
dim and wan and watery, was hailed with
merry derisiorv.
"One soldier remarked,, ‘lf that’s the sun,
it ought to go back imtil it’s strong enough
ip be allowed out alone.’
“Along the Anzac front the battle blazes
up from time to time, with frequent and
considerable spells of quiet.
“There is much trench-mortar activity,
of which preponderance is altogether on our
side. The raiding spccicb of warfare suits
the Wallaby temperament, and is corre-
spondingly execrated by the Bodies. I
found here, as everywhere on the west front,
nowadays, the confirmed conviction that our
army can go through the German lines
whenever the time is opportune.
“The fighting east of Gueudecourt in the
beginning of February was the hardest 61
the year for the Anzacs, and was mainly
sustained by the Queenslanders and New
South Welshmen. In one attack these killed
GO Germans in the onslaught and took 54 pri-
i soners. In another the totals were 70 and
50. The enemy fought hard to retain his
valuable tactical positions. But the most
formidable of his counter-attacks was cut
(Off by the Australian artillery and wiped
j out.
“There were fierce bombing contests, cs-
| peclally on the night of February 3. The
I Germans were always bombed out, and once
I an entire party was annihilated by a shower
of hand-grenacVfts. It was a great fight—'-or
rather series of fights—in which the glori-
ous motto ‘Advance, Australia!’ was real-
ised.
“There is much digging and improving of
positions, and the pioneer battalions have
advanced the road construction splendidly,
and the great evil, mud, *s being steadily
overcome.
“Every effort is made to beguile the
tedium in and out s of the trenches. Cinemas
and canteens are run liberally, and football
matches occur daily.
“I am informed that the returning drafts
are arriving satisfactorily, and the new ma-
terial is splendid. The Anzacs ara training
in every form of modern warfare.
“Visiting the scenes of last year’s great
Anrac battles is a unfailing source of re-
creation to the newcomers, but the battle
is becoming Increasingly difficult to recon-
struct, because Pozteres, Mouquet Farm, and
the Windmill and Cemetery aro now mere
names, to which no material semblance is
left to give meaning.”


ZjU*- a s-~ 19 n .
ALL SWING TOGETHER
NO INDECISION NOW
CTrom
Captain C. E. IV. B*-an.
AnMrallan I’res*
'toDrwifntatlre with the Commonwealth t'orci'i.
Copyright h> Crown.)
ITEAI H j l * A RTKRS < Franc* )
Feßruary~2T. j
Wherever it is known amongst the troops 1
j that Australian party quarrels are b.eing
i dropped, and personal differences and
I jealousies abandoned, In order to allow Aus-
I tralia to concentrate on the war during this
i period of tremendous importance, I have
heard no word except approval. The belief
is here that we are entering at last on "the
straight."oand tha.t the time has come whefl
the whole energy of the Allied peoples, both
in thought and action, should be devoted
from hence on to the end of the war to the
single tremendous purpose of winning. From
this time on let everyone who is hesitating,
everyone who Is waiting, realise that the
moment for the supreme effort has come, and
put his shouder to the wheel and throw in
all his weight. We cannot have too much
weight behind the wheel now. Despite any
honest doubt which may exist elsewhere, it
is qilite clear to anyone here that there is
only one way of bringing a quick end to this
war—perhaps all wars —and that is by act-
ing with all possible strength and making
the blow, when deliyered, overwhelming and
crushing, and possible of being sustained j
long and steadily enough to break down the I
German defence. Any weakness now would 1
have the same effect as indecision, and could 1
only result in the prolongation of the i
struggle. To those who look on here there
is not the slightest doubt that now, if ever,
j the time has arrived whtn the whole nation
! should resolutely put aside all temptation to
private personal bickering, and swing to-
gether with all possible strength, as men, in
one great rowing boat until the end of this
i w r ar. /


JLAju -4—~ l9/7
THE IRON CROSS
WAVERLEY MAN’S TROPHY
TAKEN IN MAY, 1915
Mr. TV. Mitchell, a .esident of Waverley,
and formerly a lance-corporal of the 2nd
Battalion Yorkshire Regiment, claims to have
been the first soldier to bring an officer’s Iron
,Cross to Australia. He says:—
“Having read the account in last week’s
‘Sunday Sun,’ and seen the facsimile of the
Iron Cross, I think Lieutenant Loxton will
pardon me when I put in a prior claim to
bringing the first officer’s Iron Cross into the
Commonwealth.
“I took the cross from a German officer
who surrendered along with a party to me in
Lance-Corporal W. Mitchell
our traverse during the battle of Festubertj
in May, 1915. I returned to Australia ir"
November, 1915, being one of the first batcl
from the western front.
“On the outbreak of war I was one of the
first to be mobilised, and proceeded to Eng-
land with the Ist Contingent, leaving hers
on October 17, 1914. When I joined in Eng-
land I found that my regiment (the Green
Howards) had suffered severe losses, most
of my old comrades being killed at Ypres.
They had formed part of the glorious 7th
Division which took part in checking the
Germans on their march to Calais. The 7th
Division sustained severe losses during that
period, only 44 officers being left out of 400
and 2336 men out of 12,000. It is to those
men we ought to be grateful, as owing to
their bravery the Germans were bluffed to
think that more men were there than really
was the case. The 7th Division took part in
the fighting at Neuve Chapelle, where so
many noble lives were sacrificed.
“I was unable to proceed to the front un-
til a few days after the battle, when I was
one of the draft to reinforce the battalion
after coming out of action. I joined my
regiment in billets, and three days later we
were in reserve trenches. Three days later
again we went into the fire trench (the first
line), where I had my first experience of
real trench warfare. I was in several lines
of trenches ere it was my lot to take part in
battle. In the battle of Festubert my com-
pany was allotted the task of holding a
trench (horseshoe shape) whilst the line was
being straightened on our flanks. For two
days and one night I was selected as orderly
to headquarters to convey messages from our
dugout, about 30 or 40 yards, in the rear, to
the fire trench, to parts of the line where
the wires had been broken by shell-fire. On
being relieved at 11 p.m. I rejoined my sec-
tion, and thought I would try to snatch a
sleep, but found it impossible, as we were
bombarded heavily, commencing at 11.30
p.m., and practically lasting until we were
relieved two days later, when we occupied
German trenches which had been captured
the previous day.
“After eight days we were relieved by
r Canadian division, and none were loth to re-
turn to billets for a sleep, as we were utterly
’fatigued. We left the trenches at 11.30 p.m
and marched till 5.45 a.m. next day, not a
pleasant ordeal on almost an empty stom-
ach, as all we could get was biscuits, bully
beef, and water; not too clean, yet it was
wet, and quenched our thirst temporarily,
After a good spell in billets we knew we were
in for a difficult task. We were paid out the
day prior to going in the trenches to give us
a good opportunity to have a good time.
“We had to make an attack on the Ger-
mans, about 40 yards away, with a hill be-
tween, which made the position difficult.
After an hour’s bombardment we blew up a
mine, and A and B Companies mounted the
parapet, where a large number fell, as the
Germans’ machine-guns opened fire with all
available guns, which resulted in our men
falling like sheep. We took part in the
attack from 6 p.m., June 15, to 2 a.m., June
16, during which time we lost between 400
and 500 men. We were relieved, or the regi-
ment would have been annihilated. Fortu-
nately I was not wounded, but after another
month rheumatism got such a hold of me
that I was sent into the nearest field hos-
pital. After 13 days I returned to my regi-
ment in the trenches, although I was not fit
but was a great deal better, and I wanted
to be back with my comrades.
“After three weeks I returned to England,
to await embarkation to Australia, after
completing 14 years militia, color, and re-
serve service. I joined as a boy of 16 years
Df age, but was not able to proceed to the
South African war owing to my age.”


J+ /9/ 7 - P Hr
SOLDIERS WANT WORK
THE “SHORT ARM JOB”
MANY APPLICATIONS
The returned soldier has hia own way of
styling things. He may not always get it
correct, but you can understand what he
means. Last week a returned soldier walked
into the Employment Department of the
State War Council. “I want a short arm
Job.” “What?” “A short arm job, you
Know, up at Lithgow.” “Oh. you mean Small
Arms Factory?” “Yes, that’s it." He was,
accommodated.
This week’s list shows the number of re- j
turned soldiers waiting employment to be
104, made up as follows:—69 single men, 16 j
men with wife only, 8 men with wife and 1
child, 6 with wife and 2 children, 4 with wife j
and 3 children, J with wife and 4 children.
They comprise 56 light laborers, 1 engineer,
1 useful man, 5 watchmen, 7 motor drivers, j
8 clerks, 1 blacksmith, 1 iron driller, 1 car-
-1 enter, 1 tally clerk, 1 house painter, 3 care- 1
takers, 1 handy man, 1 barman, 2 stationers, i
1 night watchman, 1 lift attendant, 1 chain- 1
man, 1 billiard marker, 3 general laborers, 3
horse drivers, 2 storemen, 1 packer.
IH29 —Single. useful man In city or country.
1308—Wife, engineer. 2nd-class certificate.
871—Single, Pght work.
2770—Single, light work.
1485—Wife, 1 child, watchman or caretaker.
1296—Wife, 1 child, light work.
318—Single, motor driver.
3387—Wife, light work.
2247—Single, clerk.
540—Single, clerk.
1799—Wife, 3 children, driver.
2461—Single, light work.
645—Single, light work.
1824—Single, watchman or messenger.
1672—Single, light work.
• 1340—Wife, 1 child, light work.
2216—Single, clerk.
» 3294—Single, blacksmith.
3456—Single, light work.
34 29—Single, light work.
2984—Single, motor driver.
3356—Single, .i»on driller.
1321—Single motor driver.
2597 —Single, light work.
3084—Wife, 2 children, motor driver or grocer.
871—Single, light work.
3454—Wife, light work.
3116—Wife. 1 child, light work.
2545—Single, horse driver.
1321—Single, motor driver.
IBo4—Wife. 4 children, light work.
3183—Single, light work.
2541—Wife, 3 children, light work.
3247—Single, clerk.
2764—Single, light work.
1927 —Single, carpenter,
2381—Single, light work. /
2103—Single, tally clerk.
293—Wife, watchman or messenger.
2666—Wife, 1 child, light work.
1365—Single, light work.
2995—Single, porteir.
2789 —Single, light work.
1986—Single, clerk.
2038—Single, house painter.
3108—Wife, caretaker.
91—Wife, light work.
8161—Single, caretaker or watchman.
2461—Single, light work.
625—Single, light work.
1230 —Wife, 3 children, light work.
1129—Single, handy man.
2789—Single, light work.
2660 —Single, light work.
2499—Single, light work.
3387—Wife, light work.
1867—Single, tally clerk.
2426 —Wife, stationer or light work.
3288—Single, storeman.
3437—Single light work.
1676—Wife, 2 children, barman.
2702—Single, night watchman.
272—Single, light work.
3440—Wife, 2 children, light work.
3269—Single, watchman or lift attendant.
1560—Single, light work.
3433—Wife, 1 child, storeman or packer.
3066 —Single, light work.
.3306 —Single, light work.
1941—Single, light work.
403—Wife, light work.
2845—Single, light work.
599—Single, light work.
1230—Wife, 2 children, light work.
2088 —Single, light work.
1614—Single, lift attendant.
1308—Single, horse driver or light work.
2718—Single, light work.
1423—Single, light work.
1296—Single, light work.
1066—Single, chalnman.
134—Wife, light work.
2090 —Single, light work.
3333 —Single, light work.
8161—Single, light work.
853—Wife, 2 children, watchman or caretaker.
2971 —Wife, light work.
3102 —Single, motor driver,
3433 —Single, clerk.
1211 —Single, light work.
,1569 —Single, clerk.
2793 —Single, general work.
ggSs—wife, 2 children, light work.
2196—Single, light work.
3387 —Wife, light work.
2797 —Single, billiard marker.
3379' —Single, light work.
3410 —Wife, 1 child, light work.
3400 —Wife, caretaker or watchman.
2413 —Single, motor driver.
3351— Single, laborer.


Ml /yruM h-~ ' * n .
STORIES OF WAR
“PRIVATE GILLETT” SAYS “OH!”
THE HIDDEN DECORATION
Scouting Under Shell Fire
“Private Gillett has a decoration of some
kind, murmurs the army sister as she con-
ducts you down the long convalescent ward
at Randwlck Hospital, “but Just what it is
I can’t say. I never worry the boys for de-
tails—they don’t like talking about them-
selves.”
Private Gillett is introduced—a tall, slight
lad, who has recovered from his wounds
enough to be sauntering about the ward in
khaki uniform. “The sister tells me you
re ceived some honor,” you say by way of i
getting to the story, while you settle on the
, edgre of an Immaculate bed that will give the
orderly heartache when he sees how you
'have rumpled the cover. Private Gillett
looks you in the eye. “Oh?” says he. not
committing himself.
“Just what was it?” you ask with deter-
mination. “Only a card,” says the warrior.
“What for?” you insist. “Scouting,” says he.
and stares down the ward. The silence is
oppressive.
lou w’riggle farther on to the bed. “Do
tell me what you did!” you wheedle; and.
“Oh, I was just scouting,” is the answer.
Hedging of this kind could continue for
hours, so you ask for a peep at the card it-
self. it comes out of the breast-pocket of
the khaki coat, and is addressed to Private
Olllett, of the 13th Battalion, from Major Sir
H. \. Cox commending him for conspicuous
gallantry in scouting at Pozieres on August
. 1916 ‘ You Anger it curiously for a few
minutes, after which it goes back into the
breast-pocket, together with any hopes you
entertained of hearing details of his action
from the scout himself. Private Gillett
changes the subject.
‘That’s very neat, don’t you think?” says !
he holding up his right hand and showin-1
where the little finger has been taken clean
“Very,” you say with the requisite note of
admiration, and a feeling that you are Alice
m Wonderland and the world has turned
topsy-turvy.
“Shrapnel,” he explains, and pulls up his
right sleeve. There is a scar like forked
lightning. “I got several pieces in there,” he
continues. “Look! There’s a bit not taken
out yet! Sometimes it wanders away from
the rest of the wound.” A little blue lump
m the flesh asserts itself, and Private Gillett
invites you to feel, which you do gingerly
between finger and thumb. “I got wounded
the day after this,” he says, tapping the
breast-pocket where the card lies.
"How did you come to be scouting?” you
it a matter for volunteers?” <
"No,” says Private Gjllett. “All our scouts i
had been put out of action, and the lieutenant i
asked me and two others to take it on. That
was«in the afternoon. Earlier in the day 1
j had been buried by a'shell.
buried by shell
“Two of my mates and I were standing
together when a shell lobbed pretty close
1 hink it’s worth while moving?’ one of uf
asked, and we decided not. In half a jiffj
over came another shell, and buried me under
two or three feet of earth. I called out tc
the others, and they came and dug me out.
Oh, yes, it s a queer feeling being burled,
but I didn’t feel nervy after it, though the
other two had to be taken away and treated
for shell-shock. Funny, lam more nervy
now I’m away from it all than I ever was
over there. While you’re in it you put such
a strain on yourself, I suppose, that you
don’t know half the time how you feel.
Nowadays I jump if a door bangs!
What did I do after they dug me out?
Well, first thing I went and rescued my false
teeth, which had dropped out when I shouted
to tho chaps to dig me up. It was funny,
too. I had my steel helmet on, with the strap
under my chin—against the regulations, you
know—and I paid for it, for when the fellow
that was digging me out caught sight of my
helmet he grabbed hold and nearly pulled my
head off!
“The helmets? Yes, they’re splendid. The
idea of not having the strap under the chin
is so that if anything knocks the helmet it
won’t carry your head away, too. When you
first wear the thing you call it all the names
under the sun. After a short time in action
you have quite a loving regard for it. It
often acts as a chest protector, and you’ll see
the chaps sitting down hugging it up against
themselves.
“I was out scouting in No Man’s Land for
two and a half hours that afternoon. You
have to go on your hands and knees, and as
the space between the two lots of trenches
is very flat you have to go very carefully for
fear of landing suddenly right in the enemy’s
lines. The greatest danger lies not in Ger-
man shells, but in the ones from your own
gunners.
NO USE DUCKING
“The enemy shell always lobs in or behind
our lines. Our own shells often come down
in No Man’s Land. At nighttime you have
to walk out on scout duty, and you go three
together for fear of suddenly encountering
enemy scout parties. If a star shell bursts
overhead it’s no good ducking. The best
way is to stand stock-still and trust to luck
that the enemy hasn’t seen you.”
“Did you have any exciting encounters?”
comes from the edge of the bed, where hope
of personal details has not yet died. “Oh,
everyone has them," says Private Gillett, and
further attempts at securing a description of
the scout’s gallantry are abandoned.
“Sometimes we used to get out in No Man’s
Land to go through the pockets of the enemy
dead for information. I got an officer’s
papers once. The chap had a brummagem
watch and chain, which struck me as strange
for a man of that rank. On the chain there
was a little heart-shaped trinket.
“On August 30 I got wounded in the right
arm and the left leg, and, of course, had to
make for hospital. I was in a dug-out practi-
cally naked for several hours after the
wounds were dressed, waiting until I could
be moved. 1 spent a few days in Rouen and
other hospitals on my way back to London.
“My word, it’s a splendid feeling when you
settle down into the” final hospital, know-
ng that all the moving about is over. It
’eels like home.”


,l iH n -
SHELLS AND SNIPERS
OFFICER’S EARLY IMPRESSIONS
VIVID TRENCH STORY
Sydney General Among the Rats
A brigadier-general, writing to his wdfe
in Sydney from the front in France, describes
his early experiences and observations in the
campaign:
In the afternoon orders came that we were
to go into the line as soon as possible, and
the next morning our battalion was sent up
to relieve one of the reserve battalions in
tlie line. On the following day two men were
sent up to go into the front line, and we
began our first acquaintance with the Huns.
It was a bright Sunday morning when I first
saw our lines. It was quiet and peaceful,
except for a few shells which were falling
down on our right. Opposite us there was
no sign that the Hyn was at all interested
in our movements. The first few days were
also quiet. But the Boche gradually woke
up, and our men began to experience shell-
fire’ Jt subdued them a bit at first, but
when they saw how little damage and how
e " cas ualties the shells caused, they began
1° K( t quite indifferent. One day over 200
shells, .77 mm. and Minenwerfer. fell, and
hurt no one, and did little damage.
, °“ r rtrst -’ asua, ty was a sheer piece of iad
k - An officer came up to speak to a ser-
M« n .V’ h r to ° k UP hiS rlfle and it on
his left shoulder. He had scarcely done it
" be " a bul,et struck the barrel and glanced
off, hitting the sergeant on the side of the I
H-0, killing him a. „ ne °/ f j
, and would have been an offi ;er in the
next batch of appointments. While he had
such bad luck, others had extraordinary oi-
; a a P s eS : h ° ne offlcer standing between two men'
" aS thrmvn down b y a shell, but the two
men were killed. Another time a billet took
no tip off a man’s nose, and another took
AVellV* the bridge ° f another man’s.
fill on ° ne man UP in the a,r > he !
fell on his mate. He was unhurt, but his
mate got shell shock. The same shell blew |
the waterproof cape off a sergeant. leaving I
only the straps. The sergeant was chiefly I
Z7Zt b^ 1 hiS WatCh hadn *‘ topped and I
not that he was unhurt. There have been
ber oTn 8 r^ 8 ’ t0 °’ b6CaUSe ° f the num-
dav 40 fen i the HUn BendS " Ver ’ ° nei
day « te.. a curtain, an<l , /Q(
WHAT TRENCH FEET ARE
To keep the feet warm every man has a
Pair of gum boots, which come up over the
haT; H Th r? are PreC,OUS - «™«t Mr.
has to be taken to see that they are not lost
and that men do not take them into the nack
area when relieved. When the history of
ioneTV 3 wmten gum bo °ts must be men-
tinned, for every staff officer at one time or
another has had a worrying time to account
or his men being in possession of gum roots
that the" 16 h en , ior Staff ° fflCer has bought
which h not be ’ An °ther matter
hich has given some officers, mostly pla-
°°" »>«oh worry | s , re „o h
feet. This is a species of cold feet wors>
than the ordinary frost bite. The feet swell
and lose all feeling. Then, later they be-
come so painful that a man with trench feet
ill howl if you point your finger at his
(W hile I write one of my staff is
having a high argument with someone over
gum boots.) Trench feet can be prevented
only with constant care. The platoon com-
mander has to certify daily that he has in-
spected the feet of every man in his pla-
toon. that every man has
V
, (I) Changed his socks
(2) Rubbed his feet with whale oil
p (3) Had wa...i food, and
(4) Has a pair of gumboots.
e If these precautions are not taken, trenc-:
feet will ensue. So serious is the matte
that a man who gets trench feet is tried b;
i. ! court-martial. Strict supervision ha!
t stopped it with us, but in the beginning wi
, | had a few cases before the position wai
r | thoroughly understood. -Trench feet wil
’ ! certainly have to be mentioned in the historj
1 lof the war.
THE DAY’S ROUTINE
& 1
The routine of the trenches in our
locality does not vary much from day to
■ day. Mostly the morning is quiet after the
L machine guns have sung the early morning
r song and shut up for the day. The men
i go about their routine duties~to be wror-
) ried about II a.m. by some Minenwerfer or
1 .77 mm. shrapnel or high explosive shells
which Hje Hun sends over at random. If he
is very nasty and unduly generous, our guns
retaliate, and he is shut up. Later our
guns commence to cut wire with trench mor-
tars, and the Hun gets angry, and we have
to shut him up. Meanwhile the trenches
I are knocked about, and we have to set to
iwork to repair them. When it gets dark the
Hun starts with his very light and machine
guns and our patrols go out into No Man’s
Land, and continue to go and come until
dawn. A Very light is fired from a pistol.
It rises in the aii* to a good height, and ex-
plodes into a bright light, which makes No
' Man’s Land clear as day. The Hun uses a
i great many of them, and the whole area is at
; times lit up. Our patrols do not mind them
much, for if caught, a man can usually elude
observation by remaining quite still.
Another burning question Is rats. The
1 trenches are full of them. Great big brown
chaps, fat as butter, and as cheeky as you
1 please. Still they give the men great sport.
The bayonet is much used, both as a means
of despatch and a means of entreaty to doom.
The rat is entreated by a piece of wasted
cheese on the end of a bayonet, and a pull
on the trigger does the rest.
One battery of artillery, or rather, some
artillery officers, nearly lost their jobs
through rats. A listener on a telephone
(special men with listening sets listen to con-
versations on telephones between units, and
report anything they hear which may be use-
ful to them, and the talkers duly hear about
it) heard one duty officer say to another,
"Zero time for to-night’s operations will be
7 p.m.” This was reported in due course,
and a heavy rebuke from higher command
came along. A very senior officer made in-
quiries and reported as follows; “The opera-
tions in question were entirely successful.
Many of the enemy were killed. No casual-
ties among our attacking party. No identi-
fications were obtained, except that two of
the enemy were white. The artillery were
not called upon.’’ For this he got a No. 1


rebuke, for the whole thing referred to a rat
hunt.
COURAGE OF DIFFERENT TYPES
The men are a curious lot taking them all
through. Some quite unconvinced about
danger. One sergeant in particular spent
every night his unit was in the line exploring
No Man's Land. lie appeared to have abso-
lutely no fear. One night he lay for three-
quarters of an hour outside a wired-in sap
listening to a Hun in the sap to find out
what he was doing. The Hun was tapping
on a piece of wood, but doing little else, and
the sergeant had at last to give it up.
Another night he saw a Minenwerfer shell
go over his head, so he climbed a tree in
No Man’s Land and watched for the flash
of the next shell. He marked it by taking
a line with the tree he was in and two
others, and the next night took an artillery
officer out and showed him the place. The
Minenwerfer open'd that night, and three
well-placed shells blew it up. This sergeant
won the Military Cross —the first in the
division. I saw him the next morning, and
his eyes had a strained look, and altogether
his aspect was that of a man scared of
nothing.
Quickly, without any blow, he told his
story, and also how for him there was only
one machine-gun on the front, one which
had fired at him, and under which he had
lain for an hour at a time until he could get
away. He begged to be allowed to go and
take it, but it could not be permitted Just
then Quite a different type of man was an
Irish batman (Major 's man). The first
time they went in, he carried up ’s valise
through the communication trenches. But
it took so long, about a mile to walk, lie
I decided to go overland the second time. He
did, too, in the afternoon, escaping what
shells were coming over, and was seen about
to go over the top into No Man’s Land.
When asked where he was going, he said.
‘Tve brung up Mr. ’s valish.” That he
had lost his way or done anything out of the
ordinary did hot occur to him.
One man on patrol was told to come back,
but he said, ‘Tve Just stopped five, it’s no
good me going back,” so he stayed. Another
boy was hit just on our parapet. His only
remark as they pulled him in was ‘‘Oh, dear,"
before he died. A much more angry person
was one of our lot who was buried up to
the neck by a shell. This was bad enough,
but he w r as on the wrong side of the parapet,
which the shell had changed. He faced the
Hun for an hour while behind him his mates
were working to dig him out. He struggled
all he knew, and at last got his hands free,
and then fell forward into the shell hole.
All the time he was hurled there the Hun
was sniping at him, but couldn’t hit him.
With the help of a mate he scrambled hack,
and then he stood, and shaking with shell
shock and anger, he let the Hun know (or
rather his mate, for th 6 Hun couldn’t hear)
what he thought of him. “Walt till I get
over there, you (xyz), and VU (xyz) deal
with the (xyz) who did that,” and more to
that effect. The joy of his mates at his
excitement was something fine.
i


Sfu. n "<417
STORIES OF WAR
EATING THE MACHINE GUN
“CHAMBER OF HORRORS ”
ARMISTICE OR SURRENDER?
It is at Randwick Hospital.
“Allow me to Introduce Private Donnelly,
Ist Battalion, commonly known as ‘Glutton’
on account of having tried to eat a machine-
gun,” says the man in pyjamas and overcoat.
“Couldn’t swallow it,” laughs Private Don-
nelly bringing his wheel-chair to a stand-
still.
You are a trifle bewildered, and want to
know more. “Let’s us hear about it,” you
ask.
“1 m afraid I’ve forgotten everything since
I had shell-shock,” comes from the wheel-
chair.
“He’s stringing you!" the other convales-
cent protests. “Go on, Donnelly; be a
sport!”
“Did you really suffer from shell shock?”
demands the visitor.
“Yes, from eating peanuts!” says the in-
corrigible one; but a few more protests set
him on the narrow pathway of truth, and
you lArn that after four months on Gallipoli
he got so badly peppered by a machjne-gun
that his mates suspected him of having
tried to eat it. He was taken off to Malta
with a complement of 32 bullets. He marks
off the joint of his first finger to show the
length of them. His right arm is of use only
! when lifted in a certain way, and it will be a
week or two yet before he is able to discard
I the wheel-chair. His legs show several cre-
| vasses where bullets entered. “I’ll have to
, wear stockings in surf-bathing now,” he says
‘whimsically, and with eyes too rueful to be
anything but comic. "This was a bull's-eye,”
he continues, opening his tunic so that you
can see a cup-shaped wound in his chest.
: The bullet came out through the shoulder.
DAYS WITHOUT SLEEP
During the Gallipoli campaign Private
Donnelly went from a Friday afternoon until
the following Tuesday with five hours’ sleep.
“In action,” he says, “you never feel tired,
even when you’ve been at it for as long as
three or four days; but as soon as you come
off duty you go flop. 1 remember being sent
into the trenches by a lieutenant to have that
five hours’ rest. In the trenches there were
regular rooms where you could lie down. They
were shell-proof, and, as you may imagine,
very dim. I w’ent along the trench looking
for a place to rest, and I met one of my pals.
‘Oh,’ he said, ‘the big room along here is
alright. I’ll wake you when your time’s up.’
“I stumbled along, and when I got there
the place was full except for one bit of f* or
just big enough for me. I tip-toed over the
others to it, and lay down, with my water-
bottle for a pillow. There were two big
chaps either side of me, and as they’d been
theVe before me I took it they’d had a pretty
fair innings, so made myself more comfort-
able by shoving one of them against the
wall. My pal woke me at 9 p.m. I asked
him for a cigarette, and when I struck the
match I said to him, ‘My word, those fellows
are doing well, sleeping so long.’ He laughed,
and I took another look at them. I had been
sleeping between two dead Turks! But you
didn’t take any notice of things like that out
there!
“On the day of the armistice I and two
others were at a part of the lines known as
the Chamber of Horrors. It was the un-
finished section of what we hoped would
eventually join up with Quinn’s Post. There
was only room for three in it, and it was
quite near to the German officers’ quarters
in the enemy trenches. The enemy did not 1
know that, though, and we had strict orders j
not to betray the unfinished state of the lines, |
as had they charged us there we should have i
had no place of retreat but the tunnel which j
was being gradually made with the idea of
joining up
“One of the three suggested taking a peep
over on this day. I did so very cautiously,
and, to my surprise, saw a big German officer
in his shirt sleeves advancing with a white
I flag. I told the others. By this time more
I were advancing. One of the boys in the
Chamber of Horrors thought that at least
this sectipn of the enemy was surrendering.
He leapt up on the parapet shouting, ‘Good
for you, matey! Are you going to quit?
Come and shake hands with us.’ He was
dragged down, and the news of the armistice
soon passed along to us.
“The quietness of those few hours was
almost more than we could bear after the
continual firing. If a man spoke to you you
jumped at the sound of his voice. It was
uncanny the way all the little singing birds
came back as soon as it was quiet. The
whole thing got on our nerves, and we were
j glad when the time came for the armistice to
end. The Turks had the right to start off
again, and I never heard anything so puny
as the first shot that was fired. Then the old
naval guns got to it. and we were happy
again.
SMOKES TO-DAY, LEAD TO-MORROW
"During the armistice I made friends wlh
a Turk. He s*poke perfect English. He had
been coming out to Sydney to join his uncle
and nephew in business, but five days before
his departure he was called up. We ex-
changed cigarettes—l gave him a box of
those awful Scotch things we used to get out
there, and he gave me the real Turkish
article, which, I can tell you. I enjoyed. While
we smoked he said, ‘Strange, you know! To-
day we smoke, chat, and are happy together;
to-morrow we shall probably pour lead into
each other!’ He was taken prisoner after-
wards, and I saw him again. He was a really
good fellow, like many of the other rural
Turks against whom we fought.
“Life in the trenches? Well, there wasn’t
any dinner-bell! We toqk bully beef and
biscuits with us, and opened the beef when-
ever we were hungry and had the chance of
eating. There was one fellow who had been
a shearer s cook. He made a sort of grater by
piercing a piece of tin with holes. He used to
grate the biscuits and beef, and make rissoles
and cutlets and things. My word, we
wouldn’t have lost him for a fortune' We
were the envy of the lines.
“One day someone shot a hare (the first
and last I saw on the peninsula). It was a
lord mayor’s banquet! We grilled it, and" as
soon as a bit was cooked it would be hacked
off and it was ‘Good-bye. hare.’”
Private Donnelly was in London for Anzac
Day. He says that most of the Australians
had fresh tunics made for the occasion, more
smartly cut than usual. He and several
others were in a theatre during the day In
the seat in front was a broad-shouldered
Australian in khaki. They recognised him
as a pal. “How about it, Nugget?’’ said one
of the soldiers, laying his hand on the
shoulder of the Anzac in front. “Nugget”
turned round, and, to their dismay, they saw
the crown of a general on his shoulder. “Be~
pardon, sir.” said they; “thought you were
one ot ourselves.”
“Well, damn it all, aren’t I?” said the
general. “Come out and have a drink.” He
refused to tell them his name, and they have
never discovered it.


JJU, cL i 9/7
BIRDWOOD’S BOYS
WINTERING ON THE SOMME
TROOPS WELL CARED FOX
DIFFICULTIES OVERCOME
(From Our Special Representative)
LONDON, January 19.
Our five divisions are not yet all together
though no one doubts they would flght bettei
if grouped into one army corps, shoulder tr
shoulder. General Moriash’s baby division
is far north of the Somme, near Armentieres
The Germans know this well. They knew it
as soon as the division marched in, and they
have been taking full advantage, dusting up
these raw warriors to i jch an extent that
already “The Thirds’’ have earned theii
place in the line, and choked the gibes and
laughter of their more hardened brothers
While spending the long summer at Salis-
bury Plain, in mock trenches and in in-
glorious safety, "The Thirds” were the sub-
ject of scorn—some of it bitter. Older di-
visions could not forget that they had had
no such prolonged training, and that while
they were going “through” the Somme three
times the Plain carried fully sixty thousand
stalwart and eager recruits. Of course, the
training was wise, and we are all proud ol
our “baby.” But until German shells rained
on them, until their name echoed down the
line for the efficiency and daring of their
raids, until they had shivered for nights in
snow and slush and conquered their appre-
hensiveness, General Monash’s men were not
admitted into the great A.I.F. brotherhood.
I would like to write that all is well with
| our men now, but they are not quite happy
j yet, though there has been good progress
, They deserved a rest- They’ might perhaps
j have been taken out of the line, a division al
! a time, if in this hurried and exacting war
| we could have brought their real needs U
| the understanding of those in authority. Th«
call made on them to stick It out, in some
of the worst parts of the line, was greater
than Sir Douglas Haig thought. Our mer
had fought through the very crisis of the
| Somme, when the toughest German resis-
| tance was broken. They had been in the
pres salient- and brought down again tc
the south for further attacks. And they
were called on to spend the winter —a winter
much more trying to them than to British
or Canadians—in the rough and shelterless
trenches south of the Ancre. General Bird-
wood said to me at that time, “I doubt if any
army has had to meet a harder time than
that before us now, with conditions of wea-
ther and country to be fought Just as deter-
minedly as we have to flght the Germans.”
THE FIGHT AGAINST SICKNESS
It was not a fight against tiredness or low-
ering morale. The Australian soldier has
well proved his gameness and determination
It was a flght against sickness. For a time
it went againgt us. I suppose the condition
would come within the term “dry rot,”
though there was little enough dryness on the
Somme in the early’ winter. Hospitals filled
up. Men got trench feet, influenza, bron-
chitis, rheumatism, 'trench fever, and neuras-
thenia. They were living in a flood. The
mud was deep and sticky’, billets were a long
way’ back,
ncft’ be organised, and
shelling was continuous. Lately, the Somme
has become as quiet a sector as any on the
front. But it was not so in November and
December, and many a brave Australian lies
in the shell-holes and covered-in trenches of
winter line. Our men were sorely tried
in body and spirit, and those living in in-
glorious security longed that they should
rest and become refreshed.
This winter struggle has been a triumph,
and before this letter reaches Australia our
divisions will be thoroughly fit and eager for
the decisive battles. They shook off each
succeeding attack of gloominess. They
shovelled mud and carried supplies until they
made their lines habitable. They- went to
hospital, came back, and took better care of
themselves because of their experience. They
learnt how to make the most of whale oil
and dry socks —how they relished those
socks from home! They made railways, put
up huts, kept on raiding the Germans and
sprinkling them with shells, and dug deep
dug-outs and mines. They lost some of their
love for Birdwood, though they never ceased
whole-heartedly to admire him as a man.
All that affection and trust came back, and
they grew to like (heir officers better, for
these men, too, floundered in the filth. Per-
haps the sth Division had the worst time.
At the end of November it had,7B cases re-
ported of trench feet and a total of 268 sick
in 24 hours, as compared with another divi-
sion’s total of twQ cases of trench feet and 31
sick. To-day the sth Division has the low-
est record of sick in the army. The men
grumbled a little at having to go through it.
But they showed that Australian soldiers
possess great powers of endurance and ob-
stinacy, and they showed, too, that their
physique has fine recuperative qualities.
BIRDWOOD’S WAY
One of the horrors of the Somme during
these months has been the dead, for No
Man’s Land is cluttered with them, and we
cannot get out to bury them. These are the
brave Englishmen who went out in the last
attacks —principally against the Butte de
Warlencourt, which we wished to hold dur-
ing the winter months as a point d'appui—
and who fell in rows before German machine
guns. “Victims of insufficient artillery pre-
paration.” you say. Well, the whole lesson
of the Somme has been the impossibility of
dealing with machine guns by artillery. Our
men have had the faces of the dead turned
up to them —in the moonlight a most stir-
ring spectacle; and they have been ever re-
minded of the bad circumstances in which
they are placed, and the certainty of more
attacks over just this sort of ground, until
the might of honest civilians has broken the
power of those who have set themselves
against the god of love. These farmers’ sons
and clerks’ sons —these men from the fac-
tories and brickyards and sheep stations—
these truly home-loving youths must have
wondered at the horrors of warfare, and
sometimes believed it all a dream, so different
is their life to-day from its sheltered regu-
larity and affectionate interests of yesterday.
There is difference of opinion in the army,
but I think the majority of those who have
been with our battle flag since the beginning
will say that November and December on the
Somme were more trying, more exacting,
more horrible than anything that went
before.


SET HIS TEETH
Australians owed a lot to General Birdwood
i during these days. He had not an easy
task. There was some good-natured disaf-
fection, and the men were disposed to take
his complimentary little lectures with ban-
ter. His easy course would have been to
secure a complete rest for his men, and I
do not say that this was not well deserved
and proper, in view of the stiffness of tasks
ahead. But Birdwood saw it through; he set
his teeth and faced the music, and I think he
stands all the higher with his men to-day on
this account. Certainly he has all his old
hold —it is a wonderful hold—and more than
his old power of exacting obedience and re-
spect without punishment or Hardship. The
fact is that he set himself to put his men
right, and succeeded. It meant continuous
tramping in the trenches, e-verlasting talks
; to men and officers, a sapping of his own
; strength that left him weak and ill for a
I little time, a new burden in letter-writing.
In some ways it meant a’so a stiffness and
assertiveness that, though power is always
evident in the man, do net usually obtrude.
I have seen some of the orders he issued at
that time, and know they cost something to
write. Briefly, his scheme was to make
junior officers responsible, and to keep them
hard at it. They were to see that their men
• kept we 1. “I happened to-day to be visiting
our forward support line,” he wrote in one
memorable order, ‘‘and saw a battalion ,
which had just come in after three days in
the trenches. The men were naturally abso-
lutely dog-tired and thoroughly worn-out,
and I am sorry to say a great many were j-
suffering from ‘trench feet’—some of them
very severely, too. It was a beautiful
sunny day, and I should like to have seen
full advantage taken of this In doing what
was possible to ease the men. when no com-
forts were obtainable locally. I should like
to have seen company and platoon com-
manders going round immediately the bat-
talion had reached its hailing place, seeing
that every 'man had taken off his puttees,
boots, and socks, drying them in the sun,
and loosened his breeches at the knees. This
alone would have caused immediate circula- !
tion, while the men might also have been em- |
ployed rubbing their feet. In a few instances 1
this was done, but in a great many cases I
noticed the men sitting all about, no one hav-
ing taken the tumble to see that they were |
receiving proper attention.” Junior officers ! j
had a bad time. No Australian mother '
could have bec-n more solicitous than Bird- \
wood. He fought sickness right through, i
and fought it by the disciplining of his |
younger officers.
A BETTER JANUARY
We got the Somme defences down fine
point by the end of the year. It became
possible to hold the line in modern battle |
fashion, and the only special handicap that'
made our army suffer was the mud and the |
distance to billets. Firing line became easily 1
and tightly held, as modern conditions allow; |
‘the defence was in depth of trench system i
instead of in numbers of men in the first line. '
How much the British army could have |
saved if, in 1915, this lesson had been learned!
Pei haps the Somme during these first wee ks '
of January has been even quitter than other i
places, for there has come a kind of reaction,}
as if both armies, German and British, had
become so horror-stricken with the place that
they have agreed to rest. Sometimes we
have lit fires in Geudecourt, and attracted
fiyidus German shelling. But on the whole
we have been content with raids. There has
.been to think of without thinking of'
keeping the Germans feverish.
In any case, we have established our rights
to full participation in the greatest of all i
battles. The Somme has been as much mr
batt e as that of any other divisions. And
perhaps the winter there has prepared these
great-hearted men, who have shown such
ability to conquer, for some work of equal
moment in Australia Itself.


JUU, 4W- / *• “
NURSING ON A TRANSPORT
LIFE AT SEA
ROYAL RED CROSS FOR MATRON
"What we owe (o the Red Cross cannot be
sufficiently emphasised. Its splendid provi-
sion for the hospital transports makes just
all the difference in the work of tending the
patients on board,” declares Miss Ethel
Strickland, matron on the hospital boat that
arrived here last week.
Matron Strickland has just been awarded
| the Royal Red Cross, and has been already
j five trips on hospital transport duty between
j England and Australia. She comes origin-
| ally from Victoria, and trained at the Mel-
i bourne Hospital, after which she had a pri-
vate hospital of her own at Sandringham
(Melbourne). Some time before the war
Miss Strickland underwent a course of train-
ing in military nursing, so was well fitted for
the work ahead of her. She was accepted
for military service in July, lb!s, when she
left in charge of 134 nurses, and has been on
duty attached to the same transport ever
since.
“It is exacting work, of course, and on the
trips home to Australia with the wounded
i aboard there is practically no time off duty
jat all. The nurses feel quite ready for the i
| comparative rest of the trip back again,
: when they are able to mend and attend to
hundreds of little personal matters that have
to be ignored in the stress of duty with a
big boatload of patients.”
Miss Strickland says that the nurses are
glad to just rest; and going to bed is the
most popular form of recreation on the re-
turn trip.
“Yes, there are often bad cot cases, and
; operations are frequently performed; we have
a splendidly equipped theatre aboard,” Miss
Strickland proudly replies to an inquiry.
"Oh, the boat is not always rocking, and op-
erations can be done at sea as well as on
land usually. There are many cases where
splinters of bone, bullets, shell and shrapnel
have to be extracted on the voyage out, and
cases often develop in unforeseen way's after
leaving London, requiring immediate atten-
tion by skilled hands during the voyage.
There are many inconveniences,. of course,
and a lurch of the ship will often upset all '
your dressings.”
Miss Strickland is most enthusiastic about
the courtesy and kindness of the Red Cross
everywhere. "It is so splendid to be met
and have your luggage looked after, and to
be whisked off in a motor immediately on
arrival,” she says. "And how splendid they
are to the men! Everywhere motors are
ready to take them about; only the pride
and independence of the Australian boy often
makes him reluctant to accept so much lavish
hospitality and kindness ‘for nothing.’ ”
"We nurses are always included in the
kind cordiality at the different ports, but, of
course, it is not often that we can go off
duty, and then leave must be taken in
turns.”
One of the happiest times was spent at
Durban on the trip out, Miss Strickland says,
and this was undoubtedly owing to the fact
that the serving of intoxicants to the men
was prohibited. The ordinary lay mind can-
Miss E. Strickland
not conceive at once what a great difference
this makes. But men who are weak and ill
are affected by the slightest amount of
stimulant, and it is heartbreaking for the
nurses and doctors to find convalescents
having the careful nursing and attention of
weeks ail unclone in a single afternoon. At
Durban the men were entertained lavishly,
and big "spreads” were given by both the
Methodists and the Y.M.C.A. The free tram
rides appealed to the men tremendously. It 1
is not that the Anzac begrudges his tup-
pence—he spends royally wherever he goes.
But the courtesy of being allowed free on
the trams appealed to him, and for the rest
of the voyage this was often commented
upon.
The transport is supplied with all requisite
comforts by the Red Cross when it leaves
Australia, and these are used for the return
trip with the consignment of wounded. It
is not only the hospital necessities, the gar-
ments, and such comforts, as well as jam,
pickles, cigarettes, and chocolate, but the
games, cards, literature, and amusements
for the patients (hat are valued by the staff.
The journey is tedious at any time, but for
sick men—some suffering very severely—the !
lours are long, indeed. So the amusements 1
are a great boon to the nurses, who say |
hat they make an amazing difference to a j
patient’s progress, as there is invariably a J
iig percentage of insomnia and nerve trouble ;
pases.
The nurses have only about a week’s pause
n London, and are cut off from the world, !
md ev£h news of the war. They cannot re-
ceive many mails, as a letter intended to
;atch them in London or again in Sydney
nust just follow by a boat leaving at about
:he same time as their own. So the noble
irmy of military nurses whose duty has j
alien on a transport are fulfilling their part
n the great struggle. Some have to relin-
luish their appointments owing to sea-sick-
iess. Many grow weary of the sea life, the
hip food, and the isolation from the world
ishore, but stick to their posts and carry on.
Though they do not face the very strenuous
lappenings of hospitals close to the front
hey risk the danger of submarines, and are
acriflcing comfort and the thousand necessi-
ies and luxuries of life ashore in remaining
vhere they are needed, on board the trans-
orts.


k "'19/7. ~ P H
THE CLEARING STATION
Lightning Construction Work
SURGERY UNDER DIFFICULTIES
Captain Dr. M'Lean, who has just returned
from military service at the front, most gra-
phically brought before the members of the
Red Cross Committee in his address on Wed-
nesday afternoon the tremendous difficulties
of surgery and general relief work for the
wounded in the advance clearing stations I
close to the firing line. In a few vivid word
pictures he des'cribed what the doctors, sis-
ters, and orderlies are doing there every day;
and the relation of the bare facts would seem
to tell of the work of superhumans.
In all that he told the value of the Red
Cross organisation was revealed, and the ne- j
cessity for constant supplies of all comforts
and equipment for the hospitals at the front
cannot be too much emphasised.
Dr. M‘Lean related how a clearing station
on the fringe of the firing line is established.
An advance party goes forward with two
motor lorries carrying equipment, and on a
suitable field or bare place begins by erecting
a few bell tents. These and some Indian
marquees are quickly put up, and soon a can-
vas hospital is erected, wards 125 ft. long be- ,
formed by a number of Indian marquees i
being put together. Then the engineers put
down flooring-boards, the electricians follow I
and instal electric light, water is laid on ;
-from a g ’.-.bermg o h«ta»u that has an
artesian well, and within five weeks a re-
markably well-equipped hospital of canvas
and wood (many huts being built as well as
the tents) is ready to receive casualties from
the heavy engagements expected.
A clearing station is, in the present war, a
huge hospital, holding in emergencies, as
many as 1000 patients, including 600 cot cases,
which is a remarkable contrast to the old-
time clearing station that accommodated
about 200. It Is the treatment of the wound-
ed at the clearing stations that determines
the whole future progress of a patient, and
the operating theatre must be equipped as
efficiently as possible.
But the difficulties under which the doctors
and nurses have to perform their skilful du-
ties are shocking. For one thing, there are
very few beds. Imagine what it must be like
for a surgeon to have to attend to a Serious
case on his hands and knees, and sometimes
groping in the light of a hurricane lamp. The
wounded are brought in on a trench-stretch-
er, which is a kind of bag slung on two poles
(the ordinary stretcher will not fit in the
front trenches, it cannot turn). This is
usually covered in mud and blood, and the
wounded man is in all hi-s heavy equipment.
The wounded usually arrive at the clearing
station at about 3 a.m. (being brought under
cover of the dark). And it is then that the
doctors, nurses, and orderlies have to re-
ceive them, rip off the uniform, and wash the
patients, -who probably have many different
wounds, including compound fractures.
The boon of a real bed—-with sheets—is tre-
mendously appreciated by the doctors, who
reserve them for all the bad cases. Dr.
M‘Lean told of the great delight he experi-
enced when going to the Red Cross head-
quarters at Doulon with a long list of neces-
sities required for the clearing station, and
returning with a very much longer list of
requisitions and Red Cross comforts to be
forwarded. This clearing station was within
six miles of the firing line, and all the severe
cases from the heavy Somme attacks were
brought in after reciving temporary treat-
ment at the first dressing station. The bulk
of the real heavy work is shouldered by the
sisters, declares Dr. M'Lean, and too much
cannot be said in admiration of them. For
the doctors, of course, the work is exception-
ally exacting, and very difficult cases have
to be treated at once under primitive condi-
tions. The provisions afforded by the Red
Cross are more than acceptable, they are ab-
solutely essential, and save the lives of hun-
dreds of men in the clearing stations alone.


rJUi*-
FOR THE SOLDIERS
SUGGESTED NATIONAL SERVICE
Organising Industry
WHAT COULD BE DONE
“Australian soldiers could be repatriated
without additional taxation.”
This is the statement made by Mr. George
Fitzpatrick, the honorary organising sec-
retary of the Voluntary Workers’ Associa-
tion, which is now ouildlng homes for wound-
ed soldiers and war widows by the utilisa-
tion of free labor.
Dr. Arthur has proved to be a practical
seer," said Mr. Fitzpatrick. He has been
able to look ahead and to visualise what
could be accomplished by an organised and
controlled voluntary effort. When it was
suggested that workers would labor after
ordinary hours, not only without overtime
payment, but without any wages at all, the
idea was ridiculed. Men are doing this every
week-end. Tens of thousands of pounds
worth of buildings have now been added to
'he national wealth of the State through the
efforts of these men. Homes which would
ordinarily cost about £4OO are now being
erected «t the cost of about £2OO, and the
scheme is capable of being still further ex-
tended to reduce this primary cost by at
least 50 per cent.
"What actually happens now is that car-
penters, plumbers, painters, bricklayers, and
other tradesmen give their time on Saturday
afternoons and Sundays to the work of
erecting homes. If the whole State were
properly organised, and if every individual
were compelled to give a certain number of
hours of labor free in just the same way
that he is compelled to give the product of
his labor free now in the form of money by
taxation, instead of actual product in his
hands, a tremendous amount could be ac-
complished. Recently a timber firm gave
the whole of the material free to the build-
ing of a cottage, and their employees gave
their time for the erection without charge.
The idea could have been taken still farther
back if the men who cut the timber, as far
as this place is concerned, gave their week-
ends free. The teamsters could on Saturdays
and Sundays give their services free, the
railway employees or the shipping company
employees could have given their services,
the timber-mills could have prepared the
raw material free, because the employers
are now making the machinery plant avail-
able without charge, and the tihiber could
have been landed at French’s Forest or any
suburb practically without cost. Another
typical instance could be given in the case
of stoves. A Sydney firm of stove-makers
supplied the raw material at cost price, and
made their plant and power available on
Saturday afternoons. The employees give
their time free on Saturday afternoons, and
stoves are turned out at about half the
ordinary price. The same reasoning might
be applied to this case as in the former. To
go right back to the primary producers, if
they worked at the week-ends the cost
would be still further reduced, and the
asset to the State increased.
4, 1 f It is going to take £20,000,000 to re-
patriate the men, as stated by the Prime
Minister, it means that £20,000,000 is going to
be taken from one pocket of the taxpayer
and put in the other, less the cost of dis-
tribution. If every individual in the com-j
munlty were compelled to give of his labor,
and the product of that labor was either
utilised direct or sold for the benefit of the
soldiers, there would be no cost of distri-
bution or administration, for the services of
organisers, supervisors, and distributors
would be utilised without pay. Merely im-
posing taxes cannot create a national asset or
j national wealth, but if men and women de-
vote even a tiny portion of their leisure to
this work, as outlined, an enormous sum of
tangible assets will be added to the wealth
of the nation.
“The time for promises has gone past, per-
formances are now demanded. Pitiably little
has been done for the permanent repatria-
tion of the men. Most of the help given is
merely of a temporary nature. The Volun-
tary Workers’ Association has found that
some individuals are bearing more of their
share of the burden while others are shirk-
ing their responsibilities. The time has now
arrived when everyone should be compelled
to take their share in the national responsi-
bility. If it were good policy to compel the
youth of Australia to give up portion of their
leisure for military training, surely the
sound reasoning to compel the fathers —and,
if needs be, the mothers —of these youths,
together with their elder brothers, to labor
at their ordinary occupations a little longer
on behalf of the nation.”
This alteration can only be brought about
by Federal legislative enactment, when the
public have been educated to its necessity.


cZ/o /WWL X!'"'?/?.
WITH THE REMOUNTS
BUCKJUMPERS IN CAIRO
BREAKING-IN OUTLAWS
Banjo Paterson as Leader
Sergeant W. E. Brown, of the remount*,
sits up in bed at the Randwlck Military Hos-
pital awaiting the doctor, who is to say
whether or not he shall undergo an operation.
He left Sydney with the artillery, but before
reaching Egypt met with an accident that
forced his return to Australia, where he suf-
fered a year’s illness. After this he was
turned down for active service, but managed
to get in with the remounts, or the “Methu-
selahs,’ ’as they were laughingly called on ac-
count of the many white-headed men In their
, ranks.
"You know” he says, "we were given all
sorts of a character when we first went to
Egypt, and many accused the younger mem-
bers of suffering from cold feet, but we’ve
shown ’em differently, and the work of the
remounts is appreciated nowaday
"Banjo Paterson led us, and you never met
a finer chap nor one more suited to manage
men. Why? Because he is a real sport.
He didn’t wqnt us only to work well, but he
saw that we got our play, too, and was al-
ways keen on our doing well in sports.
"You should have seen the English people
in Cairo at the Belgian Day sports The
roughrlders inithe remounts (there were 80
of them) took-part in a buckjum'ping show
that fairly took away the breath of the Eng-
lish residents. You should have heard the
ladles scream and seen them standing up in
their places as the Australians careered
round on outlaws. I think they thought we
were wild men.”
Sergeant Brown reaches over to the white
enamelled cabinet for an album of snap-
shots. When he has shown you a few you
know why the ladies stood up and cried
aloud! Here is a horse nxmpant with a
human bundle huddled somewhere between
its neck and Its tail.
"That’s me,” says the sergeant, with a
casual finger on the bundle.
He turns over a few leaves .to show you
the picture of an outlaw doiitg its best to
emulate a sky-rocket. Upright upon the
curve, between inturned head and tail, is an
alert figure with arm upraised in the act of
hat-waving.
"That’s Dempsey,” says the invalided
roughrider with pride. “He’s the finest
rough-rider in the world
There are snapshots of horses pig-rooting,
bucking, careering madly i*ound, and always
somewhere upon their person appears the im-
perturbable Australian, who is doing the
breaking-in. One shows an animal that
caused much trouble to the Victorian section
I of the remounts Eventually they had to give
it up as a bad job and sold the rebel to an 1
Egyptian, whom it killed, incidentally smash- j
ing up a lorry.
“They wouldn’t give it to the New South
Wales section to break in,” says -the ser-
geant. You see the ghost of State antagon-
ism leering from behind the “bedpost.” Bpt
one of our fellows rode it for a £5 wager, and
won his bet before they sold it.”
You come upon the portrait of a little white
donkey surrounded by a crowd of khaki-clad,
men. One is chucking it affectionately un- 1
der the chin.
“That’s our mascot,” is the explanation.
"He used to go into the officers’ tent and
stand there on hot days. He knew a good
thing, I can tell you. Sometimes we’d put
him to bed on a mattress and cover him
over with blankets. He’d have a sleep that
way just like one of ourselves.” You take
another look at the little donkey and
note the expression of smug satisfaction upon
his face is intensified. No doubt he will bray
his disgust when peace is declared, and he is
handed over again to the Egyptian that he
sees in nightmares after a too substantial
dinner.
The Remounts are up at 3 a.m. in summer
to exercise the horses, of which there are
usually 1000 in camp. After the tally reaches
1200 a native boy is allowed for each horse
over that number. Otherwise the Remounts,
now numbering 400 in the New South Wales
section, have to do everything themselves,
even to the cleaning of the lines.
“Trucking is a great game,” says Sergeant
Brown. “Horses are easy to manage when
they’ve just come off a transport, because
they have become accustomed to cramped
quarters. But give them a short time in
Egypt and then try to truck them! You have '
to be a pretty experienced hand to do it.”
But as the sergeant was a record-breaker in
such affairs in New South Wales the work
offered few difficulties to him.
Four hundred and fifty army horses were
trucked in 40 minutes during his stay in
Egypt.
Talking of the breaking-in of outlaws, he
owns that Australia sent some scandalously
rebellious steeds to Egypt.
The antagonism between the Senussi and
the Australians appears to have been com- j
municated to their mounts. In Sergeant 1
Brown’s album i« the snapshot of a proces- ;
sion of beautiful steeds, the four first being j
pure white. You exclaim at sight of them. |
“They are captured Arab horses going to be ]
paraded before the general.” he says. You !
want to know what was their ultimate fate.
“Oh, sent forward for the ( yeomanry,” is i
the reply. "We dax-en’t put them among
Australian horses. They’d bite them to !
pieces. Jn the yeomanry they form a sepa-
rate unit, so that they can’t make mischief.” j
And Sergeant Brown says it all with a stiff
upper eyelid.


JUut. ii- 10 /9/7
Mninr D. R. Harris. D. 5.0.,
Second son of Mr. Herbert Harris, the well-
known Senior Crown Prosecutor of this
State. Major Harris has been connected with
the Commonwealth forces for several years.
His first appointment was to the R.A.C.A.
in 1906. He was then a lieutenant. In 19b.
1 he was promoted to the rank of captain, axm ,
1 when the war broke out Joined the A. 1.1*.,
I leaving for the front with the ammunition
1 column, and in 1916 was promoted to major.
He went through the Gallipoli campaign with
distinction, and was invalided Just prior to
the evacuation. Recovering, he went to
France in charge of a battery with the rank
of major, and. returning to England in Oc-
tober Rest year, Commenced to train men for
I V l ie n . .vliz. r battery, and from the latest
advices was expected to go back to France.
He recently gained t^ic D.S.O.


CZXI a- " ' 9 / -7
“BIGGEST DESOLATION”
DESTROYED FRENCH VILLAGES
MUD ON THE SOMME
Sydney Solicitor's Experiences
i
Major , a Sydney solicitor, also wel
! known in the Bathurst district and at Dor-
rigo (N.S. \\.), has forwarded to Mr. James
Voung, a well-known member of the New
oouth V\ ales Bar, the following interesting
letter from France under date January 12,
1917;
"We are once more in the middle of the big-
gest desolation ever put up by mankind. The
villages are all destroyed—never a house
standing in any village that we have taken
or are attacking during the battle of the
Somme. If they are far behind the firing line
there is a notice boa id up with the name of
what town or village was once there. The
woods also have been quite destroyed. Some
of them have a flew stumps standing. For
n couple of hours every day it snows, and
there is always a fair amount of 11 lying
about. The sky is Just a dull grey color—
■ *eems us if it is frozen. When our water
[ parties are smashed up we have to drink
shell-hole water. Often enough the bottom
of the pool is occupied by a dead Hun. He Is
well and truly held down by the weight of his
rifle and ammunition. As the water is very
muddy wo don’t see to the bottom. ‘What
the eye doesn’t sec ¥ho heart doesn’t grieve
tor. But we dodge the shell-holes as much
ar possible. They are always polluted. Even
when it is boiled and served as tea the water
makes a proportion of us ill.
"To-day we are a little behind the front
line. There are lots of dead horses about.
But there Is enough shelter for us to collect
the casualties and to conduct very hurried
funerals when required. Just up there,
though a bit forward of this, we have dead
men lying all over the place. They will stay
there till wo move forward in the spring.
Nice, ain't it? No wonder the eomfort-lov-1
ing unionists turned down conscription! Tak- I
lug it all round we are comfortable, in a way.
Up there set always one hot, or warm,
meal a day. Back here, which is. a bit over
half a mile from the enemy lines, we con-
tinue for the most part to get two hot meals
each day. One is hot bacon and hot tea at
breakfast time. Besides, there Is a daily
issue of rum. It goes very well in boiling
hot tea and sugar.
"You’ll observe that ‘hot’ occurs quite a lot.
Ooodness knows we pray hard enough for a
bit of a lilt from the everlasting cold. At
least it seems to be everlasting now we’ve
had a couple of months of solid winter cam-
paign.
"The Hun*shells make deep mud. There is
a tank near here. It cannot get through
mure than 10ft. or so of good Somme mud.
| So, I’ve had a very complete Inspection. Quite
' interesting it is to be able to visit the sights.
I have a bit of time to myself now that I
'am second In the battalion. The papers have
probably told you all about the tanks. This
one has had a rough time. The Hun must
have interrupted salvage operations. There
were casualty marks inside and on the sides,
and the mud all round was crimson. A
young cemetery was marked off by shell bas-
kets, about ten yards away. When blood is
spilt into the puddle during the cold weather
it seems to coagulate at once. And it settles
in the water as a bright crimson splash. This
same bright color is retained for many weeks,
just during the winter, of course; in summer
it gets fairly dull in 24 hours.
"We move about In trenches when possible.
But the heavy weather has made many of the
trenches useless. And we have lines of
‘duck walks’ over the surface. These are
used at some risk. Right near the front line
they can only be used at night. Back here
we just risk the shell and keep to the ’duck
walk.’ Every few yards one comes to a
place where a shell has made a good hit.
Please don’t imagine it worries me at all. I’m
in tip-top health and feeling O.K. —but just
thought you might like a reflection or two
from a very cold party in the case.”


CUs^-A-'
THE ANZACS' PART
Shock Troops and Holding Troops
OVER THE TOP
CUR SHARE IN THE OFFENSIVES
fFrom Our Special Representative)
LONDON, February 4.
When the Australian, divisions join in the
hammering attacks upon the German lines,
the peculiar strain of their winter experi-
ences must be remembered to their credit.
They have had the roughest of work, and
the roughest of hardships. They have held
hard sections of the British line, and
taken their part in the ceaseless aggressive
tactics by which we Increase German ner-
vousness and apprehensiveness. They have
sustained the floods and frosts of a winter
of almost unparalleled severity. They have
stuck it out in conditions which grind with
peculiar hardness on minds and bodies ac-
customed to freedom, sunshine, and varietj.
All this and more the men have borne with
less complaint than would have marked a
bad day at the races or a stormy ploughing
season. They have taken their work of
soldiering to include as much manual toil
and physical danger and monotony as can
be crowded into every day. They are pay-
ing the price of their country’s freedom un-
grudgingly. But in mere justice to the divi-
sions it must now be pointed out that troops
cannot be first-class shock battalions and
at the same time first-class holding battal-
ions.
DASH AND INITIATIVE
Not long ago a section of our army went
over the top on a moderately simple expedi-
tion. They were to take enemy trenches,
beat off the counter attacks, and consolidate.
To the Australian army of the spring or
1 summer the task would have been easy and
soon over. But these men made mistakes.
They went forward bravely, lost men, but
pressed the Germans back. They stayed
there for some hours. And then they came
hack. There were errors in orders, inord-
inate difficulties in getting up supplies and
1 reserves, and little apparent utility in hold-
ing the new line. It was only another long
step forward into slush and filth. But the
main fact is that they came back. That fact
has made every brigadier wonder whether
our men have not been changed into holding
troops.
It stands to reason that we cannot expect
dash and initiative in attack if we make our
men the working bees of the trenches. In the
French army the distinction between shock
troops and trench troops is clearly marked.
This was one of old Joffre’s rules. The
French are unequalled in attack. But their
attacking divisions are not their holding di-
visions. The shock divisions are taken out
of the line and thoroughly rested before the
attack, and they take over their trenches
again only a few hours before the assault.
These shock troops of Joffre and Nivelle,
their corps d’elite, are not dulled and warp-
ed by the drudgery of trench building and
.sapping. One essential part of the French
schemes is that these leaders in assault
should not", be* jaded; They are fresh in
uou/; eager in mind, tuned to the assault.
DIGGING AND CARRYING
British headquarters has never had suffi-
cient troops to indulge in this form of nurs-
ing. Ever since we got to France our insis-
tent need has been for more men. At the
height of the Somme battle the call was as
urgent as during those days when a few divi-
sions of British regulars were saving France
and civilisation. It is said that we now have
two million men in France—a much higher
figure than we ever had during 1916. Ido
n*ot speculate as to what G.H.Q. may now be
doing with its men—whether resting is pos-
sible or proceeding, or whether the British
Tommy, a stolid and patient stickler under
any shellfire, requires nursing. Specula-
tions can but help the enemy, and all that
need be said is that whatever our men do this
year it must be remembered that for long
and weary months they have been diggers
and carriers, fighters, and sentinels, with lit-
tle respite and no long spells of quiet.
There are still many cold and self-suffi-
cient English officers who regard the Aus-
tralians as far beneath them and theirs—who
grade all British things according to a rigid
caste system, and all things not British as
in a caste far below the lowest British. But
even these will agree that our Australian
divisions are as good shock troops as have
been produced in this war; and further, that
as hewers and drawers, as men of mettle and
muscle for trench work, the Australian sol-
diers have done fully as well as others. It
is an axiom that an Australian division
leaves a trench system infinitely better than
it was. Our men’s trench work can be
grouped into three periods or trench systems
—north and south of Armemieres, the Ypres
salient, and the Somme. The Improvements
made in each case were general and thor-
ough. The faces of each system were changed.
New saps were dug, lines were strengthened,
railways laid, dug-outs of a safe pattern
made in plenty, draining completed, and even
schemes of defence changed. In one case
in particular, the trench system was scarcely
recognisable. What had been single lines
of poor sandbags, with dug-outs merely
death-traps, became a consolidated system
of many lines and all was clean, bright, and
workmanlike. lam told that the British
General Staff recoghises that the Australians
are the best trench-builders in the armies of
the Empire and this might well be so for
their work stands out in excelsis.
The price lias been constant drudgery. Bat-
talions taken from the line to rest have gone
up again—perhaps walking two or three miles
from their billets—as night working parties.
Men have not slept at nights for weeks on
end, working while it was dark, and snatch-
ing’ their sleep whilst Fritz was busy. Our
staff could not visit a trench during day-
time, either without seeing a small party
here or there, working in danger, but where
observation was difficult, working stripped
to the skin, despite the chances of their glis-
tening shoulders being seen by the enemy,
working with spade, pick and bar at trenches
and draining systems. We have put down lit-
erally scores of miles of duck board, which
means building staves all along those miles
to hold the duckboard off the ground. Men
in the first firing line have physical ease. It
! might almost be called a lazy life. Ido not
1 even assert that the majority of the men do
1 anything like as much work as they do m
i normal times at home. But coupled with
[its monotony, its dangers, its hard sleeping


and feeding, and its crampedness, the work
is found by us to be physically and mentally
most exacting.
THE CONSTANT GRIND
The trenches, to my mind, in France even
more than in Gallipoli, will ever ;be places of
stern physical endurance, not so much be-
cause of danger, though that is constant, and
will invariably catch the neglectful; but be-
cause of their toil and crampedness, and
lack of rest. To the sad sights, the smells,
the noise and shriek of the missiles, you can
become accustomed. But the strain on phy-
sique is with you always. You can never lie
up, forget it, walk freely with head high and
lungs well filled. The red clay of the narrow
prison is the poor background of a ceaseless
battle in which digging, mining, building, I
have their claims upon muscle as soon as
fighting is suspended. Water must be car-1
ried painfully in tins, corrugated iron comes
up on the heads of men, ammunition and ah
supplies are brought up with difficulty. tn
course, at night time transport waggons go
far forward toward the firing line. But even
packhorses could not go through the muu
on the Somme. Everything there had to he
carried 8000 yards by our men through
knee-deep mud that made strong men labor
with weariness. When a battalion is re-
lieved, billets are as often as not found to he
flooded or filled after the long march to them;
and though the feeding arrangements are
wonderfully well organised throughout
France, if a lire cannot be lit there can bo
no hot soup or tea.
It would be an insult to the fine men vs ho
I have gone through the summer and winter
in France to suggest they flinch from hard-
ships or danger. No shelling deters them,
no dangers of patrol work or wire-setting or
raiding or trench warfare affect them. They
remain the happy, enduring warriors, always
ready for what fun comes along, and full
of song and merriment when chance brings
them freedom. But let it be well undci-
stood that they have had a lung period of
«evere trench work as holding troops. ihey
went fi*om the Somme to Yprea. where a
great deal in trench construelloii aud im-
provement was well and faithfully done, de-
spite constant German efforts to prevent it
by artillery and trench-mortar fire. Thpn
they came back to the Somme, where the of-
fensive was petering out, and where then
work was to hold a line of trenches, occa-
sionally extending their ground, and building
a ragged battle line into a modern trench
i system. To-day the Australian line is big-
ger than ever, extending—as the Germans
well know —deep into that sector Oj. the
Somme glorious because of its French vic-
tories in October and November. We are lor
the present more than ever holding troops.
Perhaps a more generous recognition of tne
Australians’ value as shock troops, and of
their essential difference in composition and
temperament from the stolid, phlegmatic
British Tommy, would have brought other
arrangements and given every Australian
1 brigadier a chance to bring his men veil up
'to the mark for coming events. Perhaps it
i is not intended in future to use the Austra-
lians as first-line shock troops, keeping them
for the army of pursuit or the wedge after
the initial successes. In later years we will
decide whether during this year of warfare
in France they were understood and used to
their full advantage. But in the meantime
it is essential to consider their achievements
in coming offensives in the light of their ex-
periences during the long winter.
STORIES OF WAR
STRETCHER-BEARERS IN ACTION
AFTER POZIERES
Five Survive of Thirty-two
The sister of the ward into which you have
wandered at Randwick Military Hospital
whispers that Private Biggar knows a thing
jor two about war, so into the ward you go
; and demand to see him. Private Biggar de-
taches himself from a group of card-players
round an inadequate table.
“Oh, yes,” says he, good naturedly, “I’ll
tell jou what I can think of,’’ and leads the
way to the balcony, where, having seen you
settled in a canvas chair, he proceeds to
lower himself gently into another, -with solici-
tude for his injured arm which is still in a
sling.
“Where did you get that?” you ask with
your eye on the sling, and a feeling that
you will have to open the conversation your-
self.
“Pozieres.” says the wounded soldier
briefly. By dint of questioning you find that
ho served in Gallipoli as well, and was a
stretcher-bearer.
“Did you happen to be at the actual tak-
ing of Pozieres?” is the question which
proves the open sesame to some of the
richly-stored corners of Private Biggar’s
memory. “I did,” says he, with a sharp light
in his eye. “I was with the Firsts. We went
into that fighting with 32 stretcher-bearers
—there are five left now.”
You insert another question as a child does
a coin into a penny-ln-the-slot machine.
“Where do the stretcher-bearers wait?”
repeats the returned soldier. “Why, in the
trenches, until the lust man’s over for the
charge, and then over they go, too. If the
stretcher-bearer has a quiet spell sometimes
he makes up for it in action. At Pozieres
we hadn’t enough stretchers, but for my own
part I’d rather carry the chaps in without.
It’s quicker. Of course if a fellow has a
stomach wound you can’t very well carry
him across your shoulder.
“You’re out in No Man’s Land practically
all the time. You bind up the wounds as
well as you can, as soon as you reach the
( poor beggars, then you carry ’em in to be
sent on to the dressing stations- Perhaps
their bandages won’t be removed for two or
three days, but the main idea of the stret-
I cher-bearer is to stop the bleeding.”
ASKING FOR NEWS
You suggest that the work is more har-
rowing than that of the actual combatants,
and Private Biggar agrees. “You often find
mothers and relatives of killed and missing
men asking for details of them from their
mates," he goes on, ‘but in the excitement
of a charge a chap may likely as nut fall
over the body of his best pal without notic-
ing who he is. The stretcher-bearer’s work
puts him in such a position that he can’t fail
to know the circumstances surrounding the
deaths of many of the fallen.
“What the Australians would have done
without the great dug-outs in the German j
trenches, I don’t know. They were the sav-
ing of many of our wounded. Yc!r~it*.rqulu~
true; I’ve seen German dug-outs with slabs
going down to rooms which were comfort-
ably furnished and lit with electricity. In
one the walls were whitewashed, and there
were a woman’s clothes hanging about. Not
far from the actual firing-line was an under-
ground hospital belonging to the enemy. It
could have held a whole battalion of men on
j stretchers.


“At first,” goes on Private Biggar* “those
dug-outs were an awful trap. The Irish on i
the Somme, for instance, charged the enemy, |
took the first line of trenches, whlci they
found empty, and rushed the second line.
Xo sooner w§re they in the second than the
(enemy appeared behind them. Hieyd
1 emerged from the dug-outs, where they had
i hidden while the Irish rushed through the
first line.
“Our boys have got wise to that now, and
first thing hunt the enemy out of the dug-
outs, just as they rooted them out of the cel-
lars at Pozieres the morning after the vil-
lage was taken.
“The Australians would go down what
were once the streets of the p'ace. They’d
come to a cellar. ‘Are you there, Fritz?’ |
they’d shout, and a bomb would be thrown ;
down as a souvenir* Six officers surren-
dered on that morning—crawled out of a col-
lar and begged for mercy.” The wounded
stretcher-bearer curls his lip in disgust.
“You know, they must have deserted their
men to do it, but the German is a frightful
coward.”
COBBERS OUT OF ACTION
When Private Biggar was sent with h.s
wounded arm out of the firing-line, there
went with him a German prisoner, the llesh
of whose legs was practically shot away, i
For about 10 miles of the journey the Gcr-I
man kept his face under the blankets, i
Finally he uncovered it, feeling certain of
not being returned to his own lines. Ho
could talk good English,” Pnvite Biggar
says, “and was not keen to fight poor devil.
He told me that the front line men weie
well-fed—those we had time to examine had ,
brown bread, biscuits, and sausage m their
kit bags- better stuff really than we our-
selves had. But the back line men were
practically starving. He also told me that
the British were sending over five shells to
the Germans’ one.
‘‘We were quite cobbers, he and I. When.
vve reached the dressing-station they got to
me, washed me, and changed my clothes,
which were caked with Pozieres mud, and
;rave me something to eat. I said. ‘I think
Fritz here could do with a feed, too. So
they gave him a bowl of chicken broth with
the meat in it. When I saw him eat I could
quit™ believe his story of the back-line's
food. He wolfed the broth and then tore at
the meat with his fingers. After that they
never moved him without his wanting o
know was I coming, too. But eventually we
had to go different ways, and I never heard
of him again.”
As you struggle out of the depths of the
deck-chair Private Biggar slips into the ward
for a war-souvenir he has promised to show
5 ‘‘There it is,” says he, proffering a tat-
tered pay-book. You are aware of dark red
stains with serrated edges, showing on every
leaf You wrinkle your nose and make a
queer noise in your throat. “From my own
bleeding,” says the stretcher-bearer witn ap-
preciation. “I hod to get a new one after
that. I’ve got a pipe downstairs, too, full or
Pozieres mud. And I had a walking-stick
I picked up in a German trench. I lent it
to a fellow that had a game Did you
notice anything funny about that s
he. ‘So: said I. He pulled at the handle
and out came a dagger. I never got my sUca
back.”
Thp “Naked Array” on the Western Front
A fine day in France enables the Roya. Australian Heavy Battery to 6 o Into action in .he


OXvU- /ar /9 / ?
STORIES OF WAR
AUSTRALIAN OFFICERS AND MEN
GAME STRETCHER-BEARERS
Pearce and Charlie Nurse
Private Anderson, of the Ist Battalion, lies
in a bed at Randwick Hospital holding quite
a levee. On the opposite bed aits a private
: of the 3rd in his shirt-sleeves; a boy with his
arm in a sling smokes at the foot; another
1 hangs over the railing, and you are perched
on the edfeo of the bed with regard for the
invalid s foot, which has not long been
' operated upon.
“How did you feel after the anaesthetic,
Darkle?” asks one. The invalid’s eyes go
twinkling. "The first thing 1 said when I
came to,” says he, "was, "Well, this is the
best drunk I've ever had!”
Ihe sally is greeted with delighted
chuckles, and the smoker, taking his cigar-
ette from'his mouth, regards it whimsical.y.
"That reminds me,”-, says he, "of how, in
Egypt, I got reduced from warrant-officer
corporal. I fell off a camel and broke the
officers’ beer —at least that’s the yarn I told
em. How could 1 see the men drinking
slimy water while the off.ctrs quaffed ty-er?
Couldn’t be did!” says the corporal.
OFFICER JOE TO HIS MEN
The boy in the wideawake, hanging over
the bed rails, laughs comfortably, "it’s no
good for Australian officers to try and
swank it with their men,” he asserts. “Tne
less swank the farther we’ll follow ’em. 1
remember one officer who to stand opt
in iront of us. He’d say, ‘Morning, Bui!’
’Morning, George!’ and so on, and those that
knew him’d answer from me ranks, ’Morn-
ing, Joe!’ His men d have followed that chap
to Kingdom Come, but they uidu’t saiute him
b oing past, and he didn’t’try'to make ’em,
cither.”
A murmur of approval guts round the little
circle, "that’s wnere so mafty Australians
ieil foul of English officers. it sno goou
crying to make em salute. They’re Lrcugnt
up different to the English Tommy, tMOjga
mey mean just as wen cy the.r ofiiCvi's,
| moves the sn.ri-aieeveu one, ana the icsolu-
lioii *s carried uiiainuiousiy. ,
I All tour oeys nave seen ngnting in fiance,
aim Private Anderson anu ms thirl-slecVcd
mate arc Anzaes. rnvate Aimtrson Uc.es
not wear the iionorabie A on Ins sieeve to de-
note his acquaintance wun Gailipo.l.
"\v ny don't you, n>arKie - .'” asks one,
“'loo much swank,” answers the invalid,
and thereby expresses me pet aversion of
lomrny Cornsia,K. Galnpoli, ne asseits, was
cm Id's piay to the ngnting in * ranee. ‘ln
r ranee," he tens yOa, "it* is simp.y artillery
against aitinory. Men uun’t conic into u,
except as targets.”
“iou dun t get a soldier s chance in
r ranee,” says the shirt-sieeveu one, ’%ou’re
just a placard lor tne enemy’s guns. 1 re-
member trenches ut Poziyes Wood be.ng
1 pac'ked so lull of men that no more coam
nave oeen put in. 1 comun’t say me exact
number mat went in, but 1 know that in the
morning mere were oiny uU left standing!’
ihe others nod the,r heads, ana Private An-
uerson is inoveu to remark that Standing in
die ueuches under a bombardment is about
me most trying part of me soldier’s life ip
r ranee. "A cimrge is nothing to standing
mere wondering w nen a sneil is going to dob
your way,” says he. *
•'Of course you re given fatigue duty to
.ceep your mind occupied, but ic isn’t suffi-
cient to keep your nerves steady. You build
up tne parapet, lor instance, and the enemy
mows it down again for you and you have
to build it up again. No, you can’t tell where
uie shel.s aie coming from, though you can
uistinguish each shed by its sound. Howit-
zers shriek like a woman.”
•’Hike a woman shrieking death,” murmurs
one of the others.
The boy in the wideawake stirs. ‘‘l be-
lieve if I heard a woman shriek now I’d duck
.or shelter!” says he.
"It’s funny,” remarks the shirt-sleeved
one, "how everyone wishes for a *bnghty,’
and when he gets it wisnes he hadn’t. At
nrst, of course, you don’t feel your wounds,
cneus, come so snentiy, and as such a sur-
prise too, that 1 oet a lenow doesn't know
mien ne 3 mown to pieces." 'lne remark
sounds insn I enough, out you understand
tne comtort he is ouenng to many motnero j
wno nave urearatu or agony tor sons kmed
.11 the way he describes.
Private Anderson semes his wounded foot
more conuonau.y. ”'lll6 man wno says ne
aid not tvei afraid in his first battle is a
crook," remarks he, "The nrst two uays at
ciainpoll 1 was dead scared of everything,
anu i wouldn’t mind belting every other new
enum teeis the same. If you ask me who
are the bravest men at the front I’d say-
stretcher-bearers every time. How those fei-
10W8 work at the strain they do beats me.
iou see, with tne infantry uuring a charge,
they’re too excited to be aware of the tre-
mendous danger of coming out from cover.
But the stretcher-bearer has to take it on
in cold blood. I knew one cnap—Pearce his
name was —who worked trorn Saturday nignt
at Pozieres until Wednesday morning with-
out shutting his eyes.”
FOUR DAYS WITHOUT SLEEP
‘‘That was like Charde Nurse,” breaks in
the shirt-sleeved snidier. "He worked the
same-four days at a stretch. He neipeu 1
me In on his arm after I got it. He to.d me
he had gone out with 4mi neid-bandages, anu
he showed me the single one that was tea!”
Private Anderson takes up the story.
"And yet,” he says, "you’d iare,y /icar of
a stretcher-bearer getting war honors. If
an infantryman dames out and rescues a
pal it’s ten to one he gets a V.C. or some-
thing. He gets ihe iiot.ee because it’s not
the work he's volunteered for, but tne
stretcher-bearers who take it on lor days
at a tune get nothing but their pay.” iou
suggest that they get as wen a good ueal
of comradely auimratlon and gratitude?
"By Jove,” comes the answer, "they get chat
all right!”
“It always tickled me,” continues Private
Anderson, "how quiet we wou.d be on fatigue
duty behind the ones, where- the danger was
not neany as great us mat in the tienches.
in the trenches you’d hear the fellows yap-
ping a treat, roaring and making an awiul
i*bw-. But once you gut out behind the lines
on fatigue you didn't dare open your niou.h
or someone would get on to you. You'd hear
’Ssh!' a.l round you. It aiways struck me
as being rum, and 1 never got to the reason
I for it.”
Then the ta k turns on Bairnsfather’s
sketches of trench life, and out of cuiios.ty
you probe in search of what appeals most to !
the man who has lived through war cond -
: tions. To your amazement the heard-st re-
] commendation goes to the picture of two sol-
diers on leave, who, watching a silk*siock-
mged ludy go by, decided that greater safety
lies in the trenches. Then the boy in me
wideawake reminds them of “that 16m. ren-
j nation, in which a diminutive so dler stri g-
l gles through a shell-swept aiea with giant
I shackles on his feet. They all understand
that sketch!
"By Jove!” says one, “I’d like to have been
j near Bairnsfather in the trenches!”


“Ma Feesh,”
The Australian, as he lived at Anzac.—
Statuette by Pte. W. S. Percival, late 15th
Battalion.
Mr. W. S. Percival is a Sydney artist, who
enlisted with the earliest Queensland
troops, and fought through Anzac till
wounded, and discharged as unfit for further
service. He has returned to Sydney, and is
devoting himself to his profession. The
little statuette, which is here reproduced, is
full of truthful character, and uncommonly
well modelled. “Ma Feesh” is an omnipotent
Egyptian expression with a whole knapsack
full of meanings, among which “Buckley’s
chance,’’ “Up the spout,” “Bad enough and
good enough,” “No good to Gundy,” and
“All over, bar the shouting,” may be reck-
oned. It signifies, at least, a temporarily, a
philosophic acceptance of the end of the
tether, the end of the the shrug of the
shoulders.
Good judges who have seen the statuette
think that once more Private Percival has
done his bit, and a good bit.


, jr ° n
MUD TO THE WAIST
AUSTRALIANS ON THE SOMME
SHELL-SHOCK RESULTS
The new scheme of taking Invalided
• soldiers straight from the hospital ship to
the Anzac Buffet to meet their friends and
relatives is attractive and humane. There
was a time when elderly women had to
stand in the streets or about the wharves,
waiting for the first glimpse of warrior sons.
It was not an infrequent event on such days
to see these weary and over-excited mothers
drop to the ground before the boys’ arrival.
Nowadays the great fig-trees of the Domain
shade them, and the grassy lawns of the
Anzac Buffet offer quiet resting-places dur-
ing the excitement of waiting, till there is a
stirring of the crowd at the gate and the
motor cars unload their gallant freight.
The cruel waiting to discover the names of
cot-cases is also abolished, and the list now
goes up early, allowing friends of the unfor-
tunate to be out at Randwick Hospital to
greet them.
Yesterday a grizzled sergeant of the 33rd
owned to having told the military authori-
ties a lie concerning his age. “It was so I
could go with my two boys,” he explained.
They were together on the Somme, until
the father was wounded in the side with
shrapnel. The two boys have since been
wounded and are now in Blighty.
"I reckon,” said the sergeant with a touch-
ing quiver of the lips, “that this is God’s own
country.” Then he told of mud to the knees
and waist in the Somme trenches. “If it had
not been for the ’duckboards’ we should have
been drowned in mud.” But he will go back
willingly if he is able.
Another oldish man considered there was
a likelihood of his recovering sufficiently to
return to the firing line. When asked
whether he wanted to go again, his answer
came grim and sharp.
"By God, no!” he said. “I reckon there are
others here should take their turn at it now!”
Some of the invalided men were injured by
falls of earth during bombardment. One had
his spine hurt by the collapse of a parapet.
"When I got to England,” he remarked, "you
would have thought I was about 120, I was
so thin and doubled up. But they are get-
ting me all right again now.”
Pathetic little vignettes of war were to
be seen everywhere one turned in the buffet
enclosure. Here a man with hands still
bandaged manages to dangle a year-cld
baby; a mother overcome with emotion found
herself limp when the time came for greeting
her boy, and was half carried by the return-
ed brave to a seat away from the hurly-
burly of arrivals and welcomes. And sud-
denly, in the middle of the grounds there col-
lected a pale and frightened group, where a
boy in khaki had collapsed at full length .on
the grass. The grizzled sergeant of the 33rd
looked on compassionately.
"Poor beggar,” he said, "he’s frightened
them now, but they’ll learn to get used to it
in time, lhats the result of shell-shock,
there is nothing crueller. It is the excite-
ment that has made him go off this morning,
he nerves get shaken right through with it.
\V hen we had gun practice at sea coming’
across, shell-shock patients would go off just
as he has done. A bugle-call does it with
some, and this morning coming up the har-
bor, just the steamer whistles sent some of
them off. Shell-shock sometimes robs them
of speech, sometimes affects their brain and
goodness knows what else. One of the’boys
on board the ship, as a result of it, had been
dumb for seven months, and suddenly got
day ” hIS Speech durin S Sun practice one


AiLcl ij j<l Ad <j cU X6't 9/1 -
Mayors’ Special Effort
ANOTHER CONTINGENT
RAISED.
- A ROUSING SEND-OFF
Amongst the days that will long be
remembered in the history of Wagga
will be the day on which the Mayor,
Private Hug]! Oates and his unit were
farewelled. There have been in the
last two and h half years some re-
markable demonstrations of Empire
loyalty in Wagga, but never were our
people so stirred as on Tuesday last.
It is on record that this district has
contributed over £15,000 to the var-
ious patriotic funds, (exclusive of War
Loans), whilst for every hundred
pounds raised a volunteer has also
gone forward for active service—a
record standing almost unchallenged
throughout the Slates. Men have
gone forward singly and in batches or
companies. On many occasions as
many as twenty and thirty have gone
together, whilst it will live long in
the memory of the people of this com-
munity such splendid parades as the
■Kangaroos, when a batch of nearly
one hundred were sent off, and now at
this stage of the war we can still
raise a contingent of fifty-four to go
together. The cheerful spirit in which
the men are offering is proudly ad-
mired;) and Itr is but a (reflexion
of the magniflcCht spirit with which
the men of more advanced years and
the womenfolk are encouraging them.
There is in reality no limitation to
the numbers of Win the War Leaguers
whether signed on or otherwise, but
It undoubtedly stands mainly to the
credit of the splendid band of workers
in this community that the National'
spirit is maintained here at its re-
cognised high standard.
No centre of the State probably is
more In touch with the Central auth
oritles on defence matters than this
town. Every conceivable method has
been adopted to induce the eligible
men to come to their country’s assist-
ance, and it is the magnificent spirit
with which the movement is organ-
ised that Induces the present day re-
sponse .
In one of his most recent speeches
In Wagga the Mayor, Private Hugh i
Oates, said that in his two years’ term
Of office as Mayor of this town, Wag-
ga had done remarkably well in re-
cruiting and personal sacrifice to the
Various war funds, and he felt a
’ crowning feature would be for the
Mhyor himself to enlist, and to en-
deavour to raise another contingent
to go with him. The need for more
men was urgent an<j Aid. Oates recog
nlsed this. Moreover, he saw that
some special movement must be in-
itiated to get them within the time
to help supply Sir William Robertson
with his 500,000 before July. With
the Initiative that is the outstanding
feature of his characted the Mayor him
self volunteered to lead a unit. The
undertaking was no light one for a
tuan to set out on this purpose tr
raise a special number of men within
limited time of a few weeks, at o
period 'when fhe 'country is be'np,
combed of every eligible man. From
the moment of his determination he
threw himself into the work land has .
allowed nothing to sway him from his
purpose. The men going forward in
these days are" military men whose
Interests and ties would not permit
their going earlier and these are re-
cruiting days of real sacrifices, and
with this knowledge it was little tho
ught that another hundred men could
he raised. It wilt ever stand to the
Credit of Private Oates that those
■ I
men could not have been gathered to
gether within the time by any move-
ment. In addition to the fifty-four
who went with him on Tuesday, about
thirty went Into camp direct from
Wagga since his enlistment. So his
objective was (achieved —even apart
from his example set to other dis-
tricts —and it was with proud spirit
of enthusiastic admiration that Wagga
turned out to its almost every in-
habitant to shower its congratulations
land good wishes upon its Mayor and
the fine body of men, young
and elderly, going off with him. It
was as the Mayor himself wished it
to be in reality, a crowning day of
days in demonstrations of Wagga's
loyalty, when its foremost citizen—
himself a married m'an and leaving a
family behind him —led off a strong
contingent to join the large numbers
already gone forward. Undoubtedly
the occasion has induced many to
view the Empire situation witjhi a
changed ‘ outlook. The spirit of ad-
venture with which earlier contingents
went forward was absent in Tues-
day’s demonstration, for these men
were marshalled with stedfast pur-
pose of embarking upon a grim land
serious undertaking, and that was the
spirit that thrilled the crowds (in
which the fair sex now largely pre-
dominate) who gathered to see them
off.
The procession through the street
was arranged to give an effective
message leather than as a spectacular
display. The banners that have
waved over previous contingents were
in use, and tho two local bands joined
tn to give the martial
strains. The police mounted and foot
men acted as ‘a guard of honor. Tho
Mayor was accompanied by a num-
ber of his co-workers on the severa 1
local committees. His men mustered
four deep formed the main body of
the procession. The cadets gave the
answer to the central powers of fur-
ther men here in the earlier stages
of training, whilst there was the tone t
of pathos in this world-war demon-
Btration in the inclusion of the chil-
dren of tho public schools in the march
to the number of several hundred.
RECRUITING RALLY.
A recruiting rally at the Court
House corner was responsible for an-
other volunteer to join the march.
There have been some large crowds
at the corner, but Tuesday’s perhaps
was the largest of them all. The
Deputy Mayor, Aid. Thos. Dobne'P
presided over this meeting, and the
speakers were the Mayor, and Major
Heath and Rev. Canon Pike. Very
telling addresses were delivered, np


preciative of the sacrifices made by
these men and others gone before
them, land of the example established
by the Mayor.
' A demonstration such as this, said
Major Heath, must stir every man
worthy of the name of a man, ana it
must have shamed many to look upon
this unit. To those who hitherto had
evaded their duty they were now muk
ing this final appeal, for there was
still time to go into camp and join
the unit late>. Tt’had been recently
said from a platform that we could
have peace if we would give in, but
that was not the spirit of Britishers
(emphatic cries of “Never”). Yet it
was the spirit'of some who were still
holding back, and he appealed tc
them. The sacrifice was not so great
for a man, as the sense of conflict
brought out his real manliness, bu 1
for the womenfolk the sacrifice was
greatest, and their influence was fur
ther desired to aid the recruiting
movement. The hope and salvation
of the rising generation rested In their
hands. Every fit man was wanted,
to-day more than ever he was. O f
the men of this unit he wished them
every success land honorable service
and a safe return to their homes.
In his reference to the Mayor, Canon
Pike said he had been working with
him since the recruiting movement
started, and could say he did more
work even in private capacity where
not exposed to the limelight than or
the public platform, which was slaying
a good deal. His work had been
intelligently carried out, and redoun-
j ded to his credit. Personally, he
hoped he would not get to the front,
and he (Canon Pike) had to admit lv
was doing his very best to prevent (
his going. Still if those efforts were ,
of no avail and ho did get here, he I
would carry with him the profoundesl
respect of every citizen of Wagga.
In challenging a -well known po’itl
cian’s statement that they should bo
as well off under German ru’e, Canon
Pike said that was the sort of mar
the Germans want land we don’t want
—men who were afraid to face the
dangers of the front, and would
rather keep their skins whole than see
the country free. Such a' statement
was made neither in blind ignorance
or absolute folly, but was la wicked
and deliberate lie intended to mislead
the people. But no man who takes
an intelligent interest in The war
''ould ever imagine we could be as free
under German rule as under the Brit j
Ish flag. His study of works of the
world’s best writers convinced him
that we had still to look forward to
a lengthy war, so he urged the re-
maining men to make up their minds
and Join these Heroic men in service
for the country and for the freedom ,
of the generations to come.
The Mayor on rising was received
with prolonged cheering. He said he
was not out for ,a long speech on this
his final rally. His contingent were
not downhearted, but were the finest
lot of men to march from Wagga, and
he was proud of every one of them.
He was not In speaking mood tha f
day, but just wished to say a few
words in farewell before leaving. Ah
the cannons and guns would hold no
felar for Him but the home-breaking
was a severer tesf. He had been
dodging a little girl that day, but he
guessed she knew there was sorae-
thing in it when she said
eoing to march with the men to-day
fDakldy." "There,;V he said, ''‘And
what am I doing it for? —but there i
was going to swear —well I’ll call them
coots —and they are coots, and be
cause they won’t go I’m going my-
self.” He then went on to speak In
disgust of suggestions he had heard
against recruiting, and said there war,
a pretty strong German element in
our midst, land that was not the way
to encourage men to go to help their
country. He had not much strength
left, and was tired and worn out, but
was going into camp to take his chance
with the rest, yet there were men
here not game to go, “I’m out to go
right to the front,” he said, "and I’m
going. If they attempt to send me
out as a recruiting speaker, well, I’ll
be dumb.” "But,” he added, “I'll come
Jihck again with a uniform on before
I go, to shake the liVer out of some
of these fellows.” IJe then concluded
his speech with special thanks to the
ladies of the Red Cross and Comforts
Fund Committees for their arrange-
ments for the day.
The men then marched to the
Masonic Hall, where the
RED TEA
was provided. The arrangements
here -were carried out in the usual
snlendid style of the ladies of Wagga.
The large hall had been artistically
decorated with bunting, and the tables
were laid representing a Cross, with
a red floral cross in dahlias for the
table decorations. The Red Cross
ladies to the number of between
twenty and thirty attended, all in
white dress with the Red Cross in-
signia. An orchestrh under the direc-
tion of Miss Gallagher, Including Mrs.
Meager, Misses Elliott and E. Cam-
eron and ’’Master E. Morrison, added
greatly to enlivening the proceedings
s 0 that never at any moment was a
lull in the proceedings permitted. It
is hlmost needless to comment upon
the tea itself, suffice to say that the
ladies saw to it that nothing was lack-
ing In the menu provided, even to a
liberal supply of "smokes” at Ps con-
clusion .
In the after tea speeches. Private
Argus said it was the greatest pleas-
ure had had ever known to propose a
toast to the mothers, wives, and
sweethearts of our boys at the front.
"I have a mother,” he said, "and know
what a true mother is, and have an
only sister and there was never a
better sister.” (Applause.) "Of the
sweethearts, w T ell there may bo oth-
ers here know more of them than
me. but some day on my return 1
hope there will be a heart boating
and willing to share the joys ana sor-
rows of my life.” (Applause),
The toast of “Our Guests” was
beautifully proposed by Mrs. Lyons.
Mr. Oates, she said, was one of her
oldest friends, but they were all fri-
ends that day. Though they were
going over the waters to serve their


J King and country she hoped they wo-
uld never see the front, but would be
spared to come back to the right royal
welcome that would be awaiting them.
Her parting words were to remember
truly their God was their best and
truest friend. “May He bless you
all,' he concluded, f ‘and bring you
back safe and well.”
In his acknowledgements the Mayor
said he particularly thanked Mrs.
Lyons for speaking on behalf of Mrs.
Oates —she had been one of their best
friends always. It was hard for Mrs.
Oates to come out that day, but she
had mustered pluck enough to come
out to shake hands with the men ot
the Unit before their going off. In
thanking the Red Cross ladies, ho
said he felt sometimes he could cry
his eyes out to think of all they had
so nobly done during this war. “We’ll
fi ht like —men —l was going to say
the devil —Yes, and if need be w r o will
frighten the devil out of the Germans”
“We don’t like to leave you,” he ad-
ded, "still I will be glad when the
last farewell is finished and when we
get over to-morrow I hope they will
give me A rest In camp, and I think
I’ve earned It. I want a rest and
must have It.” (Cheers.) The speech
throughout was made with deep feel-
ing, Included an appreciative reference
to his old school chum Aid. Donald
Cameron and concluded abruptly on a
further reference to Mrs. Lyons, and
the loss of her son, Lieut. Howard
Lyons.
The toast of "the Red Cross” was
very capably handled by Lieutenant
Francis, who spoke of them all as
sisters. He had heard the remark
that the war would be won by the
women, and he Acknowledged, as a
returned soldier, they would be lost
without the Red Cross. (Applause.)
The men of the Unit could see that
afternoon the interest taken by the
sisters in the soldiers. They would
see more of it when they got into
camp, and realise that the sisters were
proud of them. He had begun to look
upon them almost as (Angels from
Heaven. The ladies had expressed
the hope that the men would not see
any fighting but he was sure the men
all hoped to be able to do a bit of
fighting to defend their splendid Red
Cross women. (Applause.)
The spirit of the Red Cross women
of Wagga was further demonstrated
when after the singing of the Nations 1
I Anthem and Auld Lang Syne thej
joined In the procession at the May-
or’s Invitation and walked the dusty
road, a mile to the railway station,
and many a cheer went up for them
too on the way.
The crowd that followed to the rail-
way was unique and unprecedented
In the history of Wagga. The ladies
of the Comforts Fund Committee
here taken a hand, and under the sup-
ervision of Mesdamcs Smith and Shaw ,
bad elaborately decorated the railway ,
station, whilst further liberal supplies
of travelling comforts were forthcom-
ing .for distribution amongst \ the
boys. Long before train time the
" n ’ e of platform tickets was suspen-
ded, and hundreds were unable to
■ain admission, whilst others posted
themselves on All vantage spots, fen-
ces, sheds, etc. Many bought tickets
for stations along the line to enab.e
their admission, and In one instance a
fare of 5/ was paid. With 20 minutes
to spare, the two bands filled the time
with alternate selections on the plat-
form. The Mayor was simply be-
seiged by well wishers, whilst one
elderly lady whose five sons are at
the war, one having gained honors,
proudly boasted the fact that “he kis-
sed me.” It was a crowd with mixed
feelings, for there was many a tear-
dimmed eye, and many hearts were
bearing up bravely, though well nigh [
to breaking point, whilst of the Mayor
himself It was the general admiration
that he carried out his part so splen-
didly under circumstances
larly distressing to himself.
, The railway authorities provided
liberal accommodation for the Unit
but it was noticed that Private Oates
refused to take a sleeper, but got in
amongst his men, When all wen-
aboard the bands struck up Auld Lang
Syne, and immediately after the train
stemmed out amidst the ringing cheers
of the great gathering.
MEN OF THE UNIT
The list of men in the Unit includes
five more members of the Wagga
Brass Mand, making 42 recruited up
to date from that body, a magnificent
record for a Band.
Following is the full list of the men
of the Unit: —
OATES, Hugh.
CORBETT, James.
LANG, James H.
CLARK, David T.
HARRIS, James, T. A.
CARLON, Clement.
CHAMBERLAIN, Melville
ROBERTSON, lan Struan
FRANCIS, Resolute Edward
BOSWELL, Henry Alfred
ARGUS. Herbert
MENDHAM, James John
TITFFIN, Charles
EMMITT, John
MACLEOD. Bovd A. C.
MALONEY. Francis
DAVENPORT, James E. N.
LATITS, Vincent
ELLIOTT, George Vigor
MARTIN, Ronald Dudley
McDONALD, Ernest Arthur
BEGGS, Oscar
COOK, Reginald Filton
TURNER. Thomas E.
RYAN, Charles V.
HANSON. George S.
BOSWELL. Edwin C.
HARTLAND, Raymond C.
ENTWISTLE. Walter
BURNLEY. oJhn
RYAN. William J.
CLARKSON. Charles J.
PRICE, Bertie
HOAD. George R. W.
x DEVINE. Cecil
DEVINE, William J.
THRELKELD, James B.
LUCK, Arthur E.
BAKER, Leslie
WHITE, Lawrence A.
MENZ, Leslie
McLARTY, Oswald V.
MORRIS, Francis James
MUMFORD, Ervvn James
CASTLE. Walter Roy
DODWELL, Frederick R.
HALE, Garnet E.
WILD. George Alan
O’DONOHUE, Herbert M.
CASTLE. Alan H.
JONES, Edward
JUNEE.
DOBSON. Henry.
TURNER. Frederick James
1 MICHIE, Robert


''tOoLjjec t
ANZAC DAY.
IMPRESSIVE MEMORIAL
SERVICES.
Two years have elapsed since that ’
memorable day of the landing of the :
Australians on Gallipoli Peninsulaa, In
their 'gallant attempt on a task later
realised as Impossible to carry out.
The memory of the day burns into
Australian hearts, and will continue
in memory for many years to come. [
The day in Wagga yesterday was
given up in sacred memory and recog
nition of the noble effort that maur
the name of Anzac world famous.
Business was suspended and memor-
ial services took place in all the loca 1
Churches morning and evening, and
all the public schools specially obser-
ved the day; whilst public observa
tion took place at noon at the Court
House, and later In the afternoon ic
the Town Hall Gardens under the Aus-
pices of the Red Cross.
Most of the business places and
many private houses in the town were
decorated with flags of the Allies
with the Union Jack preponderating.
The main window of Messrs. Copland
and Co’s emporium was beautifully
* decorated in memorial design, by Mr.
E. W. Perry, manager of the dress
department. The Honor Rolls of v.he
Wagga Primary School, Wagga Brass
. Band, Wagga Rifle Club, and that of
the firm’s employees were displayed
an angel mounting guard over all.
The following names were recorded
on the honor roll of the firm, viz.,
ft. L. Wunsch, N. H. Rudd. W. F.
Hinton, F. S. Parker, D. Boyd, H.
Huxtable, W. E. Wakefield, L. Quick
J. E. Sinclair and F. S. Schadel.
.THE PUBLIC MINUTE.
Business being suspended for the
mid-day hour the people gathered at
tli© usual meeting place under th--'
town clock in Fitzmaurice steeet.
hTe Deputy Mayor, Aid. Thos. Dob-
ney, presided over the funnctlon, and
stated the clergy would deliver short
addresses.
Tne singing of the National Anthem
concluded simultaneously with the
striking of the clock for the noor
hour, and thereafter a silent minutt
was observed. The addresses fol-
lowed, delivered by Rev. Canon Pikr
and Rev. W. Tulloch.
Canon Pike said he was proud tr
address such a largely representative
gathering of Wagga citizens. He re
called the arguments used by the ad
vocAtes of Federation many years
and said they had been chiefly based
upon consideration of the mutual la
teres*s of a material kin : i that bound
the State together. Then, when our
men landed at Anzac it was said
that Aus + ralia had emerged amongsl i
the nations of the world. He though' :
they were all learning something be*
ter than either of these things. Au,s
tralla found her soul on Anzac Day
and her people were now moved b 1 >
higher considerations than those o !
f commercial materialism. They knew
that sacrifice made nations, and thf
Joy of it filled them with thankful
ness. He reminded the audience tha-
death is not the end of all things
The dead are only absent in a visible
sense. In reality they are with us
and in that faith we have the hope o'
immortality.
Rev. Tulloch in his address refer
red to the press reports that two Aus
tralian Divisions had been withdrawn
from the Western front owing to the
exhaustion of reserves. If the report
were correct, he said, then it would
be a serious reflection upon Australia
He appealed to the eligible mer
through the blood of their fallen her- I
oes and unseen spirits around Dit-
to consider {her duty to their brother
Australians, and their even greater
duty to their country.
The National Anthem was again
sung and the gathering quietly dls
persed.
RED CROSS SERVICE
Under the auspices of the Wagga
Red Cross Society a public memorial
service was conducted in the Town
Hall Gardens during the afternoon
t
Upon a shrine erected, a number o'
floral tributes to fallen heroes were
beautifully arranged, past which the
military, cadets, Boy Scouts, and
school children marched in salute as
a silent tribute, Mr. G. Dart, M.A.,
addressed the gathering, and Mr Wat
ers led in prayer. The hymns ‘‘O
God our Help in Ages Past.” and
“Abide with Me” were sung, the pro-
gramme concluding with the National
Anthem.
ROLL OF HONOR.
The following list of fallen heroes
1 of Wagga was specially compiled for
the occasion:
Lieut. MEAGHER.
„ GELME.
E. H. WILSON.
„ HALL
„ LYONS.
SignaTer WHTTFORD
Trooper HOLLIDAY
MURRAY.
Gunner DUKE
Lance-Cpl. HALLORAN.
Corporal BRUCE.
„ R. HURST.
„ LATHAM
„ THOMPSON
P COYNE
TAYLOR.
„ HAMILTON
„ JACOBS
„ JOWETT
„ J. MULHOLLAND .
„ R. MULHOLLAND ,
R. MULHOLLAND I
„ BIRMINGHAM
MINTY
„ PAT MER
KEM
„ CLAUDE WUNSCH
STUART
„ McLEAN
BARLING
„ MURDEN
CYRIL LAYH
.. BENSON
.. HUNTER
FYRNFS
DUPREZ
~ DUFFIN
„ BEATTIE
„ DARBY
„ NIXON
.. SHEATHER
„ PHELAN
„ DIAMOND


METHODIST CHURCH.
In the Methodist Church a service
Was conducted by the Rev. H. Pen-
nington. The rostrum and portion
of the Communion Table were appro-
priately decorated. The speaker said
they were assembled to do honor to
tho bravest of men, to keep in mind
the landing of our men at what has
j come to be known as Anzac Cove,
Gallipoli, to express our gratitude
to them for their noble, daring, to pay
a tribute of respect to the men who
cheerfully and grandly
their lives Jor the cause of Empire.
After mentioning the orders General
Birdwood gave to our officers and
men’ just before they were to enter
Into action, Mr, Pennington, at some
length, described the landing and
their wonderful achievements. He
reminded his hearers that our” men
did not wait for orders to laud, or lor
the boats to take them to the beach,
but sprang into the sea and rusheu
the enemy’s trenches. He further
described how the Turks were pushed
out of their positions, and how when
daylight appeared the Australians ban
actually established themselves on
the ridge of the cliff. The heroism
of our wounded men he declared to
be astonishing, and he also referreu
to the bravery of Major-General Brid
ges and of Captain Townshend, ana
also the commendations of Ashmeau
Harriett and General Birdwood*, in
praise of our troops in general. “Have
not our men quitted themselves like
men and been strong?” the speakei (
asked. “Yes, they have done well, 1
done their best; done all that men
could do.” That day they were askec.
to honor the noble dead. How shah
we do it? First, we must see to u
as a people that where necessary th-
loved ones they have left with u.-
are amply provided for. That wil
be a practical way of remembering
them, and it is the least we can do.
These men have well earned our gra !
titude and love, and all reasonable
support should be given those belong-
ing to them. Secondly, we must also
see to it, that as far as may be, tht
places of those who have fallen and
of those who come back to us are filled
and more than filled, at the front.
If we could, to-day, ask these men
what they would like us to do, thinV
you, would they not, every man o
them reply, “Take up the work w<
have been trying to do; go yourselve'
if you can go; do all that lies in your
power to send others; let the las
pound be spent; let the last ship pic
ugh the seas with munitions, pro
visions, and raen ; let the last man spill
his blood rather than fail in thi:
mighty struggle against tyranny
greed, and wrong; do it for our glori
ous Empire; do It for the fair name
of Australia,
Addressing the mourners present
Rev. Pennington, said he would like
to speak a few words of comfort to
those who have been berehved. Jesur
will give back to you your departed
loved ones, and your anguished heart?
shall be comforted and satisfied.
He added, “Jesus is the Resurrection
an.(j the Life. He gave back to M'ary
and Martha their brother Lazarus
and He will restore to you those whr
have been taken from you. And you
shall rejoice together again, and weep
no more, and part no more.’
AT ST. MICHAEL’S.
In the morning, Mass was celebra
ted for the repose of the souls of the
fallen, soldierfs (and I,he prayers o'
the congregation were asked for them
At 10 o’clock there were special de
votlons for the children of the school?
in memory of the day. Rev. Fathe;
Galvin officiated, and reminded them ,
of the supreme sacrifices of the stai
wart sons of Australia, whose bone?
now lie mouldering on a foreign soil
He hsked them especially on that, day
and on all future days not to forge"
them In their prayers. This, he said
was the best and only way that the'
could help those dear ones whose me
raory they cherish so much.
Brother Garvey, the principal of the
Schools, then addressed the children
on the events of Anzac Day, and this
Was followed by appropriate songs
and after the singing of the Nationa 1
Anthem, the children were granted r
holiday.


THE CHURCH SERVICES
ST. JOHN’S CHURCH OF ENGLAND
The services in St. John’s Church
were well attended. There was a
large number of communicants pre-
sent at 6.45 a7m., when Canon Pike
received and dedicated a collection of
floral tributes to the fallen. At the
altar steps a beautiful floral cross had ,
been erected, on which a wreath of
laurel rested. The Cross was sur-
mounted by a crown of gold, which
rested on a handsome purple cushion
dedicated to the memory of the fallen
by Mrs. W. Hamilton. The tributes
of relatives Ijind friends were laid at
foot of the shrine.
At 10.45 a.m., the church was
nearly full, A choral service was
held with special Psalms, inc’uiding
the Burial Psalm, a special lesson,
and prayers authorized by the Bishop
for this service. The reading of thb
Roll for the Dead, and the singing of
the special hymns made the service
most solemn and 'impressive. There
was no sermon, the Canon announcing ,
that it was not a day for words, but
for dedication and prayer. The choir
was present in large numbers, and the
singing of the hymn ‘Now the labour-
er’s task it o’er” was most impressive.
Mr. Selby New played the "Dead
March in Saul” In a manner that
profoundly moved the large congre-
gation.
At the evening service, Canon Pike
delivered a short sermon on the pros-
pect of peace, from the words of
Isaiah “The Lord will ordain peace for
us, who hast wrought all our works
in us.” We shall, the preacher said,
look for the day of peace with a glad-
ness never known before, and people
were wondering by what means it
could be reached. There were some
steps that could never be retraced,
and the actions of July, 1914, were
among them. The war must go on
until peace was ordained for us. The
vital necessity was to keep up the
strength of our armies. It was a piti-
ful story in the papers that day of the
withdrawal of the Australian soldiers
and to him came almost as a blow in
the face, and the majority of his con-
gregation would feel it as keenly as
himself. Any discredit on our coun-
try he felt as a dlicedit personally
and was ashamed to walk the streets
of the town and see eligible mem still
here. To secure peace there must be
a silent righteousness. There were
some faults on both sides, but one
side was right in the main and the
other wrong In the main, and It was
the main*that mattered most. He
was confident that on the main ques-
tions we were on the right side and
that being so we could not hesitate to f
do our utmost in this war by force of
I arms to bring our enemies to the right
also. But, withdrawing our divisions
was not going to bring that about.
We have reached superiority in muni-
tions, but after all it was the stout
and resolute heart of the man behind
the gun, having a strong conscious-
ness of the righteousness of his cause,
that was needed. We had only to gc
back into the history of our race to
realise that all our dialing u'shing
characteristic and power manifested
came to us by the gift of God, and He
expected of us to surrender ourselves
to His will as His humble servants.
The service concluded with the
hymn:
The Son of God goes forth to war,
A kingly crown to gain;
His blood-red banner streams afar!
Who follows in his train?
They climbed the steep ascent of
Heaven
Through peril, toil, and pain;
O God, to ns may grace be given,
To follow in their train.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
There was a crowded congregation
at the Presbyterian Church, when at
a morning service special hymns and
lessons were chosen. Rev. Win. Tul-
loch offered an Impressive prayer In
which he said their hearts were ach-
ing with the memories of those bitter
days of Gallipoli. He thought of
those boys as soldiers of Jesus Christ,
who died nobly for a noble cause.
The blood spilt on that peninsula cried
out to the Nations to avenge it. In
the address following the preacher
said the service was no', only in mem-
ory of the fallen but to pray to their
God —a time for heart-questioning and
searching of ourselves. A prayer for
victory was a very natural though
almost selfish one, but was after all
the means to the greater end of that
peace which He alone could give us
as a people. Truth and honor with
the enemy had been torn up, and
righteousness destroyed, but with aud-
acity and blasphemy they dared as-
sociate the name of God with their
cause. Truth, honor and righteous-
ness were with the allied cause, and
therein was the great lesson in this
memorial to our men. Thousands of
sorrowing minds to-day had thoughts ,
concentrated on that peninsula—all
caused through a nation not observing
those true Christian principles of
truth and honor. Whilst conscious of
the heroic deeds of those men, he
concluded, we don’t want a patched
up peace, that our children might go
through what we are going through
to-day.


AT THE SCHOOLS
WAGGA PRIMARY SCHOOL
Anzac Day was fittingly observed
at the Wagga Primary School yester-
day. During the morning Aid. Thos,
Dobney, Deputy Mayor, Mr. Geo. Dart, i
M.A., Inspector of Schools, Mrs. Dart, ,
and Privates Campbell and Cohen, )
both returned soldiers from Gallipoli, }
visited the school.
Mr. D. A. Pike introduced the Dep-
uty Mayor, and stated the Mayor hav-
ing enlisted it was necessary to ap-
point someone to act in his place.
This honor had fallen upon the shoul-
ders of Aid. Dobney. He was sure
that all would join with him wish-
ing good luck to the Mayor’s Deputy in
the fulfilment of his onerous duties.
It was not an easy matter to be Mayor
of a Municipality like Wagga, especi-
ally following the excellent work done
by Private Hugh Oates. They would
all be pleased to see Mr. Dobney at
any time.
Mr. Dobney, who was received with
applause, referring to the Mayor
stated the occasion generally brought
forward the war and this had been
the experience in the case of Mr. H.
Oates. He hoped that when the boys
and girls left school they would work
hard, that they would put their mind
into their work and prove equal to
the occasion. The speaker traced
the action of the Australians at Rab-
aul, the sinking of the Emden, and the
despatch of troops to Egypt and sub-
sequently to Gallipoli. The doings of
the Anzacs would be handed down
from generation to generation, and
they should all feel proud of their
fathers and brothers in action.
Aid. Dobney then called for three
cheers for the Mayor, Private Hugh |
Oates, and cheers were subsequently
given for Mr. Dobney.
Mr. Pike thefT welcomed Privates
Campbell and Cohen. He stated it
was a pleasing duty to welcome men
who had fought at Gallipoli. They
all had a sense of pride and admira-
tion for the brave Australians who
had fought for us, and we are proud to
know that authorities had called them
“the bravest things God ever made.”
We could only picture the hardships
and trials that these Anzacs had suf-
fered. They were men who sailed
away from Mudros Bay and Lemnos,
at that time covered with flowers, ac-
ross the Aegean Sea which on that
morning was like a blue jewel, the sun
rising behind the spray. They had to
jump from their boats and wade
through a foam of blood. cross a
beach mine-laden, with shrapnel burst- i
ing round them and force a landing
at Gaba Tepe. We justly felt proud
''f them. (Applause).
Mr. Dart, M. A. stated he was pleas-
ed to be present that morning to join
In the celebrations of Anzac Day.
Many in the landing had been killed,
but they had not died in vain. Al-
though the Australians had to with-
draw, their expedition had not been
a failure, because they had held up
' the flower of the Turkish Army, which
was unable to operate against the
Russians. He pointed out the diffi-
culty of the landing, but with all the
hardships success might have been
reached had sufficient reinforcements
been available. This emphasised
tne tact tnat more men were still
needed to keep the Australian divi-
sions up to their full strength until
fhe Germans received a good hiding.
He impressed upon the gathering that
they were fighting for freedom and
that all Nations had united to keep the
bully in check. He was pleased to
be able to extend a welcome to the
soldiers present.
Private Campbell, ah old pupil of the
School, stated that Anzac Day would
never bo forgotten in remembrance of
his brave mates and comrades whd
were left on Gallipoli. He was
wounded in the charge at Lonesome
Pine. Men to-day were taking a r
long time to consider whether they
should go to the front.
Private Cohen, an old pupil of the
head master, responded by a recita-
tion of “Fallen Comrades” (Tom Skey-
hill). The piece, which was listened j
to with rapt attention, depicts vlv- J
idly the garden of sleep of his com-
rades, in Gallipoli, where he landed
on the 25th. April. 1915 at Anzac Bay. f
Wild poppies thrive beside them,
Their bloom is scarlet born,
Red poppies, flowers, emblens
Of that blood red April morn.
Shrapnel Gully is on the right.
Courtney’s Post at their head.
And the Mediterranean at their feet,
And the blue sky overhead.
During fhe ceremony the children
under Mr. H. Eagles, sang very
sweetly and effectively, “As a Nation
we Implore,” and "A Soldier’s Fare-
well.” The following programme was
carried out during the morning
by the girls, Miss Cleary, head mis-
tress, and boys-
, Talks on the War.
Anzac Day, and Its meaning.
Reading from John Masefield’s “Gal-
lipoli.”
Australians at Gallipoli.
Songs and recitations by pupils.
Saluting the flag at 12 noon.
God Save the King.
WAGGA PRIMARY SCHOOL
HONOR ROLL
SECOND LIST OF NAMES.
(In addition to 66 names previously
recorded.)
T. J. Perriman R. Bellalr
F. Schwind B. C. Nixon
W. R. Pendrick M. Redhead
H. D. Meldrum L. Douglas
A. L. Wunsch K. Irving
N. M. Nixon L. Irving
T. W. Burgess J. Carswell
W. H. Hutchings A. E. Headley
N. Sherrie A. J. Arndt
A. Box F. Hoye
Fuller Rif'h Croaker
\. B. Riley Rob Croaker
H. L. Vincent B. J. Morgan
W. F. Hinton W. Miller
A. Fraser L. H. Rake
J. R. Oates P. Rushton,
F. Henningham p. j. Horwood
J. Vincent r, Castles
M. Henningham p. Bowen
R. Norman r. w. Resso
J. Norman W. W. Dunn
A. Carver r. Cuskey
R. Walker J. h. Blackmnan
E. Bowen J. williams
F. Towner H. Wiesner
* A. Woolley


SOUTH WAGGA SCHOOL
i
The second anniversary of the land- 1
ing of the Anzacs at Gallipoli was ob-
served at the South Wagga Primary
School by a programme of songs and
recitations suitable for the occasion.
Mr. Dart M.A., Inspector of Schools
Mrs. Dart and a number of
among whom were mothers of soldiers
now at the front, were present.
Mr. Dart in the opening address re-
ferred particularly to the bravery
shown by the Anzacs at Gallipoli, and
pointed out the fact that for the first
time in their history Australians had
fought side by side with soldiers from
the rest of the Empire and with the
Empire’s Allies. He urged the chil-
dren to remember not only the her-
oism of the Anzacs at Gallipoli, but
also the sacred cause In which that j
heroism was displayed —a world strug-
gle for freedom. Special reference
was made by Mr. Dart to the re-
cruiting scheme inaugurated by the
School Teachers’ Association, and to
the departure on the previous day of
the Mayor and his Unit, among whom
were four ex-pupils of the school, viz., j
I Mervyn Mumford, Garnet Hale, Ray
, Hartland and Roy Castle. The sight
of these men marching to the station,”
said Mr. Dart, “was an inspiring one, j
and made me wish myself younger so
that I could go with them.”
Mrs. Dart was presented with a
bouquet of roses from the pupils.
The names on the Roll of Honor, j 1
(which was draped with the Union
Jack and the Australian Flag) were
read;, the pupils and visitors standing
Mr. C. McKay in a short speech,
spoke enthusiastically of the great
landing. When the war broke out,
Mr. McKay wondered whether the
British of to-day were the equals of
those of ages past, in fighting quali-
ties, but such acts as those of the An-
-1 zacs at Gallipoli and in France con-
vinced him that the old fighting spirit
is as keen as ever.
The programme included; —Reading
by sixth class, account of landing at
Gallipoli; recitation. “The Holding of
the Line,” Miss Mary Holloway; reci-
tation “How Sleep the Brave,” sixth
class; part song, “Near the Dardan-
elles They Lie,” sixth class; recita-
tion “The Battle” (Hentry V.), sixth
class; part song, “When the Empire (
Calls.” sixth class; recitation, “Sol-
dier Rest.” fourth and fifth classes:
song, “We are Little Soldiers,” junior
pupils; recitation “My Dad,” Bailee
Ruthven.
During the introduction of parents
of Anzacs (returned, or at the front),
much enthusiasm was shown as the
names were mentioned, especially cf
Mrs Birrell, having four sons at the
front and another going, Mrs. Hale
three sons (one returned wounded).
Mrs. Bruce three sons enlisted), one
killed recently, one now in hospital,
and one still at the front.
The head master, (Mr. E. Byrnes ,
stated that the Roll of Honor Board
was full and that he hoped in the
near future to obtain another on ,
which to record the names of many
other ex-puplls who had gone to the j
front.
At 12 noon the School Flag was
placed at half-mast in memory of
fallen Anzacs, and each pupil stood!
at the salute. The flag was after-
wards raised to the masthead in honor
of the day.
Ihe National Anthem was sung,
both at the opening and the closing of*
the proceedings.
4
NORTH WAGGA SCHOOL
SHAKESPEARE AND ANZAC DAYS
Both days were fittingly celebrated
at the above-named school. On
Monday, 23rd. Inst., suitable and in-
structive addresses were given by Mr.
G. Dart, M.A., Inspector of Schools
and Mr, K. Flett. Mr. Dart dealt in
a very lucid manner with Shakespeare
In general, and gave pleasant and In-
structive explanations on the various
pieces recited by the pupils. Mr.
Flett emphasised tl\e great influence
of Shakespeare’s work while the head-
master, Mr. Stevenson, connected
Shakespeare with Nature Study, show.
Ing how he worked his knowledge of
flowers into his writings.
The following programme was ren-
dered by the pupils—“l know a Bank’
(Shakespeare); “When the Empire
Calls”; recitations, “Mercy (Merch-
atn of Venice), Ivy Clarke; dial-
ogue “Portia and Nerissa” by Phyllis
Waters and Dorrie. Honey; Anthony's
address, Lily Spokes; “Cymbilene’s
Dirge” Gladys Butler.
ANZAC DAY.
On Anzac Day Mr. G. Dart, M.A.
was again present, and gave a most
inspiring and sympathetic address de-
picting the splendid and heroic stand
of the Anzacs. He pointed out most
vividly the reason why Germany should
be defeated, and the treatment we
would receive if we were under Ger-
man rule.
Mr. Stevenson read a very graphic
description of “The Landing at Gal-
lipoli” by an Anzac, and referred to
the honor in which we should hold
our boys who have fought so nobly.
The school Roll of Honor was then
read, all standing as a mark of esteem.
Suitable items were contributed by
the pupils as follows; —“Awake, aw-
ake Australia,” “Flag of Britain,”
“Gallipoli,” “When the Empire Calls”;
song, Vivian Butler; recitation,
“Graves of Gallipoli” Phyllis Waters;
"How to Die,” May Spokes; . “My
Sprig of Wattle,” Elsie Clarke; ‘‘The
never ending Chase,” Roy Pulver.
The ceremony concluded by singing
the National Anthem, and hoisting
the flag at half-mast the pupils stand-
ing at the salute.
In the afternoon teachers and pupils
attended the service In the Town Hall
Gardens.


1 V C 7V f/ 7
MURDER FROM THE SKIES.
LONDON IN WAR TIME.
THE SALVATION ARMY AT WORK.
(By
N.Z. Command Depot,
No. 9, Cod ford,
Wilts, Oct. 23rd.
Another month has gone, and never
in the history of the. world has so
much slaughter taken place; the blood
that flowed in brave men’s veins is
now on the fields of Flanders, leaving
the ground covered with brave men’s
remains. Our hospitals are re-charged
with men in all conditions, the sur-
geons being compelled to work day and
night extracting bullets and removing
legs, arms, eyes, etc. It is too sad. 1
will change the subject.
We had our monthly depot sports,
and the men simply excelled them-
selves. being winners of many prizes
against all comers. Sir Thomas Mc-
Kenzie was present, and at night pre-
sented the prizes. An enjoyable even-
ing was spent.
Football has come in, and last Satur-
day the N.Z. boys met the Canadian
boys, and beat them by 20 to o—an
excellent win. The Canadians are fresh
men from Canada, and ours are all
convalescent, having seen service in
France and many on the Peninsula.
Our Commandant, Colonel McKenzie,
is well again, and it is a pleasure to
see him amongst his troops—the boys
all love him.
The hospital visitation 1 still con-
tinue, and each fine receives the differ-
ent gifts such as handkerchiefs, soap,
sweets, cigarettes, apples, writing ma-
terial, etc. I hold three services a
week in the hospital, anti an average of
120 are present. You should hear
them sing “Abide with me.” “Where is
My Wandering Buy To-nigid,, ’ ‘Lead
Kindly Light”—really it is inspiring
and impressive. Does them good.
I touched last month on our women
workers—l should have spoken on our
housekeepers, and how they struggle
on with present- day prices—butter
(Irish) 3s 4d a pound, sugar 8d
(lump) per pound, and you can only
secure one pound at a time, eggs 3s 8d
a dozen wholesale, milk 8d a quart, 4-
pound loaf 9d. tea 4s per pound (that
being the maximum, and it is a com-
mon sight to see in shop windows five
pounds for £1), and only a few tins
left. Processions of people wait out-
side shops, two deep, to buy goods,
just as it was for potatoes a few weeks
ago. You can go into any shop for a
cup of tea in London, and all they give
you is one cake of lump sugar, no
more, for a cup of tea.
I was in an air raid for 2\ hours
The streets were deserted. Men closf
their businesses a little earlier so tin
workers can get home before the rnooi
rises. Twenty minutes before raider
appear the police give warnings’, am
after raiders are driven off the polic.
ride through the streets with a bl(
sign—“All clear.” it is a pretty sigh
to see the shells from our guns explod
in the air. I saw one bomb fall 18ir
Into the pavement—it did not explodt
and I was not prepared to take the risl
of pulling it out of the place. I pickei
up a piece of shrapnel about 2 A in. long
If ever you have been at a rifle rang<
marking, that is the experience you g(
through in a London raid. The bullet-
in all directions are making a whizzing
and humming noise. Seeing the women
and children at 4.30 making their way
into the underground railways is a sad
sight, loaded up with a pillow and a
blanket, and a basket of eatables; also
old, grey-haired people trying to se-
cure some shelter. Aner a night raid,
Mr Lloyd George visits the wrecked
parts, and while there he finds the
Salvation Army sisters feeding and
clothing the hungry and homeless crea-
tures. This paragraph appears in the
London daily, it may interest you:
O' ihing the recent air raids have
| revealed is that London possesses an
army of Florence Nightingales.
"This army is one which, like that in
trance, carries on its work of deliver-
ance under a fire of bursting shells and
shattering bombs, yet it fights not to
bike life, but to save it: terror, hunger,
cold are all that it claims to kill, it is
called the Salvation Army.
“When the deserted streets the
capital resound with the throb and
rumble of countless guns, when roof
and pavement are bespattered with
falling shrapnel, this brave band of wo-
men sets out on its errand of mercy.
That spirit which immortalised ‘ The
Lady of the Lamp.’ who strove so no-
bly during the Crimean war, seems to
have been handed flown to these sisters
ot mercy; self is forgotten in consid-
eration of others.
if during an air raid you should
happen to be in one of the ‘poor’ dis-
tricts of London, a district where pen- I
ury an(l disease and ignorance hold)
sway, you will be sure to see them at 1
her work. With the first alarm they I*
their shelters and pass into the
far fried streets. where surging
[ crowds of tenement dwellers— V vild-
eyeil, slovenly women, crying children,
uncouth, and often terrified men—
burry hither and thither towards the |
nearest shelter. You will see them
rather together numbers of this fright-
ened rabble, speak reassuring words to
them, and shepherd them along the
Streets to the nearest Salvation Army
shelter, where they may .find a refuge
nt tfeT" ,S f)aSSed ' Then out
nt the byways and alleys to find and
OU s hUf( '‘ ly more of ;crr:tW|
“Enter the place of refuge with
them. There you will see crowds of
unkempt women and children, seated
in warmth and light: and ttie sound of,
the guns without is drowned by the
strains of music ad of singing within.
“But the work of these Sisters of
Mercy does not end here. Out in the
streets are others, unperturbed by the
sounds of war that till the city, visit-
ing the tenements and public shelters,
entering the underground stations, as-
sisting the aged and infirm, comforting
the fearful. Presently a rumble of
wheels is heard,, echoing strangely
along the now almost deserted streets,
and a van stops at a large building that
has been converted into a shelter. From
the vehicle is taken food and warm
drink, which is distributed among the
densely crowded refugees.
“Jn the underground station near by
there are also a number of Salvation
Army lasses. One is distributing food,
another serving out milk to the ragged
children and the babies: others are
nursing and soothing the babies whose
mothers are too distracted to give them
proper attention.
“One sister brings out a handful of
pennies, and with them empties an au-
tomatic sweetmeat machine, distribut-
ing the contents among a dozen or so
laughing children, who crowd around
her, their fear dispersed by the diver-
sions of their new playmate. Present-
ly blankets make their appearance, and
children worn out with crying quickly
sink into forgetfulness in their tempor-
ary beds.
“Then when the foul work of the
Hun murderers is done, and the guns
have ceased, those who have no home
to which to return, and no friends to
take them in, llnd a haven of rest in
the shelters of the Salvation Army un-
til new homes are prepared for them.
And children who are left homeless
find a safe refuge at a large country
house far beyond reach of the death
that thunders down from the clouds.
“Truly might this band of women be
called the army of Florence Nightin-
gales.”
Capt.-Chaplain Win tun).


IVI//9/?
NOTES FROM CODFORD
CAMP.
SALVATION ARMY ACTIVITIES.
I Chaplain-Gapt. Winton, In a letter
dated Codford. Nov. 23rd, 1917,
writes: —
Many and varied have have been my
duties this month, all in the interests »
the Sons of the Dominion. I had a
photo taken of the graves of our N.Z
bovs in Codford, and have sent a let-
ters to the four ends of N.Z.. also a few
petals of the rose-bush I planted there.
The blooms on the graves are very
good, and admired by all. One of the
jobs of a Padre is to try and cheer tb
bereaved, who have so bravely suffe
e Cold weather has come, and all the
extra clothes on our beds are needed,
as well as on our bodies. Thfe*water
in the taps is frozen, and It.will. be
worse yet. One cannot see an> dis-
tance ahead, but 1 suppose it. is an
C'r.rrlicll lIIIIITI O .
' The air raiders have been busy, and f(
the tubes are in great demand. Our
Armv workers are again doing great
work. The Hon. Lloyd George again ~
appeared on the scene, and gave in- o]
s true lions to the captain to see all were (j
provided for. and he was prepared to
meet the expenses. London tsa * vat * ol | 2
Armv workers are so arranged that d
the moment air raiders start their work e
the Army lassies an on the move with fl
all kinds of goods. A Church of Engi .
land Canon, in writing to an officer,
stales: “We have tried in our Parish
Magazine to express something of t ie ;
deep gratitude which the stricken peo-
ple of tills part feel towards the Salya-
tion Army for all the kindness that
was shown to them In the Masters
name since, the terrible raid. Without
vou I do not know what we and they ]
would have dune. You are really
“Godsends.” and your loving, whole-
hearted. practical, and prompt help
will never be forgotten. May God re-
double it all in you. If ever I can by
mv voice, or in any other way assist
vour splendid ministry, do not hesitate
to let me know. God bless you all.
I Outside testimony is the best testimony
of our work. , „„„
u»;nerais iioniey ana mcnarason
made an inspection of our soldiers and
officers in this camp; they were more
than pleased, and congratulated the
Commandant. Colonel McKenzie. They
then inspected my hall, .and compli-
mented Commissioner Hodder of the
Salvation Army, N.Z., on their mag-
nificent gift to our brave boys. I had
the pleasure of meeting Chaplains
Bladen and Walls. They love their
work amongst the boys in France and
in the trenches. Our 0.C., Colonel Mc-
Kenzie. is again suffering with his
knee, and is going to an expert in
London. lam afraid we shall lose him
for a while.
everything is going up in price. Yes-
terday it was stated in a paper that for
half soleing and heeling 10/- would be
charged. How the poor people live, I
don’t know. Eggs are now (5d each.
The number of chaplains serving are
1 2000; 170 have bfcen killed; 25 died of
disease; two V.C.’s have been award- 1
I ed. and 130 have been decorated —a
1 fine record.
Our hostels are a great uuuu .....
bovs from over the seas, and they call I
each of them a home. Nothing is too
much trouble to do for them. I see
bv our War Cry that Colonel Unsworlh
lias been sent for by His Majesty; on 1
■several occasions he has had such a j
privilege. Queen Alexander commis-
l sinoned him to’ go to Egypt in the 1
early stages of the war. No man is
1 better known in the lobbies of the 1
House of Commons than the Colonel;!
being an old soldier, keenly interested
in all humane work, he is eager to do
anything he can to improve matters —
you wirt always find him there when
I wanted.
I had the privilege of attending a
farewell gathering in Westminster
Hall where 5000 persons were present
to say good-bye to Commissioner and
Mrs Jeffries, who go to take charge of
our work in China. The Salvation
Army began operations there in 1915,
and now has some 50 missionaries,
whose activities are confined to China.
China is an ancient and vast Empire,
comprising some 400,000,000 souls
Paganism lias constituted the beliefs of
its people until recent years, but con-
tact with the Western world has
brought about the introduction of
Christianity. ,


{Lb/
SOLDIER’S LETTER
REMARKABLE MEETING.
AERIAL COMBATS.
Driver J. B. Rooney, from whom se-
veral interesting letters have been pub-
lished, advised an Invercargill friend on
10th November that be was an inmate
of the Ist London General Hospital.
He was suffering from an internal com-
plaint, dm 1 , the doctors stated, to
damp and exposure. He had been
marked ..as a surgical case, would prob-
ably have to undergo an operation, and
might be invalided home to N.Z. “In
a few weeks,'’ added Driver Rooney,
“I will have given two and a half years
of my life to this cause, and this is
the Hist time I have been absent from
my company since leaving N.Z., with
the exception of the ten days’ leave to
England, which is the privilege of all.”
Driver Rooney states that while in
a French h< spltal on his way to Eng-
land he met with a pleasant surprise,
which he thus desci^bes: —
About four years ago I was staying
with my brother at Balclutha, or rather
Kapapuaka. One evening a young lady
was biking down the road, which takes
a steep dip past my brother’s home,
and a mob of cattle were being driven
the ether way. The cattle so scared
■ her that she lost control of the mach-
ine, which resulted in a nasty fall on
Urn bard metal. Her face was badly
cut. and ''he was unconscious for some
time. My brother and I carried her in-
to the bouse, where the doctor kept
iiei tor two days. Her father, who is
a farmer in the Hillend district, about
eight miles distant, called the follow-
ing day tu remove her, but she was not
allowed away till the next day. I had
P e ' er ‘““ , n this young lady in my life
before, nor bad I S66n her since, until
1 was in the hospital about an hour,
when who should walk in but the self-
same person, in full nurse’s uniform,
to take charge of the ward during the
iii—lit hours. V\ hen I made myself
known she was greatly surprised, and
you can bet we had a great chat about
lliaf part of N.Z., and about people
whom we both knew from there I
think you will admit that this was a ra-
ther remarkable meeting. The tables
were completely reversed: Instead of
her being the patient, and I acting as
one of her attendants, I had taken the
former position, and she was mv
nurse!
"I have seen a lot of aerial combats
during the nineteen mo nths I have been
m trance, continues the writer, “but
the moft spectacular and thrilling was
one that occurred between a Hun and
two of ours. .As might have been ex-
ported from the odds, Fritz
second best. They were lighting at
what we estimated to be eight or nine
thousand feel in the air. The manoeuv-
res they went through to gain the
dommating position were grand to
watch. fheT tight lasted from ten
minutes tu a quarter of an hour. At
last (<ne of ours got home on Fritz with
an incendiary bullet, and set ids ma-
-1 | u p e ,° n Th e machine immedi-
ately dived for earth, but the poor fel-
lows were doomed. At about (5000 feet
from earth the most thrilling scene of
," ne of occupants
ihi . "'the descending machine, and
J iate at which he travelled through
. ;. lU ' was appalling. The machine,
, K h "as checked somewhat by its
wings, was some seconds longer in
irr: r, * rQund ’ an 'J hy the time
it landed it was a mass of charred
rums Both the machine and its vic-
tims landed about 200 or 300 yards
Irom our lines, and of course a crowd
thi 1 * „ ms iu''! Pver 10 see the result.
Jhe one that had fallen out was a
sickening sight. He was smashed be-
yond recognition.
n ?°. nths earlier, about the end
nL of wii 11 '’I’’ 1 ’’ J saw ;l ] W't between
I n and a Fritz » which result-
SoPry t 0 in trie downfall
°J , OUI own man. In this case our ma-
a"'e?r V r ' % , bu ' the ,)il ' )t man ~
1 "i . his head apparently fin
within about four or five hundred feet
up. where I tie heat must have over-
< me turn, as from that height down
trot Thil nC Came tumbling out con-
f uas in tiie evening, and the
following night about the same lime a
German machine came Hying over the
same spot and dropped someth ng and
was told later that it was a wreath
vvhich was a fnbute from the Hun to
his adversaries whom he had overcome
m fair combat, which shows, I think
that some of Uiem at least have a spark
of humanity in them. paK


/f/f
Our Boys in Palestine.
SOLDIER’S LETTER.
A letter was received last week b>
Mr and Mrs H. Wilson, Gladstone, from
their son Harold, who was one of the
mounted men from the North Island
whom the citizens of Invercargill put
up and cared for from the Saturday to
Monday, in July, 1916. Several letters
received from the same men mentioned
how grateful they were for the kind-
ness shown them upon that occasion.
Bluff being their port of departure, the
Mounteds were given a cordial send-
off at our railway station.
Trooper Wilson enlisted with the
13th, afterwards incorporated with the
14th Mounted Rifles, going forward di-
rect to the Egyptian training camp, and
front there on to the Palestine front.
He has taken part in most of the fight-
ing in Palestine. He writes;
“I hope you do not think I have
neglected you of late. You will have
learned how busy we have been, and
will understood how impossible it
w’ould be under such circumstances to
write. Indeed, for weeks, even had we
the time or opportunity for letters,
there was absolutely no way of posting
a letter. For several days past there
has been a mail closing about 9 a.m.,
but I have felt far from anxious to
write, being so tired and run down. At
night, when we might have scribbled a
few lines, there have been no candles
available, so directly tea was over it
was a case of making one’s bed, and
after a smoke turn in. It is cold to
sit about once the sun goes down.
“When we started this big push, in
fact when we left our camp near
Khangumer, I was troubled with sev-
eral “septios” on my hands. Scores of
others were the same. We went for
weeks without being able to have them
attended to. We just had to make the
same bandages last as long a* po«sibl<>,
occasionally taking them off and pour-
ing a drop of water from our bottles
over our sores. My left thumb-nail is '
now coming off. The sore at the root
has healed, so that is all right. There
is now only one small sore on the right
hand. The skin all over the hands,
and finger tips especially, has been
dried up and cracked. That trouble
also is now fast disappearing, thanks to
being able to wash and having that
cake of lubricant you sent,
“I received that parcel about a fort-
night ago. It was a very good and ac-
ceptable one. The only improvement
that I could suggest is: Address in full
bn each wrapper, so that should the
outside wrapping wear off the inner
one will still show for whom it is in-
tended. Some parcels have several
wrappings, but only the outside ad-
dressed. I received also several par-
cels containing tobacco —that is most
acceptable—and also newspapers, the
latest dated Aug. 23rd, which is the
latest I have seen.
Now that I have started writing I
could go on indefinitely, there is so
much to tell.
“You see I am using a makeshift
piece of notepaper, all creases, for my
gear got a soaking a few days ago while
we were away from our horses for six
days holding some front-line trenches.
The weather broke the day after we
| got into them, and it rained almost in-
| cessanlly until the morning of the day
we were relieved.
“We are camped in an orchard. It
is winter, you know’, and just three
days from Christmas Day, and every-
thing is looking at its worst. Still, so
long as the weather remains fine it is
a beautiful country here—lots of great
wells, very good soil and of a great
depth; the water is good for man and
beast.
“My health is wonderfully good—
still, like the majority of our boys, none
too strong or vigorous. Yesterday an
'extra big warm blanket was issued and
a small canvas sheet, so now
able to put up a very fair bivouac. We
are supposed to be resting after our
severe service, but the rest is much
like that of the man who knocked off
work to carry bricks. Each evening at
dusk the majority of us have to ride
several miles to within a few’ hundred
yards of the enemy, and assist the
Tommies in digging trenches, and get
back here soon after midnight.


iu JttocfaJjU ±*> ■ gL ,/v/r-
CHRISTMAS AT CODFORD
CAMP.
(By
Staff-Captain W. Winton).
Godford, Jan. 23rd, 1918.
I
No doubt our doings on Christmas
Day will interest you. Sir James Allen
wished that we should have service at
8 a.m. on Christinas morning, and at a
i few minutes past that hour my hall was
well filled. Padre Ross and I each tak-
i mg part. At 8.30 1 had breakfast, and
'at 9.15, with my hut orderly (N.Z. Sal-
ivation Army Officer Sergt. Sawyer) I
was on tho way to one of our hospit-
als. We have two here. Every pati-
ent was visited, presented with a nice
handkerchief and wished a Happy
Christmas, At 12.20 we started our
service and linished at 11 a.m.—the
singing was lovely, haven’t heard better
for many a lung day. They all rejoiced
over the good news that a Saviour was
JuCrn —Christ Hie Lord. At 11.10 1 was
visiting the boys in the clink (military
gaol). They each received a handker-
chief and greetings were exchanged.
The Maoris were cooking their own
food —pig. etc. They would have me
taste it —it was so nicely done. They
talked a lot of Maori to me, and I ac-
cepted it as Christmas greetings. No
doubt they are a nice lot of boys. A
party of 25 went to Bristol to sing to
the wounded Tommies on 27th Dec. —
they conducted themselves like gentle-'
men. Lieut. Hewitt was in charge of
the party. Their last visit was such a
success that the Bristolians wanted
them back again.
W e then visited the four cook houses
to see the turkeys cut up. It was a
sight. The sweets looked and tasted
lovely. Received my mail, and had
just linished reading same, when the
bugle went —“Come to the cookhouse
door," and there was a rush. The
Commandant (Col. McKenzie) —all
were glad to see him— and the Adju-
tant (Capt. McPherson) went round
and wished all the boys a Happy
Christmas. After the Commandant left
I went to the Auckland, Wellington, 1
Canterbury and Otago boys, and wished
them ail a Happy Christmas, while they
were haVing a battle with turkey, j
roast beef, corned beef, tongue, and i
other meats. All kinds of sweets fol- I
lowed. Nuts and surprise packets
were also received, which caused a
good deal of merriment. Tea, coffee,
and cordials, were also obtainable.
What can I say about the decorations?
They were all very creditable, and the
winning one was Canterbury’s, under
Captain Mewitt. It resembled a nice
green bush with a slight fall of snow.
Auckland came in second, Lieut. Hewitt
being officer in charge. He hails from
Auckland, and before this letter ar-
rives he will be at the front again.
Thd Sergeants’ Mess No. 10 was
visited, and I had a few words with the
hoys. 1 arrived two minutes before '
the Commandant at the Maori spread, i
All were at attention, ready to receive
their chief. He spoke nicely to them of
the hopes he had of the future, I
then gave them a few minutes’ talk,
and very hearty were their cheers for
the padre.
At 1.30 we sat down for our Christ-
mas dinner. Ladies and gentlemen
were invited —Miss H. McKenzie being
among them. The King’s health w r us
honoured. At 3 p.m. I started to go
through the wards of the hospital.
Each and every ward was a perfect pic-
ture, many of the Sisters spending
pounds on goods so as to make it look
nice. Each man had a stocking which
caused a gread deal of pleasure. 1 wish
you could have seen the wards—they
were lovely. The supply of food was
all that could be desired. I asked the
boys in the mess-room of the different
companies if they had any complaints.
All were unanimous—“ This will suit
me” and cries of “No complaints.”
(Every day the orderly officer goes
round at meals to see if the food is all
right, and if not the men have an op-
portunity to complain).
The ward orderlies I next visited,
and for 20 minutes I spoke on the
blessings of Christmas. Three hearty
cheers were given for the Army padre.
At 5.30 I went to the. Sergeants’ Mess
No. 9, and was entertained right roy-
ally. it was my duty to speak on be-
half of the brave women who are left
in N.Z. The sergeants rose to their
feet, and sang on behalf of the wo-
men: “For they are jolly good fellows,”
etc. Tea was linished at 7.15 and
7.30 I was conducting a divine ser-
vice in my hall, and at 9 p.m. I visited
Sergeants’ Mess No. 8, and for half
an hour a pleasant, homely chat took
place, and 1 retired at 10.20 p.m., quite
happy, feeling that I had done my
best.
Boxing Day was also very busy.
Close on 1200 men went away for the
holidays. I forgot to say that I gave a
supper to all the boys in the hospital
—close on 350, and they enjoyed it.
I Papers will give you an idea of the rise
in goods. Officers’ gloves. w r ool lined,
costing 4/C, are now 18/G. In Man-
chester meat was scarce last Saturday,
thousands of families not being able to*
secure any for Sunday’s dinner.


t&u Joutfits/^ ° /ft *
NOTES FROM CODFORD
CAMP.
WONDERFUL MUNITION
WORKS.
Staff-Capt. W. Winton, a well-known
Salvationist from N.Z.. now at Codford 1
Gamp, forwards the following interest-
ing notes, dated 23rd Feb.; —
The weather this month lias hoes
perfect—lovely days. One ran hardly
believe we are' in the middle of win-
ter. An early spring is expected.
We have lose Colonel Fenwick from
our No. 3 General Hospital. Ho was
a great favouriU. but has been pro-
moted. so we wish him well. Oui
0.0., Colonel McKenzie, having regain-
ed health, is heartily welcomed home
to the depot.
1 have had a fortnight’s holiday.
Colonel Camhrin, 5.M.0.. ordering me
away, as 1 was run down. You see,
one must be at it when the opportunity
.presents itself. I was invited to go to
General Booth’s meeting in Coventry,
and very hearty indeed was the wel-
come received from the Mayor, C.E.,
clergymen, and citizens. The two for-
mer spoke in high terms of the work
/of the Salvation Army. It was indeed
a pleasant change to get away from the
military life, if only for a few days.
To have a few days in a private house
was lovely—home comforts and little
children just starting to walk brought
back home, memories. While on tour
1 visited a munition works. The build-
ings alone covered 66 J acres; fifteen
months ago cows and sheep were graz-
ing on the ground. Eighteen thou-
sand hands were employed and turn-
ing out as many shells per week. It
takes 16 trains with 12 carriages on
each to carry the workers to and from ,
the works. The money the workers
are earning is very large. The mana-
ger quoted to me a case of a father,
mother and son. who between them
earn £25 a week, ami by Tuesday they
had nothing left—spent one does not
know how. Many men on machines
have averaged £lO per week since the
war began. Still the cost of living in
England is awful. Ideally don’t know
how some of tfie poor people manage
Many eating houses, large and small,
never think of giving you sugar fur tea.
It is distressing to see the poor wo-
men .standing for hours waiting foe
or ilb of sugar, tea, or bacon, and
many, after a long wait, go away dis-
appointed. 1 bought 11b of butter
(N.Z.) at 2/6 per lb, and my host
thought I had done a wonderful stroke
in being able to get it. Meat is out of
the question. Vegetables are to be
had, as the plot system has done such
a lot for the poorer people. The plot
system means that all the parks and
spare allotments have been lent to
the citizens, and they have cultivated
them with line results.
Our Salvation huts and hostels are a
great boon. They are crowded every
night. The boys speak highly of them.
Thousands of beds and meals are avail-
able every week. I don’t know what
they would do without them and other
kindred associations.
Air raids have again been experi-
enced in London. I heard a story of
a Minister who used to go round dur-
ing air raids to comfort the frightened
women and children. During a raid a
bomb struck a building, and lie, with
others, was found dead. Found doing
his di^ty —what a fine end! Many New


The Southern Cross 4/5/1918
NEW ZEALANDERS IN
PALESTINE.
TROOPER HAROLD WILSON’S
EXPERIENCES.
In Hie course of a letter to ids fa-
ther, Mr 11. Wilson. Gladstone, Inver-
cargill. Trooper Wilson wrote on 2nd
March: —
We New Zealanders and others on
lids flank have had quit# an experience
lately. We are now at the same old
spot, near Agon Bara and Bichon le
Zion villages, where we have been for
sume time past.
On the morning of Feb. 9th. we
(W.M.H.) moved quite unexpectedly
for Jerusalem. It was a cold, stormy
day. We were quite excited to find
that we were actually hound for the
Holy City.
After travelling about 13 miles we
■bivouacked for Hie night. It was quite
far enough, as Hie country through
which we passed was so soft apd
boggy. Just here (Latrnn) we found
Hie country composed of rock for Hie
most part. That night was a miserable
(•no. Everyone lay down wet and
shivering, and our horses were very
restless owing to the same trouble.
In case I pot everything wet, I did not
undo my swag, hut just lay down with
overcoat and a blanket and one oil-
sheet stretched above me, just high
enough for one to crawl under. My
word, I did get cold and- cramped be-
fore long, and was very glad when day
broke. We remained there that day.
The country was too sodden for the
transport.
The following night we were com-
fortable. as we put up decent “biv-
vies,” and the weather having improv-
ed had allowed us to dry everything.
The following day. 11 Hi. we were on
Hie move again by 8 a.m. This time we
kept pretty well to Hie main road, rid-
ing two abreast. As K turned out. that
was really the only way to travel, as
very soon we found ourselves among
Hie hills, the road lying'in Hie bottom
of the gullies, and Hie steep, rocky
bills rising on each side almost from
Hie edge of the road.
From here on to Jerusalem it is all
the same bleak-looking racks. When
you reach a top, and lock round, there
are. as far as you can see. steep rocky
hills in all directions. All the hillsides
have been formed into terraces by
building walls of logse stones and fill-
ing in the space above. Then, as a
rule, these are either cultivated or
planted with olive trees. The olive is
everywhere—in ones or twos, or in
groves, according to Hie space avail-
able. • Evidently it is too cold here for
Hie orange, as it completely disap-
pears. It is a great road, and is kept
in good repair by thousands of natives
from round about and Hie, E.L.C.
(Egyptian Labour Corps) men. The
natives were there in both sexes and
all ages, all smiling and happy, like so
many Maoris—a steam roller here and
there finishing off the work. Many very
ancient villages were passed.
We came to Jerusalem quite unex-
pectedly. We entered from the north
side, and rode right through to Hie
south, and bivouacked between Jeru-
salem and Bethlehem. The two places
are about five miles apart; altitude
above sea level. 2500-odd feet. We
found the wind very cold and piercing.
The wonder is how Hie population of
these parts exist. The terraces are
most wonderful, and a great sight.
They must be the work ot centuries.
There are no fences —everything is
slnne —stone buildings, stone walls.
Thousands of Bedouiris come flock-
ing round the lines each day. It is
finite a job to keep them off. From
here you can see the Mount of Olives,
and from a hill close by can be seen a
glimpse of the Dead Sea. Bethlehem
is just a couple of miles further up
this road. Exercising horses each day,
we pass the tomb of Rachael, the mo-
ther of Joseph. The 6th squadron
mdved out during reconnaissance.
on the 17th we moVed out and join-
ed them at Ohied Hill, where there is
a monastry. where much lighting took
place recently between our infantry and
the Turks. Spent a good night here.
On the 18th some of us went on
outpost all day. and were fired on from
several points. X\ e saw a monastery
down below in a big gully. It is said
to contain some very ancient and valu-
able pictures, and at one time accom-
modated 5000 monks. It appears t f >
he built into the face of the cliffs.
We reached the lines at about 5.30
p m . and found all ready to move out
at 6 p.m., so we had to scurry—water
our horses, have tea, pull down the
hivvies, and make up swags, horse
feed, etc., and off. Of course we were
slightly behind the others. We made
towards the Dead Sea. It was dark
when we moved out. a very slow jour-
nev, travelling single file, leading our
horses most of the way. Very rocky
; md stoney. stumbling and knocKing 1
sore feet. Down into a deep gully, v* ■
followed that for a mile, then up and
ever the top and along a, precipitous
roc k face; then down a long spur, z '£"
za ir Near the bottom we were tired
on from Uose range. Such a clatter
made ...ovlw through the
moonlight night clanking thou 10
on the rocky surface.
Passed many Bedouin camps, will
heir occupants all apparently asleep,
and their herds of sheep and gmats
etc., grouped around the blvvies, ai
midnight we bivouacked close to Mun-
tar Hill, which the Tommies were to
take at daybreak. I was among others
to go on night-post. Took only p \ rA }
coat, and found it very cold. At 4
a.m. we moved on again in the dars
The day before two of our men bad
gone ahead to spy out the land towards
Hie Dead Sea. They ran great risks,
and deserve credit for what they did
voluntarily. We picked them up about
48 hours later.
Formed our posts for the day. wa-
ter for our horses was found away up
a big gully, the rocky sides rising
straight up from the horses on each
side It is evidently a spring. A big
square track has been cut out of the
solid rock under the side of the cliff.
The horses are watered by buckets.
There is barely room for two horses
to pass, so it is a long job to water a
• j brigade.
(To be Concluded next week).


did' /fsp
NEW ZEALANDERS IN
PALESTINE.
■ *
TROOPER HAROLD WILSON’S
EXPERIENCES.
(Concluded).
That night we lay down in eves.
coats only, and held horses until
a.m., when we were moved out to a
lack, leading oni horses behind. \\
walked about two miles. At last w
lound the enemy, occupying a hie rid«
overlooking ours. We lined the to
and found the range from 1650 vard
at one end of the ridge to 2300 at th
other end. The 6th squadron had at
tempted to rush the big ridge, bu
found it impossible owing to the pre
eipitous face and the raking machine-
gun tire. They got about two thirds oJ
the way when they took cover, anr
while we put in a covering tire to keer
down the Turks they retired—one maJ
killed and several injured.
toThP Tt .To U, ° n closi
to the Dead Sea. On our left were th.
other New Zealand men and aw-fv t
th. e left of that we could see the Tom-
i n ater S m r fh ing i° ne hel * ht a «er/ another
hater n the day, we found the enemv
opposite us had retired, owing to in’
fantry having turned their rigid I ater
Z e f W ° 1 "- ma " ‘or- this hid oppos e r
w; PPi° Ur P f l for t,lis day was don -
We returned to the spot where we
bad bivouacked the night before and
™ d up> our horse feeds were very
nd ° ur own cations almost
nil. I had gone that dav with only one
'u r i t tw vrn rui ? ‘' r
run. we had plenty of water mil
Srf We Y g ° nera,ly able
but had little or nothing to ear so fh a
lnTl\ e T yC( ! a good p annikin of tea
and a hot rasher of bacon fat just
off the pan. Was afraid that it would
U dfd re wr" d °7 n ' bUt hirtunalely ;
comfortable. It had e be°“u S a dull i
provetiTbettar rai "' but ll "‘ '
At 9 p.rn. our horses went to wainr
You! can imagine what, Vi,». 1 r
&irS?
but for a drink of te-V \u / empt y
SfArt - d r
WffSt before C Tha„ r t - d l"7 Sl> >- ‘ha
still had plenty flf f, h oodness - we
dies. J ° f tobacco and mat-
erSf ning vvas Yer >’ dull and mis-
ers it. •T ~ erf were «ood heavy show-
daV n ll 00ked like a thoroughly wel
our coats off n was , to take
w;,y d “™
*<*m opeied "nR ""‘ Cb
MSo°-Mfgr
The motor hike* t be .'° W sea ley el!
were an eye-opener/ ride, ’ s
-ss,; £r & s -" :
wards the mouth n, n °/ tlle Sea l »‘
there is a “** Jo ‘: clm - where
alongside, and a few SU “ k
tiring was deser-fp/i . u , udings. fcvery-
me J few rS s of a r nen ' l herc e av »
he and l enjoyed , h“ k , e " «■><!
cults and “>««> Wa-
ken wiiieh nn 1),.., 1 V°f dam ohic-
me, washedl^ r w^ d co^er «"t
Syr' tS
oient and found also the rest of the
brigade there . Australi«n« r LF\ e
I 1 *' U *"‘ Horse^iS-'^U^
Our divisional headquarters were in
been °\ve btn’ w,llch had
‘n threequarters of 1 /j»vouaoke»J with-
and It looked much ifi ' °I UlLs *®wn (
among a few tree, it?/ village
there the next dav h, d n . (>t g 0 acr °ss
I was too tired and Ug 'l, n,any did-
vya-s not worth the xvaT’ T l ”* say it
■stinking hole wifi, ~ —-just a dirty,
building in it.' thn rnsl "11 „"1- <lecc " t
As we arrived at this native huts,
tions. and none 1,1,. v'ldrewra-
s,na,l stream of beautifni T * lere is a
J ng off the hills clo e s a e U Jn Ul ' Vdter Corn -
' was tempted is ab o . | u ‘ hich Christ
appears to hate a 7/ furU *r on.
astery is built on JL 1 t 0p * A m ‘>n-
Bio stone on whlcli ri,r-\ er - y top> and
t 0 have sat Is preset S Buppo8 * d
•«Pcnt the night of the 9^f re - We
day of Uie 22nd here L? 1 * and aII
again at dark 6 n m n„ d moved out
Jenmsalem, leaving a m d 6turn r,)V
days, besides Australian , f ° r 10
find. °f course, ininpri/ Horse
ne i time we tonir
s- salem-Jericho road \ K ma,n Jeru-
ui of recent formation and^ 6 ” 115 ’ jt is
le work. For about tlireel. s a * r °at
y. on the up-grade «//,If lours we were
tt A beautifui clear m ! /If a {? d tw fctlng.
a I the road is cut out .??«.•/ h ° wed ‘bat
't hillsides, the Jowpe f / d rook on tbu
'I in place.; from oude « ein * built.
>• 'big square blocks nf /! good de P*h. of
yI ed kerb Rad if , tono with a rais-
-1 interesting p^ot os wn man V
t taken here. About lo •?n d ,iave bee U
Point on top of ie ™ We reao,] C(i a
• tions and one hor£ fi2?* e where
» nut:. After a hu rr,ed^pT ere 9ery ed
’on at eleven o’clock ■ WP m °ved
' old lines between ’ £ T,Vin * at our
Bethlehem at 4a m fL rusalem and
refreshments at to’m Aft ° r having the
“ difficult to keeJ aw. lL a - m -/ Ve ftnind
we were passin- Vo? ke ‘ 0n bnding
round the foot Ur* th!! [? Ug 1 Bethany,
an<l through the °, f ol,ves »
bard to keep awake t Y 1 s,rove
was to be seen b,d » tu see all that
\ slept almost the wh i\' as irn POssible.
rtval at the old line" i / ,n iir ’
1 was and slept like ■ V’ 1 ruy d °wn as
when I awoke to fin d \°* ~ntil c -30.
frozen. The cold i,// m>se, f almost
ticeable. Spent 2 vf most no-
ary here. 2tJld and 24th Pebru-
the 24 th
s«ein* to j” ent
failed tu draw a Zi M . Jerusalem, r
a shame we we™™? “?*«»• « was
opportunity. The a K,ven the
occur again. Qii L Sk 6 may »ever
started for this place 'and^ 8 a iTI, w:
Pleased at the thomSf* Y 'Y ere 9 u Ue
l A ° - so niuch more oh-,'/ f ett,in £ hack
About half-way we lS M .* country.
?*£bt. and arriv i C . ked for B'e
5 -30 P.m. on Peb r about
>cen glorious 26U| ‘ T o-day has


'A Juws /i/t //I/ y.
SOLDIER’S LETTER
In the course of a letter to his mo-
ther Mrs .1. L. Bonlhron, Ryal Bush),
Trooper David Bonthron, grandson of
Southland’s pioneer temperance re-
former, remarks: —
We are all able to keep tine and dry
as long as we arc stationary, as we
have a good bivvie up. with a little
shelter put round it. We had some gift
stuff dealt out for Christmas, which
was packed during last January, Feb-
ruary and March. It had been ac-
cumulating sum ewti e re.
1 suppose you will be getting de-
tailed accounts of this front by now.
It has been quite a good advance. This
part of the country is very fertile and
well-watered. There are very small
villages in this vicinity, mostly of Arab
| population. These people are called
I Bedouins by us. A little further on are
Jewish villages, or colonies, as they
call them, which are socialistic and co-
operative societies, and are run ac-
cordingly. There are over forty of
these Jewish colonies in Palestine, and
in them one sees several different types
of Jews. \
Before going up to Jaffa we were
halted for about two days near a
Frencli-Jewish colony. Ricbon-le-Sion.
This village also carries the name of
Ayan Kara, which is the Arabic name.
It was in these ridges, too, that we had
our biggest scrap and greatest vic-
tory* , i.e., the N.Z. Brigade).
The people of this town were glad
to see us. Here one could buy brown
bread, wine, grapes, syrup, honey and
almonds. In the centre of the town is
a pumping station, which supplies the.
place with water, and here we used to
water our horses. The inhabitants were
greatly struck with our horses, and
used to gaze at and admire/them. I
think it was (be size of tbemyjompaced
with the Turks’ scraggy little ponies
that caused the wonder. <»ur horses
were not by any means at their best at
that time, either, having had a very
rough spin and trying limes.
This town is surrounded hy vine-
yards and orange groves. It produces
wine, which is exported, wine-making
being the chief industry. The houses
are modern, of stone and plaster, with
tile roofs. photos I sent are of
>arona. which is a German colony en-
tirely, there being nothing Jewish
about it; hut the houses are of the
same European type.
The brown bread we buy is very
wholesome, and is made to rise with
some preparation from the grape.
These people have not seen sugar
since the beginning of the war, so in
place of jam they use a syrup or kind
of Jam made from the grape, which is
very sweet. They also use honey,
j The grapes are not grown on fences
las in N. 2., hut are grown in goblet
i shape, or gooseberry hush form.
There are some splendid vineyards
round the village.
The oranges are irrigated, and are
grown close together 12ft. apart),
.and the trees are kept cut back. They
appear to have great crops, but there
is little sale locally. The export
trade in oranges through Jaffa used
to be a large one. Around Jaffa we
saw many acres of oranges, which were
in very had condition: they appear to
have been totally neglected during the
last liree years.
This is a great place for wild flow-
ers and bulbs. Growth is commenc-
ing, and i have noticed lots of little
wild crocuses in bloom, and an orchid
Monk s Hood) too, while there were
a lot of little hollyhocks coining
through as well. There are a lot of
bulbs growing round here—vary large
f,nes ’ as bte as my two lists together.


CUtIL+J / fAP
Soldier’s Letter
THRILLING EXPERIENCES
Writing from Hornchurch Convales-
cent Hospital on March 7th, 1918, Pri-
vate R. Hutton-Potts gives to his
parents in answer to a request for
information) some interesting experi-
ences of the Bellevue Spur battle. The
Wyndham Herald gives the following
extracts;—
I "You were asking if I had been
through the Bellevue Spur battle. Well.
I was: and, thank God, I came through
without a scratch. . . .‘‘We put in a
deadly cold and wet two nights and
one day in a shell-hole, with oiled
sheets over our heads, until the morn-
ing of the 12th October. At » a.m. it
was pitch dark, and the rain was pour-
ing down, so we got orders to move
back 100 yards and wait till 5.25 a.m.,
when the artillery borage would open
and the attack commence. We crouch-
ed in shell-holes covered with slimy
mud and drenched to the skin: Fritz
meantime lobbing shells amongst us
sending up showers of mud and wa-
ter. At 5.25 the artillery opened out
with a roar, and we promptly started
ducking and dodging from hole to hole.
About 10 minutes after we started
there were four out of our section of
eight left, j was sticking to a chap
named Frank Williamson—a good fel-
low, too. I "went over” at Messines
with him, and a gamer fellow I have not
struck since. The four of u? were In
a shell-hole, looking for a gap in
Fritz's entanglements, round very
nearly at the lop of the spur. At last
Frank spotted a gap about a hundred
yards ahead, and we rushed it. On
(he way (he other two got smacked.
That left Frank and me. Wo lay down
together in the open beside tluj gap
and had a look around us. and saw
that our barrage had almost stopped.
There could not have been more than
a dozen of our guns firing, and they
were putting more shells amongst us
than Fritz. Dead and wounded were
lying everywhere by the score. Frank
and I were arguing the point whether
we would go on further, when an ex-
plosive bullet went right through his
head and into his valise on his back,
setting it on fire. He died instantly.
I could have howled, but there was
no time for that. I tried to unstrap
the burning valise, but could not. and
Fritz was after me. The bullets were
I plunking in all around me, and one
went through the cuff of my tunic.
That did me. I jumped into a shell-
•'oJe in front, and lay there in water
up to my reck. Filling my tin hat with
w’rter, I threw the contents over the
valise, and managed to put it out.
l lay jn the shell-hole all day, not dar-
ing to move, if ] p ar j showed my head
fritz would have made a pepper-box
of me. After dark I crawled hack to
a drier shell-hole, where 1 found two
ior three of the company. Two were
! wounded slightly, and thev told me I
had better come out with them when
things got quieter. My legs and feet
had swelled to twice their size with
lying in the water, and I was cramped
all over. Had I stayed another dav I
would have been a stretcher case. ‘ It
I took me all next morning to get to the
dressing station, crawling and stagger-
er. turns. We were soon conveyed
to Papennghe, where 1 gut a bath and
a clean change of garments, miles away
from the firing-line.”


'$JJs /UidLihhJ ' C^'
Chaplain-Capt. Burridge
WELCOME HOME.
Chaplain-Captain 11. \V. ljurridgc,
who has returned to Invercargill after
nearly three years’ service, preached
in ySt. Paul's Presbyterian Church on
Sunday last. There were large attend-
ances. especially in the evening. He
dealt largely with the great war, in
which our soldiers were going through
terrible, experiences in order to realise
their/ ideals —a world lit for decent
men and women to live in.
on Monday night Chaplain-Captain
Burridge was entertained at a social in
Victoria Hall, when the Rev. .1. Collie,
M A., presided over a numerous com/-
pany, and congratulated Mr Burridge
on Ids safe return, Mr .1. S. Baxter do-
ing the same on behalf of the congre-
gation and office-bearers.
Mr Burridge. in returning thanks,
said he was still under military orders,
and had been advised that he had been
posted to a reinforcement which was
due to leave N.Z. some time this month.
Much as he would like to stay with
them, lie felt it his duty to return to
the lighting front and the boys.
A motion was then moved to the ef-
fect that the congregation endorsed
with great regret ho Chaplain’s deter-
mination to return JLo the front, but
[ that the Presbytery strongly urge the
; military authorities to grant Mr Bur- I
I ridge an extra three months’ leave in I
| order that suitable arrangements can/
[ be made to till the vacancy caused by
his absence.
On Wednesday Chaplain-£apt. Bur-
ridge gave a most Interesting address
°n the war in the Municipal Theatre,
the building being well filled. His
Worship the Mayor Mr John Stead,
M.8.E.) presided. A charge of 1/-
and 2/- was made for admission, the
proceeds going to the Y.M.C.A. Red
Triangle fund. Mr Bufridge’s address
held the attention of his listeners right
to the close. It was a graphic recital
of actual experiences—the most thrill-
ing. perhaps, being the account of the
torpedoing of teh Marquette. On that
occasion Mr Burridge got into a half-
tilled boat, and a boat lowered from a
higher dock crashed into lt„ and many
of the occupants being killed. He es-
caped through being in the bows, and
kept afloat with the help of a piece of
wreckage for nine hours, when he was
rescued by a French destroyer. War
scenes in Egypt and France, varied with
camp and hospital life in England, and
visits to Scotland, also received atten-
tion. The outstanding impression gain-
ed by intercourse with our men was
that of their courage, invincible cheer-
fulness, and self-sacrifying in spirit.
In one case a npmher of wounded men
lay for several days before they could
| be attended to, and gangrene set in,
and necessitated the removal of various
limbs, but there was never a whimper
—if home folks witnessed such scenes,
and noted the spirit with which our
soldiers, bore themselves, grumbling at
minor hardships in a favoured coun-
try like N.Z. would cease. Personally,
lie marvelled that he had ever com-
plained. Referring to Egypt, lie stated
tliat Kitchener was so beloved there
that the people would have acclaimed
him King had he so desired.
At an intervaWn the address songs
were given by Missds Arthur, Cope-
land, Wade, and a recitation, by Mr
Haigh.
At the instance of Mr C. S. Longuet
Mr Burridge was thanked by acclama-
tion for his address.


rfLb JtujtkA-J ft '
Soldier’s Letter
Private G. B. Williams, writing to
bis father. Mr George Williams, of this
town, remarks; —
You have a good idea what happen-
ed up to the time we arrived outside
The roadstead here was crowd-
ed with vessels of all countries, but
the British Flag was flying at the masts
of more than half the boats. It was
great sport trying 1o make out from
the flags what countries the neutral
ships belonged to. The sight of land
after weeks without seeing a sight ot
land, boats, or anything else. was.
needless to say, welcome to all. This
is the port the have made, but it
was only an ordinary affair., .lust near
I could distinguish a fort or two. The
buildings were nice. The port is really
on a river, and is somewhat depressing
*on that account.
The houses at these places are very
nicely built. At some of these places the
soldiers threw apples, oranges, cigars
and cigarettes on board to us. I man-
aged to gel some cigarettes.
We called at a special coaling-place.
Everything worked by machinery. The
night makes no difference—it was as
brightly lighted as day here, and the
coaling went on all along. I was on
guard, so was up the best part of the
night. I managed to secure several
coins from one of the negroes, also
a few bananas costing 2d each. It
being the end of winter, things were
scarce and dear. But they were very
big ones, and were well worth the
money. Next morning we pulled out
to the stream, and lay there till Sun-
day afternoon, amusing ourselves the
meanwhile in trying to catch sharks
from the stern of the boat. Only a
small one came aboard, but that was
enough to let us know what they
looked like.
We eventually left in company with
another boat. All the Why from here
to in the U.S., boats of every
description could be seen, plenty oif
wind-jammers, or sailing vessels, too.
Also, one day to our great surprise, a
seaplane flew over us, and another one
could be seen a shhrt distance away.
Outside we struck a number of
guard boats at the entrance. This is
a very historical part. Outside the bay
r vesifjs of all sorts were
This iieing an important naval station,
we saw quite a lot of destroyers and
cruisers, and also one or two battle-
ships—all American.
Arrived at on Sunday, March 9.
and anchored in the stream. This port
is the embarking place for quite a lot
of different things required for the
war. Here we saw some more sea-
planes. On the Tuesday we pulled in
to the pier and started coaling once
more. Strange to say, 1 was on duty
again.. Anyway, word came that leave
was granted, so about 3 p.m. we got
ashore. Made for the bank first thing
and changed our money. The town lay
only ten minutes from the pier..
The shops here are line, most of the
buildings being three and four storeys
high. The streets were in good trim,
and they have a line trolley car sys-
tem (electric cars). The fashions in
shop windows were much like the N.Z.
ones. Fruit was dear, apples being
6d per pound and bananas 2/- per
dozen.
At night we went to an entertain-
ment given us at short notice by the
Women’s National Service League.
Good singing and music. The Maoris
gave two hakas, and we bad a cup of
tea and a cake, which was very nice.
Throughout the evening the whole
crowd of i’js Sant-’- popular songs.
*1 was one of a crowd of 200 taken
charge of by the above League, We
marched up town and boarded two
trams—fine and big they were, too.
Conspicuous were the notices calling
attention to'the Tact that negroes had
to conic in and go out the reai en-
trance, and also sit where told to by
the tram-man (that is the conductor)
The trams have whistles instead of
gongs. We were a hit surprised when
the conductor came round and asked
us for 15 cents—the fare. We thought
we were being entertained, you see!
Wc had been told that. However, as
the ride was 12 miles, it wasn’t bad.
Passed two or three small towns, and
saw all sorts and conditions of resi-
dences —aristocratic and the reverse.
A fact that struck me was that quite
a lot of the houses had no fences in
front of them. The roads through-
out were in line order. .lust as we
pot out of Hie town we came to the
overhead bridge across the railway.
What adiig yard! Saw a real whopper
of an engine. The couplings are great
on the rolling slock —buffers of a side-
grip, centre buffer, no side chains. The
bases are very high above the track.
The coal-trucks hold 50 tons, so you
can imagine the size of some of them.
When we got out of the tram we
yvere at . The first thing you see
#
is a palatial hotel of seven
storeys. I did not have time to go in-
side —some of the people were pay-
ing 20 dollars a day. Ferry steamers
run from here across the bay. You
can see complete trains on feYries go-
ing across the harbour from one ter-
minus to another; but the main things
are the forts, one of which I was in.
Big guns are here, but cannot tell you
their sizes, and yet they can be moved
round on their bases very easily.
Another ilve-cents ride and we were
at ; then 10 minutes’ walk and we
reached the National Volunteers'
Home, for veteran soldiers. A lot oi
Civil War veterans are here still, but
only the Federal men—no Confeder-
ates; also men who have seen service
since. The grounds coyer many acres,
and the buildings include a theatre,
and a double church —(this is unique;
the two churches are really, in the one
divided building, but from the outside
there is only the one entrance leading
to the portico). Pipe organs in both
churches.
We had lunch at the cafe here, where
tiie inmates may obtain any extras they
may want. We saw the Governor of
the Home, who is a General —a bright
young fellow of only 811 The dining-
rooms are great big buildings, with
kitchens at the back—everything scru-
pulously clean.
Outside is a cemetery. When the
Civil War was on a big hospital was on
the ground where the Home now is.
The* inmates who died in them were
buried here —both Fed. and Confed. —
over each grave a slab of stone, with
both Blue and Gray buried beneath.
Next we visited a school (really a
college) where negroes are taught
trades and occupations. Fine buildings
and lots of students. Acres of ground.
This is their home for four years, so
they have a thorough grounding.
A little walk and we were at Elk
Club, where some ladies gave us a
snack. A song or two and we were
away again and back to .
We sailed next morning. Arrived At
next day. Cold here. Anchored
in the stream again amongst a lot of
other shipping. Far off we could see
some of the famous sky-scrapers
standing out boldly against the sky.
We slopped here two nights and left
for on Saturday, 16th, We did
not gel ashore and were bitterly dis-
appointed. We left in company with
quite a lot of merchant boats. Of
course we were, escorted, and also had
a popgun on our own craft.
Soon after our escort increased, and
we arrived at on 28th.. That
morning early a boat had struck a mine
away out at the entrance to this port,
hut they managed to dock it. Num-
bers of Yankees came across at the
same lime as us. They have nice uni-
forms—tunics like ours, riding breech-
es and canvas gaiters. „
They have great couplings on these
railways—a hook on each waggon or
car, also a three-link chain, then at
each side of that the buffers. I don’t
like ’em. They seem to strain so
much. There were four compartments
to a car, nicely upholstered seats. The
steam-pipe is under the coupling and
the Westinghouse is above it.
It took us just about hours to
come 100 miles, so we travelled. Of
course we had to stop at a few junc-
tions. The country was very interest-
ing—hills and dales all under cultiva-
tion; but such small fields.
Soon we were at Broctou, where
we got out. Quite a lot of our boys
were out to see us, also a N.Z. band.
An hour’s march and we were here.
Coming along, who should I see but
Pat Shepherd, Charlie Duerden, George
Peters from Kennington—quite nicel
Had a chat with them. Plenty of
womenfolk out to see us, a few old
men, and young boys. This is the camp
of the N.Z. Hide Brigade Reserve De-
pot,


ll\Jy j' oJA+Wt /f^ 4^//^
A local soldier, writing to an In-
vercargill friend from Codford Gamp
on April 7th, when he had completed
a year’s active service, recounts his
voyage from N.Z. to England, and
adds; —
"We embarked from Folkestone, and
it only took hours to land on French
soil at Boulogne. We spent the night at
a camp on the outskirts of the city,
and in the morning commenced our
long march to Elaplcs, distant about 20
miles. The roads in Franco are nearly
all flagged or cobblestones, which
makes marching very hard on your
feet.
“Once you get out in the country
the intensive culture of the land strikes
you. You never see any land lying
Waste; every foot seems to he growing
some kind of crop, and growing right
up to the road without any fences. The
villages we passed through were
“smelly.”
“The roads in the country are very
picturesque, with their trees —general-
ly lime-trees —which are a feature of
the landscape in France. Every mile or
so you see a wayside shrine by the
roadside, consisting of a porch contain-
ing a crucifix, I have never seen any-
one praying at them, though you come
across them everywhere in this part of
the country.
“Etaples is said t<* have been a fav-
ourite camping ground of tlie great
Napoleon, and there arc a number of
look-out towers, generally on the edge
of a wood, which the people say were
erected by him.
“We had about a month here, and
then were sent into the lighting zone.
We were *-ent up the line, passing
through and detained at .
From there we marched to , where
1 Joined up with tfie 2nd Battalion N.Z.
H.B. We did a lot of marching from
place to place, sometimes putting up in
billets —generally a French farmhouse,
sleeping alongside the farmer’s hens,
pigs and dogs.
In the towns we passed through, ev-
ery second house had a notice up—
"(lpen to British troops.” Eslaminets
bars') are ev**ry\vh**i><*. You ask for
beer and she says “Bass.” You nod
your iiead, and you get "Bock,” which
is a French light ale something like
Hancock's. * There arc plenty of French
wines and Cognac brandy), so you can
soon get tight if you want to.
"The French paper money is rather a
humbug. The smallest denomination
is worth about 2 Ad, A-franc sd. 1 franc
lOd. though you can only get 8d for a
franc-note when you come to Eng-
land.
“We soon gnt within range of Fritz’s
guns, and often had an uncomfortable
time. However, the bombs he drops
from his planes are the worst, especi-
ally at night. We sleep in a. tent or a
dug-out, on an ojlsheet, •with our
clothes on. The only water to wash
with is what you can get In shell-
holes, which are full of frogs anil
other creeping things. The drinking
water is all chlorined before use, which
gives it a rolb-n taste, hut you will
drink anything wtien you are thirsty.
Living like this you soon get lousy,
which is taken as a matter of course.
You would wonder what they were do-
ing on a Sunday afternoon, to see hun-
dreds of men stripped naked, looking
carefully along the seams of their
shirts and pants, engrossed in the ex-
citing pastime of bee-killing.
“During September we Mad a mg
cable-laying job. It consisted of dig-
ging a six-foot trench, burying the
cable and tilling it in. The first part
we did in the day-time, but as we got
nearer the front line we had to do it
at night. After doing night fatigue we
got an issue of ruin. Later on we
shifted up to . digging gun pits,
carrying ammunition, etc. The soldier,
when he is not holding the line, is em-
ployed doing the most arduous work
of the common navvy, generally under
shell-lire. A man needs a constitution
of iron to stand it for long.
“Ypres must have been a fine city
before the war. it is the centre of a
great canal system, and has a very fine
lock. It is an important railway cen-
tre, and all the leading roads in the
district radiate through il. Its famous
cathedral, with its cloth hall, was one
of the sights of Flanders. To-day
Ypres is practically a heap of ruins,
and all that remains of the Cathedral
are a few tottering walls.
“The military traffic that passes
through the city is prodigious. Day
and night il never ceases. A guard at
every street corner regulates the traf-
fic. Motor waggons, mule trains, ar-
tillery, troops on the march, take the
road appointed them by the guard.
“Early in October we were notified
that our battalion were to “hop the
bags’’ in the advance on . and af-
terwards hold the line for a week. On
a Wednesday night we marched to
, where we arrived about mid- 1
night. We immediately dug in. and
when daylight broke, looking out of I
our trenches we could see Fritz’s pill-
boxes and village. On Thursday
we crouched in our trenches, as ho
was shelling the locality all the lime.
We were perished with cold, and had
very little to eat. At midnight we left
our trench and got down close to the
front line to wait for the signal to ad-
vance, which was to be at r»..'10 on Fri-
day morning, when our barrage was to
open.
.lust as dawn was breaking our bar-
rage opened, bursting in front of us
about 100 yards. Immediately Fritz
put up from ids front line the most
wonderful display of Hares 1 have ever
seen. The whole place was lit up with
them. We at once got up and started
the advance. Fritz seemed to have an-
ticipated us. however, as we had no
sooner got going than lie started en-
filading us witli machine-guns.
“I had not gone far when a machine-
gun bullet went clean through my right
arm near the shoulder. Just felt as if
someone had hit you a good smack on
the “funny-bone.” As my arm was
useless I sat down in a shell-hole, and
was soon joined by another fellow, who
was also wounded. We hadn’t the
slightest idea where we were. All we
could see was mud and slime, shell-
holes and bursting shells, and dead
men,
“By the look of the place 1 judged
that it had once bean a farm, as there
were hedges and trees, and what was
left of some brick buildings. We de-
cided to make for the rear, and started
through the mud, which in some places
was over our knees. Shells were burst-
ing all round us. throwing up great
black mud. i believe it was
the mud that saved us, however, for
if the ground had been dry and hard
wo would have been almost certain to
have been hit. By good luck we struck
the duckboards, which brought us out
to the road near .
“We soon found a dressing station,
which was already crowded with
wounded. After having our wounds
dressed we got a motor and were soon
going through I'iires. A five mile run
brought us to the casualty clearing sta-
tion at Poperingc. where we were in-
oculated with anti-toxin, had our pa-
pers fixed up and put on Hie |\e,j <>qss
train, which was waiting. It was some
hours before it was tilled up. All night
tong our train steamed along. At day-
light we stopped at Wimerlux, which is
7 kilos from Boulogne.
“I was sent to the 55th Field Hos-
pital, where the first thing I got was
a hot bath and parted with all my
clothing, with its lice, for ever. Four
days I spent there, when my card was
marked “-Evacuation to United King-
dom. which is known as “Blighty,"
“A motor run for twenty minutes
landed me at the docks, where we join-
ed the steamer St. Denis. A heavy gale
was blowing, but within two hours we
landed at Dover. We went right
through to Broekenhursl, where I was
a week. I was then sent to Hornchurch
for three weeks. Then I was discharg-
ed on 14 days’ furlough, to report to
Codford. I received a free railway war-
rant for Scotland, and visited Edin-
burgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen, and York,
and had a good time. I was back here
for Christmas —my first experience of
a Christmas with snow* and frost. Per-
sonally I prefer the N.Z. style of
(Christmas, in the matter of climate, at
any rate."
Soldier’s Letter
EXPERIENCES IN FRANCE.
HARDSHIPS OF TRENCH LIFE.
WOUNDED IN ARM.


The Southern Cross 22/6/1918
Notes from Codford
Camp.
( By Chaplain \V. Winton. Salvation
Army).
N Z. Command Depot,
Codford. April 23rd.
what a month this lias been! What
carnage! Uis estimated that GermanY
i ws lost 3000,000 men sima -I’
March. It will he worse it is
'"’our N-.Z. boys havo again boon into
tho i rav and have done credit to
themselves an,l their loved oner across
"* General Richards'n >¥l
Rhodes visited us the other da>. Ihe
General staled that though our boys
have been into it since 21st March, up
to Gib April we only bad a thousand
casualties. When one considers the
thousands of tons of lead that are
thrown from time to tune into the
tiring-line, it is a miracle so many men
escape. We cannot hut feel that Cod s
angels still protect his own people.
1 Germanv has again opened the eyes
of the world by using a gun carrying
so miles Its first victims were at
worship when the charge hit the
church in Paris.
The Amsterdam papers sa> inai
scores of trains are proceeding to Ger-
many via Antwerp hunted with wound-
Pd * what awful home-coming* foi
mothers, sisters and sweethearts!
Last Saturday I saw off from hen
GO of our boys for N.Z. Some were
cot eases, while others would never bo
lit for service again, and yet all were
quite happy. You should have seen
their faces, in view of what was hefon
them —N.Z.! .
The next week (and it is even’ week
now). I marched down to the station
with a big crowd of our men going
back to the front, and it was cheering
to hear them whistle and sing on the
road, allhough they realised that they
were up against it. as they had all al-
ready received or more wounds.
Brave spirits!
Our airmen have excelled them-
selves in bravery. Dne man received
the V.C., M.MM.; and a bar to the
M.M. a French medal). Many have
tired themselves out with bomb-drop-
ping, destroying hundreds of Germans,
i The submarine menace has not been
so great tliis last last month. This is
wonderful when one thinks of the hun-
dreds of vessels coming to, and going
from, English ports, only six large
vessels for this last week.
King George has won Ids way into
the hearts of the troops. He was out in
France during the last struggle, and an
amusing incident happened while he
was in the trenches. Me came across a
colonial, and the colonial, rising to his
feet, said; “Well, I’m so glad to see
you—put it there,” and shook hands
with the King. His Majesty also visited
one of our huts In this country, and
expressed his great admiration for what
the Salvation Army had done in cater-
ing for officers ami men.
Sir Douglas Haig writes about our
work: “I am glad to have - the oppor-
tunity of congratulating'the Salvation
Army on ttie service which its repre-
sentatives have rendered during the
past year to the British armies in
France. The Salvation Army workers
have shown themselves to be of the
right sort, and 1 value their presence
here as being one of the best Influences
on the mc-ral and spiritual welfare of
the troops at the bases. The inestim-
able value of these influences is rea-
lised when the morale Of the troops i>
afterwards put to the lest at the front.
The huts which the Salvation Army lias
staffed have besides been an addition to
the comfort of the soldiers ttiat has
been greatly appreciated. I shall be
glad if you will convey the tliunks of
all ranks of the British Expeditionary
Force in France to the Salvation Army
for its continued good work."


Ay JdJLo /f//
“ I STOOD IN OLD JERUSALEM.”
SOUTHLAND SOLDIER IN THE
HOLY CITY.
ITS FAMOUS PLACES.
Corporal R. R. Foster, of the Mount-
ed Ambulance, third son of Mr C. H.
Foster, O’Hara street, South Invercar-
gill, has sent, his parents an interesting
account of his visit to Jerusalem. We
make the following extracts:—
“We wore in Jerusalem for three
days, but only got a half day in the old
city, and did not get as good a look
round as 1 would have liked.
“Jerusalem is built on four hills
Mount Zion, Mount Moriah, Mount
Bezetta, and Mount Akra, it is now-
very difficult to distinguish the hills,
as the valleys have been pretty well*
tilled up with rubbish. Round the
city is an immense wall, which has
seven gates named Jaffa, David's (or
Zion), Dung, Golden, Sheep. St. Ste-
phen’s (or Ahrgin Mary’s), Herod’s (or
Damascus) gates. We entered bv the
Jaffa Gate on the west. The actual
gate has been closed up for 19 years,
AVhen Kaiser Bill came this way lie de-
cided it was too small to allow his
troops to pass through, so an opening
was cut in the wall, and the valley be-
tween Mount Zion on the right imd
Mount Bezetta on the left was tilled in,
and the road now runs through here!
The gate itself, which is of heavy iron,
was opened to let General Allenby en-
ter, after which it was locked up
again.
“As we enlered the Jaffa Gale, Just
on the right is David’s Tower or Cas-
tle, which David captured from the
Jebusites, and dwelt there—hence the
City of David, or Zion. It is a huge
castle, formerly surrounded by a great
moat 60 feet deep, hut how 'that is
practically idled in with rubbish. The
castle stands 2540 feet above sea-
level. and at one time was the high-
est building in Jerusalem, till Kaiser-
Rill, when here 19 years ago, built a
R C. church on the top of Mount Zion,
w'hich stands far above everything
«lse. ‘ ®
We next came to the Armenian
Church, built on the spot where Herod
beheaded James, the brother of John
Inside* we were shown the large pic-
ture of James being beheaded, also
Ihe stone on which he stood when exe-
cuted. This stone is kept sacred, and
every year pilgrims visiting Jerusalem
come and kiss the stone.
"We then went out through David’s
Crate, and visited the Palace of Cai-
aphas the High Priest, where Judas
bargained for the betrayal of Christ.—
(Mat. 3-6). Next we came to the up-
per room where Christ partook of sup-
per with His disciples, in the same
building is the tomb of David.
moved op to a spur of Mount Zion and
looked over into the valley of Jehos-
ophat, at the foot of which lies the
Pool of Siloam, in which the man blind
” >f ?n his berth washed and received
his sight. The village of Siloam lies
on the hill above the Pool. Higher up
is the spot known as the hill of the
Kvd Council. The valley of Jehoso-
phat is also called the valley of Ked-
ron, down which the brook Kedron
usod to flow, though it is now quite
dry.
"We moved across from Mount Zion
to Mount Moriah, and past the Dung
Gate (the name of which explains its
use). The valley between the two
mountains was at one time very deep,
and was spanned by arches, but it is
Idled up now, and only a small portion
of the arch remains. From there we
went on to the Jews’ Availing Place, a
long, narrow lane, where the Jews
come daily to recite psalms and wail
for their sins. The lower stones of
the wall are the original stones of the
Temple, and are worn quite smooth
with the continual kissing, for great
numbers of Jews visit here daily. Mil-
lions of nails are driven in between
the stones, the idea being that once a
person has his nail in the wall, no mat-
ler where he goes he has his portion
in (tie house of God.
“We next visited the Temple area, in
the centre of which i.s the Mosque of
Omar, built 1300 years ago on the
place where Abraham offered up his
son Isaac. The mosque is a magnifl-
oant building, the glazed tiles on the
outside being as fresh in colour as
when first erected. The inside is really
past description, every bit of available
space being occupied with the most
beautiful Mosaic work. In the centre
of the mosque is a huge stone, the or-
iginal stone on which the altar was
set up in the days of Solomon’s Tem-
ple. There is a Dole running down
through the stone, and the blood from
the sacrifices used to run down
f? . . I,S lolc aiui out into the val-
Jehosophat, past Siloam. W’e
' down - s ' steps Into a sort f
co e. i nner the rock, which was very
S w-n had ,0 '>« to see
b«m f. i* .° ‘ corner Mahomed is
f“ d t l' ,ave *n the haliit of pray!
m/ Tt i e Is sd ffhtly raised over
( ns spot, the Mahomedans’ belief be-
ing dial us Mahomed rose from bis
tnc-s the roof of ~.,ck lifb'j m
,o honour. The Temple area covers I
e *yres, the sputh-east corner havintr
courtw'rrt ,' Jl> J m pi,,ars t 0 ntlow of the
couttyard beutg made Hat Under the
courlyurd are supposed io be So „
non s stubtes. Wr wore not attend I
n b„( the guide told us they were I
ld,ffe enou ffh to hold 25,000 horses.
On the eastern side of the mosmic I
I I'-re is a small dome Anown as the
Dome of (he Chain, so called because
he 3 Th!"M7 R ' nS .' l ' m " ,nm ,h '’ ««-|
V J ‘ I,u -Mahomedans believe that the I
■ omo was suspended f, by
hat chain. The dome is built ov^
the spot where Christ was . I
sented in the Temple. 1 pre “ I
Gate ron in he t? W ° w * ent on t 0 »‘e Golden
Gat , m the centre of the eastern
v Gdl, so called because of its brilliant
colour, being made of brass, it faces
directly the Mount of Olives and oil i
gnms visiting Jerusalem used to wail
on the Mount until (he singers and in
strumentahsts came out when the
hole crowd would march to the Tem- I
120 Z*Tfr*°T ()f /‘egFees. Psalms I
14 V ana 1{ -‘. The gate is now elos. o
colour * ‘‘ emainS 0f the oltl golden
: so "a G , aU ’
. ";" m "><• markets were held' -«* *
“Iso called St. Stephen’s Gale he
WaS < "’ ,Ten of this
haie when he was stoned. Close hv
the Sheep Gate i. s the Pool of Bet
«ada. where the man la me for
■ears was headed by Jesus. Ver? 1,1
le remains of tl„. porc J" s
„r« -ur i
Zf • Uib a heautiful little church P , t
nf the ancient arch remains , art
ohund. hems h,7t rounS it Kr 7
3SSEr-^S(
ous church, eight different’
Jng u chapel therein, inside !l h ! !
hundreds of s , n ,ii nbl(Je theie are J t
oi small rooms, and the c
,r Placed, and down hein™ ir ,
y hollow rock is tiL , a * reat
e crosses were h J p,are wh ere (he
s ll.\ion. i m i|,e ? afte , r thfi cr,,(*i-
- self arc thnvhrfiS^K* 1 CaJvary
-■ rrnsses are said W> ‘ e K rr the
if a 1 ’ c”IS of nil«r rnw tnu A I
H °ly Sepulchre is close hr .. £ h ! I
•tis so plastered un ami t " ,u^l, t I
It is hard lo beneve h° rate ''
the solid r„rk corin' r °M
railed because the f ,Llv ' lry - 3 « I
Pou£iSe a Th? “,n s be r **S2!
Whe,? H
» Kln SS , "hor- ,he ° f I
“ : «re supposed ?o be huS
. I info the square /nr i * P , S ead tloNvn j
I 'loop and 30it Sr ,?”" 1 20rt
"Mich, and lower lull ihe" e t L' C
lure cut Th.. hrio • . uu ’ 'he tombs I
three feet I 7 7,1 ls “bout
• Circular h>
I Side to the other i nL r ? 1 from one!
««■» -«i S dS;^*®:
fiave taken years to makV T«t* ♦. ™ ust
tdaoe is cut out of thtfsoildVoek w^°*e j
UldS.phaT tho «•«<* ot
Phen was ’stoned the vl whare «•••-
I tomb, into the Garden „f r?,h Mar> ’ s
00, -a iS?’a*: , ,;‘r s l Ullw
present if looks insi m Spot-
garden. JUS * ,)ke an ordinary
I “ J'he Mount of Olivet i,. JD ,
tower of 274 stone I a I
wwoi. «:tS*; i, r'? " r
*alem, Bethlehem tnl uf Jer u- I
Ju<lea; the Doari 4.! he of I
Valley. As you pnmi a , nd Jordan I
-Mount you pass th * /i ( , (nvn rom Hie I
stood and went i,v ( ! a f e vvhere J«su.s I
Id.' place where , " “Iso j
oiPlos the Lord's ‘ l,s < lis -


tiv w 'iohjJf/1
Soldier’s Letter
THE SIMPLE LIFE.
A SOLDIER’S BIVVIE.
SPIDERS AS BIG AS A MAN'S HAND.
fi,o M r n 1 * w,ls . cn ’ Gladstone, received
the following letter from his son liar-
date MaJ 9th!- Pa,esti ™
rather is ho) anti sultry and
wc,r M . ar " »""•* Mlintr u7’ !
(Wellington 11.11.) arc now bivouacked
on the east side of the .lordan holding
inT:z° o ir Th nt anil (,oinp patn,is
Cl L ft? 1 f he rest - of the bri-
gade (C.M.R. and 0.M.R.) are snellint-
at our old lines west of Jeriolu/ nnr
u" lnd^’ P,e ' n '' nts ■ lr '' J>”" ahead or
us and the enemy quite bandy
cl and 10 b ' “"-ongly reinforc-
ntei
.. “ i« too hot, and the files are 100
S 5
• „ 7 k 80 a: > to get more breeze n
made simply by two upright stick
etrelched across the top and you ,Sve 1
a «£SrTnff-1
trnnri . •i* i ua>, and it was I
ffired T s^ora h h“4 1 -i?'i'> a ? f ™
the only attraction^of This s"„ ‘ t™“ e *
dlrecnv“ te J? S ° l " f ' fIHWn •« "'e Hv«
Scattered "SroVgh‘“’ll,““ VunV™”'
and" tew nie'’.'^^" 1 CMII bmze 'here. I
a’ «„°!1 # ««
Per whfn‘?l C ? f cocoa for ««P- I
tula) rac?d out nf B^ r t pider Cran-
ed to the shadow, wheel- I
*•. «nd h up ‘hTrli't S'
thrcclwn of this blwie. 1 caned to ISe I
\™ a T? S l to the feature to jump
I m it, but he shuddered and stenned
ceed J n fi Md - I ««« eha“and aSc?
Hy he ~ '"*'‘™der ray heel.
1.. n ! U f matches we gathered
I ‘ e® ®r two, and so were able tn
I e was , ";S°fA knowinK H waB billed.
nand
| ami surSslßgMy g weak aS Mos^o?^!
of ci hands are the same. When these
.'.turns are on. (he chief food wo have
l h ‘ ie f e “ d on 18 bully beef and biscuits
Tim latter soon make the gums na n
"> us belng^wlfaV. w lhe chte ' *»«>


tiut/ ■ Zlh/fl't ■
Notes from Codford
Camp.
(By Staff-Gaptain W. Winton, Salva-
tion Army).
May Mas been a very busy month.
On Anzao Day all the depot turned out
to a big memorial to the brave men
who toot part in the Dardanelles en-
gagements. Padre Ross and 1 offici-
ated. It was a unique gathering. The
afternoon was tine. The depot sports
were held. Colonel McKenzie being in
charge. Happy Valley was the spot
selected. (It is said the same valley
was used for the escape of King Char-
les). It was nicely laid out with
tapes, etc, 'and white lines. It is an
ideal spot. Races of all kinds, throw-
ing the hammer, tug-of-war, tilting the
bucket, etc., were held. The tilting
of the bucket caused a lot. of fun; see-
ing a bucket of water go over a man
in a wheelbarrow simply convulsed
the crowd. The ladies of the district
were invited and catered for
in afternoon teas. 1 might add
that Tommies. Australians, and New
Zealanders all take part; all are wel-
come. The depot band played during
the afternoon, and its music was much
enjoyed.
The No. 3 General Hospital also had
sports, Colonel McLean being in
charge. It did one good to see the boys
in blue wanning their respective
prizes. Sisters and nurses come in
for their share as well. The Matron,
Miss McNle, is loved by all—she is out
to do her best. She is going for a few
days’ rest; it is well earned, and I
hope it will do her good. What can I
say about the Sisters? I shall quote
: the British Medical Journal —“The
N.Z. Sisters are the linest trained Sis-
ters in the world.’’
Several boys have gone. west. Mili-
tary honours were given each. It is
a weird sound at the grave, when the
Last Post is played. All funerals start
i from our Hull, and for half an hour
one can hear the strains of “ The
Dead March in Saul.” The Hall is
packed every night for 40 to 43 min-
utes. Hymns are sung, and the volume
of sound can be heard a mile away.
At 6.45 the men are looking for me
to appear to beat time for them. We
have an excellent orchestra, under
Corporal Watson, which assists in
nearly all services.
Quito a number of our boys left for
N.Z. in the Maheno. We wish them a
safe voyage. Our two hospitals are
visited by me twice a week, each pa-
tient is spoken to, and a handkerchief
and other goods left them, so as to
cheer them up on Commissioner liod-
der’s behalf. A cheery person going
through the wards w'orks wonders.
Sergt. Sawyer and I are quite happy in
our work. It will no doubt interest
you to know how I spend a Sunday.
For example: 10 a..m., church parade,
Salvation Army Hall, 800 men; Hospital
No. 2, 10.40, 200 men. Afternoon is
devoted to interviews, and if line 1 take
hospital boys for a walk on the hill,
say 150 as a rule; 5 p.m., volunteer
service at No. 2 Hospital, 120 present;
6.15 p.m.. No. 3 General, 120 present;
7 p.rn.. in Salvation Army Hall, service
with 750 to 800 Sisters, nurses, and
men, till about 9.15 p.m. So you will
agree I have a full day.
The following officers have gone
over seas:—Lieuts. Yeo, Hewitt, Mc-
Kinnon, Harsey, and their places have
been taken by Lieuts. Davidson, Angus,
Oow, Bell, and Greig.
1 secured for the matron a nice box
of tulips—each ward receiving a just
portion. It would have done you good
to see the expressions on the boys’
faces on seeing nature at its best.
Mothers’ Day was held in England
on May 12th. I did my best to hold
up the noble standard of our brave
mothers, who gladly gave us their
boys for King and country.
General Richardson (our popular
chief) presented many medals to our
boys for bravery.




C. OF A.


>,>'})T7TT7
fw
L
WVWWWWVVWWWWW
BIN
PUCI lINOtN ON DIM.MIII
•ACM TO* COVKH WITH LIFT
NANO At INOWN.
TO
I N
Tht mitt fit I «nd workmtmhip
In thit trflclt trt of tht hiqhtit
qustity ltd trt qutrsntttd by
tht Mtttftcfurtr.
ALWAYS UtK fltlHllT
AKMOVI on INIinT
COnm tAONOINCI


A time of truth
at Armentieres
By W. H. FENWICK
A LL hell broke loose, with some 200 men
locked in deadly hand-to-hand combat.
We lost 11 killed and 36 wounded before we
qained the upper hand.
“A heavy box barrage
prevented reinforcements
reaching us, but head-
quarters runner Private
Marshall penetrated it
three times.
“On his last run he fell
into a shellhole and lost
his gumboots but con-
tinued on in the snow,
with the temperature be-
low zero, in his stockinged
feet.”
The place was Armen-
tieres, France; the date
January 22, 1917. A
Company. 36th Battalion,
A.1.F., had been singled
out for a killer attack by
a specially trained enemy
force.
It was a time of truth;
a time of blooding.
OUR artillery re-
taliated, but since
No Man’s Land
at that point was a narrow
strip it could not stop the in-
vaders-
“ They stormed into our
trenches and desperate fighting
followed, our defence confined
to grenades, revolvers, rifles
and bayonets.
“Captain Wells and his 2
i/c Captain Carmichael shared
the leadership in a fight to the
finish.”
The 36th Battalion, 9th In-
fantry Brigade, with its sister
battalions the 33rd, 34th and
35th, was new to the line and
to the war.
It emerged from Armen-
tieres a seasoned fighting unit
that was to cover itself with
glory at Messincs. Passchen-
daele, Villers-Bretonneux, Han-
sard —
That was to carry its spirit
not its colour patches into
■be storming of the Hinden-
irg Line.
TH E battalion
came into being
in late 1915
ien the N.S.W. Minister for
abiic Instruction, Mr. Ara-
irose Campbell Carmichael,
aised his “thousand” from
ountry rifle clubs and led
hem into Liverpool Camp.
Early in 1916, with com-
pany commanders Captain
Wells, Doig, Grant and Buch-
anan, they arrived at Broad-
meadow as the final unit of
the 9th Brigade, and in May
embarked on the Beltana for
England and the Third Divi-
sion.
After intensive training on
Salisbury Plains, they were
posted to the Armentieres sec-
tor under the command of
Lieutenant-colonel Simpson,
and the Great War became
reality.
It was the worst winter in
10 years, “and this, plus the
memy’s urge to give the new-
omers a taste of hell, soon
■‘educed the inexperienced Dig*
A ravv in< i elemental
ight for self-preservation.
They learnt quickly.
“Trench warfare was not
heir concept of fighting
-landing still on the firesteps,
logged in mud and slush with
many men falling to fever,
frost-bite, pneumonia and
trench feet. Over this scene
of suffering the air was full
of deadly menace, night and
day ...”
me attacK on A Company
took place on the Houplines
sector near the river Lys. The
attack failed and the Ger-
mans learnt a bitter lesson.
Soon afterwards the batta-
'ion lost Colonel Simpson. A
ledicated officer, he was tour-
ing the line with Lieutenant
McGrath when a shell lobbed
n the trench killing them
both. Lieutenant-colonel Milne
—“Jock” to his friends and
‘■Billjim’’ to the troops
hen took command.
IN the spring of
1917 the 36th..
with other units
if the brigade, was pulled out
if the line for rest and train-
ng. TTten came action of an-
other order.
On the night of June 7
more than 20 deep mines
blew a vast ridge off the
face of the earth and the
heaviest barrage of the war
to that time signalled the
opening of the Battle of Mes-
sines.
The 36th. was the “carry-
ing battalion” for the attack
and suffered heavv losses. On
June 10 it took the offensive
at La Potterie and fought
grimly through to its objec-
tive. losing nine officers and
421 men.
In September it took over
a section of the front line
round the Ypres sector. Fol-i
lowing the Battle of Brood-
seinde Heights, and with its
sister battalions, it slogged
through a sea of mud to the
Menin Road and on to
Passchendaele Ridge.
Food and ammunition had
to be carried by mules, and
it took six men to carry a
casualty out on a stretcher.
There was only one track, and
the Germans shelled it cease-
lessly.
When the remnant of the
battalion was relieved the bat-
tered troops staggered back
to a village behind Ypres, a
pitiful handful still undaunted,
still joking . . .
“ ‘Billjim’ lined them up
and called the roll. Out of
about 700 men. fewer than
200 were left —mostly signal-
lers, runners, cooks, ambu-
lance and transport men. Bill-
jim bowed his head, and the
tears ran down his hard-bitten
face.”
Another period
of rest and re-
organisation fol-
lowed in the Boulogne area—
a period of physical and men-
tal recuperation. The winter
of 1917-18 passed, the 36th
spending Christmas back at
Houplines geared for defen-
sive operations.
Then came the big German
spring offensive and the re-
treat of General Gough’s
Fifth Army. Amiens, the gate-
way to Paris, was seriously
threatened and the Austral-
ians were called into action.
The Australian Army Corps,
under the command of one
of the war’s most brilliant
strategists, General Monash,
was rushed to the Somme and
for the first time the infantry
found themselves riding in
buses —to Doullens.
On the march to the Am-
iens sector where the line was
fluid, the 36th went forward
by platoons and companies,
with connecting files at every
intersection of the road. On
the way they passed units of
the Fifth Army retreating to
new positions.
With other units of the
brigade, they made contact
with the enemy north of
Villers-Bretonneux and dug
in. Machine-gunners and rifle-
men, backed by mortars,
grenades and light artillery,
poured in a withering fire and
stopped the enemy in his
tracks.
On their immediate right
the French forces, backed and
flanked by the Americans,
had their backs to the wall.
Three times they lost posses-
sion of a small village: three
times the 9th Brigade coun-
ter-attacked and regained it.
Days passed, with artillery
and machine-guns maintaining
a constant barrage to cover
the fact that the vital sector
was being held by a thin line
without support.
Of paramount importance
was the ridge in front of
Hangard Wood, a ridge that
offered territorial advantage.
A decision was made and on
April 4 the brigade launched
its fateful attack.
THEY charged
at the double,
their bayonets
flashing. Sick of trench war-
fare, exulting in the chance
to fight in the open, they
gave it everything they had
and nothing could stop them.
An officer of the 35th. run-
ning out of ammunition, used
his steel helmet with devas-
tating effect.
The Germans broke and
ran. The Australians swept
through to their objectives
and dug in. holding the front
as one line.
The 36th lost heavily in
the attack in killed and
wounded. On April 12 they
suffered another blow when
a heavy calibre shell made a
direct hit on headquarters,
killing Colonel Milne. Adju-
tant McNce and other ranks.
Colonel White was later ap-
pointed C.O.
About this time the Ger-
mans counter-attacked with
barrages of gas shells, mixing
phosgene, mustard and Lachry-
matory. The brigade lost 50
officers and 600 other ranks
to gas alone, human chains
of blinded and agonised men
staggering back to advanced
dressing stations for first-aid.
Later the brigade was re-
organised on the basis of three
battalions, the 36th being
selected for dissolution.
If had then lost more than
half its officers, N.C.O.’s and
men Most of those who re-
mained w'ere transferred to the
33rd Battalion.
FORMED early in
1916 the 33rd
Battalion was
originally made up of men
from the New England dis-
trict.
A Company came from
Armidale and Tamworth. B
Company from Walcha, Uralla
and Barraba, C Company
from Narrabri, Moree and In-
verell and D Company from
Glen Innes, Guyra and Ten-
terfield.
Commanded by Lieutenant-
colonel Morshead, it trained
at Armidale and Rutherford
and embarked for England on
IHS Y 1 -
May 4 in H.M.A.S. Marathon.!
Its battle honours include
Messines, Passchendaele, Han-
gard. Villers-Bretonneux, Al-
crocha Wood. Bray, Road
Wood. Bony and the Hinden-
burg Line.
With other units of the 9th
Brigade it saw its first action
at Armentieres in late Novem-
ber, 1916, suffering three
casualties on the first day in
the line at Square Farm.
Several tours of duty were
completed in this and neigh-
bouring sectors, interspersed
with tours in support.
After hard training behind
the lino for the Messincs
assault the battalion marched
to Pont de Nieppe to be
equipped—covering the 53
miles in three days with not
one man dropping out.
IN the Battle of
Messines it was
placed on the
right flank and took every ob-
jective allotted it. Casualties
were heavy, but the whole line
went forward steadily and
held for four days till relieved.
In this fighting Private J.
Carroll, a West Australian
of A Company, won the bat-
talion’s first Victoria Cross
by capturing two machine-
guns and killing their crews
with the bayonet.
After Messines the battal-
ion continued to hold the line
in various areas till it was
pulled back for a rest and
transfer.
On September 28. 1917. it
marched through the city of
Ypres to take over the front
line from shattered Scots and
English battalions. The hor-
ror of Passchendaele follow-
ed, and casualties were again
heavy.
With the big German push
of 1918, the 36th made its
presence felt as never before.
AT HANGARD
Wood, by its
brilliant and
dogged work, it helped check
the German advance. In the
defence of Villers-Bretonneux.
when it was reduced by casu-
alties to about 100 rifles, it
further added to its laurels.
After reorganisation. and
with many former members
of the 36th in its ranks, the
33rd moved into the line at
Morlancourt, where it saw
action over a long period. On
August 8 came Bois d’Ac-
croche, with the tide turned
and the enemy on the run—
then Bray, Bony. Bouche-
vaines. Mont St. Quentin and
the Hindcnburg Line.
In one of these engage-
ments, though only 187 strong
on “hopping the bags.” it
took 600 prisoners and cap-
tured 101 machine-guns, 27 j
field guns and 10 trench mor- !
tars.
During the fighting Private
G. Cartwright. of C Com-
pany. won the Victoria Cross
for destroying a machine-gun i
that was holding up the ad- i
vance.
When the 33rd Battalion
sailed for Fiance it had a
strength of 34 officers and
994 men. In nearly two vears
of action it lost 24 officers
and 364 men. while 87. offi-
cers and 2090 men were
wounded. Two officers and
25 men were taken prisoner. !
(The 9th Brigade’s anniver-
sary commemoration celebra-
tions will be held in New-
castle next Saturday. A laying
up of colours ceremony will
be held at 10.30 a.m., fol-
lowed by a march past at
City Hall at 12.10 p.m.)


THE FIRST ARMISTICE.
Fraternising on Gallipoli.
(By LiT.-COL. W HYMAN.)
About May 15, 1915, the Turks sent over
a message to the Australians on Gallipoli that
they were going to drive them Into the sea.
and in the early hours of the morning of the
19th, they endeavoured to carry out their
threat by a general attack in mass forma-
tion.
The 77th Regiment of Turks were on our
right, and on our left was the sth Turkish
Division: In ‘he centra were the 2nd and 16th
divisions of the enemy. In all, it was es-
timated there were about 200,000 Tu*' 1 ng
the Anzacs.
The Anzac Corps consisted of Australian
New Zealand, and Indian troops, of about
19,000 men. The front line, which ran
round the crest of the cllfis, can be best
understood by being described as moon-shaped,
with Its ends or flanks, resting on the sea.
The Turkish trenches were from 200 yards
to only a few ards beyond, and as the enemy
came forward the Australians stood on the
parapets and dred point blank Into the Tur-
kish masses, as they bravely advanced crying
“Allah, Allah!” In twenty-four hours the
battle was over, and the Turks had suffered,
so It was estimated, 10,000 casualties, and
had left many thousands of dead between the
two lines. Lieutenant Jacka. of the I4th
Battalion, the first Australian t earn a V.C.,
, won it that day.
On May 20 an informal armistice was
asked for by the Turks, for the purpose of
burying the dead; and during this period a
written message from Anzac headquarters was
passed to the enemy, in which it said that
if an armistice was desired. It must be for-
mally arranged through envoy to be sent
along the beach om Gaba Tepe, on the
right. On the 21st a rumour quickly spread
through the trenches that the Turks wished
to surrender. This, of course, proved to be
untrue; but it turned out that a party of
Turks were approaching the Australian right
flank, in which were entrenched the 3rd Aus-
tralian Infantry Brigade, under Brigadier-
General E G. Sinclair Maclagan, supported
by units of the 2nd Light Horse Brigade, this
being under General Ryrle. Treachery was
suspected, although it was seen that a Turkish
officer, mounted on a white horse and waving
a white flag, seemed determined to approach
our lines, for, notwithstanding our tire, the
party continued to advance. Orders to cease
fire were given and the Turks were halted
Word was sent to General Birdwood, with the
result that Major Blarney (now Brigadier-
General Blarney) and Major Glasfurd (later
a Brigadier-General, and killed in Prance
while commanding the 12th Infantry Brigade)
went out to meet the party. They blind-
folded the Turkish officer, and ed him down
towards the beach. The result was an ex-
traordinary sight, because everyone in the
trenches, realising something unusual was
happening, came rushing down the Anzac
slopes to the beach till a passageway was
formed, through which the Turkish officer,
led by Majors Blamev and Glasfurd passed
AN ARMY OF “NAVVIES.”
It was noticed the Turk was a staff officer
and he was specially well groomed and turned'
out ro’- the occasion; no doubt this was done
to 'Pecially impress « eryone, because the
Anzacs actually looked a ragged crew. It
has been said that if anyone could have seen
the Australian Army at Anzac. they would
have wondered where all the soldiers were
and asked who were all the navvies, because
that is exactly what everyone looked like.
One of the regimental cooks on the right
flank, hearing that a Turkish officer was
coming Into the lines, could not stand the
strain and rushed at the Turkish officer with
an axe; but. of course, he was quickly
disarmed. y
The Turkish officer spent some time with
General Birdwood arranging the terms of the
armistice, and finally it was settled that It
should begin at 730 a m on thi 24rh of May
and end at 4,30 p.m the same day Red
Cross flags were nlaced in front of the 3000
yards of Anzac front lines; and the Turks
carried out a similar plan, but they used red
crescent flags
It was a beautiful day and exactly at 730
a m thf Australians and the Turks began the
work of burying the dead between the lines
The Australians had received orders not to ■
go hoyond the Red Cross flags and the Turks
had received similar Instructions as regards
their flags but It was soon anparent that
neither side Intended to strictly observe the
arrangements, because each side fraternised
at once exchanging greetings and cigarettes
and other souvenirs The Anzac stretcher-
bearers. supervised by senior medical officers
undertook the work of burvlne the dead All
the rest of the A.I.P had been expressly for-
bidden to show their heads above the para-
pet of the trenches as this would disclose
our position to the Turks. Owing to the I
short distance between the front trenches.
It was Impossible to see exactly how each line'
ran The Turks, not realising this very
soon after the armistice commenced, sat In
hundreds along their parapets, and disclosed
their exact situation It was hard to be’Jeve
that so many thousands of men were opposed
to us. whom we had not seen till that verv
moment
During the operations a German threatened
to hit a Turk with a soade for not working
hard enough, and an Australian soldier, seeing
this, immediately rushed up to hit the Ger-
man who then slunk away
A REPELLENT DUTY.
Many of our dead had fallen at the landing
on the 25th April, and had been lying In the
wheat fields In no man’s land In the meantime
The identity of many missing men was now
cleared up for the first time. The task of
both armies was a most difficult and arduous
one, and full of the horrors of war. The
wheat in the fields was lust coming to the
ear. and interspersed with the wheat were red
popples.
The tas) of burying the Australian dead
Tu d i )ra , ctlcally ceased by 3.30 p.m., although
Were ®tlll heavily engaged at work
At 4.30 p m the Australians w-ere anxious to
see what would happen. At the precise hour
the Anzacs began to pull down the Red Cross
flags, bu‘ it w’as noticed that the Turks
seemed to pull theirs down with reluctance
and hesitation. The battle was then renewed
with all Its Intensity, and firing never again
ceased at Anzac. until the evacuation on the
19th and 20th of December, 1915—seven
months afterwards.
It was a memorable day to those who had
the privilege of taking part in it. and one
that should never be forgotten in honouring
the memories of those of our glorious dead
who gave up their lives for AusLalla and the
Empire ir that historic theatre of war


y<f . dc//// 9.
CLEMENCEAU.
A 1918 War Incident.
VISIT TO THE AUSTRALIAN CORPS.
(BY LT.-COL A W HYMAN.)
The Battle o! Hamel on July 4. 1918. had
oeen fought and won under the direct com-
mand of General Sir John Monash, of the
Australian Corps, which then formed part
of the 4th British Army, whose commander
was Lord Rawllnson
On the second day after the battle, while
the troops of the 4th Australian Division were
holding the line, word quickly went round the
division that M. Clemenceau. then Prime
Minister of France, was to pay us a visit.
The headquarters of the division were estab-
lished at the time In dugouts In a quarry and
in a wood close by, on the outskirts of a small
village named Bulssy les Dours. about 10 miles
east of Amiens, on the Somme, for we had
been constantly under shell Are during the
battle, and we had been heavily gassed.
In the afternoon a few of the Australian
troops, who were In the Immediate locality
waited in the quarry to receive this “Great
Old Man" of Prance, who arrived with a
small staff of French officers and his Minister
for War.
M. Clemenceau, who was dressed In an
old tweed suit and felt hat, was received by
Lord Rawlinson, Generals Monash and
MacLagen A few officers and men of the 4th
Brigade were specially withdrawn from the
line to be Introduced to M. Clemenceau. and
they came on the scene straight from the
trenches In fighting kit and covered In mud.
A small circle of officers and men formed
round M. Clemenceau, who took off his hat
and addressed us In English, but In the way
that only a great man. such as he undoubtedly
was, could do.
His sentences were broken, but were sharp
and incisive, and most Inspiring. He asked
to be excused for his bad English, but said
how much he wanted to thank all for their
success in the battle and for coming all those
thousands of miles across the seas to fight for
La Belle France; that France would never for-
get their great deeds and what she owed to
Australia.
The whole Incident did not last more than
half an hour. M. Clemenceau had come
straight up from Paris, which was about 70
miles away, for the express purpose of the
visit.
One of our battalion bands was drawn up
near the road, and as M. Clemenceau broke
through the circle to return to his car the
band struck up the “Marseillaise." Every-
one stood to attention, and after the last
note of the French anthem had died away
M. Clemenceau rushed into the middle of the
band and embraced the bandmaster, as only a
Frenchman could. Then waving his hand to
us all, he stepped into his car and was gone.
THE SPEECH.
The address given by M. Clemenceau re-
ferred to by Colonel Hyman Is recorded In
Mr. F. M. Cutlack’s book, “The Australians:
Their Final Campaign, 1918."
“I am glad to be able to speak at least
this small amount of English," said M.
Clemenceau, "because it enables me to tell
you what all French people think of you.
They expected a good deal of you, because
they have heard what you have accomplished
in the development of your own country.
“I should not like to say that they are
surprised that you have fulfilled their ex-
pectations. By that high standard they
judge you and admire you that you have
reached it. We have all been fighting the
same battle of freedom in these old battle
grounds. You have all heard the names of
them in history. But it is a great wonder,
too, in history that you should be here fight-
ing in the old battlefields, which you never
thought, perhaps, to see. The work of our
fathers which we wanted to hand down un-
harmed to our children the Germans tried
to take from us. They tried to rob us of
all that is dearest in modern human society
But men were the same in Australia, England,
Prance, Italy, and all countries proud of
being the home of free people.
“That is what made you come; that Is
what made us greet you when you came. We
knew you would fight a real fight, but we did
not know that from the very beginning you
would astonish the whole Continent with
your valour. 1 have come here for the simple
purpose of seeing the Australians and tell-
ing them this. I shall go back to-morrow
and say to my countrymen:—T have seen the
Australians: I have looked Into their faces.
I know that they, men who have fought great
battles in the cause of freedom, will fight
alongside us till the freedom for W'hlch we
are all fighting is guaranteed for us and our
children.’ ”


CLEMENCEAU AFTER THE BATTLE OF HAMEL.
The news of the Australian roMfee Supreme w™ ™ E BATTLE OF HAMEL.
Commonwealth official, historian " M ° naSh * Captai " C - E - W. Bean,


/^/f//f//’
MATUNGA’S END).
S.M.H 14.3.1918
GRAPHIC STORY OF
CAPTURE.
SINKING THE WAIRUNA.
WOLF'S CAREER.
Mrs Mo,*!.- LONDON’, March 12.
Matunga whoF 6tf ' ward<?ss on the steamer
Denmark L, Srrived ,n London *ron
Australian h p gIVCn a represe utatlve of the
- a - ab “‘ b at«;
aCke ° Zie says: —We left Sydney 01
Guinea.' We^were"a^outT/ ° CrmaD Nc *
on August 6 .
Matunga’s th&t She had picked up the
ST 8 IrcJess on the nrevioucj nioVif
ZTZt: r *~‘°* ket i‘ e wls“-
ordinary bjy t Th 6 W ° lf lo ° ked " ke an
•bat ,Z wa g s armed. raniP N ° m °*
takinn She . had been fDform ed wo were
needed c t C ° aL Tbe Wol < desperately
bvo days' ’“ d aWa “ cd us ln tbe (or
a 'zzt:
Me whether we were armed. When the
oCama c,oßer sbe hoisted the German en-
to stop Th a pM r ', maSt ’ aDd signall cd to „
- .gnai. rtr rwsrri x
1
bom hi cbar gc of Lieutenant Rose with a
bombing offler immediately lollowed. A ,“
and carried Wllh P tsto,s and bayonets,
Presenipa 3 . arge nu mber of bombs. They
Ing sight aD mposing ’ if somewhat terrify-
tunga’s nffln l " teDant R ° se greeted the Ma-
tungas officers courteously.
6poke g ood English. They
their ow n wire! ’ papers and manifests, put
Matunga’s t man ,D charge of the
boats fromXwoT. f ° r
tonga’s eanfVit They ordered the Ma-
offleers, eowfera and “ °® cers ’ m,J itary
Messrs ~ hre ® male Chilians-
•b. Wolf n’ £ ° reen -, aoa Noble—aboard
"an, Maiorlnd d S,ra «-
others on the ' d ’ the steward s, and
notch New ere Wb thr " aat'ol 'or
charged the coal 0,6 Germa ns dis-
coal and all the nroviT° * shlpped the
the stewards sailor*! 13 &nd trans f er red
The reCs th- a ° thers ab ° ard tb *
miles on August 27 ° n proceeded seaward 10
sunk. The Germans Matunga was
•a methodical" th” Sf? ° Ut ‘ he B '“ k ‘" s
Thev loek.j , iae capture.
appliances to p?™enrd r . e n “' > ' r '‘ d tbe deck
wreckage, lowered ti gers from floating
b J the Rides „( the .J* bb “ b » "> the water
20 minutes later. The b ° mbs exp loded
tied down and dic, n n h M^tunga gradually set -
™ «ew o," d he d^ r ~ >" ** an hour
ew and Passengers.
sengeiT ever weiT* 'j * r ° uM No Pas-
v essel as wo did. th ° strandin e of a
recovered <Lhat She has ful,y
d on vlfTheX ‘ ,IUeBS - aiTlVed ia
THE WAIRUNA.
AValruna% R c 7eV n f Dono , Van ’ members of the
I The Wairuna ’ h aBO roached London.
where the raider Captured off tho Kerrnadecs,
A German b«5 w« M | ,** reflttlng -
One of th d Paying aboard the Wolf
ateamor. aT“ “l rtt6d the nppr ° acb lb<(
the Wairuna aCh bandsman caught sight of
I'be bl* dru ram r r Ta P s P w t Pl t a h lng, , U '’ t " °”' y
part. The « 1 1 ft, tnumplng out hia
am, dropp'dT'*” 0 ° Ver the "'alruna.
At th D P d Paper ’ ordering her to ston
bar ho£“ I'"' , the W °“ Sre ' i * -"-t across
took posses,*/' W ' Pt ab ° ard and
Wairuna for is‘ d * ,d * rS worked a * the
3f coal provision and removed 12 °0 tons
ha Wolf « ’ and 42 sheep - At this time
er or L7 S “ Starvation in the mat!
tr °f food and coal.
I,
e WAITING FOf l THE NIAGARA.
: tbe Wa,ru "*’“ «*
1 r to d°r tab "- w >“"
1 Sun ?“ ‘ b « b »w“ ?"S.
afterwards laid m, Wa3 BUDk ’ The raider
between the' Thre. “ C °° k St ' a,t ’ and aISO
The Wolf nearly way^tnTV*®
occasions, 1 Niagara on two
warned the Wolf of the*^ s^ 3 fr ° m cru,sers
Sir Thnn a r ° f tb Eminence of danger
co s :;^r n rr ) M r^' e d »•*
Donovan v/ith pr , ov,ded Mr - Rees and Mr.
them. P P Wants * and entertained
; ji atu.\ga passengers. s
)0 —-
Lo„r. MWUh'd 40 .„ th » ? b |f from
b, stating, on the y es terday 3 “Herald"
a Mrs. Mackenzie tha^vr 7 ° f tbe Bt ewardess,
a and M’Enally thp th cilii^ eSSrS ' Green > Noble.
I Matunga. were aboard ILr passcn gers of the
Burns. Philp, and On th T e f^ gotz Mtndi . Messrs.
’ that, this is evidenti,,’’ stated yesterday
'I of the steamer Whit ta * e ln the Dan,e
• meant was that these BtewardesB Probably
• the only civilian na tbree gentle “en were
Matunga “ passeD ecrs aboard the
Co° ?«"•. WHP. and
London office yesterday IPf ’® Ba s e fr °m their
Mackenzie is Jow ,n a(lv,sln S that Mrs.
remainder of the crew and that th «
Matunga were taken to OeJmanTTls ? h f the
fore clear that „ , ra "oy. it Js there-
aboard the Igotr Mendl were “colmS o? eople
Sr"” 10 ' *"• "«* SSmW^SE


IN THE INDIAN OCEAN.
The subsequent course taken by the Wolf
Is only surmise, but I presume she went to
the Indian Ocean. It is known we were once
off Colombo, again off Singapore, and later
near Borneo. We were accommodated com-
fortably until other crews were taken in on
the Wolf. The Germans took the cabin fittings
from the Matunga and fitted up berths for
three military captains. Colonel Strangmau,
Major and Mrs. Flood, and myself, on the
promenade deck.
There was some resentment over the Ma-
tunga s captain, with the officers of other ships,
being placed among sailors and soldiers on the
after-deck. The food was generally fairly
good, well cooked, and served, but it was
monotonous with over-much tinned stuff. The
German orderlies were just civil.
An exciting adventure occurred at Christmas
Island. Some of the Matunga’s seamen,
while engaged on a fishing excursion, made a
dash for liberty. As a punishment
the remainder were only allowed on
deck an hour a day. This was a
terrible hardship in tropical weather.
The nights seemed Interminable. The
ship had no lights, and little liberty was al-
lowed. There was an old piano, but only-
occupants of the promenade deck were allow-
ed to use it during specified hours.
The Germans sowed mines at night time. We
heard the nightly rattle of the soundings’ 1
line. Then the mines were carefully lower-
ed. The capture of the Hitachi Maru, 640
miles from Colombo on September 26, de-
lighted the Germans. The seaplane had been
making daily excursions, and returned an-
nouncing the locality of the Hitachi Maru,
whereupon the Wolf immediately speeded up
and overhauled her. The Wolf never sent
out wireless messages, even to the Matunga
or other following ships, but an operator
was wdßklng night and day hoping to pick up
messages. In this way they learned that
the Hitachi Maru was near by, and sent out
the seaplane to confirm their belief. The
seaplane noticed the Hitachi Maru’s crew
preparing their gun and dropped a bomb,
whereupon the Wolf fired several shots. There
were sixteen casualties.
The Hitachi Maru was regarded a great
prize with her cargo of silk, copper, rubber,
and food, being valued at over a million. It
was decided they must get her to Germany.
Our captors transferred us to the Hitachi
Maru. It was stated w« were now bound to
a neutral port where we would be landed.
The Wolf went off and left us, but in a week
returned, and on November 7 it was resolved
to sink the Hitachi Maru. We then reboarded
the Wolf. We met the Igotz Mendi laden with
coal on the 10th, and went in close to the
Nazareth Bank, where the Igotz Mendi trans-
ferred her coal to the Wolf’s bunkers. The
Wolf was absent some days. She returned
after sinking some American and French ships.
The Wolf merely took the provisions.
EXCITING ADVENTURES.
Wo were now making towards- the Trini-
dad Islands, when the Wolf picked up a
wireless, stating that a Chilian warship had
arrived there, and we went off in an opposite
direction. The Wolf now needed more coal,
but the seas made its transference from the*
Igotz Mendi most difficult. They attempted
to fill the bunkers, but both vessels were
badly damaged. The Igotz Mendi shook from
end to end like a leaf. I thought her last
hour had come, but the Wolf finally abandoned
the attempt, which was carried out success- i
fully later.
There was great enthusiasm among the
crew when It was announced the next move;
would be for Deutchland. Then a 4-masted'
Norwegian, in ballast, came in view. The
Wolf at first appeared willing to let her go
on. She changed her mind, overtook and
sank her, after taking in the crew. There
was not the slightest reason why she should
sink the ship, until it was feared the crew
would give information that it was suplclous
two vessels in mid-Atlantic should be travell-
ing together like the Wolf and Igotz Mendi.
The greatest activity prevailed on the Wolf
when two armed ships, apparently American
transports, suddenly hove in sight out of a !
haze. They looked like men-o’-war. The |
fact that they passed on appeared to surprise!
the crew, who rushed about, expecting aj
signal to stop. The Igotz Mendi twice at-|
tempted the Iceland route, but the ice blocked 1
the way. There was one frightful stormy i
day on January 27. It was the German Em-
peror’s birthday, but there were no signs of
special celebrations, except a faint cheer from
the cabin, where the captain drank the Em-
peror’s health.
The storm raged all day and the ship
groaned dreadfully. It was uncomfortable In
ail parts of the ship, which was overcrowded
owing to recent captures. Ido not know how
the Igotz Mendi weathered the storm, for she
was a dreadful roller. I fe’l ill three weeks
before she stranded and cannot tell what bap-:
pened, but I understand we slipped down the'
coast of Norway without meeting a British,


fj . '/ ‘y/^5-
NAVAL SLOOPS
MAY BE BROKEN UP.
A/raTio 6 Aus i rallan naval sloops Marguerite
the W ’hrili < Geranium ’ whlchare now lying
at the breaking-up wharf at Cockatoo Dock
tended for river and harbour defence
capable ordeJeJop“ e to 2Mo d h? laC The‘’M aild
July Thtw^T 5 from MeJ bourne early j n
of°f warVe" fScte?^ 8 ,- and vltal
fore the veieb a™'be-
‘to compliance with international agreement/ 8 ’ I


; iLI- lxMUjA.j / f/c'/t 9^
naval sloops to be broken up at cockatoo dock
F '° m J ' f,: HMA S - H.M.A.S~M.llow77„d HM S
berth at the Naval dockyatd y e.te r da X m ' along “ ide th « breaJcing-up


tkuM' lj 7/fy
ANZAC TO-DAY.
Hallowed Ground Revisited.
(BY STANTON HOPE.)
[Lieutenant W. E. Stanton Hope. R.N.V.R., served
for six months in the trenches of Helles with the
Royal Naval Division, and was among the last to
leave on the final night of the evacuation. January
8, 1916. He Is the author of several books, Includ-
ing ‘ Richer Dust,” which the Press hailed as an
outstanding novel of the Gallipoli campaign. At
present he Is engaged in preparing an illustrated
book on this year's Gallipoli pilgrimage, and this
will be published in September.]
A few weeks ago I stood on the ridge at
Lone Pine, south-east of Anzac Cove, in com-
pany with an Australian who had Journeyed
from Brisbane to England and from England
to Gallipoli, to stand there on the “sacred
soil.’’ My companion was Captain H.
Wetherell, of the sth Light Horse, and I—who
had only visited Anzac and Suvla Bay in 1915
on a busman’s holiday from Helles—could
imagine the effect on him of a scented country- i
side where the birds sang, where flowers blazed i
In colourful splendour among the high scrub,
and the salty tang of wind from the Aegean
Sea swept healthily over the nullahs and hills.
The headlands and bays of the tragic Penin-
sula remain the same: the hills retain their
contours. Gaba Tepe, Chocolate Hill. Baby 700,
Chunuk Bair, and many other once familiar
spots have altered little, save where the white
or grey stone of memorials pierce the blue
skyline.
Three days on the Gallipoli Peninsula
afforded little more than glimpses of the war- !
fronts. On this, the pilgrimage organised by!
the Royal Naval Division, it was not possible
to stay longer, for the Canadian Pacific liner,
Duchess of Richmond, was to take us farther
afield to Constantinople (now Istanbul), the
objective of the Dardanelles campaign.
It was a privilege I esteemed to visit Anzac
In company with an Australian. Never have
I forgotten the friends made in Sydney in
the year before the war, or the friends
made in Egypt and Gallipoli in the war days.
Many Australians will remember the Drake
Battalion of the R.N.D. at Helles. and the
affectionate—though unprintable—nickname I
they applied to us. The Drakes were ever !
proud of that soldierly name tagged to them
by the men who also coined “Anzac’’ and set j
upon it the stamp of immortal fame.
On this Gallipoli visit, our ship lay un-
mo: ?sted and serene in Khelia Bay on the |
Dardanelles side. Our transport across to:
Anzac consisted of a collection of cars and
motor trucks of doubtful age and parentage,
whose appearance would have caused derisive
laughter in the outback of Queensland. Some
had come 400 kilos through Asia Minor before
being ferried across from Chanak to Maidos,
for. in the ordinary way, motor transport is
practically non-existent at the southern end
of the Peninsula.
The road from Khelia Bav across to Anzac
was rough, and rougher still along the ridges
from Shell Green to Chunuk Bair. The luck
was in, though; there had been no rain for a |
fortnight. When it rains, the few Gallipoli
roads become quagmires impassable to motor
traffic.
WAR-SCARRED SOIL.
Scrub has overgrown the hills and nullahs,
and among the scrub blossom colourful patches
of wild flowers. Debris litters the site of the
old trenches at Lone Pine, Johnston’s Jolly,
Quinn’s Post, and Walker’s Ridge—shell frag-
ments. barbed wire, iron rations, scraps of
equipment, and. most grisly reminder, the
bones of many who fought and endured on
those serried slopes nineteen years ago.
We visited the memorials. Wreaths were
placed at Lone Pine, among them one by Cap-
tain Wetherell "from comrades of the A. and
N.Z.A.C.” A Turkish delegation, led by the
Governor of Chanak. added their tribute both
at Lone Pine and the New Zealand memorial
on Chunuk Bair.
We met Tasman Millington, the Australian
who laid out the cemeteries on behalf of the
Imperial War Graves Commission, and who
remains in charge of the work. The simple
oblong stones which mark the graves of the
known dead, are set among the beauty of
iris, stock, and rosemary, the flower of re-
membrance. The passing years have given
height and girth to cypress and other trees,
which pattern the grass with their shadows.
But these cemeteries reflect only too vividly
the unique and tragic nature of the Gallipoli
campaign. At Aniac, Suvla Bay, and Helles
this tragedy is revealed poignantly—at one
cemetery 2500 names of the fallen are re-
corded, and there are only 300 known graves:
at another, 500 names are cut in the white
stones, with only 5 known graves. Down in
Shrapnel Valley we saw a settlement of Rus-
sians. who work under Tasman Millington.
Among them are former artists, writers, and
singers, including a once well-known tenor of
the Petrograd Opera. Often, when work at
the cemeteries is done, the melody of an alien
song mounts from the valley to the Anzac
ridges, where only the battalions of the fallen
keep the former battle-line.
Men and women, cruise-members of the
ship who had never known Gallipoli in 1915,
saw a land unknown in many respects to the
veterans themselves. But all recognised to
a greater or lesser degree the incredible fatigue
and torment to which the youthful troops
from the Commonwealth and the Dominion of
New Zealand were subjected in a country
Ideally fortified by Nature to the advantage of
a defending force. They recognised, too, some-
thing of the youthful strength and heroism
which alone had made possible the achieve-
ment of gaining and holding those heights
overlooking the blue Aegean.
A PAINTED NAME!
The rusted wrecks of K. lighters, with sand
silted on them, still lie on some of the beaches.
But the old dug-outs in the cliffs have dis-
appeared, and. lest anyone should not recog-
nise the place, Anzac Cove is marked by a
painted name on a signboard!
Back of Anzac and Suvla Bay, Turkish
peasants grow figs, olives, and maize. Tortoises
creep through the undergrowth, lizards sun
themselves, and wild boars have bred so fast
since the war days that they have become
the new Gallipoli pest.
But the present-day troubles of the Turks
who have drifted back to peaceful pursuits
Interested us less than the view of the sea and
beaches from their former front-line positions.
The difficulties of the country unfold them-
selves in a new light. One wonders if the
entire plan of Invasion were not a mistake.
But no doubt remains that the achievement
was a miracle—a miracle of youthful strength
and resolution.


]<\_B_xaJ c*u<A;V. \TVN uc~~c\ 1 A » N\tro . ~2.?> .
Labour cleavage and
ballot enigma Conscription (5)
TWO DAYS before the
first referendum on con-
scription was held in
October, 1916, the
Labour Call in Mel-
bourne reported that the
matter had been debated
by every Labour organ-
isation in Australia.
“Every State has con-
sidered the question in
conference,” said the
paper, “and throughout
the continent almost
unanimous opposition
has been declared to it.”
The grounds for op-
position in Labour
circles were diverse- You
might be thoroughly in
favour of the war effort
and of reinforcing the
A.IF., but convinced that
conscription was not a
military necessity and sus-
picious of Hughes’s mo-
tives.
Or you might regard
the demand for conscrip-
tion as inspired by capi-
talists who wanted to
divide the workers; if you
thought that the real
struggle was the one be-
tween classes, then the
war was at best a dis-
traction and at worst part
of a capitalist conspiracy.
‘Lottery’
The executive of the La-
bour Party in N.S.W. spoke
of “the familiar wartime
masquerade of reaction
in the bright clothes
of patriotism"; and one
Victorian Labour man
who had grave misgivings
about the war anticipated
the style of Mr. Arthur Cal-
well’s resistance to the Na-
tional Service Act ot 1964
when he called conscription
a “Lottery of Death.”
To the small, zealous
minority among social rad-
icals who belonged to the
International Workers of the
World, as to the Bolsheviks
who were about to seize
power in Russia, the only
loyalty to be considered was
loyalty to the proletariat;
and the war was simply an
opportunity for bring-
ing the revolution closer.
For such men, opposition to
conscription fell into place
alongside forgery and arson
and perhaps murder as
means to this end.
In the minds of many La-
bour men, the solidarity of
class was at odds with loy-
alty to the Empire. There
was a conflict between what
might be called the idea of
Eureka, where men fought
against their masters, and
the idea of Anzac, where
men fought for nation and
Empire against an obscure
foreign enemy.
At the time and later, It
was sometimes said that the
conscription issue was merely
the occasion for a split within
the Labour- movement, and
that the real cause was ten-
sion between politicians and
men in control of the indus-
trial wing. Certainly there
were fierce struggles between
politicians and industrial men
in 1915 and 1916, especially
in N.S.W., but the factions
might not have become irre-
concilable if Hughes had not
decided for conscription.
In W.A. and S.A., tension
between union leaders and
Labour politicians turned into
open warfare only when con-
scription became the issue
Labour in the West could have
survived the referendum of
1916 without permanent divi-
sion if only the party had noi
split in the cast and in the
Federal Parliament. In Ade-
laide the industrial Left Wing
did not feel strong enough to
force a showdown with the
leading Labour politicians
who were conscriptionists
till after polling day in 1916
Try as they might, Labour
leaders in the less populous
States could not avoid the
split forced on them by the
combatants in the East.
Voting
It is clear from electoral re-
turns that most people who
had voted for Labour in 1914
voted "No” in 1916. But
some Labour supporters voted
“Yes”; and many people voted
“No” who never voted Labour
Hundreds of thousands of
people who put themselves
at the census of 1911
as |V
ardent and almost unanimous
advice of Protestant ministers,
and voted “No.”
Such a gulf between the
minister and nominal laity is
a reminder that the word
“Protestant” can be mislead-
ing. Of those people who
described themselves as Pro-
testants, fewer than half were
regular visitors to public wor-
ship: and for most purposes it
seems better to think of these
nominal adherents as non-
Catholics than as Protestants.
When they voted, their decision
was not affected by sermons
in which the Hun was identi-
fied with the Devil.
Why did they and so many
other people vote "No?" We
only guess. Secret voting is
good for democracy but bad
for history.
Blamed
Some conscriptionists blam-
ed women for the result; hut
nobody knew how women
voted, and nobody ever will
know. Nor is it likely that we
will ever have precise evidence
about how Catholics, or mem-
bers of any other denomina-
tion, voted. More than one ob-
server has suggested that th:
"No” vote was helped greatly
by farmers who feared that, i;
conscription came in, they
would be short of labour tot
harvesting In some places this
appears to have been true, but
in others not; farming elector
ates in N.S.W. tended to
vote “No” but in W.A. they
tended to vote "Yes." Simi-
larly coalminers in N.S.W. ap-
pear to have been much less
favourable towards conscrip-
tion than coalminers in the
West. Tht overall discrepancy
between W.A. and the rest of
the nation is striking: twice
Australia as a whole voted
“No,” but twice W.A. voted
"Yes” by a majority of two
to one. A scholar in Perth
has pointed out that W.A. had
a far higher proportion than
any othet State of people who
had been born in England,
and he suggests that the sort
of imperial sentiment which
would incline people to favour
conscription would be livelier
in English-born voters than m
others.
It may be that historians
and political scientists can tor-
ture out of the electoral re-
turns and other documents
more than they have revealed
so far; but, unfortunately, somj
traditional assertions about
why the voters rejected con-
scription could be tested only
if ballot papers had been
signed before they went into
the box and burgled later.
Some interpreters of the
majority for “No” in 1916
have overlooked how very
slender it was only 72,000
in a poll of 2,250,000. If
some 36,000 people had voted
"Yes” instead of “No,” the
A.I.F. would have been rein-
forced by conscripts. Lack-
ing Gallup Polls, participants
in the controversy had no
idea how evenly the nation was
divided. Later, some of the
losers looked back ruefully
and wondered whether the ac-
tual conduct of the campaign
might have antagonised
enough voters to have caused
the defeat.
If only Hughes had not as-
saulted Mannix so venomously
• • ■ “At one time,” declared
W. A. Holman, the conscrip-
tionist Premier of N.S.W., “it
looked as if the whole organi-
sation of the campaign was
very much less concerned with
with that of a turbuteht Cath-
olic prelate. This was a mis-
take.
Censor
“If only Hughes had not
manipulated the censorship
so blatantly for his own poli-
tical purposes ...” Sir Ern-
est Scott concluded that
Hughes tended “to make en-
emies of some who might have
supported a less uncompro-
misingly aggressive leader
. . . Mr. Hughes sometimes
seemed to confuse the Im-
perial cause with his own. as
though in breathing forth fire
against his own enemies he
was assisting in the defeat of
the enemies of the Allied
powers.”
If only he had not allowed
a boatload of Maltese immi-
grants to land in September,
1916 . . . The anti-conscrip-
tionists seized on these
swarthy newcomers as evidence
for the charge that the Gov-
ernment meant to ship in
cheap coloured labour to re-
place the white men who
would be sent away to fight.
VOTE NO AND KEEP AUS-
TRALIA WHITE, said hoard-
K, S. INCUS ,
By
Reader in History, Australian National
University
ings all over the country on
polling day.
If only he had not called
up the young men who were
nicknamed the Hugheseliers
. . . The Prime Minister,
confident that the people I
would vote ‘‘Yes',” called up
for home service thousands
of single men, who could be
despatched quickly overseas as
soon as the referendum was
won. To some voters this may
have seemed a temptingly
arrogant gesture. Thousands
of young men refused to en-
rol among them a future
Prime Minister, John Curtin.
On the day before the refer-
endum, Hughes said that if
these young men tried to vote
they would get the shock of
their lives; he was moving un-
der the umbrella of the War
Precautions Act to have them
asked awkward questions
when they turned up at the
polling booths.
On voting day Australians
eould read in their morning
papers that three members of
Hughes’s Cabinet had resigned
in protest at this manoeuvre.
Plausible
We do not know whether a
significant body of electors
:hanged their minds during
the campaign. But it is at least
»s plausible as anv other inter-
PHfifi nari^sSjES
“No” may have been achieved
by the recklessness of Hughes
himself in the few weeks be-
fore the referendum.
Hughes believed that the
vote of the soldiers would be
of great importance. They
voted earlier than the civilians,
and they voted “Yes” but by
a majority so small, and open
to such varying interpretations,
that the Government concealed
the results. If the men of the
A.I F. had voted overwhelm-
ingly "Yes,” their votes would
have been numerous enough—
given the division of the
civilian vote —to have caused
their ranks to be reinforced by
conscripts
But the soldiers, like the
civilians, were divided for
reasons about which they have
gone on talking among them-
selves ever since. “It’s a simple
matter to start a minor war in
most R.S.L. clubs these days,”
wrote a columnist in the Syd-,
ney “Sunday Telegraph” re-
cently. “When the conversa-
tion gets around to the defence
call-up—as it invariably docs
—ask the old Diggers how
they voted at the two Con-
scription referendums in World
War I.”


ac'hw. m/■
A NEGLECTED HERO
Man Who Captured Von Luckner by Biggest Bluff
on Record
(By A.C.C.S.)
- .
During the past week there walked into the Sunday Times office
the man who captured, practically single-handed, the notorious sea-
raider Count von Luckner, who, sailing from Germany in December, i
1916, passed complacently through the British fleet and was responsible
for the sinking of over £3,000,000 worth of British and Allied shipping
before finally being laid by the heels in Fiji.
’ V, I
: -- ...
At the moment of his capture Von
Luckner was on the point of bringing
off still another coup, which, had it not
been frustrated by the plucky and timely
action of Sub-Inspector Hills, would,
in all likelihood, have led to the loss of
some additional millions.
We, as a nation, are curiously short
of memory where our war heroes are
concerned, wherefore it may be as well
to recall the famous arrest of one of
Germany’s most daring sea-raiders. This
story should not be allowed to be for-
gotten. It is one of the greatest epics
of the war, yet the hero of the incident
to-day is without a job, . down to his
last shilling, and has been obstinately
refused a penny-piece of the £l4OO prize
money which should be his legal due. To
plead his cause before the then Secretary
of State for the Colonies, Lord Milner,
H. C. Hills gave up a government job
in New Zealand, and worked his way
before the mast to London. There his
case was laid before the great man, who,
whilst he would not see him personally,
deputed his private secretary, Mr. Jones,
to inform him that the claim could not
be entertained because Hills was a
Civil Servant at the time of
the exploit, and not a member of either
the Navy or Army. Not only has Mr.
Hills, for the outstanding service he
rendered to his country, received no re-
ward ;n any shape or form; hut he was
fer months comple:ely stranded in Lon-
don, and finding himself penniless, was
forced to draw the unemployment dole for
his very existence. He has worked his
passage back again to Australia on the
Barradine, and is off to New Zealand
to try and get a job in his old department
■—the Customs. Failing this, he will try
in New Guinea or Papua, and a look at
Mr. Hills’ sunburned, tigijx-lipped face
tells one that he will succeed. He has
been Natal Mounted Police trooper ; has
explored Portuguese East Africa; experi-
enced a rubber slump in the Straits
Settlements ; and been a member of Sir
Edward Whymper’s mountaineering
party in Canada.
The Sunday Times finds itself in daily
contact with all manner of cases of
hardship and injustice, but this is surely
one of the worst ! The terrible irony of
it all is accentuated by the recent be-
stowal of the Order of the British Em-
pire upon a United States negro in recog-
nition of his services as messenger in
the British Embassy at Washington !
There is something rotten in the selec-
tion for our national honors if such a
glaring instance of official ingratitude
and ineptitude is to pass unremedied. But
indignation has carried me away from
the story of Von Luckner’s capture by
H. C. Hills in Fiji.
Hills is the son of well-known people
in the Old Country. He went to sea as
a lad, and when he left it he was an offi-
cer in the P. and O, Company. Since
then his roving spirit and love of adven-
ture led him to various parts of the
world, including a sojourn in Canada,
where he was on the staff of Sir Edward
Whymper, the author of Scrambles
Among the Alps ; some time spent in
South Africa, where he joined the famous
Cape Mounted Police; and when the war
broke out he was in Auckland, He
hastened to join up, but was turned
down, and his doctor ordered him to a
warmer climate for health reasons. He
then went to Fiji, joined the Constabu-
lary, and was appointed sub-inspector at
Levuka, the old capital of the group.
How Von Luckner Was Caught.
Now comes the story of his daring
capture of Von Luckner and the count’s
party, armed to the teeth, while Hills,
carried an empty revolver, and his boat’s
crew was equally innocent of weapons.
About the middle of Leptember, 1917, a
half-caste Fijian named Macpherson re-
ported to Hills that a strange launch
with six Europeans had been seen at
Wakaya, a small island not far from
Levuka. Hills scented something, and
at once telephoned to headquarters at
Suva, asking permission to run across
and investigate. After considerable de- i
lay and explicit instructions that he must (
on no account arm his party, the
permission came through, and Hills,
taking six of his best native Fijian police,
set off in a small open cutter. It was
blowing hard, and it took them several
hours steadily beating to windward to
reach the entrance to the anchorage. As
the passage was narrow and the wind
dead against them, it was eventually
decided to run back to Levuka, and wait
for the wind and the sea to go down.
As it turned out, this was a fortunate !
decision, as Von Luckner told them af- |
terwards he would nevetf have been
taken by a sailing vessel (he and his
party were in a powerful oil launch),
and would have blown them out of the
water.
When Hills and his men reached Le-
vuka they found the small coasting cacti*
steamer Amra had arrived. As soon as he
got ashore. Hills and the Collector of
Customs (Mr. Marsh) telephoned to Suva
for permission to take the Amra for the
expedition. This was granted, and an-
other start was made for Wakaya. As
the Amra rounded the reef at the an-
chorage of that island, Hills spotted
the mysterious launch, and lowering a
boat, he and his Fjians set out to inter-
cept the stranger, which had in the
meantime got under weigh, making for
the passage. There was not time to be
lost, and Hills called out to the party
to surrender, threatening that if they
did not do so he would have their craft
blown out of the water by the guns
on the steamer. Some cattle pens on
the Amra. covered with tarpaulins, must
have looked sufficiently like guns to de-
ceive the strangers, who then and there
gave up their idea of sneaking off
through the passage. Pulling along-
side, Hills (with his empty revolver in
his hand) again called on the party—
there were two officers and four men—
to surrender. When he first hailed them
he was answered in excellent English,
but the two officers on the launch now
began to converse with one another in
German. Hills peremptorily l ordered
them to speak in English only.
Hills has a strong fighting face, a de-
termined mouth, and the air of a man
used to command men. He was then 33
years of age, and a keen, wiry-looking j
chap, without a scrap of superfluous
weight—just as he is now—and Von
Luckner and his crew evidently thought
such a front must be backed hy force,
and quietly the two German officers
stepped into the boat handing, their auto-
matic pistol butts foremost to Hills, Van
Luckner remarking, “I surrender.” Send- i
ing one of his Fijians to the tiller of the
launch and another to guard the man at I
the engine, Hills gave orders to tow the
Amra’s boat back to the steamer. It may
be as well to remark that, while the heads
were parleying one of the Germans in
the launch was standing with his hands
behind his back, and in each of his hands
was a bomb, which would have blown
the Amra’s boat to smithereens if thrown.
The Germans and their property were
secured on the Amra, and that vessel’s
head was again turned on Levuka.
When the Bluff Was Discovered
Von Luckner and his lieutenant (Ker-
schicss) were allowed to remain on deck,
and after a look over the little tub, their
practised eyes evidently detected some-
thing wrong, for they began asking Hills
where “the guns” were. When Hills told
them there were no guns the look that
came over the faces of the captives was
as good as a play. Doubt, dejection,
chagrin, and finally wrath, were regis-
tered in most approved movie style, and
Captain Day, the skipper of the Amra, said
he would have given a hundred pounds
for a photograph of the two captives as
the truth of the great bluff slowly dawned
on their phlegmatic, well-disciplined Teu-
tonic minds.
There was great excitement when the
Amra reached Suva. The whole town —
civil and official turned out to inspect
the men who had been playing havoc
with Pacific shipping for so many
months.
The launch and her contents were then
handed over to the authorities. She
was splendidly found with arms, machine
gun, chronometers, charts, binoculars,
etc., and there was cash on board to the
value of £489, the whole outfit being
worth about £l5OO.
It must be remembered that when
Von Luckner left the island where the
Leeadler was wrecked be intended to
capture another vessel and then go back,
pick up the rest of his crew and the
ship's fittings, and start out again on his
piratfeal career. And all these great
plans were wrecked by this daring, young
British sailor-adventurer by the most
astounding piece of bluff on record.
A grateful country awarded Hill
nothing for this exploit, and he accord-
ingly filed a claim for prize money
(£1400) on June 27, 1918 in The Supreme
Court of Fiji. Nothing came of this,
and as he could not afford to ask for a
Royal Commission, he characteristically
chucked his job and went to beard the
Lion in his den in London —with what
result has already been told.
A N.Z. Testimonial.
But everyone was not so callous. Hills
has with him a beautifully engrossed
and decorated testimonial in album form
signed by most of New Zealand’s best
known citizens. The man who is
chiefly responsible for working up in-
terest in this testimonial is Mr. H. E.
Partridge, of Auckland, who was the
first man—in spite of his 75 years of
age—to take up Mr, Hills’ case in New
Zealand, and who secured for Hills this
beautiful address, which impressed even
Viscount Milner when he was shown it.
When we consider what Mr. Hills’ ex-
ploit really meant, how probably another
million pounds worth of damage to ship-
ping in Australian waters and commerce
was prevented, it seems that the big in-
terests in Australia might well concern
themselves in this case.
How Von Luckner, after escaping
from his island prison at Motuhihi in
the Prison-Commandant’s launch with
his lieutenant (Kercheiss) and several of
his compatriots, overpowered a scow and
made for the food depot at Kermadecs
and was there forced to surrender to
the armed cable ship Iris, is all fairly
well known. What the public possibly
do not know is that Von Luckner now,
in spite of the German defeat, is re-
garded as a national hero, and is enjoy-
ing wide popularity and success on a
lecture tour. With Kills, how different
is the case. The conqueror of Von
Luckner, unknown and urecot nised, is
striving to get work in the country that
owes him so much.
“Can you wonder the beaches and the
Islands call me back? I’ll get there by
hook or crook,’’ said Hills as he wrung
my hand at parting. “I’ve seen all I
want of cities and civilisation to last
me all my days.”
It is men of Hills’ breed that make the
best of all “boundary-riders of the Em-
pire,” and Britain has ever been for-
tunate in finding a man for every occa-
sion. But is Australia going to let this
hero go in need?


THE SEE ADLER PILATE AND HIS CAPTURER.
H. C. HILLS.
—See letterpress on this page.


/ . ‘ , /r- 6 - / 7 •
LONDON REJOICES OVER
ANZACS’ GREATEST DAY
How They Love the Australi ans Now—The Whole People
fi u -t-f in one Heart nr. 6>. ,
The Anzacs have become a British m-
,*titution, so far as the people of the
Homeland go. Nobody seems able to
form an opinion of what England will
seem like when the last Anzac has re-
turned to the places of the sun. The
Anzac in England may, within certain
necessary limits, do pretty much as he
chooses. He is everybody’s pal, and all
the world is his host.
Anzac Day in London this year was
a great event. It was, in fact, a much
greater event than it has been in Aus-
tralia since the first Anzac Day was cele-
brated in Sydney. There are no unen-
thusiastic class for a London Anzac Day.
The whole people are one in heart, in-
tent on doing everything in their power
to honor the Anzacs. London knows
how much the Anzacs have counted in
the war.
So that it is interesting to go to a
sober and reserved paper like The
Times to get an idea what Anzac Day
fn London was like. No risk of ex-
travagance or mere high-falutin’ here.
The facts, as to their glow, will be a
trifle under-stated. Here are some ex-
tracts from what The Times had to say,
“On April 25, 1915, the Ist Australian
Division, followed by the mixed Austra-
lian and New Zealand Division, landed on
Gallipoli and made their kangaroo-like
leap up the ‘Anzac’ cliffs. On April 25,
1918, the 13th and 15th Australian Bri-
gades recaptured magnificently Villers-
Bretonneux, which the Germans had
taken the day before. On April 25,
1919, 5,000 Australian soldiers, with guns,
officers, and other impedimenta, took a
stroll through London town.
“Apologies must be made for using
such a word as stroll for such a dis- j
play of marching as the Australians gave !
yesterday, when they saluted the Prince
of Wales at Australia House, and went
on to salute the Lord Mayor at the
Mansion House, and to take luncheon
with him or with the Honorable Artil-
lery Company. But the Australian sol- j
dier has such a way of pleasantly, and
pertinaciously, doing just what he
chooses, and of persuading the London
public, and even the London police, that
because he is doing it just to please
himself there can be no possible harm in
it, that everything which these great,
smiling, easy-going brothers of ours do
seems to be entirely spontaneous and
accidental. Their geniality, no less than
their tremendous achievements in the
field of battle, have made them the peo-
ple’s pets ; and the people of London
yesterday gave them a welcome in which
affection was as strong as admiration.
At Australia House.
“However magnificently casual the
Australian soldier may seem to the pre-
cise Londoner, there was no sign of the
DRIVER E. T. COOK. A.S.C
Driver Cook is the eldest son of Mr.
A. Cook, of Roseville formerly of Coo-
gce), and enlisted early in 1917. He
joined' the Army Service Corps, but on
arrival in England applied to be trans-
ferred to the artillery, and was sent with
j the big guns to France. He remained
in the firing-line till the armistice was
signed, and was drafted with the gun
teams that went to Belgium. From there
he was sent to England, and, while
awaiting his return home, was stricken
i with ‘influenza, and for some time was a
patient in St. George’s Hospital, Lon-
don. He is now on his way to Sydney
by the trooper Devanha, due in Mel-
bourne about 19th inst.
accidental in the appearance of Austra-
lia House, where the Prince of Wales
took the salute. Splendid red velvet and
( gold draped the Strand windows and the
front porch of the noble building ; on
the tall pillars and fine columns of the
south front, five column? o names hence-
forth to be great in history—Anzac,
Messines, Hamel, Bullecourt, Gaza, Pass-
chendaele Jericho, Jerusalem Villers-
Bretonneux and others—each column
surmounted by an Imperial crown on a
fiery rising sun, recorded the deathless
deeds of the Australians in the world-
wide war. The balconies were filled with
wounded and maimed Australian sol-
diers, some of them most perilously
perched on awning or windowsill. While
we waited for the arrival of the proces-
sion, they amused themselves by hailing
their friends in the crowd below or the
crowds that filled every window, every
roof of church, court, and office, sprouted
up every lamp-post, or hung, a strange
and heavy foliage on the stripling trees.
And now and then they all fell to whist-
ling like parrots—a forcible, though
cryptic, comment, as we were assured,
on the Australian Military Police, and
especially on those who were within
earshot
Mr. Gladstone and the Anzacs
And when the notable people began to
arrive the animation grew. “Good-day,
Doug !” rang out lustily when Sir Doug-
las Haig drove up in a closed car, and,
looking for the source of the easy greet-
ing, one discovered the Gladstone statue
to be covered with Anzacs —the top-most
of them hanging affectionately round the
neck of a statesman who had never been
so familiarly treated in his lifetime. Later
In the proceedings the same friend of the
great was to be seen sitting at ease on
Mr. Gladstone’s head, holding on by Mr.
Gladstone’s nose—but that was when the
excitement, like this climber, had reached
its highest. Genera! Birdwood, we
fancy, must have come very early, or
slipped in by a back way, for though
the name ‘Birdie’ was on many lips, we
did not sec or hear him arrive.
“Before the procession had passed
there must have been a dozen planes at
least whirring and whirling overhead.
The Prince of Wales
“In the thick of the hum, the Prince
of Wales, accompanied by Prince Albert,
drove up in an open car, to be received
at the front door of Australia House by
Mr. Fisher, the High Commissioner.
The Prince, attended by Sir Douglas
Haig, entered the building, to emerge
again a few moments later by a door on
the Strand to the red-covered platform
on the pavement where he was to take
the salute. Here he took his place, with
Sir Douglas Haig a little behind him,
Sir William Birdwood and other officers,
Mr. Fisher, Mr. Hughes, and other pro-
minent Australian, and one or two ladies.
‘ Very soon afterwards the head oi
the procession appeared, becoming visible
when it was about opposite the bot.*-m
, of Wellington-street. At the head rode
Lieutenant-General Sir John Monash and
other commanding officers. Then came
the mounted troops, under Brigadier-
General W. A. Coxen. and a battery of
Australian artillery, horses, guns and
accoutrements shining till they gleamed
the pale Spring sun, and the men
riding as only Australians can ride.
Then the westward view seemed to be
nothing but a long serpent of steel—the
fixed bayonets of the men of the five
famous divisions who marched by, each
division with its own band. They coiled
south of St. Mary-lc-Strand, wound
northward to come to the left side of the
road, wficrc the Prince was standing,
turned sharp to the left past the front
door of Australia House, sharp to the
right again, and disappeared between the
Law Courts gardens and St. Clement
Danes Church.
The Quality of the March
"Let soldiers estimate the quality of
the marching and the salute; a ( :ivilia\
would only find it all extraordinary pic-
turesque and moving, with the thousands
of sturdy, bronzed men marching, so far
from their homes, through a spot where
the old London of England, and the
new London of the Empire so closely
meet, amid the cheers and cries and wav-
ing hands and handkerchiefs of massed
friends and admirers from whom they
I are soon to part, perhaps for ever,
“It was Mr. Hughes’ turn next.
Speech, Billy!” cried the soldiers; and
Mr. Hughes responded by waving aside
some great police official in order that his
pocket camera might get an unimpeded
“snap” of the crowd. Long after the
platform was empty, the people surged
about it, the Australians anxious appar-
ently cither to stand on it or to tear it
to pieces for souvenirs, and the police,
unmounted or assisted by those marvel-
lously trained horses of theirs, firmly,
though as gently as might be, stopping
the rush here and the rusK there.
A Monotony of Brawn
Then there is this, as to the physique
of the Anzacs and the enthusiasm of the
London crowd. It has significance, for
there were at this time several matters
as to which the London crowd was in
no good humor. But the Anzacs, once
again, were everybody’s friends. In Lon-
don, be it noted, every Australasian sol-
dier is an Anzac:—
“A march of infantry must needs seem
a little monotonous, but yesterday’s was,
at any rate, a splendid monotony of
brawn and sinew. One after the other
the five divisions in miniature went by,
the long procession broken only by each
divisional commander, riding at the head
of his men, and by the band. On and
on they went, differing from one another
only in the triangles or circles or dia-
monds of bright cloth upon their shoul-
ders—red and blue, green and white,
purple, black and yellow—the distinguish-
ing marks of the different brigades.


“There is something about this steady i
flowing river of men, with its regular j
tramp, and the regular ‘Eyes right’ to (
the Lord Mayor upon his balcony, that
seems to prohibit continuous cheering,
but the cheers broke out over and over
again in spasmodic bursts, and a special
word of praise should he pdvrn to two
little girls in green coats and black hats
who never ceased from their shrill piping
and the waving of their handkerchiefs
from the moment they saw the first I
mounted policeman till the very last one
had vanished. They, at least, were de-
termined to say. ‘Hail, Farewell!’ to the
Australians as it should be said.
“When the last of the infantry had
disappeared round the corner of Princes-
street the Lord Mayor palled for three \
cheers for the Australians, which the I
crowd gave with a will. Next, after one
or two false starts, and a little difference
of opinion on the question of time, they
broke into God Save the King. Finally,
the barriers of policemen were released,
and the big circle before the Mansion
House that a moment before had been
empty and yellow with gravel, became
Black with people, melting away again
to workaday life.
The speeches at the Mansion House
luncheon have already been reported by
cable. A word of reminder will suffice.
A few sentences here and there:
Mr. Hughes: Anzac Day would be
kept in remembrance. They had done
that which, from a military point of
view, was considered to be impossible;
they kept on doing the impossible until
they retired, and that retreat was more
glorious than a hundred victories. In
the deeds that were done that day they
not only showed the world the manner
of man the Australian was, but also they
set the standard and made the mould into
which every Australian recruit was
poured. The peace must not rob them
of the things for which they had fought
and for which 60,000 of their men had
died. They must keep Australia for
themselves, living their own lives in their J
own way, building up on the sure and
lasting foundations of their own race, a
nation which in days to come was de-
stined to be great because it loved liberty
and was determined to retain it.
The Saving of Amiens.
Lieutenant-General Sir John Monash:
Very few people in England realised
what a decisive and critical battle was
fought on the Amiens front just 12
months ago. That event was the crisis
of th e whole war. If they had failed to
capture the village and the high country
overlooking Amiens it was a moral cer-
tainty that the Germans would have been
in possession of the city within three or
four days and separated the British and
French Armies. There was nothing in
all the annals of war to equal or excel
the records of the Australian Corps in
the last 60 days of the war, which were
one succession of offensive and victory
due to one thing only—the extraordinary
moral of the Australian troops, a moral
which steadily increased from day to
day.
Lord Milner; Anzac Day would always
be remembered as that on which their j
fellow-citizens who lived under the j
Southern Cross first showed in a war
on a great scale what they were capable
of under the terrific conditions of modern ,
warfare. But, after all, >yizac was only
a prelude to other similar achievements
in many theatres of war, in Palestine, in
Syria, and, above all, in France. The
Australian commanders throughout had
had the satisfaction of knowing that
their troops would be as unstoppable in
attack as they had been unbreakable in
defence, even when thrown in, at the
last moment, to fill a dangerous gap.
General Sir W. Birdwood. |
Sir William Birdwood: Let them never
forget some of the best and bravest they
had left behind at Gallipoli. Many in
that hall were' wearing decorations, but
none had a greater cross than the little
white wooden one which stood at the
head of the graves in Gallipoli and
France. Though they grieved the loss
of their comrades they realised that they
had not died in vain. They came from
Australia with the one idea of fighting
for liberty and for the freedom of Aus-
tralia. Let them also remember those
other factors, the British Navy and the
glorious 29th Division. (Loud cheers.)
ft
Lieut. Walter Marks, R.N.R., and
Mrs. Marks, with their family, returned
to Sydney on Friday. They, arc staying
at Mona« Darling Point.


ljl /
INTERNED IRISH.
MR. JUSTICE HARVEY’S
REPORT.
CONNECTION WITH
GERMANY.
SECURING WAR MATERIAL.
MELBOURNE, Thursday.
The report of Mr. Justice Harvey, who we:
appointed a Royal Commission to inquire iutc
the cases of seven Irish internees w r as tablet
in the House of Representatives to-night.
After reviewing the evidence the Roya
Commissioner remarks;
There appears to be no evidence that
any of the interned men had any connec-
tion with any enemy persons resident In
the Commonwealth. Such of the in-
ternees as were members of the Irish Re-
publican Brotherhood had by virtue of
that membership hostile associations
through German agencies in America.
They collected moneys in Australia for
the purpose of assisting armed rebellion
in Ireland against the British Govern-
ment on the first available opportunity.
This money was expended in the purchase
of warlike material from Germany, with
which country the leaders of the move-
ment were in communication. In Aus-
tralia they made use of the Irish National
Association to further their aims, but it
is not shown that the rank and file of the
association had any knowledge of their
connection with Germany.
In conclusion the Commissioner says:
1 may state that the evidence tendered
before me was almost entirely documen-
tary. The internees themselves put for-
ward no evidence to explain away any of
the suspicious circumstances disclosed by
the documents, in spite of my published
statement that no person would be re-
quired to answer any question which lie
feared might tend to incriminate himself
in a y way. Although my powers under
the order authorised me to compel any
person to give evidence, I did not think
it advisable under all the circumstances
j to summon any person as a witness, as the
internees themselves did not elect to give
i evidence. The only really material mat-
ter upon which I was assisted by evidence
called on behalf of the internees was the
identity of John Doran and the nature of
em P lo y me nt in Melbourne between
1309 and 1916.
EVIDENCE REVIEWED.
; Albert Thomas Dryer, the Commissioner
states, was a second-class locker in the Cus-
at Sydney - and a B.A. of
Sydney University. About the beginning of
August, 1916, Dryer was enrolled as a m b-
centre of the first New South Wales sub . i r -i 0
of the Australian division of the Irish Rcpuh-
rriarnhi Brot f hev l}ood. This brotherhood, the
members of which are commonly called “The
Remans.” wa s formally organised in 1868, and
“ t ? lat date been the principal organi-
onro* n ? n , g at Bec uring complete independ-
ence of Ireland from Great Britain by the
use of physical force. It has always been
a secret society. There was. so far as
of the r iß n ß f i or “ a,ly constituted organisation
of the 1.R.8. m Australia prior to 1916, though
Sffer^ er f- a nU “ ber of mpa who had at
different times been members of old circles
elsewhere. The Australian branches adapted
Cmj 1 ° for D tlfpV ° D and rltUal ° f the Clan aa
ciaei for their own use. John Dovov amt
other members of the Clan na Gael o r I R B
in America were the principal Intermediaries
for communications between the promoters of
ies ,n S r RebelH ° n ° f . 1916 ’ aad the authorU
THflii p Ge ™any. The proclamation of the
nsh Republic by the rebels of Easter week
eferred to their “gallant allies in Europe ’’
obviously referring to Germany The Aus
tralian branch of the 1.R.8. was armarentlv
started in Melbourne in 1916 a PParently
i on jmy 8> 1!)16 John Doran gaj]
Melbourne and arrived in Sydney on the llth^
otpii inner IJ, 1916, when he sa led as chin’u
carpenter on the Cacique, bound for t
Francisco. During his stay in Sydney
was actively engaged in founding y th^Sydney
fo inforni % IR ; B - AuKllßt * hewijTabS
that U l e , int ,° rncd nian Maurice Dalton
that two sub-circles of ten men each were
completed, and the names were conveyed to
Dalton in invisible ink. The first two
, of ‘V, flwr v two
those of the interned men Dryer and
M Sweeney. The first two names of the
second sub-circle were those of the interned
men M’Guinness aud/M'Giug. Doran also
busied himself with g/ttlng the 1.R.8. started
in Brisbane. At the time of the foundation
of those branches the Intimate nature of the
connection between the Irish physical force
party and Germany was probably not so
notorious as it afterwards became; but I think
there can be no question that it must have
been known to the persons who joined the
1.R.8. in Australia in 1916 that such a con-
nection existed, and by the end of 1916 or the
beginning, of 1917, it was known to every-
body who took any interest In passing events.
John Doran left Sydney for America in Sep-
tember, 1916. Dryer informed Dalton that he-
(Dryer) had been left by Doran in charge of
the “regulars;” by which expression! he meant,
no doubt the members of the I.K.p. When
conveying this information to Dalton in No-
vember, 1916, Dryer also states that the con-
scription question has taken up all his time,
but he “will try to make strides now. How
are these affairs progressing with you? We
have about 50.” Doran on his arrival In
America evidently came into close contact
with Devoy and his physical force associates;
and was recognised unofficially as “the rep-
resentative of the Australian wing.” Writ-
ing frtfm San Francisco in December, 1916,
to a correspondent in Melbourne, he says
“there are great things on foot over here
which I dare not even hint at just now. but
which will all be known to the world. In due
time. I can only say this much, there will
be another Easter week before the war ends,
and it won’t be 3000 men against 20,000 this
time." In this letter he promises to keep
“our old friend Mr. D. (no doubt Maurice Dal-
ton) “informed through Sydney of the trend
of events.” A was established by
which communications between America - and
Australia were conveyed across the sh by
hand, and It Is evident from such letters as
have been produced that many communica-
tions passed between the members of the
1.R.8. In Australia and America. America
came into the war in April, 1917, and Do doubt
this put difficulties in the way of extremists
of the Irish party in America. On July
16. 1917, Doran wrote to Dryer a letter from
which an excerpt was found in Dalton’s
possession, which showed that Doran was
actively working in America though disap-
pointed In his Irish associates regarded as
“a fighting unit-” He Ldds. “there Is every
sign of coming trouble in Ireland again.” On
Scftember 17, 1917, a letter was written from
San Francisco by Doran to Dalton, sent by
hand on the Sonoma to Sydney, and posted
there on October 10. This letter was signed
“X.Y.Z.” but is in Doran’s handwriting. This
contains the following pas.sages:—“America’9
entrance into the war is a blessing in dis-
guise. It has thrown the Irish and Germans
in this country into a united mass,”
“if you have any subscriptions for guns. etc.._
send them to Sydney (you know who I mean)
along with a list of names and they will be
transmitted here and through the proper
channels to Berlin or Hamburg by direct
messenger. Keep the boys in good heart, for
the outlook is very bright.” The same mes-
senger brought a letter to Dryer from Doran.
Dryer is, no doubt, the person in Sydney re-
ferred to In Doran’s letter to Dalton, as Dryer
aad been left in charge of the “regulars”
by Doran. In the latter end of 1917, the
members of the brotherhood set themselves
to collect moneys for arras in view' of the
inticlpated fresh rebellion in Ireland. An
‘initiation fee” for each member of 10/ and
veekly “dues” of 3d per member were fixed.
Phe Sydney “Due Book” of the brotherhood
vas found in M’Sweeney’s possession- The
ibject of the initiation fees and dues, as
shown In the constitution and ritual, is to
lefray the expenses of the organisation and
,o procure “war material.” It is show r n that
rom this fund M’Sweeney handed to Dryer in
December, 1917, a sum of £2O/5/5, and that
Dryer on January 8, 1918, despatched £2O to
Doran in San Francisco. The receipt of this
nonev was acknowledged by Doran in April,
1918. He states that he Invests fh« r>,
aa required, and that that amount re^ved-
-BoT D Thir rn ? de R total t 0 date of 194 dol s h
oc. There Is every reason to believe that
this money was despatched to Berlin or Vam
tbur- as indicted in Doran’s letter to nVft?n
of September, 1917. for the purchase o( l “
| materials f° r the Irish physical fore® nlrtv
I vT. 11 ? 1 , t . he connection between th/ lrish
m. P ? rt H the r '"™ a " s w ‘5-
J . 3916 continued into the rear lais'
|v,as definitely stated by the Under-Secretary
i« 5 lS aD and n t th6 H H s°\T ° f Comraons on June
and is definitely shown by Doran,
|X£ - resist *the “ fc
rr« »" "•»
any love for German® k. , " ,a * B n °t from
are in their view’ juirtifl^bfp 6^ 5 ? f ny mean 3
Britain, whom they L the"^" 6 GrPat
n o ara as the enemy and


Jii/uv fJjjL
T ,
TjT -r?. S ° , a sergreant of
First Battalion, The Man with the
Donkey is now at Heaven’s gate, help-
ing the soldiers through ”
“At Quinn’s Post, where the fight
woo ® !
was thickest, says the British-
Australasian,’’ “and it was almost cer-
tain death for the stretcher-bearers to
venture out in search of the wounded,
, , . . ,
he and his donkey went out day after
day through a murderous fire and
carried back many a man into
tj, . . , * ,
safety. But at last a day came when
the little donkey returned alone. Pri-
vate Simpson had stopped a Turkish
bullet, giving his life for his fellows
more gloriously perhaps than any other
hero of that desperate campaign. The
whole of the A.I.F. mourned for him
as a brother.”
“A MAN THAT DIED FOR MEN”
This is the tale of what he accon-
Plished ere his days on earth were
done. Though not himself an Austra-
ban, he had served with Australians on
land and sea, and he gave his life for
Australia’s cause on that rugged patch
of Turkish soil held so long and at such
cost by Australia’s sons. His name
v-us John Simpson Kirkpatrick, and he !
Was the only son of Sarah Simpson j
Kirkpatrick, of 14 Bertram-street,South
Shields. England. He enlisted in the !
mme r>f t Umn«r,n ojiu,
name Ot Simpson With the Third Field J
Ambulance, a unit of the Australian
Army Medical Corps, comprised of
men from Queensland, South Aus-
tralia, West Australia, and Tasmania,
But his name in the mouths of his
Private J. Simpson
comrades and of many thousands more
was simply Murphy. He lies with the
Battalion of the Dead in Shrapnel
Gully, Gallipoli.
Here is his record, from the official
roll of honor read by an Australian
general beside his grave;—
“Simpson.—Conspicuous bravery follow-
ing- the landing. Rescued sixteen wounded
men under fire. Made a great manv trips
daily with injured down Shrapnel Vallej,
when enemy guns were most aetive. Hit
by sniper from the Bloody Angle.”
As “202 Private J. Simpson,” the Man
with the Donkey, was mentioned in
Army Corps Routine Orders, dated at
Anzac, June 29, 1915, and again, his
death in action being then noted, in
Sir Ian Hamilton’s despatch of Sep-
tember 22 of the same year.
MURPHY OF ANZAC
Sunday Sun Sydney, 1919
COMPLETE STORY OF HIS WORK
With the Donkey in Shrapnel Valley
HIS MOTHER’S MESSAGE TO AUSTRALIA
A TYNESIDER’S RECORD
Born in the parish of Tyne Dock,
:at South Shields, in the English
county of Durham, he gave up his
work as ship’s fireman to enlist on
j September 5, 1914, just a month after
i war broke out. When he entered
camp at Blackboy Hill, West Australia,
he was a blue-eyed, brown-haired, well-
set-up man of a little more than 22.
Twelve stone in weight and sft. BHn.
in height, he was, as the result of his
work at sea, in perfect physical con-
dition. He had no wife to think of,
but at home in England there were two
women to whom his success meant
much—his mother and his sister. He
had formerly served in the 4th Durham
Territorial Regiment, and was there-
fore no stranger to military routine.
It was between April 25 and May, 5
that he established his name where
many a deathless name was made, and
secured for it a place in despatches.
His selfless labor came to an end soon
afterwards. Mr. C. E. W Bean, the
Australian war correspondent, states
that he was killed in action on May 19,
but the official records give the date as
June 15.
HIS MOTHER’S LETTER
These are the words of his mother,
| in a letter to a friend in Melbourne: —
“John Simpson Kirkpatrick, that sailed
in the s.«. Kooringa for two and a half
years, is the donkey man of Anzac. And
tell the Australians from me, his mother,
that my heart is bursting with sorrow and
with pride to know that my beloved son
and the light of my life died with the
brave Australians.”
“My beloved son!” The very words
used centuries before of another, also
an Only Son, a Man with a Donkey,
who gave His life for men.
Murphy’s Mount of Olives waj Sari
! Bair, and Lis Gethsemane Shrapnel
Valley. That valley led to the little
dressing station of the Army Medical
Corps at what was known as Brighton
Beach. At first he had only one don-
key, but later, for a time at least, he
possessed two. The Australians were
given 14 days to take the hill of Sari
Bair. They took it in 20 minutes.
Then came Murphy’s turn.
CHARLES BEAN'S STORY
His advent did not escape the notice
of Mr. Bean. In one of his letters, dated
from Gaba Tepe—or, as it was then the
fashion to spell it, Kaba-Tepe—on June
12, 1915, Mr. Bean tells the story in
the following words:—
“It was the evening after the Turk-
ish attack of May 19. The trencnes
realised during the night what a big
: attack it was; but I do not think most
of those outside of them did until some
of us saw the way in which the Turks
lay outside the lines the next morning.
It was the talk of the whole force for
the next few days.
“Some of us were sitting yarning
that evening while the sun set over the
sea, turning the craters of Imbros into
the dull-grey of an elephant’s hide,
set against a background of the most
delicate rose, when someone passing
said, T suppose you’ve heard that the
Man with the Donkeys Is dead?”lt came
as a real shock. Everybody knew the
Man with the Donkeys, and everybody
knew that if ever a man deserved ,
honor in this war it was he. He was a
stretcher-bearer. Few people knew his
name. To most he was “Scottie,” or
“Murphy”—those who called im the
one called his donkey the otl, ; r, He
was really Private Simpson, of the
3rd Field Ambulance. When firs); we ar-
rived at Anzac, there were landed a
number of donkeys, which it was
thought would be useful in carrying
water and food to the firing-lino. Don-
keys wil live on a diet of little more
than sticks. It was found from the
first, however, that the animal for this
work —out and away the best is the
mule. He drinks much less than a
horse, he is harder, and the amount
of work he gets through on these steep
hills is an eye-opener. The donkeys are
the favorites with the men on account
of their temper, but there are not many
of them remaining.
UNDER THE RED CROSS
“It was some time during the first
night of our landing that Private
Simpson annexed one of these donkeys.
He knew the loads they carried in
Egypt, and it struck him that they
would be especially useful for carry-
ing down men wounded in the leg. He
put a Red Cross brassard around the
donkey’s forehead,and started business
at once. He went off and camped with
his donkey among the Indians who
drive the mules, and fed with them;
and all the day, and half the night ho
made continuous trips to and from the
firing line with his donkey. Everyone
used to meet him time and again com-
ing down the gully with wounded men
sitting on the little animal beside him.
You cannot hurry a donkey very much,
however close the shells may burst,
and he came absolutely to disregard
bullets and shrapnel. The Man with
the Donkey became fatalistic —if they
were going to hit him they would,
whatever his precautions.
“For nearly four weeks he came up
and down that valley—through the hot-
test shrapnel, through the aimed bul-
lets of snipers, and the unaimed bul-
lets which came over the ridges. When
shells were so hot that many others
thought it wiser to duck for cover as
they passed, the Man with the Don-
key calmly went his way as if
nothing more serious than a summer
I shower were happening. Presently ho
got another donkey, and started to
work with two of them. He was com-
ing down the gully on the morning of
May 19 after the attack, clearing
some of our 300 or 400 wounded —the
Turks lost twice as many thousands—
when he passed the water guard,
where he generally took his breakfast.
It happened this morning that break-
fast was not ready. ‘Never mind,’ he
said to the engineers there, ‘get me a
good dinner when I come back.’ But
he never came back. He and his two
patients were nearing the end of their
journey when he was shot through the
heart, and both of his wounded men
were wounded again. The commander
of this section of our line told me that
the Man with the Donkey had been
worth a hundred men to him. The
colonel of the ambulance to which ho
belonged had from the first so recog-
nised the value of his work that he
was given a roving commission, and
allowed to camp and work entirely on
his own, almost as if he were a separ-
ate unit. All he had to do was to re-
port once a day to his unit. The mo-
ment he fell someone else took on the
work with the donkeys.’-


IN THE MOUTHS OF COMRADES
Said Pte. Arthur Branighan, of the
Army Medical Corps, writing from
Ghezireh Palace, Cairo, on June 30,
1915: “He had a donkey which had on
its head the Red Cross, and two pairs
of trousers on its legs. .. . He was
recommended for the Distinguished
Conduct Medal, but when doing his
29th trip a sniper shot him through
the heart. He had played his part
well
' A soldier who returned to Sydney
by the Hororata thus pieces out the
story:—“Murphy had a little donkey in
Egypt. It was small and thin—so thin
you wouldn’t think it could carry a
pound weight. Murphy got it aboard
the troopship, and was nearly broken-
hearted when they told him it couldn’t
land at Gallipoli. He put it in a chaff-
bag and had it sent over the side. The
first thing we knew about it was when
we saw Murphy running alongside the
donkey up to the front line.”
The donkey was elsewhere describ-
ed as “a little mouse-colored animal,
no taller than a Newfoundland dog.”
His master called him Abdul. This
description is borne out by a photo-
graph in possession of Kodak Limited,
Melbourne, which shows on the don-
key’s back a wounded soldier, whose
feet barely clear the ground. Beside
the animal, holding its halter, is “Mur-
phy,” in flat cap, shirt, khaki trou-
sers, and puttees, with the wounded
private’s arm about his neck. A story
in an English paper says that Mur-
phy and, his donkey carried out their
appointed work together for a month
and more.
Australia will not forget John Simp-
son Kirkpatrick, otherwise Murphy, of
whom it has been nobly written that
the last of the men he saved—
“ Saw from the veil of the breathless
night, a half-dressed Shape that
stole
Sorrowful, seated upon an ass, on a
colt, an ass’s foal, ,
Lingered, and looked, and went; and
a flame, in the dead eyes dimly-
glassed.
Shone for a second and sank again, as
the Man on the donkey passed!”
LAST TO LEAVE
Story of Evacuation
There were more than five men to
hold the trenches against the Turks
during the final stages of the evacua-
tion at Gallipoli, says Private Patrick
G. Ryan, a Lismore boy, who is at
present in Sydney, in referring to a
recent statement published in the
“Sunday Sun.’’
The men, he says, left in big batches,
until there were only comparatively few
left. Then they were sent away 45 or
50 at a time. On the last night, just
prior to the evacuation, the officers
selected certain men, Including himself,
to hold the lines. Volunteers were not
called fur, but names were called out.
Altogether 22 privates, a corporal, and
officers, making a total of 28, were
sent to the main firing line. They left
the trenches in a body.
“I say,” added Private Ryan, “we
were the last, to leave. By that I
mean the last of those of the 28 to
leave. Absolutely, the last man to
leave was a signaller from another bat-
talion. The night of the evacuation
he discovered a bottle of rum ,on the
1 each. Then he made himself comfort-
able and finished the bottle. His sleep
extended until the next morping. He
signalled to a warship, and a boat was
sent to take him off. Later on this
signaller was wounded in France. HA
, now back in Australia,”


/ / 3 J/tf&o
SIDELIGHTS ON
WAR.
A GRIM DAY.
By
LIEUT-GEN. SIR JAMES McCAY.
Saturday, May 8, 1915, was a fateful da;
for the 2nd (Victorian) Brigade of the Is
Australian Division at Gallipoli. On th
previous Wednesday the brigade had heei
moved by night from Anzac to Cape Hclles
and for two days it was in bivouac oi
swampy ground well back in a reserve posi
tion. On the Saturday morning it receivec
orders to move forward to support the
29th Division. Those orders named £
square on the map into which the brigade
was to move and bait. The square hac
apparently been chosen by rule of thumb
merely as being a normal distance behind
the forward ITne, for two officers sent b>
the brigade commander to reconnoitre it
reported on their return that it offered no
cover, and was a flat area in full sight
and within comfortable range of the Turkish
guns. The officers further reported that if
the brigade marched half a mile farther
forward some small contours of the ground
would afford at least partial cover from
enemy shells*
Orders were issued accordingly to advance
beyond the named square, so as to procure
the very modest protection offering. Ac-
cordingly the brigade set out on its two-mile
march. This meant much more than the
forty-minute movement of a marching
column, as the whole of it after the first
few hundred yards had to be made in full
sight and easy reach of the Turkish guns.
So thc brigade moved in “artillery forma-
tion, platoons of 40 or 50 men marching
in fours at 50 or 100 yards apart. If a shell
should land in a group it would do great
damage, but the theory, which then and six
hours later proved to be eminently true,
was that most shells would land in the
gaps and hit nobody. But all this took a
great deal more than mere marching time,
so that it was after half-past 3 o’clock in
the afternoon when the four battalions of
the brigade reached their new position,
slipped off their marching equipment and
settled down, as they supposed, to thc pre-
paration and eating of their evening meal.
At this moment neither the brigade com-
mander nor his troops knew the enemy’s
position. No information had been sup-
plied from headquarters to indicate who
Mas fighting, or what had been happening
during the previous days. A New Zealand
biigade was known to be somewhere on the
left, the French somewhere on the right. No
sketches had been supplied showing the
positions, even of the Allied troops, still
less of the real or supposed positions occu-
pied by the enemy. With the best will in
the world it is impossible to call this
aught but extremely bad staff work.
: ine Attack.
I he brigadier had but one option, to g<
over the position in front himself. Thii
he did, accompanied by an officer. Hi
found the New Zealanders ahead on his left
and the French far away to his right, bu
not ahead. On walking back after mori
than an hour’s walk across the front, to hii
great surprise, he found what came to Lx
called “the Tommies’ trench,” ahead oi
Ids hi igado, for lie had not been informer
even of its existence. Then he met tin
brigade major, with an order just receivec
! trora a bove, that his brigade was to attack
at half-past 5 o’clock over a front of about
1,000 j ards according to the hopelessly
incorrect map—about 700 yards, in fact
The brigade major had received the order
at five minutes to 5 o’clock, notified the
battalions to fall in, and hurried forward
to find the commander, who returned to
his headquarters, and at five minutes past
a o clock issued orders for the attack.
'I here was no possibility of doing anything
else. New Zealand on the left, and France
on the right, were to advance at the same
tunc. No opportunity to protest against
the astounding haste or the non existence
of information was available. The thing
had to be attempted. The Australian
iw»g*dc formed the centre of the intended
attack, New Zealand the left, France the
exl reme ngl , ily Naval Dir ision the right
centre. Seldom have troops been literally
lorced into battle on such inadequate notice
and hopelessly scanty information. But it
had to be done, and the best made of it
or the centre left as a great gap into’
which the enemy could penetrate and de-
stroy the flanks. At half-past 5 o’clock the
two leading battalions were on the move
up in line with the New Zealanders, ahead
■ uT "fi* Centrc ’ aud thc *>ench on the
light J hoy moved again in artillery
format ion, and again almost without a
casualty till they extended into a long
line and dropped, already out of breath
with haste, into the “Tommies’ trench.”
1 he sight in front of them was ugly. The
lurks recognised that the previously un-
successful attack of the preceding davs
was being renewed. The ground for bun-
°/. ya . lds in , frout oi the trench, over
M inch this brigade was to attack, consisted
0 a Jong gently sloping glacis, wholly
withou cover. It was being swept by a
ten table storm of enemy rifle fire, inter-
spersed with shrapnel, the rifle tire per-
haps, ns heavy as Australian troops’faced
during the whole war, even in France or
JfT- S . t ie P ant ' n ß troops recovered
their breath in the “Tommies’ trench,” an
officer serambkd on to the parapet, shout-
”?£*, Co, » e on, Australia.” The cry ran
all along that trench. -Come on Australia "-
It was an awful and thrilling moment Au’s ‘
St-Tambling
inomLl i g over the parapet—at such
! n th , e gl 'f we of 'notion are for-
thiterfdiSf U n rose and movod into
hrLido ill 1 Vu r iu * thut eve ning thc
L»i igado lost more than a third of it*
wounded W « b nd h W * B P ear] y 3,000 in killed,
*“ !J and missing. Men and oifi-
le'id libi i undor . t,ie deadly shower of
iuij 1 ~* leaves in an autumn wind. Yet
.here was no hesitation. The line of tho
• iattalio n .s P' ew thinner and
1 ‘ v r * but lt . was reinforced from and by
die two rear battalions. Night fell with
iricc art *\ffa^ I0l ?, nd Rained, but at a bitter
ic . Missing was merely an interim
Morel, pending further investigation for ;
vounded. 6 ° descnbed ' vas either killed or j
“An Unrecognised Balaclava.”
No man who went on—and all went on—
into that deadly shower could have be-
lieved that he would live through it,'were
it not for the ever-present but unconscious
idea that his neighbour might fall, but he
was exempt. Vet of the 3,000 only about
300 were killed on the field, though no
few died later of their wounds.' Over
absolutely open ground, with many grass
tussocks to stumble over, but nothing to
shelter behind, the troops went on, till
sheer exhaustion brought them to a halt.
Then they dug themselves in with those
queer apologies for tools called entrenching
implements. There they dug themselves
in, and there they stayed. The ground
which they had won, and over which they
had advanced, had been left untouched be-
fore by those directing the operations, be-
cause it had appeared to be almost madness
to order troops to advance over it against
hidden and well-entrenched enemies, with
plenty of rifles, and no few of that worst
of foes, the machine-gun. Yet these Aus-
tralians faced it, and went through it; and
what they had gained they kept. They
had lived up to the reputation of the day
of the landing at Anzac. Great as was
the name Australia had then won, it was
equalled bv the courage, the undaunted
facing of deadly odds, displayed that day
in the second battle of Krithia. Forty-
eight officers and 1,000 other ranks were
killed or wounded. Of the brigade head-
quarters staff of officers and non-com-
missioned officers only one remained alive
or unwounded, the signalling officer, whose
life, having regard to the duties he per-
formed. must have been charmed. The
“brass hats” took their share.
It is no wonder that the British official
historian, who writes from impartial ob-
servation, with no bias for or animus
against Australian troops, calls tins ad-
vance of the 2nd Australian Brigade in
front of Krithia “an unrecognised Bala-
clava.” It was carried out by Infantry,
and not by cavalry. It was carried out
in the face of fire as great, and. it must
also be said, as a general headquarters
gamble with the lives of inch as inexplicable
as that indulged in on the Crimean slopes.
That Australians suffered is a cause of sor-
row; that Australians did it cannot but
be a source of iutensest pride. I happened
to be in that fight. There, as earlier and
later, I learned to love my fellow Aus-
tralian soldiers with an affection and a
pride that the years cannot quench—and
there, too, as later, came to hate war and its
hideous hells with a hatred that will last
.to the grave—aye, and eyen beyond it.


J. ■ ft. SI//J/9&
BACK FROM THE WAR
On an Hospital Shi p.
S.M.H. 8/11/30
C. R. MORTIMER*'
(BY
The hospital ship No. 1 A.H S- (Karoola)
had a trip to England after armistice to bring
home those too ill to travel by other boats.
With each trip we seemed to get a class of
patient that would represent the various
phases of the war We had many cases of
trench-feet when the stalemate was on, and
our men were having a rather torrid time in
the mud and slush of Flanders. Then came
the shell-shock patients when both sides were
well provided with guns and ammunition, and
bent on breaking the stalemate. Later on we
had the gassed meh when Fritz introduced
that game into the strafe, followed by the dis-
abled “sport” after the “Sportsman’s Unit”
went into the line of action.
This time our complement was made up o*
those who fretted over being knocked over on
the last day of the fighting. They took it
hard, being lucky enough to go safely through
the horrors of war right up to the last day,
and then with only a few hours’ more fighting
before them, to get smashed up in that short
time There were times when the hardest
part of the nursing consisted in cheering the
Digger up. No good nurse on the boat let his
or her patients get down in the dumps. Soma
of them would have died and never have seen,
mum and home again had they been allowed
to let themselves believe that daisy pushing
would be their next occupation.
Shortly before we arrived at Sierra Leone
the days began to get decidedly warm. I have
turned up my diary with reference to this
trying ordeal, and find the following entry:—
“Now, let me see—there was the kid. Listen
you who hid behind women’s petticoats; he
was a spine case, with two years’ war ser-
vice, and only just turned seventeen. The kid
is fretting, with his face turned to the wall;
poor little baby is down in the dumps, crying
his heart out because just when life was tres
bon he is well on the outer. Across the ward
from him is a nipper just turned twenty, who
is a mass of bandages. He has been well pep-
pered with shrapnel (iron ration). The heat
makes his wounds very inflamed, and he is
also smothered in prickly heat. There is a
boy of 23 lying on his back in his cot stripped
to the waist. There is not much of his face
to be seen for bandages. He has an artificial,
nose, two parallel scars showing the mark of
stitches the full length of his neck, and a
chest well dusted with shrapnel. He says
Fritz gave him a full issue of iron ration.
There is the dinkum Digger holding his poor'
maimed hands and forearms up in the air.
His hands and arms caught the liquid fire
issued by Hock, and the sweat is stinging
him. By the time we arrive at Sierra Leone
the other patients in jny ward are as silent as
oysters. They are sticking it in the good old
Aussie style.”
TERRIFIC HEAT.
While the ship is coaling we have the hottest
day known in our travels. God only knows
what it was in the wards, with steampipes
7ft overhead and port holes closed to keep
some of the coal dust out. It was 96 degree*
in the water surrounding the boat.
I try to get 17-year-old to stop fretting and
crying, and have something to eat, as he had
arrived at the refusing to eat stage. Having
pacified him, I then start to treat 20-year-old
for his prickly heat. The others are silently
gazing at the ceiling. How they stick it only
those that see them can realise. When I
have given the kid some ease from his prickly
heat, he says: “You look after a chap like
as if you was his father. Say, Dick, where
does you come from?” I replied, “Prom the
legitimate capital of New South Wales.”
“Not a bad ’un!” said burnt hands.
“What yer coming at? I comes from Stake
and Kidney (Sydney),” said another, thinking
I meant that town.
“Well, it’s this way,” I said, “old Parramatta
was the dinkie-die capital of New South Wales
until you Sydney guys came along and robbed
us of our rights.”
“That’s the stuff to give them,” roars the
spine case from Tasmania.
.“What! that sleepy old town!” chips in
another.
“Yer don’t want to say too much about the
old town. It will do me,” says the boy with
the false nose.
“And who keeps the booser now, Dick?”
Do you know Mr, So-and-So?” are questions
fired at me.
The tension is broken, their minds are
taken off the hell they have been through and
the pain of their wounds. • Laughter and
banter grow apace with respect to their various
homes. For the time being they forget about
it.


vLs °? c / j //
“The Australian Retriever."
-A- IV, , , v , .
x i iii _ i U' '-'is -L 0. /*' \^o)*(4t.
John Bull welcomes the first achievement of the Australian Navy.


tlx- /i-' tj r
CAN WE FORGET?
The Lesson of Armistice
S.M.H. 15/11/30
(BY
AMY ELEANOR MACK.)
Some of the authorities seem to think It Is
time we began to forget, and to give up
leaving our flowers of memory at the war
shrines. But as long as life lasts, no man
or weman who lived through the war years
can forget them, and each Armistice Day
as it comes round must be crowded with
memories. Some memories have faded a little
and softened at the edges through distance;
others are as sharp and poignant as they were
twelve years ago, clearer than many memories
of a year, or even a month ago.
My thoughts go back to the first Armistice
Day, in London. All the world has read
again and again, of tire glad, sad happening
of that day; how London was released with
dramatic suddenness from the tension of
four and a half years by the bugle call of
“All Clear,” the call which had been waited
for so often during the long hours of air-
raids; of how people walked along the streets
waving flags and cheering, while tears poured |
down their cheeks: how the whole populace
rushed to the Palace and cried: “We want
King George,” and cheered, and sang, and
cheered and sang: of how the King and Queen
drove out amongst their people, attended by
a single out-rider; how the Houses of Parlia-
ment adjourned to St. Margaret’s to “Thank
God,” and how every church throughout the
land was filled with a grateful people giving j
praise. Those happenings are matters of
history now, but we all have our private
memories.
A VIVID INCIDENT.
One little Incident often comes back to me.!
: With thousands of others I was making my
way down the Mall to the Palace, and with
Ime walked a fellow Australian from “out
back,” one of a fearless pioneer race who
always faced truth. Towards us came a row
of munition girls, with arms linked, and sing-
ing lustily. Just as they reached us they
shouted, “Who won the war? America won
the war!” My friend stepped towards them,
and said in a quiet, compelling voice, “No, It
was the heroes of Mons who won the warl”
The girls looked staggered, stared at her for
a moment, then went silently on their way.
! And, silently, I applauded my friend, for
only the very night before I had been amused
by the enthusiasm of some news-boys slng-
\ ing loudly, “Over There, Over There.”
The Yanks are coming, the Yanks are
cqming,
The Yanks are coming over there!”
Yes, London certainly cheered on Armistice
Day. And looking back, I realise that on
i only one other occasion did I hear similar
| cheering in all those five years. As a rule,
| Englishmen are too self-conscious to let them-
j selves go “all out.” I heard Kitchener cheered,
| and Lloyd-George, and Haig, and Foch, and
j Clemenceau, but always the cheering was a
1 little intermittent and uncertain, and shy. On
j Armistice Day, all restraint was removed, and
! heart called to heart, and the people rejoiced
| with one voice.
The other time when 1 heard the same
spontaneous cheering was about the middle of
1918, I think, when the “Old Contemptibles”
—all that was left of them —marched through
London. I stood In the crowd near Hyde
j Park corner, and as row after row of those
war-worn men filed past, there arose a
"heer from the watchers such as I had never
heard in my life before. It was the Salute
to Heroes!
No, we cannot forget!
ARMISTICE DAY.
A Reminiscence.
J.E.C.t
(BY
ic was in cne yeai —me
sary of Armistice Day. We were on a tour of
some of the groups of Pacific Islands, notably
of Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa. In Fiji we had
assisted at the “Welcome Home” of the Fiji
Labour Corps of 100 men, who had just re-
turned from the front after an absence of two
or three years. The great audience comprised
representatives of the Government and all
classes and castes in Fiji. The Governor and
his suite were present, and his Excellency
voiced the pride which all Fiji felt in the
splendid record put up by these dusky islanders
away in France during the great days of the
war. Their Commandant (Captain Aller-
dyce) publicly testified that these 100 Fijians
had commended themselves above all other
Labour contingents for their excellent be-
haviour, their unfailing Industry, and their
attention to their religious duties. It trans-
pired that 90 per cent, of them belonged to
one of the Mission Churches in Fiji, and that
amongst them were several native preachers
or students for the native ministry.
The day was spent in high jubilation,
’Tokos” of several provinces having brought
with them representatives who performed in
ah artistic manner the “mekes” which are in-
separable from native festivities. The next
day we embarked on the inter-island steamer
Paloona for Tonga, and on the morning of
November 10 we landed in Nukualofa —the
capital of the Kingdom of Tonga. Her
Majesty the Queen was not to be interviewed,
she having given birth to her second son a few
days previously, but her husband, Prince Wil-
liami Tungi, did the honours and welcomed
the visitors. Of course, a call was made upon
the British Resident (or Consul), who exercises
1 no small amount of influence in regard to ad-
ministrative affairs. The Consul had just re-
ceived an important official document, advising
him of his Majesty the King’s desire that
Armistice Day should be becomingly observed
throughout the whole Empire, and that “at
the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the
eleventh month” a solemn silence of two min-
utes should obtain in reverent remembrance of
those who had suffered and died in the Great
! War. The Consul intimated his Intention to
suggest that this observance should be recog-
nised in Nukualofa-Tonga, being a Protector-
ate under the British Crown; and also sug-
I gested that we might arrange for its observ-
ance at sea. He courteously supplied us with
a copy of the Proclamation.
Our vessel weighed anchor early in the
morning. The skipper of the Paloona was in-
terviewed, and courteously fell into line. Pre-
cisely at 11 o’clock on the high seas between
Nukualofa and Haabai, a bell was sounded, the
engines were stopped, the ship’s company was
called to attention. The captain, standing on
the upper deck, surrounded by his principal
officers, read his Majesty’s Proclamation, and
a the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of
the eleventh month of the first year after the
close of the War, every one of the ship rever-
ently uncovered the head, stood at attention
I for the tw > minutes, and silentiy remembered
those who “nobly striving, nobly fell.” The
silence over, we sang “God Save the King;”
| the engines again began to throb, and the
i Paloona sped on her way to Haabai. We had
observed the first “Armistice Day” anniversary
in a way and under circumstances leaving an
indelible impression. The silence of London
streets at the hour named could scarcely have
been more suggestive.
AT THE CENOTAPH.
•
(Two minutes’ silence was observed through-
out the city on Armistice Day.)
The hushed crowd gathered round, and laid
their flowers
All reverently upon the marble’s base,
Then paused a while, remembering the hours
When desolation swept the world’s wide face;
And then for these who had the utmost given
A silence deep and reverent fell from heaven
And held the crowded streets a little space.
N. A. EVANS.


The Sydney Morning Herald 10/11/1931
HONOUR ROLL.
University of Sydney.
TO-MORROW'S UNVEILING.
(BY C. E. W. BEAN.)
To-morrow, Armistice Day, at Sydney Uni-
versity there will take place the dedication by
the Anglican Archbishop of Sydney and un-
veiling by the Governor of what is an essen-
tial portion of the University’s War Memorial
—the roll of honour.
It should be explained that not merely the
carillon (now three and a half years old)
but the whole great tower of the University
constitutes the memorial, the tower having
been formally appropriated for this purpose
and transformed by gradual stages to its
special use. The process is not yet complete
—the adapting of the uppermost chamber to
carry the bells, and of the chamber below' it
for the clavier-room (where the bells are
played), was only ope step. The room below
these is to be architecturally remodelled into
a “muniment” chamber for holding the book
of remembrance and other records. Below this
again the main archway has been transformed,
its pavement redesigned and raised, its ceil-
ing beautifully moulded in Australian wood,
and a bronze lamp hung: and here the rolls
of honour, engraved in bronze, have been
affixed. All this work has been carried out
under the supervision of the Government
Architect, Mr. Evan Smith. Additional funds
are needed for remodelling the muniment
room, and possibly for the extension of the
carillon by five heavier bells. Except in these
respects the great tower is now in the form
in which it will always stand as one of the
main memorial buildings of our country.
THE SUPPLEMENTARY ROLL.
The work of raising the memorial has, in a
sense, been national. The idea that the self-
sacrifice of many young lives should be com-
memorated by means of these sw'eet tones,
echoing every hour through the University
cloisters and other buildings, had an appeal
far wider than the University, and many men,
women, and groups of citizens grasped at the
notion of giving a bell in memory of a son, a
friend, or old comrades. The largest bell
was given by the w'hole Faculty of Arts in
memory of the A.1.F.: and, in addition to the
sacrifice of individual soldiers, there has
been commemorated by the gift of a bell or
of subscriptions towards one the loss of old i
boys of Armidale School, of members of the I
University Club, of men of several colleges,
of suburbs and towms. of players of the Rugby I
Union, who played their last great game on
the battlefield, of the nurses of the A.1.F., of
the 3rd and 34th Battalions, the stretcher-
bearers of the 17th, the 6th, and 7th Light
Horse Regiments, members of the old New
South Wales Scottish Rifles, the engineers,
the signallers, the dental service, and very
many others.
29th DIVISION COMMEMORATED.
One valuable advantage of this system is
tlmt it has afforded the opportunity for as-
sociating with an Australian memorial cer-
tain names that every “digger” would like to
see there; for example, that of Edith Cavell,
friend of soldiers, and that of the 51st (High-
land) Division. One could wish to find some
day on that list the names of the New Zealand
Expeditionary Force and of the navy, in both
of which Sydney graduates must have served,
and to both of which the A.I.P. was over and
over again indebted for support which never
failed in tight corners. But it is Indeed pleasant
to hear that the latest name on the list —-
placed there through a special effort headed
by the Vice-Chancellor, Dr. R. s. Wallace,
who himself served with the A.l.P.—ts that
of the 29th British Division. Is there any-
where else in Australia, one wonders, a
memorial to our most famous comrades of
Gallipoli?
These names stand on a supplementary roll
of honour on one side of the great archway,
surmounted by the medallion (designed by
Mr. J. D. Moore) by means of which certain
funds were raised for the carillon. At the top
of the roll are the words; “These also shall
be held in grateful memory and shall be sung
for ever by the bells,” and at its foot part of
two lines from Virgil which, in their adapted
form, may be translated: “A black day
dawned; bravely they fought and died.”
THE UNIVERSITY’S ROLL.
It Is on the other side of the great archway,
however, that there stands the list of over
200 names which is the main motive for the
memorial—the University’s own honour roll
The Virgilian lines at its foot may be trans-
lated; “Noble spirits, who with their blood
won this our country for us.” Not everyone is
agreed as to the value of war memorials. But
among all nations and classes beautiful archi-
tecture and impressive ceremony are a recog-
nised means for the expression of their grati-
tude and admiration for the greatest civic
virtues; and the general sense of the com-
munity unerringly recognises that the noblest
civic virtue was that of the men and women
who gave their simple answer to a public call,
and —not for the purposes of which most life
is the pursuit, but for a public ideal —were
ready to forgo all that life promised them.
It is not, perhaps, generally realised to what
a degree the war tested the quality of the
services given by the Australian universities
to their nation. Before 1914 our universities
had turned out scholars and scientists, and
had manned our professions, but no oppor-
tunity had arisen to show whether they pro-
duced leaders. And then came the nation’s
1 call for the most that men and women can
give—unconditional devotion of their whole
bodily, mental, and moral powers to its ser-
vice, involving very possibly death, possibly
worse than death. Within 12 months every
j informed observer knew that our universities
! were pouring into the national service the
j cream of our people. The judgment, not of
clients or school children, but of rough-hewn
I soldiers who daily saw character stripped
naked, was paying to these University men—
boys almost—the tribute of whole-hearted ad-
miration and affection. Hard-grained, clear-
sighted workers from the bush, the wharves,
and the mines, recognising in them a precious
vein of pure altruism, were ready to follow
them anywhere. The first of them, Henry
Norman MacLaurln, son of the University’s
Chancellor, from the time of his early death
in Gallipoli was the accepted pattern in the
A IT• of what a young Australian should be.
“NOBLE SPIRITS . . .”
They went as unknown men—but what a
concourse that roll now holds: Pockley, the
first Australian officer to fall, who had given
his protecting brassard to another man; C.
R - , Pye - the “Perfect, gentle knight,” a
medical graduate who, little more than a boy.
•was killed as a battalion commander in the
infantry on the duckboards at Ypres; M. P.
Smith, another medical graduate in the in-
fantry killed rallying his men at Anzac after
he had been wounded and ordered to the rear;
noble, unselfish, light-hearted Charlie Man-
ning (in whose memory Dr. Bickerton Black-
bum has given a bell); Evan Richards beau
ideal of a soldier and a gentleman: J. K,
Henderson and A. G. Ferguson, beloved
leaders; S. J. G. Davis, precious intellect and
rare spirit, who, when demonstrator in
geology and undergraduate in the Faculty of
Arts, was medically rejected for the Australian
infantry, but afterwards enlisted in the Eng-
lish ranks and fought the tedium of the front
line by writing Latin verse: R. W Howard
great-hearted airman, shot down while stem-
mmg the great German attack in March 1918 *
Laurence Street, son of the Chief Justice hit
great Turkish attack at
s ; W Gritten, former secretary of the
wll ° helped to lead a forlorn hope at
Bullecourt, and was killed at Ypres; W. G. V.
Hillcoat, Congregational minister, hit while
stretcher-bearing at the Menin-road: RAM
STO ° n £-year “med.” killed marking
. lne °f a ttack full in the enemy’s sight
R ‘ 11 ™ 11 and the Kirkland
brothers, killed at their humane duty; J B
thp^hem,^ and bravest of men , hit in
the shelling of Bonnay. and his brother, also
a doctor, who died in London; J. E. and C B
M° n^rt SO R~A 10 4 he ! s ’ captaln and private;’ p'.
M. and R. A. Barton, each killed going for-
ward one at Mouquet Farm, the other at
Messmes; J. S. D. and A. D. Walker clean
f r o T thffr n ? W , leaders their father and
ux of their family served: the well-loved
colonel of the 3rd Battalion, E. S. Brown (a
veteran regular who won his diploma in Mlli-
ta£LSfience) ’ kilkd at Lone Pine. :
be W written. Stor> a " thls ' “ 11 ™r|


, 7 7 V '
HIS DIGS!
UNRECORDED HISTORY
The Mix-up at Hazebrouck
WINE AND SONG AND SHELLS
(By
“An open go.”
So said the Diggers of the First Di-
vision, when they hit that land flowing
with milk and honey round Haze-
brouck, Caestre, and Strazelle. With j
not a moment to lose as the Hun
legions swept on towards the coast,
the tradespeople of the towns and the
toilers of the fields grabbed up a
bundle of clothes and set out for the :
“land of I don’t know where.”
This was the time the Digger had
waited for. During those weary
months' when he ploughed through the
slimv, loathsome wastes of the Somme
and Ypres, how he had longed to battle
with the enemy on country that had
not been blighted by a pestilence of
shells and gas. At last there was corn
in Egypt. The moral side of it did
rot concern the Digger a great deal.
As he philosophically remarked, “Why j
leave it for the Hun to ravage and 1
plunder?” Even as they spoke —before (
the result of the second brigade’s epic j
hand-to-hand fight was known—the i
German artillery was pulverising the !
once prosperous towns and villages to j
dust.
“HOME ON THE BIT”
Back at an artillery horse-lines the
I first teams to report in from the guns
1 since detraining arrived with the glad
1 tidings that Hazebrouck and Caestre
j were chockful of the best in every-
thing. They all gathered round the
lead driver of the first team and sought
“the oil,” while the donk-propellers
waiting to go forward with rations and
ammunition leant over in their stir-
rups to get the lay of the land.
“Boys, she’s home on the hit,” said
the driver, “It’s just as if everyone had
cleared out of Sydney to spend a holi-
day in the Mountains- As we were
coming back through Hazebrouck the
Digs, were going for their life, tearing
into the booze, ’ sampling the goods in
the tucker shops, and bagging the
best of the souvenirs. We were
‘cruelled’ through having that cow of
| an officer with us, but, take it from me,
we’ll make up for lost time after
‘stables’ to-night.”
Before being dismissed that night
the Diggers were informed that tht
towns of Hazebrouck and Caestre v/ert
1 out of bounds to all troops except those
on duty, and warned that offenders
would be treated to a court-martial—
if caught. That served to make th<
S i ———.
boys all the more anxious to go. Was
there not a saying by one of Austra-
lia’s generals: “Give the Diggers ar
extra pay and put Berlin out of bounds,
and the war will be over in a fort-
night-”
TROUBLE FOR THE “EMMA PIPS’
The cub reporter could have had
truth on his side for once by statin?
that all roads led to the forbidder
towns that night.
The Blue-bands —those individual!
whom all good soldiers regard as hav-
i in g sold their birthright-were there
in full force strengthened by the Kea
In run - - were against them,
1 C3 j S ’ oI U fast as they hunted one gang
and as *® t dozens sprang up to
Itake .Ur pTa« *»■< -1»* >•>««
bovs were " ’laminated” to the eyes the
policemen’s life was not a y .p" s »
More than one pair of Lmma i ips
were sorry th6y disturbed festive par-
ln cellars The tossing of Mills
bombs with the advice to ‘‘divide that
£p amongst you » was of frequent oc-
currence, and several deaths that
neared in the casualty lists from mu -
adventure" could be traced to the loot
? c lasli* between a soldier mad-
dened with drink and two Blue-bands
stands out because the duel was staged
right in front of the church. He pre-
sented a sorry spectacle as he stood
hack to the wall and defied the police
him. "It you try to pinch me
you’ll get a full issue, he yelled
1 antlv the while he affectionately
I toved with a Mills’ bomb. Argument
il was useless, and the M.P.’s not having
sufficient sense to get some o-hise b
! bers to persuade him to ret 1 « to - h „ l *
,! billet, started to advance. In a nasi
I’the pin was out and the bomb hurled.
1 —: —t - '' '
They fell prone and escaped, hut a ser-
vice revolver barked and the man fell.
Later, he had a bullet removed from his
neck at the dressing: station, and was
then lodged in the clink-
On those opening nights of the loot
campaign wine and spirits flowed liu»
water,lind those who were not incap-I
able of movement roamed the town in
search of good things. What a sight
those strange soldiers fighting to make
the world safe for Democracy pre-
sented as they reeled from store to
store! Dressed in all manner of clothes,
from the frockcoat to the smock, they
wandered along, occasionally adding ,
to their bundles and singing those
songs that delight the hearts of the
* disci- les of Bacchus. From way dow n
in the depths of an old cellar carne the
strains of an old camp fire ditty.
And we’ll all take a holiday In the summer-
time,
And it won’t be beside the sea.
Left, left, I had a good Job and I left,
That’s what the song Is going to be.
And we’ll all take a holiday in the summer-
'(■ time,
! And it won’t be beside the sea.
We will live In woodgn huts.
With the mud up to our guts,
On good old Salisbury Plain.
Across the road a musical corroboree
was going on in the deserted music
store which had been badly dinged by
a shell during the day. The great
plateglass window was lying in a
thousand fragments on the cobbled
pavement, and this permitted easy en-
trance for the busy attendants, who
were “running the rabbit’’ for the audi-
ence and players, to' the estaminet
next door. For hours that crowd
jazzed and bawled ragtime to the ac-
companiment of music from a new
' I; baby grand!
I i
EXPENSIVE CHAMPAGNE
While these wild carousals were tak-
ing place those paved streets were
-alive with bursting shells screaming
death and destruction, and as those:
motley crowds of merrymakers wan-
i dered' back to their billets their joy
i was tinged with sadness. As they
I passed along one of the main
I thoroughfares, not many yards from
the church, they saw the lifeless form
1 of one of their comrades spread-eagled
! with a case of champagne in his arms! ’
■ There was a great gaping hole along- '
j side, and the wine that he had bought
; at such a price was still trickling into j
the gutter.
Many of the participants in that
costly orgy carry scars to this day—;
and wear no wound stripe for them.
Back at those artillery lines the
next morning a sick and sorry saddler
came on parade with his hand bandag-
ed. He informed his questioners that
his hand stopped a shell fragment
“when that Digger was skittled near
the church.” “I wasn’t game to go
to the dressing station, because it was
a moral the quack would have marked
me ‘S.I.,’ and then a court martial, and
1 a stretch in clink.” And as he pulled
off the rough bandage he mournfully
added, “Just take a tulkeroo at it—
| what a bonser Blighty.”
SOUSED HUMAN MOLES
With the war to carry on it was not
long before the Command put the
damper on the wild times, and there
commenced a general clean-up of what
remained of the town of Hazebrouck.
There were numerous finds down In
the dark recesses, and among those
'soused human moles” who were un-
earthed none presented a. more sorry
-pectacle than Willo, the machine
unner from Surry Hills. He was dis-
overed in a cellar in a drunken slum-
er, with food and empty bottles
eaped all round him. And in the sur-
rounding stacks were enough stingo
to keep Wilio’s jag going till the end
, of the war.
i As he was being dragged away to
the place where there is no kick in
the liquid refreshment, he mumbled
something about "this war’ll do me.”
Willo had been underground for six
days, and it took a lot of work with
j the stomach pump to put him on the
i road to recovery.
Phil Cell)


HIT BY A 100 LB. BOMB
THE BUG BRIDGE AFTER THE ATTACK
During the latter stages of the war it will be remembered, the Royal Air
C rfu Carr u ?d u oUt ve x y « ffect jy e operations in the neighborhood of Constan-
nrarfh ! n wh + lch * W3S ltse f El i b J® cted to bombing. This remarkable air photo-
graph illustrates a singular incident that proyed disastrous to the enemy. The
ICrOIb r hlmh y bnd 9e, t' n the fsleEtos Gorge, is seen just after being hit by a
1W)lb. bomb, dropped from a height of about 500 ft. Curiously enouah the
W |f S not apparent at a distance, and, to test the stability of the
bridge, the Turks ran a tra.n on to it, whereupon the bridge and train col-
lapsed.


f TUt ZrA) I^ll
LETTERS
THE CONVOY SYSTEM.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sir,—l am glad to have Mr. Orton’s assur-
ance to-day th:*t he did not mean to infer
that the convoy system during the Great War
was an Innovation at all. But he is a little
contradictory in the latter part of his letter
when he refers again to the “originators of
the convoy plan,” and sums up by allowing
that Lord Jelllcoe, whom I quoted, differs
from the writers of the official history as to
who those originators actually were. The
context of Mr. Orton’s letter leaves no doubt
that he is referring to “originators” during
the Great War, and not, if I may so call them,
the “original originators” during previous
wars. How could anybody have originated
anything during the Great War, which Mr.
Orton admits was not then an innovation at
all?
As a matter of fact, and without having
actual data on which to work, I am personally
doubtful if the convoy system was so effective
during the Great War as it has been assumed
to have been. Its introduction took place in
1917, and largely coincided with the intensifi-
cation of our general anti-submarine measures*
which became increasingly - effective. That
these measures must have acted as a serious
check to German submarine activities cannot
be doubted, and the following comparison ot
total merchant tonnage sunk and submarines
destroyed in 1917 (as far as Lord Jellicoe,
from whose “Crisis of the Naval War the
figures are quoted, could ascertain) is de-
cidedly interesting;—
Tonnage Submarines
sunk. destroyed.
Ist quarter .. 1,619,373
2nd quarter .. 2,236,934 12
3rd quarter .. 1 ’ oa
4th quarter .. 1,272,843 ~4
The figures suggest the question; "Was the
convoy system responsible for the drop in the
tonnage losses, or was the drop mainly due to
the intensification of our submarine hunting
campaign, whose success is measured by the
increase in the figures for submarines sunk.
I am, etc., '
C. H. ROLLESTON,
Commander, R.N. (Retired).
July 2.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE HERALD.
Sir,—Several letters having recently ap-
peared in your columns on the subject of
“Convoys,” the following note may be of
interest. In 1406 the English merchants hav-
ing become extremely dissatisfied with tne
policy, or lack of it. of their very irresolute
monarch. Henry IV., and the in-
security of their property upon the high seas,
negotiations were opened between the prin-
cipal merchants and shipowners of England
and the King’s Council "respecting the guard
of the sea,” the merchants being determined
to protect themselves if the King s ships could
not do so. Finally, at the request of the
Commons, the King appointed six of their
number to treat with his Council on the mer-
chants’ behalf, and conclude the affair. The
merchants and shipowners offered to under-
take the guard of the sea from May 1, 1406,
to September 29, 1407. upon certain condi-
tions.” with as many vessels as might be
necessary and two thousand fighting men be-
sides mariners. Most of the m + e Jf n tVi?«
gestlons were adopted, even to the appointing
of two of their nominees as admirals, one of
the north, the other of the south, who re-
ceived the usual commissions oi Royal
admirals under the Great Seal. The EngUsh
princess Philippa, having been affianced to
Eric King of Denmark, she sailed for that
country from King’s Lynn, in Norfolk, m
August, 1406, attended by Richard, brother of
the 8 Duke of York, and the Bishop of Bath.
On June 11. 1408, Nicholas Blackburne, the
merchants’ admiral of the north, was paid
the sum of £166/13/4, a large amount in
those days, “for P r °tectlng theses and con-
voying the princess to Denmark. Hits yepr
extraordinary reversal of the usual relation-
s' between King’s ship and merchants’
ship is as Sir Harris Nicolas remarks, a
very remarkable event in the naval and com-
mercial history of this country.
T n.m. etc..
FLINDERS BARR.
July 2.
/


Our First V.C.
%
CAPTAIN JACKA, V.C., M.C. (with bar), of
the 14th Battalion, was the first of the Austra-
lians to attach the coveted V.C. The story
of his winning the Cross has been told and re-
told. When a lance-corporal of the 14th, under
Col. Courtney, he was in the defence of Court-
ney’s Post, and was one of those who held the
line between Quinn’s and Courtney's v hen San-
ders Pasha made his attempt to drive the Anzacs
into the sea. At Courtney’s the Turks suc-
ceeded in penetrating the Australian trenches,
and Jacka rushed among them, alone, from the
rear. He shot five and accounted for two
others with the bayonet. Thiee who evaded
Viim rushed into the arms of Lieut. Crabbe’s men
guarding the entrance to the trench. “I must
have lost my head,” was Jacka’s own comment.
He was awarded the V.C., and until Lone
Pine it stood as the only one at the credit of
Australia. Col. Courtney spoke of him as the
model of what a soldier should be. And Sir
Evelyn Wood said of his feat that he considered
it the finest in the history of the Cross—as it
probably was up to that time. His perfor-
mance at Pozieres, when, with seven men, he
held 600 Germans till help arrived (previously
detailed in this paper) won him the M.C., and
the bar came for a bit of bright work with the
bare hands at Bullecourt.
, Murray’s Wonderful Work
The story of the gallantry of MAJOR MUR-
RAY, V.C., D. 5.0., etc., has been told in the
Sunday Times previously. He is one of the
much-decorated of our soldiers, but the special
reward for special valor is, of course, the best-
prized of his badges. He won the Cross on
account of what is referred to in the Gazette of
March, 1917, as “most wonderful work.” He
was in command of the right flank company
in an attack, and, the men going to the assault
with great skill and courage, the position was
quickly captured. The enemy did not yield
without putting up a contest, in which there was
very heavy fighting. Three vigorous counter-
attacks were driven back by Major Murray’s
«en, but in the course of the night they suffered
numerous casualties from concentrated enemy
shell-fire, and gave way under one of these at-
tacks. Murray rallied his team magnificently.
He led them in bayonet charges and accounted
for many of the enemy with the steel; he headed
parties of bombers, and when there was time for
rescue work to be done, got out with the
searchers and brought in his wounded.
Throughout the whole of the fighting of the
day, and the trying hours of the night, when the
enemy fire was cutting up his command, his
magnificent example inspired his men. Major
Murray went away as lance-corporal with the
13th Battalion. His home address is Erina-
ftrcct, Launceston, Tasmania.
" " 1 \v-
r — —" r '‘ Bracketed Braves
The morning of August 9, 1915, was One of
the busy days (at Lone Pine) of the Anzacs,
and rewards for bravery were numerous. On
that day CAPTAIN SHOUT, LIEUTENANT
SYMONS. LIEUTENANT TUBE, COR-
PORALS A. S, BURTON and WILLIAM
DUNSTAN, and PRIVATE HAMILTON won
their Crosses—and more than one of them their
crowns. On the preceding days (7th and Bth)
L.-CPL. KEYZOR played catchers with death
in the same line wf trench, and won his
V.C. Burton and Dunstan, of the 7th Bat-
talion, are bracketed in the award of the V.C,
M for most conspicuous bravery.” They v/ere
with Lieutenant Tubb when he held his portion
of the trench, and repeatedly re-built the oarri-.
cade, blown in by the Turk fire. Burton was
killed by a bomb while building up the parapet
Under a hail of missiles. Dunstan and he were
Specially mentioned in the announcement of the
kward to Lieutenant Tubb.
-r “A Precious Asset To Us All.**
At Lone Pine on August 9, 1915, the Turks,
heavily reinforced, came on in a furious torrent.
The big attack of the Australians had failed.
The enemy held a communication trench wind-
ing into the heart of the Allied psoition, and
menacing General Smith’s headquarters. The
Turks came up three abreast, and Lieutenant-
Colonel Howell-Price was shooting them down
it pistol range. CAPTAINS SHOUT (Ist
Battalion) and Sass, with a party of sandbag-
bearers, started to clear the enemy out. They
rushed to a position in the trench, threw up
their temporary parapets, and fired and bombed
from behind these. Sass was the rifleman of
the team and Shout the grenadier—joking and
laughing all the time. They drove all before
them, these two Australians. Shout lit three
bomb fuses at once for a final' throw, but one
of these burst too soon, blowing off one hand
and shattering the other, destroying an eye, lay-
ing open his cheek and scaring his breast and
leg. His work was over. He was cheerful to
the last. Asked for a drink of tea, sent a
loving message to his wife, and died smiling.
“The life and soul of his section; a precious
asset to us all.”
Playing Catches With Death
LANCE-CORPORAL LEONARD KEY-
ZOR (Ist Battalion, A.1.F.) was one of the men
who defied death to get him. On August 7
and 8, 1915, there was some fierce fighting in the
south-eastern corner of the Lone Pine trenches,
and our men were hard pressed in a section of
the outer trench, which had to be abandoned,
though they prevented the Turks establishing
themselves in it. Here Keyzor was in his ele-
ment. He not only threw our bombs across,
but, noticing that some of those flung by the
enemy were slow in exploding, he picked them
up and threw them back into their trenches.
Finally, when the enemy cut down the time of
the fuses he caught the bombs in the air, and
threw them over. He was twice wounded, and
marked for hospital, but refused to leave, and
volunteered to throw bombs for another party
which had lost its throwers. Altogether he played
this game of catchers with death for over 50
hours, almost continuously. Lance-Corporal
Keyzor, who was 30 years of age then, was
born in London, and came to Australia in 1910.
Previously he had been in Canada for some
Sears. His next-of-kin is Mrs. B. Keyzor,
laida Vale, Londori (Eng,).
Symons of the Seventh
About 5 o’clock in the morning of August
P, 1915, the Turks came down in strong force
on an isolated Australian sap at Lone Pine. The
attack was vigorous, and six of our officers were
killed or wounded severely in quick succession.
The enemy assault was successful to the extent
that a portion of the sap was taken. CAP- I
TAIN WILLIAM JOHN SYMONS, of the
7th Battalion, was in command of the right sec-
tion of the trenches held by his battalion, and
stood off the enemy with notable coolness.
When the Turks entered the portion of the sap
Which they had taken, he led a charge and re-
took it, shooting down two Turks with his
revolver at very short range. Hostile fire
was pouring in from three sides to the sap, and
Symons withdrew his men about IS yards to
, where there was a trifle of overhead cover. Here
he built up, in the face of a heavy fire, a
sand barricade. The enemy managed to set
fire to the fascines and overhead woodwork of
j the barricade, but he extinguished the fire, re-
built his defences, and held his little fort. His
, coolness and determination were too much for
the attacking force, which discontinued opera-
tions.
Held on Under Bomb Fire
LIEUT. HAROLD TUBE, of the 7th Bat-
talion, won his Cross on the same day as the
distinction fell to Symons of the 7th —and for
bravery of much the same type, under a hot
enemy fire. He was holding a section of the
newly-captured trenches at Lone Pine, on the
morning of August 9, 1915, when the Turks
came down in strong force in a most determined
counter-attack. They advanced up a sap and
blew in a sand-bag barricade, of which they left
not more than a foot standing. Tubb charged
them, and drove the Turks back, and held them
at a distance while he rebuilt the barricade.
Twice subsequently the Turks, with strong sup-
ports of bombers, blew in the barricade, but
the little company of Australians held them,
and Lieut. Tubb, though he had been badly
wounded in the head and arm, kept command,
re-built the barricade, and maintained the posi-
tion under continuous enemy fire. He has
since been killed.
■; .
A Target fox Six Honrs
At Lone Pine, that treacherous man-trap of
machine guns and barbed wire, with thousands
of stalwart bombers hurling death, CORPORAL
JACK HAMILTON, of the Ist Battalion, won
his V.C. In one of the bitter, almost hand-to-
hand melees, the boy leaped on the parados,
and with absolute disregard for his own safety,
stayed there while the gallant 3rd stood off I
each Ottoman wave till the flaming assault
fell off, and the cruel field was ours. It was
a miracle he lasted a moment, much less six
hours —a silhouetted target Or crowds of Turk
• marksmen and bombers, whose movements he
called out to the officers below. When im- j
plored to some down from his perch on the
parados he shouted : Tve got a better fire
position here. Right and left, like shooting
pigeous from traps, he killed many of the enemy
with his rifle. His coolness and daring thrilled
his battalion to heroic deeds that spread in
• cycles of desperate achievement. The defence
was heartened to superhuman feats, and the
enemy was driven off. Corporal Hamilton is |
the son of Mr, Wm, Hamilton, of Carrothcrs-
st., Penshurst,
rr
Jackson; of Gunbar
PRIVATE WILLIAM JACKSON, 7th Bat-
talion, was made much of on his return to his
j home State. He is one of the youngest of the
i V.C.’s —twenty years and three months —son
of Mr. John Jackson, of Gunbar, a settlement
near Hay. Till he enlisted, young Jackson had
; never seen a railway train. He was seventeen
when he joined up, giving his age as eighteen.
He saw the finish at Gallipoli and then went
on to France. At Bois Grenier, near Armen-
tieres, many of our raiders were wounded in
ian adventure in to No-Man’s Land, out of
which Jackson came unwounded, bringing in I
... , , A
■ a prisoner. Handing him over, he went out
under very heavy shell fire, and assisted in
bringing in one of our wounded. Again he
went out, with a sergeant, and was returning
with another man when a shell struck him,
and blew his right arm off. The sergeant was
rendered unconscious, so Jackson took in the
wounded man, had his own wound attended to,
and went out again to look for two wounded
comrades. His was one of the splendid examples
of pluck and determination. Officially it was
noted that his work had always beeq marked
by the greatest coolness and bravery,
Birks Went on Alone
■
i SUB-LIEUTENANT FRED BIRKS put up
a record in single-handed work in France in
October. With a corporal as his sole support
he rushed an enemy post that was holding upi
advance. The corporal was wounded, and
put out of action, but Birks went on, killed the
crew of a machine gun, and took the gun which
he carried back to his lines. Then he returned
with a small party and attacked a strong point
held by twenty-five of the enemy. Of this
force he captured an officer and fifteen men,
the remainder being killed. In the course of
subsequent consolidation work, he reorganised
parties from broken units and harassed the
enemy, keeping his own men in fine
spirits by his marvellous display of cool
courage and unflinching determination. He I
was killed while endeavoring to extricate some
of his men who had been buried by the ex-
plosion of a shell.
A Quarter-mile of Trench
CAPTAIN ARTHUR SEAFORTH BLACK-
BURN, of the 10th Battalion, was ordered to
take fifty men and drive the enemy from a
strong position, somewhere in France. With
his half-hundred he put up a dogged fight
against odds, and by grim determination cap-
tured the trench eventually. Before he secured
possession he had led four separate parties of
bombers against the point, and many of the men
became casualties. The opposition was fierce,
but he pushed on, and before he held up his
offensive, he had taken 250 yards of trench.
'The Sunday Times' Dec. 16th, 1917. p17
Australian Heroes
How Our V.C’s. were Won


Then he returned, with a sergeant, to recon-
noitre, and after considering the position, went
in and seized another 120 yards, by this es-
tablishing communication with the battalion on
the left. Lieut Blackburn, who is 25 years of j
age, is a son of the late Canon Blackburn, and
the second old boy of St. Peter’s College, Ade-
laide, to win the V.C. The first to the credit
of the school was won by Captain Wyly, in the
war in South Africa.
Captured a Garrison
PRIVATE BUGDEN, of the 31st, enlisted in
Queensland in May last year, and was killed—
after doing some splendid work for his side—
on September 28 of the current year. He was
prominent in the attack on a number of pill-
boxes, against which he led small parties of
bombers with success. In one case they silenced
the - enemy and captured the garrison at the
bayonet point. In another of the movements
his coporal was taken prisoner and was being
led to the rear when Bugden rushed to his re-
lease, shooting one of his captors, and bayonet-
ing the other two. Under intense fire he went
out five times and brought in wounded com-
rades, and volunteered for a number of danger-
ous missions. In the carrying out of one of
these, this splendid Australian was killed. His
father was the late T. J. Bugden, and his
mother is now Mrs. J. J. Kelly, of Lismore.
Private Bugden was born in Gundurimba on St.
Patrick’s Day, 1897. He had a fine school
career, was a splendid sample of the athletic
Australian—he was 6ft tall and 14st. 91b. in
weight- He had never been beaten at weight-
putting, and had won many medals in cham-
pionship contests of different kinds, and on
the transport won a number of the prizes for
pre-eminence in athletics. General Birdwood
referred to him as “a splendid Australian.”
_ i
Most Conspicuous Bravery
SERGEANT CLAUDE CHAS. CASTLE-
TON, of the sth Machine Gun Company, 18th
Battalion, of the A.1.F., was gazetted V.C.
(posthumously) on Sept. 26, 1916, for most
conspicuous bravery when in an attack on the
enemy trenches the infantry was driven back,
temporarily, by intense machine-gun fire. Many
of our wounded were left in No-Man’s-Land,
lying in shell-holes and under a withering fire.
Castleton went out twice, in the face of the
hail of death from the quick-firers, and brought
in a wounded man each trip. He went out
again, and was coming back with his man,
when he was hit in the back and killed in-
stantly. The official note is : “He set a splen-
did example of courage and self-sacrifice. He
was an Englishman, and his father lives in
Lowestoft, Sussex.”
He Cleared the Village
CAPTAIN PERCY HERBERT CHERRY,
V.C., M.C., 26th Battalion, was in command of
a company detailed to v=.orm and clear a vil-
lage. This he did, bu'i the clearance was
effected at considerable cost, for all the officers
except Cherry had become casualties. He
carried on with care and deternfination in the
face of vigorous enemy opposition, and cleared
the village. When held up at a point where
the enemy was strong, he organised machine-
gun parties and bombers, and took N the point.
Having cleared the village, he took charge of
the position, and beat off a most resolute and
determined counter-attack. The fighting lasted
through the early hours of the morning, and
at about 6.30 he was wounded. His men wished
to remove him to the rear, but he refused to
leave his post, and stayed with the command,
encouraging the mep to hang on, at any cost.
They did for the rest of the day, and he stayed
with them through all the hours till 4.30 in the
afternoon, when this very gallant officer was
killed by a shell.
The Only Man Left
PRIVATE THOMAS COOKE, Bth Bat-
talion, after a Lewis gun had been disabled,
was ordered to take his gun and gun team to a
most dangerous part of the line. Here he did
splendid work, under very heavy fire, of which
his gun was the target, till he was the only man
left at the piece- He stuck to his post, and
continued to fire. When assistance was sent he
was found dead beside his gun. “A splendid
example of determination and devotion to
duty.”
Turned Their Gun On The Enemy
SERGEANT J. J. DWYER, of the 4th
Machine-Gun Company—late 15th Battalion
(Queensland and Tasmania) —enlisted with the
Tasmanians in February of last year. He was
in charge of a machine-gun party which went over
with the first wave, attained to its objective,
and placed the gun in position. An enemy
gun crew started firing on his flank. He
rushed his gun to within 30 yards, and firing
from there,, killed the crew. Then he took the
enemy gun and carried it, under heavy fire, to
a position alongside his own piece, when he
turned it on a counter-attack of the enemy,
which he repulsed. Next day his position was
shelled heavily and his gun blown up. He led
his gun crew back through the barrage, got
i another gun, and returned. Through all the
incidents he preserved an utter contempt of
I danger, and a cheerfulness which inspirited his
l_men. . m ' i
Bombed the Gunners
During some of the hard fighting in France
CAPTAIN R. C. GRIEVE found his command
sadly knocked about by an unseen battery of
machine-guns. He succeeded in locating
these, and personally bombed and killed the
gunners before he rallied his men and advanced
to a successful attack. He was wounded seri-
ously, but stayed with his company till the
objective was gained. He is another of the
school athletes who have made good. An old
boy of Wesley (Vic.), he joined up in June,
1915, and left with the rank of Second-Lieu-
tenant. Pie was promoted Lieutenant in May
of that year, and Captain in February, 1917. He
is in his 29th year. The official note reads ;
“Captain Grieve, by his utter disregard of ,
danger, and his coolness in mastering a very
difficult position, set a splendid example, and
when he fell wounded the position had been
secured and the few remaining enemy were in
full flight.”
n il *
With Bomb and Bayonet
Ws in so many instances in which the act
which won the V.C. was an inspiration to a
h -dly-pressed company of our fighters, the
gallantry of SERGEANT JULIAN HOWELL.
V.C., M.M. (Ist Battalion) inspired his com-
rades in a successful counter-attack on the
enemy. He was in a position from which he
could see a party moving in the direction of
the flank of his battalion. On his own initia-
tive, and exposed to heavy bomb and rifle fire,
he climbed to the top of the parapet and pro-
ceeded to bomb the enemy, pressing
along the trench. When his stock of bombs
was exhausted he started out with the bayonet,
and carried on till he was wounded severely.
What he did was in sight of the whole bat-
talion, and his single-handed fight was in the
face of a determined movement by a strong
force of the enemy. The official observation
on it was that the gallant conduct of this non-
commissioned officer, in the face of superior
numbers, greatly inspired the battalion. Sergt.
Howell is the son of Private and Mrs. Howell,
of Boyle-street, Enfield (N.S.W.), 22 years old,
and enlisted on June 5, 1915. He was one of
the rearguard in the evacuation of Gallipoli.
• Brought in the Last Man
PRIVATE REG. ROY INWOOD, of the
10th Battalion (South Australia) did some very
fine work on his own initiative. Early in the
morning of Sept. 21 he went out alone and
located a machine-gun of the enemy. He killed
all but one of the v .crew, and used the one left
i
as a pack-mule to carry the gun into his own
lines. Before this rather fine feat of arms he
went, also alone, through the British barrage,
past the second objective, and captured a strong
German post, where he killed several of the
enemy, and from which he brought in nine
prisoners. His penchant was for aH-night j
patrol work, alone. On this duty he pene-
trated the enemy lines, on occasions for half-
a-mile, and brought back most \ 'iluaUe infor
mation. Inwood is one of the men who may
be claimed for New South Wales, since his
home, when he comes back, will be with his
kinswoman, at Broken Hill.
A Bluff Which Carried
PRIVATE JORGEN CHRISTIAN JENSEN,
V.C., left South Australia with reinforcements
of the 10th Battalion in August, 1915. He is a
j naturalised Dane of about 24 years, and worked
on the boats on the Murray. He won the
j Cross as the result of a bluff which might not
have come off. He and five other Australians
i attacked a barricade which sheltered 45 of the
enemy and a machine-gun. One man got the
! gunner with a shot from his rifle, and Jensen,
I I single-handed, rushed on and bombed the post.
With a bomb in his hand he drew the pin of
another with his teeth, and, poising both for a
throw, called on the Huns to surrender —which
they did immediately. From this party he sent
one to advise a company of Germans close by to
surrender—as they were surrounded —and this
came off, as well as the previous bluff. The
six Australians were making their way back
to the lines with the prisoners when a company
of Australians, mistaking them for a German
force, began firing on them. Jensen leaped on
the barricade, regardless of the shooting, and
waved his helmet as a signal that everything
was as it should be. The firing ceased, and the
prisoners were inarched behind the lines.
Charged Alone
When his platoon was held up at an enemy
strong point and severe casualties prevented
progress, LANCE-CORPORAL THOMAS
BEDE KENNY (2nd Battalion), under heavy
fire at close range, dashed alone to the enemy
position, killed one man in advance of the
point who endeavored to bar his way, and
then bombed the position. He wounded all
the gun crew, killed the officer, who showed
fight, captured the whole of the crew, and took
the gun. His action enabled his platoon to
occupy the position, which was one of great
local importance. This gallant non-commis-
sioned officer is the son of Mrs. M. Kenny, of
Park-parade, Bondi, and is now with the phy-
sical culture instructional staff at Weymouth,
England.
With Bomb and Bayonet
PRIVATE JOHN LEAK (9th Battalion) was
one of a party which captured an enemy strong
r-sint eventually, after some very determined
fighting. At one time in the course of the at-
tack it was found the enemy bombs were out-
ranging ours, and we were being badly cut up.
Leak jumped out of the trench, ran forward
under heavy machine-gun fire at close range,
and threw three bombs into the enemy’s bomb-
ing post. Then he jumped into the post and
bayoneted three unwounded bombers. When
the enemy, in overwhelming numbers, was
driving his party baclf, he was always the last
, man of the withdrawal, and continued throwing
bombs. The effect of his example was such
that on the arrival of reinforcements his party
cut in with them, and recaptured the whole line
of trenches.
Four Times Wounded
LIEUTENANT RUPERT VANCE MOON
was wounded in the initial advance on a hostile
trench, the objective of the attack of his com-
pany in co-operation with another force whose
aim was a strong point further in the rear of
this. Though wounded he went on, and in the
attack on the trench was again hit and put out
of action for a moment. He rallied and cheered
on his men, who took the trench. His com-
mand had suffered severely, but he led them in a
general assault, and was once more wounded;
i.but the attack was pressed home with success.
, In the consolidation of the position he received
his fourth wound, this time in the face, and'
then he ednsented to retire. His was another
magnificent exhibition of indomitable courage,
and the effect of it on the troops was notable.
They held the flank safe against repeated at-
tacks by superior numbers, and, while holding
on, captured many prisoners and a number of
machine guns. Lieut. Moon is a Victorian,
born in Bacchus Marsh, is about 24 years old, j
and son of an inspector of the National Bank
of Australasia.
Charged a Pill-Box
The Island State has sent some of the gamest
of the Australians to the hottest parts of the
lines. SERGEANT LEWIS McGEE, of the
40th Battalion, was killed in a fine piece of
work, which he accomplished before he was ac-
counted for. A pill-box party of Huns was
holding up the advance of his platoon, and this
little impediment to his progress had to be re-
moved. McGhee, with nothing but a revolver,
charged the pill-box single-handed, shot some
of the occupants, and captured the rest. Then
he reorganised his platoon and proceeded in the
lead of it. He was killed during the advance.
His widow lives at Avoca (Tas.),
A Hero of the Air
One of the young Australian game birds of
the air is LIEUTENANT F. H. McNAMARA,
V. a graduate of the flying School at Point
Cook (Vic.). At Gaza he was despatched with
another airman, to destroy a railway an'd pre-
vent the coming up of reinforcements. The
locality of his adventure was historic Eeersheba.
Shortly after he left the aerodrome a body of
Turkish cavalry opened fire on him, perforat-
ing the wings of his machine. He dropped bombs
to discourage the enemy, and had just released
the fifth when it exploded prematurely under
the ’plane, which it tore badly. A piece of
the shell struck him, making a nasty wound in
i the thigh. He dropped smoke bombs, the dis-
! tress signal, but at the moment saw his mate
also drop two smoke bombs as he hovered be-
fore settling down. His engine had gone
wrong. “I couldn’t leave him,” said the Vic-
torian. Badly hurt as he was, he flew across
to the other, but, being unable to_ control his
machine, made a oa<f landing and smashed it.
His mate was lying wounded by his ’plane, one
machine was injured, and the other out of ac-
tion, They were prisoners—unless a miracle
occurred. McNamara burned his plane, tried
the other, and got it to go, hoisted the other
flyer into it, and sailed away, with the Turks
firing from 500yds.
Valior—and Generalship
CAPTAIN NEWLANDS, of the 10th Bat-
talion, was in the railway service of Victoria
before he entered the Garrison Artillery of that
State (in which he was born, second son of Mr.
W. A. Newlands, of the railways), but he en-
listed from Tasmania, and went as Q.M.S. with
the first contingent. He was in the Landing,
wounded there, and sent to Egypt to recover.
From there he went to France (wounded at
Pozieres), and did some fine work, among other
duties, as transport officer. The Cross was
given him for three specific acts of bravery.
He organised and personally led an attack on a
most important objective, and under heavy fire
rallied his company after it had suffered nu-
merous casualties. He was the first man to


reach the objective in that attack. Next night
j there was a strong counter-attack, and in this
he regained the position, after dispersing the
enemy, by personal exertion under heavy fire.
I Later he showed fine judgment in the use of re-
serves when a company on the left was over-
powered, and his own was attacked in the rear.
He succeeded in defeating the attack in both
j directions, though it was made three times. The
1 work had far-reaching results.
_
A Gallant of the Bravest
PRIVATE MARTIN O’MEARA, of the 12th
Battalion, is another of the West Australians
who did splendid work for his side. In the course
of four days of heavy fighting, when the patch
of No Man’s Land was a shambles, he went
out repeatedly under heavy enemy fire and
brought in wounded officers and men, with
machine-gun and artillery projectiles hurtling
all about him. He volunteered and carried up
ammunition and bombs, through a heavy bar-
-1 rage, to a portion of the trenches which was
being heavily shelled at the time. Throughout
he showed an utter contempt for danger, and
undoubtedly saved many lives. O’Meara was
a new-comer to the State, and at the time of
his enlistment was employed as sleeper-cutter
in the Collie district. He joined up in August
of 1915 as one of the 12th Reinforcements of
the 16th Battalion. He is a fine stamp of man
physically, and a splendid sample of the fight-
ing Irishman,
*■" * * i
i
More Than Thirty Scalps
CORPORAL PEELER, of the 3rd Pioneer*
(a composite from all States of the Common-
wealth) is one of the many Australians
to whom the word fear has no mean-
ing. He enlisted in Victoria, where his wife
liyes, and has been a year and nine months in
uniform. In one of the big moves of the last
months he was a Lewis gunner in an assault,
and rushed a shell-hole from which snipers
were firing. He shot nine Germans in his first
break, and took nine in each of two succeeding
attacks on their hiding places. Next he located
a machine gun and killed most of the crew,
pursuing those that bolted. These sheltered in
a dug-out, and, with bombs, he accounted for
ten of them. All told, his tally for the morn-
ing was 30 Huns. The official pronouncement :
“His fearlessness and fine example ensured th*
1 success of the attack.”
With Eighty Enemy Dead
Tht stand of LIEUTENANT CHAS. POPS
(18th Reinforcements of the 11th Battalion) with
a picket at Lagnicourt on April 13 of this year,
will be given space when the story of the
heroid deeds in the war are written. He was
in command of a picket post, with instructions
to hoW it at all costs. He did—at a heavy
cost tip the enemy and the last cost to his
brave -little force and himselL The enemy,
greatly superior in numbers, surrounded the
post, and the ammunition of the boys (all West
Australians) ran out. Pope sent back for
supplies, but before they arrived {he end caem.
What gallant ending it was for the little
band! )No ammunition; therefore the rifles,
except as clubs, were useless. Bayonets were
fixed, they charged the foe> He led that
very foilorn hope. Not a man came out of
the splendid charge. Their bodies were found
later —with 80 enemy dead. They had held the
post to the last.
Killed Team and Took Gun ■■'"■'•'v-
JOHN CARROLL, who has attached a V.C.
for W.A., was a guard on the Kurrawang wood
line at the time of his enlistment. He won
the Cross, in the beginning of August, for
exceptional bravery. He was one of the first
into an enemy trench after the barrage was
lifted, and promptly bayonetted four Germans
who had cornered an Australian. After get-
ting away with these, he effaced a Hun be-
tween him and a machine gun in operation,
went on alone and killed the three men work-
ing the gun—which he captured, though him-
self wounded. Though W.A. claims him as a
V.C. winner for the State, Carroll is a Queens-
lander, born in Brisbane and taken by his
parents to the western State when he was
about 2 years old.
First West Australian
LIEUTENANT HUGO V. THROSSEiL
was the first West Australian to win
the V.C. in the present war. He was
attached to the 10th Light Horse Bri-
gade, and began his career at Gal-
lipoli. He was awarded the V.C. for most
conspicuous bravery at Hill 60 on August 29,
1913. Although severely wounded in several
places, he refused to leave his post to obtain
medical assistance until all danger to the posi-
tion was passed. Then when his wounds were
dressed he returned to the firing line until the
medical officer ordered him out of action. His
personal courage and example kept up the
spirits of his party, and were largely instru-
mental in saving a critical situation. Later he
was sent back to W.A. for a rest, and he was
given a most enthusiastic reception, especially
in his native town, Northam. He has since
returned to his regiment. On the: hews being
L. KEYSOR, V.C.
LIEUT. TUBBS, .
-
J. HAMILTON, Y.C.
' W. J. DUNSTAN, y.c.
CAP T BLACKBURN, VC
a>RP._ P^LER 4 y.c,
=r
y.C.
received in Perth that he had been awarded
the V.C., reference to- the fact was made in
the Legislative Assembly, and the following
motion was carried : “That the House places
on record its appreciation of his bravery, and
that a copy of this resolution be forwarded to
Lieut. Throssell,” He was 33 years old on
October 27 last, and is the youngest son of the
late Hon. Geo. Throssell, one of the pioneers
of the State, and at one time Premier of W.A.
Killed the Crew and Took Gun
SERGEANT JOHN WOODS WHITTLE
(26th Battalion) is a Tasmanian, well
known as an Interstate athlete, and the
undefeated heavyweight boxing champion
of his home State. He has a good
all-round experience in the navy, the artillery,
and the A.S.C.; is a hefty warrior of 12aSt and
sft 9in; quiet as a kitten till he is roused, and
then . He was roused on pne of the busy
days of the British in France, when his pla-
toon was rushed, under cover*of an enemy
barrage, and an entry made to his section of
trench. He collected all the men he could get
hold of, charged the Huns and drove them out,
re-taking his bit of line. Later on in the
same morning the enemy brought up a machine
gun to enfilade the platoon. Whittle was
among them before the gun was placed in posi-
tion; he had made a. one-man rush across the
fire-swept area. Fie bombed the gunners be-
fore they had got the piece in position, kil’ d
all the crew, and brought in the gun.
W JACKSON, y.c.
P. J. BUGDEN. Y.C.


CAFTAN AM AR A .VC
JOHN PWYETL V-C.
GEO* Y-Q
INWOOD T.C.
I. KENNY. y.O.


CAPT CHERRY. VC
IIEUT. THROSSELL .VC.
CAPT
\\ SHOUT
VC.MC
FOR
VALOUR
Captjacka.vcmc
MAJOR MURRAY VC MCDSQ
!■■■■■■■ ■■ I-
IIEUT SYMONS.VC.
iIEU T MOON, VC.
' IIEUT M
Pope.veil


~ TLc .» u-i - I 1 L-| .
MADRAS BOMBARDED.
CRUISER EMDEN BUSY.
SHORT STAY AND LITTLE DAMAGE.
Important Russian Capture.
ALLIES STILL PRESS IN FRANCE.
The German cruiser Emden has bombarded Madras, the
chief city on the eastern coast of India. Very little damage
was done.
The position on the River Aisne is only a little altered.
The Allied Forces have progressed, and in the Lorraine and
Vosges region the Germans have evacuated Nomeny and Ar-
racourt.
By the capture of Jaroslav the Russians obtained a base
of action on the right flank of the Austrian armies. As Jaro-
slav is reckoned stronger than Namur or Liege, it is con-
sidered that its evacuation proves that the Austrian morale
is absolutely gone.
Though the Russians are in close touch with the Ger-
man front around Przemysl no fighting has occurred there.
The enemy is retreating behind the forts. The railway has
been captured by the invaders.
The Germans are said to be embarrassed by the loss of
horses in France, and the capture of the oilfields in Galicia.
The mobility of German movements depends largely upon
motor tractive. —— r
It instill doubtful what force of submarines attacked
the three British cruisers that were sunk. Various state-
ments put it at from two to 20. Whether any of the Ger-
man craft were sent to the bottom is also doubtful. The
Cressy could have got out of danger by moving away, but she
chose the braver part.
The Servians and Montenegrins have conquered Bosnia-
Herzegovina.
The Russian cruiser Bayan is reported to have sunk a
German cruiser and two gunboats which were engaged in
mine-laying.
The British Government has decided not to extend the
Moratorium relating to bills of exchange, except as regards
cheques and bills of demand.
The censorship at the front in Great Britain is becom-
ing still more strict. War correspondents have been warn-
ed not to go near the line of battle.
Many complimentary things have been said about Lady
Dudley s Australian Field Hospital in France. It is doing
great work.
MADRAS BOMBARDED.
ÜBIQUITOUS EMDEN.
NOT MUCH DAMAGE.
(From Oup Special Representative.)
LONDON, Thursday Afternoon.
Lloyd’s agent at Madras, on the eastern
coast of India, cables that the city was bom-
barded on Tuesday night, presumably by the
German cruiser Emden, which has been caus- 1
ing so much trouble in those waters.
Two oil-tanks were fired and burned them-
selves out, and a shed was damaged.
The British-Indla Company’s steamer
Chupra, which is lying in the harbor, was
hit. and sustained slight damage, but the
other shipping was not touched.
The general damage was nothing to speak
of.
The guns of the forts replied, and the Em-
den, which had all her lights extinguished,
then steamed off.
The bombardment lasted for a quarter of
an hour.
CORRESPONDENTS WARNED.
(Published in tne ’I imes.l
LONDON, Wednesday Afternoon.
General Gallieni, the military governor of
Paris, has issued a strict warning to war cor-
respondents not to attempt to get into the
Aisne battle area. Rigorous penalties are
threatened.
CENSOR MORE DRASTIC.
(From Our Soeciai Raoresentativa.)
LONDON, Thursday Afternoon.
The British censorship has been made more
drastic, and prohibits the obtaining of first-
hand narratives at the front.


BRITAIN’S AIR RAID.
BOMBS ON DUSSELDORF.
(From Our Special Representative.)
I ONDON, Wednesday Afternoon. ,
I Belgian papers assert that a squadron ofJ
British airmen threw bombs on to a Zeppelin
hangar at Cologne, leaving the whole place
aflame. They returned safely
Dusseldcrf reports that a hostile airship
dropped a couple of bombs in the vicinity of
i a large hangar near that city, but that only-
slight damage was done.
GENTLE HINT TO GOTHS.
(Published in the Times.)
LONDON, Wednesday Night.
Referring to the dash of British naval air-
men into Germany, the Times, in a leading
article, says that the naval wing of the Royal
Flying Corps has accomplished the n»nst
brilliant and most daring feat of airmanship
yet seen in the war.
The leader adds:
"There are 37 churches in Dusseldorf. They,
are still intact. Cologne Cathedral is only
a few miles away. It remains untouched.
“The aircraft sally was meant as an ad-
monition. Its value lies in its moral effect.’'
! LOSS AT MAUBEUGE.
FRENCH PRISONERS’ MESSAGE.
(From Our Special Representative.)
LONDON, Wednesday Night.
French prisoners passing through Liege
threw scraps of paper from the train reading,
“We are 15,000 prisoners from Maubeuge. but
the Germans lost 80,000.”
ON THE AISNE
LEFT WING PROGRESSES. 1
GERMANS EVACUATE TOWNS.
(Published in the Times.)
LONDON, Wednesday Afternoon.
A Baris official message says that the left
wing has made progress in the direction of
Lassigny where violent engagements have
been fought.
The position in the centre is unchanged.
In Lorraine and the Vosges region the Ger- |
mans have evacuated Nomeny and Arra-
court.
VICTORY IS ASSURED.
RESISTANCE WEAKENS.
(From Our Special Representative.)
LONDON, Wednesday Afternoon.
Wounded arriving in Paris predict that the
German resistance on the Aisne is weaken-
ing, and i. victory for the Allies is assured.
ALONG THE LINE.
POSITION OF ARMIES.
MELBOURNE. Thursday.
Sir George Reid sends the following cable-
gram from London, dated September 23, 10.15
p.m.:
Reliable: Operations during the past
three days along an extended front favor
the Allies. The enemy has sustained a
series of repulses to the north of the Aisne.
On the left bank of the Oise the position
is a little changed. Between -the Meuse
and Rheirhs the position is unchanged.
The enemy shows little activity in
the Domevre district. They have evac-
uated Nomey and Arracourt, but hold the
j lines south of Woevre. ,
Paris reports that while a German crui-
Iser and two torpedo boats were laying
mines in the Baltic they were all sunk by
the Russian cruiser Bayan.
TIME S_CHANGE.
HEARTILY SICK OF IT.
GERMANS AT THE FRONT.
(Published in the Times.)
LONDON, Thursday Morning. j
An officer who has returned from the firing
line of the Aisne battle says;—
“I never met a German talking Eng-
lish or French but who said that he
(' was heartily sick of the whole show, and
vho did not immediately ask for food.”
THOUGHT THEY COULDN’T LOSE.
(Published in the Tirr.ee.)
LONDON, Thursday Morning.
A German officer who has arrived in Eng-
land was captured 20 miles from Paris. In
conversation he said, “The Germans must be
there now,” and when he was told that they
had been driven back 60 miles from the
French capital, he put his hands to his head
and answered, “No! No! It’s not true.”
Officers and men have been schooled to
believe in the absolute invincibility of the
irmy, and that the final defeat of
their country is impossible. All of them
have been deluded with stories of uninter-
rupted success on land and sea,
HIT BY SHELL.
HOW IT FEELS.
(Published in the Timet i
I
LONDON, Thursday Morning.
A wounded English officer, who was struck
on the arm and leg by fragments of a big
shell, describes the sensation of being hit.
He says:
“It was like standing behind a gun and
being knocked flat. The feeling was exact-
ly as if one had been battered all over with
enormous rod-hot sledge-hammers.”
GETTING EVEN.
CERIVSAN MINE-LAYERS SUNK.
RUSSIAN CRUISER’S GOOD WORK
(Published in the Times.)
LONDON, Wednesday Night.
Paris reports that the Russian cruiser :
j Bayan has sunk a German cruiser and two
torpedo boats.
The German vessels were found laying
mines in the Baltic.
CAPTURE OF JAROSLAV.
OF VAST IMPORTANCE.
AUSTRIAN MORALE GONE.
MUST SEEK NEW FRONT.
(Published in the Times.)
LONDON, Wednesday Afternoon.
An official message from Petrograd states
that the reached Vislok.
The operations around Przemysl are pro-
ceeding successfully. The Czar’s troops are
In close touch with the German front, but no
fighting has yet occurred there.
The situation of the Austrians on the
Przemysl-Cracow line is full of peril, and
they must soon seek another line of defence.
The capture of Jaroslav was made the occa-
sion of the greatest rejoicing in Petrograd,and
the highest strategic inportance is attached
to the success, because it gives the Russians
a base of action on the right flank of the
Austrian armies.
It is evident that the garrison deserted the
guns and retreated in haste. The Russians
are in hot pursuit, and should make a cap-
, ture inside two days.
Fortress experts consider that Jaroslav is
stronger than either Namur or Liege. The
1 only explanation of the evacuation is that
the morale of the Austrians must be abso-
lutely gone.
AUSTRIAN PLAN FAILED.
ARMORED TRAIN SHELLED.
(Published in the Times.)
LONDON, Wednesday Afternoon .
The Russians continue to pursue the Aus-
trians in the north-west. The front is un-
changed.
South of Przemysl the Russian outposts
successfully shelled an Austrian armored
train, which was equipped with Maxims.
The fact that the fortresses on the River
San have been so well supplied with heavy
artillery, searchlights, and all kinds of stores,
clearly indicates that the Austrians had ex-
pected to be able to put up a strenuous re-
sistance along the line of the San, but their
efforts failed owing to the energetic and in-
creasing advance of the Russians. The val-
ley contains immense quantities of valuable
booty.
German columns of considerable strength-
which crossed the Russian frontier at
MJawa, in the north of Poland, on Sunday,
have retreated northwards.
On the left bank of the Vistula a force of
Germans which had fortified a position be-
tween Thorn and Kalisch has been con-
siderably reinforced.
BEHIND PRZEMYSL.
- ■■
RUSSIANS SEIZE RAILWAY.
(From Our Special Representative.)
LONDON, Wednesday Afternoon.
The Austrians are retreating behind the
forts of Przemysl, the railway to which the (
Russians have seized, besides many locomo-
tives and much rolling stock.
The Russians state that German aeroplanes
dirigibles circle, above their positions at
night and drop large Bengal lights to
localise the artillery and small bright lights
to show the position of the infantry.
FLEEING BEFORE RUSSIANS.
(From Our Special Representative.)
LONDON. Wednesday Afternoon.
A message from Cracow states that count-
less Poles, Hebrews and Lithuanians are flee-
ing before the Russian invasion.


LOST CRUISERS.
SURVIVORS’ STORIES.
PLUCK OF THE CRESSY.
COULD HAVE RUN AWAY.
(Published in the Times.)
LONDON, Wednesday Night.
The Aboukir, Hogue, and Cressy were
steaming in line at three-mile intervals in a
grey misty dawn and a choppy sea. They
were patrolling with a fleet of destroyers and
trawlers.
' Silently and without warning four or five
German submarines of the largest class crept
up. and steamers in the neighborhood saw
the Aboukir suddenly shaken as if she had
been dealt a titanic blow.
It was assumed that her magazine had ex-
ploded. She actually was struck on the
starboard side. Those aboard thought that
the vessel had hit a mine. There was no
time to lower the boats. The Aboukir sank
in three minutes, and the only hope of the
ship’s company was to jump into the water.
The sudden tragedy caused a sensation on
the Hogue, which slowed down. Lifeboats
were launched, but the rescue operations
were not complete when she also heeled over.
She had been struck in three places.
The crew managed to get a few of the boats
afloat, and picked up the survivors from the
Aboukir.
CRESSY’S BRAVE END.
Simultaneously the Cressy detected the sub-
marines. She could have escaped by fleeing,
but instead she dashed to the assistance of
those in the sea, firing heavy shells at two
submarines which were visible. But tor-
pedoes also hit her, and she swiftly sank.
The majority of the men were below In
their berths when the vessels were struck.
Many of the survivors remained in the sea for
five hours before destroyers and the cruiser
Lowestoft arrived and got them aboard.
A seaman of the Aboukir was saved by the
Cressy. When the latter sank he was again
precipitated into the water. The second time
a trawler rescued him.
The submarines delivered their attack when
between the cruisers.
It is believed that two of the under-water
'craft were smashed by the Cressy, but there
is no confirmation.
Seven officers and 266 men rescued by
Dutch boats will be interned in Holland until
the end of the war.
Seamen interviewed at Rotterdam confirm
the previous description of the sinking of
the cruisers. One of them said:—
“Our first knowledge of the attack on the
Cressy was a tremendous shock. Then we
saw a cloud, caused by the explosion, rise as
high as the mast-heads. We should have
been all right if we had only been struck once.
SMOKING AT THE TIME.
“We were smoking at the time and taking
things very coolly. When the second torpedo
struck our ship she began to sink.
“The water was full of men swimming, and
as the boats launched saved the crews ol
other ships the men of the Cressy were ob
liged to do the best they could. I saw five
men sharing one lifebuoy. Only two of them
were rescued from it.
“A 16-year-old drummer-boy from the
Aboukir was saved on the ship’s rum-tub,
and when a swimmer asked whether he could
do anything for him the youngster replied,
‘No. thanks, old cocky.’
“The weather was clear at the’ time of the
attack, and only a light haze was perceptible
on the horizon.”
WANT ANOTHER GO.
Many of the wounded who have arrived at
Harwich are badly hurt, but there is no com-
plaining. One hope animates them all, and
that is that there may be another chance of
trying conclusions with the enemy.
An engineer from the Aboukir said:—-
’ “I was below when it happened. The
weather was bad. The Aboukir was steam-
ing slowly, and she reeled under the shock
; of a tremendous explosion. At first I thought
it was a mine, but soon I found that a tor-
pedo had hit us, probably between the first
and second boilers. A giant hole was torn
in the side.
“Men on the upper deck were killed in-
stantly. Those below tumbled up as quickly
as possible, and everything was quite or-
derly.
EACH FOR HIMSELF.
“As the ship was heeling over, the order
was given, ‘Every man for himself.’ There
was no question of jumping orf. The deck
was almost at right angles with the water.
We just slid off into the sea.”
A gunner on the Cressy reports that at 400
yards he fired at and sank a German sub-
marine. and also set fire to a German trawler
which was only 100 yards away.
The latter was flying the Dutch flag, was
directing operations, and evidently covered
the approaflfh of the submarines.
HORSELESS CAVALRY.
GALICIAN OILFIELD CAPTURED.
(From Our Special Representative.)
LONDON, Wednesday Afternoon.
Glanders has decimated the German horses
in France, and dismounted cavalrymen are
searching for 20,000 horses in Belgium.
The Germans are also embarrassed be-
cause the Russians have captured the oil-
fields of Galicia. Motor traction is essen-
tial for the mobility of the Germans owing
to the wastage of the horses.
BOSNIAWAR. j
SERVIANS’ BIG SUCCESS. j
ASSAULT ON SERAJEVO.
/
(From Our Special Representative.)
LONDON, Thursday Morning.
The assault against Serajevo, the capital
of Bosnia, is being conducted from two sides.
On one side is the bulk of the Montenegrin
army, supported by several Servian regi-
ments,
Bosnia-Herzegovina is now in the posses-
sion of the Servians.
i
GORKY FIGHTING.
(From Our Special Representative.)
LONDON, Thursday Afternoon.
Maxim Gorky, the famous Russian revolu-
tionary and writer, has taken part in several
fights in Galicia.


'dit k f3 */
BRIGADIER HERITAGE
DIES AFTER OPERATION.
DISTINGUISHED SOLDIER.
MELBOURNE. Monday.
Brigadier F. B. Heritage, Quartermaster-
General of the Forces, died in a private hos-
pital to-day, following an operation for acute
appendicitis on Friday. Brigadier Heritage
was 57 years of age.
The news of his death was a great blow
to his colleagues on the Army Board at De-
fence Headquarters. Brigadier Heritage was
noted for a charming and friendly disposi-
tion, and unfailing consideration for every-
body, although at times many officers and
undergraduates at the Military College knew
how scathing could be his denunciation of
delinquencies and inefficiency.
On Tuesday Brigadier Heritage underwent
his annual medical examination, and for the
first time for years the Medical Board pro-
nounced his heart to be sound and normal.
The doubtful condition of his health in past
years had undoubtedly militated against Briga-
dier Heritage’s career. He was twice passed
over for important promotions, because of his
health, and thereby he missed opportunities
of becoming chief of the general staff.
Brigadier Heritage was a Tasmanian, and
began his military career with the Tasmanian
Infantry Regiment in 1897. He fought in the
South African war with the Tasmanian In-
fantry in 1899 and 1900, and was appointed to
the permanent staff in 1901. He was ap-
pointed Brigade Major of the first expedi-
tionary force to leave Australia in the Great
War. It was the naval and military con-
tingent which annexed New Guinea. Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Heritage, as he then became,
was appointed the first military governor of
the territory, and was retained in New Guinea
and Australia on various administrative duties
until 1916. Eventually he joined the Fourth
Division, and served in France and Flanders,
both as a brigade and divisional commander
and with the general staff.
He was appointed State Commandant In
Western Australia in 1919, and was attached
to the staff of the Prince of Wales during the
Royal visit to Australia. From 1922 for several
years Brigadier Heritage was commandant of
Duntroon Royal Military College. Later he
was State Commandant in New South Wales
He was appointed quartermaster-general and
a member of the Army Board late in 1932.
It was expected that Brigadier-General Heri-
tage would shortly have been promoted Major-
General, and appointed Chief of the General
Staff. In a letter to Mrs. Heritage, the
Munster for Defence (Senator Sir George
Pearce) expressed his personal regret, and
said: “By the death of Brigadier Heritage the
Australian army has lost a distinguished
officer, who can ill be spared.”
The Commonwealth Government and all the
forces will be represented at the military fune-
ral to-morrow. •
SIR GEORGE PEARCE’S TRIBUTE.
CANBERRA, Monday.
I deeply regret the death of General Heri-
tage,” said the Minister for Defence (Sir
George Pearce) to-night. “He was a very valu-
able officer, very zealous in the performance
of his duty, and a very capable man. His loss
will be a severe one to the defence forces.”


The 9th will
march again
By W. H. FENWICK
'T'HIS month the surviving members of an
A infantry brigade that saw action in some
of the bloodiest war battles of World War I
will celebrate the 50th anniversary of their
embarkation.
The brigade—the 9th
Infantry Brigade—came
into being in late 1915
and early 1916 and was
made up of men drawn
mainly from Northern
N.S.W.
Its segments, streng-
thened by some troops
from other centres, re-
ceived early training in
the North and embarked
about May, 1916.
Further training fol-
lowed in camps on Salis-
bury Plains where it was
forged into a tightly-knit
fighting unit.
Late in 1916, under
the command of Briga-
dier-general Jobson, it
went into action in Flan-
ders.
AS PART of Gen-
eral Monash’s
hard . hitting
Third Division, the 9th Bri-
gade distinguished itself in the
battles of Messines, Passchen-
daele, Ypres and the Somme.
It was one of the first bri-
gades rushed to the area
around Villers-Bretonneux to
stem the German advance that
had forced the retreat of Gen-
eral Gough’s Fifth Army. And
it held fast.
From the day of its first
contact with the enemy, Hin-
denburg’s formidable divisions
were halted, never to gain
another yard.
Each of the brigade’s four
battalions the 33rd, 34th,
35th and 36th—has its own
story to tell; its own veterans
to tell it.
With their ages now around
ihe 70 mark, and the snow in
th ir hair, this month’s cele-
bra ion will probably see the
la i parade of the brigade as
a whole.
This month they will swap
reminiscences for the last time
—and ‘hey will make the most
of it
THE 35 th Batta-
lion was the
only unit of the
Third Division, A.1.F., to be
raised and trained in New-
castle. It went into camp at
Broadmeadow in December,
1915, under the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel G. A. H.
Holborrow. and embarked in
the Benalla on May 1, 1916.
Its company commanders
were Major W. Snedden,
Major Brent Rodd, Captain
H. C. D. Cadell and Captain
Hugh J. Connell; its nominal
roll on embarkation 30 offi-
cers and 1000 men.
After training in England it
was sent to Armentieres where
it relieved the Northumber-
land Fusiliers in the subsidi-
ary line and sustained its first
casualty.
In April 1917 it left the
Armentieres sector for the
back area of Le Torquet near
St. Omer where it relieved the
36th Battalion. On June 2 it
was relieved by the 41st Bat-
talion and went into billets at
Nieppe where it was subjected
to gas shelling. There were no
casualties, and preparations for
the Messines operation soon
to follow were uninterrupted.
At 3.0 on a grey June
morning, following a heavy
barrage, the battalion went
over the top for its first battle.
The fighting itself lasted only
a few hours, but the 35th held
its ground for two days, fin-
ally being withdrawn for a
spell in Bunhill Row.
Casualties for the month
were two officers and 34 men
killed and two officers and
191 men wounded.
July was spent in holding
new ground won, withstanding
heavy counter shelling and re-
pulsing small local attacks. On
July 28 A Company, under
Captain Cadell, fought off an
attack with heavy losses to
the enemy—an action that
won Cadell the Military Cross.
AFTER recuperat-
ing at Wismes
for two months,
the 35th marched through
Ypres and relieved the 13th
King’s Own on Zonnebeke
Ridge. A month later came
the Third Battle of Ypres—or.
as it is better known to the
A.1.F., the Battle of Passchen-
daele.
From the outset, Passchen-
daele was a nightmare. The
field was a quagmire that
swallowed up vehicles and
field pieces—and any soldier i
unfortunate enough to lose
his way. Throughout the battle
the Germans shelled what
roads and tracks remained.
In a whole day’s fighting
the battalion advanced only
300 yards, and casualties were
heavy. In five days eight offi-
cers and 47 men were killed
and six officers and 189 men
wounded. One officer and 49
men were reported missing
Relieved by the sth Yorks
and Lancs, the unit went back
through Ypres to a rest camp
to lick their wounds. On Nov-
ember 9 it moved forward
again to relieve the 2nd Scot-
tish Rifles at Pont-de-Nieppe.
Christmas Day was spent in
the front line.
The March 1918 break-
through by the Germans and
the retreat of the Fifth Army
resulted in the 35th being
sent by train to Belgium. No
sooner had they arrived at
Famechon than they were sent
by bus to the Somme at Cor-
bie where they took up posi-
tions at Bois Abbe and pre-
pared for attack. On April
1 their brigade was attached
to the 18th British Division.
The Germans attacked Vil-
lers-Bretonneux on April 4
under cover of a heavy bar-
rage. The shelling caused the
35th to retire several hundred
yards, but a brilliant counter-
attack by D Company under
Captain R. Sayers, in conjunc-
tion with the 36th Battalion,
saved the village on the crest
of Villers-Bretonneux.
IN this fighting
two officers and
29 men were
killed and four officers and
164 men wounded. One offi-
cer and 23 men were reported
missing.
The Regimental Sergeant-
major, W.0.l Campbell, was
killed by a shell on April 18.
As a result of this battle
the Germans were denied ob-
servation of the Somme Val-
ley and Amiens. They were
further reminded that the in
(tiative was on the side ol
the A.I.F when, having set
| tied comfortably into thei
positions, they were attackec
by the 35th, 33rd and 34th
A total of 153 prisoners were a
taken, together with the sec- j e.
ond line of defence at Mor-1 tl
lancourt. sl
Command of the 35th n
changed on June 22 when
Lieutenant - Colonel H. F.
White took over from Colonel
Goddard.
On August 7, then based tl
at Aubigny, the battalion be-
gan its approach march for t
its jumping off position for ii
the big offensive to start the s
following day. It was in the r
first wave of the attack at I
4.20 a.m. and quicklv over-
ran the enemy, taking Ac-
croche Wood at 5 a.m. j
The battalion hopped over (
with B Company under Can- .
tain R. D. Dixon on right }
front, D Company under
Captain G. G Coghill on left j
front, A Company under .
Major H. V. Carr in left sup-
port and C Companv under .
Captain A. E. Yates in right
support. Twelve machine-
guns and two light trench ■
mortars were captured and
nine officers and 313 other
ranks taken prisoner <
Ci
APTAIN Yates ,
was the ontj
casualty in the
whole of the Third Division.
His body, stripped of all
badges of rank, was recover-
ed by a detachment of the
35th.
On August 22 the heights
overlooking Bray-sur-Somme
were taken for a loss of two
officers and 20 men killed
and four officers and 101 men
wounded. About 200 prisoners
September 2 found the 35th
resting at Suzanne on the
Somme. On September 27 it
moved out towards the Hin-
denburg Line where, with
other Third Division units, it
was held in support of the
27th American Division.
Only one company went into
the front line during this period
—B Company under Captain
D. L. McKenzie, brother ot
Newcastle solicitor Mr. lan
McKenzie. The battalion mov-
ed out on October 2 and i
settled down in the Hallen-
court area. It was here that
the news of the Armistice
came through.
The battalion served in
France a total of 716 days
and won many decorations.
Twenty officers and 404 men
were killed or reported miss-
ing, and four officers and 106
men died of wounds. Sixty-
three officers and 1574 men
were wounded.
THE 34th Bat-
talion was form-
ed at Maitland
in January, 1916. and was
composed mainly of men from
(‘the Maitland and Northern
districts. Some had taken part
in the famous Wallaby
March” from the North-west.
I Under the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel M. S.
Lamb, with company com-
manders Major W. A. LeRoV
Fry, Major W. E. Foxall,
, Captain H. L, Wheeler and
Captain J. A. McDowell it
I embarked on May 2 and ar-
rived at Salisbury Plains on
June 23.
; On November 21, after ad-
vanced training with _ other
t I units of the division, it em-
- | barked for France and its
r baptism of fire at Armen-
-1 tieres.
ror me him uay uic gum#
was tough.
Writes a battalion historian:
“Our first casualty occurred
on the second morning at
sunrise when Private Peck
was sniped with an explosive
bullet through the forehead.
Country battery work, ma-
chine-gun firing and sniping
were fairly active during this
first term. Trenches and
parapets and one of our
listening posts were destroyed.
Enemy working parties were
active on our front and his
patrols were strong.
“The trenches were in a
very wet and muddy condi-
tion. The water in the bottom
of them being frozen, the ice
had to be broken to provide
sufficient cover for the men,
as the parapets were not high
enough to allow walking on
the ice. Thus the men had to
stand in the freezing water and
mud . . .”
FROM November
27, 1916, till
June 6, 1917,j
the battalion held various
sectors of the front line in
the Armen|ieres area, includ-
ing the battle-scarred Ploeg-
steert Wood. During this
period Lieutenant-Colonel E.
E. Martin assumed command.
The 34th’s first major en-
gagement was the attack on
Messines Ridge on June 7, an
outstanding success in spite of
gas and heavy bombard-
ment . , .
“Seven seconds before zero
four mines on our front were
fired. There was a violent
swaying as if an earthquake
had taken place, and men
were thrown together. The
sky was brilliantly illuminated
by the explosive and the ter-
rific artillery fire, the sound
of which could not be heard
above the intense machine-
gun barrage.
“Just before midnight Cap-
tain A. Whitelock was killed
and Captain R. J. Stewart
took command of D Com-
pany. Our casualties to date
had been eight officers and
236 men.”
During the following four j
months the battalion alter-
natively occupied the front
line in the Messines and
Ypres areas, carrying out a j
number of local raids. It j
also trained hard for the 1
coming Third Battle of Ypres.
THE battle of
Passchendael on
October 12 was
a gruelling test for all ranks.
Great gallantry was displayed
by all. more particularly by
Captain C. S. Jeffries, who
was posthumously awarded
the Victoria Cross.
Of the 22 officers and 640
men who took part. 15 offi-
cers and 250 men were either
j killed or wounded.
The condition of the ground
was appalling “There
were many men lost alto-
gether in the mire. The pace
of the advance was slowed
up owing to the assistance it
was necessary to give men
who had sunk into shellholes
and could not extricate them-
selves. In a number of cases
the helpers became engulfed
in the awful morass and
many of the wounded had to
be left where they fell.”
KlaAAiwHjL +\ «^cdA
(Uyi •
ON May 4, the
enemy contain-
ed in the al-
fected area, the battalion took
up the offensive in the Mor-
lancourt sector, employing
harassing tactics that kepi
the Germans occupied till the
big push of August 8 when
the Allied Armies took the
general offensive.
From this date till its final
withdrawal from the line on
October 2 the 34th was con-
tinually advancing, fighting
successful engagements at
Bray, Clery and the ap-
proaches to Mont St. Quentin
and Peronne. Its final engage-
ment was the storming of the
Hindenburg Line near Bony.
Battle casualties were: Killed
in action, 18 officers, 343
men; died of wounds, 4-105;
wounded, 62-1665.
[The 9th Brigade anniversary
commemoration celebrations
will be held in Newcastle on
April 18. The story of the
33rd and 36th battalions will
appear next week.]
During the attack Battalion
Headquarters at Seine House
and the Regimental Aid Post
at the railway line came un-
der shellfire. Many casual-
ties occurred at both places.
The R.M.0., Major G. R.
Clarke, was killed by a shell
that fell among wounded who
were being treated in the
open. The major fell dead
across an officer of the 37th
Battalion whose wounds he
was dressing.
On March 26, 1918, after
some months of comparative-
ly quiet trench warfare inter-
spersed with raids, the bat-
talion was transferred to the
Somme to take over a sector
from the Fifth Army. It made
contact with the enemy at
Villers - Bretonneux where
fierce hand-to-hand fighting
finally stopped the enemy’s
advance


siUM/u.iuj oiaieis ui iHe entrance o I the (. uni-
corn hs in 1917. The Catacombs was a system oj
underground bivouacs dug by the Ist Australian
Tunnelling Company beneath Hill 63 near Mes-
tinet.
fVW*>vt' (Uvjouxtl .


a
WHO SAID RETIRE?
Gallantry of Anzacs
Sun 10.5.1917
STRETCHER BEAREDS SHOT
(From Our Cpecfsl Representative)
LONDON, Wednesday Night.
Continuing his story of the position of the
Anzacs at Bullecourt, Mr. Keith Murdoch,
“The Sim’s ’ special London representative,
who is at Anzac Headquarters, cables:
During the severe counter-attack,
when our Hanks were pushed in by strong
bombing parties suprpi;tod by a fusillade'
from trench mortars, word reached our men
to retire.
They replied: “Who said retire? We
will wait till our rfficers s?y ‘“Retire!”’
The men stuck it out when encirclement
seemed certain, officers and men having
agreed tc fight their w r ay back together if
surrounded.
The troops who got beyond the Hinden-
burg line had the most severe losses, one
company being cut off during retirement,
but selling their lives dearly. Only 17 re-1
gained our lines, four Victorian officers ;
dying heroically daring this phase.
The Germans mowed down our stret-
cher-bearers, who bravely tried, under
the white flag, and by other means, to bring
in our wounded.


rXA*. ( o tu
ANZAC LINE
Centre of Huge Battle
GAINS GRIMLY HELD
Fierce Enemy Attacks Fail
280th Day of the Third Year of the War
(From Our Special Representative)
LONDON, Wednesday Night.
Mr. Keith Murdoch, the special London
representative of “The Sun,” cables from
Anzac headquarters in France: —
“The southern section of the battle has
become localised, centring upon the section
of the Hindenburg line which the Australian
brigades gained, and to which they are now
grimly holding.
We sustained our gains against eight
counter-attacks, some of which were very
strong, and were .t.ade across the open.
Others were tenacious bombing attacks.
During the heaviest attack, each flank was
pushed in. Even the Brigadier seized a
rifle.
Each day we have extended our gains
by strong bombing attacks with fresh
troops, until now we hold a considerable
section of both the trench systems of the
Hindenburg line between Bullecourt and
Queant. The enemy is using up the last
reserves he has on this army sector in
vain endeavors to drive us out.
1 •• * . * ' ' i ■* .
“During the last 24 hours nc aaa puuuucu
the trenches with a great concentration of
guns, which the easing of the situation in
other sectors has enabled him to use here.
Mr. Percival Phillips (“Daily Express’)
states that during the Scottish attack at
Bullccourt the Australians rendered effec-
tive co-operation with hand-flung explo-
sives. Our guns are now scattering work-
ing parties.
A message from Captain C. E. W. Bean,
official press representative with the
Australian forces, says:—
Yesterday afternoon the Germans directed
a tremendous bombardment against the lines
won early that morning in Bullecourt on
the flank of the Australians. Abdut 3.30
o’clock lines of Germans were seen moving
over the open with the view to delivering
theii counter-attack, similar to those direct-
ed on previous days against the Austral-
ians. An aeroplane put the British and Aus-
tralian guns on to the target, and, although
the enemy’s shelling increased to a hurri-
cane before dusk, the attacks semed to Lave
withered. The position was held.


PURPOSELESS SACRIFICES
Wave Follows Wave To Slaughter
(Reuter's Telegram)
LONDON. Wednesday Night.
This afternoon’s French official message
states: —
The struggle was exceedingly keen dur-
ing the night on the Chemin des Dames,
where the enemy attempted at various
points to turn us out of the positions we
recently captured. Th 2 attacks, which
were made by large forces, were preceded
by violent bombardments. They were
everywhere repulsed.
In the district of Cerny de la Bovelle
and on the Monument de Hurtebise the
Germans twice suffered a sanguinary re-
verse.
Our positions were entirely maintained,
and we took prisoners.
We in turn attacked last night, and bril-
liantly carried the German first-line tren-
ches on a front of about 1300 yards north-
east of Chevreux, capturing 150 prison-
ers.
Field-Marshal Sir Douglas Haig reported
this afternoon:
We slightly advanced our positions last
night north-east of Hargicourt.
Our barrage of machine-gun fire com-
pletely broke up an attack in the evening
north-east of Gavrelle.
Simultaneously our artillery dispersed
forces which were concentrating for an
attack northward of Fresnoy.
Our counter-attack in the night im-
proved our position westward of Fresnoy,
regaining portion of the lost ground.
We drove off a raid eastward of Armen-
tiercs.
Reuter’s correspondent at British head-
quarters states that it was the sheer weight
of numbers that drove us back at Fresnoy,
which our guus are now making a perfect
inferno, but the question of such gains and
losses of territory must remain altogether
subordinate to the main business of wear-
ing down the Germans,. who have been
forced to givd battle on ground more favor-
able to us than to them. It is manifestly
to our advantage that they should continue
to stand where they can be hammered. This
broader strategic view must not be over-
looked in the present ebb and flow of the
great struggle.
(Published in “The Times”)
(Admiralty, per Wireless Press)
The Press Bureau announces that Field-
Marshal Sir Douglas Haig has written to the
Minister for Munitions:
"The army, during the recent operatibns,
appreciated the efforts of the workers to
supply guns, rifles, ammunition, aircraft, and
tanks. It knows that it can rely on the
workers to maintain their efforts to ensure
that the army will lack nothing in future
fighting. The reduction of the number of
‘prematures’ proves that the manufacture,
filling, and inspection of shells has reached
a high standard.”
The German official report issued to-day
states;
The Bavarian and Frankish regiments
which storfhed Fresnoy held the village
against counter-attacks and took another
ICO prisoners.
We repulsed Brtish advances at Roeux
and Bullecourt.
We repulsed the French after a hand-to-
hand struggle between Winterberg and
Corbeny, on the Berry-au-Bac road.


I ( ~ I <? I 7 - P . I
HOW SCOTLAND CAME TO THE RESCUE
Joining up the Dangerous Flank
GRAPHIC SCENES FROM THE WEEK’S FIGHTING
281st Day of the Third Year of the War
(From Our Special Representative)


■
LONDON, Thursday Night.
i
- Mr. Keith Murdoch, writing from Anzac
headquarters in France on Monday, says
• that after bitter fighting the Scottish troops
won at dawn a section of Bullecourt, and
established connection with the Australians,
who bombed down the trenches to meet
them. Having finally convinced themselves
that no British troops were isolated at
Bullecourt, and that it must be taken by
heavy charges with bomb and bayonet, the
British systematically bombarded the posi-
tion yesterday. We saw the ruins changing
shape beneath the shelling. The Scottish
troops encountered the stiffest opposition,
especially from hidden machine-gunners in
the concreted posts, and from snipers in
the ruins. The troops of the Australian
division launched bombing attacks syn-
chronously with the advance. The other
i troops effected a junction after 75 minutes
heavy fighting through the trenches. This
makes most secure the gaping wound in the
Hindenburg line which the Australians had
made, and had been heroically holding open
awaiting support on the left. The Germans
throughout last night were jumpy, but did
not attempt any further counter-attack.
Stretcher-Bearers Work
! Through four days’ battle the Australians,
I including many of the famous brigades,
withstood 13 counter-attacks and the heavi-
est shelling. Our losses were considerable,
but very much less than during the first
battle of Pozieres. No praise is too high
for the infantry, which has shown great
fighting spirit. Amongst the bravest have
been the carriers, who, owing to the crowded
saps, have repeatedly carried great loads
1 of bombs across the open with finest, quiet
gallantry.
Eighty stretcher-bearers averaged 40 miles
of walking during the continuous work of '
the first 24 hours of battle, carrying laden -
stretchers. One of the strangest sights of
the battlefield has been the long line of
stretcher-bearers walking across the shell-
strewn plateau to the waggon-post, which
was repeatedly shelled. Luckily no waggons
where hit, though some of the horses were
killed. Our men, blackened with dust and
smoke and weary with long fighting, are
very cheerful. There was half a gale of cold
wind yesterday and during the night. To-
day was sunny.
Identification of the prisoners shows ;
that the Germans have used up all their
1 l
reserves in this area, including hastily-
collected mixed divisions, in a vain effort
to throw us out of the Hindenburg line,
whilst the best of his Sturmtruppen and
the Guards Division were used in his prin-
cipal counter-attacks.
Writing on Tuesday, Mr. Murdoch reports
that the night was the quietest since the
commencement of the battle. The Germans’
bombing attacks yesterday were feebler, and
they let the night pass without infantry
action* thereby admitting themselves thor-
oughly discomfited in this sector. The
junction of the Australians’ left with the
British right through Bullecourt was effected
by a Queensland battalion with light losses.
The Germans offered little resistance here
when the Australians began bombing down
the trenches, the Scottish, assisted by the
English, having already taken them in flank.
German Bombardment
“Yesterday I saw from the support lin*
a wonderful spectacle—the German bom-
bardment of the British lines about Bulle-
court. The battle had lulled, and a light
barrage was falling on our supports. Our
men seemed at last to be enjoying a respite
from the awful ordeal of shelling. Gradu-
ally the Germans opened upon Bullecourt
from our left flank along high ground above
the village; then through the ruins back
for a thousand yards to Longatte. The shells
fell in a continuous stream on Rest Plateau.
The valley seemed suddenly detached fiom
the battlefield, which at Bullecourt was
like a boiling cauldron. For 90 minutes the
Germans poured heavy shells on this line,
the roar of “crumps” drowning all other
noises. Sky and earth became livid with
every color. The white of shrapnel, the
red of brickdust tossed amid the black of the
heavy explosives, all mixed with stabs of
flame as the shells burst. A counter-attack
was prepared for, but the Germans have
not come yet, and the position is steadily
being consolidated. Every night sees more
saps and deeper trenches built by our pio-
neers and sappers, therefore we have greater
security. Despite their losses the Austra-
lians are cheerful, as victors should be,
strong, confident, and fit. The prisoners
say they never imagined such fighting.”
Writing yesterday Mr. Murdoch says
that experts state that the Germans will
not hold the village much longer, in spite
of their continual reinforcements. The
British artillery work is widely praised.
A diary of a captured Feldwebel says:
“The enemy holds the whole line in an in-
tense fire, against which there is no protec-
tion. Arras will be assuredly an eternal
memory.* 5
General Petain says that every shell saves
! if 20 lives.


/ a ~ /<? / 7 -
(J
CARNIVAL OF HORROR
HAND TO HAND IN DEADLY VAPOR
Night Work Near Bullecourt
FEW PRISONERS OR WOUNDED-DEATH HAS LION'S SHARE
(From Our Special Representative)
LONDON, Friday Night.
M. Tudesq, a French correspondent, de-
scribes a gas attack at night
“Lavish gas expenditure is characteris-
tic of the furious attacks and counter-
attacks day and night around Bullecourt
and Frecnoy. The mask here is as precious
as the grenade or rifle. The battle re-
sembles a frightful carnival imagined by
Edgar Allan Poe. One saw in the night-
time entire regiments in masks fighting
and killing amidst the black vapors, ren-
dered fantastic by the light of the moon.
Throwing down their arms, the combat-
ants ».y at each other's throats and tear
away the protecting masks. There are few
prisoners in these encounters, and the
wounded are fewer still. Death receives
the lion’s share.
(Reuter's Telegram)
Field-Marshal Sir Douglas Haig reports:—
The Germans attacked yesterday even-
ing eastward of Arleux and southward of
the Souchez River. He was repulsed by
artillery and machine-gun fire. We drove
off a later attempt, assisted by flammen- 1
werfer (flame-throwers), southward of the
Souchez River.
We made a successful night raid east-
ward of Ypres.
Reuter’s correspondent at British head-
quarters says that the artillery and ma-
chine guns broke up many enemy attacks
j last night, notably two formidable move-
; ments south of the Souchez River (referred
to in the official message), wherein flame-
throwers and large bodies of infantry were
employed. The enemy came on most deter-
minedly, but finally fell back shrouded by
our shrapnel. Altogether the night was
most costly for the Germans.
Fighting in Champagne
A French communique says:—
We carried the centre of the resistance
in the region of Chevreux with the gren-
ade. Counter-attacks broke down under
our fire. We repulsed a stronger attack
on the salient north-east of the California
Plateau after lively fighting, in which the
enemy suffered serious losses.
There was a lively artillery duel on the
Cerny and Hurtebise front.


4-
PRAISE FROM HAIG
Gallantry of Anzacs
MOST OF BULLECOURT HELD
Twelve Determined Counter=Attacks Repulsed
284th Day of the Third Year of the War
(Reuter’s Telegram)
LONDON, Monday Morning.
Field-Marshal Sir Douglas Haig reported
at midnight:
During the morning we repulsed two
counter-attacks upon our positions in the
Hindenburg line east of Bullccourt. The
Australians during the past ten days have
gallantly maintained their positions in
this sector, repelling at least twelve de-
termined counter-attacks. We hold the
greater part of Bullecourt.
We to-day established ourselves in the
western houses of Roeux. We again pro-
gressed on the western slopes of Green-
land Hill.
We destroyed six German aeroplanes,
and drove down five uncontrolled. Six
of curs are missing.
Field-Marshal Haig reported yesterday
afternoon:
Patrol encounters occurred last night
north-west of St. Quentin jind north-east
of Le Verguier. We advanced our posts
at certain points, inflicting casualties.
We repulsed a counter-attack east of
Roeux Cemetery, taking 50 prisoners.
Reuter’s correspondent at Headquarters |
wrote yesterday:—“lt has become apparent!
lhat the fighting on Friday and Saturday
scored most and important suc-
cesses, and tactical advantages. The smart
lanking movement around the chemical fac-
ory near Roeux nonplussed the enemy as to
he whereabouts of our main attack.
in and around Bullecourt the situation is
developing favorably. The enemy to-day
Id 120 yards cf trenches south-west of
; village, which we have surrounded,
j nail parties of cur troops have filtered
rough tiie village with few casualties,
d are now clearing up numerous enemy
j
chire gun pockets, which have been es-
iished in the ruins.”
tor's correspondent at British head-
! q srs, writing on Saturday, said:—
- *e British are active on a front of 20
miles. As the stonewalling of the past few i
days developed many small attacks were
made by the armies of Generals Allenby;
and Gough. Fighting began in the twilight
yesterday, and 377 prisoners were counted)
by 8 o’clock in the morning north of the j
Scarpe. Others are coming in. Many more
would have been taken, but the Germans
bolted and were shot down. If our success
at Roeux can be maintained against the
inevitable counter-attacks it will be most
important.
The first batch of prisoners from Bulle-
court numbered 160. Here the Australians
are bombing their way westward along the
Hindenburg line. Simultaneously other
movements cast and west are surround-
ing Bullccourt. Our casualties are low.
| Hottest Corner of Acivance
(From Our fjpeciai Representative)
Correspo idents say that the Australians
fought with the greatest dash and gal-
lantry in the new advance, of which Bulle-
court is the hottest centre. The British
artillery did deadly execution prior to the
attack which gained the village, Austra-
lian and British troops capturing it ?ft--
the most desperate and the
most important bastion of the German line
between Croisilles and Qucant.
M. Marcel Hutin, writing in the “Echo de
Paris,” gives a vivid picture of the difficul-
ties the Australians surmounted at Bulle-
court. Prince Rupprecht did his utmost to
hang on to the ruined village. The whole
of his positions here formed a maze of al-
most unapproachable trenches, bristling
with fixed and mobile machine guns, which
were almost impossible to locate, enabling
the defence to resist for nearly a fortnight.
The captures are of important strategi-
cal value, and the Germans will sacrifice
large masses to regain them.
Mr. Beach Thomas (“Daily Mail”)
writes:—
“The stiff, almost static, fighting of the
past ten days broke on Friday evening into
waves of attack, carrying us forward into
many desired havens. We won all the points
assaulted with singularly light casualties. A
wounded man returned from Bullecourt with
cracked and dried blood lining his face, but


grinning with delight over the penetration ot
the village. Ho was one of a unit which
shared in as dramatic a moment as the war
has provided. His people were bombing
towards the much-harassed Australians, who
were also bombing towards them. They
sighted the distinctive figures of the Aus-
tralians, who, however, did not see them,
but happily stopped their aggressive bomb-
ing owing to the surprise of finding dead
Germans, who apparently had not been kill-
ed by them, in a trench. They were puzzled
over the discovery, when an English trooper
jumped on to the parapet with a good Eng-
lish shout. Then both parties knew that a
junction had been made. With ringing
cheers the men ran out, and hands were
shaken over the bodies of the enemy. The
antipodes had met indeed.
The Runner’s Message
(Published in “The Times*’)
Mr. Pirrie Robinson, “The Times” corre-
spondent at British Headquatrers, relating
deeds of courage by English north country
troops, writes: —"A private arrived covered
with dirt, bearing a message from a strange
unit. When he was questioned the truth
came out. He was at a certain point when
a runner came dodging and dashing through
the barrage. Hardly had the runner arrived
when a great shell exploded near
them, killing the runner and bury-
ing them both. The private suffer-
ed badly from shock, but was able to
dig himself out. Though dazed, he dug out
the runner, found the message on his dead
body, and then went on and delivered it.
(Admiralty, per Wireless Press)
To-day’s German official message says:
Great English attacks from Lens to
Queant, between Gavrelle and the Scarpe,
astride the Arras-Cambrai road, and near
Bullecourt broke down. They only suc-
ceeded in forcing an entry to Roeux.
Attacks on both sides of Monchy also
broke down.
The advantages the English gained at
Bullecourt were again recovered by our
guards in counter-thrusts.
The enemy lost yesterday 17 aero- j
planes.
THE DISTRICT ROUND BULLECOUET.


/ila* He ~ /7 .
FOLLOWING FRITZ
The Big Retreat
MOST SHELLED SPOT
Sun 14.5.17
Australian l*reM
Captain O. B. W. Bean,
(TVnm
B«pr«sentativa with the Commonwealth Force*.
Copyright by Crown.)
<
BRITISH HEADQUARTERS, FRANCE,
March 16.
Three days ago the German forces oppos- i
ing the Australian and British line upon the :
Somme battlefield again withdrew.
This makes the second stage in the German
retirement. It seems to have been carried
out earlier than was intended. If so this was
because the heavy artillery fire on the south
side of Loupart Wood, where the Australians
had pressed up to within a few hundred
yards of the main German position, made the .
German certain that an attack on his flank
was Imminent. And if that attack were made
and succeeded, it would have placed this por-
tion of his force in a position nothing short
of perilous. He withdrew from this line at
dusk on March 12. Within three hours after
he left them Victorian troops were in his
trenches below GreVillers. And during the
day before yesterday their posts were pushed
out beyond the village of Grevillers itself.
Yesterday three of us took the most interest-
ing walk, I think, that I have ever taken in
my life.
Duckboard Walk
During the early and appalling months of
the Somme winter you had to drag through
three or four miles of continuous deep glutin-
ous mud to reach the front line. Battalions
going in and coming out arrived at the end
of their journey in a state of weariness such
as I have never seen on men before. But
after a few weeks of this, narrow wooden
paths, made of planks similar to those of a
gangway, and known as duckboards, began
to be laid over the mud, and by Christmas
time these had spread all over the district
like arteries —tens of miles of them. We
drove to the duckboard walk at “Swansea
Circus,” where in the winter Australian
policemen used to direct the traffic under
German shellfire, and went along it to a
certain gullyside of evil reputation not far
from the ruined village of Flers —known as
Factory Corner. Factory Corner was some
old agricultural factory in the bottom of a
country gully. It was a heap of bricks and
rusty iron when the New Zealanders took it
in September. All through the winter the
Germans shelled this corner until there was
no unshelled yard of ground on any side of
it. It was almost as heavily shelled as the
ground behind their own lines.
From Factory Corner we struck right
across the valley to Gueudecourt. We wan-
ted to see Gueudecourt. because for some
reason the Germans shelled the remains of
it heavily during the whole winter. It was
easily the most frequently shelled place in
our lines during the winter. When we came
into the Somme again in October Le Sars
and Flers had the reputation of being most
unhealthy corners. But to anyone who knew
Pozieres they were child’s play. There were
quite respectable ruins left in each of them
after six months shelling. There was no-
thing left of Pozieres after one month.
But Gueudecourt was different. The Ger-
man rarely left the place alone night or day
for a single hour. That was why we wished
to see it. It is the only place which I have
seen that looks in any degree like Pozieres
as we knew it. There is one stump of a
wall, or perhaps two. There is a mound of
fine brick dust which once was a church. The
rest is the short stumps of trees and wilder-
ness of black hollows filled with the pounded
grey debris of shattered roofbeams. There Is
more of it left than there was of Pozieres —
but it would not be worth arguing about
anyway. They were even shelling one end of
the place still. Why they so shelled Gueude-
. court is a mvstorv. and always will be. .
Fritz’s Folly
Prom there we walked down to the strange,
steep-banked sunken road known to us as
“Fritz’s Folly,’’ which I once described un-
der the name of the “Green Bank.” It was
a meeting-place of two of his front line
trenches —fire trench and bayonet trench —be-
hind a steep road cutting through the foot of
the hill. The British, and afterwards the
Australians, several times attacked this
knotty point each time in high hopes. "*But
the Somme mud beat them. The Germans
saw them coming and the brave waves only
just lapped over into his position in a few-
isolated driblets, easily wiped out. In the
end ,at a time when it was easier to lose
j your wav than find it in this wilderness of
Somme mud, a messenger with some of our
! arrangements for assault missed his turning
and wandered into the German lines; and
about the same time a German with some
of their counterplans missed his turning and
wandered into ours—and the Germans
evacuated the place and we took it without
'falling into the trap they had laid.
That will show what sort of a battlefield
these Australians were braving during the
winter. • • ■
We followed along bayonet trench. Our
people had just been able to start burying
I
the men who lay there by the German wire
and In no man’s land—lay very close to the
trench. The Germans had not even troubled
to bury their own dead who lay behind their
trench —not in front of it. They seemed to
have pitched them out over the parapet
without troubling their heads further. There
they lay among the broken bottles and old
tins which marked the ground at the rear of
this trench along its whole length. The Ger-
mans bring mineral waters into the trenches
with them, and parados of this trench as it
wandered across the mud flats was marked
by an endless ribbon of these bottles thrown ,
out of the trench.
And they were mud flats with a vengeance.
Our artillery would cover every square inch
of them during the winter with shell.
Beyond them, where they abruptly ended in
a steep chalk bank, was the German second-
line trench. Rye trench—moderately high
, and dry on the bank top. But the stretch of
flats below was simply a maze of water-
logged shell craters. Here or there were the
timbers of an old German gun position blown
, in, the beams sticking up like dishevelled
pins. We picked our wav cautiously around
the edge of deep mud-holes to Luisenhof
Farm—that is to say, the foundation of it,
and a recognisable hedge. It was a small
German headquarters, the working-rooms of
course being dugouts deep below; and the
farm foundations were heaped with ungainly
humps of earth dug out from the interior.
The Germans blew a big crater in the road
here in the scare after the British tank at-
tack, but the mine was not well sited, and
the huge crater was by the roadside. I* rom
Luisenhof we took the road across the flats
to the villages taken by the Australians in
February—Ligny le Barque and Thilloy.


Unexpected Shelling
As we walked this road towards Ligny
across the flat, and neared the opposite slope,
we drew quite suddenly clear of the filth
which covers seven or eight miles of battle-
field more or less, and out into a shallow
chalk cutting through almost green fields.
Exactly fourteen hundred yards away, on
our right, in full view, was the first main
German trench still held by them; you could :
see the rusty wire-like brown gorse wind-
ing over the hill and the chalk parapets be-
hind it. At eleven hundred yards the cut-
( ting hid us from it. At our feet w r as another j
crater in the crossroads, blown a few weeks
back. By our side w r as a German notice,
“Road to Beaulencourt-town, major next
the church.” We had just passed it when
there was a rushing through the sky, and
great pieces of Ligny and Le Barque and
Thilloy seemed to be thrown about our ears.
For some reason the Germans suddenly flung
heavy shells ’nto the place at the rate of
about 20 to the minute—eight inch and five
point nine pounding with a heart-satisfying
bank into the heart of the village. We with-
drew slightly, as the communiques say, and
watched the spectacle from a roadside as
you would a show. When pieces of tree root
had ceased to turn circles in the air, we
turned down the main street of Ligny to-
wards Le Barque.
The houses are three-quarter shattered
(here, and they look out through a fairly
j skinny patch of wood. But there is enough
| both of houses and wood left to make the
I fighting of the last fortnight something like
village fighting; machine-guns had fired from
the houses on our right against Australians
attacking through the trees. There were
whole walls and roofs still in position. We
struck across from a small field where the
1 Tasmanians had lain on their stomachs and
j bombed the Germans behind the road-bank 15
i yards away, and made along the lane where
: those‘Germans w r ere killed as they fled; a
double line of trees ranged up the hill across
our path. .A minute later we found ourselves
upon the Bapaume-road.
The Bapaume-road
It is a double row of trees running straight
as a ruled line from one horizon to the other.
Miles back it runs through Pozieres and Al-
bert. Then through Le Sars and past the
Butte. And here we tvere on it about
three kilometres from Baupamue. By the
side of us was the old German railway
running down the road. A little behind us
some last German train had been cut off by
shellfire —and there w T ere the trucks lying at
angles on the rails, trucks from Magdeburg
and Essen. Across the road was a blow r n-up
culvert, and further a second mine crater.
We walked uphill until w'e looked down a
long straight vista, near the end of which
the German outposts and ours must have
been facing one another across the road;
then we cut straight across the grass to our
left towards Grevillers.
It w r as green grass compared to any we
had seen on the Somme field. And half of
it was very big new shellholes. but they
were clean cut and fresh, and the earth was
not a slime. As we walked a solitary Ger-
man gun was banging about twice a minute
into a small scrun patch a few hundred
yards to our right. Ido not know w T hat they
had found, but they certainly thought they
had found something. A couple of men
hopped across the skyline quickly—the gun
put four shells in within a few seconds as
they skipped. An hour later as we Passed
the place the same gun was still pecKing
twice a minute at exactly the s P® t ‘, il _
We crossed the excellent litLe trench dug
by our own troops the week ketone,
great square mud trenches of the Germa
main line protecting Loupart Wood. They
were great deep square trenches, withi J;
outs, but no other woodwork or improve
ment, and were half waterlogged. The bombs
there showed that they had been held for the
few nights of the retirement, but until then
they had never been lived in— they we
spare reserves to be improved if occasion in -
quired it. The wire in front of L °upart
Wood consisted of two entanglements
stakes before the second trench, and five
before the front trench. Two on stakes, one
on huge steel knife rests, a fourth on
stakes, and a fifth on knife rests, and they
were still adding to it when they retired.
We walked up a muddy lane into a grove
behind Grevillers-an old quarry long since
grass grown, with tall trees springing irom
the depths. All round it like the boxes of a
theatre the Germans had buiit dugouts, am
having left them they had spent this after
noon in shelling them with very big shells.
Outposts
It was the least broken village and the
est woodland that we had seen. There were
i still unbroken roofs and some whole rooms.
; German shells had that day been pounding
into the deserted place. We moved up pas
1 the deserted ponds and into the countiy be-
yond. and hesitated at a corner where a lane
i ran away into the fields. We were not sure
1 whether to turn up that lane —we saw some
men in another direction. Another man
| was walking quickly round a hedge corner
towards them. We stepped over there too.
1 They were the men we had come to sac.
i They were the front line company. Five
hundred and fifty yards down that quiet lane,
which still had branches and twigs enough
in its hedges to suggest an English lane, was
the main German .trench still held by Ger- ,
mans. These outposts were living here,
v ithin shout of it, something like their or-
dinary Australian life. There had been a
good deal of sniping, the Germans were
throwing high explosive, softly-falling, pine-
apple bombs all day—the ugly little dry pits
of the explosive were obvious all along the
road. He had lathered the place with heavy
shell in the midday. And they were living
at the cutting edge of it, going and coming
oh their messages quietly and promptly;
sending their patrols regularly out through
the unknown an<j back —one of a patrol had
Just been hit in the last half-hour. They
knew they were doing their country’s work
and doing it outstandingly well, and what
pleased them more than anything is to think
that away back home in Australia people will
be pleased and proud of them. They were
Victorians and New South Welshmen in that
village. Dusk was falling as we left them.
Within a few hours they were fighting the
German in his trenches, and before dawn he
came out at them and was driven off.
j That is all in the night’s work.


cZXc IH 10 I 9/7
THE WAR
(Continued from Page 1)
“NOTHING FINER”
AUSTRALIANS’ DEFENCE
Taking of Bullecourt
OUR LOSSES LIGHT
(From Our Special Representative)
LONDON, Monday Morning.
Mr. Beach Thomas (“Daily Mail”) states
that an attack in the small hours of Satur-
day was marked by the fine co-operation of
the forces engaged.
“Companies of a famous division,” he
said, “were attacking two corners Of Bulle-
court. They pushed rapidly across the
mangled rubbish of houses that were still
fortifications. The German garrison were
diversely affected. Some stuck limplike
to dug-outs and cellars. Others seeing the
converging onslaught hurried south-east-
wards, and fell into the jaws of the Austra-
lians, who, still insatiate after eight days’ en-
durance of concentrated shell-fire, were
bombing in every direction The enemy
lines bear inexpressible witness to their
skill with rifle and bomb. The glory of
this long, unflinching defence to the last,
flamed into an attack of quite unabated
dash and spirit. In the whole war there is
no finer page than the heroic defence of the
Australians.
“The Australians’ capture of the Hinden-
burg line to the south, which they describe
as a very ordinary line, not worth brag-
ging about, should be assured, and the long
agony of defending points hideous by con-
centrated shell-fire, should be over. The
Germans lost heavily. Our losses at Bulle-
court were very light.”
(Published in “The Times")
Mr. Pirrie Robinson, “The Times” corre-
spondent at British Headquarters, writes:—
“On Saturday we forced our way frontally
into the main part of Bullecourt. Simulta-
neously, by a sudden and dashing raid, the
Scottish troops stormed through the western
edge. While the troops worked through the
village and the raiding party on the left held
the sunken road, the Australians began
bombing the support line of the Germans,
who saw a good chance, and tried to es-
cape. But the Australians caught 170 of the
enemy. The counter-attacks were almost
pathetically futile. Two separate attacks
were utterly smashed by our guns and rifle
fire. The prisoners are largely Branden-
burgers, a large proportion being extraordi-
narily weedy and insignificant, which shows
the extent to which Germany is drafting into
the front line men formerly rejected as un-
fit.”
PRISONERS IN GERMANY
HOTELS FOR OFFICERS
(Reuter’p Telegram)
LONDON, Sunday Night.
Reuter’s correspondent at Amsterdam
states that according to a report from Berlin
the transfer of British and French officers
who are prisoners to Freiburg has begun.
They are now to be accommodated in hotels.


•'* W ( c m
INTO THE STRAIGHT
National Understanding
EMPIRE’S ARMY ONE TEAM
Australian Press
(From
Captain C. B. W. Bean,
Representative with the Commonwealth Forces.
Copyright by Crown.)
British Headquarters. France,
February 22.
There has been a certain waste of energy
and opportunity in this war, to my own
! personal kn. .vledge, simply through the fact
that when the British and Dominions corps
first came to fight next to one another they
did not understand each other. They each
expected to find the other attempting to ex-
cel at their own virtues, and judged them
by their own standard; and they each found
something very different. The misunder-
standings which this aroused were childish,
but they existed.
British and Australians have been fighting
and dying side by side for a year now, and
I have noticed quite definitely that these old
misconceptions have been melting like the
mist before the morning sun. Armies of
which the Australians have been members
for many months have changed gradually
from a sort of half suspicion to a warm ap-
preciation: as for the Australian—well, the
winter has brought home to him qualities of
the British at his side which but for the
appalling trials of the Somme mud he would
probably never have appreciated; and they
are the very qualities which have been the
marvel in the British people from ancient
times.
The average British officer at the outset
of this war, though intensely friendly to
Australia and her effort, looked upon that
effort as coming from some section of his
own nation analogous to Scotland or even to
Cornwall Some British officers even now,
quite genuinely, and with a warm friendship
in their hearts for the Australian, think it
quite a pity “that there should be any dis-
tinction between Australians and British.”
| But whether it is a pity or not. it exists. The
Australian is at least as different from the
Englishman as the Scotsman is. His whole
nation has been brought up to think some
things right which the Englishman thinks
wrong, and some things wrong which the
Englishman thinks right. The English-
man’s virtues would sometimes be a vice in
him, and some of the Englishmen’s vices a
virtue. For the purpose of this war and the
winning of it, there is a good deal of wise
modification on both sides.
Basis of Understanding
But that does not alter the fact that to
understand the Australian you must under-
stand that he is prouder of belonging to the
Australian nation than of anything on earth.
He is proud of Britain, too—of the races and
of its high honest purpose in the war. But
he does not regard his army here as being
so many mere units scattered in the British
Expeditionary Forces. An Australian unit
wherever it is in the line looks upon itself
as part of the Australian force in France
fighting for the future of Australia above
every other object. Australians have an in-
tense corporate feeling, exactly the same
confidence that a big family of brothers
often has in itself —they would rather fight
with an Australian or New Zealand unit be-
side them than alongside the most famous
troops in the world. And I have no doubt
the British and the Scots feel the same
about themselves.
That is one side of the story. The mis-
understanding is a noted fact. Some who
have come to know the Australians in France
have learnt in some cases, to my personal
knowledge, to value Intensely some of those
very national differences which at first they
misunderstood or were suspicious of. I have
spoken, for example, to British officers, who
realised that in some most important essen-
tials discipline of the Australian units was
not bad, but outstandingly good—and it takes
hard thinking to bring that home to the
realisation of one brought up in the ideas
of the old army.
Lack of Appreciation
The other side of the story is that the
Australian is in some cases only beginning
to understand the British soldier, *There has
sometimes been want of appreciation on that
side too, and comment has not always been
quite fair. In every way if anything goes
wrong in action with the unit next in the
line, the other unit, which is left unsup-
ported, is apt to fly to hasty conclusions and
harsh judgment without making the slight-
est effort to find out what was the case. I
can only say that of many scores of such
stories related by troops of every sort which
it has been my duty carefully to probe,
there are very few in which the harsh judg-
ment was even partially justified when you
knew all the facts of the case. These hasty
censures are too common in all our armies.
It is not the way of the Englishman or of the
Australian to be ungenerous in his judgment.
The petty gossip and harpings and criticisms
which sometimes enlivens the boredom of
the front is not a generous thing, and it does
not help to win the war. Men know in their
hearts that it is probably unfair to any man
who is not here to give his version. We are
all in the same big fight, and for the same
big end. And if we only recognised what
everyone of us knows to be true —that we are
different, and that everyone has his own
peculiar virtues —w’e shall all come in to-
gether with a very perfect understanding now
that it looks as if we are turning into “the
straight.”


JUx. in ~ i 9 l'r ~ l°- i
BLOODY BULLECOURT
PRUSSIAN GUARDS’ FAILURE
FACE ANZACS 13 TIMES
Then Refuse Duty
(From Our Special Representative)
LONDON, Wednesday Night.
Artillerymen from the front describe the
tremendous work of the gunners in the re-
cent engagements. Once the 10th Battery
fed the guns unceasingly for 22 hours, strip-
ped to the waist, reminiscent of the fighting
at Gallipoli. Some of the men bled from
the nose, and all suffered from the head-
splitting noises. The Germans replied with
every kind of shell, from whizz-bangs to 18-
inchers. The ammunition columns did great
work in bringing up supplies. All are unani-
mous that nothing has previously approach-
ed the violence of the artillery fire in France.
German m ss attacks were frequently scat-
tered, bursts of shells making great gaps in
the ranks. Tommies fighting on the flank
said that they never saw finer shooting.
Our aerial supremacy was most valuable,
the observations resulting in remarkable ac-
curacy. The Germans, who are wonder-
fully accurate when they find the mark, were
compelled to search up and down the valley
in an effort to discover the Australian posi-
tions.
Prisoners say that after the thirteenth
failure to retake Bullecourt a brigade of
Prussian Guards refused to attack, and
was sent to the rear for disciplinary mea-
sures.
Fierce fighting is still raging around
Bullecourt. A French commentator says
that both Bullecourt and Roeux are ad-
vance fortresses of the Hindenburg line.
The enemy attaches considerable import-
ance to the keeping of these points-
d'appui, but the power and precision of
the British artillery, allied with the tenac-
ity and ardor of the Australian infantry,
overcame the enemy resistance, and car-
ried these formidable defensive organisa-
tions. Now the Hindenburg line is pierced
at several points, and the enemy wishes at
all cost to fill the breach without counting
the sacrifices in counter-attacks.
Correspondents state that while the Ger
mans on the Arras front are generally
allowed to rest, the Guards are kept inces-
santly attacking Australians, and endeavor-
ing to regain the lost sector. Their suc-
cesses in the north-west corner are the
trifling outcome of a bombing match in the
church ruins. The whole of the Bullecourt
fighting is now done by bombing, in which
the more expert Australians have the upper
hand. Mr. Percival Phillips (“Daily Ex-
press’’), describing the latest counter-attack,
says that the Australians welcomed the in-
truders warmly, and bombed them with
great accuracy, the Germans leaving many
dead before the Australian trenches. Many
new corpses overlay the victims of the pre-
vious futile efforts. The Kaiser, who so
frequently boasted of “his invincible
Guards,” will find their repeated repulses
unpleasant reading.
A later message states that the British
regained their ground at Bullecourt.
(Reuter’s Telegram)
Reuter’s correspondent at British head-
quarters says that the Prussian Guards con-
tinue to be hurled against Bullecourt. There
were four distinct infantry attacks yester-
day. Anzac and British troops inflicted ap-
palling casualties upon the onflowing human
waves, and the enemy’s final gain was in-
significant.
Field-Marshal Sir Douglas Haig reports:—
Fighting continued yesterday, to our ad-
vantage, in the western portion of Bulle-
court. We took a few prisoners during
a small encounter last night to the right
of our position on the Hindenburg line
and eastward of the village.
Severe fighting is in progress northward
of the Scarpe.
The French communique says:—
The artillery struggle was continued all
night, and after a violent bombardment
the enemy this morning powerfully at-
tacked on a four-kilometre ( 2\ mile) front
in the Moulin de Laffaux district. We
STOP-PRESS NEWS
i-I-rUL GERMAN ATTACK
(Reuter’s Telegram)
LONDON, Thursday Morning.
Field-Marshal Haig reported last night
that a powerful German attack between
Gavrelle and the Scarpe forced the Brit-
ish troops back slightly, but that the po-
sitions have been regained.
We made progress in the Hindenburg
lin north-east of Bullecourt.


/ r' "in
In Sinai.
AUSTRALIANS IN THE DESERT.
Historic Ground.
By VV. M. CARNE.)
Here 1 lie in my corner of the cluster of palm
leaf and grain-bag shelters (?) which make our
bivouac. A sandstorm rages outside, but the
dies and 1 have fairly good protection from
my ground sheet, and only the finest of saud-
tlour comes sifting in. As for the dies, 1 have
smoked numerous cigarettes with doubtful re-
sults. so have decided to allow the dies undis-
turbed tenancy, for to me there are decided
limits to the smoking of “Flags” or “Red Hus-
sars.” or whatever may be the latest name of
the army-issue cigarettes.
It is a wonderful old place. Here Joseph pass-
ed. a captive slave, to the greatness that came
to he his. Here came his brethren, wandering
tribesmen, seeking food in Egypt. Here came
Jacob and his people overlanding their herds
and docks to the land of Goshen, somewhere
about the present town of Zagazig, there to
multiply and wax rich and great: then to wane
into captivity until the exodus took them into
Southern Sinai. Here came ary and Joseph
and the Son of Man. Here came caravans and
armies, marauding tribesmen and nomadic
shepherds with their docks —Arabs, Syrians.
Persians, Israelites, Egyptians. Romans —and
in more recent times Ercnch. Turks, and now
ourselves. Ourselves —English. Scottish.
Welsh. Australians and New Zealanders, In
dians. West Indians, and Egyptians! An Tm
perial army, surely! Rut shall we leave mor6
traces than those before us? Of those others,
what remains has the desert saved of them?
The Bedouin Arab. wandering*tribesman with
his sheep, goats, and camels, being of the
desert, has survived long ages—or, rather, con-
tinues to be one of the desert products. A few
cemeteries, detected mainly by the aloes with
which he plants the graves of his fathers, the
ruins of some tombs raised to the memory of
departed sheikhs, a scattering of humpies of
palm leaves, or occasionally of brick's and stone
looted from the relics of an earlier age: some
birs or wells, built of palm leaves and logs in
depressions in the dunes? and. lastly, the best
of his works—the palm groves or hods —these
are his signs. Those hods and birs! what is-
lands in the sea of sand, what relief to thirsty
bodies in the grateful shade of the graceful
palms. What rest for the eyes in their green-
ness! What memories thev have for us of the
desert column. Here we camped, and there
we stopped to boil our billies ; here we fought,
and there some of us died!
But of the others who came here, those great
builders, the Romans, alone have left traces —
here a name and there a stone well or a pile of
bricks, and occasionally ruins of buildings.
Those near Hod-cl-Sagia will have a good idea.
To get there our ride took us over magnificent
dunes and through fine hods. The smooth,
clean, wave-like masses of sand are verv strik-
ing. In places some disturbance in the air cur-
rents has formed great whirlpools in the sand,
making regular, funnel-like depressions 60 to
100 feet deep. We lunched in the shade of the
palms. About half a mile further on are the
ruins, covering several acres. Thev consist of
a large public building or temple, with a num-
her of smaller structures, in the main so des-
troyed or covered with sand that no arrange-
ment or system is evident. Thev are built
of the limestone (?) which constitutes the back-
bone of Sinai, and were once covered with ce-
ment. The blocks of stone are small, and.
being very soft in nature, their surfaces have
become weathered, and beautifully crystalline
even in this dry climate. The cement facing
persists in places—that in which the stones
have been set has proven more lasting than the
stone . The walls are about three feet thick,
and the inner spaces are filled up with rubble
concrete, containing cpiite a lot of broken
bricks, probably from older structures. The
purpose these ruins served in the days of their
prime we can only guess. Maps do not show
their existence, nor, I believe, is anything
known of them in Cairo. It is possible that it
was a post on an old Roman route, the adminis-
trative centre of a military district. The route
probably came through Romani and Katia,
leaving the coastal route to Palestine at Ogh-
ratina, following the fine series of hods south
of that place to the highlands and so up into
Syria. But this is purely surmise in the ab-
sence of a reference library to one stationed in
the desert.
The buildings are fiat-roofed, with one ex-
ception, and are rectangular in design. The
door arches are square, but some interior open-
ings have a triangular finish. The main build-
ing appears to consist of a central chamber,
opening to external rooms, the whole sur-
rounded by a colonade of pillars. Behind this
is a two-chambered structure with a single en-
trance and high ventilation holes, and no ap-
parent provision for light. The little digging
we were able to do seemed to show the pre-
sence of cellars or rooms beneath this place.
Possibly the larger ruin was the court and ad-
ministrative offices of the district, and the
smaller the prison. One small building, now
two-thirds full of sand, can be entered through
a hole in its domed roof. The dome is built
of small limestone blocks, somewhat larger
than the modern brick, arranged in concentric
circles. The stonework, although at one time
covered with cement, is well finished. The
stones are laid in regular designs, which
in different buildings or in different parts of
the same structure. The domed roof was the
< nly one actually seen in position, all the
others have fallen in. The ground round about
is covered with broken earthenware, but this
is probably due to the Bedouins, for. in Egypt,
water is still carried in earthen water jars as
in past aees. We also found what appeared to
be very inferior moulded green glass; it also
may be recent. No indisputable relics were
found, though possibly they may be beneath
the sand, which partially covers the ruins. But
of this we may be sure, that wandering Arabs
long took all that appeared to them of
value. And so Rome passed.
Of Napoleon’s army which crossed here in
1798-99, nothing remains. But to the French
we owe the first successful invasion of the de-
sert in De Lesseps’ Suez Canal. That to-day
forms its western border. But across the canal
the desert has reigned supreme until the pre-
sent war. Of Turkish and Egyptian rule, bor-
der police stations, and a telegraph line sum up
their necessary aids to international require-
ment. But what we have done, and are
doing to-day will be found in the records of
the Great War when they come to be written.
And of their permanence, history alone can tell.
We are camped at the back of a long beach,
which extends eastward into Palestine, backed
by dunes, broken by a few wadis (or valleys
in the sand), running back to the high back-
bone of the Peninsula. Along this beach out-
side, about 50 feet from the sea, fresh (nearly!
water may be obtained at about 3to 5 feet. In
the dunes it mav also be found usually within
two feet of the bottom of' depressions. This
water we drink, though it has a slight taste,
but not of sodium chloride. The content is
probablv the frvpsum that makes the desert
well-water undrinkable. Apparently tjie water
comes from above sea-level. The rainfall here,
probablv exceeds 8 to 10 inches ner annum
—"S. M. Herald


~ /9*f 7
DASTARDLY HUNS
Sun 25.5. 1917.
Anzacs III=treated
WORKED WITHIN SHELL FIRE
STARVED PRISONERS’ STORY
(From
Captain C. E. W. Bmn.
Australian Press
Representative with the Commonwealth Forces, |
Copyright by Crown.)
I
That Germany is shockingly treat-
ing Australians who fall into their
hands is proved by the story of two
men who recently escaped from cap-
tivity and rejoined their companions.
I
BRITISH HEADQUARTERS. Tuesday.
There reached the Australian lines to-day
two Western Australians who were taken
prisoner by the Germans when the Hinden-
burg wire was first broken by the Australian
troops on April 11. They were cut .off with
750 others from all parts of Australia after
that magnificent attempt to seize and hold
the Hindenburg line without the help of the
artillery.
From the first the Germans starved these
men while working them mercilessly. They
say that many of them are now falling so
ill that even the Germans see that some
can work no longer. From the day they
were captured they never had one blanket.
They had to lie on straw through the cold-
est nights. Their ration consisted of one
loaf of bread between seven men with stew-
ed turnips and two cups of coffee daily.
French civilians and pries-ts were constant-
ly trying to help them with little gifts of food,
but this was done at great risk. One woman
who was caught giving food -was knocked
over the head by a German and taken away.
They say that the Germans are deliberately
trying to cause dissension between Australia
and Britain. They were told by the Ger- j
mans that they could write anything they
pleased about their hard treatment and short
rations provided they said in their letters
that it was punishment for the English em-
ploying German prisoners under shellfire.
Needless to say the accusation is utterly un-
true, and is only made in order to give the
Germans an excuse for using all possible
labor behind the front.
These Australians said that a French pri-
soner told them that they had been made to
carry rations to the front line, a flagrant
breach of all international law. The Aus-
tralians themselves were sent within shell
range on working gangs. They became thin
and haggard from want of food.
Finally, two days ago, they decided, “We
will have either bacon or death for break-
fast.” They escaped, and made their
way across the line of trenches. Finally
they reached the Australian lines. They
state that the Germans invariably asked
them how England was standing the sub-
marine campaign.


<r/7 ■ P-i
BEYOND BAPAUME
AUSTRALIANS FOLLOW ON
THE TRAIL OF THE HUN
Australian Press
(From
Captain C. E. W. Bean,
Representative with the Commonwealth Force*.
Copyright by Crown.)
British Headquarters,
France, March 21,
The troops were five miles beyond Bapaume.
The evening before they had occupied the
part of the fourth German line which ran
opposite the Australian front at about two
and a half to three miles beyond Bapaume.
There had been some slight fighting in which
a German officer was killed at Delsaux Farm,
near Beugny, through which that line, ran.
During the night the infantry pushed on
through Vaulx and Yraucourt.
As we drove up the main road into Ba-
paume and turned into the town we noticed
that the barns along this part of the road-
side had been destroyed by blowing out the
wall nearest to the road. When the side
wall was blown down the roof collapsed into
the building and lay drunkenly on the ground. |
Building after building had been destroyed in!
the same way.
In the centre of the t*wn is a big oblong
square with the town hall on the northern
side of it. The floor beams of this and all
other houses had fallen in, and often were
still smouldering—glowing red in the breeze.
The trees which had made beautiful the
cattle market In the southern part of the
town had been sawn off short near their
! slumps, and were lying there as they fell. I
do not know what was the motive of this —•
whether to open the square to aeroplane ob-
servation or sheer destructiveness.
INTO THE GREEN COUNTRY
We left Bapaume behind us and went
straight out along the Beugnatre-road. The
car spun between banks of green grass along
a good even road, as roads go in these parts, \
After our endless trudgings along intermin- i
able duckboards during the past winter, over
miles upon miles of mud and water-filled 1
potholes, it was like breaking suddenly Into !
another world. We scuttled past the lines I
of tangled wire where the enemy had been \
jon Saturday after we took Bapaume. Her© j
and there in the roadside bank was a square
yard or so of digging with newly-broken
earth around it. It was the mouth of a
dugout w'hich the enemy had blow down or
stripped of its timber before he left it. The
slimy yellow clay of the roof had collapsed
inside, and was lapping over the stair.
The road became suddenly worse. On the i
left were the marks of traffic and trodden !
mud. The Germans had clearly had one of •
their supply dumps or depots of engineering !
stores here quite lately. But they had clear-
ed everything as clean as a dog licks a
plate. The road swerved into Beugnatre, and
just at the village entrance there stared at
us In the middle of the road a big, newly-
blown crater. There was no possibility of
getting round it, and so the car was left
there, and we walked on through the village. ,
A WRECKED VILLAGE
It w r as a poor little hamlet of a place at
its best —Beugnatre—a dozen or so of tiny
agricultural cottages; one fair-sized farm:
and the attendant flimsy plaster-walled
barns. The Germans had blown it to ruins
with absolute completeness. The cottages
had collapsed upon themselves with the
blowing up of their walls, and lay there —
what remained of them —flat upon the
ground. Not a single house that we could
see was left. The furniture must have dis-
appeared long ago to furnish German camps
in the neighborhood. Those who had been
through Bapaume more thoroughly than I,
told me that the furniture had in some cases
been piled inside the houses with tar poured
over it in order to help the place to burn.
The German uug-ouis aiwaya uma
British dug-outs in this respect, that they
are furnished with chairs, curtains, table-
cloths, stoves, and looking-g’asses from the
nearest villages, whereas the furniture of
a British dug-out is improvised woodwork,
such as the engineers or pioneers put to-
gether for them.
Through Beugnatre the road for the first
time became sloppy—for a space—very like
the roads that we were used to upon the
Somme. It climbed a gentle hill, and, until
a few days ago, it had been lined, as most
of the French roads are, by a double row
of great planted trees.
Here again, for some reason I could not
fathom, the Germans had sawn off trunks
low down, and the trees lay side by side on
the field beside the road. Sometimes it was
on one side of the road that they had been
felled, sometimes on the other, but rarely on
both sides. The Germans say that they
have been preparing the whole country into
a favorable battle-ground as they retire, and
one must suppose that these are some of theii
preparations. But their meaning is difficult
tc see.
THE FOURTH GERMAN LINE
At the top of the gentle rise we came upon
the fourth German line. It was a double
line of boldly-planned wide trenches with
great square massive traverses, very regular,
as are all German trenches. They were not
very deep trenches, and we noticed no dug-
I outs in them. The second trench was 60 or
70 yards behind the first, and there was a
double belt of wire in front of each of them,
i The line wandered away to left and right
I across the country, a monument of labor gone
Ito waste; but which might have been the
| salvation of the German army in certain
eventualities. T’he German assuredly leaves
very little to chance.
As we reached the hilltop to the right of
the road, over the crest, appeared the rooftops
of two more villages. The purp.e slates
seemed to be intact upon a good many of
them —but as they had been shelled with
fairly big shells that morning and weie sued-
i ed again yesurday, their immunity will not
last very iong. It seemed that the German
had been hustled out of this part of the
country some days before he calculated on
leaving it.
REARGUARD OF THE HUNS
Our troops were at the top of their bent.
On a hill on one side of us was a sunken
road—there was a patrol of Light Horse and
a post of Infantry somewhere thereabouts
which had been blazing at the Germans,
whom a couple of our field guns bolted from
a copse near by. A battery of German ‘'pip
squeaks” was somewhere in the country
ahead banging occasional salvoes into what
it considered likely corners in the open land-
scape.
Far ahead, on the summit of a grey hill
four miles away, we could see through our
glasses three or four figures moving on the
sky ine; on this side of them, up the distant
hillside, crept lines of troops. The lines
seemed to form into bodies of about fifty
men each in close column of route as they
went. It was part of the German rear-
guard.


/W.GL-, 19/ 7
I
SAMPLING THE HUN IN FRANCE
Our Boys as Raiders and Raided
AUSTRALIAN GENERAL'S STRIKING STORY
Brigadier-General Jobson writes from
France to a Sydney friend: —
.... We did not stay long in billets, for
on Saturday afternoon we got orders that
one lot would have to go into reserve near
the front line on Sunday, and that we would
relieve the front line on Monday. It was
sudden. However, we managed it all right,
and the Corps Commander said he was very
pleased with the smoothness of the relief at
such short notice. During our first term we
had no special excitement; in fact, apart
from artillery and machine-gun, the Hun
was very quiet. We had no casualties at all
for the first three days, and then one poor
sergeant was killed by a bullet which glanced
off his rifle as it was slung over his shoul-
der. On Christmas Eve we came out and
went into rest for a bit, and then came back
again. This time the Hun was more aggres-
rive, and on our third day put up a raid on
us. He started off by shelling about 2 p.m.
fairly heavily, but gradually increased his
fire and put over some big minenwerfer—ap-
parently 9.8 —(40 inches long), “as big as half
a man,” one officer described them; “coal-
boxes” was the term others applied. It was
mostly within an area of 1000 yards broad
and 1500 yards deep, and concentrated chiefly
on one particular spot of about 250 yards.
This went on for about three hours, during
which we retaliated with shrapnel and H.F.,
Hows., and Heavies. About a quarter to 5
(he started shelling at a quarter to 2) men
were seen leaving the Hun trenches. The
distance here across No Man’s Land varies
from 70 yards to 250 yards. The leading man
in blue uniform, probably an officer, was
shot by one of our men, and others were
shot too. But they came on.
“OUR POLITICAL FRIEND”
! Our political friend Carmichael (now an
M.C. in consequence) hung on and kept his
men well organised until he was wounded
by a couple of Minnies bursting on either
side, and he was led away just before the
Huns arrived. About 40 of them reached our
parapet in one place, and ran about in a
disorganised mass —shouting like a “drunken
rabble,” one officer described it. Just at the
spot they came in at, the officer thought it
best to defend his dugout; they bombed him
twice and he fell into his dugout, dazed for
a time but unwounded. Shooting one man
through the chest, the Huns oassed on and
neglected to search the dugout, where they
would have got some papers of sorts. Some
of them passed down the trench to find our
men there, and the leading man was shot in
the act of throwing a bomb, which exploded
and helped to finish him. The doctor said
his body stank of liquor. Then the rest clear-
ed over the parapet, anj our men fired at
them as they went, enjoying themselves im-
mensely. One lad told me he had not been
so warm for months. They accounted for
quite a number of them as they cleared. A
group bunched at one corner of the Huns’
trench, and one of our shells hit the spot,
and at least one Boche went up in the air.
The Hun kept on shelling till about a quar-
ter to 7, and then both sides knocked off, we
having last say. Strange to say, despite the
intensity of fire and its duration our casual-
ties were really very light. The Hun did not
seem to have any method in his raid. Ho
waited three hours before he came. His men
moved over No Man’s Land at the run, but
hunched, and were in no proper formation,
so that our Lewis gunners and Vickers got a
number of them. He ran into our trenches,
stayed a few minutes, and then ran out
again.
FRITZ’S KEEPSAKES
He brought two demolition charges, one he
put in a dug-out and pulled the igniter, but
it misfired. The other he left with us as it
was. In all his raids in this vicinity he
leaves most of what he brings-—bombs, Ac.—-
and does not worry about taking them back.
We got two Military Crosses out of this
show— one for your political friend, and the
other for the officer who was bombed, and
who had kept the flag Hying, as it were. Two i
Lewis guners and a Vickers man and a run-
ner who ran twice through the barrage, got
Military Medals. The Hun tried the same
game on again about 10 days later, but this
time it was only shelling for an hour—there
was no raid. We had a go at him ourselves
about 10 days ago with a small party. It
was successful, In that the men did the job
they were sent on, except that we got no pri-
soners back. We got three, but two of
them were killed just near the Hun wire, and
the third—an officer—was killed, too. His
was a curious case. One of our officers on
his way out saw someone crouching in a
recess and hauled him out.
Eighteen days later. —I. was interrupted
here, and have not had a chance since to con-
tinue.
This Hun appeared to be an officer and
spoke English. He had a steel helmet on
and this our man annexed and took the Hun
down to the gap. There he found one of
our wounded men being helped away, so he
made the officer sit on the parapet w-hile he
lent a hand. Now, he said, “Come on!” but
the Boche wouldn’t move, so M. hit him a
smack* on the jaw with his revolver butt,
and he got a move on, asking, “Where are
we going now?” “Home," said M. “As fast
as wo can.”
TAKE MY ARM
M. said ho seemed quite a decent sort,
snd they went off arm-in-arm helping one
another up out of ditches and shell-holes
when a Hun shell came and M. saw a
(lash, but heard nothing, and a few minutes,
oi really seconds later probably, he came to,
and tugged at the Hun’s arm: “Come on!”
but the Hun’s arm was all he had; the rest
had gone to the winds. M. felt numbed
down his right side, and could scarcely
walk. Fortunately his runner, now a D.C.M.
in consequence, missed him, and came back
from his own trench to the Hun wire, when
! he found M.. and though M. was much
I bigger, the runner carried him about 150
yards in the mud and slush under heavy
machine-gun fire and also Hun shells. M. was
all rlghr and able to tell a story, but after
a fortnight he got very seedy, and is now
in an officers’ rest home. M. is now a
M.C. man Tor what he did. His party de-
stroyed two dug-outs and a machine-gun
emplacement A very curious thing hap-
pened during this stunt. M. had seen
the signal to retire, and was coming down
the Hun trench to the wire gap, but turned
too soon into an opening bv mistake. He
found himself in a bay, and, as he entered,
a man in a crouching position with his
hands up came towards him shouting
“Kamerad!” only to be pulled up short. He
looked and found that this man was fastened
to a wire running the length of the bay, and
there was also another man fastened. Three
men lay over the wire as if dead. M. got
out his knife and hacked through the strap
—sort of leather and webbing—and cut him
free, passing him over to one of his own men.
He dropped his knife, and couldn’t find it, so
had to leave the other man, but fixed him
first. The man who was a prisoner bailed
up on the way over was fixed too.
WHO TIED THEM UP?
Of course this made us all very keen to know
what the solution of the tying-up was. It
looked like F.P. No. 1 in the front line. We
got a fairly reasonable, but not conclusive,
solution two nights later. Our stunt was a
blind for a much bigger one two nights later,
which brought in 17 prisoners and some very
useful materia! of war. One of these pri-
soners was a machine-gun corporal. All the


prisoners were questioned about the tying- i
up, but, though serious in other answers, they
all smiled at the idea. They were really j
very happy at having finished with the war. |
They said they didn’t care who won, nor did
their friends at home care, so long as the
war came to an end. However, I got M.
along, arid he and the corporal independently
identified the bay. The corporal said it was
a machine-gun position, and there was a
gun in it which M. in his haste l ad not seen.
Hun machine gunners have a cross belt with
hooks on it (snap spring-hooks), on to winch
’ to hitch the gun to carry it.
suggested that one of the cross straps had
, got loose—M. said the man had only one
| strap across his chest, not two—-and that the
hook had snapped on an electric light wire
which ran along the bay (the dug-outs are
lit by electric light), and the man had be-
come fastened in this way. This does not
account for the second man. The corporal
was, however, very definite that no men were
tied up as a punishment. He said there were
five men in the bay. and three were killed
and two wounded, but though he saw bodies
I and the wounded men he could not say that
1 they were all found in the bay. The pri-
soner’s body was no doubt brought in. It is
not conclusively cleared up, but the corporal
appeared to be telling the truth, and his
solution seems the more reasonable.
SPLENDID ARTILLERY WORK
Our own barrage that night was the won-
der of our men; they got within thirty
yards of it. During the five minutes it lasted
only one shell fell short of the Hun front
line, and that was in his wire. The front
line was one mass of flame, and then there
was black darkness for a second, and, as
from one gun, the shells fell on the second
line, and formed the box. It gave our men
tremendous confidence, and they say they
will go anywhere under our guns now. It
made the reputation of our guns, for the
folks at the ton said it must have been won-
derfully good shooting, as never before have
our men got within thirty yards of a bar-
rage without some of them being hit. Be-
tween ourselves, it was really a successful
stunt, apart from the loss of the prisoners.
We got some credit for it, because an hour
and a half after zero X was able to tell the
General the main facts of the story, and he
was able to pass it up above. The General
sent a message of congratulation through,
which I sent on, and the men got it while
they were being examined by their C.O.
Telephones shorten distance, and it was
something to be able to pass this
over from my General a few miles
back to the men down in the-
line. Another unit did a bigger show two
nights later at the same spot. It was very
successful, and I saw my first Boche prison-
er—not mine, of course, as I wasn’t running
the show. They were average height for the
most part—quite ordinary men, and not a bit
shaken up by the she’ling. One or two of
them looked as though they could be beasts,
but the others seemed quite harmless citizens.
We gave them some tea and bread and
butter, and cigarettes, and off they went to
the compound.
OUR MEN “REALLY WONDERFUL”
Our men are really wonderful in the way
they have taken to soldiering. The discipline
l is good. This week’s crime report was really
small not more than about 15 cases for the
whole of my outfit; far less than at Lark
Hill even. They are very cheerful, and make
the best of it, and when I see men in the
line, mostly in the morning, when the aver-
age man doesn’t feel too bright, thev have
always got a cheery word. We have one man
who, when his lot go in for its term, sings
all the way in and sings all the way out;
but the sheer wonder is how they stand pain.
The other night in the dressing station three
men were receiving attention. One had been
hit by a piece of shell, which scooped both
eyes out and took off part of his nose. After
his wound was dressed the A.M.C. sergeant
said, “How do you feel?” (The man had
said nothing, and they thought he was un-
conscious.) “Oh alright, if I could have a drop
of rum.” The second man had had both
thighs smashed with a bullet. He lay quiet-
ly by, saying nothing. A third had a bullet
scratch on his face, and he made a great
noise. When the ambulance came to take
the first two to the hospital they both in-
sisted that the third man who was not
seriously hurt, should go first, as he “must
be in an awful way.” Another man had a
very ugly gash in his thigh, but he said no-
thing except “Give me a cigarette.”
DEATH HAS NO TERRORS
They met death like men who have no i
fear whatever. A youngster who was being I
earned down said quite calmly to the bear-
ers, Well, I m dished,’’ and died a few
seconds afterwards, A shell came through i
a dugout and passed between an officer’s '
legs and exploded outside. There were two
officers and a batman in at the time. Neither
officer was hurt, but the batman near the
door was wounded and died in a few sec-
onds, but before he died he said “I’m dying,
Captain; good-bye, sir.” He had been an
old school pupil of his captain’s, who was
very badly cut up about it. Another lad, a
runner, had both legs blown off. He was
thrown into icy cold water, which numbed
the pain. When found, he said, “I would get
up and go on with my message if I could
get my legs free; they arc caught in the
duckboards.” He died before he knew the
truth. ~ Still another man was blown up three
times by shell explosion, but apart
from occasional trembling he .was un-
hurt. But he refused to go to a rest
camp, as he did not want to miss a chance
of getting back on the Hun for blowing him
up. That reminds me of another man who
was buried to the neck by a shell which blew
away a parapet and left him facing the Hun
trenches. The Hun sniped at him from time I
to lime for the hour it took to get him out. I
At last he worked himself free, and with the
aid of a sergeant scrambled back to safety, i
Shaking with shell-shock, he let go the best j
language he could think of, principally aimed I
at the Hun who had buried him, and what
he would do to him when he caught
him. A sergeant came up to his officer
one day and said, “The extraordinary thing is
my watch hasn’t stopped.” “But why should
it?” “Oh, I was just blown away by a shell,
and my waterproof cape was blown right off
me, leaving only the straps round my chest
and my watch hasn’t stopped.” The same
shell blew one lad up in the air, and he fell
on top of another; the first was unhurt, but
the one underneath got shell-shock.
UNCONQUERABLE HUMOR
The batmen provide us with amusement 1
at times —one was particularly amusing re-
cently. The first time his officer went into
the line ho carried up the valise and bed
along the communication trenches about a
mile in the straight line, but a bit more
in the actual sap. So he decided to go over-
land the next time, and he did, but lost his
way. The Hun was shelling in a desultory
fashion, but this did not deter the batman,
who kept steadily on until he reached the
front line, and put the valise on the parapet
preparatory to going over into No Man’s
Land. When asked w'here he was going, he
said: “I’ve brung up Mr. M.’s valish.” He
was not much disturbed about No Man’s
Land, but a bit annoyed to find he had to go
back about 500 yards to the officer's dug-out.
Another batman was reading “Blighty” in
his dug-out when a shell came and buried
him. About a quarter of an hour after-
wards his officer came along to inspect the
damage, and found to his astonishment tha
batman emerging unhurt from the ruins. Ho
was covered in mud, and held in his hand a
boot. “I’ve lost one of your boots, sir,” he
said in a most apologetic manner, “and I can’t
find my tin ’at.” At the pictures here .the lads
are always quick to comment on the pictures i
with some topical phrase. Last night, in a
drama, the husband of an erring lady was
called up at his office by the housemaid to
■ say that his child was very ill and his wife
was not at home. As soon as his eyes began
to dilate in the usual “movie” style, a voice
called out “5.0.5.,” and as he got up and
rushed fpr his hat, “They’re coming over.”
Of course the house roared.
“RUNNING A HEADQUARTERS STUNT”
I don’t know that anyone has written any


sketch about the way a stunt is run from a
brigade or divisional headquarters. Probably
not, for there is nothing really very dramatic
about it. Still it seems to me that Boyd
Cable or lan Hay could make quite a decent
story of it. Take our own show —our first
one. I will use fictitious numbers and calls,
but it was something like this. I had just
finished my meat at lunch when the B.M.
was called to the 'phone. He came back in
! a few minutes to say, "They’re putting them
j over on Locality 25. I’ve got the Group
| X.Y.Z. (call of battalion) asking for retalia-
| tion, and got it, but they want a bit more.”
! Five minutes later he came back. “They’re
I getting heavier on 25, putting over bigger
( Minnies than we have seen, so I’ve got the
j Heavies going." I finished my meal and
; went to stand by the 'phone. Every few
i minutes we rang up to see if the shelling
was lessening, for we cannot hear clearly
where we are. But there was no cessation.
Meanwhile the news was passed on up above.
Presently the telephone went, "Group here
(group is short for artillery group); S.O.S. on
25.” This we passed on, and the heavies Joined
in with more vim, and the field-guns and
Hows, fired at a more solid rate. We, at the
end of the telephone and hearing nothing but
a continuous roar, punctuated by the sharp
bark of one gun above all the rest, knew no-
thing of what was going except what they
told us from Battalion Headquarters. The
telephone wires between them and the front
line went soon after the shelling started, and
we knew they were dependent on runners and
on observation from a rise midway between
headquarters and front trenches. There was
nothing to do but (interrupted here —con-
tinued seven days later)—to wait.
A GAS WARNING
After half an hour of S.O.iS. news came that
1 the Hun fire was slackening, but that big
, stuff was coming over, so the S.O.S. rate was
! stopped and we continued at the ordinary
rate. A ring at the telephone a little later;
"Locality 22 reports mist rising from Hun
lines—may be gas.” “Alright, warn every-
one, ‘Gas alert.’ ” Of this we heard nothing
more, and it was probably mist caused per-
haps by the steady bursting, of shells on
frozen water in the trenches or on frozen
snow. Anothing ring, this time by my gene- j
ral, calling up to speak to me. I satisfy him
that all is being done that can be done, and
he rings off after saying he is satisfied. All
this time the ’phone is going with reports
from the line ("No change’’ mostly) and with
reporting to higher command on the situa-
tion and discussing it, and outside are the
steady roll of the Hows, and the big shells,
and ever the bark of the one gun. This gun
is an ordinary How.; but the angle of its
muzzle as it was placed as regards us gave
if quite a different note from the others. The
big 60-pounder shells also punctuated the
row, as did the big 9.8 Minnie shells of the
Hun. These weigh about 2001 b. Now a mes-
sage came: "Locality 22 expects a raid; no
definite reason, but they think so.” “Al-
right, keep us advised and let us know when
he is sure.” Meanwhile no news from 25,
where the main shelling is concentrated.
After a bit a ring again: “S.O.S. has gone up
from 25,” and this passed on to the artillery,
brings down the heavy fire again. It is a
bitter cold day, and despite a fire in our big
office we can’t get warm.
Before this reaches you we will probably
have been in something much more strenu-
ous than the little show I have just referred
to.


The Sydney Morning Herald May 30th 1917
BAPAUME.
THE AUSTRALIANS’ ENTRY.
A RUINED TOWN.
A. J. B.)
(BY
>
BAPAUME. March 23.
When we entered Bapaume this morning
we did so with the knowledge that our artil-
lery had not landed a shell In the town. Our
gunners. In spite of the fact that they knew
the town was housing thousands of Huns, had
refrained from damaging the ancient town.
They did so in deference to the wishes of the
French, and contented themselves by raining
lead upon Fritz as he worked on roads
beyond Bapaume. Our Impressions can be
Imagined, therefore, when we swung Into
the main street to find Bapaume a mass of
ruins. Not a single house or building re-
mained intact.
After finding a billet, I made a thorough!
tour of the town, and the sight that met my
eyes made me feel very sad at heart.
Opposite the Town ■ Hall, In the square of
the old town, the statue of General Faidherbe,
the famous soldier who won the tpwn from
the Germans in 1870, had been deliberately
knocked down. The ruins lay on the little
plot of land Inside a low railing which en-
circle the statue. The Bureau de L'Octrol
was smashed to pieces. From buildings In
Rue Sadi Carnot, Rue Gambetta, and other
main thoroughfares smoke was coming off In
thick clouds, and through the window-frames
It was easy to make out patches of tar on the
walls and doors, oil waste, and shavings. This
state of affairs obtained throughout the town.
Many streets It was impossible to penetrate.
Houses had collapsed on either side, and
completely blocked the roads. At the backs
of houses cats and dogs were lying dead, hav-
ing been crushed and killed In trying to
escape when the shock came.
In all parts of Bapaume Australians stood
aghast. Their eyes conveyed what they
thought of the work of the Hun. Notices In
German at every comer told how much use
the Hun had made of the town as a railhead,
knowing all the time he was Immune from
shell fire so long as he kept to town limits.
He gained no military advantage by destroy-
ing beautiful villas, offices of small pro-
fessional and business people, a hot house,
botanic garden, and other places. He had
accomplished this to satisfy his cruel tastes.
Cattle and pigs which could not be consumed
or driven away lay dead In the paddocks near
the town. I carefully looked round Bapaume,
but failed to find any trace of our shell fire.
We thus spared for many months a town which
the Hun destroyed as soon as It came to be
no longer tenable.
THE WORK OF RESTORATION.
Australian troops were not only the first
to enter Bapaume after fighting very promin-
ently outside the town for weeks during severe
weather. They played the most prominent
part In the restoration work which so promptly
followed the capture of the place,
A few hours after the Australians arrived
Major , D. 5.0., (a Sydney barrister),
was appointed town Mayor, and In quick time
he had parties at work In all parts of the
town. Debris blocked the streets, and pre-
vented transport getting through. This was
caused by fallen masonary, brick walls, and
fronts of shop# and bouses. Beams were
picked up, and with ail sorts of refuse, were
burnt in an incinerator which had been Im-
provised near the Town Hall. All sorts of
material that would not burn was removed
to the outskirts of the town, where it did not
Interfere with traffic. Houses were cleared,
and made fit for billeting purposes.
At all sorts of odd places men came across
collections of German flares. These they flred
as soon as dusk came on, and a stranger to
the proceedings might have been pardoned
for mistaking the affair for a fireworks dis-
play. A couple of civilians who arrived dur-
ing the afternoon glanced down what was the
main street of the town, saw the ruined scene,
and burst into tears. A wall and an iron
gate were all that were left of their premises
opposite the Town Hall—also blown to
atoms. Bricks and mortar lay piled several
feet high about the town. Not a single
building had escaped the attention of the
Boches.
CAPTURE OF PRINCE FREDERICK.
As the result of a fight on the outskirts of
Bapaume, an Albatross aeroplane was
brought down this afternoon. Prince Freder-
ick of Prussia was the pilot.
The prince was hit by the machine-gun of
the aeroplane he was fighting, so badly that
he was forced to make a hasty landing. As
soon as the machine touched earth In some
fields he clambered out of his seat, and made
* dash for his lines. Australian Infantry saw
him, however, and succeeded In wounding
him with their rifles, and stopped his pro-
gress. He was secured by a patrol, and re-
moved to an ambulance station, where his
wounds were found to be serious. Late to-
night his condition was critical.
His aeroplane, which was of scout pattern,
and painted dark green, attracted much at-
tention. It was wheeled to Bapaume, and re-
mained on view for several hours outside the
local town hall. On the nose of the machine
and the sides a skull and cross bones were
painted, and black crosses were prominent
In many places. French officers “snapped”
the machine before It was removed for re-
pairs. a'—,
IN THE PROMISED LAND.
We are told that one of the Joys attaching to
onr soldiers’ entrance Into Bapaume was that
of the sight of green grass after months of
struggle within a bare and devastated country-
side. Something of the sort seems to have
been vouchsafed our Light Horse In another
zone of the war. The "Times” correspondent
with the troops under General Murray des-
cribes their entrance Into Palestine, after
twelve months’ Incessant toll In the Sinai
desert, as a marvellous relief. "Behind them,’*
ho says, "la a hundred miles and more of
monotonous sand. Before them, as far as the
eye can reach. Is unfolded a picture of
transcending beauty. No wonder when
the troops come up to Rafa, and look
over the billowy downs, they break into
rounds of cheers. . . Before and around us
everything Is green and fresh. . . You can
truthfully compare the country to the Berk-
shire Downs. . . There are crimson ane-
mones, bright as any rubies, and crocuses
and narcissi, Irises, a tiny sweet-pea, clover,
and many common flowers in abundant pro-
fusion. Can you not Imagine the effect this
exhilarating scene has had upon the condition
of troops who have become desert veterans?
And what of the horses, those noble beasts
whose courage and staying-power helped to
make possible the victories of Maghdaba and
Raja? One of the prettiest pictures I have
seen for many a long day was of an Aus-
tralian Light Horse regiment out grazing.
Each roan was tending two horses. He was
enjoying the luxury of a rest on the grass,
but his pleasure was derived not so much
from lying full-length on turf as In seeing
the animals revel In abundant green food.
1-or beast as well as man it is the Promised
Land.


r A U S T R A L I A N S IN B A P A U M E.


THe Sydney Morning Herald May 30th 1917
CRIMINAL ELEMENT IN THE
A.I.F.
S.M.H. 30.5.1917.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sir, —Having noticed In your columns re-
cently that the military authorities were to be
given the option ot saying whether they would
receive a criminal, and give him a place
amongst our soldiers, Instead of allowing him
to go to gaol for three years as sentenced
by the Judge for the crimes of garrotting and
robbery. It would. 1 think, serve a good pur-
pose if you would Insert the following.
Aa a soldier, and In the interest of sol-
diers who are absent fighting in France and
elsewhere. 1 strongly protest against men of
the class above mentioned being allowed to
contaminate and associate with respectable
and decent sons of respectable parents. Re-
member that In civil life we need not. unless
we wish, associate with or know an unde-
sirable person, but with a soldier this Is very
different He has to make the best of his
mates, and put up with whatever criminal
element Is sent to his unit He cannot get
away from It, for his place on the march is
fixed, also his place for mess, for his
bivouac and bis billet, and I think It Is a
very left-handed compliment to our brave
men at the iront to give a criminal the option
of three years In gaol or to become a nuis-
ance to the officers, N.C.Os-, and men on
active service. There has been far too much
of this from the beginning, and It bas caused
us great trouble and work at a lime when
other and more Important military duties
called for all our energy and thought. Early
in the war there were many cases where
police magistrates gave a criminal the option
of six months or enlist In the A.I.F. 1 feel
quite sure there is no Judge or P.M. In Aus-
tralia who would tolerate this sort of thing
If be knew the hardships bo was inflict-
ing on the decent soldiers, who have only
one ambition—to defeat the enemies of their
country, and in doing so to behave in such a
manner that Australia will feel honoured and
proud of her sons when the history of the
great war Is written. The criminal element
in the various battalions Is small, from & up
to 2 per cent, bet t small element causes
no end of troubl • -ilh proper care
could be avoided The police re-
cords could be cp id If a man Is
found to be a 1 '** <ial h» '■
at once turned
pojlce survelll*
leserve lines,
of an officer, <•« 2c -V
all because a po>' thought that
a criminal was a-h r soldiers.
I have known of ' ases wb(^e th|a
element has been goj _ the firing lint; they
are Invariably m, sBing when moving up to
take over our stft or Q f front nnes. M any of
them have bee, court-martlalled, and the
extreme penakfr has been awarded. In every
Instance with the Australian soldier this Las
been commuted sometimes to as low \s DO
days and up to 15 years. No Australian
soldier, so far as I know, has paid the death
penalty for deserting bis mates In the tren-
ches, although the Imperial authorities do
not hesitate, neither do the Canadians, to
inflict the death penalty In cases where they ,
will act as an example to deter others.
A great number of people are under the
Impression that a criminal makes a good
soldier; nothing is further from fact. He
cannot be got Into trenches, and will com-
mit crime openly, so that he may be sent
to gaol rather than go Into trenches or to an
assault upon the enemy’s lines.
Towards the end of last year two men, re-
cent reinforcements to my battalion, were
brought in by the P.M. of an adjacent town
They had been absent from the trenches
after having been duly warned that the bat-
talion would move In at a certain time.
Both men said "that even If they did get 15
years they would be let out at the end of
the war, and that they would rather do time
in gaol than live In wet trenches and be .
shot at.”
I would like It to be understood that I
am dealing with the real criminal, and not the
man who gets too much drink sometimes, and
commits military offences while uuder the in-
fluence.
This letter will have served its purpose If
Judges, police magistrates, and recruiting
officers will realise that our soldiers should
not be compelled to associate with criminals
and also that officers have more than enough
to do without having to be continually wor-
ried with a small criminal element In their
units.
I am, etc.,
A BATTALION COMMANDER.


Ml I 4? n
THE PROMISED LAND
AUSTRALIAN’S OBSERVATIONS
Sun 3.6.17.
World's Oldest Road
An Australian officer writes from Pales-
tine: —
“We are about to leave our pleasant camp
by the seaside and our little humpies (made
of a blanket over some sticks) to go on fur-
ther into this wonderful country, for won-
derful it certainly is:—
“It was on the oldest road in the world,
from Kantara to Gaza, that our troops tra-
velled. It dates back to COOO 8.C., and the
last Christian troops to travel it were the
Crusaders under Richard I. (Coeur de Lion).
There were at one time about IuO.OOO Greeks
settled about Khan Yunus. Raffa,' El Arish,
&c.. but their villages and towns have been
all devastated, and one town —Mohamedieh—
has been rebuilt on the ruins of itself seven
different times, as the Mahometans, Jews,
Greeks, &c.. have always been lighting.
“Gaza is rtie town where fcamson took
away the gates of the city, and has been be-
sieged more often than any town in the
world. The country is magnificent, and tins
is the original Promised Land that the Chil-
dren of Israel looked! forward to after their
tramp across the desert. It was from here
that Joshua took back samples of grapes
and figs to .the aforesaid Children of Israel,
to show them it was a land flowing with
milk and honey. The Turks transformed ail
the Christian churches built into mosques,
and in one case, at Khan Yunus, you can
see where they have cut the original
Greek ornamentations and replaced them
with extracts from the Koran. They forgot,
however, to xihliterute the Greek initials of
the Redeemer, which are still visible.
“The palm trees are beautiful, and the
fields covered with crops of barley, which the
horses en.iov verv much after being so long
away from green feed (two years). Every
conceivable thing grows here. Water, how-
ever, is pretty scarce. The ground is de- |
pendent for its remarkable fertility on the
heavy dews. One wakes up in the morning
wet through. hut the days are not unplea-
santly hot.
“Farming men here with us say that they
never saw such lapd. and of course the rail-
way being pushed through so fast will de-
velop it very Quickly.
“The only inhabitants are the Bedouins—
a most interesting people, hut warlike. 1
rescued two calves some soldiers took from
them the other day. and they kissed my rid-
ing boots and called noon Allah to bless me.
You would have been quite amused. Of
course they are very poor. and live m little
mud huts. Tu show they were sincere—l
had had to gallop a long way after their
calves, and they gave mv horse a drink of
their precious water, which they jnust have
carried miles.
*'Thev shelled the devil out of us yesterday
I morning:. Their aeroplanes are over us every
day trying to bomb the aerodrome and rail-
head.
“If vou want to see a muddle you ought
to see a camel cpnvoy under shellfire. The
natives who lead the camels run away first
shot, and then the white men try to induce,
by all the profanity thev can muster, those
accursed camels to hurry out of range, or
under the cover of a hill. All th£ time good
iiVes are being lost trying to save the convoy,
which perhaps has the water supply for
thousands of men in the firing line away
I from the water, and they are dependent on
it reaching them.”


THe Sun June 3rd 1917
AUSTRALIANS IN LONDON
ALLEGED DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Rumors Unsustained
REPORT OF INQUIRY
MELBOURNE, Saturday.
Most reassuring advices have been received
by the Minister for Defence (Senator Pearce)
from the High Commissioner (Mr. Fisher)
and the Commandant of the Administrative
Headquarters A.1.F., London, dealing with
more or less strong statements which have
appeared in London newspapers recently,
based on complaints alleging disorderly con-
duct In the neighborhood of railway stations,
clubs, and hostels frequented by the men of
the A.I.P. on leave in the metropolis.
As the rumor grew in the usual way the
Commissioner for Police of the Metropolis
at New Scotland Yard instituted an inquiry
among private persons whose avocations
provided them with special opportunities for
observing street conditions, and whose
opinions, therefore, should carry weight.
The commissioners adopted this course as
it might have been alleged that evidence ob-
tained from police sources exclusively would
tend to minimise the extent of evi'« for the
repression of which they must be held partly
responsible.
The evidence thus secured endorses entirely
the opinion expressed by the Police Commis-
sioner in forwarding the statements to the
High Commissioner, and supported by Lieu-
tenant-General Sir Francis Lloyd, command-
ing the London district, that the statements
appearing in the newspapers misrepresented
actual conditions, and that on the whole the
behavior of the overseas troops have been
creditable, instances of misconduct on their
part having been relatively rare.
The Minister added that the existence of
excellently equipped dubs for the overseas
men in the city, and the facilities previously
described for the guidance of men upon their
first visit to the heart of the Empire, render
i* quite unnecessary for soldiers to resort to
the streets because of loneliness or for means
of recreation.


SLI (9/7
AUSTRALIANS HONORED
ONE VICTORIA CROSS
(Reuter’s Telegram)
v LONDON, Saturday.
The Tress Bureau slates that the follow-
ing Australians and New Zealanders re-
ceived decorations from the King at to-day’s
ceremony in Hyde Park:
AUSTRALIANS
Victoria Cross, Distinguished Service
Order, and Bar. —Major Henry Williams
Murray.
Distinguished Service Order. —Lieutenant-
Colonel Albert Fewtrell.
Military Cros. —Captain C. Guilfoyle,
( Distinguished Conduct Medals.—Sergeant-
Major R. Harrington, Quartermaster B.
Tidmarsh, Sergeants T. Brew, C. Bryce, J.
Blenkinsop, G. Hughes, I. Grinlinton, R.
Scott, G. Seagroot, A. Taylor, Corporals C.
Askew, J. Fletcher, M. Reilly, C. Blrtles, W.
O’Connor, Privates W. Healey, T. Merton
(infantry), Bombardier R. Conacher.
i- / Military Medal. —Lance-corporal P. Scha-
fer (infantry), Gunner N. Hargreaves.
Royal Red Cross. —Matron Ethel Strick-
land, Sister Bertha Williams.
NEW ZEALANDERS
Military Cross. —Captain James Mewett.
Military Medal and Bar.—Sergeant R.
Simmers (infantry).
Military Medals^— Sergeant-Major A.
Macqueen, Privates W. Bright, R. Hough,
R. Jeffry (infantry).
Royal Red Cross.—Sisters Annie Buckley,
Kathleen Davies, Fanny Speedy.
Hyde Park Investiture
(From Our Special Representative)
Vast crowds are expected in Hyde Park
to-day to witness the King’s presenta-
tion of decorations. .It will be an Imperial
gathering of extraordinary interest. All the
Dominion troops will be represented, and
will also be included in the guard of honor.
Seats will be allotted to wounded oversea
soldiers and nurses. The recipients of deco-
rations will be seated opposite to the Royal
stand. The King will drive through London
streets en route to Hyde Park. ■ Subse-
quently an Empire Day service in St. Paul’s
Cathedral in the evening will be preceded
by a stately Imperial procession through
he streets carrying 64 flags of the Empire,
vith the Union Jack.
Major Murray is a New South Wales man.
tie belongs to the 13th Battalion, and was 1
ippointecl to the A.I.F. on August 13, 1915.
Te went to France as a captain.


3 t 9 ! *7
AFTER BAPAUME
ANZAC'S STIRRING TALE
No Strikes On Firing Line
Writing last St. Patrick’s Day from the
“Trenches in France’’ to Mrs. Scott, of the
Westminster Hotel, Regent-street, city, an
Australian officer says:—
“We have just returned from the taking
of Bapaume, and I find your letter—the first
from Sydney—awaiting me. I have been in
the trenches eight months, had good times
and bad times, and plenty of experience in
the art of war, both ancient and modern.
“The methods of present-day warfare are
varied and numerous, and one laughs and
cries alternately at the crude methods used
at times, but our chests swell out when we
think of the tanks and a hundred other de-
vices ail working in conjunction, and con-
verging on the one spot with the one objec-
tive —the end.
‘‘How dreary It must be in Sydney with no
excitement around! We have so many
changes here that I honestly feel sure I
w’ould not change places with any man in
Australia at this pleasant time. .... I
have stopped taking liquor since I arrived
here, as I find I get along much better with-
out it—attend to business better and to the
noble lads here with me.
“What can we give those brave boys who
so cheerfully left home, mothers, sisters,
brothers —all that ‘home, sweet home’ im-
plies? They are heroes, every one; they never
kick or grumble, and such a thing as a strike,
oh, Lord!
“MERCY, KAMERAD"
“I saw these lads get the order to charge
twice now, and, oh, what a night it was!
Not a sound was heard while they got over
the ground separating them from the enemy,
and suddenly the Germans let the lid of hell
fall off, and started throwing iron foundries
all over the place. Pitch dark two minutes
before, the night was turned into day by the
light of burning shells. ‘Australians, come
on!’ rang out, and you can scarcely imagine
how our boys jumped up in that inferno, and
charged as only Australians can. Going
straight ahead, with comrades falling all
around, they kept on in dogged silence, until
within speaking distance of .
“When we charged up the street 'nothing
was heard but ‘Kamerad, kamerad, mercy!’
However, the job was well done, as several
other jobs have been done out here by the
Australians. The picture they made will live
in memory for years—silent, eyes straight
ahead, sliifi, wiry, confident they could do
what was asked of them, they w r ent in and
finished what they had to do. . . . Some-
times it seems supernatural even to me—we
are always pitted against superior numbers,
and yet everywhere the cry of ‘Mercy, kam-
erad!’ is heard.
CAPTURE AND RECAPTURE
“A few days ago we had advanced about
a mile and a half in country we knew very
little about, dug holes in the ground, and
waited. Suddenly a mist rose and you couldn’t
see two feet In front, then came a shout,
some words In German, and every man
grabbed his rifle and bombs, and still waited,
not a word being spoken.
“Into the dark silence comes a queer noise
or squeak—one of our boys has potted Fritz.
But the enemy finally cut off our party,
taking 20 prisoners, and started driving them
at bayonet-point to the rear of the German
line: when all at once, and apparently out of
nowhere, up came some more of our boys,
1 calling on the Huns to surrender. In reply,,
a German shouted in good English: ‘Damn
you Australians; w 6 will die first; no quar-
ter!’ ‘All right,’ replied our lads, ‘then die,’
and a lovely scrimmage followed. Results:
179 dead German bodies, nine Australians
wounded and two killed. Of the 20 who
been taken prisoner seven were killed (six
dying of wounds afteb being brought in), and
four wounded,
THE CONTRAST
“Can you wonder that my love lies here
with those gallant lads, who are shedding
their life blood so that Australia may escape
the scourge of war on her own soil? You
have only to look at Ypres, Reims, Combles,
Beaumont Hamel, Mens, aijid a few other
places to be thankful that the war is con-
fined to this side of the world. . . . Some
people in Australia talk offstrike, and try to
take a cruel advantage of their fellows while
even this great war is on, and thus cause
much suffering and distress to the parents
and other relatives of the gallant lads fight-
ing for them here.
“It makes my blood boil to think of it.
Why don’t the men (?) who are so ener-
getic in Sydney in fomenting trouble come
over her and cool off? I warrant they’ll cool
quick enough. I really can’t imagine why
such curs exist. They want higher wages—
for what? Let them come over here, and see ;
the English soldiers and the different kinds
of work they do and the willing way it is
done. Then perhaps they’ll alter their tune '
and wish they had come sooner.
HORSE FLESH IN LONDON
“I spent ten days leave in England re-
cently, and saw horseflesh being sold in the
butchers’ shops, plenty of it, and big queues
of women waiting to buy it. In a ten-
minutes taxi drive I saw nine butchers’
shops which had been converted into horse-
flesh depots; and yet some well-fed people
in Australia talk strike! A friend in Eng-
land has just written to say he has not seen
a potato for nine days: tea is very dear, and
sugar unobtainable. When 1 look things
straight m the face I begin to wonder if
there sane men left in Australia.
“"By the way, your letter took over three
months to reach me.”


3 i °f cl,
I STORY FOR SOCIALISTS TO TELL GERMAN BRETHREN
Britain Does Not Want Peace With Horror
INTENSE INDIGNATION AROUSED
304th Day of the Third Year of the War


nmi
«
LONDON, Saturday.
The London press gives great prominence
to Captain Bean’s story of the tortured
Australian prisoners. Leading organs re-
gard it as the best possible answer to the
latest German peace overtures by the Ger-
man catspaw Karl at his opening of the
Austrian Reichsrath. The Radical “Star”
advises Mr. Ramsay Macdonald to tell this
story to the Russians at Petrograd and |
the German socialists at Stockholm, at the i
same time explaining that we have treated
the German prisoners with generous hu-.
manity, despite Zeppelin, submarine, and
aeroplane savagery, and the murders of
Nurse Cavell and Captain Fryatt.
Germany wants peace, but we will not
have peace with horror.
The story of the tortured Australians and
(From Our Special Representative)
the Kasier’s recent orders regarding the
treatment of British prisoners have natur-
ally resulted in much indignation in Bri-
tain. This has been intensified by further
stories of escaped prisoners, which, if less
appalling than that of the Australians, is
sufficiently shocking i.o merit the most dras-
tic official action to protect war pri-
soners.
It is now authoritatively stated that Aus-
tria is approximating to the brutal German
methods, acting with particular cruelty to-
wards penniless civilian British prisoners,
of whom several hundreds are herded in
insanitary wooden barracks surrounded by
barbed wire, and not allowed liberty. They,
are covered with vermin, with wretched and
insufficient food, principally wurzels, beans,
lentils, and vermicelli. They are only able
to prolong their existence by parcels from
• England. They have suffered greatly dur-'
• ing the last winter, being kept for weeks at
• a time without fires or lights. The older
1 prisoners are suffering terribly.
The story of the tortured Anzacs was told
by Captain Bean (Australian Press Repre-
sentative with the A.1.F.) In "The Sun" of
May 25. Two Western Australians, captured
by the Germans, managed to escape to the .
Australian lines. They were captured on j
April 11. From the first they were starved, I
while the Germans worked them mercilessly. !
Others left behind were so ill that even the I
Germans saw thlat they could not .work any I
longer. They had no blankets, lying on straw )
through the coldest nights. Their ration con- !
sisted of one loaf of bread between seven i
men, with stewed turnips and two cups of
coffee daily. One woman caught giving .them
food was knocked over the head by a German
and taken away. They were sent into the
range of the British fire in working gangs.'
They were informed that this treatment was j
punishment because the English employed!
German prisoners under fire.


JXo 9/7
CAPTAIN MURRAY, V.C.
ROSE FROM THE RANKS
Previous Exploits and Honors
Captain William Henry Murray, who has
recently been awarded the V.C., is a West-
ern Australian, who, from his first days in
camp, shaped as a first-class soldier. H s
commanding officer noticed him at the Black
Boy (W.A.) camp when he was a member of
a machine gun section. Something in his
bearing individualised him from his com-
panions, and before his training was com-
pleted all those connected with him prophe-
sied great things of the young man.
He was well known at Comet Vale, on the
goldfields, and at Holyoake, where ha was
engaged in contracting work prior to enlist-
ing, which took place shortly after the de-
claration of war.
He left Australia as a private with the
first contingent. On May 31, at Gaba Tepe,
he was awarded the D.C.M. and promoted to
lance-corporal for conspicuous bravery. He
was wounded twice, but remained on duty at
the machine gun until a wound in the leg
Captain Murray, V.C.
fcrcod him to leave the field. The honor con-
ferred on him did not surprise his mates, for
it had been common talk among them that
hardly a day passed without his being con-
spicuous for some gallant deed performed
with perfect sang froid.
Palling ill with dysentery he was sent to
Alexandria for some time, but returned
to the firing-line. Shortly afterwards
he was promoted again, and in Jan-
uary of last year he earned his second star.
He was among the last 70 men to leave Gal-
lipoli.
In France he again distinguished himself.
It was in the preliminary fighting round
Pozieres. One hundred men of his batta-
lion, after hard fighting, stormed and gained
entrance to a farm, but were met by over-
whelming forces in the shape of 600 Germans.
The hero of Gaba Tepe saw that they would
be forced to retire. He manipulated the re-
treat in such a masterly way that he not
only got his men back to safety, but brought
several prisoners along, too. Fur this per-
formance he gained the D.S.O.
achievement was the leading of
his company to an assault with great skill
and 1 courage. The position was quickly cap-
tured, and three heavy counter-attacks were
beaten back owing to his wonderful work.
Throughout the night his company suffered
heavy casualties from concentrated sheil-flie,
and on one occasion they gave ground. He
rallied his command and saved the situation
by sheer valor, encouraging his men, head-
ing bombing parties, Lading bayonet
charges, and carrying the wounded to safety.
His magnificent example inspired his men
throughout. And now the coveted V.C. is
his.


I 0 I c t / *~7 I* I
THE WINNING Of MESSINES RIDGE
“Daily Mail’s” Magnificent Story
STUPENDOUS, PICTURES OF BATTLE
311th Day of the Third Year of the War
(From Our Special Representative)


LONDON, Saturday.
Mr. Beach Thomas, “Daily Mail” correspondent, writing on the
Messines Ridge victory, says:
“This morning Sir Herbert Plumer’s army, which has fought a
! fine stonewall battle for nearly two years, took in hand the biggest
• and boldest attack of the war. I return from the sight of it dazed
, and battered by the fury of the engines of war, new and terrible,
' and grouped in untold mass. It will remain a miracle how human
beings In the midst of the storm kept sense and courage enough to
move their limbs as they wished, much less to carry through com-
plicated tactics in a turmoil where no man could hear an order,
recognise the landscape, s f gns, or scarcely catch sight of a neigh-
bor ov enemy.
“I have seen several of the heaviest bombardments of the
war, but none approached this in volume, variety, or terror.
One moment in it will live eternally In the minds of those
witnessing it as the world’s spectacular miracle. Before dawn
we stood in a dim valley, where black tree tops looked like
rocks in a calm sea and saw what might have been doors thrown
open in colossal blast furnaces. With each blast the earth shook
and shivered beneath our feet. It was worse than an earth-
quake.
“The air Hiook as the earth shook, and where earth and air
met incredible explosions set the world afire, thunderclouds of
smoke rising solidly to Immense heights. We seemed part of some
cosmic revolution. Facts, figures, pictures, experience, words, and
sentiments altogether cannot tell one-tenth of the battle that broke
this summer morning after 10 days’ accelerated momentum, "W e
saw the faminer landscapes, ploughed and harrowed by war, vanish
and assume grotesque shapes.
Devilry of War
“Verdun, the Somme, nor Arras never saw such mutual fire,
such a complicated devilry of war. The tanks, like obscene mon-
sters, squirmed forward. Our aeroplanes swarmed like rooks.
The weight of the mass of onset defied, even despised, conceal-
ment. The Germans knew the exact limits of the onslaught. Be-
hind their lines a series of Clapham Junctions, with broad and
narrow' gauges, were all as busy as the London terminus before
a football final.
“The enemy had massed troops, specially equipped with light
machine-guns and bombs loaded with deadly gas. He Md
penetrated the hills, and his forts, tunnels, and caves cloaked
a thousand guns behind the ridges, where he had held the mas-
ter position for two and a half years, practically daring us to
attack him, and knowing that never in history had an army of
equal strength presumed to attack an enemy ensconed in an
indestructible fortress. Yet this we dared, and with a new
civilian army.
“The attack stretched from the Observatory Ridge through St.
Eloi. Hill 60, Wytschaete, Petit Bois, and Ploegstreet Wood—famous
places over the area where the German line sags in a great bend
between the jutting headlands of Ypres and Armentieres. Here
the German had the advantage of all the ridges, his trenches making
a delta, miles deep, of innumerable channels. A tw r o hundred
yards’ advance meant crossing half a dozen trenches, and behind
the ridges lay hid more guns than the enemy had ever before col-
lected.
Enemy’s S.O.S- Signals
“The enemy dropped gas-shells and high-velocity shells into
the valley till the bombardment began, when, instead, up went his
SOS. signals, rocket lights, and sky-high shrapnel, pursuing our
airmen, who raced across the enemy lines, each showing a tiny
light winking across the black sky. Our balloons went up in
twos and threes, adding their quota to the nightmare by emitting
curious red-fire signals, giving the Impression that the balloons
were afire. Once I heard machine-guns aloft, and then the tinkle
of gas-alarms. .
“Below us inflammatory shells burnt red, twisting into fan-
i tastlc shapes, like red dragons. Some of the attacking troops
1 used smoke barrages, some preferred a clear field. The Ger-
-1 mallS protected iheir guns by smoke screens. Soon the valley
was filled to the brim with smoke and mist until the explosive
shell-fire was the only thing visible. Nobody could see our
infantry English. Scotch, Irish, and Dominion troops, walking
calmly up to the thunder and lightning of their own shells, dared
more terror to their senses than human tissue has endured
in history. ~ ,
“The prisoners were aghast with horror at the suddenness and
fury of the attack Many were recently from the Russian front,
but the defence Included the pick of the Bavarian and Prussian
troops, with reserves heavily massed behind them.
“When the Anzacs went to storm the crown of the famous ■
ridge, the enemy stopped them not at all. The Anzacs waited |


for the advance of their own barrage, but the most ardent
spirits declined to wait, and dodged forward among their own
shells. There they sent up hilarious rockets announcing
their arrival. While some dug with gusto and skill on the
back of th» ridge, others pushed on down the slope, where, at
the momen‘ of writing, their adventure is in full career.
“The Anzacs reached and captured Messines a hundred min-
utes after the attack commenced, despite heavy fighting in the
German trenches. The Irish troops stormed their way up to
Wytschaete, capturing White Chateau, after the most desperate
resistance.’'
Science Cheapens Cost
"The whole of the second army Is gay with the certainty that it
has won the most thorough, most scientific, and least costly
battle of the whole war. Every single unit reached its objective
pat to the moment fixed to time-table. Water and food were
forwarded to the fighters as calmly as in billets. Captured
trenches were wired anti strong posts made at proper points
within an hour.
"The Anzacs beat all records by digging successive lines of
trenches six feet deep during the morning of the attack. At
the same hour guns, even the heavies, were rattling forward
amid cheers over the lines which had been held by the
Germans a few hours earlier. Most of the infantry speak with
more zeal and zest of the artillery’s performance than of their
own.
"We have had losses that will be personally felt by the nation
as well as by families, but the cost was miraculously light, and the
gain heavy.
"Even a stiff-necked Prussian officer said, ‘We are done.’
“The South Irish took Wytschaete Wood and village, and fought
side by side with the Ulsters. An officer, whose loss is most
regretted, was driven off in an Ulster ambulance. A man who was
told of the incident felt that It was a symbol of the sacrifice that
will soon make things right in Ireland.’’ .
A Great Mine-Burst
"Petit Bois, opposite Wytschaete, was garrisoned by a full
company of Germans. Here exploded one of the most thorough
mines. The w'hole place vanished in a thought. Two badly
wounded men were the only survivors. The explosion broke the
timbers of our dugouts, and the rubble rattled on the tin hats
of our soldiers. The last clod had not fallen when the men were
over the top. One of the few casualties was a staff officer, who
| begged to be allowed to return to his battalion for the fight. The
opposition was not serious till w r e had penetrated Wytschaete
Wood. Along the wired trunks in the wood was a snipers’
fortress. Up a tree a German sergeant signalled to the guns.
The Irishmen could hear the bullets sniping this way and that.
A German machine-gun group well behind w r as sending up con-
tinuous S.O.S -red and white stars.’’
This danger spot was encircled, and practically all the Germans
killed. They fought heroically, one of the few examples of good
fighting by the enemy, w'ho was generally cowed by the artillery,
and came to heel like a spaniel, offering bribes, and servilely
begging to do some service on behalf of the captors.
The whole of Wytschaete was organised as a circular fortress,
but only a few isolated groups of snipers and machine-gunners
gave trouble.
A British sergeant, who had his hand smashed, threw three
bombs in succession and trotted back to the dressing station in
the highest spirits, though every bone in the hand bad been
shattered.
Incidents of Battle
During the battle many poignant incidents occurred. The
captain of a tank jumped out of his machine and walked In front,
holding a map open, and directed the course to a German trench.
A German balloon observer directed high-explosive fire upon him,
making craters around him. He did not heed the fire, and was
unharmed.
The battlefield is sprinkled with bullets. It is possible to
collect hundreds in a few minutes.
We have apparently not taken many undamaged German guns,
but fragments of guns are the commonest features on the
Messines Ridge. Never in the history of the war has artillery so
hammered artillery with direct hits. We knocked out w'hole bat-
teries.
One German was found chained to his gun. It is marvellous,
but we hardly suffered from enemy gunfire.
The battle appears to be over except for little affairs. The
Germans are a flagrantly beaten army, and are materially and
morally the worse for it.


c ZXc Jh** / c ~' 9 ' 7 /
THE ANZACS’ PART
VICTORIANS AND TASMANIANS
CAPTURED HUNS AND GUNS
(From
Captain C. E. W. Bonn.
AtiNtrallan Pres*
Representative with the Commonwealth force*.
Copyright by Crown.)
LONDON, Friday Night.
This morning the Australians, fighting by
the side of the Now Zealanders in their first
great common battle since Gallipoli, swung
round to make the flank of the giieat attack
on Messines. and penetrated into the strong
German position behind Messines Ridge, j
For many days there had been tremendous
practice bombardments, which had reduced
the houses of Wytschaete to ruins, and
Messines Hill to powder. Raiding parties
often went across behind these bombard-
ments, nearly always finding the German
trenches well held at some points, and
bringing back many prisoners. This morn-
ing, when the first streak of dawn Just
showed, the British on the left, the Austra-
lians and New Zealanders on the right, at-
tacked under a hurricane bombardment, and
with the explosion on the right and left of
seven great mines.
Throughout the night the Germans had
drenched the whole landscape of woods and
hill slopes and trenches in front of him with
gas shells. Despite this, the whole attack
went more precisely and mathematically to
programme than any ever made by the Ger-
mans or British so far a.s I know. The Aus-
tralian division on the right, coming through
the gas-drenched woods, without the slight-
est hitch, crossed the River Douve in No
Man’s Land and advanced from ofi© shattered
trench to another, from ruined farmhouse to
farmhouse. All the time within 50 to 100
yards of the gradually advancing line was its
own shellfire.
New Zealanders First on Ridge
For two hours it was impossible to see
anything through the dense clouds of dust
and shell smoke. Then the figures of the
New Zealanders were seen moving on tile
top of the ridge by the ruins of Messines.
More men appeared south of it. As the haze
gradually cleared the British could be seen
on the summit of the ridge away to the north
and the Australians moving by the woods
and farms on the Douve \ alley, to the south
Within a few hours the whole attack had suc-
ceeded, and the men were moving into posi-
tion for a further advance. The Germans
at the same time were massing for a counter-
attack. The British preparatory bombard-
ment appeared to catch this counter-attack
and crush it. The Australians then attack-
ed beyond Messines. This attack, at points
where we could see it, reached the German
trenches. The men were fighting at one
point side by side with three tanks. But the
roar of the bombardment was there still ter-
ribly heavy. One portion of the trench had
been taken, and then re-taken by the Ger-
mans, and taken again by the Australians. I
do not know at the moment the exact re-
sult.
The Australians were Victorians and Tas-
manians. These captured some machine-
guns, two of which were Immediately used
against the Germans, and two German field
guns, besides about a hundred prisoners. In
the .afternoon attack further Germans were
captured, and could be seen coming back in
droves, but the exact number taken by the
Australians is as yet impossible to ascertain.


JL**. / 9 »7 - p-//
SOLDIER OF SIXTEEN
HELPED TO TAKE BAPAUME
Boxes of Bombs for Hun Troglodytes
During the three months he was in the
trenches in France recently, Private Her-
bert Cornish, the 17 years-old son of Mrs.
Cornish, of “Cedardale,” Pennant Hills-road,
Wahroonga, saw exceedingly heavy fighting
He then developed trench feet and is now
in hospital in London.
Private Cornish was only 10 years old when
he enlisted. He went away as a bugler, but on
reaching the front he was attached to a bat-
talion as a private.
In a letter written from London at the end
of March, he says that early in the month
his battalion charged the German lines,
which formed the ridge to Bapaume, “As
soon as we jumped out of our trenches,” he
says, our artillery opened up and blew the
German trenches to pieces. Within two min-
Private Herbert Cornish
utes we were there and we killed 300 Germans
some of whom were in dug-outs 40 feet un-
der the ground. We threw three boxes ol
bombs on to them and quickly settled them
We took many prisoners, and as soon as
we had got rid of them the Germans
counter-attacked. But we had no trouble in
driving them back. After that it was not
long before we captured Bapaume.
“The game over here is not exactly joy-
ful, for we are getting 9.2 and high explos-
ive shells sent after us all the time. But
we have got the Germans running, and when
we get their last line of trenches on the
Somme it will be open fighting. Then it
■'•ill be the start of the finish.
“The life in the trenches here is not all
that could be desired, but it is all in the
game. Our trenches have been mud and
water mud up to the knees, and water up
to the hips. Imagine standing in that for
three or four days before getting released.
But my feet will soon be all right again, and
then I 11 go back and do a bit more.”
Private Cornish is the youngest soldier in
his battalion, and was one of the youngest
soldiers who took part in the capture of
Bapaume. He has a brother fighting in
Mesopotamia.


aj s 9 /*7 - if
STORIES OF WAR
COMMONNESS OF DEATH
“CARRY ON" THE MOTTO
VINE-CLAD RAIDERS
Private Geppert, propped up in bed at the
wh te I T BPita1 ’ talkS quict,y t 0 the
knp-h Pe , masseuso wh o smoothes and
Kneads the long, shapeless limb that was
were 110 **' ° f the SCiatic n^ve
0t away ln th “t heroic charge of July
as V; rr tie r- s,nce then m -km
shattered rerves. but the leg
.. CS a f® m and demand the
:rr; a ,r they are
Inquiry on the wonder of knitting the sci-
atic nerve, after such disaster, brings the
I ; n £ rm *tion from medical sources that it is I
tke on °f cats’ nerves' I
Private Geppert’s low-pitched voice goes
the voi the r ornPanlm ° nt of and
the voices of a group of returned braves ex-
z n Ti: a zr n '~° at ,he
“When I came back.” he is saving “some-
one coid me that his son (a pal of mine, “.V
afmJT'V ?: 1 *•“"*’ -M I. "ana rm
afraid the father thought it pretty good
* e c ° n "* y part t 0 answer that way. Rut
kill i 6 1 6 Ulat after you have s6en men
killed all round you.” (The masseuse mur-
th U a S ls he n r /°T rehenSi ° n ° f that
tnat is not callousness.)
A BRAVE MAN’S DEATH
. h :iL A ™ 9nt ' er ? after 1 sot thls wound in
log-, and was lying out in No Man’s l and
,„m T f r hTs* w T ed to help me in ’ 1
if he stayed where he was he’d likelv
" He was kneeUng besfdo
me I resently a bullet got him in the head
and he fell dead right across me I w
moved him to one s,de-,hat was all y" „
'f ere 13 s ° much s
, e * yo “ ' et yourMlt upset, there'd
e no nerves left in you.” Private Geppert
1 quiet for a second while the
asseuse goes on smoothing and chafing the
The soldier folds his arms again
„TZ; <lldn '' blecdat •“••• »« Zl
ism which UU 1 *-? 1 ' into the queer mechan-
ias J. wr ‘ hC m ‘ n<l ,rec ‘o make its
casual jottings even in disaster
STouid 'do s ‘r^r t r A r"
everyone
couldn’t help myself a bit That „ J
stretcher-hearers from another battahon
came out and got me.”
SAVED THE SOUP
The soldier goes on in illustration of the
apparent callousness of war. “I remember
once when shells were lobbing pretty close
to the cook-house, the cook put down the
ladle and was walking off until things cooled
down a bit. He had hardly got to the wall
of the trench when a shell got him. He
was killed, of course. The boys simply pick-
ed up the ladle, started dealing out the soup,
and in a few minutes everyone was laughing
and chatting as though nothing had happen-
ed..!, -
Private Geppert was at Gallipoli, too, so
ho is quite a veteran. He is talking of
charges and barbed wire entanglements,
which he describes, leaving the listener with
an impression of a rabbit-proof fence made
cruel with barbs. With the fingers of each
hand spread wide ho demonstrates the
, squares which go to the making of the en-
i tanglements, that mean a 2ft. or 3ft. jump
for the charging soldiers taking part in a
raid. The defence is made solid under the
impetus of even such a rush, being fixed
through rings attached to iron augers that '
can be screwed into the ground to any depth,
without making a noise likely to attract the
enemy’s attention.
DEFENCES DE LUXE
“Different to Gallipoli,” says the wounded
man. “There, we had to use anything we
could get, long spikes of iron and wood that
had to be hammered into the ground, and
thus gave the show away.
“Training is really no good to you out
there, for when you do take part in a charge,
you’re so loaded up with spades and shovels',
and your kit, that it wouldn’t really matter if
you were cross-country champion under
such conditions.”
He tells of night skirmishes and raids. All
the place round Armentieres was covered
with foliage, and particularly vines. The
raiders would wind the vines round their
bodies and round their hats, and make a
screen for their faces, for a face under the
scrutiny of a star-flare shows up like a piece
of white paper.
“No, we never had our faces blacked in
my time,” he continues. “They were pretty
muddy and dirty, of course, but we never
blacked them on purpose. When we got out
into No Man s Land with our vines on, there
was nothing to tell, when we stood still,
whether we were bushes or men, until the
signal came, and then we’d be up and run-
ning any old how, laughing and shouting,
and some of us singing.”


The Australian Courier July 14th 1917
A Fallen hero.
DIED OF WOUNDS.
GUNNER WILFRED F. K. KEMP
The late Gunner Wilfrfd F. K. Kemp,
whose death from wounds was recently re-
ported, was the third son of Mr. Richard
E. Kemp, barrister-at-law. of Gordon-street,
urwood. In civil life he was a solicitor,
and shortly after being admitted to his pro-
fession went to Bellingen, where he rapidly
established himself in a good practice. He 1
IfcrSW this U P In order to go to the aid of I
Ills two brothers i a defence Of King and !
country. He was wounded oh the 11th
April, and died on May 29th, 1917. On re- '
ceipt at Bellingen of the news of his death
the town/was beflagged at half-mast, and
the followfeig notice of him appeared In the
local paper, “The Northern Courier”:
♦
OBIT WILFRfD FOXTON KING KEMP.
(By H. B.).
The flags in the town are half-mast to-
day, and on every face of the townsfolk
j there is a strained look bordering on deep-
-1 es >- grief and regret that one so well known
has passed away in the pride of his early
manhood for the electric wires have flashed
to us the sad news: Wilfrfd Foxton King
Kemp is no more on earth. He has paid
the penalty accruing ever due to war, and
has made that sublime sacrifice, his life for
his God, his Country, and his King, I
know it was love of all three that won his
early appreciation of his duty to all, and I
remember so well the day he made the an-
nouncement: “I must go and do my share.
It is impossible for me to stay on here and
see others go, knowing that I should go,
too.” It was in such words he made it
known the “call” had reached him, and
thus quietly he mapped out his future
course. “He was my friend: and, take
him for all in all, I’ll never look upon his
• like again.” The original wording of the
| sublime thought may not run just so; but
j this will suffice to clearly make known just
| how I felt towards him. I was proud to re-
j gard him as my friend. He was of -hat
I type of Australia’s sons most all might be
I reasonably proud to know. I remember him
well when he first came to us—a stranger
to a strange land. He brought with him
into his office and his every day life a
keen appreciation of what was due by aim
to others. Honourable in every thought,
truthful and honest to a degree—l defy
any finger to point to even one small act
of his life while with us to say: “Will'.
Kemp deliberately and of evil Intent did
that thing.” In the Church to which he
gave adherence he was ever of help, even
to at times giving up his Sabbath res- to
lend his Pastor assistance in carrying iut
the day’s duties. As a citizen he was tver
ready to do his share in ‘ keeping the j
home fires burning,” and socially he was
one whom most all delighted to welcome to
the home life and family circle.
Then the War broke out, in few places
as-in Bellingen did the sense of duty come
so strongly to every citizen. It came to
my young friend; and with commendable
zeal for the great work of inducing our
young men to realise their responsibilities,
he was of our first Recruiting Committee,
was secretary thereto, secretary to our
every Patriotic effort, and slowly but sure-
ly the while growing a graver and at times
a sadder man. Then came his announce-
| ment—he felt he could not conscientiously
urge others to go, he the while in the
prime of early manhood, and without more
serious encumbrance than his business ties.
He went. And time and again have I been
delighted with his letters—some from
Camp, some from Africa, while on the way
over to the War theatre, others from
Salisbury Training Camp, the whole breath-
ing a note of intense anxiety to be in, the
thick of it. Once, and once only, was
there a note of complaint in any letter be
wrote me: “For the fourth time since I
have been in this Camp 1 have been re-
moved to another unit. Seems to me,” he
complained, “When the Authorities feel
they would like to do something they put
in time moving me into another unit.”
Then came the change. It is made known
he is in the trenches, then news comes to
us — an d it was saddening news—that he
had been wounded, and finally—the day our
flags went to half-most high the news tnat
he had paid the penalty. “The road to
Nationhood has ever been cemented in
every country by the blood of her Sons,
wrote one young Australian; and it re-
mains for me to say of my friend; no death
he could ever die could be more to his
taste, and “inasmuch as it is given m all
men once to die,” we mourn, knowing he
died perhaps before his time —but to me
to all—his memory will be ever sacred as
the memory of one who gave his life for
truth and liberty.
If I mistake not, it was Ethel Turner
who so fittingly said all that I would like
to say:— i
*
God’s gift to youth, fair happiness.
And Fortune’s gift, a life of ease,
He flung aside for battle stress;
For toil, for peril overseas.
Hearing above the drums the Voice,
That leaves the valiant heart no choice.
Oh, not of laurel wreaths at all.
That clarion Voice spoke, high and
clear,
Not even the patriot’s stirring call,
“To arms” rang loudest in his ear,
But just that one plain call to man
That has been since the world began.
The call to man to be a MAN,
To play the part a man should play;
Nor heed the risk, nor pause to plan.
Nor seek for less austere a way.
But just with soul and muscle knit
To do the work that is definite.
The bloody mystery of war.
He served: God’s faithful artisan,
And slept, his day of service o’er —
(Salute!) a gallant gentleman.
And marvel that those living yet
Mourn with such passion of regret.


AU /f ~ /?7
KANTARA CANTEEN.
(BY
TROOPER BLUEGUM.)
NEAR GAZA. May 14.
Kantara has changed.
In the old days, before Romani, It was a
dreary caravanserai. It is now a delight to
pass through Kantara. Light Horsemen and
Cameliers coming in from the never-never
country in Sinai find in Kantara a refreshing
oasis.
The reason for this? Simply that two Aus-
tralian ladles came to Kantara. Now there
are thousands of Australian ladles doing
splendid war work back home, or in England,
or France or Egypt. But when the Light
Horsemen start heaving bouquets about they
think first of these two ladles at Kantara. Tired
troopers trekking to town, sick of the scorch-
ing sands of Sinai, find their first full feed
at Kantara. Dirty and travel-stained with a
week’s whiskers on their sun-burnt faces,
they find rest and comfort, and a cheery Aus-
tralian welcome. There are flowers —real
flowers—butter (real butter, on ice), fruit
salad, and nice, soft, fresh bread. It’s just
like a breath of Australia.
On Anniversary Day, 26/l/’l7, the Soldiers’
Rest was opened by Mrs. William Chisholm
and Miss Rainey McPhillamy. There was one
little marquee, one small spirit stove, one
mule, one water-cart, one big table; quite a
modest beginning, was it not? Vet already
over 150.000 men have passed through. As
many as 4000 soldiers have been cheered and
fed in a single day, and 5000 eggs have been
sacrificed between dawn and midnight. Ihe
Soldiers’ Home has increased, and prospered.
There are now several big tents, and a sub-
stantial hut. There are huge ovens and ice
chests, and bread bins and cake baskets and
boilers, and about 25 big tables. The original
staff of two has increased till now there are
30 assistants—alb B class men from Moas-
car.
Though the two cheerful pioneers do not
mention it, one can readily guess at the
strenuous times they had in the beginning.
Trains arrived at all hours, and soldiers saun-
tered in to the canteen for a snack. The
"open all night" notice was not up, but men
came along just the same. Sometimes for
two or three days on end the ladies never
had a chance to get to bed. A couple of
times the tent was blown down, and dust
storms made life miserable. Then came tor-
rential rains. There were millions of mos-
quitos. Water was scarce. Eggs went bad.
A rush of hungry soldiers time and again
cleared out the larder. But the indefatig-
able workers just smiled and carried on.
All the officials on the lines of communica-
tion were most kind. But officialdom was,
as usual, very apathetic. Miles of red tape
had to be cut through. A rest hut, something
more substantial than a tent, was urgently
required, and there were scores and scores
of empty huts lying idle at Tel el Kebir and
other deserted camps. But no one would
give the ladles the necessary timber. So
one hundred and fifty pounds cash had to bo
paid for a little bit of timber for a hut. Wood
is very dear in Egypt. Tanks were needed
badly. All recognised how inqch they were
required; but no one could give or sell them.
So a couple of enterprising young Australians
just sauntered off and "found” a couple of
empty tanks.
The main object of the canteen is to give
a rest and a welcome and a good cheap meal
to all soldiers passing through Kantara. It
is not confined to Australians. The men get
the same food as the officers, only the men
pay seven piastres and the officers ten. All
the profits go back to the boys in the shape
of more food and luxuries, and belter accom-
modation. On one occasion word came that
a whole division of Territorials was to detrain
at Kantara. Mrs. Chisholm promptly wired
to Cairo and Port Said for a huge stock of
bread, cake, eggs, and fruit, and the Tommies
had a glorious and most unexpected feast.
Another time a perspiring orderly rushed in
to say that 80 officers would be in to lunch,
and could they be accommodated? The ladies
smiled and said "yes.” Five minutes later
another excited Tommy bolted in to say that
the officers would not be in to lunch. The
ladies sat down and breathed a sigh of relief.
Three minutes after the 80 officers arrived.
An hour later they went away well-fed and
happy, wondering withal why the army could
rot feed them as satisfactorily and graciously
as these Australian ladies.
Many an Australian mother could she see
this Kantara canteen at night, would bless
the motherly care of Mrs. Chisholm, and many
a trooper returning to the dangers and priva-
tions of the desert campaign tninks grate
fully of the greeting and welcome of the
Australian ladies at Kantara.


Qi- <-i\j Ih- I°} I 7
I I (J 6 f
SALISBURY PLAIN.
A REVIEW BY THE KING.
(BY OUU SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT.)
LONDON, April 18.
A furled flag bunched high upon its mast
suddenly broke and spread itself to the
wind, and was revealed as the Royal Stan-
dard, a distant band crashed out the Na-
tional Anthem, and His Majesty the King
came riding at the head of an escort of
officers. The scene was a corner of the
great open expanse of Salisbury Plain. The
occasion was a review by His Majesty of
Australian troops from the training depots.
It had in its service a gloriously fine day,
with brilliant sunshine that went far to-
wards easing the attack of the still bitter
wind of our winter, and with the detail of the
programme quite admirably In hand from
beginning to end, this fine Australian func-
tion was an unqualified success.
The prohibitions of war-time do not allow
much more than general reference to a re-
view. It may, however, he said that for over
an hour Australian soldiers marched past the
King, marched variously, as men In all
stages of soldierly training, but in the mass
made as finely impressive a showing as any
Australian would wish to see. 1 was told
by a staff-officer that the news of the in-
tended visit of His Majesty had had a great
effect upon the men, and that for days past
their work at the camps had been keyed up
in anticipation of it. At all events they
made the most of their one chance of ex-
pressing, on the day itself, their feelings in
the matter. For at the end, when the King
went riding across the plain to the railway
station and the Royal train, he rode through
a cheering host of Australian soldiers, thous-
ands of Australian soldiers off duty, and
strewn upon the roadside thereabout to see
him go, whose whole-hearted shouting en-
thusiasm gave him the keenest pleasure.
That demonstration made, Indeed, a happy
ending to an entirely delightful day.
The King, accompanied by Major-General
S l .’ Newton M*. f re, commanding the Australian
troops In the United Kingdom, General Sir
Henry Sclater, commanding the Southern
Command, Brigadier-General King, of the
General Staff, and other officers, first rode up
and down the lines and afterwards look posi-
tion at the saluting base, and the march-
past was begun. All varieties of arms were
represented, the units including flying corps,
light horse, cyclists, artillery, Infantry,
pioneers, machine-gunners, trench mortar,
motor transport, and A.M.C. —in lull fighting
equipment, and the effect of this solid mass
of soldiers, so many of them men of fine phy-
sique, was unquestionably impressive. Besides
his written message of congratualion and en-
couragement to the officers and men, his
Majesty expressed personally to Sir Newton
Moore his admiration for the appearance of
the troops, with a special reference to the
continued high physical standard of the Aus-
tralian forces.
At the conclusion of the march-past the
King decorated an officer and a number of
men with awards made to them for gallan-
try in the field, and official representatives
of Australia, including the High Commissioner
and the Agents-General, with their wives,
General Maclagan, and Lieutenant-Colonels
W. Mailer, C. A. Johnson, J. L. Johnston, M.
W. Logan, H. B. Collett. P. P. Abbott, J. G.
Teddar, L. P. White, and J. Williams were
presented. His Majesty, who was in vigorous
cue, and manifestly enjoying the day, spoke
freely to those about him, and made especially
animat' ’ ■ rences to the recent victories in
Fraru proceedings of the saluting
base i . ith three cheers for the King,
called i . . > Mr. Andrew Fisher, and heart-
ily given by the hundreds of spectatoxs pre-
sent.
This function Is, It Is understood, one of
the last for which Sir Newton Moore will be
responsible, as the General Officer Command-
ing the Australian troops in the United King-
dom. If that is so, a word of appreciation
is due to the ex-Agent-General for Western
Australia, who, called to onerous and import-
ant military duties, not only has discharged
these ditics with obvious ability, but has
giv-n ell of us whose work has brought us
into ccntact with him reason to be grateful
for bis entailing geniality and his unsparing
rt’idltJesi* ol advice and help. And it is pleas-
ont, tncicfore, to be able to record this func-
tlMt, perhaps the last of the kind to be under-
taken by I'm, as a brilliant success.
It is good to think of, as an interesting
and heartening occasion in the life of the Aus-
tralian soldiers on Salisbury Plain. In some
regards, no di u«t, they will be tempted here-
after to recall that life with mixed feelings.
Detachment after detachment, they have come
there by the thousand in these two years past.
The camps that have housed them, grown
gradually out of their original spaces to the
dimensions of populous tow-ns, have been the
scene of as arduous days and as heavy tasks
as any they have ever known. And many of
them have spent a winter there, to recall
which will always be easy, for the reason
that on this point memory will always be
vivid. Salisbury Plain is, in winter, unques-
tionably a cold place. So far is it from being
a real plain of undevlatlng level, this ancient-
ly famous and historic stretch of England,
which contains not only the ruins of the
Roman Sarum but Druidical Stonehenge also, 1
is a great open spaciousness of undulating
country. It has, it is true, its levels, but
more often than not it goes leaping up to
heights that disclose miles of the Hampshire
countryside, and down again to the valleys
between those hills. And anywhere on Salis-
bury Plain, when the winter winds sweep
acros it, and the winter snows and rains
fall upon its undefended expanse, they sweep
and fall ..with a sharp intensity of thorough-
ness.
A cold place, this Salisbury Plain, of the
long winter, as many a man of our’s now
knows —a cold place, and a toiling, moiling
place, where many a man of our’s has won
through to soldierly fitness by a long, bard
road of discomfort. But it is not always
winter, even at Salisbury Plain, and here and
there, in the countryside, are pleasant vil- j
lages, which even in winter are attractive
variation from the camps, while in the camps ;
themselves are all manner of diversions and
devices meant to persuade the Australian
1 soldier of other things than the hardships
:of his training. And, in any case, the sun
| is beginning, now, to fill Salisbury Plain with
a new light, and presently will fill it with a
I now warmth. And with that hope of a
springtime, though an unparalleled winter still
delays it, Salisbury Plain and the soldiers
i there have had, now, a visit from the King.
! Salisbury Plain has seen many Kings. But
for hundreds of Australian soldiers, this visit
of King George was their first sight of a
King, and their first contact with the ruler
who symbolises the far-spread unity of Em-
j pirc. And not least among its varied in-
-1 terest, this review of Australian soldiers by
1 the King gave occasion for three wholly
1 welcome facts that were obvious to every one
of us who was there —it spurred the ener-
gies of thousands of young Australians com- i
pelled to a new and arduous life; it revealed
them as enthusiastically glad to take part
in a ceremony of which the King was the
central figure; and it revealed the King to
them as manifestly pleased to be among them,
and proud of their greeting of him.


£Jk& '9/7
STORIES OF WAR
MOLES OF BATTLE
Learning to Listen
HOW THE MINERS FIGHT
Sapper M’Naily turns quickly at the call of 'j,
"Mate!” from your friend in the wheel-chair, c
He has been standing in the middle of the t
ward in a brown study, as he waited for an r
orderly to arrive with cigarettes. Sapper £
M’Nally is not a boy, but perhaps he will f
look younger as time goes on, lor he has only t
just returned from France, and two gassings *
underground, in the course of mining around
Loos, Ypres. and Ba Bassee.
He strolls along to where the boy in the
wheel-chair invites conversation, and since,
you happen to be paying a morning call you 1
are lucky enough to hear a littie of subter-
ranean warfare.
The sapper, who was a miner before going
♦ fjuiut. regards his work as mildly dan-
' gerous, and tells casually of how he and six
1 others were knocked out underground by
1 their constantly threatening enemy—foul air.
"In the school.” says he "we were told to
get out as soon as we felt queer in the head.
To wait until our legs gave way was con- j
sidered fatal. But it comes like that!” he j
explains, flicking his fingers, "and gets you (
before you have a chance.” He holds a box
of cigarettes towards you by way of example.
“There!” he continues, "it might .happen just '
in the time it lakes for me to hand you
that!
THE MILITARY CANARY
"I was half an hour in the tunnel before !
the ‘protos’ (or stretcher-bearers) could get ,
me out. They are differently trained from
the field stretcher-bearers, and carry in front
of them a great bag filled with oxygen. Be-
fore Cuming aown to where the gassing has
taken place, they try white mice and canaries
in the neighborhood, if they are nut knocked,
out, the stretcher-bearers can come along.
"When they get you up to the top,” con-
tinues the man with the T on his shoulder,
"they give you black coffee, and get you off
to hospital as soon as possible," He laughs
, grimly, and adds, "I think the cruellest thing
ever I had happen to me was when an
orderly came along with a dixie full of water.
I was that thirsty 1 could have drunk the
whole dixie full, but the doctor knocked it
out of his hands!” He shakes his head more
ruefully than ever. "They won’t let you
drink when you’re gassed. But it was the
cruellest thing ever happened to me, alright!
"Eight days it took me to recover. You
1 have a tightness in your chest, then it goes
to your throat and chokes you. Your face
swells—yes, sometimes it goes black. The
second time I was gassed I got over it quick-
er, but the colonel told me I’d never go un-
derground again!”
You ask what the sapper’s own opinion is.
"We’ll see,” says he stoutly, "when 1 get
over these fainting fits, 1 shouldn’t be sur-
prised to find myself at it again.”
Of the actual work of tunnelling, there are
so many aspects of absorbing interest to the
uninitiated that you could sit all the morn-
ing firing out questions, if you were not
aware of that weariness at the back of the
sapper’s eyes. At the school for military
miners such things are taught as distinguish-
ing sounds from the enemy’s underground
workers.
UNDERGROUND SPIES
The listeners during their training become
accustomed to a telephonic machine. Say
he and I were learning to listen,” explains
Sapper M’Naily, inaicating the man in the
wheel-chair. "Well, here’s the machine set
'in the wall” (the wall is the back of the
chair). "Now 1 go down to the other end of j
the ward, where he can’t sec me, and take |
wires attached to the machine with me. )
Then I do all sorts of things—take a sack i
and half-fill it with sand, dumping it as I
fill; drive a bit of wood into the earthy wail;
tap hero and there. Then I came back and
ask him what I’ve been doing, and if he’s any
good of a listener he tells me.
"One day the listener came hurrying with
the message that it sounded as if ‘he’ were
tamping it up.” (By this time you know that
y "he” means the enemy mole a few yards
away through the earth.; “Sergeant ,
the bravest feliow a man ever broke bread
with—said he wouid go back with the listener
to Investigate. He never shirked danger. If
there was anything coming to us he took
it on, too. The fact that Gerry (as wo
called the enemy) was tamping it up meant
that ho was wedging wood into the wall of
his tunnel, so that when he let off his mine
against us the earth would not be flung back
on himself.
“Well, feergeant and the listener both
got blown up! Strangely enough, when the
stretcher-bearers went in atterwards they
found that though the back of the sergeant’s
watch had been biown off it was still going!
"Sometimes we were only 27 yarus away
from Gerry’s trench. We Austral ms were
not too careful to keep silence, until one day
one of the Tommies came to us and said how
our loud talking was endangering the lives
of the Tommies and the Jocks who worked
with us.” He laughs slyly. "They talked of
teaching us the deaf and dumb language.
But we were more careful after that.”
"Yes, there was a good deal of excitement
to it, especially when the listener would bring
news that Gerry had made a tunnel beneath
ours, and we’d have to sot to work to got
beneath him again. He used to set auto-
matic picks at work to deceive us. The ro f
above us would be about 140. t. thick.’’
He is amused at your obvious mental
effort to conceive of such a covering. Then
he proceeds in eulogy of the Tommies and
their work underground. The Australian sap-
per has seen some of the English miners su
worn out on reaching the surface that tluy
had actually to be fed. In this connection
his admiration of a certain Lieutenant
is unbounded for the care he took of
the work-weary.
Sapper M’Naily is insistent on one point—
that there was really no danger!
"During bombardments we were always
called to the surface,” says he."Of course, a
man had to be careful going along the saps
carrying timber on his shoulder (good Ore-
gon pine it was, too!). If he were careless
and let the timber tilt so that a bit of it
peeped above the trench, lie stoo 1 the chance
of being sniped—that’s all!”
j mere nothing,” you say mockingly, but
I the sapper sticks to his point.


JUU. (U^Jft'
It Is an exhilarating experience to dash in a fast ship acioss
the invaded Channel, and plunge into a foreign battle zone, where j
millions of men and massive machines are absorbed in the work i
of lighting. I had to spend long hours on the roads, going from
headquarters to headquarters, but it was never Irksome. German
prisoners —stout-looking, fair-haired youngsters for the most part ;
endless lines of B transport, ever-industrious Frenchwomen
and children laboring in the fenceless fields —these and other
sights made the journey fascinating. We saw village after vil-
lage in ruins, and later the dreadful desolation of the trench area
—just the trail of the Boche through France, a trail that madron
wonder how Australia would look if the war were at home. |
The following article has been written in Lbndon by the Premier (Mr. Holman)
specially for the “ Sun.” It draws a vivid picture of the never-ending work of our
men in France :
WHO WILL GIVE THESE MEN A REST?
HOW HOLMAN FOUND OUR LADS
Anzacs Sick for Home
“ We Have Had More than Our Share ”
CALM ACCEPTANCE OF SHELLFIRE RISKS
346th Day of the Third Year of the War
(From Our Special Representative)


Reinforcements Badly Wanted
1 lie thing that struck me about the Australians was their
great mental weariness. Some show that two years’ separation
from their homes, combined with the monotonous round of mili-
tary duties, has made them sick of the whole business They are
beginning to feel that they have been overworked, and affyrded
inadequate reliefs. The fact is, of course, that the war has
lasted too long. There has been insufficient recruiting. 1 »eard
some men say that they had had more than their share of fight-
ing, but on the whole they welcome actual combat, which makes
a change from weariness. They ought to be largely reinforced
in order that they may be given longer periods of relief. When
they do get leave, unlike the British, they cannot go homo, but
must spend their furlough with strangers; sometimes desirable
strangers, sometimes otherwise, but always strangers. There is
no cure for the Australian soldier’s homesickness.
Keen, Alert Soldiers
The RPueral epfrft of j? fcayqjvd pvai-.yv 3h-»y
are extraordinarily keen and alert, and seem entirely satisfied
with their commanders in the field. General Birdwood Is their
greet hero. He appears to possess a remarkable capacity for
maintaining discipline without inflicting hardship. Their relations
with the other officers are thoroughly good. I saw unit after unit,
and always thought it remarkable how profoundly the Australians
entered into the spirit of soldiering. They were smart in bear-
ing, and performed parade movements and ceremonial details with
the accuracy of regulars. Personally, Ido not attach importance
to these, but was interested in the way our young men have be-
come not merely soldiers in fact, but in appearance and man-
ners. I was satisfied when attending a parade of the celebrated
First Division, and addressing a few words to them, that It would
be difficult to imagine a finer or more formidable-looking lot as
they formed their great square of khaki. Examining them in de-
tail as they marched past, I realised what tough, hard-bitten war-
riors they had become. They are mostly young, with a few vet-
erans, but they look as hard as nails, their intelligent, resolute
faces indicating the individual strength and determination which
make the power of the Anzac contingents.
Australia’s Old Guard
Seeing them, it was hard to remain articulate. I thought their
deeds at Bullecourt, the story which rings through France, worthy
of the Lone Pine heroes. This brigade regards itself as the Old
Guard of Australia’s army, not without warrant, for they have
acted up to that ideal. ■ •
During my visits closer to the line I was struck most by the
perpetual roaring of cannon, next by the unceasing aerial activ-
ity The town at which I was\ quartered was bombed regularly
every night by German airmen, and as regularly was the scene
of a furious demonstration by anti-aircraft batteries. A large
amount of damage was done, but nothing serious until the night
after my departure, when the hospital was wrecked, and a num
ber of wounded were killed.
It was probably unintentional frightfulness, as the Germans
were aiming at the station and aerodrome.
After the tragic death of General Holmes, I spent the night and
day in the company of Brigadier-General Jobson, who is acting as
commander of a certain division. I was greatly struck with the
ease with which he controlled 20,000 men. I attended a divi-
sional generals’ meeting, where plans were discussed for consoli-
dating newly-won ground. It was most impressive. Next I saw
a trench-mortar demonstration. This mortar fires a cylindrical
bomb which breaks under the force of its explosion into long
fragments like knife-blades, which hurtle through the air like
boomerangs. They wreak great havoc in the trenches. A frag-
ment will cut a man’s leg off. I saw the whole procedure of
trench attack, the searching of the trench with mortars, the
use of rifle grenades, and Lewis guns, the actual taking of a trench
with the bayonet, and the smoking out of the dug-outs. Of
course this was a rehearsal.


IH ' The Clash of Battle
t T found our guns at close quarters very much more disturb-
ing that the bursting of enemy shells. The noise of our bat-
teries is greater and more sudden, and has a more wrecking effect
on the nerves. The experience of being under shellfire is not
in itself at all distressing, though doubtless it would become so if
too long continued. My short experience did not create a marked
. teeling of nervousness, nor leave anything like a general impres-
j sion of shock. Unfortunately my experience terminated with the
sudden shock of General Holmes’s death alongside me. The first
thing 1 knew I was thrown to the ground; next that my friend was
d> ing. i hat was a fact of sufficiently real significance to drive
consideration of my own feelings out of my mind. I think the
great majority.at- Jttfin. very rapidly get used to the idea of
being shelled, though everybody is happier when out of it. The
fire-eater does not exist nowadays, but men speedily arrive at a
j stage v-hen they are not disturbed in their duty by shellfire. This
calm acceptance of immediate risks is one of the characteristics of
the war. It is as obvious amongst Londoners, who refuse to get
excited at air raids, as amongst soldiers at the front. It seems to
be the form which modern courage is taking.
The Work of the Tanks
It is not a case of loving danger for its own sake, but of serene
indifference to danger when unavoidable. I was able to see some
of the extraordinary work of the ‘tanks/ under unusual circum-
stances of which lam not at liberty to write. I was surprised
and profoundly Impressed by their possibilities, for I had come
to the conclusion that they were played out. lam now satisfied,
as a layman, that this is not so. I was generally most im-
pressed with, firstly, the complete contempt of everybody for the
enemy’s military power, and the definite certainty prevailing that
the enemy cannot under any circumstances win; and, secondly,
with the good feeling throughout the armies. There is no doubt a
certain small number of shirkers amongst the officers and men.
but the general feeling is unmistakably one of anxiety to throw
the whole available weight into the scrum, and push through. The
men will not leave the fighting line if they can help it Finally
there is a general belief that we are working along a definite
plan, and that the scheme is well conceived and reliable,
All this is excellent, but the process of grinding down the Ger-
man power is wearisome for the soldiers. If the Russian return
is genuine, one can quite understand that it may be essential to
strike this summer with our whole force, whilst the Russians are
holding part of the enemy's armies. Afterwards our men ought
In batches, to be given relief, and permitted to return to Australia
A request for five months’ leave for those who have completed two
• years service is not outrageous. They could return for the final
offensive if necessary.


JUx. /tr" tin.
ANZAC MEMORIAL
Tribute From French Residents
At Anzac-avenue, RanHwlck-road, there
was an Impressive ceremony yesterday In
memory of the heroic Anzacs who have
died at the front. A number of returned sol-
diers formed a procession, and marched from
the city to the avenue, headed by the bands
of the R.S.A. and Seventh Light Horse.
Mile. Soubeiran, a member of the Prench-
Australian League, was the first to place a
handsome wreath at the base of the column—
“to the Immortal Anzacs.”
Dean Talbot delivered an address, in which
he extolled the heroism of the French nation
in its fight for freedom.


oZXI >9/7
STORIES OF WAR
GALLIPOLI AND FRANCE
INSIDE THE TANKS
Two Days in a Shell Hole
“You can go and wake Candy up,” says the
ward sister at Randwlck. "He’s had quite
enough sleep for one morning, and a talk
would do him good.” So along you trot to
where a brown head is barely visible above
the bedclothes. Private Candy has just de-
cided to wake up. H e yawns luxuriously,
and opens his eyes to find a stranger settling
comfortably into the chair at his bedside.
He shows no surprise, for a returned soldier
is past being taken unawares by the vagaries
of 'civilians, and the lack of a formal intro-
duction is a mere bagatelle. As one khaki-
’clad youth puts it: “Lord bless my soul, you
never know what liberties they’ll take with
you!”
So Private Candy overlooks the imperti-
nence of disturbing his slumbers, and is soon
leaning on his elbow, good-humored,y an-
swering questions. misfor-
tune to lose one of his legs from a little below
the knee, but even that in these days of
topsy-turvydom has aspects that lend them-
selves to laughter.
“It serves me right for being too cocky,”
he grins. “And now I’ve got an abscess on
the stump. You see, I took to riding a bike
fifteen miles or so with my new leg, and
now I’ve got to pay for being too cheeky
with it!” He laughs like a little boy who
has been discovered in the pantry after he
has disposed of all the jam in the pot. “It’s
over there in the cupboard,” say's he. “I’ve
had it only two months. Funny thing is,
though, that when I’m tired from walking
or riding too much. I’m dashed If I haven’t
the sensation of feeling my old toes aching
in the boot! When you first wear a leg like
that it gives you a pain right up your leg
and arm and into your forehead; but after a
time that disappears.”
Private Candy was in the Gallipoli landing,
and after some weeks was wounded. He was
sent to hospital, and on recovering returned
to the peninsula to receive a second wound,
after which he passed on to France —a
veteran who had learned all the tricks of the
trade, and knew so well how to make the best
of war conditions that his mates christened
him “Old Grandfather.”
SLAPPED HIS FACE
He talks of the Turks.
“They were real kind-hearted fighters,”
says he; “but I don’t know that I’d feel in-
clined to throw ’em over cigarettes, like
some of the lads used to do. I’d give ’em a
drink of water when they were wounded or
prisoners, of course. The first batch of Tur-
kish prisoners I saw finished me! They
wanted to kiss me! I gave the first one a
slap in the face, and rolled the others down
the hill, jtist to show there was no ill-feel-
ing.” Private Candy looks ruffled at the bare
thought of offering his cheek to Abdul. Then
his memory sets him laughing. “You know,
war is a great game of bluff,” he explains.
“We used to fill jam tins with dirt and throw
them over into the Turkish trenches for the
fun of hearing the darkies call out; ‘Allah,
Allah, Allah, Allah!’ There was often not a
suspicion of explosive in the tin, but the
Turks were dead scared!”
That reminds him of how the Germans fly
before the tanks. “I used to kill myself
laughing at those blessed, big, lumbering
snails as they went across No Man’s Land, ’
he chuckles. “To see ’em waddling along,
down into a shell-hole, and up again, walking
through stone walls and over trees, was
enough to make a cat laugh! The black cat
mascot that appears in the film at the Town
' Hall I have often seen, though 1 don’t re-
member the officer who holds it. Another
tank had a fox-terrier as a mascot.”
“Have you ever seen inside a tank?” you
demand, and know delight when the wounded
man says he has. “Inside they are lined,
lloor and all, with rubber about £hat thick-
ness” (he holds out his first finger, and you
gape open-mouthed as if you had never seen
a human hand before).
MIRRORS IN THE TANKS
“The reason for it is that those inside the
tank would get so terribly knocked about if
it wasn’t for the rubber lining. No; there’s
nothing inside except the men and the ma-
chinery for the guns, and the propelling of
the thing. Where the guns pierce the side
there is an arrangement of mirrors that
gives those Inside the tank a view of prac-
tically the whole of the battlefield. The gun-
ners have a kind of belt about their waists,
otherwise they would be shot away from the.r
guns as the tank waddled over walls and
Private Candy fought on the outskirts of
Pozieres, and it was during a bombardment
that he received the wounds responsible for
the amputation of his leg. There were six
wounded men in No Man's Land, and the
private who is now at Randwlck brought in
four, and was going out for a fifth when
shrapnel and three bullets shattered his leg
below the knee. He still has a grudge against
those who found him two days later, because
they prevented him from cutting off the
wounded member with a penknife! “It was
hanging only by shreds,” he grumbles, and ’
gazes inquiringly at the wrinkle that ap- |
pears In your sensitive, civilian nose!
He crawled into a sheli-hole, covered him-
self with sandbags, and slept and smoked
until the bombardment ceased, and then un-
til the stretcher-bearers found him.
You are surprised at his not having bled
to death.
"I bound it up,” says he, and then, depre-
catingly, “to tell you the truth, I was caked
with such muck and mud that it hadn’t
much chance of bleeding when once the muck
caked and dried. It was good in a way, but
it was responsible for the septic poisoning
that made them amputate the leg when I got
to hospital.
“Funny how they found me eventually!” i
he muses. “A pal of mine and another chap
were galloping back to our trenches after a
raid, when my pal tripped and fell into the
very shell-hole where I lay under my sand-
bags. ‘Tell ’em.’ said I, ‘that Charlie’s here
with his leg off’—and it was not long before
the stretcher-bearers came to me.”
Private Candy has gayer vignettes of war
than this. He draws graphic word pictures
for you of mail day at the front. “The fact
that a mail has arrived is called out,” says
he, “and up come the boys like a lot of
chickens when corn is scattered!”
Then there are stories of securing deli-
cacies in French villages. “You get into the
way of bailing a cow up in a corner, and
milking her into a Machonochle’s tin,” he
tells laughingly. “And coming out of the
trenches you wouldn’t dream of letting a
chicken run past without jabbing it on the
head with your rifle butt. Then into your (
pocket she goes, and it s poultry for tea!
“We used to scoop out the clay of the i
trench into a kind of oven, and under that ,
we’d leave a layer of clay before scooping
out another hole for the fire. I’ve cooked j
scones, and bread and butter custard, and I
what-not that way when we were near |
enough to a village to get the flour and milk ;
and eggs. You get to know all those things
after a bit,” says he, and gives a pat to the !
’•fde’fithps where you guess tbnt excess is.


CUvj. SL-4 19/7
TRENCH OF THE DEAD
GALLIPOLI MAN IN FRANCE
“ GOOD SHOOTING TO-DAY ”
(From
Captain C. E. VC. B«an.
Anttrall&n Pr«M
n«pmrnt«(lT( with the Commonwealth Forcaa.
Copyright by Crown.)
Rritish Headquarters, Prance.
June 1.
It was on the second day after a heavy
fight. Two mornings before, in the dawn,
after drenching the Hindenburg trenches
with trench-mortar bombs and artillery
throughout the night, the Germans had made
their carefully-prepared attack, with the
Lehr Regiment and special assault troops
against our holding in their line. The Officer-
Commanding the Australian battalion which
drove them out of its trenches was an old
Gallipoli, hand—one who had lived for
months together like a hermit In a little dry
vlay dug-out in the side of a deep red sap and
sniped Turks daily as a good Light Horse-
man should, where their buff skull caps could
be seen crossing through the holly scrub on
the slopes towards Gaba Tepe. This was
his first big fight In France; his battalion
bad been through one tremendous night’s
work, but that was before ho camo over to
command it.
He had always a good j'arn to spin in the
old days, so a couple of us went to find him.
At the tiny hole In the ground which formed
his headquarters they told us he was up In j
the line. We threaded our way up the long
shell-pounded, dusty way with its ghastly
relics of a fortnight’s hard fighting, through
the remains of the Hindenburg wire, batter-
ed down much as a wheatfleld is battered by
a hurricane; worked up the dusty old plough-
ed field of the great trench itself —both sides
were in it time and again in the early days
of the attack until it was little more than
traceable in parts—running like the old dry
te-d of some droughty watercourse amongst
ti e shellholes.
THE SNIPER
On our way to find the Colonel we came
on a little group of men In dusty, war-worn
clothes, lining a rather wide shellhole. We
had heard the crack of a rifle as we came
up the trench. There was an occasional dis-
tant shot from the Germans, and once or
twice a rapid succession of shots from near
'by. Evidently some Australian sniper was
having good shooting. The report of a rifle,
which used to be continuous day and night
in Gallipoli, is almost an event of itself in
France: if you hear half as many reports of
a rifle as you do of an eight-inch howitzer
it is time to ask what is causing the dis-
turbance.'
Wo cant» round a corner of the french on]
to this group in the shell-hole from which
the activity clearly proceeded. Two men
seemed to be doing the shooting over the
top. Two others were observing. Out on the
dry shell-pitted slope seven or eight hun-
dred yards away from them, which formed
the opposite incline of a shallow spoonlike j
valley, a couple of Germans were hopping j
from shell-hole to shell-hole across what I
once had been a wheat field. They would
disappear from sight for a time, apparently
in a trench along a road, but always re-
appeared where our shells had broken the
trench down. The Germans were trying to
conduct a relief by daylight, and it had to
cross this precarious area before it reached
the white chalk .parapet of a further trench
where the country was still green.
One of the men in the shell-hole fired
twice quickly. The hurrying Germans nip-
ped down into some crater. The Australian
rested Ins rifle on the bank in front of him
and looked around.
It was our old friend of Gallipoli. ‘‘Mj
word,” he said, ".the best shooting I’ve evei
had. We are touching thd beggars up
Sometimes they have the hide to try anc
cross the open—that’s when we have soxm
fun.”
There came an excited yelp from the mar
leaning beside him. ‘‘Dere dey goes—oh
Colonel, queeck, queeck!—now, by de white
trench; queeck!" It was a French or Rus-
sian Australian who was lying by the
Colonel’s side observing for him —as keen as
a greyhound in the leash.
The Gallipoli hermit let off a clip of five
cartridges as fast as he could fire —they no-
ticed the dust tlick once or .twice near the
hurrying figures before they dived into shel-
ter again. The Colonel put down his rifle
and turriVd t‘o talk. Once or twice an an-
swering bullet from some German away in
that pink hillside richocheted off a lump of
earth somewhere In the foreground and went
singing far overhead. It might have been
a day at Anzac.
THE CORNER OF DEATH
He had a place he. wanted to take us too,
this colonel, ‘‘awfully interesting,” he said’.
“I was there yesterday. You ought to.see
it.” And so he took us. The Germans and
ourselves occupy the same trench in the
Hindenburg line. Our troops seized a sec-
tion of it on May 3; the Germans remained
in the adjoining section; and ever since they
had fought up and down it. We had barri-
cades at the end of our portion of the
trenches; and the Germans had barricades in
their trenches about thirty yards further on;
and there was thirty yards of abandoned
trench in between.
It was into this section that he took us;
out over our barricade into the dry, winding,
crumbled trench where no one lived. The
midday heat trembled in the dry pink clods
around; the green flies moved here and there
over the pink crater sides. Kxcept for that
'.}ve might have been In mid-Sahara.
The fight had been tremendously heavy in
that, corner two mornings before. The Ger-
mans had attacked, and in that region the
last remnant of the attack had been wiped
out. On the bottom of the trench lay four
Germans, the red facings of their grey uni-
forms as bright and their color as clear as if
they had laid down there to rest. The trench
was littered with the debris of battle—old
waterbottles, bombs, odds and ends of kit.
At one point there stood against the trench
wall, exactly as they were left when the
owners were killed or wounded, the rifles of
some small Australian outpost that had once
held the trench some way In advance of our
final position.
Once whilst we stood there the noise of
hammering came from not far away. Some-
jotje was tacking up a notice board on the
(entrance of a dugout. or driving a stake into
the trench side. The sound came from be-
yond us. It was the Germans at work in.
their trench.


to 19 n- P 7
DIARY OF THE WAR
THE AUSTRALIANS AT REST
GOOD DAYS OF SPORT
SOME MEMORABLE NAMES
(From Our Special Representative)
LONDON. June 18.
After their fight in the Hindenburg line
between Buliecourt and Queant. the four
veteran divisions of General Birdwood’s com-
mand were given from four to six weeks rest.
This will be good news to Australia. It was
the second best possible news to the men.
The best would have been, “War over—all for
home”—which Is not likely to come for many
a long day yet.
The divisions have been more fagged than
they were after this fight. At times at the
Dardanelles two looked infinitely more rag-
ged, tired, jaded. All four were getting near
their last strength during the worst of the
winter on the Somme. But never have they
more intensely longed for a rest than after
the heavy fighting of early May.
I went round with General Bird Wood into
Noreuil and along the sunken road£ in which
our reserve lines were sheltering on the ' day
on which he had convinced General Gough,
his Army Commander, that a rest was im-
perative. General Birdwood has easy access
to the men’s confidence, but that day he was
barred by sheer, weary disbelief that a holi-
day would ever come again.
“Boys, there will be a rest soon,” he would
say. Sometimes the men would good-na-
turedly laugh their disbelief, saying they had
heard of rest many times, and each time
been disappointed. At others they would
smile politely. Only once did I see real ex-
pectation lighten a man’s eyes. I found he
was a recent draft. He had not yet learnt
what a long-drawn-out misery is war, what
travail it brings to body and soul, how many
months must be passed in unceasing strain
wihout the relief of a clear, long break.
As the divisions went through their “stunt”
on that barren hillside in the triangle of
three ruined villages, they were shifted back
to areas where the flash of guns could be
seen but where no shells could come, where
the devastation of the Somme was all around
but where sweet-smelling grass grew, and
football could be played and sports held, and
newspapers read, and good food and water
enjoyed in plenty. I cannot name the divi-
sions, but can say the first division out was
the one which so signally distinguished itself
on April 11 at Buliecourt, that after it came
the division which opened the great battle
for the Hindenburg line in the dawn of May
3, that the first relieving division came next
and the second relieving division came last.
It was a hard fight to get them out. It
began six months ago, and was kept up with
all pressure until the British authorities
must have been ashamed to look the com-
parisons in the face. Ido not say we would
have done better in the Hindenburg line if
rest had been possible at the time it was
most urgently needed; nothing could have
made us do better, for we did everything we
were asked to, and any failure there was
not our failure. But the war necessity which
reduced our Australian divisions to trench-
holding troops and yet called them later
into fierce offensives as shock troops was a
peculiarly bitter necessitv.
AMONGST AUSTRALIAN GENERALS
In the soldier s life the genuine patches of
ease are few, and the times of exacting and
prolonged labor are many. In such fighting
as that at Piers at the end of last year and
through the winter, and that at Buliecourt
during April and May, men are physically
shaken. Few can snatch sleep in the front
lines. All must work with spade or stand
in readiness for counter-attacks. German
shells jpour down on the line —one section of
‘our new line at Messines got nine hours of
steady drenching German high explosives
during the Messines offensive. Apart from
nervous strain there is inevitable physical
effect from the shaking of the ground and the
fumes of explosions. The terrors and trials
of an offensive can be dimly imagined but
never described. Men invariably are taken
i out to rest for a few days after them. The
best man would crack up in nerve and spirit
If this was not so. Even with such rests
there is a cumulative effect, enhanced by the
steady strain of trench warfare. I do not
think that any army in the war has had less
complete rest than the Australians.
Happily, the Australian divisions can now
boast of commanders who, whatever may
be their faults, are at least in close touch
and sympathy with their men. Not nearly
! enough is known in Australia of these five
divisional commanders, the five who fight the
divisions in the offensives and the trench
warfare and who, in their own domains,
whether'their men be in the line or out of
It, are all powerful. In these days of im-
mense armies locked together in a stifling
grip, there is little strategic opportunity for
a divisional commander. But he controls
the movements of his men when there is
movement, and has more actual fighting re-
sponsibility than a corps commander, for
corps commanders have become during battle
J merely the channel of communication between
army commander and divisional commander.
Sometimes they are not even that, and an
army commander gives his directions direct
to divisional headquarters.
Australia’s generals deserve to be well
known in the homes of their men. Yet prob-
ably no one in Australia outside the Defence
Department could name the five divisional
commanders. All the Gallipoli men know
General Walker, of the First—“ Fighting
Walker,” they have always called him. An
Indian army officer, he came to Egypt with
Blrdwood. Australia had not contracted to
supply an army corps staff, and at that time
could not have managed one. So when Kit-
cj ener cabled to Blrdwood to drop his work
as organiser of the Indian expeditionary
forces, and told him to get to Cairo at once
and weld the Australian and New Zealand
d : visions into an army corps, he added, “You
bad better bring a staff.” There were many
fine men on that first Anzac Staff. The war
has produced no more brilliant chief of staff
than General Skene, who is back in India,
and we owe also Walker to that first draft
from the Indian army. He is a most kindly
man, aging just a little, full of affection for
his men, and skilled in soldiering. It will
be to Australia’s dishonor if vi e do not recog-
nise all that General Walker has been to our
great First Division, which remains the
crack unit of the Australian Army, and has
had through nearly all its struggles, vic-
tories, and vicissitudes the firm and fatherly,
leadership of this British soldier. No offer
has tempted him away from his men, and
he asks from the world to-day only that he
should be allowed to go with them to the
end. But there are ways we can and should
show our recognition.
Another Indian army officer in Major-
General Smyth, V.C., succeeded General
legge as a divisional commander, and with
1 im there are the same ties, for he led our
First Brigade from early days, and saw it
tnrough its hardest times. General Smyth
had command of the division which attack- !
ed the Hindenburg Line in May, and the re- ;
Peving divisions as they went in fought un-
der him also, so that many brigades to-day
can say that they felt his touch. He is an-
other thrusting general, anxious always to
use his punch, and the worst criticism made
of him is that he pushes his headquarters
up too near the firing line. Like General
Walker, he is fair-haired, deeply tanned, with
blue and happy eyes.
The other three are Australians. General
Monash has had his first serious fighting as
divisional commander in the Messines push.
He had plenty of hard fighting with the
Fourth Brigade in Gallipoli, all of which his-
tory will judge in time. His ability and sin-
cerity are beyond question, and his division
swears by him, which is an excellent sign.


AH Australian divisions have not always
sworn by their divisional commanders—tii*
men, indeed, have accounts to settle with
generals, brigadiers, and others which will
not be forgotten when the war is over, and
the time comes to protect the future of Aus-
traiia Irom the incompetence of men who have
failed, and yet seem to have succeeded. This
ii i ncd b ® said of Generals Holmes or
Hobbs, the two other divisional comman-
ders—one a Sydney infantry leader, the other
an Adelaide artilleryman. They are in many
respects like Birdwood— somewhat short in
_ aturc, agile and aggressive men, who hold
, their men well together and do not hesitate
I to punch.
WORTHY CAMPAIGNERS
j H Gne <. (lespairs ’ of ever securing due recognl-
' " r ° r all T the worthy senior officers who
Lave gone through the brunt of the war with
the Anzacs. nursed them and led them. The
list is too long. Many have been struck:
and ' vill never return to Australia,
‘f* y lmpcr J al Indian army or Egyptian
" y °tf? c f rs - who will never see the shores
Irom which their men came. Many will go
home when their deeds will have been over-
-o Many will be lost in the crowd,
unep the Government and the people will
have room for only a few elec*- Many wil?
fnrLa he sta y' at 'bomes and the early-re-
-1 s ® cur ® 1 > r entrenched in the positions
, that count. Such is war—always chamrintr
uncertain, hazardous, unjust. ranging,
men - of course, stand out too distinct-
°f such are Major-General
> u he Gorps Chief of Staff, who has
i stro d n£ t a bri,,iant student of war. and
have had J « 6 m f n - General White could
™ a divisi °nal command, which would
Promotion and a better chance
la ki” lndlvidual reputation. But ho
»« jn \ alual 'le as Chief of Staff, for he is Bird-
vvoods right hand man, and Australia's ovvn
thoroughly-tested representative on Jha
Corps Staff. General White is wearing well
and wll emerge still young and eager-a
I »"* P ersonal ambition, hut with a
if An !“ H drt f nn,natlon tG SCt thC be «t OUt
“ Australia for Australians. He could rise
to higher rank and pay if he deserted us for
the British Army, which respects him so
greatly that it would eagerly find him scope
ii or big work. But to be in Australia’s
service is an Australian’s best fame, and
? e «Tt 1 , Wh ‘ te the Australian army is the
vfded fie U f ° r dUty the W ° rld has yet pro “
Major-General Chauvel—or has he received!
nis expected promotion, and become Aus-
tralia s first Lieutenant-General?—had diffi-
icult times at Gallipoli, where General Hamil-
ton had him In his black books. But the
magnificent Light Horse seem to have beeni
well led by the gallant Queenslander in thei
deserts and on the’plains of Palestine, ami
a Ib® great reputation made by our horse-
men their general naturally gets full share.
Generous British soldiers say that the Light
Horse have proved the finest cavalry in the
war. That says much for their commander.
here are Brigadier-Generals who stand out
also—General Ryrie, who understands hia
wel i: a ? d has a blunt, rough, but suc-
cessful method of soldiering; General Gelli-
brand who left his orchard in Tasmania, and,
as patient, gentle, and firm leader of the 6th.
Brigade, has won an undying name; General
Glasgow, vyho has developed from bank clerk
iiAt, UC^ eSS U * leader of fighters; General El-
hott. General Bennett, and the others
borne day Captain Bean, the official wail
correspondent, will write a full history of the
Australian Imperial Force, and names will bo
enshrined there which the public will not
, a £nise, but which will be worthy of all
that Australia can offer. .Of Captain Bean!
himself It is just to say that he is one of
,W e invaluable men of the corps—a jour-
m a Ji S H m mdlte pains > Whose statements are
invariably facts, whose writings are dispas-
sionate reflections of the actual truth. Yes-
a r , the Foreign Office, from a high,
tribnS- dl £ lomat » 1 heard this unsolicited
tribute. Bean is one of the great successes
tb ® ™’ ar amongst journalists-a most ex-
cenent correspondent, whose work helps u»
, Th « War Office. I know, holds a
am- a u°, pln . Ion ‘ ° ne of Ca Ptain Bean’s most
difficult tasks, and one which he dreads not
'which’ I h«? n | ltely T re th3n tho German shells
i which he is continuously amongst, will ho
A h T t TT-° f of th ® senior officers of tho
I ? 6r ® must be ytern Passages, but oni
the whole there will be justified apprecia-


O COBBRCTIOKS.
sr S' 3s*ss%SSr^.™-‘-’-
As per State-
ment of
Receipts and
Payments to
31/13/1916.
£ s d
705.839 18 7
1 43.993 13 8
53,353 3 11
3.539 8 10
% %
• •
• •
• 0
For period
ended
30/6/1917.
£ s d
1.393 8 11
0 0 0
0 8 0
0 0 0
Total.
£ «
.. 706.932 7
43.993 12
52.253 11
.. 3.329 8
d
8
8
11
10
The Moinoro and Auction 6»>ies •
»•;?£.« «-» «.
electric , u *
• •
» 0
0
I
11
A
ti
vtbSkTm" Current Ar«*unts:
C.045 14 3
• •
1.860 0
1311 7
5
0
.. 3,440
18
8
iUnk of N®w South W*IM •■ dnt) , Lt d.
Commercial Banking c raUa
tIoos 15 8
• •
» •
• •
'S, 180 13
1,803 2
9
0
.. 9.183
3.068
0
1
•>
3
common wealth »a.n». South
Government Savings Bank or »«
£825.660 18 1
0 %
£8.647 6
7
..£834.308
0
O
0*
As per State-
ment of
Receipts and
payments to
si/ii/me-
crow !IS:S5S j
For period
ended
30/6/191".
d £ « d
0 100,000 0 0
0 .. 70.000 0 0
• •
• •
Total.
£ »
350.000 0
170.000 0
\
d
0
0
UUlilia nay Amelioration
E CW?lnrtoI ■>“ rCh "'.°!
ins boxes, advertising, c - _
collect- „
466 13
i4i s
0 .. 42 18
1 .. 0 •
0
0
• •
0 •
509
141
13
16
9
3
tralla Day
Cash in hand *//.•.*.♦
Balance *
«» It
• «••«***
1 • • * T
313,243 13
2
6
• •
• •
• •
409
3
813,243
11
5
13
2
6
£351,017 16
ii .. £483.290 3
8
• *
£834,308
0
*
reconciliation' or balance as shown abotbi-
6
4
rr, nk of Australia - | 94,817
SSSr^.S^.' &«S
5
t
14
10
4
0
jjank or * Ne . * New SoutU ales •
Govt. Savings Bank of Aew suui £-13.243
18
H
' w <? / 7
Australia Day Fund.
Statement of Receipts and Payment to
30th June, 1917.
receipts.
payments.
V'ZVtifS?™ '{ Hon. Treasures,
nroern. FRENCH, i
JOHN j. COHfiN. L Joint Hon. Secretaries.
TC. B. HARKNBSS, J
~ urtAT'K Accountant, 1/8/131**
4 bSS j
Receipts and ? X S«wl U th the constitution of the fund.
made in accordance wltn me cou j jjcKBRX.
Department of Audit Chief Inspector of Public Accounts.
Svdney. August *, 1517. /


Lv\j
BEYOND BAGDAD
WITH THE BRITISH FORCES
Hot Weather Prevents Fighting
Many people in Australia have lately won-
dered why they have heard so little from the
British force in Mesopotamia since it so
brilliantly captured Bagdad and advanced a
few miles further north. The reason is
given in the following interesting letter,
which a Sydney lady has received from a
chaplain with the forces at the front. He
writes:—
“This comes to you from the heart of the
Mesopotamian desert, and from a shade tem-
perature of 120 deg. We form the advance
barrier half-way between Bagdad and the
Turkish lines. We cannot go back, for Bag-
dad, and all that leads up to it, must be re-
tained, and the heat is too great to enable us
to attack the Turks Just now. So w© are
digging ourselves into the ground just be-
hind our advanced outposts. We have quite
good food and plenty of water (Tigris), but
the heat is insufferable. AVe wear splno
pads and curtains to our helmets, and try
1 to keep under cover from 9 to 5.
“Wo have little to fear from our foes at
present—the conditions are Just as trying for
them. We cannot meet again for four
months. Wc got their flying machines over
our camps at about 5 in the morning, but
apart from a few shots from our anti-air-
craft guns, and a few bombs from them, no
damage is done. There is a certain amount
ot mutual chasing of each other between the
Turks and our own machines, but we have
lost interest in them.
“Wo get away our cases of heat strokes
every morning by motor Red Cross boats,
sending them down to Bagdad, and in this
vay give the men a fairly good chance of
recovery,
IN BIBLE LANDS
c are not in the Holy Land, but we are
in Bibio lands, and traverse the soil crossed
and recrossed and dwelt on by Abraham, (
Ahasuerus, Esther-Sorgon.Tiglath.Pelleassar,
the riven? of Babylon and UI of the Chal-
dees. lam giving our men lectures on
Bible history, which seem to have become
quite popular. These lectures are given in
the centres of the camps. It is quite unique
to be standing in the full light of a clear white
| moon; or, the moon being gone, under the
i gloriously clear heavens, tilled with scintil-
lating starlight, and talk to these hundreds
o? men, lying on the ground in their shirt
sleeves, smoking. They listen to the story
of Esther, of the Babylonians’ captivity, of
Ezra’s entreaty to Cyrus, King of Persia’ of
i Khushan. of Ruth and the kingdom of Chas-
wes. and the story of Ctosiphon
: “ The Crusaders brought the cross to the
Holy Land; the British soldier is bringing 1
it to Mesopotamia. England will not sweep
away the Crescent, for that is not her way
but she sets up the cross beside it. It
at least, the sweeping away of Turkish lyr- I
rany, Mohametan cruelty, and the estab-
' lishment ot just laws, freedom and security
to human life.
PREPARING FOR MIGHTY ENTERPRISES
Chaldean and Syrian priests, also repre-
sentatives of the Latin Church, and Jews,
have all spoken to me of the unfolding of
the light of freedom and dispersion of dark-
ness which has come with the advent of Bri-
tish rule. It is wonderful to see the wharves,
docks, railways, water systems, which have
teen established, and the mighty plans for
i development of this desolate land. It is
i costing vast millions of money, sacrifice of
British youth, and withering up of the life of
those advanced in years; but it is worth it
all. As soon as peace comes vast enterprises
will rush into this land, and find conditions
ready for It all,
“S'o there is not so much ineptitude in these
regions as is sometimes credited to us, nor is
It only ‘a little aide show’ which does not
affect the war one iota, and so forth. We t
are trying to hold the fort and do our bit, I
looking forward to the time when we can
get down this river to the open sea to fresh
clean air, clean clothes, and clean, cold
water.”


3 '^ 6 I'tlb
MASCOT AND HERO
DETERMINED LAD OF 16
Bugler Linley Gets to the Front
NOW PARTIALLY PARALYSED
A bugler whose abilities in three directions
—swimming, resourcefulness, and courage—
are extraordinary Is now lying partially
paralysed, but improving, at the Randwick
Military Hospital. He is Ewart Linley, the
17-year-old son of Mr. William R. Linley, of
Newcastle. The lad’s story is particularly
interesting and clearly truthful, his romanc-
ing being for the purpose of getting to the
front.
At the hospital Bugler Linley said to a
“Sun” reporter: “I wanted to get to the front,
and made two or three attempts to get away.
I passed the medical examination, but my
age was discovered to be 15 years and two
months, and I was turned out of the camp
at Liverpool. I made up my mind to go,
and when the A.S.C. was leaving to catch
the boat for Egypt I went with it I kicked
about in my cadet uniform at the camp till I
knew the fellows, and I got aboard with them,
and made my way to the crew’s quarters on
September 20, 1914.
Before we reached Albany I was discover-
ed and had to get off. When they were ready
to go I swam out to the boat about two or
three hundred yards and clambered aboard
on a rope that was left hanging over the side.
I was Jolly glad it was no further I had to
swim.
“After the boat left there it had to put
oack to pick up horses that arrived late, and
I was put off again. I offered to lead one on,
and got aboard again, and next day we left
for Egypt. A couple of the fellows asked
me where I was going to sleep, and I said:
‘Down amongst the firemen,’ and I kept their
quarters clean for them.
HIDDEN IN LIFEBOAT
“On Christmas Eve I was collared and told
them that I wanted to go to the front and
had stowed away. I was told I would be put
j off at the next port, Colombo, and was put to
! work cleaning the brasswork on tho bridge
j and other odd jobs. I had my food at the
I soldiers’ galley, the chaps looking after me
j well. I’d left my tunic and kit on the wharf,
so some of the boys took up a subscription
for me and I got some of their spare uniform. )
At' Colombo I thought 1 was going to be
turned off again, so I hid in a lifeboat with
some tucker the men brought me from the
galley. I worked among the firemen keep-
ing their quarters clean, and they got me food
too. All the company seemed to want to
keep me; they reckoned I was a mascot. I
told one of the higher officers I’d made up my
mind to get to the front, and I was given the
task of polishing the brass on the bridge.
“Later on the decks were stripped for action
in case we met a submarine, and I had to
carry some bombs from the bridge. I was
told to be careful not to let one fall. As
luck would have it, going down a ladder I
tripped, but caught by the foot, and hung up-
side down by my leg with a bomb tightly
grasped in my arms. The boatswain got
the bomb and then booted me.
THE FLESHPOTS OF EGYPT
“We yere fighting in the Canal for three or
four days in January. At one port, as there
was a guard on the gangway, I slid down a
rope and got ashore. A captain—l don’t
want to say any of the officers’ names, be-
cause most of them were so sympathetic with
me —told me at Alexandria that I was to be
taken to England and charged with being a
stowaway, and some of the men told me they
were after me. One of the sergeants gave
me tucker, and said, ‘Come out with me to
Heliopolis and get the kit and rifle of an-
other boy whose foot had been injured.’ He
added, ‘See some Australian colonel and get
sworn in.’ 1 met the A.S.C. going to Cairo
and I wouldn’t wait for the sergeant, and
helped the A.S.C. to take out 700
horses to Ma’adi Camp. The men
all called me ‘Stowy’ when 1 joined
the rest at Ma’adi. ‘Stowy,’ one said, ‘How'd
you get here?’ I told them,;‘Same way as
usual.’ The captain there could not swear
me in, although very decent and wishful to
do so. At the camp • the men made up a
regular subscription of 400 piastres a month
for me, collecting on pay days. I cleaned
up their quarters.
“Then the captain told me the old battalion
I came with was moving to the front. When
I told the fellows they collected £3 for me,
and I went to Heliopolis to see other com-
rades and get with the battalion again. The
battalion could not go till Saturday, as luck
happened, instead of on Thursday as ar-
ranged. I went to Cairo by train and thought
I had missed them, but suddenly I heard their
band and I went out to meet them. The
| men were surprised and glad to see me. I
joined them, and kept dodging about among
the horses, sleeping at night on bags of chaff.
When we neared the boat three of the men
got leave to buy some eggs, to enable us to
come along with a run and get aboard in a
hurry. We had to eat about 20 eggs each
till the fellows were nearly all on. The egg 1
was running out of the corners of our mouths,
and we must have looked pictures as we tore
up to the boat. The colonel stopped me on
i the wharf and asked me who I was with. I
said, ‘The A.S.C., sir. I’ve been two years
with them. He told me to clear out, and I
thought that I was finished with being
hauled up, so I hopped up with my kit. The
third day out I got with the stretcher-bearers, |
and they supplied mo with food. I was told
the sergeant was always worrying somebody
to find me, but he never found me, as my
comrades were loyal to me. When we
reached Lemnos it was a week before the
sergeant caught me and took me to the colonel
and said, ‘Here’s the stowaway again.’ The
colonel said:
“ ‘You’re a bit of a liar, aren’t you?’
“ ‘No, sir,’ I said.
“ ‘You said you were with the battalion,
didn’t you?'
IN GALLIPOLI CHARGE
“ ‘Yes, sir, ever since they left Australia.
I want to go, sir.’ Afterwards my captain
j friend told me I was being sent back to Aus-
tralia, but they evidently had another dis-
cussion and I was sent for by the colonel,
who said: ‘We’re taking you on.’ The doc-
tor passed me easily. I was sworn in, and
given a disc and pay-book, with my name in
it, and underneath my name ‘Mascot’ was
written. Someone pinched my rifle before wo
; got to the Dardanelles. When we got there a
I captain asked me what I was going to fight
, for, being an A.S.C. man. I showed him my
rations, a tin of bully beef, and two biscuits
as hard as bullets, and told him they were
iron rations that I could fight with. Finally
I I was put on stretcher work, as I had picked
it up, and I was in the fighting at Pope’s
Hill.
“On May 2 I was in a charge there, but I
I don’t think I killed anyone. I am glad of
that, too, because I didn’t like the idea of
killing a man. Afterwards I went to Quinn’s
Post and got a bit of a scratch, and on May
18 a shell burst among us, and I didn’t re-
member any more till some weeks after in
hospital. I was paralysed all over the body,
i Now it is only in the legs, and the doctors
1 tell me I will get alright, and I think so, too.
i Only one thing I’m sorry for is that I did
not get to France. All the men call me the
; baby of the war. Father says I am only 16;
but I think lam 17. Still he ought to know.
“Oh, there’s one thing you might do for
me. There was a young lady I knew in Syd-
ney, Miss May Nelson. I must have missed
most of her letters, and I’d like to see her.’’
This young hero has been getting about in
an invalid’s carriage, and is thinking of put-
ting in a request for leave to get into Sydney
I to see “the old city.”


Bugler Linley


AjUAj (> ~ I 9 / 6 ■
GERMANY’S BEST TROOPS
BEATEN BY ANZACS.
How Surrender Call was Met.
Although Mouquet Farm was defended
l'v a battalion of the famous Prussian
Guard, the Anzacs. facing a terrific fire,
surrounded the and fully attained
•their objective.
Mr. Philip Gibbs, the special corre-
spondent of the “Daily Chronicle,” con-
films the fact that the Australians at
Mouquet Farm defeated “Germany’s best
troops, the first Prussian Guard reserves.”
He states:—“One of the most valuable
factors in the British advance on Sunday
was the Australian attack on Mouquet
Firm. The men knew the ground inti-
mately, haring already explored the ruins
of the farm by a strong patrol some’days
ago, and were confident that they could
do the same thing again, though the site
might be difficult to hold against hostile
lire
“One of these clean-cut Australian boys,
with fine, steady, truth-telling eyes, which
icok so straight even after the nerve-
breaking ordeal of fire, said the bombard-
ment preceding the attack was the greatest
tney had ever heard, but the enemy’s
guns were powerful, and the 200 yards
journey across 'no man’s land’ was peril-
out m the extreme. Nowhere was there
level grouAd, shell holes being everywher -.
Men fell into these, scrambled out, and
■ ri l again, feme of the holes were full of
water and mud. Men plunged in up to the
armpit®, and many were bogged. Thera
were really no trenches to be taken, the
Germans merely holding lines of shed
craters, in which were machine guns.
Ihe enemy was scattered into isolated
groups, with stores of bombs.
Tt wae extraordinarily difficult to attack
such a position, because there was no
definite line. The Australians encountered
horrible spasms of machine-gun fire teona
unknown quarters on both sides, and even
behind them. By the time the farm was
leached the batt.e had been broken np
into many separate encounters between
small parties of Australians and Prussians.
There were many bomb duels and single-
handed sniping encounters at short range
across craters. Despite the hugger-mugger
lighting, the Australian® pushed forward,
and advanced parties entered the farm and
get 200 yards beyond it. Though nothing
remains of the farm higher than a mm,
the enemy had the usual dugouts and tun-
ic Is. strongly protected by timber and
cement.
One group of Australians plunged into
a tunnel for a fitfht. They found the place
empty of Germans, but there were plenty
of cigars, which they forthwith proceeded
to smoke. Suddenly Germans appeared in
the entrance, and an officer demanded the
Anzacs surrender. The Australians
shouted, ‘Surrender be damned ! Surrender
yourselves. Both sides flung bombs until
other Australians came up, and the Ger-
mane then surrendered.
“More prisoners were taken in other
dugouts. The number is still uncertain,
Mri 11 is certain that the Australians cap-
tured rood ground and defeated Germany’s
best troops the first regiment of the
Prussian Guard Reserve. The prisoners
are sturdy, fine-looking *ien, but they do
not conceal their joy at being alive and
well treated.”
The "Morning Post's” correspondent at
the British head quarters states:—“The
first battalion of the Prussian Guard de-
truded Mouquet Farm in Sunday’s battle.
All the prisoners, wounded and un-
wounded, were the Anzacs- captures. Prior
to the Anzac advance the British artillery
terrifically shelled the enemy positions.
The Germans responded with great vigor.
The Anzacs leapt over the parapet® at
dawn. They faced not only shell fire, but
the crossfire of machine gim 8 , y«*t ’they i
rushed on with irresistible dash and
gained the enemy’s linos, although, as a
wounded Anzac said, The infernal machine
guns seemed all round us.’ Nevertheless,
using bomb®, machine guns and rifle fiiei
they killed numbers of the Bodies. The
Anzacs were soon in and beyond Mouquet
Farm, which is merely a jumbled heap of
rubble and charred wood. The Anzacs
are now all round the farm.
"Many of the Prussians fled rather than
face a stand-up fight at close quarters.”
An Investing Episode.
War correspondents give prominence to
an episode which occurred during a lull
in the fight for Mouquet Farm. The Aus-
tralians and Prussians exchanged messages
regarding their wounded men lying on the
ground and exposed to fire from both sides.
By agreement they sent out parties, which
worked close to each other. In one in-
stance an Australian came very near a
German trench, and was ordered to return
to his own lines within ten minutes, or
otherwise he would be shot. He returned
unmolested.


/ 9,7
AUSTRALIANS IN THE FIELD
THIS YEAR’S GREAT BATTLES
SOCKS, SOCKS—STILL MORE SOCKS
WHAT THE MEN MOST NEED
(From Our Special Representative)
LONDON. July 4.
When the Division swept through
the New Zealanders at Messifies, and thrust
hack the German lines a further 2000 yards,
it set the coping stone upon another fine
Australian fighting achievement. You can
imagine the solid blocks of men, loaded with
the impedimenta of an offensive, and yet
swinging with free and lithe movement from
shoulder-blade to ankle—you can picture
them marching across the brown fields of
Flanders, and then deploying in wide com-
pany formation as they reach the shell-swept
area—you can see them marching steadily
across thfe open, in the curious way that
troops move across open and observed places
during a concentrated battle. And next, if
you know what tense strain is, and how
shells and bullets shake the souls of lesser
men, you can go with these boys over the
top of the poor line of shell-holes and
trenches made by the New Zealanders durr
ing the morning, and face German machine-
guns and bayonets, and suffer the biting
German barrages of all the hours of building
and holding on to the new line tar ahead.
The division kept its time-table, and did all
that General Plumer asked of it. That it
suffered some hundred more casualties than
its comrade Division on its right was
only another proof that the second stage of
a, big offensive is always more expensive than
the first. The - Division had also done
Its part fully and well. One battalion —re-
cruited wholly in Victoria, principally in
Melbourne —was compelled to retire from its
farthermost objective, owing to heavy losses
and continuance of German shell-fire. But
that retirement in no way marred the day.
Opinions differ as to its necessity, but hav-
ing seen the ground and heard the full de-
tails, I may be allowed the opinion that the
few yards of territory were worthless and
to come back wns the prudent and ' wise
course. The great fact is that we did every-
thing asked of us, at lower cost than the
High Command estimated the job worth.
SOLIDITY AND SUCCESS
The fighting at Messines was the old story
cf stark death, stark wounds, stark souls.
You may say that the two Australian divi-
sions accomplished their task with compara-
tive ease. You would be wrong. It is never
easy. The job of going out at dawn into
a nude and unknown and ever-changing strip
of enemy territory is as difficult a task as
<?ny man can face. To hold on in broken
enemy lines after you have surmounted all
the tortures of getting there is only slightly
loss trying*. "\\ hat was once a mind becomes
mere blind fighting instinct, carrying you on.
What was once a body is a shaken and qui-
vering thing. Men do not deny that there
|c a soul after such an experience. They
know that something in them was tortured.
I write this not in under-estimation of the
essential manhood and strength of the Aus-
tralian soldier who so sturdily goes through
an offensive, nor In under-estimation of the
juyous elation of victory, and the other many
happinesses of the infantryman. It is duo
to these men, and particularly the young
and untried Division, that the depth
of their trial should be known at home. For
though this Messines incident did not com-
pare with the fighting at Bullecourt for long-
sustained effort, and though it was much less
aifficult than the prolonged and heavy
fighting for Pozieres and Mouquet Farm, yet
its hardships were intense and its achieve-
ment was great. Had we not learnt at
Pozieres the invaluable lesson of reducing
our line under shellfire, and had we not
learnt at Bullecourt that? offensive actions
must be limited to definite and small zones,
these boys would have gone through an ex-
perience as sustained and trying, and I doubt
not have done as well as their more seasoned
comrades. It says much for the Australian
divisions that their great battles have not
only achieved great results, but also enabled
the High Command to draw important de-
ductions from experience. The battle for
Pozieres and the high ground to its east and
north was fought so valiantly that from it
the British learnt that masses of men did
not avail in modern offensives, and that new
lines should be held thinly to avoid casual-
Lies. We learnt there also how desirable it
i? to give frequent short spells of fighting
and trench-holding to troops during a battle,
filtering in fresh troops as soon as possible.
From Bullecourt it was easy to see that the
lesson of the general experience on the wide !
front was that a massive bursting up of the
Hindenburg trench systems was out of the
question, and that strategy must be changed
in conformity with the French, American, j
and Russian situation into a series of strong
offensives on limited fronts. But though
these two famous Australian victories will
stand first In the records of the A.I.F. in
France to date, that of Messines is a very
good third. Perhaps no set victory has been
so great an achievement as the consistent,
steady work of trench improvement and
trench holding, and the brilliant work of the
advance early this year through Bapaume
and on to Lagnicourt-Longatte. Australians
have earned as great a name for them as for
the fierce onslaughts of Pozieres, Bullecourt,
and Messines.
GENERAL HOLMES GONE
To-day the Division is stricken
and every section of the A.I.F. is condoling
with it. It has lost its commander, Major-
General Holmes, who by a trick of fate nas
missed more bullets and shells in exposed
positions of the line than any other general,
and been caught by a stray shrapnel burst
far behind the line. In these days, when
divisional commanders cannot speak to all
their eighteen thousand men, and cannot
even be seen by all, it is remarkable to re-
cord that General Holmes was known to
everyone in the Division. But Gene-
ral Holmes was a remarkable commander.
He was always on the move about his lines.
He believed that the best way of fighting a
division was to go to all parts of its line as
often as possible, so that decisions about
its front, about the arrangement of its men,
and about the comfort, discipline, and or-
ganisation of its units should be made from
personal observation. He was utterly in-
different to personal danger, and seemed
almost foolhardy in his adventures into peri-
lous places. The results were magnificent.
‘Holmes’s young men" have made the
a famous band. General Geliibrand has
trained a similar lot for his brigade.
You know the type—youngsters who go head
high and cheerful about their business, ig-
noring shells and bullets as though they did
not exist. The sight of a man who
"ducks” is to them a cause of merriment; a
cool contempt of enemy fire is drilled into
them until they seem to have forgotten that
their skins can break. It is the only way,
this forgetfulness of German shellfire. The j
true soldier learns to ignore it. But few nup
succeed so well as those fine officers trained j
by Geliibrand in the Brigade and
Holmes in the Division. All such
considerations however are swept aside by
the larger aspect of General Holmes’s death.
We are not likely to look on his like again
during this war. He made an ideal divi-
sional commander, resolute, resourceful, and
strong. His ability was never questioned,
and it is indeed hard to replace him. If it
were not that the A.I.F. has often been hard
int, and accepts the uaily loss as it comes,
there would be almost consternation in his
fbal Sl ?ho t0 A “ da . y . .. Truly it may be claimed
£, tf ? e Australians have had more than
h i ar ? ° f SUCh losses ‘ We have cer-
tainly lost jn ore generals proportionately
than any other section of the British forces
geS ’ M ‘f au t rin > Glassfurd, ai.d Ho.mes.
generals have been wounded, and I
think I am right In saying that the general
casualties amongst our senior officers have
been considerably higher than those of any
force in Allied armies. *


HOW TO HELP THE MEN
It can still be claimed that the Australian
forces are tho best paid, best cUUmd, end
best fed army In tho world. But smug sutls-
faution will bring instant hnrUohips on the
, men. The system of organisation and con-
trol is still far from perfect In Australia.
Mistakes are made and repeated which cost
lives and endless chains of discomforts. The
men's chief vexation Is that they are not al-
lowed to get their full pay readily. It la
naturally a cause of irritation when men are
prevented from taking advantage of long-
expected leave because they have not £lO
to their credit in their pay-books. This sys-
tem has resulted In far too much cabling for
money to relatives at home. But the sys-
tem has some very wise points about it, and
I do not think the men’s best friends ask for
changes In it. Nor can the men really com-
plain about tho cautiousness with which new
clothing la Issued to them. This policy of
care—the men call It meanness—entails ex-
penditure upon the men, for tney nave too
much self-respect to go about London In the
rags of the trenches, and so buy now uni-
forms as soon as they arrive on leave. But
there might well be full provision for the
Issue of clothing to them at cost prices by
the Ordnance Department, Instead of allow-
ing Australians to be mulcted by British
minor profiteers, who sell an extraordinary
number of poor grade garments at extra-
ordinarily high prices. Apart from these minor
troubles, the men's vexations touch larger
questions. Too many old men are sent,
and too many men who have sooner
or later to be returned as unfit. There have
been Instances of officers sent across
from Australia who could never have been
allowed to take troops into the firing line.
Cases could be mentioned where the visit to
Great Britain has been nothing more than
an excursion, and could not, In the nature
of things, have been much more. It Is un-
doubted also that hundreds of men, too old
or too weak physically for the fighting line,
have been accepted in Australia as recruits.
This Injudicious passing of unfit men
has cost us many thousands of
pounds, and much waste labor. An
analogous wrong is the sending over of first
lieutenants and captains, even majors, who
join battalions at the front, and at once
become senior to second-lieutenants and |
other Junior officers who have borne the heat
and burden of many campaigns, and should
not bo deprived of well-earned promotion,
A NATIONAL ARMY
But as a national expression the army la
n great and glorious effort. For its size, It
expresses almost perfectly the military spirit
of the puibllo behind It. Londoners are told
that Australia Is absorbed In Us doings, and
that it regards the A.I.F. as the full result
cf national labor during the war. In France
one sees to what an extraordinary extent
Institutions have grown around It. General
Robertson says that no army Is ever com-
plete~that It Is always requiring more guns,
more men, more clothes, and comforts, and
hutments. A glance at the ramifications of
the Australian Red Cross, the numerous huts
end distributing agencies of the Comforts
Fund, the tents and houses of the Australian
Y.M.C.A., and tho clubs and hostels behind
the lines and In London for Australian oflfl-
j cers and soldiers tempts one to say that in
' accessories the Australian army is almost
complete. There is plenty of room for more
money and more organisation, but the A.I.F,
Is better looked after by its friends than
any other army. It Is all the more pity
that such a truly national effort should not
be accepted by tho British Government as
national in Its form. The divisions are scat-
tered. instead of fighting together. Because
the Canadians insist that their work is a
national expression their divisions are
grouped into one army corps. They have
not as many divisions in tho field as we,
yet they are more aggressively Canadian
in every way. The weight of Australian
j opinion is not felt here as It should be. It
seems to be nobody’s business to make repre-
sentations which would, if properly and
strongly made in the right quarters, upset
the idea that Australian divisions are mere
isolated and scattered units of a “British
army." Until that idea is shattered the
troops will have many of their just rights
Ignored, and they will be deprived of their
dearest wish —to fight as a homogeneous and
united Australian army, with Australian di-
visions to support them and a specific Aus-
tralian task ahead.
1 1 j


AxjUs 9~ 1 ? n
LAND OF PROMISE
OUR BOYS IN PALESTINE
Surf-Bathing in the Holy Land
Private J. Glennie, writing from Palestine
to friends in Sydney, gives little glimpses, by
means of pen and camera, of the life of our
boys in the “Land of Promise.’’
“I consider,” he says, “that, for a soldier, I
am writing this in rather a romantic spot
on the sea beach. The Y.M.C.A. has erected
Private J. Glennie,
Outside his dug-out at Skellal, Palestine.
a tent for us about 40 yards from the water,
and here we manage to write a few lines. But
of course the censor is a person to be treated
with respect up here.
“The breakers and the crowds of men
surfing remind you of Manly, and at times 1
make a chap feel homesick. It is fine to be
here for ten days rest, after the everlasting
dust out at the front.
“Being inside, however, calls for plenty of
inspections by generals and others, so we are
kept busy polishing and cleaning our
saddlery. The front line is the only place
we can get any peace in this respect!
“As I write, the usual aeroplanes are flying
overhead, but since this campaign started, 12
months ago, there has been a great change
in the aircraft. To-day everything has to be
of the very best, so now’ w r e see our mono-
planes chasing Abdul home when he pays u 3
one of his frequent visits.
“Everything points to this front’s de-
veloping into a pig-headed struggle “a la
France,’ so I suppose we—the infantry, any-
An Arab Youngster,
Photo at Khan Tunis, Palestine.
l low _can look forward to gas and liquid fire.
Gas has been used more than once, I be-
lieve; but, of course, the horses are kept as
_ far away from that stuff as possible.


3IU. - ,9/7
Australian Football Team at El Arish


cXAI iu« jJyUra.f~i tit: - P-l
NEW ZEALANDERS COVERED WITH GLORY
Splendid Trench Work at the Somme
(Published in “The Times”)
LONDON, Sunday Night.
The correspondent of “The Times” at Bri-
tish Headquarters on the western front,
writing on Saturday, said;
"Last week’s grand attack resulted in
the salients at Fle'-s, Courcelette, and Mar-
tinpuich, and in the spaces between, which
were sagging here and there, being cleared
out. This week the enemy Is desperately
striving to prevent our advance, and is cease-
lessly counter-attacking, especially at the
most exposed point at Flers, which the New
Zealanders held. The New Zealanders not
only maintained but gained fresh ground on
the left, materially helping the general ope-
rations. The New Zealanders’ initial ad-
vance was steady and methodical. Starting
at 6.20 o’clock in the morning, they occupied
the first main trench within an hour. The
second trench, 500 yards distant, which was
the main German third line, left of Flers,
was carried before 11 o’clock. They reached
advanced positions beyond the village 800
yards further on. shortly after noon.
“The first formidable counter-attack was
made at 4 o’clock in the afternoon. Four
German battalions were launched from the
sunken ground parallel with the left of the
front. They were beaten off. Next
day the men from Wellington pushed
on, and flung the enemy from the
trench from which he had attacked the pre-
vious evening. They held the trench against
successive counter-attacks. From the even-
ing of the 15th to the evening of the 21st, a
most desperate fight raged. There were al-
most continuous attacks and counter-attacks
with very stubborn bombing and bayonet-
ting in which the troops from Otago, Canter-
bury, and Wellington covered themselves
with glory.
“A captain of the Canterburys repeatedly
led his men into attacks under conditions
of the greatest imaginable peril. Each time
he emerged unscathed. The whole story is
magnificent. The New Zealanders held a
most advanced position. Their left flank was
exposed, and the enemy hurled against them
all the strength he could muster only to find
the line immovable, and to recoil with heavy
losses. Meanwhile the enemy repeatedly at-
tached the English troops on the left who
though temporarily forced back came on
again and splendidly recaptured the posi-
tions.
“Meanwhile the New Zealanders made
gains, which are spoken of as valuable to
the general situation, especially a very
strong position, consisting of two trenches
at right angles across the German third main
line, half-way towards Eaucourt-L’Abbaye,
the obliteration of which greatly assisted the
troops on the left, who then advanced on a
mile front, clearing out the space between
Flers and Martinpuich, gaining an almost
even front from north of the latter to a line j
500 yards north of Flers. The joint opera-1
tion was not of small magnitude, and it,
solidifies the new line. The New Zealanders
gains, while not crucial, are on the last edge
of the plateau in that direction, and the des-.
perate German attempts to retake them
prove their importance. The enemy resort-
ed to the old trick of showing the white flag
and then firing. One cheerful detail is of a
New Zealand sergeant bringing four officers
In captives, so to speak, off his own bow and
spear.”
(Reuter’s Telegram)
Reuter’s correspondent at British head-
quarters on the western front ex’.ils the 1
j courageousness of the New Zealanders dur-
! ing the six days battle which began on Sep-
! tember 15. He says that they carried out
i three assaults over varying dis ances within
j six hours, advancing 3000 yards from the
original line. Later in the day they repelled
two furious counter-attacks.
Subsequently fresh New Zealanders con-
tinued to gain ground, notwithstanding the
heavy shelling and the shocking weather.
Great counter-attacks twice led to the i
ground changing hands, but the New Zea-
landers eventually were the masters of the
j hotly-contested spot. About 35 > of the enemy
| were killed in one trench alone.


JJU JUJU. ViM 3 19/7
LIEUT. FREDERICK SYDNEY
EDGINGTON.
D.T. 3.10.17.
On September 30 a cable message was re- j
ceived by Mrs. F. S. Edgington. of “Walnut."
Eastern Road, Turramurra. reporting the death
in action in France of her husband, Lieut. Fre- )
derick Sydney Edgington, on September 20,
1917. He is the youngest son of Mrs. E- E.
Edgington, of “Newstead," Woolwich, and prior
to enlisting was studying for the legal profes-
-1 sion in the office of Mr. Percy D. Wynne, soli-
citor, of Moore Street, Sydney, having but the
1 last section of the Anal law examination to pass
| before his admission as a solicitor. Lieut. Edg-
| ington was married on September 30, 1916. his
wife being the youngest daughter of Mr. C. N. '
| iddure. of ‘ Lrumtochiy,” Woolwich. i


'fut Cv&R~tin
RAIDER IN PACIFIC.
ADVENTURES OF THE SEE ADLER.
CREW DRESSED IN WOMEN'S CLOTHING.
A thrilling story of the work of a German
raider in the Pacific Ocean was related in Syd-
ney this morning. The raider was command-
ed by a German Baron, and after sinking three
American schooners, was herself destroyed
while tied to a big rock for the purpose of be-
ing cleaned.
The raider i s believed to be the Sec Adler,
and the schooners that fell victims to her were
the Manilla, the A. B. Johnson, and the R. C.
Slade. The master of one of the schooners,
Captain Smith, and four members of his crew,
reached Pago Pago after a thrilling adventure
In a small launch from Papeete, jn Tahiti.
The Manilla was held up at sea, and after
her crew had been taken aboard the raider,
the scar oner was blown up by explos vea,
wnich were put aboard her. The raider had
a c*c» of ab:ut sixty-four, and earned lour
o*i launches, one of w h ct» had a stemming radius
of about a thousand mijes. The German com-
mander tr< uied his laptivcs well, and Captain
Smith spoke of him as "a tine humane type of
man.’ The Manilla's crew, were wunossca to
the sinking cf the other two schooners wuKh
were sighted soon after, and their crews were
taken aboard and cared for in exactly the sama
*ay as the men from the Manilla.
SUNK IN A GALE.
After cruising about for some time, tho
' aider put in to one of the Society Islands,
leaded the crews of the sunken sebuoa t's, au)
n-xt tied up to a huge rock, where she was
listed over for the purpose of being clsei.od
This proved to be the end of the See Adler's
career. A heavy storm blew up while she wai
tied to the rock, with the result that she
battered about and so badly damaged that she
sunk. The Germans lost nearly all their
pt ©visions, and the two sln guns which s e
carried. They managed, however, to save the
machine guns and two of the launches which
were seaworthy.
A few days - later the commander of the
raider, with a small crew, set out in the best
oi the launches, in which he had mounted a
couple of the machine guns, and that was the
last the captured crews saw of the commander
The bslnncf _of the Gormaji crew,
♦ hough, made good use of the second
launch, and succeeded In capturing a French
trading schooner. The owner had leased tae
island on which the crews had been landed, and
was visiting it to pick up natives. The
Germans captured his vessel, and after pudrtg
him and his Crew ashore, put out to sea in the
schooner, the object, no doubt, being to use
her as a mother ship to the launches until they
could get something better. The crews on
the Island saw no more of either the launch's
or the schooner.
i h,'r victims at close range, it was then an easj
matter for the raider to dictate orders with
uer guns to back them up.
Officers 01 the raider told Captain Smith thf. I
I she pad successfully run the British blockade
from Gcmany with a cargo of guns and ammu-
nition and explosives. She was then also un-
' do* - the Norwegian flag, and was stopped by a
1 British cruiser. The majority of the crew had
been hidden in the bolds, and the raider was
I allowed to go cn. having answered all ques-
tions to the sat’sfa' tion cf the cruiser. She
went on *o South America, and held up eight
tramp steamers on tho way.
Several members of the crew of the raider had
seen service in the German trenches on tne
western front, and a number of them bad been
wounded.
MYSTERIOUS CRAFT.
Yesterday's Melbourne "Argus" published the
following story of a mysterious vessel in the
Pacific:
A mysterious craft called at Altutakl, Raro-
tonga, on August 31. The visitors stated that
their launch was the Cedlle, of Honolulu, char-
tered from Messrs. H. Hackfeldt and Company
by tho Messrs, southart and Mr., Van Houten.
vv hen asked for their log-book they replied
that it had not been written up for eight or
ten days, and had been blown overboard. Their
nag and passports were asked for, but could
not be produced, neither were there any docu-
ments to verify their statement that they had
called at Tahiti, or that they had come from
Honolulu. The only book that couid be found
was the log of a vessel named the W, C.
Siadc Smith, master, on a voyage from Eureka
lanfornia) to Sydney. On being questioned
as to their possession of this book, they replied
that it had been given to them by Hackfeldt
as a guide fir thel r voyage. Their time-book
chronometer was printed in a foreign language
which they said was "Dutch." No name was
painted or visible on the boat. When asked (
for further credentials they produced a canvas
bag of gold which they emptied Into a kerosene
can for exhibition to onlookers on the wharf.
There appeared to be about £3OO In gold vis-
ible. The two men wore khaki coats with
brass buttons bearing aa anchor., a.ad-,
helpiets. Revolvers were seen in the lockers.
V Norwegian living on the islarm spoke to the
crew i n the Norwegian language, and appeared
satisfied that they were. Scandinavians. No
questions were asked of news of the war. nei-
ther were their Inquiries made for newspapers
The strangers reported that on their return
:hey would write the narrative of their voyage
for an American magazine. Inquiries wore
ma,l ° as whether there was wireless at AUu-
takl or Rarotonga.
LONG TRIP IN A LAUNCH.
Captain Smith, the master of one of tho
logt schooners, soon after made a sensational
escape from the island. With four members
of his crew, he secured a small oil launch, and
put to sea. He made a long and eventful trip
in the small Craft with little water and excep-
tionally short rations, but eventually reached
Pago Pago, where he joined a ship for San
Francisco. When he left the island there
were 42 men waiting relief.
Captain Smith and his crew tell interesting
stories of the cunning methods of the German
raider in securing he r victims. She was, they
■lid, sailing under the Norwegian flag, and j
v ®ke sighted a ship she promptly hoisted
n distress signal. Meanwhile, the crew wou*l
oe dressed in women’s clothing, and stood n
‘■onspicuous places about the decks so that
when the victim approached to render assm-
, aT,ce, she would rarely have any suspicion that
1* e distress signals w r cre not genuine. Wth


NATIVES EXCITED.
After a stay of six hours the Cccilie resume*!
her-voyage, presumably to Honolulu, In which
cant she probably would call at Walden or Fan-
ning Islands for water. The native population
of Altu v aUi were much excited at this foreign
visit, b«.ing of the impression that the strangers
were German spies. Threats were made by
certain natives that they would seize the
launch, but as there was no direct evidence
against them the visitors were permitted to j
depart in peace.
The correspondent of the Auckland “Star,”
writing from Rarotonga on September 13, makes
the following reference to a mysterious flve-
masted schooner which was reported recently )
to have been seen off Rarotonga:—“About a I
fortnight ago a large five-marted schooner sail- j
Cd past. It was evening, and she stood right ;
in to Avarua, and then started an engine, and
had a look at the wreck of the Maltai on the
reef. She then stood out to the north, and-
the people in Avarua say she switched on elec-
tric light. I feel sure she Is a raider of some
sort, but why she wastes time round here I
don’t know. Unless she is being chased, why
should an ordinary merchant ship come so close
in here and waste petrol. I fancy they sighted
the Maltai. and came for a closer look, for
when she passed our place she did not appear
to be heading for‘Avarua at all, but must have
stood in as soon as she saw the MHtal. I
have since heard that the vessel called at Atlu
and got food and water. She wss a long
veps a l with no’e mas s, no topmast, and had
a yard on the foremast, and looked a nice
vessel


o 6 o
GERMANY’S CLUTCHING
HAND.
A COLONIAL EMPIRE.
In the course of a statement yesterday, the
Minister for the Navy (Mr. Cook) said that
Germany wanted Australia. It was in plain
and unmistakable language that she said so
Mr. Cook quoted as his authority for such
assertion the following from the "Cologne
Gazette";—
It is a great pity that the German
colonial army was not five times as
large, for in that case the Allies would
not have been able to bring such vast
numbers of colonial troops to the
European theatres of war. The ex-
perience of this war shows that the
' East African native, if sufficiently
trained and led by Europeans, makes
an efficient soldier, while the South-
west African makes an even better
one.
In order to prevent her colonies
being overrun in future, Germany
must make full use of these resources
in man power, and such natives as
hitherto have not been subject to Ger-
many must come under her rule, while
all foreign colonies which made war
against the German colonies must be-
come German property. Germany
must have a strong colonial army in
order to strengthen her position, and
at the same time weaken that of her
enemies.
Mr. Cook proceeded to eay that Australia
was the one “foreign" colony that had fought
against the German colonies and had taken
them. Australia, therefore, according to the
authority quoted, was to become German pro-
perty. In the face of this explicit statement
of Germany’s Intentions, It was a dangerous
attitude to assume that we were still outsiders,
helping other people to win the war for some
purpose that affected them primarily and
Australia only secondarily. Whether, how-
ever, we regarded ourselves as being primarily
at war or not, the Germans said that they
were out not only to conquer us but also to
make Australia German property. It was
only further convincing proof of the necessity
for Australia putting every effort forward to
remove this menace from our gates. Aus-
tralia’s young men should awaken to the
position, as their fellow-men oversea had al-
ready done.


The Bega Standard Dec 19th 1917
CHAPS I KNOW
REAL MEN OF OUR ARMY.
Private Edward G. Cochrane'
(By
PART I.
(Passed by the. Censor)
“ Big Boh ” was one of the most
popular of our N.C.O.’s. Toll,
handsome, cheerful, and strong as
a lion, he knew how to treat men
and had those ideas on discipline
which |>crhaps was the mainstay of
his popularity. By which I meap
to imply that ho was not strict
and was not forever talking of
“criming” the men. His easy-go-
ing and devil-may-care feeling was
characteristic of him. For ins-
tance, when we came out of Hie
trenches for a so-called spell •he
would absent himself without le-
ave and without taking the trouble
to find out if he was “ orderly cor-
I¥»ral,” and go for a visit to Ar-
menlieres, which was out of ho-
unds to our troops. Another chap,
without Boti’s personality, would
have got into trouble, for there
was no doubt that the officers knew
of the escapades. Indeed, our pla-
toon officer saved him on a couple
of occasions by reporting. “ All
present and correct,” when every-
one knew tliat Bob was anywhere
but in camp. But wc could all bet
that Bob would be with us ‘when
the whips were cracking” and this
Was proved to us in a very sud-
den fashion one evening. Every-
thing was quiet. The most of us
were thinking of going to bed. and
I had one puttee off and was un-
winding the second. Bob was on
one of his “without leave” visits
lo Armcnlieres. Suddenly, “Crash !
Crash ! ” went the German shells
and in a few seconds our guns
were replying and altogether there
was a thunderous roar. Men came
running in from the streets and
the estaminets, for the word had
been passed along for all men to
return to their billets. We formed
up o utside. waited a few seconds
for orders and then wore off at
the double for the trenches. W c
were t;e battalion in reserve. Up !
the street, across the fie’.d over an
emergency road, through a ruined I
village and a'ong a road again, wc
went at the doub'e. Now and then
we jumped a ditch or passed the
word back to mind a wire that
hung just about the height of our
heads. Our own guns wore firing
over our heads with a tremendous
roar and a German shell would fall J
close to us with a metallic crash,
luckily missing us. Then came the
zipl zip I of bullets from a mach-
ine gun as they hit the grass and
earth a few yards ahead. Our po-
si*.ion in inrorls was l i a trench
alongsi'.c m a cemetery. very real-
istic ! Just as wc readied it, for
some reason there was a hall in
front, and “ Hang! Bang! Bang! ”
went “ Whizz-bangs” on the parap-
et above our heads, the p e es fly-
ing among the tombs. One shell
crashed into the graveyard itself.
But without casualty we had, reach-
ed our position and we filed along
lo our respective posts in the bays.
•Meanwhile, where was Bob? dom-
ing like the wind, as soon as the
bombardment was heard, he and
a friend caught up lo - Company
i and reported to the commander,
and then considering the pace was
100 slow, left them and caught up •
i to Company as they entered Ce-
metery Post. It is said • that the
latter company b\*>kc all records
that night in reaching the support
, trenches. Well. Bob, coming a co-
uple of miles further, in about the
same time, must have broke a good
record. He tells an amusing inci-
dent of his night’s experience. Co-
ming along with Company a
shell hurst alongside of them and
several men juini>ed into a ditch o!
water. Needless to say “Big Bob’
was not one of those who jum-
ped or “fell in.” It was not till
I next morning that we learnt .the-
j strength of the night’s proceedings.
The Germans had raided our front
line, taken some prisoners and cap-
tured a couple of trench mortars.
Our men had not been put wise lo
raids, which were new to them.
In effecting repairs in the morning
wc had a good idea of the damage
The trenches were knocked about
considerably and there were a good
many casualties. But on the oth-
er side the Germans could be seen
working just as hard and wc had
reason to believe that their losses
were just as great.
Our Corporal, “Big Bobwas
one of the gamest men that gra-
ced our ranks. The Huns, short-
ly after we went into the trenches
pul up a flag in No Man’s land.
There was an inscription on it
which con'd not be* definitely made
! out. Three men wore determined
to bring the Hag in. They were,
JLicut. Bretherton, Ronald Fidgc,
and “ Big Bob.” It lay to Fidget;
honor to pull the trophy up and
on returning found the w r ords it
bore to l>e, “Kitchener: Shame
You!” They returned it to No
Man’s Land and put up an aswer-
j ing message, an uncomplimentary
wish to the Kaiser,
Bob used to be the Corporal o"
the wiring party, which put up i
barb wire entanglements in front .
of the parapet. In the trenches
one could not wish for a belter
soldier.


The night of the —th Brigade
' raid we bore the brunt of the.ci-
‘ cmy's artillery fire, liccause from
the arrangements of our own ar-
) tillcry fire they thought the trouble
I came from our quarter. ‘‘Big Bob'
went along to see how the men
iof his section were faring. Shells
were falling all along the parapet.
In one bay the Corj>oral found no
sentry on the Tire step. He and
someo tliers were silling down wi;h
a duct-board over their heads to
keep off stray bits of iron. Bob
did not order him up, ns another
N.C.O. might have. but got
up himself to see if the Geminis
the sand-bags. A shell burst in
were coming. One arm rested on
front of him with a crash and a
; piece entered his jaw, while ano-
ther piece severed a finger. Wi.h
his face and hand bandaged up !.c
came along to us, laughing and jo-
, king.
' Another chap, nick-named ‘‘Sc ’- 1
( ty,” was slightly wounded In l!i *
head, and the two were talking s
to who had the best chance of
winning in n fight on the way ;o
the dressing station. 1 do not r o
much on “Scotty's” chance, lx -
ausc he was slight and not stnon
while Bob liad one sound braw. y
arm left, with muscles on it li’ic
you see in a worker of the bu: h.
I think Bob Walls is still in hospi-
tal. Good luck to him, wherc\cr
I he goes.
(To be continued)


I e i 1 1
CHAPS I KNOW
REAL MEN OF OUR ARMY.
PART 11.
(By
Priiv’Jc E'hv rJ 0. Cochrane)
(Passed by the Censor).
T have already referred to P.o-
nald L. Fidge, He is a tall, fair
Englishman, who has spent some
lime in Germany and knows some-
thing of (he people, their character
and their methods, and this, 1
think, is one of (he things that ma-
kes him so ardent in his work ag-
ainst them. He has a light mous-
tache and a fine looking face, bold
and fearless, the look of a born
loader —a man to inspire confid-
ence and trust. He is now a pri-
vate, though not long ago he was
a sergeant, and, for awhile, acting
lieutenant, pending the court-mar-
tial of the platoon lieutenant, who
was exonerated and reinstated in
charge of the platoon. The Major
had a talk with Sergeant Fidge.
‘To tell you the truth,” said the
Major, ‘‘ I am not cpiite satisfied
with your work.” “Then, be good
enough,” said the Sergeant, “to
accept my resignation.” All the
men were very sorry to lose suen
a fine sergeant. The fair Eng-
lishman then joined the Scouts, i
or, rather, formed it, and with a
little band of men under him. pa-
trolled No Man’s Land, brought
in the messages the Germans had
put up, chased enemy patrols, and
brought in useful information.
Fidge was simply a man who could
not be kept down, and soon every-
one in the battalion was talking
of his exploits. Work in the sco-
uts I might say is very dangerous
and nerve-straining; one is const -
anlly expecting Germans (and they j
send out very large patrols) in No
Man’s the nerves are con-
stantly under a strain; and after
a while one’s encounters with Ger-
mans reoccur in one’s dreams.
Soon, however, to use Fidge’s
words, They h*d the German.,
bluffed.” One night a party >■'
scouts, under Fidge, crawled close
lo the German trench and threw
bombs into it. Almost immediately
the Germans opened up a fire of
“Whiz-bangs” on the right on No
Man’s Land. It may be noted here
that (he previous day the Germ-
ans had put a number of “duds”
into the same place. We have
found out something,” said Fidge
on his return; ‘‘they expected a
raid from the salient.” This was
where the trenches were closest
together. A couple of nights after
a small number of scouts charged
down on a German listening point,
but were slopped quick and sharp
by barb-wire. They were chalice .
ged. Fidge took his hat off a.id
stood up, addressed them in
German in the tone that an officer
would use to his men, and asked
the way in through the wire. Thev I
replied, explaining the way. The
i other scouts afterwards said that
the conversation was just a ‘‘series
lof grunts.” Never suspecting th at
they were ‘‘barbarian Australians”,
the men of the German listening
post allowed them to pass, and,
walking along tn a line with the
trench, the scouts saw a large par-
ty of Germans working as if f>r
dear life along the parapet, and
behind it. ’Twas the chance of a life
time 1 Each, of the Australians
drew the pin from a bomb and with
one accord threw the “compres: cd
death ” among the enemy and then
• hastily ran back. Fidge tripped
j over barb-wire, but was up instant-
■ ly and with the others, and soon
j they were awaiting events lying
in a shell-hole. The listening post
were too paralysed for action. Fer-
res were now going up like a fire-
works display and a machine gun
rattling, but it was Loo late. I
wonder what happened to the men
of the listening post next mornir g.
Were they court-martialled ? Ji I
they plead ignorance or admit 1 e-
ing outwitted. I believe this c
ploit was mentioned in despatches.
Fidge carried out many others of
a similar nature. His uniform was
now soiled and lorn by barb-wire,
but he still had the air of a born
leader and gentleman about him.
He received no medals for lis
brave work, but he has the satis-
faction of knowing that it was i
success. Before we* came to too
trench and- for a short while af-
terwards the Germans had the run
j'of No Man’s Land at night time,
but Fidge’s work kept them confi-
ned close to their own trench.
Fidge was with us for the first
few days at Pozieres, but, unfor-
tunately, he was wounded by
shrapnel, and the chance of his
doing patrol work under more ex-
citing circumstances was lost. Ser-
geant Dryden had recently taken
charge of the scouts and I hope
to tell you of the brave sergeant
laler on, thus linking up the chro-
nicle of the scouts.


("7
■ -
iftu, 4 .
PART 111.
I
Lieutenant was one of our
most popular officers. When he
first came among us. out on the
desert, we looked at this calm,
self-possessed young man, and
wondered what he was of.
We were soon to find out. He was
a soldier to his finger lips, had
been at Dunlroon for several ye-
ars, and knew his drill absolutely.
We were later to find he was
fearless, as well as well-drilled.
He saved us as much as possible.
After a route march with full
packs up, when we were dog-tired
lie would not keep us standing
stiffly in the sands with the heavy
packs still on aching shoulders, bat
give the order, “Take your packs
off, men)’ In many cases like this
he studied our comfort, and these
mu '1 1 ings count. Once a General
took him (o task on the way ho
gave an omder. He stood to at-
tention, no word passing his lips,
and looked al his chief fearlessly
hut respectfully, the very essence
of a soldier. One could not help
admiring him. On the trip over
to France he gave cigarettes of the
best brand lo his men, who relished
them. In the trenches we found
with a shock and surprise that he
had an aptitude for finding work
for us. He suggested improve -
ments lo the tranches with a quick-
ness that nearly took our breath
away. It looked like months of
labour, hut we did more work for
him fhan we would have done for
an officer of a different calibre,
and soon the trenches bore a dif-
ferent aspect altogether. They
were improved almost beyond re-
cognition. All the time he was
cheerful and optimistic, and en-
couraged the men in every way.
When the men spoke to him, as
they continually did, he answer-
ed without the snapping or snub-
bing that, unfortunately, character-
ises some officers, and his voice
always had a ring of eagerness
in it. Then he surprised the sen-
try on duty by calmly putting his
{iead over the parapet and survey-
ing the opposite trenches. The
sentry expected him to fall every
minute with a bullet through his
brain, but he did not. He had a
purpose in • what he did, for he
was studying the lay of the land,
which he, was shortly lo patrol
With the scouts. Often he picked
up chips of wasted ammunition
(it is surprising the amount of bul-
lets that is allowed lo lie about),
cleaned the bullets and fired them
al the enemy’s loop-holes. Then
he was transferred to the Intelli-
gence Department, and as the sco-
uts came under Ills administration
he went out night after night with
) them. He knew no fear. Once
when the —th Brigade made a raid
(find it was necessary lo make a de-
monstration in our quarter to di-
J vert the Germans’ attention, h e
and Fidge. after returning from pa-
trol, stood up on the fire step dur-
ing the bombardment and fired
round after round rapidly. He
had a knack in rapid-firing and bo-
at his companion, who was also a
fast firer, badly. As an officer of
the Intelligence Department he was
the right man in the right place.
I have seen him when nearly all
tire men were crouching down du-
ring a bombardment, walk along
without stooping, and report t o
headquarters, “ Shaftesbury Aven-
ue, Safety Avenue (and another of
which I forget the name), all clear,
sir.'’ An officer came out with
him, and said something about the
danger they were running. ‘Come
with me,” replied, “and
run the gauntlet,” and away he
dashed. We were indeed sorry
when he was transferred to another
brigade.
(To be continued).


*I'oJU-Cdy £</ fH/'l
CHAPS I KNOW
BEAL MEN OF OUR ARMY.
PART IV.
Prsvcle Iv.'mv r;j 0. Cociirasie)
(By
b the Censor)*
- k■■ -A' esham ” is a differ-
, • 1 typ ■ to tie others of whom I
have written. He is very dark
whence his nick-name, very talk-
ativc, with a merry twinkle in lib
eyes, and physically is as hard
as nails. He never stood on cere-
| mony. When camped in the descrl
he used to enter the lent in a sort
of flying dive, before one could
say ‘‘Here comes Darkie”; scram-
bling over three or four lo get tc
his place, and no one took any of-
fence if he got a couple of knocks
He and a couple of mates used t
wage a good-natured war on one
another, wrestling and tumbling ov-
er each other, and when it became
too hot for “Darkie” he would sho-
ut “I’m neutral.” Often it was the
other way about, and Darkie had
the others saying they were neut-
ral, or “I’ll send you a note,” Wc
were all glad Darkie was in our
tent, because he was a great enter-
tainer with his experiences. I do
not remember how many “jobs ”
Darkie had had before enlisting,
but they were n good few, and it
was very interesting to listen to him
narrate how he gol them, and whv
he left them. Once, ho said, he
had to “hump his bluey” and ask
for food. He said he got a tip how
to gel “tucker,” and he told it :
If the lady,” he said, ‘refuses you
something to eat, get a dog, any old
dog will do, and then ask for an
old tin or bucket. She will ask you
what for. Then up and say. ‘Well,
old ‘ Spot ’ will have to go. We
must have meat somehow!’ ”
Darkie advises me to try it, when
Igo back. “It works every time.”
he said. Darkie was attached In
the signallers. A sergeant came
along one day and asked for volun-
teers for that unit. “No long route
marches?” questioned Darkie. No
fatigue work ? Well, I’m your man.
Put ray name down.” And, ;:o
Darkie and a mate had joined the
S:gna ! lers. He endeavored lo make
out that he was a chump at the
new work, hut we all knew that
he was very smart at it. On the
way over lo Egypt, the transport,
in which Darkie was in, called at
Fremantle, and leave was allowed.
While walking along a street, he
was addressed by a young lady,
with a baby in her arms. Before
taking his leave, Darkie asked for
the baby. “What for?” asked the
lady in astonishment, “I want it
for a mascot,” was the reply she
received. One day on the sands
in Egypt, a squad was lined up.
“ Stand up straight there!” roared
an officer to Darkie. “ Yessir, but
—”■ ‘JDon’t answer me back,’,
sang out the lieutenant.
“ Yessir, but my 1 ”
“ Don’t answer me back, 1 101 l
you!”
“ Yessir ”
“ Did you hear me ! Don’t an-
swer me back!!”
“ Yossir, but my fool’s in a hole,
I will have my say.” The officer
glared at Darkie, and then turned
away.
Out on the desert, past the Ca-
nal, one day, our officer sang out
the order, “Come on! Everybody
out of the tents. We’re going lo
strike tents.” “Don’t hit them 100
hard,” said Darkie, Another day,
Darkie went out to the black dixie
and took a second helping of stew.
“ Anyone want any more stew,” lie
roared at the top of his voi e.
“ Yes,” answered a dozen me a .
“Well, I’m afraid there’s none
left.” Darkie got a letter one da v.
“This is a cheerful sort of a la-
ter,” he said, reading an extra- I:
“ Mum and Frank are sick in b d.
Dad’s out of work, and I’ve g>i
the measles,” “H’m! Very cheer-
ful.” Wherever you see Darkie
he is generally talking, even on a
long march, and he mostly has a
group around him,
Darkie says I put that yarn up
on him about asking for thq baby
as a mascot. Well, it happened,
any way, and Darkie might just as
well get the credit for it as ano-
ther.
(To be continued).


' THE SUNDAY TIMES. AUGUST 11. 1918-
WITH THE LIGHT HORSE
IN THE HOLY LAND
The Ordeal of the Jordan Valley - Why Our Force
Excels - Wounded Men’s Heroism—Cacolet
Horrors
Snaffle, for the Sunday Times
PALESTINE, May 24.
The Jordan Valley in Summer is the
-threshold of hell.
7 Since Jericho was taken most of the
(British line there has been held by the
(Light Horse and the men of the Im-
iperial Camel Brigade. With a shade
temperature which ranges from 108 a)
the foothills to from 115 to 120 at the
water’s edge, the valley is a distressing
area in which to exist in peace. Even
the Arabs evacuate it during the hot
season. . .
The Australians are not only living in
it; for many weeks past they have been
fighting the Turk there as bitterly as he
was fought at Gallipoli. His attacks
have been frequent and heavy, and have
cost him thousands of casualties; but so
severe are the conditions under which
our men live that the punishment they
have inflicted on the enemy has afforded
them little or no exhilaration.
The valley is a wide sea of deep, white
clay dust. Not only is this singular
trough from 1000 to 1300 feet below sea
level, but it is closely enfolded on cither
side by mountains rising abruptly to
another 3000 ft. The heavy dust rides
all day in a still and evil atmosphere.
Sometimes in the evening a relatively
cool breeze comes down from the north,
but many of the nights are as still as the
days. Mosquitoes abound, and flies
swarm.
A Toll of Sickness
As you would expect, the doctors arc
kept very busy treating and evacuating
cases of diarrhoea, dysentery, and sun-
stroke, together with not a few men
with malaria.
And it is pathetic to notice that the
men who are going down arc chiefly the
“old originals,” the men who fought on
the Peninsula and in the desert, and
have been at the harsh game for 35 years
and more. It is wonderful these veterans
have lasted so long.
The actual living here is far rougher
than in France. It is truth to say that for
three years their diet for three days out
of four has been tinned beef and stale——
very stale—bread or biscuits, and jam,
with sometimes a little cheese and a
handful of date*. Again and again, as
recently, they have lived for weeks at a
time on biscuits, or bread as dry as bran,
and bully. .
But the chief enemy is not perhaps the
excessively hard diet, although the absence
of vegetables leads to all sorts of evils,
the most troublesome of which is the
septic sore, or, in other words, our old
friend the scurvy. (At times every soul
in a brigade will have septic sores.)
Tremendous Demand on
Physique
Worse than positive illness is the
failure of physical tone which comes
from sustained loss of sleep and rest.
On a number of occasions this year the
Light Horsemen and the Camels have
done three days and three nights at a
stretch without any sleep other than they
took in their saddles at /the risk of their
necks. Thousands of men have done as
much as a week on a total of from six to
10 hours’ sleep. This happened to whole
brigades on the two raids across the
Jordan. And during these sleepless
periods the men would be ceaselessly
called upon for the keenest mental vigi-
lence and supreme physical effort. You
can imagine the result and the reaction.
On the Amman raid it was not uncom-
mon to see men fall asleep standing up,
pitch into the ice-cold mud and sleep
•on where they fell. Scarcely less tragic
_ than the sight of the slain is to see a
B large force of these men as the dawn
■ finds them in the saddle, as for instance
B when they last came down from Es Salt.
B Smothered in dust, a week’s beard on
B their faces, haggard with strain and ex-
B haustion, their nerves on edge, their tem-
-3 pers gone, in body and spirit they craved
9 rest and nourishment.
B And if they get a rest of even a couple
3 of days their recovery is scarcely short
3of miraculous. They will sleep almost
B indefinitely. But it frequently happens
B that rest is impossible. Alter Es Salt
B regiments of men who came down in
3 that condition were hurried into the line
B in the fierce beat of the valley on the
B same afternoon. And when that hap-
B pens, as at times in war, it inevitably
3 must, you get lots of sick wastage. Then
3 the Light Horsemen, unlike the infantry,
Bis not able to snatch an hour’s sleep
B when the opportunity offers. In this
B hot land of little water, he has often,
B when scarcely able to sit in the saddle
fl with weariness, to do another hour or
fl more watering his horses before he can
I settle down.
I A Gruelling Campaign
8 Foolish people sometimes draw com-
| parisons between the lot of the Light
B Horseman and the man in the infantry
fl The two services are so different and
fl this country is so dissimilar to France,
B that comparisons convey nothing. The
B Light Horseman would be the last to
B say that he has bled as have the infantry
I in the West. But the lot of the mounted
B men here is far rougher than many Aus-
I tralians appear to imagine.
8 The living is incomparably rougher
fl than in France. Not three per cent, of
I officers and men here have had English
I or Australian leave, or have known in
I their long spell of service the touch of a
I private home. Casualties by any other
I standard, than that of the shambles in
I France have been high. In short, for
I more than three years the Light Horse
I and the “Camels’ ’have lived on the diet
I of dogs among an indescribably filthy,
I verminous, and unattractive people, in a
I harsh and barren land. Their brief spell
I on the rich Philistine plain was their one
I decent break. \
} The Force seeks no defence or adver-
I tisement. It goes its way and docs its
I self-appointed job in a wonderful spirit
I of sustained keenness and thoroughness.
I But as a mere camp-follower who has
I seen plenty of the fighting at its worst
I in France, I take it as a privilege to
I write this simple, unprejudiced tribute to
I the friends of the Force at home.
I “The Great Game of Blulf ”
I You get the impression that soldiering
I has to an extraordinary degree become
the accepted lifelong occupation of these j
Australian soldiers in Palestine. Their ,
conception of duty is so high, and there j
is so little grousing that you are often .
reminded of the old-time soldiers of for- j
Tune who followed the game for the
game’s sake. It is not until you see a
regiment on the scent of an Australian \
mail, or until a man, as so many of them £
can, shows you a photograph of his wife s
and children, that he has not seen for c
nearly four years, or as I have been v
shown more than once, of a child from g
three to four years old that the father h
has not seen at all —not until then do you d
appreciate their nobility of spirit and the v
great game of bluff that is played in the v
supreme interest of the cause. I
Sound Original Training
The work of the force here has been
very keenly followed by the foreign
cavalry attaches, and the relatively few w
• lessons our men have had to learn has
e j led to much commendation of the sound
| lines of their original training in Aus-
e 1 tralia. Naturally, they are a far more
e i effective body than the original Light
_ | Horsemen who came to Egypt, but prac-
e i tically the whole of their improvement
X I has been based upon their work in pre-
c war days.
g The one striking change has been in
n their greatly increased punishing powers,
t due to a multiplication of mounted
machine-guns and the automatic rifle.
n Observers are frequently surprised at the
j, great results in positions taken and pri-
e soners captured by a mere handful of
9 Light Horsemen. At first sight you are
c inclined to put this down to the weakness
0 of the enemy. But that is a mistake.
The same enemy will put up a stout
r ght against our infantry. The secret
- of the Light Horseman’s success is due
i almost entirely to his mobility, and when
6 the lessons of this war are appreciated,
r a big relative increase in the mounted
j arm of our Australian Defence Force
r will probably be decided upon.
5 Where the Light Horseman
Scores
r To an extent never anticipated, the
J Light Horseman has been used and has
“ been brilliantly successful as straight-out
infantry. He has on numerous occasions
here played the infantry game just
as he did on the Peninsula. But it is
in his true sphere that his work has been
. seen at its best. It is scarcely too much
>
to say that in an attack on almost any
* given Turkish position which is not ac-
-4 tually wired, 500 Light Horsemen will
accomplish far more than 1000 or 1500
„ infantry, and at substantially less cost.
' The reasons for this are: Far greater
rapidity in the approach; the choice of
. lines of approach and the consequent un-
certainty of the enemy which prevents
him registering with his artillery the
s exact zone to be crossed; the relative
freshness of the Light Horsemen when
" they dismount for the final advance with
the bayonet; and —very important in-
c deed—the speed of the men when on
■ foot owing to their being able to leave
. their gear on the horses. The Light
1 Horseman moving to a bayonet attack
i and carrying only his rifle and ammuni-
t tion and water bottle, is incomparably
, faster than the unhappy infantryman
with his pack, and he is also able to
take far more advantage of any cover the
: ground may offer.
, Then the Light Horseman, having his
trusty waler handy behind a neighboring
ridge or down in the bed of a wady,
can, if necessary, break off a fight
rapidlv and cleanly. This enables him
to “have a, fly” at dubious positions
which infantry would be justified in at-
t tacking only with a reasonable chance
of success. By sheer speed and cheek
the Light Horsemen have gained scores
of such positions during this campaign.
But all of these advantages do not fully
explain the unique position occupied by
the Australian and New Zealand mounted
brigades in the minds of cavalry leaders
of all nationalities to-day. That the
mounted Anzacs are acknowledged to be
the most effective horsemen engaged in
the war is due primarily to the quality
of the men themselves—to their uncon-
scious skill as riders, their clever shoot-
ing, their peerless eye for country, their
huge bump of native cunning, their self-
control, their pugnacity, their love of ad-
venture and their capacity for endurance.
One couples the New Zealanders with
the Australians. There is not a Light
Horseman who would or could have it
otherwise.
On the whole, perhaps, the lot of the
Light Horseman is, for the young Aus-
tralian accustomed to animals more at-
tractive than most other branches of the
service engaged in the war. With all its
hardships it is a sporting force.
The Dreaded Blighty
But it has one terrible feature. No
Light Horseman looks for a Blighty. In
no wars of old have the wounded suffered
more tortures than those sometimes im-
posed upon our mounted men here. Many
men fear a bad wound far more than
they fear death.
In the desert days, when wheels were
impossible because of the sand and the
abruptness of the dunes, an Australian
devised as a merciful alternative to the
hideous camel cacolct a simple sledge
made of a sheet of corrugated iron turned
up in front. On this the stretcher was
placed, and the contrivance was drawn
by horse power. Then a New Zealander
improved on this with a clever sleigh.
Both ambulances worked well enough on
level, smooth sand. But the desert was
seldom other than a succession of little
sandhills, blown by the strong winds into
fantastic shapes and steep and often
sheer gradients, and covered as a rule
with little bumps of sand blown up about
the stunted bushes. In the fierce heat
and with flies in thousands, the sufferings
of the wounded were of a nature not to
be written about.
Wounded men, in dread of the cacolet
and the sledges, pleaded to be allowed to I
take their chance on their horses. There I
are at least two cases of troopers who B
rode six miles or more in the saddle with fl
a fractured thigh; and one of them did fl
not die! I
After the line was broken last Novem- I
ber and the Philistine Plain was reached, I
the wheeled ambulance came again into B
use, and the Ford motor van proved a B
blessing. But soon the fighting had ex- B
tended into the hills, where wheels again B
were barred, and again we were driven B
to the use of the camel cacolet. Imagine B
deck-chairs slung on either side of a I
pig-jumping horse and you have some E
idea of the motion of a cacolet on un- B
even country. B
An Extreme Picture ©f War fl
The cacolet was our only ambulance B
over a lot of the hill country across the E
Jordan. The tracks were narrow, steep, fl
rough, and at times very greasy. Camels fl
not infrequently fell. Yesterday I talked H
to a young L.H. officer who spent several H
hours in a cacolet in heavy rain and bit- H
ter cold on the road into Es Salt. He H
was shot through both feet. ■
“I think I should have frJt it mure,” H
he said, “had it not been that my mate H
on the camel had a badly-fractured jaw. H
Thoughts of him kept me quiet.” H
I saw a hospital being moved from Es H
Salt down to the plain. The steep moun- H
tain road was deeply cut by wheels into H
narrow, slippery tracks. The camels H
floundered and slipped and split; occa- H
sionally one fell. The bloody, groaning
procession was an extreme picture oi BB
war. BB
Most of the wounded, some of them H|
with their heads cut by violently bumping BB
against the wooden side rails of the BB
stretchers, were resigned; probably past BB
complaint. But one of our troopers,
with his bandaged head bloody and BB
ghastly, had by a supreme effort turned H|
half round in his cacolet, and looking BB
down he was calling the Egyptian, who BVH
was leading the camel and doing his BBj
wretched best, every awful sort of name. BB
It was the last and only possible protest H|
Df a spirited man against his fate. B|
A Ghastly Journey H
On that same raid, the first one, there BB
were on the last night at Amman some Mi


/ / 7 /'
seriously wounded men still left when
the last cacolets were loaded. Hand
bearing was impossible; the ground was
so soft that fifty men could not have
carried a stretcher that night to Es Salt.
So they took eight quiet horses, and over
their saddles they built the full length of
each horse a bed of great coats. On
this each wounded man was laid face
down, his hands tied round under the
horse’s flanks, his feet placed in nose-
bags tied along the horse’s neck on each
side. Then men walked on cither side,
and in this fashion these badly wounded
men were carried throughout the coldest
night any of us had ever known. God
knows what they suffered.
“ He’ll Get Me Down All
Right”
A few hours before we cleared Es Salt
after the second raid, I passed a lot of
wounded men riding They had 15
miles to do down a track which was a
most exhausting ride to those who were
fit and well. Any man who had a
sporting chance of staying on was given
a herse. It was that or the dreaded
cacolet. Each man wore his label, with
name and particulars of his case, always
a pathetic little touch about the
wounded. Already at the outset of their
journey, most of it by the way to be
done in the dark, many of their wounds
had opened, and there was fresh red
blood on their horses.
I found one on the ground tightening
his girths, and the efforts had started
the blood from bandages to his head,
and it dropped on to the back of his
tunic.
‘•Yes,’’ he told me as he started off again,
“I’m a bit groggy, but I’ve got me own
old horse and he’ll get me down alright.”
The "old horse" did, too.
The trek of the cacolet camels that
night was a thing of horror. But of
40 or 50 men only one died. Their in-
vincible spirit carried them through.
Hard to Kill
One camel stumbled and went rolling
over and over. Here, in the doctor’s
words, is what happened:
"I went down with two orderlies in
the dark to try and find the two men. 1
You couldn’t have given them a chance
in fifty of being alive. We found one,
none the worse, but the other, whose
arm had been amputated that afternoon,
we could not discover at all. We
searched a long time in the dark on the
steep side of the bluff, and then, very
reluctantly, as the halt was holding up
miles of the column—you know what
the pressure was—l was compelled to
leave him. I left behind an orderly to
continue the search. How later the
wounded boy rode up to me on a donkey
on the plain, and slandered my mother
because I had ever put him on a cacolet.”
One writes of these things, though not
in any morbid spirit, but because it may
bring home to those who are sometimes
a little careless about the war, a deeper
conception of what is daily faced and
endured without murmur by the men
who are fighting to keep Australia for
the Australians and war far away from
its soil.
.(TO BE CONTINUED.).
i


THE SUNDAY TIMES. JUNE 15. 1919
FOR SAILORS AND SOLDIERS
Sunday Times Information Bureau
CONDUCTED BY ANZAC OFFICER.
GERMAN PRISON CAMPS
$
Australian Officers’ Experiences
In view of representations last wee
from the central council of the R. 5.5.1.1
to the Acting-Prime Minister, urging th
deportation of all Germans carrying o
business in Australia who have been in
temed, we publish some experiences o
Australians who were prisoners of wa
in Germany. Is our memory short ?
Lieutenant Alan McGown was wound
ed and taken prisoner at Moquet Farit
near Pozieres, in August, 1916.
“After capture,” he says, "I was move
to a dressing station at Velaux, whicl
was so crowded that the wounded hai
to lie out on the road. It was five day
before my wounds were dressed, and
was then moved in a hospital trait
“Englander” was written in large letter
at the foot of my bed, and during th
journey the orderly repeatedly threatcne<
to cut my throat.
Sister’s Cruelty.
“At Cambrai the sister in charge wa:
taking coffee round, and handed me j
mug. After she had done so she noticec
1 the word ‘Englander’ on my bed, and im
I mediately snatched the mug, saying, ‘Nh
| coffee, Englander.’
“I was badly wounded, and needec
dressing every day. For this I had t<
walk to the surgery, and would havi
to wait until all the Germans and othej
prisoners had had their wounds attendee
to. Each day I had to witness mino
operations, such as removing pieces o
shrapnel without anaesthetics.
Wanted the Socks.
, “I lost everything except my sock:
and riding breeches when captured, anc
the Hun tried to take the socks fron
me all the way to the hospital. Then
was no hope—l hid them in all sorts o
places. The day I left hospital the}
gave me an enormous pair of wooder
clogs; but I was frightened to wear mj
socks with them, for fear they would b<
taken.
“At Munster we were treated verj
harshly by the doctors and N.C.O.’s. Th<
former insisted on shaving our head:
absolutely to the scalp. The treatmen
we received baffles description. The or
derlies were boys, who did not know
the first thing about bandaging. The
food was not bad ; but I only had a weel
of this hospital when I was transferrec
to the laager at Gutersloh. Three other;
and myself had to walk to the railway
station, a three-quarters of an hour jour
ncy, through the main street.
Wounded Jeered At.
“Garbed as we were, we were held up
to ridicule by the population, who called
us ‘Swine,’ etc. I was so weak on arri-
val at the train that I collapsed, and
had to be carried on board.
“At Gutersloh we met British com
rades, including a British doctor, whe
attended up. Owing to my treatment al
Munster, septic poisoning set in in my
arm, and the British doctor persuaded
the Germans that I should be operated
on immediately or lose the arm. The
operation was performed, and I was al-
lowed to return to the same camp, which
was very nice, though the Commandant
was strict. We were not allowed to
remain long at Gutersloh, but were
moved to Crefeld and afterwards split
up, the party I was with going to a
terrible camp called Etroun.
Puss-in-Boots.
‘ The Commandant, when we arrived
was an old 1870 war veteran whom we
immediately christened Puss-in-Boots
because of the enormous Russian top-
boots which he wore. His adjutant was
another veteran, whom we dubbed Cuth-
bert. These two, when they spoke,
always shrieked and yelled, and their
voices would reach such a pitch that
they would eventually crack.
“We decided to tame the Bosche.
Every time they yelled at us we yelled
back and drowned their voices; but they
would only shrug their shoulders and
try again. On the second day of our
arrival, Cuthbcrt stood in the centre of
the parade ground with his hands crossed
on his sword, and informed us that we
would be inspected by the Commandant
We smiled at the honor, and each time
he tried to bring us to attention we
would fidget and do the opposite to his
commands.
“Eventually he reached a Durham
Light Infantryman, who had spent most
of his time in solitary confinement. He
was standing with his arras folded, and
when Cuthbcrt motioned to him to put
his arms down the D.L.I. man grabbed
Cuthbert’s hand and shook it vigorously.
Cuthbcrt tried to pull his right hand
away, and the D.L.I. man grabbed the
left and shook that. Of course, the
prisoners were shaking with laughter.
When Cuthbcrt was on the point of a
paralytic stroke we, with one accord,
bowed to the ground, at the same time
saluting, and drew ourselves upright
again. Cuthbcrt gravely returned the
salute,
‘‘The Comffiandant then approached
amidst hilarious laughter. He shrieked,
and we shrieked back till the parade
ground was a pandemonium. This sort
of business carried on for a week, when
Von Hanish heard of it and had the old
men moved.
Bread From Wood Pulp.
“At this camp the food and sanitary
arrangements were atrocious. Break-
fast consisted of coffee made from
acorns. For lunch we had a muddy
soup made from saurkraut, horse beans,
cnangelwurzel and a few potatoes and
water —but mostly water. At night we
would have acorn coffee again. Half a
loaf of bread made from potatoes and
wood pulp and some other ingredient
had to last » week. It is impossible tc
think how we would have fared withoui
the Red Cross parcels, which began tc
arrive after we had been three weeks ir
the camp.
Officers Bayoneted.
“Strohen Moor Lager earned the namt
of Straaf ’em More, and in my eight
months there of durance vile the whole
of the 250 officers did time in the cells,
There were three of our number bayo-
neted inside the lager, and many othei
ugly incidents occurred. During mj
period of detention in the cells the onlj
way in which I could break the
i monotony was to kick on my cell dooi
and make the most awful din possible
This would bring the guard down tn«
corridor, and through the spy-hole we
would exchange opinions of each other
which, if they could be spelt, would be
printed with a dash.
Humorless Huns.
“The Huns have no sense of humor,
and tried time and again to break our
good spirits. I think they realised even-
tually that brute force would not tame
us. However, by that time we had been
moved to Bad Colberg in Saxon
Meningen. I think the move was due
to the number of escapes which had been
effected from Strohen.
“The Hun was so worried by these that
he sent down a large staff of detectives
from Berlin to try to locate our escape
kits. We were all locked up in a large
room and the occupants of each room of
the prison were called in separately.
During the search of men from room 39
several maps and compasses were found
and placed on a table. One of the
prisoners drew the detective into con-
versation and distracted his attention to
a war map on the wall. In the mean-
time another prisoner picked up maps
and compasses, and the detective, think-
ing the German soldier accompanying
him had removed the paraphernalia, al-
lowed ropm 39 to go.”
Captain D. P. Wells was wounded and
taken prisoner at Bullecourt on April
11, 1917. He states that after the action
no attempt was made to remove the
wounded till dark, when German Medical
Corps orderlies handled them very bru-
tally, having no regard to the nature of
their wounds.
“I was left in a dugout,” he says, “for
24 hours without receiving attention of
any sort. Whilst there a German major
robbed me of all my belongings and set
himself out to aggravate me. After
examining the ammunition of my service
revolver, he declared it was dum-dum.
and threatened to shoot me.
‘‘All German officers I came in con-
tact with made a great fuss about our
service ammunition, and said that the
British were not playing the game by
using such bullets. The major asked
me if I would like anything to eat or
drink. I asked for a drink of water,
LIEUT. ALAN McGOWN,
Who returned recently after over two
years in Germany.
and when they brought it to me found it
to be a paraffin. They were determined
that I should drink the liquid, and to
that end held me down, but without suc-
cess.
“The pain of mind and body that I
went through during the following days
was so awful that the whole proceedings
are hazy. I remember that I was ad-
mitted to my fourth clearing station on
April 14, and was immediately operated
on for the first time. My wound was
naturally very septic.
“Chloroform was administered, but in-
sufficient, and I recovered before the
operation was completed and had to be
held down. After two days I was
moved to Mons Prisoners' Hospital. The
train journey was very tedious, and
several men died en route. The only
food on the hospital train consisted of
black coffee of a sort served in dirty
bowls, and black bread which was un-
eatable.
Death from Starvation.
“From Mons I was removed to
Hameln, were special food was obtain-
able on payment; but in spite of this, at
least three men died from starvation
daily—mostly Russians. From Hameln
I was moved to Karlsruhe.
Paper Bandages.
‘‘During my stay in Germany I was
always dressed with paper bandages, and
I will venture to say that the medical
attention, compared with curs, is dis-
gusting. I can quote numerous cases of
wilful brutality to helpless wounded men.
Russian medical students were employed
in many of. the prisoners’ hospitals, and
patients were entirely at their mercy.
The Hun was very free with drugs, and
so long as one craved for morphia it was
available.


l/uvUx*) /3
“On discharge from hospital I was
transferred to Karlsruhe Camp, were
the daily menu consisted of soup made
from the leaves of trees growing round
the camp (it was black in color), a
morsel of bread 5 by 3 by 15 inches
(which had to last the day), and a bowl
of sauerkraut, which was absolutely un-
eatable.
“Later I was at Freiburg (a reprisal
camp) and Heidelburg ; but these camps
were fairly well conducted. The latter
was a concentration camp for prisoners
awaiting repatriation. I think that polite
people were specially selected for it, in
order to create a favorable impression of
the conditions of camp life, after the
treatment received in camps of the 10th
Army Corps, commanded by General vorrtj
Hanish. I should like to have a war
gratuity in the form of a piece of that
notorious tyrant.”
For the Digger Family
The A.I.F. Wives and Children’s Holi-
day Association advises that the official
opening of its Furlough House, at Narra-
been, will take place at 3 p.m. on Sat-
urday. June 21. The ceremony will be
performed by the Governor-General The
committee invites the attendance of all
interested in the scheme, and has pro-
vided a special tram, to leave Manly at
1 1.45 p.m. Visitors from Sydney should
catch the 1 p.m. boat.
SUFFERERS BY THE
WAR.
_♦
HOW THE RED CROSS HELPS.
In a return which has been prepared by the
New South Wales division of the Red Cross
Society, showing the assistance that has been
afforded by the society in this State to re-
turned soldiers, sailors, and nurses, it is stated
that, amongst other help that has been given,
16,842 men have been treated in sauaioriuma
and convalescent homes, and there have been
59,261 visits by men to the Red Cross convales-
cent room. Over 1500 tubercular cases have
been dealt with. Hospital handicrafts have
been taught to 7583 men; 750 army nurses have
been cared for in the society’s homes besides
which all army nurses in the Nurse Cavell
Home are paid for by the society; for four
years 6000 families of sick soldiers were as-
sisted weekly at the fruit and vegetable
depot; 700 men have passed through the basket,
toy-making, and weaving industries; 1,000,000
eggs aud an enormous amount of produce of
all kinds has been collected and distributed
by the produce depot; 36,000 children of the
Junior Red Cross have made 11,000 garments
for soldiers’ orphans since the Armistice.
The Red Cross executive aided the Blinded
Soldiers in starting a tea distributing busi-
ness. which is now making substantial pro-
fits.
1 ■ //’ I * k.
} I f . % K-l ■
SOUVENIR OF AUSTRALIAN AND
MALAYAN BATTLEPLANES.
—* —
“A Souvenir of the Australian and Malayan
Battleplanes. ISI4-1918,” is a sumptuous pub- t
licatlon, which recalls the science a o re'
by these gift 'planes in the latter part of
the war. Appeals organised by Mr. C. Alma
Baker met with such a generous response
that 41 war ’planes were subscribed for by
Australians and presented to the Imperial
Government, while Malaya supplied no fewer
than 53! These ’planes, which bore the
names of their donors or the districts in
which the purchase money had been collected,
served with great distinction on the Western
Front and in Palestine. One of them, of the
type known as “The Fighting Fee,” ended
the career of Tmraelmann, the f. nous Ger-
man crack. The “Souvenir” gives an ac-
count of the campaign by which the “air
| fund” was raised and a list of the donors.
1 “Boyd Cable” describes the exploits of these
i gift ’planes, and Mr. Fred Lelst and Mr.
! Joseph Simpson have contributed pictures of
them in action. There are photographs of
the various machines, and (he volume is a
most handsome and effective record of Mr.
Baker’s appeal and its results at homo and
abroad. (Field Press.)
——————————————
ABOUT SOME GERMANS
And a Soldiers’ Club
Concordia is a German Club in Eliza*
beth-strect. Just now it is dormant ;
but in March last it threatened to re-
open, and nothing short of an assurance
from the Prime Minister quieted an angry
body of returned soldiers. Men v/ho
know the Bosche liken hitn to a snake,
to be swatted every time he raises his
head. His club is a cancer, for which
trimming and paring are unavailing.
As far back as July of last year the
executive of the Returned Sailors and
Soldiers’ Imperial League entered into
negotiations with the trustees for a lease
of the building as the League’s headquar-
ters and club rooms. Through its secre-
tary (Mr. F. E. Schroeder), the club
asked an annual rental of £1575, exclusive
of rates.
The R.S.A. considered the rental exor-
bitant, and replied offering a much lower
sum. To this the trustees vouchsafed
no reply, and the Federal Attorney-
General supplied the names of the five
trustees. A second offer was made just
before the armistice, but this also failed
to drap a reply.
In March the Federal authorities were
asked to take over the club ; but up to
the present no action has been taken.
Last Tuesday a deputation waited on the
Acting-Prime Minister, and again urged
that every endeavor be made by the Gov-
ernment to induce the trustees to grant
the lease at a reasonable rental.
In all probability the League will be
ultimately housed in the A.I.F. War Me-
morial ; but for the present there is ur-
gent need of more fitting premises than
those at MacDonell House. Concordia
Hall is the most —in fact, the only-
suitable building available.
V/e do not advocate unfair treatment
of even Germans ; but surely there»is no
cause to dilly-dally in the circumstances.
The remedy is in the hands of the Fede-
ral authorities, and something more tan-
gible than promises is required to allevi-
ate the uneasiness of a very large section
of the community.


f , I ' O. - T^T->
-I. ... yj V.' XHi ? l . -. ) _ ....... .. . i -. J ,
WHERE THEY FOUGHT
Silent Fields of Bullecourt
RELICS OF AUSTRALIAN FIGHTS
EMPTINESS AND DESOLATION
(No. 4)
(“The Sun’s" Special Representative)
LONDON, August 29.
Those daily communiques which
called eveby reverse a victory and
twisted disasters into triumphs have
no more bitter commentary than the
lonely field of Bullecourt. Here four
of our divisions, together with many
fine British battalions, battered their
way a tew hundred yards up a gentle
slope—for nothing.
The corps had followecUthe Hinden-
burg retreat across wantonly devasta-
ted farm and orchard lands from
Flers and Le Sars, through the ghost
city af Bapaume, through dynamited
villages and over little ridges to the
Hindenburg line. Our men had had a
pitiless winter on the Somme battle-
field, with trench feet and trench sick-
nesses accounting for casualty lists
as heavy as those of a normal offen-
sive. Some fights in the pursuit were
tough and costly.
In those days the thick wire in front
of the Hindenburg line was like broad
red bands stretching zig-zag across
the hillside. But those forbidding,
jagged barriers did not stop the Fourth
Division, though no artillery cut pas-
sages .through them, and the tanks
that were to have rolled out a path
got nowhere near them.
There are no recognisable signs to-
day of that famous Fourth Division
attack, except heaps of rusty iron that
were once tanks. It is still the most
compact cemetery of tanks in France.
The monsters lie on their sides in shell
holes, stand rocklike on the horizon
wherever you turn, meet vou unex-
pectedly in huge pits, partly over-
grown, as you walk across the fields.
The wire has been pounded to no-
thing. The trenches are recognisable
only by the dugout entrances. Some-
one—can it have been a relative wan-
dering here? —has planted an Austra-
lian flag amongst the few graves at
the railway embankment. But there
is no distinctive mark of a truly brave
action.
AUSTRALIAN HEROISM
The six battalions of the Fourth Di-
vision which went out over the snow
that morning had to come back. En-
filaded, battered by shells, with no
supplies arriving across the bullet-
swept. field, they put their backs to
the walls of their cul-de-sac and
fought until few men had a bomb left,
and some had no more cartridges. They
faced complete encirclement. And to
come back, as they did, with machine-
guns playing upon them from right,
left, and rear, was as gallant a deed
as their advance.
It is so easy to forget, to make light
now of such heroism. So easy to be
content with pity, with a little hasty
sorrow; so easy to glance over this
field and see nothing. Yet this was
the land where priceless lads, princes
amongst the Australians of to-day,
spilt their blood. These were the
trenches against which 50,000 Austra-
lians had to storm, in an inferno of
death and wounds, with souls and
bodies reaching an apex of effort for
their country, before the Hindenburg
line was firmly ours.
Suc*i ttn'TmJTrSjiriuy or national'eapi
of high resolve and noble devotion,
does not come in every generation’s
history. Yet that It should have been
here, round Buljecourt, is almost un-
believable. One is again puzzled by
the barrenness, the emptiness, the
weediness and the loneliness of the
battlefield.
The Fourth Division was whisked
away north to follow the Third into
the battle of Messines. The Second,
First, and Fifth Divisions, in that or-
der, set out to break the Hindenburg
Line. Great guns had come up, and
the wire had been cut.
A railway embankment ran along
our front, and here one still finds
little Australian relics—tattered uni-
forms, broken rifles, the cave head-
quarters which shuddered under the
• German shelling. Our engineers did
one of their most gallant battle works
during the first hours of this prolong-
ed, costly battle, digging a sap be-
tween the embankment and the first
Hindenburg trench. Our men were the
target for every German gun within
range for the next three weeks, for
we alone had advanced. The Ger-
mans made of this sap—our only
path for supplies—a veritable line of
death. And upon those Hindenburg
trenches seized by the Australians,
they turned an enormous weight of
artillery.
THE FORBIDDEN VILLAGE
Bullecourt, which to-day is nothing
but a signboard and a few broken con-
crete cellar emplacements, seemed to
be a forbidden village until our Fifth
Division, and particularly the 15th
Brigade, going in late, completed the
British hold upon it. Remembering
the clouds of brick dust tossed above
the smoke of our exploding shells, one
wonders why there is no sign here
now of those pretty brick houses, those
red barns, that high-standing sugar
factory, that once was here. But not
a brick remains.
Bullecourt we took. But there was
a forbidden village, and its shell still
stands, 200 yards from our old outpost
line. It is called Riencourt, and it is
truly a village to-day, for three old
couples have built shanties, on the
ruins, and battened out some land,
and planted some seed —the only people
to be met for miles around. They
have not gone down the dug-outs, they
'say, but they have found things—in-
teresting things, helmets and pistols,
and Australian tunics, and little piles
of letters.
Our second wave was to have over-
run Riencourt on that fateful day in
early May, and a third wave —still the
Fifth and Sixth Brigades—was to have
gone far afield. But the Victorians,
who went on from the Hindenburg.
Line, still lie out there beneath the
village, and none will ever know how
far they got, though all know that be-
fore they leapt forward they Knew they
would never come back, or see their
own land again. Riencourt was not
in British hands until the last days of
the war.


The sunken road leading diagonally
across the battlefield to Riencourt is
yellow, sandy, neglected. The Germans
had deep dug-outs in it—doubtless
company headquarters. There are
duckboards and isolated German
graves. The roads about Noreuil,
Lagnicourt, and Vrau are much as we
left them. Our corrugated iron shel-
ters and little man-holes, made when
we used them for our reserves, have
not been touched. Shell-holes make
them impassable. The shell-hole out of
which Captain C. E. W. Bean stepped,
as by a miracle, at the instant we
thought he had perished amid the
smoke and clatter of explosives, can be
identified near the old aid posts.
The whole field is horribly empty,
even of graves. Apart from a dozen
neglected graves by the railway em-
bankment, and the lonely crosses here
and there in the long grass, the little
military cemetery at Vaulx-Vraucourt,
is all that I could see. The dead of
twenty battalions are here, but the
saddest sight is the group of new
graves, rows of them, bearing the
words, “An Unknown Australian Sol-
dier.”
BAPAUME-POZIERES
Bapaume, which had stood for cen-
turies, is making a bid for life. About
a thousand French people are back
there, though how they live is a mys-
tery, for there is no cultivation, and
! battlefields yield nothing in the way of
wealth. The old houses can never be
rebuilt. A new township of tin shan-
ties is arising, centred round the rail-
day st'atiyn, Beer and vermouth—bad
stuff, the same bad dead level in every
estaminet, but plenty of drinking
shops from which to choose.
A few of our artillery officers lie in
the Bapaume cemetery, which remains
shattered, and in small part disgorged
by shellfire. Our graves are well-
tended; some friends have been there.
I came on a German officer’s grave in
the deserted wilderness close to Gre-
villers, covered with fresh flowers, and
wreaths of everlastings, and showing
the marks of a woman’s trowel. Doubt-
less, some woman’s tears, too, though
it seemed impossible that a German
woman could have got there. At
Grevillers the ruins remain, and the
old corps headquarters buildings are
occupied by prisoners of war. Our
Australian cemetery is where the ca-
sualty clearing stations used to be. For
the first time since entering the Ypres
area I saw a man with a plough.
Flers, Pozieres, Mouquet Farm—the
old Somme field—is sheer dishevelled
waste, more a lonely wilderness, be-
cause more broken, than the driest
patfch of saltbush country at home. At
Pozieres the First Division’s memorial
party has raised an Australian flag,
and out of the tunnels of CVlouquet
Farm Australian bodies are still being
carried. Some were found locked
with Germans. The cemetery at
Pozieres is stretching now far back
from the road. Grass is high in the
fields covering the white crosses of the
scattered graves. But the British sol-
diers, busy at re-burying, have many
months of work in hand.


THE DAILY TELEGRAPH, MONDAY. DECEMBER 15. 1919
COLOSSAL BLUFF.
450 AUSTRALIANS TAKE A
TOWN.
Little has been written of the taking of
Bersheba by the Australians in 1917, though
the charge of 450 men of the Light Horse, who
captured the town, according fto General Hodg-
son, outrlvalled the famous charge of the
Light Brigade at Balaclava.
The following account was Avritten in Novem-
ber, 1917, by Sergeant K. C. Stevenson, in a
letter to his mother at North Sydney:—
“The infantry attacked from the other side,
where the Turks had a wonderful network or
trenches, redoubts, etc., and word came at
4.30 that they were held up. General Allenby
asked General Hodgson if he could take the
town. General Hodgson sent for General Grant,
of the 4th Light Horse Brigade, and asked him
if he could take the town. Grant said, ‘Yes,
in half an hour.’ Then he ordered his brigade
to charge.
e had five miles of open flat country, abso-
lutely devoid of any cover to charge over.
Instead of three regiments, only two squadrons
from each of the 4th and 12th Light Horse
were immediately available for the charge.
1 Imagine the stupendous impudence of "450 men
| charging a town fortified Avjth trenches, re-
doubts. and a position which has never before
' been taken in history—armed only with a bare
I bayonet in their hands.
“The bluff was colossal, yet they charged, ;
: yelling, cooceing, and hollering like ten thou-
; sand devils, raked with artillery, machine-
guns, and rifle fire. We cantered two miles and
galloped three straight at them. a nd right up
through the town-a magnificent and wonderful
sight. - *
The Australians Averp soon afterwards in
complete possession of the town.


, ' c ‘
THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD, TUESDAY,
FLIGHT DISASTER
THE MARTINSYDE
WRECKED
OCCUPANTS’ FATE
LONDON, Dec. 14.
Reports from Corfu state that the
Martinsyde aeroplane, in which Cap-
tain Howell and Air-mechanic Fraser
were attempting? the Australian flight,
was wrecked off St. George’s Bay,
Corfu (an island off the coast of
Albania), on the 10th.
No hope is entertained of the occu-
pants having survived.
The log, which was washed ashore,
proved the identity of the machine.
NO NEWS.
SINCE HOWELL LEFT
TARANTO.
LONDON, Dec. 15.
The Air Ministry announces that no news
of Captain Howell has been received since
h« left Taranto for Athens on the »9th
instant.
I IS THERE HOPE?
NEWS FROM ATHENS
There seems to be a possibility of one of
the airmen at any rate having been picked
np by a steamer and taken on to Athens.
r * W. Fraser, of Messrs. Fraser and
Willsford, motor-car importers,' l of Sydney,
a brother of Air-Mechanic Fraser, stated
yesterday that prior to reading the press
announcement of the disaster he had re-
ceived a cablegram through his shipping!
agents from London stating that his
brother arrived at Athens on December
10. The message was from
London on December 11, Athens is with-
in 250 miles sail of Corfu.
CAPTAIN HOWELL.
Captain Cedric Ernest Howell was born m
Melbourne 22 years ago. He was educated at
the Melbourne Church of England Grammar
School, and matriculated at the University of
Melbourne. He resigned a commission in the
Citizen Forces during the war, and joined the
A.I.F. as a private. He left Australia as a
sergeant with the 16th Reinforcements of the
14th Battalion, and after some service in
Egypt he was sent with the 46th Battalion to
France, where he saw some stiff fighting.
Later he was one of 200 men chosen for train-
ing in the Royal Air Force- He was sent to
England in the middle of winter, and as a
result caught a chill nearly lost his life.
Despite the delay thus caused in his train-
ing, Captain Howell passed well at Hendon,
and after a brief period spent in various parts
of Great Britain, he was sent to France as a
scout- A little later he went to Italy, where
he had 10 months of fighting without inter-
mission. He had to destroy enemy transport
crossing the Alps, and during one of these-
trips he was ambushed, and only just escaped
with his life. He is credited with having
brought down 30 enemy machines, and re- j
ceived for various exploits the Military Cross
end the D F.C.. and later the DcS.O-, for at- j
tacking with one other man some 16 German
aeroplanes, five of which he was allowed to
claim credit for officially, and two unofficially.
Describing this and other events, the “Lon-
don Gazette” stated: —“This officer attacked
iu company with one other machine an enemy
formation of 15 aeroplanes, and succeeded in
destroying four of them and bringing one
down out of control. Two days afterwards
he destroyed another enemy machine, which
fell in our lines, and on the following day he
led three machines against 16 enemy scouts,
destroying two of them. Captain Howell is a
very gallant and determined fighter, who j
takes no account of the enemy’s superior!
cumbers in his battles.”
In regard to the flight to Australia, Captain
Howell was one of the first competitors, and
was greatly disappointed when he was com-
pelled to postpone his flight. He mentioned
in a recent letter to his father, Mr. Ernest
Howell, a Melbourne accountant, who resides
at Heidelberg, the terrors he would have to
face after leaving India, as described by the
purvey party of which Captain Ross Smith
was a member. Before leaving on his flight l
Captain Howell had been offered a permanent
commission in the Royal Air Force. It was
intended that he should become the repre-
sentative of the Martinsyde Company in Aus-
tralia and New Zealand. '


S . A/*v- H .
DECEMBER 16, 1919.
AIR-MECHANIC G. H. FRASER.
Before enlisting In 1917 Air-Mechanic George
Henry Fraser, who accompanied Captain
Howell, was for several years in the employ
of his brother. Mr. Wm. Fraser, of Messrs.
Fraser and Willsford, motor importers, of 822
George-street, Sydney. He was an unmarried
man. 40 years ot age. and a native of Vic-
toria. Ever since leaving school he had been
engaged in bicycle and motor engineering.
He enlisted as a private in 1916, and was sub-
sequently transferred to the Australian Fly-
ing Corps.
While serving with No. 1 Bombing Squad-
ron over the North Sea ha fefch Several cxnlt-


CHRISTMAS DAYS.
WITH THE A.I.F.
r (BV DIGGER.)
Christmas, lf>l4. Overhead the Egyptian sun,
tempered by a cool desert zephyr, poured its
balmy rays on the troops assembled for church
parade, and as the grand old hymns and carols
rang out across the sandy wastes our thoughts
flitted across to our own far-away-land of
Australia.
It was an impressive service. Men from all
parts of Australasia were gathered hero. Tall,
loan Queenslanders rubbed shoulders with
rosy-cheeked Tasmanians: miners from the
Kalgobrlie fields elbowed the shepherds from
the snow-covered mountains of New Zealand.
Kinsmen from Canada and England were also
amongst the worshippers. Immediately ahead
of us, the Pyramids reared their giant frames
skyward, as they had done from time imme-
morial; and the crouching, menacing looking
Sphinx smiled its inscrutable smile as it
gazed ever eastward, towards the ope time
capital of Memphis.
The service over, the streets of Cairo were
soon echoing to the sound of our laughter as
we hurried through them, ever on the lookout
for adventure. Midnight found us in camp
again at Mena, and so passed our first Christ-
mas in the A.I.F. J
• • ♦ • *
Christmas 1915. Cairo saw certain of us again
this year. The rocky shores of Gallipoli have
° f tbc absentees in their keeping, and
the tides in the blue Aegean Sea could vet,
"rally’'° of°a,n° ™ ’ Wh ° at>C awaiting the flnal
• » • * «
Christmas, 1916. Outside the dugout the rain
rn aa ZZ < ng d ° wn witfl a persistency that is
maddening. Everything in the trench is wet
. n U l! y '*“ d sloppy- The snow which has fallen
i 8 BloWly being crunched to
pulp by the sentries ‘‘on post” as they endeav-
our to keep warm. They (the sentries) arc clad
boo B t6 ee b P ut the^ 313 ’ th ' C a mufflPrs - arirl treuen
mTkf’waiu- greaSy and muddy “duckboards”
make walking a precarious task. There is no
fir ug going on evidently the snipers on both
ties tJdav™^ 3 f reed t 0 sus P en d hostlll-
(when tho n on . cntering the dugout one finds
evif^i th . J 8 becom o accustomed to the in-
evitable cigarette smoke) the occupants en-
‘ 111 oc the sternest. ‘‘Rainimr «?tm*>*•
asks one of the card nlavers 8 U u
continues, I reckon w«Mi“a ~ . y ’ if this
feet before long/’ Deed * n ISSUC of web
This is Christmas la belle France.
nurs B et aU fl\u U in^ hit h e stiects - Smart
putting a S nT nf about the wards.
to the S ever P Vnquisifive y a^ re >, an , d exblaining
the symbol of mi ? S J£L an^ e u h t y L A^ tralian ’
is fluttering in tv,* , uutsiae the snow
warm and cheerful all ‘ S
say the “knock” nr * b,nk of Prance and
Canada Here a pSUfT hiDterland «
.ohoo, childre'rT'of 1
1 little gift from the children of one of tho
poorer suburbs of Manchester it
Jer (u 'l Our sufferings not‘ been "for-
PP6a”red' "f 4 ° ur past trla “’ «!-
ippearea in the great joy of receiving
p s and surely the workers must
elt how much we appreciated their kind-
nesses Men from all parts of the Empire
ln my Wft rd, and many a thought was
rafted across to the veldt, the prairies ami
he plains ere darkness brought a close to
foufoVn B^ 06 - And our dreams were
f out own children, our own brothers and
sisters, and our own parents.
30spital ded a Christmas s P en t in an English
* • ♦ * *
Xmas, 1918. Home again in sunny old Aus-
.lalia. 1 eace through the armistice,
has once more settled on the earth
md we no longer hear the step of the
la t the + “hay,” or see the snowflakes
nestle contentedly on the parapets, but our
/noughts are often stealing round the Pyra-
mas, and we think of the “boys” who will
never return to their loved ones, thinking of
them and thanking God for one more blessing
vouchsafed us in being safe with our family
nnce again.


ART AND ARTISTS.
WAR PICTURES FOR AUSTRALIA
D.T. 27.12.19
Streeton,, who expects to be out here in
January—he will travel as a demobilised offi-
cer—means first to hold an exhibition, and
then, in the words of a recent letter to the
Director of the Art Gallery, Mr. Mann, to “get
away to the bush and paint Australia.” Al-
though 52, he served at the front for two years
from April, 1915, and was then invalided out,
just escaping, as a matter of fact, with his
life. The Commonwealth Government has now
50 of Streeton’s works. Included among them
is a large 8 by 5 of “The Advance from Vll-
lers-Bretonneux on August 8, 1918.” He has
also been asked to paint another big picture,
“The Battle of the Hlndenburg Line.”
Besides tboee, five other war paintings by
well-known Australian artists are due to reach
this country soon. They are: “Australian
Light Horse in Action” (8 by 6), by G. W.
Lambert; “The Battle of Polygon Wood (Bft.
wide), by F Leist; “The First Australian Divi-
I sional Artillery in Action” (Bft. wide), by H.
S. Power; “The Sinking of the Southland”
j (Bft. wide), by Bryant; and “The Sydney and
the Ehnden” (Bft. wide), by Burgess. War paint-
-1? gs by Full wood, Longstaff, and Quinn will
also arrive later on. The price paid for these
.pictures rung from £2OO to £5OO, and the total
paid is £2950. This is cheap enough, if the
pictures are any good. Judging by a repro-
duction in the “Graphic” some little time ago,
Power’s picture at any rate is a fine . one,
full of life and vigor. It was shown at the
annual exhibition at Burlington House.
It is probable that all these pictures will
have their permanent home at the Federal
Capital; but that they will spend a good deal
of their lime travelling, on loan, among the
galleries of the various States.


.mty. ftf. 1.
“With the Twenty-Second" (Australian
Authors’ Agency) is a record of that bat-
talion’s experiences and achievements from
Gallipoli Boadh to Armistice day. Cap-
tain Eugene Gorman, M.C., as recorder,
has performed his task with great en-
thusiasm and skill. Ho writes with a re- ;
straint and modesty that the splendor of |
the record would have justified him aban- !
doning. In an introduction, Sir William
Birdwood refers to the Twenty-Second as a
battalion which fully played its part in
building up and maintaining the magnifi-
cent reputation of the Australian Imperial
Force. The volume abundantly vindi-
cates the introduction. Captain Gorman
explains the disadvantages under which the
record was -written—in dugouts on the
Somme, in ruined villages at irregular in-
tervals until the concluding chapters were
finished in Belgium. The diverse and ad-
verse conditions, however, have not affect-
ed the literary merit, coherency and
lucidity of the narrative. Names, places
and dates are furnished and clearly ar-
ranged. It was in the Ulysses that the
Twenty-Second first embarked for Egypt; by
coincidence at the end of the war some of
the original members of the battalion re-
turned to Australia in the same steamer.
The battalion had suffered much in the
interval. At Ypres, Bullecourt, Yillers-
Bretonneux, and other places equally mem-
orable, the Twenty-Second made great sac-
rifice and won enduring fame. Out ol
1000 men there were 46 officers and 708
other ranks killed. Pozieres exacted the
heaviest “In Poziieres sleep more of
our brigade than in anv other spot in
France, and the casualty' list of this bat-
talion was the heaviest in the brigade." It
is a thrilling story told with fidelity and
with fine unstudied effect. It is a
record in which the men of the Twenty-
Second may wejl feel pride, a pride in
■which their couhtrymen will fully share.
The volume is admirably got up, a triumph
of the publishing art. There is an excel-
lent frontispiece drawn by Lieut. Will
Dyson. The O.C.’s are given in full, so
also are Chaplain-Captain F. H. Durnford,
M.C., and Lieat. W. Ruthven, V.C. There
are numerous photographs showing the
boys in all their varied sports and employ-
ments. Captain Gorman had an inspiring
theme, and has proved himself worthy ot
it. It is a volume well worth producing.
Members of the battalion will be proud
of it; relatives of the fallen will cherish
it; and every Australian oqght to read it,
if only to realise afresh what sacrifices
were made on our behalf, not least by the
men of the Twenty-Second battalion.


THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD, SATURDAY, MARCH 27,
LITTLE BERTHA.
WAR TROPHY.
UNVEILING CEREMONY IN
RAILWAY RESERVE.
The story of the capture by the Australians
of the 11-inch German railway gun, which
was recently unshipped from the Dongarra—
has already been told —the story of how, for
instance, early in August of 1018, the 31st
battalion reached it under enemy fire on the
Western front; how, to make quite certain
of it, Lieutenant George Burrows and Sap-
pers L. J. Strahan and J. H. Palmer, of the
sth Australian Divisional Engineers, raised
steam on it under heavy fire; and how, after
shunting the burning coaches on to a siding,)
they brought the gun behind the Australian
lines.
All that remains to be said about the great
black nfcnster of war is that it stands to-
day, as ft in “penitential loneliness,” in Rail-
way Reserve, facing Eddy-avenue; but still,
as a reminder for all time, of the sort of
i thing that confronted our men. Its great
gnu, with a capacity of spitting out 6601 b
shells a distance of 20 miles or more, is
1 poked menacingly towards the city. All over
its span of 72ft from buffer to buffer —its total
weight, including under-carriage, is 186 tons
—is the hand of the enemy—camouflage ef-
fects, here and there some wording in Ger-
man, and also, but in unmistakable English,
the words; “Essen, Krupp.” It is on rails
Just as it was captured. The 80-ton under-
carriage rests on two 15-tons bogies, carrying
10 wheels in all. A line had to be specially
laid, and an earthen mound specially built
for it in Railway Reserve, where it will re-
I main as Australia’s greatest war trophy.
“Little Bertha” they called it when it was
I exhibited in Paris. The latest type of Ger-
man artillery, it has attracted a tremendous
i amount of attention. But it is a pigmy
1 alongside what Great Britain had in store for
the enemy. The story, previously not gen-
erally known trerc, was told by thft Chief
Commissioner of Railways (Mr. Fraser) at
yesterday's unveiling, or uncovering, cere-
mony. Great Britain, he had been authori-
tatively informed, had built the biggest gun
on earth as an answer to the German “Big
Bertha.” It never fired a shot—there was no
occasion for it —but it had a length of 83ft
(being lift longer than the gun in Railway-
square), and a range of 87 miles. It was
intended as our answer to Krupp’s if the war
had lasted any longer.
The District Commandant (Major-General
Lee) very happily left the unveiling of the
trophy to the “Diggers,” some of whom took
part in its capture. They swarmed over It
like a lot of flies. The tarpaulins covering
it were held by “Diggers” on either side of
it, and at a given signal, and amidst cheers,
the monster gun itself was revealed in all its
portentous might. Five powerful illuminants
on either side of the gun will at night flood
the gun with light, making of it a striking
silhouette against the surrounding darkness.
Just prior to the unveiling, an aeroplane hov-
ered about in the light-blue sky a little way
off. Very fittingly it was brought into the
picture, for it was a British aeroplane out on
the Western Front that dropped several bombs
near the engine and on the rear truck of the
train of which the gun was a part on the
historic morning of its capture.
The District Commandant (Major-General
Lee), addressing the very large gathering of
people who had assembled, expressed thanks
1 to all, including the committee of railway ex-
perts, who had been responsible for the suc-
cessful unloading of the gun, and for re-
assembling it and placing it in its present
position.
General Sir Chas, Rosenthal, in speaking of
the capture of the gun by the 31st Battalion
of the Bth Brigade of the sth Division, jocu-
larly remarked that as it was a Victorian Bri-
gade they would no doubt have kept this great
trophy in Victoria, but for the fact that they
did not have the proper railway gauge there
for it. “When,” he added smilingly, “they
get a proper railway system we will perhaps
be asked to hand this gun over to them.”
General Rosenthal said it was only fair to
remind his audience that captures in war,
whether personal or in the way of material,
were the result of organisation bigger than a
battalion or a brigade in its general scope.
The infantry would be the first to admit that
captures such as this would have been quite
impossible but for the magnificent support
given by the artillery. Again, in the battle
which marked the capture of this gun, they
had magnificent support from the tauks. Pro-
bably the best support ever given in the war
was afforded by tanks on that memorable oc-
casion. Then again there were the armoured
cars and the Flying Squadron. The gun they
saw that day was a tangible illustration of
what the Australian troops had done in the I
war. (Applause.) The fact that the gun could
send a shell twenty and considerably more
miles showed that the life of the man back
beyond the front line was often no safer than
that of the man in front.
A crowd of returned men in the audience
accepted this view with unrestrained laughter.
General Rosenthal proceeded to give a
graphic recital of the events which left the
Australians on the other side of the Hinden-
burg Itßo, after they had taken everything
before them “in their stride.” The day that
the Australian infantry ceased operations, he
added, marked the day when the Germans
asked for peace. He hoped, in conclusion,
that as long as Australia was a nation this
gun would remain here as an everlasting
testimony to the brutality of the enemy and
the valour of our arms.
“May it,” he remarked, “stand as a re-
minder for our children and our children’s
children, of the fact that w r hen the testing
time came men cheerfully took up their bur-
den, with the result that to-day we are still
t able to stand as people of a free
and of a nation which will continue to add
lustre to its great name.” (Applause.)
The other speakers were the Minister for
Works (Mr. Ball), on behalf of the State
Government, the Chief Commissioner of Rail-
ways (Mr. Fraser), and Brigadier-General
Cox. 0
“Thanks to our 4ft BJin gauge,” said General
Cox, “we have this trophy permanently. At
any rate, they (he was referring to Victoria)
have not got a crane strong enough to shift
it if they wanted to.” (Laughter.)
A voice: But they might “square” you in
Melbourne. (Laughter.)
General Cox: “I’ll take good care that this
gun will stop here in Sydney for all time,”
(Applause.)
The Gallipoli Memorial Band rendered se-
lections. ________
WAR TROPHIES.
•—-—«
DISTRIBUTION SCHEME.
MELBOURNE, Friday.
Mr. Poynton stated that the Commonwealth
Government had entrusted the distribution of
war trophies to the State Trophy Committee,
which has unanimously decided to adopt a
common scheme to secure the equable distri-
bution of trophies throughout each State, irre-
spective of whether applications have been
submitted or not. The scheme provides for
approximately 450 guns and trench mortars,
and 2000 machine guns, available at present, to
be drawn upon for Immediate distribution.
The number of trophies available enabled
tSe committees to lay down the following uni-
form scale: —Each town with a population
above 10,00 ft, two guns and two machine guns;
each town with a population between 3000 and
10,000 one gun; between 300 and 3000, one ma-
chine gun. .
In deciding upon the allotment to capital
-cities, the committees were largely influenced
by the consideration that the State War Mu-
seum in each capital city will take by tar
the largest share of small trophies and relics,
such as rifles, equipment, helmets, etc.,'
which remain to be distributed. ■Wita
this in mind, each committee has decided
that the capital cities' allotment of guns,
I trench mortars, and machine guns at present
available for distribution shall be: —Sydney,
20 guns, 40 machine guns, 10 trench mortars;
Melbourne, the same; Brisbane, 7 guns, 14
machine guns, JUtrench mortars; Adelaide, 8
guns, Itj gun?, 4 trench mot tars;
Perth, 5 guns, 10 machine guns, 3 trench mor-
tars; Hobart, 3 guns, 8 machine guns, 2
trench mortars. This allotment is tp cover the
requirements of the State War Museum and
all the suburbs within the metropolitan area.
| The State War Museum is to be permitted to
| make the -first selection. The Lord Mayor or
1 Mayor will then be invited to consult the
: Mayors of the suburbs and advise the com-
mittees as to the disposal df the remaining
trophies. Trophies remaining after the dis-
tribution, or which may reach Australia in
future, will be dealt with by the committees
at a later date.


GALLIPOLI.
REIGN OF THE LIGHT HORSE.
STORIES OF 1922 CRISIS.
(BY F. M. CUTBACK.) ,
After twenty-four hours in Constantinople/
H.M.S. Calypso took us from the Bosphorus) 1
to Kelia Bay on the Peninsula, the back door
to Anzac, and the headquarters of the Gal-
lipoli section of the Imperial War Graves
Commission. That is the official title oi
a little band some fourteen strong. But the
visiting Australian will be forgiven if he mis-
takes it for a garrison of his own country-
men, or rather not so much a garrison, as
an administration. Its head is Colonel
Hughes, a Light Horseman. He has with him
seven other Australians, mostly also of the
Light Horse, two New Zealanders, and four
British. Appearances, perhaps deceptive,
proclaim this little force the ruling authority
of Gallipoli. Its raison d’etre is, of course,
the building of the war cemeteries at Suvla.
Anzac, and Helles. But—well, the Light
Horse has a way of its own with men and
things, especially in Gallipoli.
Certainly the gods must love that wonderful
corps. Did they ever whisper to one of its
lieutenants during the strenuous days of 1915
that he, at any rate, should reach the desired
goal (though by a devious path); that he
should fly his country’s flag there even after
a Turkish victory: that he should reign as a
king on Gallipoli with the Turks as his vas-
sals, or something mighty like It; that in his
administration he should have a Russian
' prince of the blood as his gardener, and a
j distinguished Russian general as a sub-gar-
dener. Yet so It has happened; and in the
person of Colonel Hughes at least the tight
Horse has won its due in Turkey. The
story of another Light Horseman, name Jordan
of Lismore district, is also one which the
regiment might honour. He was captured,
wounded, at Anzac in June, 1915, and spent
three years in an Anatolian prison camp. Af-
ter the armistice, by favour of the same gods,
he, having learned Turkish, became British
Vice-Consul at Constantinople: He has
tasted some of the finer sweets of life; for,
having been maltreated in prison, and haying
stored up in his memory (as any good Light
Horseman will), the names and faces of some
of those Turks in authority, who insulted ins
regiment, too, in ill-using himself, he has had
given into his hands opportunity to put it
across most of them since,’’ as he says, and
has not failed to do it. There were a few
golden davs in Constantinople after the Tur-
kish armistice of 1918, when the Royal Nav y
and the Light Horse (earlier arrivals) stopped
in the streets every motor car used by im-
pudent German staff, and other officers, told
them curtly to get out and walk, and «®,;
mmdeered the cars. It wms worth doing,
said Hughes, “just to see how the Turks jeered
at them.”
HOW NEAR TO WAR?
We settled down to talking of later history
in a corner of the mess-room at Kelia. How
near were they to war here September
1022 ? Were we in Australia right in judg
ing that collision would have involved these
countrymen of ours pretty early in the scrim-
Were they thinking then of evacua-
ting Gallipoli?
"Evacuating? Again?” replied nugu«. j
God, we weren’t! As soon as the danger ap-
peared we offered our services to the small
British force, and we were all accepted
gratefully. We knew all the country well
and the British badly wanted sapper officers.
We shored up the wharf at Chanak for liar
amV We built Ul. ««*«>“
on Kllid Bahr Plateau for the R.A.F. We
helped to organise the camp here for the
military and select the battery positions for
Se guns. I think the navy has a real
affection for us. But leave Gallipoli, or
sit neutral when we held it, and bad our flag
living here, and the Anzacs graves lying un-
finished ov’er the ridges? No- blojinin- fear!
We -were for the war all right, it the lurk
wanted it, and the Defence . Depar *?£ nt *5
Melbourne had it from us by cable and
P "But the Turks were not really going to
fleht and I think the British exaggerated
the danger. All of us here hoped that the
Turk would do something silly and start the
ball rolling, for his attitude was insolent,
and unfortunately the French only made him
worse by drawing out. How could we see
him threatening Gallipoli, with our graves
here only half-finished and Hone Pine mem-
orial only just begun? As for Aus-
tralia’s response, well I think at lf
or two of us had got knocked, and the
Turk had started shooting up our camp or
the cemeteries, there would have been no
doubt about the response. ® ou ”®* A “ s ‘
tralia could always have said that we en-
listed illegally, or had become simply British
array and washed its hands of us; but it
did not seem likely. We heard soon after-
wards what individual friends ot ours out
home would have done, anyway.
As a matter of fact the Light Horse wen
represented in the front line at Chanak ai
soon as the Turks began to surround th*
British position. One of two brothers Jones,
of the Kelia camp, went out in a Ford car
with a British captain of artillery and a load
of petrol, and blew up a whole senes of
Turkish dumps near Erenkeui, 5.9 ammunition,
and grenades. Jones fired the last of these
dumps in the very faces of advancing Turkish
cavalry.
ANOTHER STORY.
The cruiser Calypso, which took us from
Kelia again to Port Said, supplied another
story, from Smyrna, to confirm the Light |
Horsemen’s assertion that the Turk did not j
really mean to precipitate trouble so long
as he was handled firmly. The Calypso and
several foreign ships were lying in Smyrna
Harbour when the Turks arrived there hot
on the heels of the defeated Greeks. The
Turks’ tails were well up, and they ordered
the ships to leave. The captain of the
Calypso said he was sorry, but he had con-
trary orders from his own Covernment, and
should have to consult them. The Turks re-
plied by mining the harbour. The
did not look happy, but the Calypso’s chief
anxiety was that a. sister-ship, the Curacoa.
was due in. Smyrna in a day or so’s time, and
the Navy did not want either to lose her
from a mine or to allow the Turks to succeed j
in keeping her outside. Fortunately, in the ,
afternoon of the day before the Curacoa was
due the Egyptian steamer Abassieh left
Smyrna under a Turkish pilot. The Calypso
wirelessed the Abassieh: "Please be so good ;
as to signal us your course as you go out;”
which the Abassieh did. The Calypso then |
signalled the course out to the Curacoa, i
which, to the amazement of the Turks ashore,
steamed in next morning, safely finding the
channel between the minefields. In the words
of the Calypso’s officers: "That finished the
Turks. It convinced them that It was no use
their trying any more funny business with ,
us.”
Mahan, if he were alive to-day, would add
a chapter or two from modern events on the
Influence of sea power on history. It is un-
deliberately carry out her own policy without
likely that he would omit mention of the
Royal Navy’s work during the crisis of 1922
in the Eastern Mediterranean.


s n/j. 3 , 'f- 2-T
THE WAR MUSEUM.
The opening of the Australian War
Museum at the Exhibition Building in
Prince Allred Park this afternoon is an
event upon which the residents of Syd-
ney may well congratulate themselves.
To have allowed this collection of war
associations to be permanently settled at
Canberra without granting to Sydney
citizens a chance of examining it would
have been Morse than a blunder, it would
have been a crime. At one time it really
appeared that this crime would be commit-
ted; all sorts of reasons were advanced to
show that the Museum either could not, or
should not, be housed ih Sydney. There
M*as no available accommodation, said
some; it M-as a mistaken parade of some- ;
thing that Mould far better be forgotten,
said others. Fortunately the difficulties
I of accommodation have not proved fatal,
nor have the peculiar views of the ab-
horrers been allowed to carry too much
weight. The museum opens this after-
noon in a situation which will allow of
its multitudinous treasures being properly
displayed, and for a lengthy period our
citizens and visitors will be enabled to
inspect it at their leisure and convenience.
This happy result has been brought about
by the constant and unshakable per-
sistency of certain advocates who knew
the value of the museum aud the advan-
tages to be derived from an opportunity
lo inspect it. Among the chief of those
advocates Mere the officials of the Re-
turned Sailors aud Soldiers' League, a
body Avhich Mas naturally aud peculiarly
interested in the Museum and its innumer-
able exhibits, and Mr. Justice Ferguson,
whose continuous plea for a Sydney “sea-
son,” and earnestly expressed appreciation
of tbe exhibition, are well known to all.
But the responsible officials continued to
press upon the authorities aud the public
tbe necessity for a local shoM’ing of the
Museum, aud to point out tbe loss and
injustice which Mould be incurred by re-
fus’ug a request which was both reason-
able and capable of being granted.
The alleged difficulty of insufficiency of
accommodation having been proved un-
founded, there is yet the opposition to be
answered which declares that this is an ex-
hibition of things which ought not to be
honoured or remembered. It is a peculiar
and a difficult plea to ausM'er; for
the point of view' from which it
is made is not easily appreciated, or
even understood, by anyone outside
the small circle Avho claim to raise it.
That there is much that is horrible, much
that is beastly iu M*ar, and little that is
glorious, may be safely conceded. But
it Mould seem to au unprejudiced thiuker
that if a hatred of Mar is the best way
of exorcising the spirit which generates
Mar, then the best way of creating that
hatred Avould be lo parade the horror and
fatuity of Mar as much as possible. Aud
certainly no one -who visits this exhibition
with a heart in his breast can fail to be
impressed and disgusted with the evi-
dence which it affords upon that very
point. There is no attempt here to glorify
war; he who could had iu all this motley
collection of matters associated with war
any one thing that could be used in ad-
vocacy of war for war’s own sake, would
be a being strange indeed, and most
illogical. There is much to thrill the
heart with pride; but nothing to help It
imagine that Avar is grand or great or
anything but horrible. ,
This consideration leads us to ex-
pound what appears to us to be the
real value of this Avonderful collection.
In the lirst place, the obvious reason for
gathering it together, and for making it
available, is its utility. Whether we
like it or not, it is impossible to conceive
of an unrecorded age, and especially of
an era of such tremendous experiences
as that which is exclusively represented
in the Museum. History must be written;
and, if it is to be written, it is obA'ious
that it must be written as accurately as
possible. No greater aid to such accuracy
could be imagined than this exhibition pro-
vides. These are the actual things about
which the historian has to write; there, to
be lingered and touched, not ideas Avhich he
must evolve out of an imagination which,
unaided! must prove Averse than helpless;
but concrete facts made visible. What
would not the historians of the past have
given for such an aid to their labours?
Hoav many a misconception would have
been avoided, and lioav much untruth
would have remained untold. But
this is not all. It is not, although the
most obvious, the greatest reason why
avc value this display of Armageddon's
years. That great and primal reason is
one of heart and not of mind, of
sentiment and not of logic. Although
Avar itself is beastly, there are things
about Mar that are far above the
things of the beast. There are imperish-
able and lovely things; there are associa-
tions so sacred that they are almost divine.
Man may often bring himself, and war
too truly often may bring him, beloAV the
level of the beast: but Avar may also prove
—a thousand times has proved—that he is
just as truly but a little lower than the
angels. Heroism, and unselfishness, and
patriotism, and the valuing of honour and
duty above the paltry claims of life: such
things as these this exhibition speaks of
Avith a voice that all may hear. These
things are things of sentiment, and
sentiment is greater than logic. There
are more things wrought by senti-
ment, to paraphrase the Teunysoniau line,
than this world Avots of. Tbe personal
aud sentimental associations of the Aus-
tralian! War Museum Mould make it Morth
displaying M'ere there never a history to
be MTitteu.


WAR HISTORY.
AN EPIC STORY.
S.M.H. 4.4.25.
For Future Generations,
MR. BEAN HONOURED BY
JOURNALISTS.
Mr. C. E. W. Bean, Australian official war
correspondent and historian, who was the
guest at the New South Wales Institute of
Journalists at luncheon at Farmer’s yester-
day, paid a glowing tribute to the deeds of
the A.I.F. Those deeds, he said, would he
commented on with pride as long as history
lasted.
There was a large attendance of member*
of the institute. Mr. C. Brunsdon Fletcher,
president, presided. The guests of honoul
were Madame Elsa Stralia, Miss Bessie Grit*
flths, Major-General Brand, Mr. C. E. W. Beao
and Mrs. Bean, and* Mr. Homer Samuels, bus*
band of Madame Galli-Curci.
Mr. Brunsdon Fletcher said It was an es-
sentially Australian luncheon, and it seemed
to him that the word '‘Australia” covered
the toast list in the form of a cross-word
puzzle. The first syllable might he taken
to represent the "Aussles,” for whom Major*
General Brand and Mr. Bean would respond,
The second syllable was represented by theit
lady guests, Madame Stralia and Miss Bessie
Griffiths, and that toast might be termed
“The Daughters of Music.” The final Ictte*
“A” might be taken to represent America,
for which Mr. Homer Samuels would respond,
THE TOAST "AUSSIK.”
Mr. T. Spencer, senior vice-president of th*
Institute, In proposing the toast "Aussie,*'
said they were extremely pleased to welcome
Major-General Brand to the Institute. Mr,
Bean, he added, was the doyen of Australian
war correspondents. If there was any fault to
be found with Mr. Bean during the campaign!
in which he was engaged it was his desir*
to get right to the place where important
events were happening, irrespective of any
personal danger there might be to hlmselt
The books he had written, and was writing,
would form a most thrilling chapter in th*
history of the Commonwealth and of the Era*
pire.
Major-General Brand, in reply, praised th*
courage of the "Aussles” during the rigor-
ous hardships of the war. He was proud
to be associated with the Journalists’ Insti-
tute, as bis personal relations and those
of his department with the members of th*
Press had always been of the most cordial
description. (Applause.)
WAR HISTORY COMMENDED.
Mr. Bean, who was given a cordial recepi
tlon, said he would never forget the complli
ment that had been paid him by the Jour*
nailers’ Association in nominating him fo|
the position of Official War Correspondent
and he had during the different campaign*
with the A.I.F. endeavoured to live up to tta*
trust bis colleagues had reposed in him. 1*
regard to the history of the war, his sincen
desire was that it should be as accurate at
possible In regard even to the minutes!
details. The Commonwealth Government wal
spending a good deal of money on the com-
pilation of this official history, and there wer*
many who though' it was not possible t*
compile a serious history of the war so soo*
after the events taking place—that it woul|
not be possible to place those events i*
proper perspective. own opinion, and
the opinion of many whose judgment o sue!
matters he greatly respected, was tl \.h*
Federal Government was fully Justified . tail
expenditure In getting a reliable and accurati
account of the campaigns of the A.I.F. (Heap,
hear.) He personally felt that he was nol
dealing with the events he narrated in
books from the truly historic standpoint!
That was never for a moment contended. H|
looked upon his task as being much the sanu
as that of the photographer who placed o*
his plates pictures which would last forever*
His was the word picture of events as thej
had actually occurred from the words oi
actual witnesses of the events. His book!
would provide the material from which th*
future historian would compile a history ol
the war, giving the different evepts of im-
portance their proper perspective. And i|
might be that In the future there would aris*
some great Australian poet, who would fm|
inspiration in bis records of the glorious deed!
of the A.1.F., and who would then tell th|
people of the world, in language that wouli
last forever, the epic story of Australial
courage and valour. (Applause.)
There were well authenticated stories i|
every chapter of the official history of deed!
by the men of the A.I.F. that were no(
surpassed by any regiment of infantry takin|
part in the war, or, indeed, of any infantri
in the history of the world. (Applause.)
The story of events, which he had to recor(
were stories that shoyld be preserved fo|
future generations of Australians. Then
wer» some people whose opinion on manj
matters Ihe thoroughly respected who wer|
not In agreement with him as to the neces*
sity for preserving the history of the valoul
of the A.1.F., on the ground that it wouli
encourage a war-llke spirit in the rising gena
ration of Australians. He did not, for on*
moment, believe that that would bo the case
(Hear, hear ) It was necessary that thcri
should be a true record of the deeds of thi
A.1.F., In order to prevent a wrong judgment
from being formed In the future in regari
to the very Important part that Australia
played In the great war. (Applause.) Arv|
there were hundreds, nay, thousands, a*
events that were well worthy of perpetual
tlon In an oflQcial history. Without thaj
official history there would be danger of sue!
gallant deeds as were dons at Lone Pine an|
Quinn’s Post, and at Pozieres, being forgot-
ten. Stories of a few men holding bac|
hordes of Turks, so that their colleagues mlg'*
retire, and the gallant deeds of the men a*
Western Australia and Victoria on Gallipoli
were those that Inspired the ideals of !
nation, and enable it to look steadfastly an|
courageously into the future. The men whi
did those brave deeds, the men who foughj
and died, were their brother Australians-*
men who had worked alongside them in th!
office or who had ridden round the paddock!
with them —and they should ever remembel
that "Greater love hath no man than thi*
that a man lay down his life for his bra
ther.” (Applause.)
The unfortunate part, said Mr. Bean, wa|
that it was the very flower of Australian men!
hood that laid down Its collective life In th!
war. The bravest and the noblest wer|
always the first to die In such campaign*
The loss of these brave and noble men wa|
the greatest loss sustained by Australii
during the war. It would be absolutely wron|
that there should be silence in regard to tbi
noble deeds and the sacrifice of those bravi
men. The qualities that inspired those need#
were the qualities that inspire th|
Imagination of the rising generation, and e|
by the record of those deeds would be buill
up a race of great and noble Australians. Thai
was the reason why he believed that thi
money that was being expended on the com*
pilation of official history of the war wa|
being well expended by the Federal Governs
ment. (Applause.)
OTHER TOASTS.
Mr. Delamore McCay, In proposing th*
toast. "The Daughters of Music,” said hi
entirely endorsed all that Mr. Bean had sai|
in regard to the necessity for preserving th!
history of the gallant deeds of the A.I.VJ
In regard to Madame Elea Stralia and Misi
Bessie Griffiths, whilst their careers wer|
delayed by the war they unselfishly gav*
the best of their talents to the amusement
and the making of the lot of the men of th*
A.I.F. somewhat brighter and easier durin|
the men’s short visits to "Blighty.” (Ap<
plause.)
Madame Elsa Stralia and Miss Beast*
Griffiths, in reply, thanked the Journalists lo*
their welcome.
The president proposed the toait of M*
Homer Samuels, coupled with the name of hl|
wife, Madame Galli-Curci, who, he said, thougl
absent in body, was present in spirit.
Mr. Homer Samuels, in reply, said he hal
read a great deal about Australia befor*
coming here, but its beauty far surpassel
anything he had imagined. He concluded bj
proposing the toast, "Australia, the Land o|
Sunshine.”
Mr. W. Leighton Bailey, whose health wai
proposed by the chairman, expressed his ap-
preciation of the cordiality of the welcom*
home he had received from his colleague*
after his ten months’ absence abroad.


TRUSTEES.
Ration Ccn. WALLACE, C.R.
President-Dr. F. ANTILL POCKLEY.
Vice-President— Mr. J. O. FAIRFAX, C.R.E.
Committee Mr. If. C. RUDDER, C.R.E.
Col. W. E. S. MACKENZIE, D. 5.0., V.D.
Hon. Secretary—Dr. MARY BOOTH. 0.R.F..
Hon. Treasurer Mr. J. H. DAVIES.
THE SOLDIERS’ CLUB.
426 GEORGE STREET,
SYDNEY.
SOLDIERS’ CLUB APPEAL.
Dear Sir , —
7 he Soldiers ’ Club, lifter 7 years' service, finds itself almost at the end
of its resources, and will hare to close its doors in three or four weeks
unless help conies.
It was formed in 1915. During its 7 years ’ service it has catered for
the wants of many thousands of our Soldiers. It has recorded over 5,000,000
attendances, and has provided about ISO,OOO beds. The Club is a place of rest
and recreation, affording J)eds with meals and billiards at moderate jirices, and
reading, writing and recreation rooms, care of money, valuables and luggage
free of charge. If a man is at the end or his resources, the Club does not
see him want giving him credit for board and lodging, which he is expected
to refund when he can. The Club also finds employment and advises the men
in their affairs.
The Club has undoubtedly done much to enable men to re-establish
themselves in civil life. At the present time, Irom unemployment and other
causes, there is a special need for the continuation of this Institution, which is
so sane and steadying a factor in their lives. If the Club be compelled to close
down now it would be a calamity to returned men.
The Trustees are most anxious to continue the work, and mindful of
the untailing response the Club has always had to its appeals, they earnestly
ask for further support.
We are,
Yours faithfully,
F. ANTILL HOCKLEY, President.
AIAI\Y BOOTH, lion. Secretary.
Mur 31st 1922,


THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD, MONDAY, APRIL 20, 1927.
THE LANDING AT ANZAC.
Photo, by the late Lance-corporal A. tt. U. Joyner., (Copyright.)
PART OF THE 4th BATTALION LANDING ON THE MORNING OF APRIL 25, 1915. IN THE FOREGROUND IS THE STAFF OF COLONEL MACLAURIN. ON THE BEACH LIES AN
' AUSTRALIAN ENGINEER, THE FIRST TO FALL AT ANZAC.


THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD, SATURDA Y, AUGUST 3, 192
A WAR MEDLEY.
After Fifteen Years.
IM. E. J. COCKS.)
The setting was the British Consulate 411
a large German city, and the time, 10 o’clock
in the morning of August 4, 1914. Outside
an excited German crowd went marching,
running, shouting by, whilst inside Indians,
Africans, Canadians, Australians, and folk
from the British Isles were massed to-
gether irrespective of age or class or coloui
On the stairway some lively Canadian
tourists were talking animatedly, and in the
large room opposite several Indian University
students were trying to explain tiie situation,
as they knew it, to a Frencn-Canadian with
a limited knowledge of English In one corner
a young West of England mother was hushing
her baby with a Devon lullaby, and in anothei
a frail old Scottish couple were wistfully
watching, and probably envying, some youth-
ful Australians, whilst an Irish comedian was
gallantly struggling to make the time pass
more' pleasantly with witticisms to which no
me paid the least attention. A varied crowd
ndeed, wherein East and West stood linked
ay the common bond of British citizenship
in the face of a common danger. One and
all waited for the British Consul. "When
will he come?” That was the question on
every tongue.
At each fresh footfall neads were turned
expectantly, only to meet with disappoint-
ment. From dawn these Britons had been
gathering and tensely walling for the Consul
and their marching orders His arrival was
the event of paramount importance to one
and all How would they travel? In cattle
trucks? In vans? No one cared, so long
as the way to England lay open, what the
means of transit or what the discomfort of
the route. ‘When we get home.” That
was the burden of their talk. Yet to most
of them England was but a name. A week
before and they had been Indians, Australians,
Canadians, but when war came they were
“just British;” London the centre of the
Empire, their Empire, and England ‘Home ”
Rumours flew. Hope, fear, the whole gamut
of emotion had been traversed in the first
hour and re-enacted in each succeeding *our
so that long before midday nerves were frayed,
indeed Steadily the heat grew more oppres-
sive as steadily the crowd Increased
THE CONSUL HAD OONE.
Suddenly a voice boomed out from the
doorway; “Subjects of his Britannic Majesty,
your Consul left for England several hours
ago; but at the request of his Britannic
Majesty’s Government the United States Con-
sul will look after your interests. Please
proceed immediately to the American Con-
sulate and you will be advised.”
The Consul gone—impossible! Yet that
j had been the message. Were they then
! deserted, betrayed? Consternation reigned
momentarily, but then that poise, typically
British, reasserted Itself.
Next came the exodus. A little crippled
English woman seized her crutches, but at
the same moment a big Red Indian show-
man, lately on tour with a circus, touched
her shoulder, “Ma’am, please permit me to
carry you, my arms are very strong,” and
with the words he lifted her like a child
and joined the procession of black and white,
j brown and yellow, old and young, who, now
walking, now running, traversed the distance
between the two Consulates. A Newfoundland
student carried a pink-cheeked baby, and a
most Immaculate society lady led a grimy
small girl by the hand. They were so unlike
in aspect, the units in this procession, vet
they were so amazingly friendly. Two quali-
ties alone they seemed to have in common
They were all British. They were all quiet
En masse they arrived at the American
Consulate, where officials, although endeavour-
ing to be kind, yet seemed widely separated
in spite of a common language. They were
neutrals. The British were combatants. The
noise the Americans made in bewailing their
losses of luggage was almost incredible. So
many had been caught, whilst travelling, by
the congestion attendant upon mobilisation,
that miles of luggage lined many railway
termini, and for all these trunks and bags
the shrillest-voiced females in the world were
wildly clamouring to their Consul. Blocks
away that clamour, so essentially un-English,
could be heard. The British stood to lose
so much more than mere clothes and travell-
ing gear, but they were quite calm. In the
weeks following the declaration of war young
British wives were often to bid farewell to
husband perforce left behind and mothers to
sons. Yet never was there any fuss, any
hysteria; quietly the women bravely smiled
their good-byes, and quietly from all sides
came the “cheerios” of the men.
To all those oddly-assorted people who had
gathered at the British Consulate, August 4
brings many memories, and one is always
of the new meaning, bom that day, of British
citizenship under the British King.


- * >1 FIFTEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE EMDEN’S DEFEAT.^*
On November 9, 1914, H.M.A.S. Sydney engaged the German raider Emden off Cocos Island, where
Captain Von Muller had destroyed the cable station. The raider was almost completely destroyed.
The crew is shown above abandoning the vessel.
ANNIVERSARY OF THE SYDNEY-EMDEN BATTLE
Lieutenant-Commander Salter placing a wreath on the Cenotaph on Saturday, on behalf of ex-
officers of H.M.A.S. Sydney. " // .


7 / /
MEMORIES.
Christmastime in Flanders.
S.M.HERALD. 19/12/31
(BY ALEX. SCOTT.)
Of the five Christmas Days which fate con
polled me to spend on active service in Flar
ders, the first was unique for many reason
As the war dragged on, year after year, it
undoubtedly true that the average man showe
the effects of mental and physical fatigue,
can think of only two comrades who honestl
and frankly revelled in fighting; some—sui
prtsingly few in the circumstances—brok
down completely; most of us, as time wen
on, seemed to be granted a feeling of numb
ness, as if nature had given us a kind c
anaesthetic which enabled us to endure th
dally strain of horror and beastliness.
But, at the end of 1914, it was different
In those far-off days we were still sufficient!;
resilient to appreciate the incongruity of cele
brating Christmas with rifles in our hands
“Peace on earth: goodwill towards men." Wi
felt there was something wrong somewhere
In that first winter of the war, our front lln<
up “Plugstreet” way. was little more than t
breastwork. Deep dugouts could not hav<
been made even if they had been thought of
for one had only to scratch the surface ol
the ground to strike water in that rich Flan-
ders loam. So we contented ourselves with
crazy little shelters banked up with sandbags
Shellfire, as we came to know it in later
years, was unknown, or we could not have
held out for 24 hours. Duckboards, which
afterwards were made by the mile In R.E.
workshops, had not yet come into existence.
To keep ourselves out of the bottomless mud
we stood on lumber “scrounged” from ruined
farms in our vicinity, or even on paths bricked
with surplus tins of bully beef! In December,
1914, the home fires were still burning fairly
brightly, and our postbag was heavily laden,
not only with personal Christmas presents,
but with communal tributes, sometimes of an
embarrassing nature. For instance, the Fal-
kirk miners sent us a huge roll of black twist
tobacco, only usable by the most seasoned
clay-pipe smokers, of which there were not
half a dozen in the battalion; from another
source came a portable bath-heater, which
belled its name, and had to be dumped at our
first move. Every soldier in France received
from Princess Mary a metal box containing
chocolate and cigarettes. To-day this box,
even if now used to hold buttons, has some
historic Interest, for surrounding the medal-
lion of Princess Mary on the lid are shields
bearing the names of our Allies.
NO COMMUNICATION TRENCHES.
A- this period there were almost no com-
munication trenches, and we reached the
front line by walking across the open after
dark; at times, with ration-carriers, R.E. work-
ing parties, and incoming or outgoing reliefs,
the recognised routes seemed to become as
congested as Piccadilly Circus, and it was in-
credible that the noise did not draw fire from
the enemy. No doubt we escaped because the
Germans were occupied in exactly the same
manner, and in those good old days there
tvas a spirit of live and let live in the front
ine. Bursts of rifle-fire broke out at inter-
nals every night, begun, one suspects, by some
.entry letting off his rifle to clean it, or simply
because he was bored with Idleness. The fir-
ng was taken up for hundreds of yards on
:ach side, no one knowing what he was firing
it, or why. Verey lights went up, and the
wise became deafening. Then, after a quarter
)f an hour, or so, the excitement died down,
md nobody (except, perhaps, the British
axpayer) was a penny the worse.
It was this give and take atmosphere, ana
absence of bitterness that made possible the
“fraternising” scenes on Christmas Day, 1914
which so scandalised the higher authorities’
Dawn, on the sector opposite Messlnes, was
notable chiefly for a total absence of those
spasmodic bursts of musketry already de-
scribed. “Stand-to,” when every man in the
line took his place on the flrestep, was, as
one unconscious humourist put it, “just like
a Sunday.” Then came the rum issue, for
which in our battalion the platoon command-
ers were personally responsible. (In passing,
it may be remarked that rum was rum in
those days; legend said that some of it had
been in store since the Crimean war; later
on, the contents of S.R.D. Jars was more like
some fiery paint-remover). After “stand-
down” the ritual of “drumming-up” began
along the line smoke from a hundred
it tie fires rose into the air, as a hundred
breakfast COOkS got to Work P re P arln S
LACK OF SHELLS.
li ve ? £ ee a day when any column
of smoke immediately drew a burst of shell-
on* bnfih* 1914 i her ? was more toleration
on both sides— and a lack of shells. Prom
e t ip e /. man trenches. 300 yards away, similar
rails of smoke mounted to heaven. There
n7ufo° mplete f si i ence ’ and for a while no sign
or l e where the German
SSrSSW toto a holl °*- There - at regular
intervals, two arms and a bucket shot up to
empty water over the sandbagged parapet
hk t e r°cnch W d^v har ? at .T° rk trylng
nis trench dry. In ordinary circumstances
fhi’ S K not U K d * certalnly hay e been taken at
the bucket, but on this morning, in some
unaccountable way, there was mutual agree-
rrnriui < u SUS *f ei i ld * bounties, and no one fired.
Gradually, at Intervals, along the line a few
heads appeared furtively. Then one bold
' e n U ™ g °t right out of Ms trench and sat
hv fl h Hnw^ ape ' Hls example was soon copied
by a dozen or more on both sides, and, though
there was a certain amount of friendly arm-
waving, most of the gestures were derisive. A
M^n> 0 re r k in i il u iduals advanced into No
Man s Land, and bartered buttons or similar
f So]dle ?. are born romancers, and
the tales of fraternising that reached the base
Sr re t ? ore than a grain of salt - On our
t 4 here was certainly no football match
Without warning from somewhere on our left
a shot was fired. Immediately, there was a
scurry for shelter by Britishand GmaiJ
a JJJ®’ t ?. d * in a few seconds “the situation was
normal, to use a classic phrase in the
German trenches, as tokens of this strange
Christmas celebration, were a number of tins
of good bully-beef; In exchange we possessed
What b i°h Xe extramely bad German Cigars
What the Kaiser thought of the fraternising
we never heard; the people at G.H.Q were
TrSv ed u' pe !; haps 2 th eood reals,
i ruiy might it have been sad, “C’est
magnlflque, mais ce n’est pas la guerre.”


MESSINES.
SMH 11/6/32
The Tunnellers’ Battle.
(BY CAPTAIN ALEX SCOTT. D. 3.0.. M. 0.)
Messines ridge was one of those mounds
on which the Germans, with uncanny skill,
hardened their resistance when the struggle
on the western front settled down to trench
warfare In the autumn of 1914. This high
ground dominated a wide stretch of country
from the River Douve northwards to Ypres
itself. Anyone who has fought In the salient
will remember only too well how the enemy
flares at night seemed to appear in rear as
well as in front; while batteries hidden behind
Messines fired right into. one’s back. So
much was this the case that British gunners
were frequently accused, wrongly, of dropping
shells into their own trenches.
As a preliminary to an advance east of
Ypres, which, if successful, would not only
clear the salient, but the whole Belgian coast
as well, and remove the submarine menace
from the Channel ports, It was necessary to
gain possession of Messines. When the spring
attack at Arras ended in stalemate, the British
G.H.Q. turned its eyes to the north. It
planned what Is known as a “limited objec-
tive.” For months, stories of colossal mining
operations near Messines had percolated
through with the rations from railhead, that
home of mendacity. For once rumour was
no jade.
Shortly after 3 a.m. on June 7, 1917, tha
attack on Messines opened with an explos on
such as surely never was before on land or sea.
An earthquake shook the whole countryside,
as nineteen mines went up simultaneously with
a roar that was heard in England. By com-
parison the artillery barrages which followed
seemed like the noise of popguns. So effec-
tive was the shock of the explosions that
the Initial infantry advance met with very
little resistance; and so well had the advance
been organised that the whole of the captured
ridge was held and consolidated in spite of
the most determined counter-attacks. It
is now known that over 600 tons of explosives
were used, and 8080 yards of galleries ex-
cavated in preparing this appalling upheaval,
NEW MEN, NEW METHODS.
During 1915 a new type of soldier began
to appear on* the Western Front, especially la
sectors where No Man’s Land was narrow.
He walked with a stoop: he knew nothing
of saluting, and often addressed his officer
as “Boss.” But he had one advantage over
the rest of us: he knew exactly why he was
there—“ For to blow the Germans up.” (Only
the word wasn’t Germans.) He had about
as much use for a rifle as he would have
had for a battleaxe. Heavy artillery he re-
spected, but for alarming the enemy he
preferred to rely on his own explosives.
Soon certain parts of the front line, when
photographed from aeroplanes, began to look
like pictures of the moon. Areas became
pitted with craters as if there had been a
volcanic eruption. That was all the work
of the tunnellers; but they did not go about
boasting of their work. The tunnellers worked
in the bowels of the earth, down and forward,
forward and down, and envied none of us
our sunlight and fresh air. To the tun-
nellers belongs the distinction of enlisting
mice and canaries as allies, whose demean-
our in their cages betrayed the presence of
foul air in the galleries, and in the won-
derful war memorial building on Edinburgh
Castle rock they appear on a mural tablet
entitled “The Tunnellers’ Friends.”
Sometimes, as a great favour, it was pos-
sible to see the tunnellers’ work. One dis-
appeared into a kind of rabbit burrow, first
with shoulders bent, then on all fours, finally
in a literal way carrying out Napoleon’s dic-
tum of an army advancing on its stomach.
At last the passage widened a little. Tha
guide flashed his torch, and demanded silence
by putting his finger to his lips. Directly
overhead could be heard a faint but regular
“tap-tap.” That was enough. Once again
in the open air the miner allowed himself
the luxury of a loud chuckle, and said. “Right
below him, by gosh.”
A BIG BLOW-OUT.
A day or two later a tunnelling officer might
arrive at our H.Q. and say he was ready to
“pop her off.” He mentioned an hour ten-
tatively. It was nothing to him that the
time coincided with our relief, and that the
exploding of a mine was apt to attract un-
desirable attention. For delay was danger-
ous. If he waited, the Germans might blow
in his galleries, and spoil all his work. So
we made our preparations. Then, at the
appointed time the tunneller pressed a but-
ton, and with a roar the half of Franco
seemed to go up into the air. Immedi-
ately every battery in the sector, both British
and German, opened fire. The Boches crept
forward to the east side of the crater and
threw bombs: we crept to the west side and
did the same. Somewhere within a hundred
yards, 10, 20, or 30 strong men were dying
horribly, smothered in debris.
Gradually the din lessened, and the flares
grew fewer. The “wind” died away: and
in the morning, except for a few scraps of
grey clothing and a new crater, everything
was much the same as before. Aeroplanes
came droning overhead, the “heavies” began
their dally strafe, and 24 hours later th
British citizen read. “We exploded a mine.”
That was all.


,*li^ vv y 33
LETTERS
“WAR EPIC.”
TO THE EDITOR OP THE HERALD.
Sir, —Captain Frank Pogson Bethune. M.C.,
M.A. (Cantab.), the author of the “do or die”
order at Passchendaele, referred to In Mr. E.
G. L. Thurlow’s book, “Pillboxes of Flanders,”
which received a cable mention in your issue
of to-day, Is a native of Tasmania. He Is, I
understand, now residing at Ouse (Tas.),
following the more peaceful avocation of
watching the progress of the Bethune woolly
flocks In that picturesque valley of the Ouse.
Captain Bethune was rector of Franklin In
the Huon River district at the time of his
enlistment, as a combatant, In the A.I.P, on
December 9, 1915. He was severely wounded!
during the fighting on the Western front,
and was decorated with the Military Cross)
for gallantry in the field.
A younger brother. Rev. Jno. Walter
Bethune, C.8.E., M.A. (Cantab.), of Wynyard
(Tas.), was a padre at the Claremont camp,
through which his brother Frank passed as a
reinforcement officer of the 12th Battalion,
A.I.F. While at Selwyn College, Cambridge
University, the younger Bethune won cham-
pionship honours as an athlete. For a period
of ten years he was principal of the Launces-
ton Grammar School.
The father of these gifted clerics was also a
Cambridge University graduate, gaining his
LL.B. degree.
Dr. C. E. W. Bean is rarely at fault with
his facts. Captain Bethune was a reinforce-
ment officer of the Ist Australian Division,
and was one of the large complement of troops
on board the troopship Transylvania (not
the Pennsylvania, as stated by Dr. Bean) en
route from Alexandria to Marseilles. Captain
Bethune was detailed for the church service
held on board that troopship on Sunday, April
2, 1916, because It was felt that a sermon de-
livered by one who was destined to share the
front-line dangers and privations with those
he was addressing would constitute a very
strong appeal. It was not, as averred, a matter
of unavailable chaplains. Captain Bethune’s
sermon and General Birdwood's address will
live long In the memories of those privileged
to listen on that occasion.
I was officer-commanding the troops on
board the Transylvania on that memorable
occasion. Doubtlessly there are many who
will recall the fact that the Impressive burial,
service conducted off the Sardinian coast—-a
sr.i sequel to an unfortunate incident on the
voyage—fell to the duty of one of the regular
A.I.F. chaplains on board.
Zlz-zagglng her course through the sub-
marine-infested waters of the Mediterranean,
tha ill-fated Transylvania carried a valuable
human freight. General Sir Wm. Blrdwood
and his corps headquarters from evacuated
Gallipoli, and General Sir W. E. Peyton and
staff, fresh from the successful subjugation of
the turbulent Senussl, were numbered among
the 4000 troops aboard. General Peyton had
been appointed military secretary on General
Headquarters, the British army in Prance
1 was responsible, at a later stage, as officer
In command of the Ist Australian Division
Base at Etaples (Prance), for the selection of
Captain Bethune as one of the Infantry re-
inforcement officers to receive special training
as a machine gun officer. He was subsequently
posted to the 3rd Machine Gun Company.
I am, etc..
W. D. EVANS.
259 Wardell-road. West Marrlckville
July 10.
WAR INCIDENT.
I ——•—-
Captain Bethune’s Order,
ORIGINAL IN WESTERN
AUSTRALIA.
KALQOORLIE, Tuesday.
The order found In an Australian pill-box
at Passchendaele, to which Mr. E. O. L. Thur-
low makes references In his book “Pill Boxes
of Flanders,” is now in the possession of ex-
Lleutenant E. H. Chambers, of Cheetham-
street, Kalgoorlle, formerly of the First
Machine Gun Battalion of the First Australian
l Division.
As the Commonwealth War Historian (Dr.
C. E. W. Bean) has declared, it was issued by
Captain T. P. Bethune, of the 3rd Australian
Machine Gun Company.
Mr. Chambers was a sergeant in charge of
a section of guns at the time the order was
issued. Captain Bethune was at that time a
lieutenant and officer commanding No. 1 Sec- j
tlon. The order, which Is still quite legible, j
was written on a sheet from a regulation ser-
vice notebook in Indelible pencil. It Is as
follows: —“Special orders to No. 1 Section, i
18/8/TB. This position will be held, and the
section will remain here until relieved. The
enemy cannot be allowed to interfere with this
programme. If the section cannot remain
here alive, it will remain here dead, but in
any case it will remain here. Should any man,
through shell-shock or other cause, attempt to
surrender, he will stay here dead. Should all
guns be blown out, the section will use Mills’
grenades and other novelties. Finally, the
position as stated will be held. —Bethune, Lt.,
O/C. No. 1 Section."
Mr. Chambers said that all the section
occupying the position were not found dead.
Quite a number returned alive.
The company concerned in the order was
badly “strafed” at Bullecourt, where it saved
only one gun. At Passchandaele gas shells re-
sulted in many casualties. Captain Bethune
was then familiarly known as “Dad.”
Mr. Chambers has lost touch with Captain
Bethune since the war. He was surprised that
after such a lapse of time any reference should
be made to the order.
[An interesting letter referring to Captain
Bethune’s present avocation appears under
Letters on page 6.]


FAMOUS ORDER.
“Hold Position to Last.”
S.M.H. 13.7.33
COLONEL VINEY’S SUGGESTION.
ADELAIDE, Wednesday.
Discussing the “hold the position to the
last” order by Captain T. B. Bethune, of
the machine gun battalion of the Ist Australian
Division during the war, which is mentioned
by Colonel E. G. L. Thurlow in his book,
“Pill Boxes in France,” Lleut.-Colonel H. G.
Vlney, who was a member of the headquarters
staff of the First Division, said to-day that
the order was not legendary. Although he
had no personal knowledge of the incident,
he saw clearly that both Colonel Thurlow and
Lieutenant E. H. Chambers, of Kalgoorlle, who
has the original in his possession, made slight
mistakes in regard to it—the former as to
the locality of the pill boxes, and the latter
as to the date of the order.
"I do not think the order could have been
issued in connection with the Passchendaele
fighting, for the First Division vas not driven
out of any positions It captured during that
battle, as is suggested by Colonel Thurlow,”
said Colonel Viney.
He added that the First Division was not
relieved at any time by a British unit during
the Passchendaele offensive, but only by other
Australian troops On the other hand, the
First Division did hand over Its trenches on
the Messines-Wytschaete front to the 9th,
19th, and 25th British divisions during the
first week in April, 1918, when it followed
the rest of the Australian corps to the Somme
area to assist In holding up the German ad-
vance there. The Messines-Wytschaete front,
which was only a few miles south of Passchen-
daele, had in it a number of German pill boxes
which had been captured by the 3rd and 4th
Australian divisions in the battle of Messines
in June, 1917. As most of them were oc-
cupied by the Ist Australian machine gun
battalion during March and April. 1918, the
order was probably Issued at that time.
The least that could be said for this theory,
he added, was that it was much more likely
than the statement from Sydney, attributed
to the Commonwealth War Historian (Dr.
Bean), that the pill box order was issued
during a critical period of the fighting at Pass-
chendaele. There was no occasion for such
an order during the Ist Division operations
there. As regards the date at the top of the
order in Lieutenant Chambers’ possession,
Colonel Vlney expressed the opinion that the
figure representing the month was probably
three and not eight.
S./VJ-H- war epic.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sir, —Reference the paragraph which ap-
peared in the “S.M. Herald” of the 10th Inst.,
under the heading “War Epic—Story of Aus-
tralian Heroism." The author’s publication of
the orders promulgated by the officer in charge
of a post in No Man’s Land at Passchendaele
referred to is really better in its actual form,
which I give as follows;
SPECIAL ORDERS to No Section.
fl) This position will be held, and the section
will remain here until relieved.
(2) The enemy cannot be allowed to Interfere
with this programme.
(3) If the section cannot remain here alive It
will remain here dead, but In any case It will
remain here.
(4) Should any man through shell-shock or other
cause attempt to surrender he will remain here —
dead.
(5) Should all guns be blown out. the section
will use Mills grenades and other novelties.
(6) Finally the position as stated will be held.
A copy of the above order came into my
possession shortly after the incident actually
occurred. It having been circulated by Major-
General H. B. Walker, Commanding Ist Aus-
tralian Division, typifying “the courage, devo-
tion to duty, and splendid front line discipline
of the A.1.F.” I still have the copy of the
order in my possession, and thought I would
notify you of its actual wording, as it created
a deep impression on the troops on service at
the time.
I am, etc.,
A. P. O’MALLEY.
Orange, July 11.


THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD. FRIDAY, JULY 14, 1933.
CAPTAIN BETHUNE’S ORDER
Historian Gives Details.
Further details were given yesterday by the
official war historian (Dr. C. E. W. Bean) of
the now famous order Issued on March 13,
1918, by Lieutenant (afterwards Captain) F.
P. Bethune —"Hold the position to the last”—
to section No. 1 of the 3rd Machine Gun Com-
pany, AiP. The section, said Dr. Bean, was
holding a point on the Spoil Bank next to the
canal at Ypres when the order was issued.
Dr. Bean said: —“It was related by Lieuten-
ant Bethune later that he heard one of his
men say to another, ‘Do you reckon that
bloodthirsty chap in there means he would do
for a fellow if he tried to get away?’ His mate
replied. T reckon he would.’ Then the first
Digger said: Til send my copy home for a
souvenir if I get a show.’
“At the time the order was issued, exactly a
week before the great German offensive, some
sort of attack was expected on all parts of
the front, although up north it was known that
It would be only a feint, and the main assault
on the line took place farther south, on the
Somme. On the day on which he wrote his
order. Lieutenant Bethune said to his Briga-
dier : Tf the army has to retire, and it comes
back within three days, you will find the
machine-gun company still there.’ These
machine-gunners were part of the Ist Machine
Gun Battalion which had recently been
formed: the companies were old companies,
had tost been formed into battalions!
The order attracted the attention of the
higher authorities, and was quoted as an ex-
ample of stubbornness. I believe it was used
in some of the British military schools. Colonel
Milligan then on the Ist Divisional Staff, went
i round the front with the Brigadier on March
13. when Lieutenant Bethune made the state-
ment I have quoted. Colonel Milligan took
away a copy of the order, and he probably
5* General Walker, who was in com-
ar?d °f the J st Division. General Walker
published a copy of the order, and many
copies were sent home as souvenirs.”
nH^fAo'? e^ n * added that to communicating his
P’-’ 1 statement on the subject by telephone
nn K^ d sefGrred5 efGrred Captain Bethune’s sermon
b< l^ rd the Transylvania, but the name of
the ship was published as Pennsylvania.
FAMOUS ORDER.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE HERALD.
vei ? lnterestin 8 war Incident
P ?S ur ls f ue of the 12th Inst., re-
O to the orders Issued by Captain F
P. Bethune, M.C., of the 3rd Machine Gun
Company, A.1.P., is in the main quite true.
L™ Ve c °Py of the order signed by
SJ” March P’ 1918 ‘ Mr - Chambers is
orlr Q « te rrecfc - The facts are the
?Q?H ote ?u was given out on March 13,
! ais, when the company was occupying Spoil
rntnii funnel dugouts on the Ypres-Com-
As the Hun was expected to
laimch his big attack about that time, instruc-
tions had been given to the 0.C., No 1
2*°"’ to hold up the enemy at all costs.
post was w o p ammunitioned and
provisioned, and I believe a platoon of B
ompany, 12th Battalion, was occupying the
post with us. According to my diary Fritz
was fainy active, but no direct aSk was
rnade on our post; and, apart from fairlv
anc^oSSfn^S 11 * nothlng of much import-
ance occurred to our section in the period
from March 2 to March 21, 1918, when we
started A the Pas schendaele stimts
started with the Glencorse Wood “hop over”
20, 1917, and continued to the
the orrip? 1917, Ifc £ qulte obvl °us that
fw. i„ d f», h f dno connect lon with any opera-
are*t- A* 1 enlisted at Hobart
Wm with S him e tlme as Captain Bethune, and
r* llh hi “ Practically all the time until
WoUl l ded * 1 can endorse Mr. W. D
of \ vrr V « ei fl fine c ?, mment a r y on the history
toe aSd7er' ln ' ‘Sf ““ front -
robt. brown.
rt I a! Ta . 1 « n
53 Chandos-street, Ashfleld. July 12.


