

Births, 1/ per line, 4 lines 8/; Deaths. In
Memorlam, and Roll of Honor. 4 lines 3/:
‘ thereafter 10d per line. Marriages, tf lines
» 8/ ; thereafter lOd pei line. Funerals, 8d per
line.
BIRTHS.
LANGLEY.—ApriI 3. Yalesco Private Hospital,
T Wollongong, to Mr. and Mrs. G. Langley,
>1 River Farm, Albion Park—a daughter tooth
I well).
MARRIAGES.
ABBOTT—WILKINSON.—At St. James’ Church.
Sydney, on February 26th, by the Rev. J. W.
i Ferrier, Joseph Palmer Abbott, of Wingen,
[ eon of the late Sir Joseph Abbott and Lady
» Abbott, of The Howard, Darlinghurst, to
i Katharine Bliss, younger daughter of Mr. and
Mrs. R. B. Wilkinson, Wilga, Strathfield.
DEATHS.
ARMSTRONG.—ApriI 13th, 1924, at the resi-
dence of her daughter (Mrs. H. Shepherd), of
. Ethel Street, Harris Park. Theresa Arra-
t strong, widow of the late William Armstrong,
aged 81 years.
BAlN.—April 12, 1924, at his residence, 151
Womerah Avefiue, Darlinghurst, Kenneth
Bain, dearly beloved husband of Catherine
Bain, aged 85 years.
BROWN.—I3th April, 1924, at her parents’
residence, "Eildon,” Austral Avenue, North
; Manly, Agnes, dearly loved youngest diugh-
? ter of John and Susan Brown, aged 34 years.
CLOUT.—On 11th April, at his residence, Rich-
mond Street. Tumut, George Clout, late of
Rosemount, Brungle, in his 79th year.
FORBES.—ApriI 13, 1924, at her residence.
"Vermont.” Victor Street. Chatswood, Mary
. Grant Forbes, dearly loved daughter of Francis
and Jane Forbes, aged 42 yeans. At Rest.
FRENCH. —12th April, 1924, nt his residence.
"Billabong,” Havilah Street, Chatswood, Percy
. the dearly loved husband of Halite French,
and father of Dick and Betty French.
HlLL.—l2th April, 1924, Al ee M.-bcl, wife of
Frederick Jeffrey (E.J.) Hill, daughter of the
late John Wilson, of "Graasmeie,” Byron
Street, Coogeo.
JOHNSON. —April 12. 1924, at Ins residence.
"Yamala,” Cooper Street, Strathfield. Henry
t Staker, dearly loved husband of Elizabeth
'■ Johnson, aged 74 years. Private interment,
7 Christ Church, West BiomwLn, Birmingham,
England.
JOHNSON.— April 13th. 1924. at the Royal
North Shore Hospital. Alexander Johnson,
late of 46 Kurraba Road, North Sydney, aged
i - i 77 years.
LANCASTER.—I3th April, 1924, at her late
residence, ‘‘Kendall,” 9 Hampden Road. Ar-
tarmon. Esther Lancaster, late of Kendall,
England, in her 65th year.
LEWIS.—On 13th April, at his residence, Crish
Cottage, Kiama. Henry Lewis, dearly loved
husband of Marianne Lewis, and loving
‘ father of William, Hettie, Archer. Ernest.
Norman, and Lottie, aged 71 years.
LUSCOMBE.—ApriI 10. 1924, at Sydney Hos-
pital (result of accident), Richard Hoskins
Luscombe, beloved fathi* of Mrs. Isabelle
M. Fogarty, of 57 Bourke Sftect, Waterloo,
i and of Richard H, and Ernest s*. Luscombe,
1 of Western Australia, aged 79 years. Interred
• Waverley/ 12th April, 1924.
WALSH. —April 13, 1924. at his residence,
"Hastings,” Brighton-le-Sands, William Mark
; ’ Walter' Walsh, deariy loved husband cf
4 Isabel Walsh, and fond father of Leslie.
1 Cyril, Doreen, and Wait or, Pas*-rres’dcr.t of
j Commercial Travellers’ Association of N.S.W.
WOOD.—April 12, 1924, at a private hospital,
Sydney, William, eldest son of the late Wil-
| Ham and Isabella Wood, of Burwood and
i Campbelltown, and dearly loved brother of
' Mrs. E. Steel and Miss L. Wood.
WHEATON. —On 11th April, 19M. at S*raih-
‘ field, Elizabeth Jane Wheaton, widow of late
Alfred Wheaton, aged 75 years.
IN MEMORIAM.
JBEL. —A tribute of loro to the memory ot j
Uec., dearly loved husband of Nance. and
i | father of Marg. and Phil., who departed this _
life, April 14th, 1919.
Deeply regretted. t
OWING TO THE
EASTER HOLIDAYS
“THE WORLD’S NEWS”
WILL BE
PUBLISHED
WEDNESDAY
INSTEAD OF
THURSDAY
NEWSAGENTS AND
JJOSES OF MERIT.
Of recent times many new roses have
been introduced, several of which, after
thorough testing, have proved to be
splendid importations. The following
we can recommend with every confi-
dence. They are kinds that are SURE
TO PLEASE.
ROSE MARIE, Rose Pink; COLUMBIA, Deep
Pink; ETOILK DE HOLLANDS. Dark Red
• GOLDEN OPHELIA, Golden; HAWLMARK
CRIMSON, Crimson, Maroon, single; PIL-
GRIM, Silver-rose, Pink; LADY MAU-
REEN STEWART, a Scarlet Cerise of great
promise; MADAM BUTTERFLY. Pink
Apricot, and Gold: Mrs. DUNLOP BEST
Reddish Apricot; RED RADIANCE, Cerise.
Red: REV. F. PAGE-ROBERTS. one of
the best yet. Yellow and Bnff; Mrs. H. R..
DARLINGTON, beautiful White.
All Perfect Buds and Plenty of Perfume.
The full set for 16/, or 17/ posted.
ANDERSON AND CO.. LTD.,
THE POPULAR SEEDSMEN.
299 and 401 GEORGE STREET
Address Letters BOX 1608, G.P.0., Sydney.
IYR. KEITH F. POTTS has commenced Prac-
tice at Beverley, 86 Percival Rd.. Stanmore.
FUNERALS.
T AN CASTER.—The Relatives and Friends of
the late Mrs. ESTHER LANCASTER, cf
Hampden Road, Artannon, ire kindly United to
attend her Funeral, ‘o lea/o our Funeral Par-
lors, 49 Mount Street, North Sydney, THIS
AFTERNOON, at 1.30 Vriuck. tor C. of E.
Cemetery. Northern Su vi.-ra. ‘Bus leaves
Chatswood Station at 3.15 or Ce oete.'v.
WOOD COFFILL, LIMITED.
r*EWIS.—The Funeral of the late HENRY
LEWIS will leave his late residence Shoal-
havejj Street. Kiama, at 2.30 p.m. THIS DAY
(MONDAY), for- North Kiama Cemetery.
R. W. KENDALL, Undertaker.
IYNCH. —The Funeral of the late Miss
J SARAH MARIA LYNCH will leave her
late residence, "Normanton,” 57 Alexandra
St., Drummoyne, THIS (MONDAY) MORNING,
at 9.30 o’clock, for C. of E. Cemetery, Field
of Mars.
WOOD COFFILL LIMITED.
\ITALSH. —The Relatives and Friends of the
late Mr. WILLIAM MARK (WALTER)
WALSH, of Brightou-Le-Sands are kindly In-
vited to attend his Funeral, to leave Wood
CoffiHs Mortuary Chanel, 810 George Street,
City. TO-MORROW (TUESDAY) AFTERNOON,
at 2 o'clock, for C. of E. Cemetery, Long Bay
Road, Coogee.
WOOD COFFILL LIMITED.
W r OOD. —The Funeral of the late Mr. WIL-
LIAM WOOD, late of Campbelltown, will
leave the Mortuary Station. Regent Street, City,
THIS (MONDAY) AFTERNOON, by 1.55
o'clock Funeral Train for Presbyterian Ceme-
tery, Rookwood. Friends please alight at No.
1 Mortuary in Cemetery.
WOOD COFFILL LIMITED.
TV WAUGH AND CO..
J- FUNERAL DIRECTORS.
92 CORSO. MANLY.
Tel.. 42.
THIS WEEK.
OTHERS KINDLY NOTE.
tiug, and re-fuelling Britain's largest
battleships, we felt that we would be
secure, no matter what might come.
In these circumstances, we were will-
ing to sacrifice the ship that bore our
country’s name—our only battleship.
Would we have agreed if we had ima-
gined the Singapore project would be
abandoned? What has happened since
looks very much like the abandon-
ment—we had almost said, the 1 be-
trayal—of Australia.
When, on Wednesday last, H.M.S.
Hood, the mightiest battleship afloat,
entered Port Jacksou, we saw in her
the embodiment of that sea power
that has been the sure shield and pro-
tector of the Empire. P.ut the fact
that she would be unable to come to
our protection if we needed her is not
a very reassuring thing to ns. It may
be that some future British Govern-
ment, when the Labor Party's idealis-
tic schemes are spent, will go on with
the Singapore base; but we have to
deal with facts as they are. One of
these facta is that without suitable
and convenient bases we cannot have
a mobile navy. Aud mobility, is every-
thing. We are ordering two new crui-
sers of what is called the Washington
type, hut they have yet to be built;
and, in any case, it requires battle-
ships to fight battleships It is here
that tile significance of the sinking of
the Australia is seen. We have heard
much talk of late about “gestures” of
peace. Well, we have made ours.
To the valiant ship which we wel-
comed so proudly eleven years ago—
the ship which protected us from the
German raiders, and which subse-
quently played an active part in the
operations in the North Sea—we have
now said farewell. It is an honorable
thing for a great ship to go down in
battle, with her colors flying. Peace
hath her victories not less honorable,
and tbe Australia has been offered as
holocaust on the altar of peace.
OPERA SEASON
♦
Verdi’s “Otello”
GREAT PERFORMANCE
MELBOURNE. Sunday.
( In Verdi’s “Otello,” at His Majesty's
Theatre last night, Dame Nellie Melba
as Desdemona was. as would be ex-
pected, remarkably impressive. She
had exceptionally able support from
the Moor, taken by Antonio Marques,
and from Apollo Grantorte. who took
tago. These two artists did work that,
as in the latter part of the second
act, quite carried the audience away.
Marques has an excellent tenor voice
Apart from a few blemishes, he
it admirably in the technical sense, and
with it. aided by good histrionic work,
he sustained the role with most con-
sistent success. Granforte’s perform-
ance of lago was a fine one on simple
broad lines. The vocal part of his per-
formance was capital. The duet with
J ill o was a great effort.
Melba’s Desdemona is a study in
mostly quiet tones. The diva brings
out now and again strong effect, and in
certain tense passages she indulges in
sounds, moans, and cries Verdi has not
provided for. Verdi could never have
objected to these. At least, not if the
other parts were beautifully treated.
Melba’s quick tones are in keeping with
the gentle lady who finds much at-
traction in the Moor. She sang
with that ease o£ delivery that must
make her the envy of those artists,
of whom there are too many, who can
only get out the tone by pressure and
sudden effort. The phrasing was de-
lightful and that it was maintained
even in her fervid outburst near the
end of act 3 showed the true artist. In
the more placid passages the notes
were o£ unforgettable beauty and qual-
ity. In the last act she won general
admiration for her death scene, pre-
ceded as it was by two items—“ The
Willow Song” and “Ave Maria,” which
Dame Nellie Melba has made her own.
The chorus did splendid work. In
act I. the opening chorus never went
better. Here the flower chorus was
beautiful. Many other parts were not-
able. The orchestra, under gifted Ar-
naldo Schiavoni, was not quite so good,
but, nevertheless, equal to most of the
effects Verdi wants. Other figures were
taken •well by Luigi Cilia, Antonio
Laffl. Ovite Carozzi, Alfredo Muro, and
Carmen Turori.
PERSONAL
— ♦ —
Colonel Foster, of Melbourne, is in
Sydney for the Easter holidays.
" * ♦ ♦
Mr. S. C. Cusack has arrived in Syd-
ney from Adelaide.
* * •
Mrs. James Gibb, of Wallendbeen, Is
in Sydney.
Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Fairburn, of Mel-
bourne, are at present staying in Syd-
ney.
Mr. and Mrs. C. G. Pollock, of
Queensland, are staying in Sydney.
They arrived here yesterday.
♦ ♦ *
Mr. J. H. S. Barnes, of Queensland,
the well-known racehorse owner and
Before seven o’clock vn the morning
four powerful tugs went to Garden
Island and look away the hulk
of what was once tlie arch symbol of
our naval glory and security. They
tied stout cables to its broken and rav-
ished shell, and they towed it slowly
after them into the, heavy, lead-blue
stream of Port Jarlßcm, and round
Bradley's Head. ThR clean blue hulls
of the squadron battleships, with their
brilliant flags and winking brass, the
challenging British light cruisers, with
their traceries of wireless aerials and
Jaunty sheer of bow, were there for
contrasts, but not many saw it. Syd-
ney wqs not awake to say good-bye,
but a few sightseers clustered in a tiny
group under a Union Jack on North
Head, and sent out a coo-ee as the hulk
was dragged blindly past them.
The cruiser Brisbane was her escort.
She steamed closely on to starboard,
with cables and huge shackles laid on
her quarter-deck in case the tow
should prove too much for the tugs,
and when the procession left the Heads
she was soon joined, in a gently rolling
Pacific, by a flock ot excursion steam-
ers black to the crosstrees with people,
and suffering a perpetual list under
the crowds that stood on the view side.
The band of one ot them played irrev-
erent music-hall tunes, which reached
those on the cruiser above the yells
and coo-ees ot greeting.
It was a sunny morning of
great beauty, tempered by a shiver-
ing breeze. There were the tugs
in line, with cables taut and rolling
and twisting to the blind motion of
their charge. There were the heeling
steamers, and presently, behind them,
just to the right of Macquarie Light,
came a sliding white wand of a mast
to announce the British Light Cruiser
Squadron. They steamed out gaily at
good speed, four ships together mov-
ing like one. masts straight and slen-
der and beautiful, paintwork gleaming,
halyards ablaze with a flow of signal
THE AUSTRALIA’S FUNERAL
• ♦
Sunk in 150 Fathoms
LIGHT CRUISERS’ ROYAL SALUTE
Saturday’s Scenes Described
Our Representative on H.M.A.S. Brisbane, M. H. Ellis.)
They sank the old flagship Australia on Saturday
afternoon twenty-four miles due east of Sydney, in nine
hundred feet of water, with other Australian cruisers,
clean and full crewed, standing by tvith the stern look
of a regiment on parade at an execution.
one saw nothing of her wounds but
everything of the majesty of her silhou-
ette. As we crossed her stern and stop -
ped a cable length away from her, detail
killed the beauty of her and left her
revealed, in nearness, as a sorry ruin
to make the heart of a lover of ships
bleed.
HAND OF THE SPOILER.
Of all the fineness and grandeur of her
upper works, of ail the tracery of rope
and spar, of all the gleaming brass and
mighty chains, of all the cleanness and
newness of her paint and white boards
and bright and brass-rimmed ports,
nothing remained. The hand of the
spoiler had touched her every corner.
Her anchors were gone. Her sides
were streaked with mire, her foremast
cut oft at the crosstree, her midship
funnels down—one of them on her
deck. She had no deckrails. Her lit-
tle guns, her eyelike searchlights, her
semaphore, her range-finders, her hal-
yards, her ladders —all were in the
breakers’ yard. Rusty decks around
empty bollards, scratched and rotting
iron, broken ropes, a sawn-oft fighting
top, and a funnel side by side, blind
portholes empty or shuttered with wood,
gaping hatches and sundered guns, and
a litter of debris—that was the Aus-
tralia just before she went to her doom,
and of her former glory all that they
had let her keep were the ensign float-
ing above her filthy quarter-deck and
the brilliant Jack at her stem. The
heave of the sea lifted her tore and
aft lazily, and every time her bow rose
to it. it revealed on her side a dank
and untidy mire of green weed.
“EVERYTHING IS OPEN.”
While we. standing close in. were
taking in the spectacle—and the ex-
cursion steamers stood off and shouted
with their sirens that we were block-
ing their view—the party on board the
Australia was preparing to join us. Its
advance guard came oft in boats, leav-
ing behind a few officers in “blues” and
lifebelts, and a signaller with red and
yellow flags. He stood there motion-
less while the officers disappeared.
Then:
“Everything is open,” he told us.
sea, out of which every second
or so, some loose piece of timber
would rise eerily, like a drown-
ing: man’s arm, and point at the sky.
A swirling- raft of rubbish formed. Our
guns crashed in a royal salute. The
guards stood to attention. An aero-
plane flew low overhead and dropped a
wreath, which touched the water with-
out a splash. The signal flags fluttered
and fluttered again. The Melbourne's
helio winked. We felt the motion of
the screws beneath us. In a few mo-
ments the cruisers were bound for
harbor, making a wide circle round
the spot where the former flagship was
still sinking.
Ahead the tugs and excursion boats
scuttled for port, and beyond them
and the Anzac, racing in a churn of-
foam, was a majestic coastline dream-
ing in that peace which someone on
the Brisbane, mindful of the dark days
ten years ago. when enemy cruisers
were off our shores, very finely called
the flagship’s legacy. There it lay
brooding and beautiful in the sunset
light its headlands all aglow and the
city behind it merry with throngs hom-
ing. from their Saturday afternoon
amusements.
HOPE OF PEACE
PRIME MINISTER'S TRIBUTE
Hope of peace was the predominant
expression in the Prime Minister's
tribute to the ship that has gone.
“The passing of the Australia closes
a glorius chapter in the history of th"
Australian Navy,” he said. “We shali
never forget that in the eventful days
o£ 1914, when the fate of civilisation
hung literally in the balance, it was
the presence in the Pacific of the Aus-
tralia, manned by Australian seamen,
that saved our shores and our ship-
ping from the fate which overtook less
fortunate nations.
“THE ONLY HOPE.”
“In the prime of her service, this,
the first great ship of the young Aus-
tralian Navy, was our contribution to
the defence of civilisation. In her pass-
ing she symbolises our contribution to
the cause of peace. We sacrifice her
with a regret rendered poignant by
the memory of her groat service, but
tempered with the hope that the world
will see in the magnitude of our offer-
ing, and the manner in which we make
it, a measure of our practical belief in
the principles enunciated at the Wash-
ington Conference, which constitute
the only hope of a permanent inter-
national peace.”
THE WRECKING PARTY
TIES WREATHS TO
FIXTURES
The personnel of the party which
achieved the sinking of the Australia
was as follows: —Captain A. G. Crau-
furd, R.N., Captain-in-Charge, New
South Wales; Engineer-Commander
P. B. MNeil, R.A.N., Engineer Man-
ager, Garden Island; Commander R.
C. Garsia, R.A.N., H-M.A.S. Marguer-
ite; Lieutenant-Commander G. Lang-
ford, R.A.N., Master Attendant, Gar-
den Island; Mr. Frank Nicoll, Con-
ANGUS MURRAY
Final Appeal
SENTENCE TO STAND
MELBOURNE, Sunday.
A special meeting- o£ the State Execu-
tive Council to-night decided that the
sentence of death passed on Angus
Murray, In connection with the Glen-
ferrie murder, would not be commuted.
The meeting was the result of a final
attempt on the part of a section of
the community to secure a more lenient
sentence.
A mass meeting under the auspices
of the Victorian Labor Party was held
on the Yarra Bank this afternoon, and
about 2000 of the 10,000 who were pre-
sent marched in a procession to the
Trades Hall.
Yesterday a petition, bearing 65,000
signatures, was presented to the Go-
vernor, who forwarded it to his Min-
isterial advisers. The ensuing meeting
of the Executive Council decided that
there was nothing to justify any dis-
turbance of the Court’s decision. Mur-
ray will, therefore, be executed at 10
a.m. to-morrow.
WAR GRATUITY
♦
CASHING THE BONDS
MELBOURNE, Sunday.
Preliminary arrangements tor the
redemption of all war gratuity bonds,
not converted into the loan recently
floated, have been made by the Com-
monwealth Treasury.
Each bondowner must forward his
bond, and a form, obtainable at any
post office, to the Registrar of War
Gratuity Bonds at the Commonwealth
Sub-Treasury, in the capital city of
the State in which the bondowner re-
sides. If the bond is in safe custody
with a bank the application for cash
should be lodged with that bank, which
should he asked to send the applica-
tion and the bond to the Sub-Trea-
sury. The applications will be dealt,
with in the order received, and paid
in full, with interest, up to May 31 on
that date.
COTTON PEST
QUEENSLAND DISCOVERY
BRISBANE, Sunday.
The pink boll worm, the second worst
pest the cotton-grower has to contend
with, has been discovered in Queensland.
The eradication and burning of stand-
over cotton in the coastal area, especially
between the Maryborough and Mackay
latitudes, has been recommended by ex-
perts.
Cotton experts were In conference on
the subject on Saturday, and it is ex-
pected that at a Cabinet meeting on
Tuesday drastic action will he taken in
an endeavor to combat the outbreak.
we
rig
pr
we
ta
co
th
th
se?
th
tri
in.
vil
in;
pr
tai
th;
th;
all
sy;
an
Th
am
de;
tal
thj
tui
so
rai
oil
se<
the
thi
pa
foi
BE AVIS. —In loving memory of my dear wife,
Catherine (Kate), who passed away April
14th, 1919, aged 61 years.
Not forgotten.
Inserted by her fond husband, A. Beavls.
BE AVIS. —In fond memory of our dear mother
who passed away April 14th, 1919, aged 61
}. Years.
. v Peace, perfect peace.
| f Inserted by her fond sons and daughters. Will,
' Ivy, Rob, Alice, a'nd Albert.
CORBY. —In loving memory of our dear son and
brother. Corporal Ernest Corby, killed in
action at Strazziele, France, 14th April, 1918,
aged 32 years.
Good-bye. it Is a little word
That often causes pain
To part with one we loved so dear.
And will nevfr see again.
The last good-bye, the parting kiss,
A deep and y-eary sigh,
And no one knows how hard It is
To say that word good-bye.
Inserted by his loving father arid mothers
ale
aq
rer
tio
THE AUSTRALIA HEELS
OVER
BEFORE GOING DOWN
'©jfJDxXtlji'aiflcg.rapJ
SYDNEY. MONDAY, APRIL 14, 1924.
ON THE ALTAR OF
PEACE
♦
Inserted by his loving father and mothers Safnrdnv xva tnnk nnr first
sister, and brothers, Mr. and Mrs. K. Corby, '^ ll feat 1110.ay Me IOOK 011 l nis.l
Sen., lona, Mumbii. ami only battleship, H.M.A.S. Aus-
tralia - ollt of Sydney Harbor aud Bank
away 14th April. 1922, inserted by his her in the deep sea. In such manner
loving wife and family. , .. , ... .. . ,
JIONCRIEFF. —In sad and loving memory of "'6 complied with the provisions
onr dear "Mura," Amy Moncrleff. who de- of t tie Washington pact. ‘ It was a
parted this life 14th April, 1922. , , ... ..
a loving thought, a silent tear, remarkable sight, this sinking of a ship
Oft recalls your memory dear. to which Australia owes so much, aud
Inserted by her loving sons and daughters,
Laurie, Reggie, Ida. and Gladys; also the heavy load of flowers she carried
chtidrem* lU laW ' and 80n ' in - la "' ana grand ‘ with her to her grave represented a
watson.—Sacred to the memory nf Maudle, nation's tribute to the service she had
who passed into a higher life 12th April. ..ii : ro nntrv Sim went down
1923. Inserted by her sorrowing mother, lemiereu inis COUUTiy. Mie w eut UOWII
c. Berry. in honor and glory, for there could
WATSON (nee Berry). In fond and loving notbinflT more honorable nothin **■
memory of my dear sister, Maudie. who died I>e Ilulumg muie uonoranie, noiuin 0
April 12th. 1923. more glorious, than this great sacrifice
She had not tithe to say farewell .. „ ~
To those she loved most dear; od the altar of peace. It a way could
But God knew best, and called her homo have been found to save her to the
From a life that was so happy.
Inserted by her loving sister and brother-in- nation, not as a fighting' ship any
law, George and Dorothy Emery, and nieces, „ , , . ~ , . .
Marcia and Vivionee, Crookweii. longer, but in some other way "which
mid have met tlie needs of the
FUNERALS situation, Australia would have been
'* RMSTRONG— The Relatives and Friends of S IiU P Hut there was no way of saving
. the late Theresa Armstrong are kindly to- her. The terms of tbe pact were
vited to attend her funeral, to move from the
residence of her daughter (Mrs. h. shepherd), clear; the ship must either be sunk or
Ethel Street, Harris Park, THIS (MONDAY) |„. o i- en Australia Ids finnp her
AFTERNOON, at 1.30, for Catholic Cemetery, UlOken U F‘ -'USUana lias (lone Del
Rookwood. part. Aud wliat uow? What is the
WILLIAM METCALFE and CO., Parramatta. .. . .
Telephone UBU99. sacrifice going to be worth to us?
sqi
un
an
ret
tri
im
JJROWN.— The Relatives and Friends of Mr. That we have honorably carried out
“ Eildon/’ Austral^*Avenue' 'are our dllt y is worth Something, worth
nearly AgneWto' move a grt>at deal ’ t 0 US ’ ° f COUrS6; b,,t tt,e
from our Private Mortuary, 92 Corso, Manly, fact PetUHms that we have SUUk the
THIS AFTERNOON (MONDAY) at 2.30. for , ~, , • , .
the Manly Cemetery. °uly battleship we possessed. ,If in
T. waugh and co. Telephone, 42 Manly. go doing we have assured peace, It is
TAOBBiiS.—The Relatives and Friends of the , 1, ; , ~ ,
■H late mary grant frobes are kindly a tm n f? w.ell done. But can we say
inyltid to attend her Funeral, to leave her late that peace is assured; and. If not,
residence, ‘‘Vermont,’’ Victor Street, dials- ,
wood, this (Monday) moening. at 11 where is our protection to come
o'clock, for C. of E. Cemetery, Northern Suh- from?
urbs.
wood COFFILL limited.. When, the Washington decision was
JAPANESE EVANGELIST
breeder, accompanied by Mrs. and Miss
Barnes, has arrived in Sydney from
Brisbane. They will be staying here
until after the Easter holidays.
TELLS LIFE STORY
WOOD COFFILL limited.. When, the Washington decision was Mr. and Mrs. Moffitt-Grahame, of
T|JRENCH. —The Funeral ot the late Mr, reached—and afterwards when the Melbourne, have arrived in Sydney,
1 PERCY FRENCH will leave his residence, „ , i . , , anerwaicis wnen tue They are staying here for the Easter
•■Billabong.” Havilah street, Chatswood, THIS British naval authorities decided that The Lyceum Hail was crowded last holidays.
Celery 00 Northern 3o Suburt’. haves the Australia should be “scrapped,” as mght, when Paul Kanamori, the visit- * * *
Chatswood Station at 2.15 direct for Cemetery, one of the Empire's battle-cruisers lns Japanese evangelist, told the story ch ’ d , an Mr Munro Mr
-TABENCH -The BrZe. Ol om pTJiTr that could most easily be spared-the of hi. conversion to Christianity. K£ e Munro, arT spending hoi idly
J ?ONI2, InS S r SdgV:°ar:V^'ueTto Commonwealth Government never Z IT. liu Syd " ey ' * • *
attend the Funeral of their late Brother, PERCY . _ when, at the age of 18, he was a stu
FRENCH, Organist, which will leave his late imagined that this country was to be dent in a Government public school. Commander and Airs. Biddlecomb
residence, ‘‘Billabong,” Havilah s ’rcet, •-hats- left without adequate protection. The The agent was a retired American I have arrived in Sydney from Mel-
wood, at 2..10 p.m., for C. of E. Cemetery, 1 1 militarv officer who had been appoint- bourne. They are staying here over
Northern Suburbs. ’Bus leaves Chatswood Sra- Washington Agreement limited the A, appoint Kaster holidays
“X a ‘.t 2, ir s a?f - H't. battleship strength, but not the crui- Christianity Mr.'Kanamori remind- * * •
SCOTT, P.M.. Secretary. ser nor the general naval sfreno+h of ed h>» audience, was first introduced Mr. Lyons, Premier of Tasmania, will
IJRENCH. MASONIC LODGE KURING-GAI, D 6 ’ into Japan in 1545, by Roman Catholic arrive in Melbourne on Tuesday, and
i no. 230, u.G.L. of N.s.w.. and sister Uie signatory Powers; and secondly, [ missionaries, and the fierce persecution later visit New South Wales and
Lodges.—Officers and Members are invited to it established a zone of non-fortification which was aroused lasted for two and Queensland on a holiday trip.
attend the Funeral of our late Bro., PERCY
FRENCH, to leave "Billabong,” Havilah Street.
Chatswood, THIS (MONDAY) AFTERNOON, at
2.30, for Northern Suburbb Cemetery. Regalia
at grave.
D. C. CAMERON, W.M.
J. It. GREEN. Secretary.
I FRENCH. —MASONIC. The Members of
LODGE NORTH SHORE, No. 440, are in-
vited to attend the Funeral of our late beloved
brother, PERCY FRENCH; to leave his late
residence, "Billabong,” Havilah Street, Chats-
wood, THIS DAY (MONDAY), at 2.30 p.m., for
C. of E. Section,' Northern Suburbs Cemetery.
Motor ’bus leave Chatswood P.O. at 2.15 p.m.
Regalia at grave. H. V. H. WATCH, W.M.; L.
J. SIMONSON. Secretary.
Mrs. M'Cook, relict of the late Robert
MCook. formerly of Mount Druitt,
and mother of Rev. A. S. M'Cook, ex-
Modeiator of the Presbyterian Church,
died at Ashfield last week, at the
age of 82.
TfJRENCH. —The Members of LODGE CHATS-
-T WOOD. No. 285, U.G.L. of N.S.W., are In;
vited to attend the Funeral of Bro. PERCY
FRENCH, to leave his late residence, Havilah
Street, Chatswood. THIS AFTERNOON, at 2.30,
for Northern Suburbs Cemetery. Kesalia at
araveside. ’Bus leaves Chatswood Railway Sta-
tion at 2.15. E. DAVIES, W.M.; 11. B. SQUIRE,
Secretary.
FRENCH— MASONIC LODGE RENOWN. No.
360, U.G.L. of N.S.W.— and Mem-
bers of the above Lodge are kindlT invited to
attend the Funeral of their late Brother, PERCY
FRENCH: to leave his residence. "Billabong.”
Havilah Street, Chatswood, THIS (MONDAY)
AFTERNOON, at 2.30, for Northern Suburbs
Cemetery. Regaliai at grave.
ARTHUR P. A. PERKIN, W.M.
P. T. PETERSON, Secv
ILL The Funeral of the la r e Mrs. E. J.
. HILL will leave “Graasmcre,” Bvron St..
Oconee. THIS (MONDAY) AFTERNOON, at
2.30 o’clock, for Randwick Cemetery, Long Bay
Boad. Coogee. WOOD CO FFILL LIMITED.
Johnson.—The Relatives and Friends of the
tl family of the late Alexander Johnson are
kindly invited to attend his Funeral, to leave
our Funeral Parlors, 49 Mount Street. North
Sydney, TO-MORROW (TUESDAY) MORNING,
at 9.30. for Congregational Cemetery, North-
ern Suburbs.
WOOD COFFILL LIMITED.
rONES. —The Relatives and Friends nf the
late Mrs. CATHERINE ANNE JONES are
kindly invited to attend her Funeral, to leave
41 Oatley Road. Paddington, THIS (MONDAY)
MORNING, at 9.45, for Waverley Cemetery, per
Motor Service.
MOTOR FUNERALS LIMITED.
The All Motor Service,
Th., Redfern 1149. 26 City Road, City.
—or, at any rate, a limitation of for-
tifications —in the Pacific which should
be a guarantee to each of tbe Powers
concerned that a policy of aggression
across that zone should be impossible.
When Great Britain’s representatives
agreed to the meridian of 110 degrees
all tbe delegates to the conference
were well aware that Singapore lay
outside the zone of non-action. They
knew that for many years past Great
Britain had devoted much time and
money to the fortifying of Singapore,
aud that there was nothing in the
Agreement that would bind her hands
so far as that strategical point Is con-
cerned. It was left for a few “paci-
fists” in the British House of Com-
mons to discover that the subsequent
proposal to construct an up-to-date
naval base at Singapore would he a
violation of tbe spirit of the Washing-
ton Agreement. “Why was the meri-
dian of 110 chosen?” asked the Hon.
L. S. Amery, the then First Lord of
the Admiralty, in replying to this
contention. “For one reason, aud one
reason only—to make it clear that
Singapore was nothin the zone of non-
action. It was perfectly clear to the
delegates that we specially retained
our liberty at Singapore.” At nil
events, it was perfectly clear to the
Australian Government and in that
knowledge we subscribed to the
A.;reuuiflit. With ji nival l:is“ ;it
Singapore capable of docking, refit-
a half centuries.
On Kanamori’s acceptance of Chris-
tianity he w r as cast out by his family,
and for a number of years he was
a preacher and entered the Congrega-
tional ministry.
Through the study of liberal theology,
he said, he lost his message and his
faith in the deity of Christ, and, feel-
ing he had lost everything, he deemed
it right to resign from the ministry.
Later his faith was xestored, and he
became an evangelist to his own coun-
trymen.
COMMUNISM
SPIRIT OF REST
‘Communism does not stand up to
its job when tested; it could thrive
only in an altruistic race,” said Mr. W.
J. Ferguson, speaking in the Domain
yesterday on behalf of the Cnmraer-
cial and Industrial Publicity Bureau.
"We are not an altruistic race,” he
added. “Biologically, we are an ac-
quisitive race.”
“The Communists,” said Mr. Fergu-
son, “favor unrest, and try to create
it amongst the workers.
“There is‘another viewpoint from
which to discuss the labor question,
and that is. ‘How little I can do and
get away with it.’ Unhappily, the num-
bers of those who so construe the query
seems to be growing rapidly. The trou-
ble with the world nowadays is not the
spirit of unrest so much as the spirit
of too much rest.
“Between Communism and sane de-
mocracy there is an impassable gulf,
and because we are as we are it can-
not be bridged. At bottom, the world’s
great need is individual reformation. *
Mr. Leslie Gannon, of Market Street,
City, and Kogaran, has not been well
lately, and his physician has ordered
him a rest. His presence will be missed
by bench, court, and public alike at
the Kogarah and Canterbury police
jurisdictions.
Captain K. W. Warner will arrive
in Sydney to-day by the Katooomba.
He has been outside manager for
Johnson and Lynn, stevedores, of Fre-
mantle, for some time. Before going
to Fremantle he was senior harbor
pilot at Sydney.
Mr. Alfred Camfield, of Carlton and
Yoik Street, City, who was suddenly
seized with appendicitis six weeks ago.
has left the St. George Hospital, and
it is anticipated that, after a few
weeks of convalescing, he will be able
to resume his public Interests.
* * *
Miss Emelie Polini, who took a, “ ’bus-
man's holiday” on Saturday evening
and watched her sister star. Miss
Gladys Moncrieff, play "The Maid of
the Mountains” at Her Majesty’s Thea-
tre, received a sustained and spon-
taneous welcome from the large audi-
ence as she entered her box.
• » »
Deputy-Superintendent W. M. Bart-
lett, of the Balmain branch of the Civil
Ambulance, was presented at the Bal-
main Town Hall on Saturday with an
illuminated address, a wallet of notes,
and a diamond brooch, on behalf of the
citizens of Balmain. Mr. Bartlett re-
cently arranged a most successful car-
nival as a result of which a new motor
ambulance was secured for the dis-
trict.
off to the north. In ten minutes they
were hazy blurs against the dark line
which joined the Pacific to the north-
ern smoke mist.
Not long afterwards, the Melbourne
nosed round the headland, scarcely dis-
tinguishable from the sea in the dis
tance. She flew the Rear-Admiral's
pennant, which once had fluttered
proudly on the Australia’s foretop, and,
behind her, keeping pace and distance,
were the Adelaide and the Stalwart,
with the Anzac scouting far off. Pres-
ently they were to starboard, taking
their pace from the tugs, which were
spread out like a fan. The Prime Min-
ister (Mr, Bruce), the Minister for De-
fence (Mr. Bowden), the Attorney-
General (Sir Littleton Groom), the
First Naval member (Rear-Admiral
Thompson), and Uie Naval Secretary
(Mr. Macandie) were in the Anzac.
A MISERABLE CORTEGE.
It was a miserable cortege. The
hardly-governed hull behind floundered
and reeled. The excursion steamers
swooped in circles. The Anzac
dashed hither and thither. A care-
free passenger boat from those
very German islands which the
Australia helped to capture in the
first month of the war swept gaily
into our sight and through the Heads.
The fleet crawled wretchedly along.
The rugged line of North Head melted
into softness, then into shadow, then
into a vague lume. After noon, the
Anzac scurried to the north, and lay
miles away.
“Four miles to go,” the word went
round, and by that time we were heart-
ily sick of it, and the minutes were
dragging themselves. At last, after
what felt like-hours, the cruiser escorts
drew across our bows, and between
them and us the tugs placed their bur-
den in position, above her grave.
At that moment, one might have
dreamed from afa r that she was once
again a mighty' flagship, for. as she
stood high and black against the sun,
The sea was pouring into her, and
flags, and it seemed only a minute be- somewhere they were preparing to blow struction Hepartment, Garden Island; ST'AT'F CABINET'
fore they drew abreast ot the hulk, a hole in her with gun-cotton forward. Petty Officers Hammond, Roope, and vnuiiiui
the steamers making way for them. The signaller vanished. Our screws Cain; Chief Engine-room Artificer .
a mice nn cirwcr churned. We moved a little away. We Hynds; Stoker Petty Officer Burchell; J
A PUFF OP SMOKE. had a fleeting glimpse across the ship, Leading Seamen Patterson and Bos- TIIK SUPERANNUATION
A puff of white smoke broke from the between the after turret and the old n; , awTo stoke i'| l I^? col } n . d
Delhi’s upper deck. It floated lazily captain’s quarters of two figures diving da ai d Stokers PROBLEM 2
for a moment, and as it dissipated it- Ross, Meeks 'Hooper Rutledge Bran- o£
self in the breeze, the crash of a three- laced cap nasnmg in me sun as it was . wnc * <2io-r.airr.oTv at
y - one sun r
Brisbane ® dUks roar. “Thf wreck"’’ foTwm-d remaining All the seamen and stokers were perannuation funds will be presented t 0;
quaked with the impact of the recoils, funnel belched a foul black smoke, chosen from volunteers, on account p° in A t i^ r * Bavin ' Attorney for
Before our last shot was fired the which poured up in a pillar, and pres- of their having served in H.M.A.S. e J ie |' a *’ nu
Delhi and her escorts were level with jntly, too, began to drift in tiny wisps Australia during the war. humors to the funds to withdraw, and 7 1 '
us. We heard their busies calling to Tull * The oTd'Tsship THE SIGNAL ENTRY. while carrying out existing obligations,
quarters. We saw tke crew rigidly wnoie null. me oia nagsnip seemed admit no more contributors finds Re ‘
lined on their OjjjuJb Their "change unmoved. She continued gently rock- The last scene, from the harbor, In a good deal *0? favor. * str
course” signal 'fI’XTL to the Delhi’s jng in the waves showing her bearded H.M.A.S. Australia’s tragedy, was path- The Public Service Association Is *? rc
yard. They left-turned deftly, and so and hiding it again, but in a min- etic. Signal-master A. Gibson officially watching closely the developments. A f
much in unity that as if the ute or nvo took a gentle list to- entered the departure as "cleared to The question whether the State Gov- of
piece of the sea on which they lay had wards us. where we lay still, with our be sunk.” He said he did not care to ernment should provide the money for
been swung on a turntable, and made crews at attention and a guard on the ma ke the entry. He remarked it as a medical Investigation of men who
.. ce j. _ (L. -r x. - x xi tnrppflfit p Tip epa rnsp rMiir-u-ltr an <i i • mr., . , _ . _ . .
forecastle. The sea rose quickly, and
each time the swell caught her the
dunnage on her decks rattled. Once a
great gun somersaulted down her slop-
ing face and fell w’ith a splash into
the sea, and presently the water boiled
in and out of her portholes.
have suffered as the result of the oc-
cupation of quarrying and stonework
generally will also be considered by
Cabinet. ,
SEARCH FOR OIL
THE LAST MOMENTS.
PROPOSED COMPANY
MONEY TO THE FISHES PERTH, Sunday.
Dr. Clapp, the American oil expert,
and party, left to-day for Kimberley.
ifirllßTSHnn yp T T ,, to carry out Investigations of the oil
rtllU mtortui rVrtJLJ.I areas held by the Freney Company, the
CDUAUC Kimberley Petroleum Company, and
ol ILAJ\7> the Australian Oil Development Com-
oanv’s block No. 1 H. and the Locke
Oil Syndicate’s block No. 25 H.
Archbishop Kelly, who yesterday The Frene y Company’s areas will
blessed and opened the remodelled 134 tlie flrs£ invest igated. During the
presbytery for the Jesuit Fathers at week negotiations were opened for the
Si. Mary’s,- North Sydney, referred in merging of the interests mentioned
his address to the sinking of the Aus- i nt ? a Proposed Australian company,
tralja to be promoted by Mr. Broue, of byd-
“Th’is Shin.” he snld -had ne y. Working capital to_ the extent
the
cep
Lar
mui
pro
tO 3
coir
vat<
helj
stat
soci
When it seemed that she would never
sink, she began to turn over, slowly
at first and then with a rush. As her
starboard side rose, more oily smoke
poured from her after engine-room,
and then she heeled, rearing her side
up eighty feet above the waves, and
momentarily blotted out a great arc ot
southern sky. Iron walls inside her.
cracking and tearing under the weight
of water, shrieked and rumbled above
the rasp of rusty turrets shifting and
the creaking of iron masts. A reeling
precipice careened towards us, show-
ering down on the sea an avalanche ot
wreckage. The big funnel astern stir-
red and rolled. The fighting top, tens
of tons of steel, came roaring and
crashing across the deck, spinning over
and over. Just for the time it takes
for an eye to flicker one had a fleeting
vision of five hundred and fifty feet of
hull, smoking and writhing, slipping
into a churning surge, of masts now
pointing towards us. now drowned, of a
great white-crested wave rising and
rushing a few feet, to be arrested
and drawn back miraculously by the
suction of the sinking. And the last
we saw of the Australia was a brown
and rusty keel, bearded with dank
olive weed. Prom one end of it a
stream of white water spouted a hun-
dred feet in the air; from the other
a battery of geysers were shot through
the open sea-cocks by the compressed
air within the hull.
HULL DISAPPEARS.
Twenty-one minutes after the open-
ing of the sea-cocks the hull disap-
peared. Where it had been was an
aquamarine patch in a dark green
a sad business. “When I heard those
ferries blowing cock-a-doodle-doo,”
he said. “I thought they did not know
the difference between a funeral and
a picnic.” I could see the hands aboard
the Australia fixing the wreaths on the
bridge and rail, so that the ‘cock-a-
doodle-doo’ idea did not appeal to me.
I suppose it is no business of mine,
but,” he added, quite feelingly, “I am
an Australian, and have seen a good
deal of that ship.”
"T-nio .11.11 x. . , , ney. Working capital to the extent
aI L L salt ]’ - f had COSt of £250,000 is claimed to be provided,
’ and u w f s ca f £ to dependent on the report submitted by
the bottom of the sea. yet, at a gather- Dr ci aDp
ing held in Sydney a few nights before, Broue. who left for the East on
everyone talked of spending millions Saturday, stated that negotiations had
more of money on cruisers and im- t, een successfully concluded, and that
plements of war. Yet they were told details of offers would be placed before
trus was all for peace. Without justice shareholders of the companies
there could be no peace. concerned next week. He stated that
“The Public Instruction Act, which he had received a written assurance
made education secular and compul- f lo m Mr. J. Scaddan, Minister for
sory, was blind to justice. If they put Mines, that the expedition of Dr. Clapp
this money into something that would would be considered sufficient to pro-
give religious and secular education, tect and hold the concessions visited,
it would be an act of justice in place of Both Dr. Clapp and Mr. Broue ex-
tyranny.” pressed deep appreciation of the as-
Rev. Dr. M. J. O'Reilly made an ap- sistance given them by the West Aus-
peal for funds. The cost of the work tralian Geological and Mine Depart-
undertaken was £4600, of which £l3OO ment officials.
was in .hand. A substantial sum was Mr, Broue claims that the proposed
received in response to yesterday's company will be sufficiently strong to
appeal fully develop the oil industry in Aus-'
J tralia.
Immediately the water began to pour through her open seacocks and the'hole torn in her side by the explosion controlled
the Brisbane, and then settled lower and lower.
electrically,
the Australia began to lean appealingly to her escort,


o
t.]
b
THE FINAL PLUNGE OF THE OLD BATTLESHIP
X
id
h
IT
S(
P'
11
tl
t]
o
il
y
it
a
s
.1
8
r
»f
r
C
V
t
t
t
h
n
r
it
0
0
d
t
ii
ii
The. Australia went down with her colors flying and silently resisting to the last. She took 21 minutes to disappear. Great geysers spouted from her bottom as she made the final plunge
to join company with the strange denizens of the deep.
