

f y iHiim lui) imjiimi im i im iuii i ny imj i uni in i inn imji im inn iimiim i im inn immi tm mui imi imiimtuui tmnm rimnin i m|i rmi im imji im inn im|iim i im imj
i|Hp sKa
m m
! B
m ■
Pi PI
lu m
I Newspaper Reports R
Pi - Pi
pi Pi
m ■ M
Pi PI
m ON m
Pi Pi
p| Pi
m pi
Pi Pi
TIE ALMIME COLLECTION I
Pi P,:
Pi N
Pi Pi
pi m
m OK pi
Pi N
pi m
Pi Pi
p| Pi
| \Jj\F.IMh Sf’KCIMENS I
Pi pi
Pi Pi
|i AT BROKEN HILL, ||
Pi Pi
! H
Pi _ _.. Pi
IM FROM THE pf
M Pi
PI Pi
m P
p BARRIER DISTRICT OF NEW SOUTH WALES. |i
Pi pi
Pi P
Pi pi
P - P
Pi pi
Pi P
p
Pi pi
P
P
PI
P
: I
Pi
P
»
p|
pi
IJroHen Bill, M.S.W.
Fiveash and Attkins, Printers, Argent Street,
rr^L
kkOiJ ~~~ ~ ~ ~ Pliffilfmlm ~“ ~ ~~~~ ~~. ~ ~ . 1:11 I: I ~ i
w




N ewspaper Reports
THE ALDRIDGE COLLECTION
JM[INERAIx^SPEGIMENS
AT BROKEN HILL,
FROM THE
BARRIER DISTRICT OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Bro Hen gill, H.S.W.
Fiveasii and Attkins, Printers, Argent Street.


■


NEWSPAPER REPORTS
THE ALORIDKE gOLLECTION
MINERAL SPECIMENS
“The Silver Age,” Broken Hill, April 10th, 1890,
The Aldridge Mineral Collection.
TIIO achieve success collectors of all sorts and conditions muai
JL be born —they cannot be made. Mr. Edward Aldridge,
of Broken Hill, is a gentleman who is establishing the very best
claim to be included amongst famous collectors. In his
instance minerals are his specialty, and in a district such as the
Barrier he finds a wide field for the exercise of his tastes.
As will be proved to any one who may visit h»is collection at
the Duke of Cornwall Hotel, Argent-street, these tastes have
already enabled him to make a collection of argentiferous
ores the equal-of which is not in Australia. It will be
remembered that Mr. Aldridge was one of the originators of the
idea to have a mineralogical museum established in Broken Hill.
A committee was formed for the purpose, and he was elected
honorary curator. Subsequently the matter was taken in
hand by the Government and the committee of private gentle-
men dispersed. But Mr. Aldridge, who prior to that time had
started collecting, continued on the course he had marked out
for himself, and day by day, month by month, up to the present
time took unto himself every desirable specimen that he could
lay hands upon. I here is no need to inquire how all the
beautiful specimens now at the hotel were obtained, for as
shown in history collectors are not as other men. Your true
collector must be a man prepared to go to any length, in order
to make a collection complete, and it is owing to this irresistible
force that the world is able to boast of many unique museums.
Broken Hill is to be congratulated on the fact that Mr. Aldridge
is about as thoroughly inoculated with the desire to acquire


specimens as ever a man was, and it may be safely prophesied
that before long he will have greatly added to his already
wonderfully complete cases.
About 15 months have passed since Mr. Aldridge first
seriously began to collect, but not until recently did the present
writer find an opportunity of inspecting the cases. In the
large upstair room of the hotel stands a handsome glass case,
measuring about 7ft. by 7ft. by 4ft. ; the sides, top, and bottom
are fitted with plateglass and the shelves, resting on brass
supports are also of the same material. The under part of this
case contains drawers for holding specimens that might be
damaged by exposure to light, and also duplicates. The whole
affair is surrounded by handsome brass guard rails. The cost
of this must have run up to three figures. Around the room
are tables covered with other specimens, either in temporary
cases, or under glass shades, while two of the most handsome
and valuable of the whole collection lie shrouded in velvet.
The room is about to be decorated with large photographs of
the principle mines on the Broken Hill lode, and this addition
to the museum will be of great interest.
Concerning the specimens themselves it would be next to
impossible to in any way describe them so that the reader
should fully understand their marvellous beauty. No other
word than “marvellous” will fit here ; for on looking at the
delicate tracery of silver and copper in their pure forms, the
sharply cut, fine edged, and fragile crystals of carbonate of
lead, the piled up beads of light green chloride, one is prone to
wonder how such things can be in the bowels of the earth and
yet be perfect. Also is it most wonderful that one of these
things should escape the shattering blow of the miner’s pick ;
yet it is so, and Dame Nature has guarded her treasurers in
subterranean places with as jealous care as they are now guarded
by their owner. In Mr. Aldridge’s collection are to be seen
specimens that would cause a brother collector’s heart to burn
with the unquenchable fire of envy. Carbonate of lead is there
in its massive form and also in the most delicate crystals ol
pure white ; copper is there in its native state, that which has
been deposited in light feathery forms resembling the most
graceful ferns. Further on one sees specimens combining iron,
chloride of silver, and carbonate of lead, each distinct in color,
the combination being as brilliant in effect as the colors of an
Eastern shawl.' Here and there specimens have been mounted
on bases of plaster of Paris, the better to display their beauty.
One of the finest specimens is a mass measuring say I2in. by
Bin., composed of manganic iron ore laden on the upper side
with chloride of silver in crystals as large as peas ; and anothci


is- gin. by 6in., comprising a piece of rock shaped like a portion of
cocoanut husk, and incrusted on the concave side with native
silver in the most beautiful fashion.
But it is useless to write of these things—not even a
painter’s brush could convey their beauty to the eye, and much
less able is a writer’s pen. To be appreciated they must be seen,
and the Aldridge Collection is certainly one of the sights of
Broken Hill. To miss seeing it is to see the play of Hamlet
with the Prince of Denmark left out.
“The Barrier Miner,” Broken Hill, 15th April, 1890-
We have in Broken Hill at the present time one of the
finest collections of silver-bearing specimens to be seen in
Australasia. Mr. Edward Aldridge, one of our best known
and most popular townsmen, has for the past two years devoted
a considerable portion of his time and energy to the collection
of a thoroughly representative assortment of Barrier specimens,
which he has now at his place of residence, the Duke of
Cornwall Hotel. One of the chief balcony rooms has been
secured solely for the purpose of display, and matters of detail
have been planned out to a nicety. Most residents of Broken
Hill have heard, from time to time, mention made of Mr.
Aldridge’s specimen “case,” but those who have not yet seen
it will —if they be possessed of a soul above share-dealing
reveal their enthusiasm as they enter the miniature museum
established by the enterprise and dogged perseverance of a
fellow-townsmen. Instead of “ a case ” the visitors will find
several cases, with a magnificent and costly glass cabinet
occupying the central position. On entering the room and
glancing around, the envious spectator instinctively asks him-
self, how was it possible for one man to accumulate such a
beautiful and varied collection ? Had Mr. Aldridge managed
every mine on the field, from the famous Davie down
to the Proprietary, such a question might reasonably be
asked. Slugs of pure horn silver from the Purnamoota district,
huge specimens of native silver from the Junction, the choicest
of chloride from the famous Proprietary mine,_ lead crystals
from the Central, and innumerable mineral curios from other
parts of the field are set off to advantage. To enumerate them
intelligibly would require the scientific knowledge of a Schlapp.
With the aid of the magnifying glasses provided, the enthu-
siastic visitor devotes his time to a minute inspection of the
more novel specimens, the lead crystals alone forming an
attractive study. Nature, unlike art, will stand the test of the


■magnifying glass. Some choice specimens which lose their
brilliancy by exposure to the light are kept in the drawers of
the cabinet. The bottoms of some of the drawers are covered
with velvet, and the exhibds are set off with great delicacy—in
short, the whole collection forms one of the most attractive
and interesting sights in Broken Hill. The most apathetic
resident, after viewing the collection, must feel proud of the
mineral resources of the Barrier, and proud of citizen Aldridge.
From a spectacular point of view, and as a thoroughly repre-
sentative collection of Barrier specimens, no better exhibit
could be sent to the International Mining Exhibition. This
suggestion may prove displeasing to Mr. Aldridge, but it is
made in the best interests of this field, notwithstanding.
“The Advertiser,” Adelaide, 18th February, 1891.
Visit of the Port Augusta Commission to Broken Hill
re the Barrier Trade.
Among the shows of the place were a magnificent collec-
tion of specimens belonging to Mr. Edward Aldridge which is
very skilfully arranged in a room at the Duke of Cornwall
Hotel. Almost every conceivable character of mineral found
in the neighborhood is embraced in the collection which is
claimed to be one of the best in the world, and has been valued
at £ 3OOO. The time spent in viewing it was well occupied and
the visitors were loud in their praises of it.
“The Silver Age,” Broken Hill, March, 1891.
The Adelaide School of Mines’ Visitors.
The party, some twenty in all, from the S.A. School of
Mines, who have been on a visit to Broken Hill during the
past few days, returned to Adelaide last night. They were in
charge of Mr. East, the director of the School of Mines, and
Mr. Forsyth, the mechanical instructor. Under the guidance
of these gentlemen the students went the round of the mines.
Mr. East, who is an authority on mineralogy, undertaking the
work of instruction in the various mining features and
minerals met with. The party did not fail to examine the
unrivalled collection of specimens belonging to Mr. Edward
Aldridge, at the Duke of Cornwall Hotel. Mr. Aldridge
showed the students round and highly interested them with
his descriptions, while Mr. East discoursed on the samples from
a scientific point of view. Daring their stay the students were
courteously and handsomely treated by the mine managers, of
whom Mr. East speaks in high praise.


“The Bendigo Advertiser,” Bendigo, Victoria,
SOth May, 1891.
Mr. A. S. Bailks, M.L.A., on Tour.
Recently Mr. A. S. Bailes, M.P., paid a visit to the silver
fields of Broken Hill, and returned to Bendigo on Wednesday
evening. He was interviewed by a representative of the
Advertiser , and in the course of conversation, Mr. Bailes, after
describing at some length the great silver mines. &c. of the
district, said : —Another of the sights of the place, and one that
I should certainly recommend any visitor to Broken Hill not
to miss the opportunity of seeing, is the magnificent collection
of specimens from the Barrier, owned and arranged by Mr.
Edward Aldridge. This gentlemen has for years past devoted
himself to the accumulation of what I think I am justified in
saying is the most magnificent collection of specimens of silver
ores to be found in the world. No description of them nor
comparison by specimens that have been seen in other persons’
possession could give the slightest idea of this magnificent
display. I regret very much that my knowledge of geology is
so- limited that I am unable to give you a list of the various
descriptions of ores that he possesses in this collection. I have
the pleasure of an acquaintance with the owner for some years
past, therefore I had very little difficulty in obtaining a view
of this collection, which is purely a private one, and is not
exhibited in the ordinary way to the public. It has won for
itself the highest enconiums from all people who have had the
pleasure of seeing it, and I think that the New South Wales
Government would be only doing their duty if they were to
secure it for their museum. It is impossible to put any
intrinsic value upon it, but Mr. Aldridge has been offered
for the collection and has refused it. He has been to
considerable expense in getting the collection together, and has
also spent a great deal of money in having cabinets and cases
made for the reception of the various specimens.
“The Barrier Miner,” Broken Hill, August 6th, 1891.
The Governor’s Visit.
After the ceremony of opening the Town Hall, Lord and
Lady Jersey held an informal reception, when over 1500 ladies
and gentlemen were presented. Afterwards Lady Jersey,
accompanied by the Mayor and Mayoress and Messrs. Knox,
Orr, and Holdsworth, visited Mr. Aldridge’s famous collection
of argentiferous specimens at the Duke of Cornwall Hotel, the
owner presented one of the richest pieces of ore to Lady Jersey,
at which she expressed the greatest delight.


“The Barrier Miner,” Broken Hill, May 2nd, 1892.
“In Nature’s Workshop.”
Three Thousand Samples of Her Work.
The Aldridge Collection has long been recognised as one ot
the sights that visitors must see before leaving Broken Hill.
It is so remarkable a collection that it is absolutely unique.
Probably no other was ever so large when the whole of the
specimens were obtained within a radius of a few miles. Mr.
E. W. Aldridge, who has made this collection, must of course
take some of the credit of this ; but by no means all ; for no
district ever offered to the most diligent collector so many
varieties and classes of ore as does the marvellous Broken Hill.
The new arrival in Broken Hill upon landing proceeds to
gather specimens. He treasures these for the first fortnight ;
thinks pretty much of them for three weeks ; in a month he has
ceased to add to their number ; in two months they are thrown
in a corner. Thus does familiarity breed contempt. It is the
highest certificate of the super-excellence of the Aldridge
Collection, not that visitors to the field must and nearly all do
see it, but that, week by week, scores of local folk go into the
specially constructed chamber at the Duke of Cornwall Hotel,
and old prospectors of six years standing find enough there to
make hours fly past with winged feet. There is no contempt
or even indifference, born of familiarity, possible ; because,
unless one be familiar with this collection, one cannot other-
wise be familiar with such a sight as this. It is, it is repeated,
unique.
It is four years since the nucleus of the collection was
formed. Mr. Aldridge then had no idea of the extent of what
was to be built upon that foundation. With him the extreme
yet common pleasure of collecting curious and characteristic
ores lasted more than the usual month. Then at the end of a
few months he found that he had been so successful in
comparison with others that a new pleasure in further excelling
was created. Presently others became proud of the collection,
too —proud that Broken Hill should yield so great a variety of
things, precious, or curious, or beautiful. And so they lent
Mr. Aldridge aid, taking to him whatever was rare that they
came upon. And lastly the collector found that what was
begun for pleasure had, as a result, something of considerable
material worth. People began to talk of thousands as its true
value. This induced Mr. Aldridge to make his collection still
more perfect, to lay out hard cash upon it, whereas previously
it had chiefly cost time. So it comes 'about that some of the
finest specimens were dearly paid for, the sellers being in many


instances dealers and others in Adelaide, Melbourne, and
Sydney. This is the history of the getting together of this
museum.
As the months and years passed the value of many of the
earlier obtained specimens increased enormously. As the
richest bodies of ores near the surface became exhausted,
explorations were carried elsewhere, into quite distinct classes
of material. So that it would be quite impossible to replace
many of the specimens found in those days il these in the
museum were destroyed. Besides, Nature makes no duplicates ;
and as far as it was possible for one man, and, afterwards, a
host of honorary assistants, to do, the best of every class has
been saved from the furnaces to be preserved in this collection.
Whether it should have fallen to a private individual to under-
take the task of preserving types from the most remarkable
silverfield ever found, and the most prolific in the variety of its
ores, is a debatable question ; whether it is the duty of a
private individual to continue that work is more debatable still.
But the price that would have to be given now for this
collection would run into thousands of pounds. Nearly two
years ago, Mr. Aldridge received and refused an offer of
for it ; since then the additions have been considerable.
The samples—they are all samples ; there are no duplicates —
have been properly mounted and furnished with suitable
cabinets ; and, what is of more value to the student, they have
just been classified and rearranged by Mr. Marsh ; into no
more able or careful hands could the work have been intrusted.
The practical completion of what was to Mr. Marsh a labour of
love was the cause of the visit of which the present observations
are the result.
The long and specially designed room which the collection
occupies is surrounded by cabinets, and in the middle of the
room are show cases, all specially designed, so that one may see
everything without discomfort. The present purpose is not to
discuss individual specimens ; as there are nearly 3000,
this w r ould be rather a severe task to impose upon onej nor indeed
would much be gained by so doing. In his classification Mr.
Marsh as far as possible first grouped together the ores in
which lead predominates. Of these there are no less than 300
varieties, some, of course, only finely divided from others, yet
all bearing distinct characteristics. Then the ores in w 7 hich
silver is present in greatest quantities—horn silver and all the
other varieties—are grouped together. This, while it does not
detract from the effect, makes the collection of far greater value
to the student. In the central cases the aim has been more for
effect, though here again there has been no duplication of


specimens. These cases contain some magnificent crystals,
with attractive variations of azurite, cuprite, cerussite,
malachite, anglesite, and others, curious in form and mostly
different in color and texture.
Some of the specimens assume curious and quaint shapes.
Here you have an arch of native copper, the parts cemented by
cuprite ; there you have a swan, the head thrown ba k grace-
fully, formed in Nature’s workshop of blue carbonate of copper.
Here other masses of copper are in the shape of old battered oaks :
there you have the finest ferns most faithfully and beautifully
reproduced. Stalactitic forms here remind one irresistibly of
ruined castles ; there stalactites in strange combination with
other matter (chiefly carbonate of lead) form a five- barred gate.
Here is some malachite which the lady visitor insists is the very
finest green velvet ; there the aborescent copper shows you
forests, with the giant trees, the undergrowth, and the rocks
scattered here and there. Here is embolite that the mariner
declares to be “very fair samples of coral.” There, carbonate
of lead crystals, fine as the product of the silk-worm ; here the
most gaudily-colored arsenical combinations. Here, lead
crystals—grey, yellow, green, black, clear white, red, pink, and
saffron ; there, remarkable conceits in native copper. Here a
sparkling agglomeration of bright blue-green crystals (hydrous
copper—zinc carbonate) taking the eye of the sight-seer at once ;
there, very ordinary-looking road metal that returns 17,000 ozs.
of silver per ton. Here humble-looking galena ; there, other
mineral gleaming with crystals of topaz quartz, and so on,
page after page. Nature must have been in a sportive as well
as in a liberal mood when she fashioned with the hand and eye
of the artist many of these remarkable quaint and beautiful
conceits as well as these less attractive masses, samples of the
products which give Broken Hill its wealth ; and the result,
as exemplified so charmingly in this collection, preaches a
sermon more eloquent than was ever heard from church pulpit
in Broken Hill.
Mr. Aldridge was approached in regard to sending the
collection to the World’s Fair to be held in Chicago next year.
The New South Wales Commission offered to pay all expenses
of transit, and, so that the owner might sleep soundly while it
was away, to insure for its full value. But, so fai as can be judged,
Mr. Aldridge is not willing to do this. “ Why should I?” he
seems to say. “This has cost me a deal of money now, and I
want to see some personal gain in the transaction, partly to
make up for the breakages that may possibly occur. The colony,
the district, and Australia would benefit if it were shown, I have
no doubt; but should I? ” These appear to be his thoughts,'


though not expressed in just that way. For all that it is generally
thought that the collection should go to America, and from
there to London. When the Broken Hill Proprietary Company
spent a few hundreds in showing at the comparatively insig-
nificant mining Exhibition of a couple of years ago, a column
representing its extraction of silver, three-fourths of the news-
papers of England did not hide their great astonishment. The
Times talked about it to the extent of nearly a column. And
this collection of 3000 specimens, each differing from the other
in some material characteristic, got together in one little
district, would no doubt be every bit as great an eye-opener.
“The Mining Standard,” Sydney, 30th May and
4th June, 1892.
Broken Hill Minerals. Mr. E. W. Aldridge’s Collection.
(by OCR BROKEN HILL REPORTER.)
It is a good many years ago since the poet philosopher of
Stratford-on-Avon expressed through one of his puppets that
the mind
“ Exempt from public haunt,
y. Finds tongues in trees, books in running brooks,
T Sermons in stones, and good in everything.”
As far as the running brooks are concerned, we dwellers
on the Barrier have not much opportunity of perusing them ;
but no more eloquent sermons could be preached under God’s
canopy than are afforded by the earth’s crust, which in no part
of the world assumes more wondrous and enchanting shapes
than in the vughs and crevices which lie beneath the rugged
scarp of Broken Hill. It can be well imagined that in the
early days of the field’s history many quaint and curious
specimens came into the hands of those whose business it was
to burrow beneath the surface. After serving, perhaps, for a
child’s plaything (though women and children were scarce in
the days of the Broken Hill argonauts), such got thrown aside
and to all intents and purposes lost. But not in every instance.
More than one individual feeling grateful for the-good things
which Dame Nature had relinquished into his hands, felt
inspired to collect a few samples from her marvellous store
rooms, so that not only he but others as well might wonder
and admire. One of these collections, that belonging to Mr.
Aldridge, it is the business of the present paper to describe—
imperfectly, without doubt, for the task is far from being an
easy one.
Mineral collections are not rare in these southern lands,
though the public institutions and museums have nothing to


Doast of in that way, Professor Liversidge of Sydney
University, and Professor Tate, of Adelaide, have, at much
expenditure of time and patience, got together collections,
which, though not large, comprise specimens of great beauty
and rarity, Other scientific men have made specimen hunting
a hobby, and have been more or less successful in their pursuit.
Outside of the higher grade of professional men, perhaps the
finest collection ever brought together in Australasia is that of
Mr. Pettard, of Launceston, Tasmania ; but even that sinks
into insignificance when compared with what will in all prob-
ability be known in the future as “The Aldridge Collection.”
It is over four years ago since Mr. Aldridge, at first in a happy-
go-lucky, haphazard manner, indulged in a pursuit, which, on
account of its fascination, eventually absorbed not only his
leisure but a good many of those hours which might have been
more profitably devoted to business. But these were the days
of the silver kings, and Mr. Aldridge, no doubt, thought he
was simply forming a souvenir that would be pleasant to con-
template when he retired to the quiet ease of his bungalow on
the bay. “ I had little or no knowledge of mineralogy at the
time,”'he said the other day. “I only know enough now to
regret that 1 don’t know more. But I saw how quaintly
curious were some of the rocks brought from below, and I
made a point of getting as many of them as I possibly could.
Some of the most valuable have been brought back from
AdeLide, Melbourne, and even Sydney, to which places they
had drifted somehow—sent to friends, no doubt, who quickly
lost conceit of them, and so they got into the hands of dealers.”
It seems absurd in speaking of the value of this collection
to refer to the number of specimens ; but perhaps the general
reader may be better impressed when he is told that it com-
prises about three thousand, and that it is valued at £lO,OOO.
Some time ago, when the collection had not assumed half of its
present proportions, when it was in a state of crudity, and
when scarce a specimen was properly set up, /4, 000 was
refused for it in Melbourne. The owner then declined to treat
for less than 000 — I “with a stipulation ” he says, “that
payment should' not be made in scrip.” The New South
Wales Commissioners of the Chicago Exhibition are in treaty
with the object of taking the collection to the World’s Fair of
189 V They guarantee all expenses, and as a pledge for its safe
return offer to insure to its full value. Mr. Aldridge, however,
is dubious of the advantages of such a course He would like
to exhibit both in Chicago and London, but the dangers of
transit are many, and the asset is too valuable to allow him to
take risks. It'is, in short, such a collection as should be


secured by the Government at almost any cost ; it comprises
many specimens that are rapidly becoming scarce —some, in
fact, which could not possibly be obtained again, unless another
Broken Hill were found—and that is not at all likely. Money,
then, could not insure such specimens. Housed in the National
Museum through the generosity, say, of one of our silver
millionaires, the collection would form an enduring monument
and attract scientific students from all parts of the world.
In a large upper room of the Duke of Cornwall Hotel, in
the main street of Broken Hill, Mr, Aldridge has a fitting
shrine prepared for his collection. Special attention has been
paid to the lighting of the apartment. Glass cases extend
round the sides, and various cases are arranged in positions
where their contents can be best displayed. The cases are
fitted up in such a manner that no craning or stretching of the
neck is necessary, one specimen being as easy of observation
as another. Here and there are large magnifying glasses and
magnifying mirrors, the better to distinguish the delicate minutice
of the web-like tracery which intertwine the most choice. On
the walls hang numerous photographs of the mines along the line
from which so many of the’specimens came, and perched on the top
of the central case, as if to guard its treasures, are two leopards ;
while on one oftheside tables is couched a cub devoid of mounting,
and so lifelike in appearance that one irresistibly strokes the
little thing. Here has been the scene of the labors during the
past few months of Mr. Marsh, one of the most learned and
enthusiastic geologists that ever set foot in Australia —a gentle-
man whose singular merit is often overlooked in the superla-
tively retiring, modest, and unaffected individual. Mr. Marsh
has been for some months engaged in classifying and arranging
the specimens, the outcome of which is most creditable to
himself, and interesting to the student. One can well under-
stand, however, that to a man of Mr. Marsh’s calibre the work
has indeed been a labor of love. Even now, as die picks up a
specimen, the better to point out some of its peculiarities, he
does so with consummate tenderness : and when it is wickedly
suggested by the writer that these fragile crystals would be
easily broken, he is rewarded by a deservedly reproachful look.
The centre cabinet forms the show piece of the room.
It contains, though perhaps not the most valuable or most
interesting from a scientific point of view, certainly the most
beautiful specimens in the room. The crystallisedforms which
lead, copper, zinc, iron, and silver assume are all shown in the
most fantastic yet beautiful designs. The various crystals
refract the rays of light, and sparkle and dazzle with all the
hues of the rainbow, from the deep azure blue of the azurite,


the bright green of malachite, the cochineal red of cuprite, the
adamantine lustre assumed by the various tints of cerussite, or
crystals of anglesite. The beauties of this centre case alone
are practically inexhaustible.
Turning to what might be termed the classified cases,
which are ranged along the sides of the room, Mr. Marsh
explains that where minerals are crystallised it is possible to
classify them truly, but where they are decomposed or mixed it
is merely a matter of approximation from results obtained.
The ores, however, where lead predominates are grouped to-
gether as much as possible. The lead specimens are in marked
variety. The pyromorphites, for instance, or phosphates of
lead, are of various colors and shades, some very vivid, passing
from yellow, which contains chromic acid, to brown, containing
arsenic acid, and black, which has lime. There are also
numerous links between these, showing the gradual passage of
one variety of mineral into the other by the exchange of their
different acids. Then we have specimens of mimetite (so called
from its resemblance to pyromorphite), which is an arseno-
chloride of lead, and vanadanite, which is chloride of lead
mineralised by the projection of vanadic acid. These two forms
also interchange with each other. The cerussites, or carbonates
of lead, are found in different forms of crystallisation, from the
clearly cut twin crystal, which assumes the appearance of arrow
heads, through the tabular or columnar form to the fibrous,
radiating, or stalactitic varieties. The crystals are transparent
to opaque, some as delicate as the wing of a gossamer, others
massive and large. Anglesite (first found in Anglesea : hence
the name), or sulphate of lead, is usually found associated with
cerussite, on which it is implanted in glassy crystals. The
other ores of lead are very numerous, and comprise argentiferous
galena, caledonite (lead and copper), zinc blende, arsenical
galena (or jordanite), garnet sandstone containing native silver,
antimonial galena, and huascolite, the chemical mixture of
galena and zinc blende. The lead specimens thus grouped
comprise about 300 varieties.
Turning to the general section, there may be seen all the
varieties of silver ore found on the Barrier, comprising kaolin-
ites, native silver in the form of crystals, in thin plates or fine
fibres like hair or silken threads, growing as it were from a
common centre, in formless masses such as horn silver or
kerargyrite assumes, embolite or chloro-bromide, iodorite, and
the various ores of mercury. In the kaolinite ores is also
frequently found cerussite or carbonate of lead, and in the clay
itself the various metals are found in small, irregular veins or
crystals disseminated through the mass. The list of names for


the various classes seem interminable, and it requires close
scrutiny even by an expert to distinguish the difference. Ihe
red silver ores (ruby silver) are represented by pyrargyrite or
antimonial sulphide of silver and proustite (from the French
chemist, Proust), or arsenical sulphide of silver. Embolite
assumes in many instances a mossy appearance, and in that
form may be here seen deposited on cerussite and malachite,
incrusting lead crystals, or hidden in the interstices of the
mammallated form of limonite ; it may also be seen lining the
crevices in garnet sandstone and in the convolutions ot native
copper.
This is but a limited description of one or two of the ore
classes to be found in this magnificent collection. Each in-
dividual specimen pleads for a more detailed description, and if
a link exists between the organic and inorganic world it might
be looked for here.
To describe all the 3,000 specimens would, of course, be
impossible. But a few demand attention. One of the first to
catch the eye as you enter the room is a slug of horn silver
(chloride of silver). There is a hole bored in the centre, from
which an assay sample was taken showing it to contain
i7,oooozs. per ton. The silver value of this slug is over 20.
The pieces of similar composition, but differing widely in
appearance, are found in the various cases, giving to the
ordinary visitor only an idea ot road metal, but to the initiated
they have a pleasant, and inviting appearance. In this case is
also a large and magnificent specimen of cuprite, thickly coated
with spongy malachite, supporting minute implanted crystals
of cerussite, allied with Smithsonite. 1 his specimen has a
coralloidal structure and is very attractive. Here also is
another finished gem of Nature’s handiwork —a sparkling mass
of bright, bluish green crystals (labelled aurichalcite ; hydrous
copper-zinc carbonate). This specimen is about eight inches
across ; and, while blinking in the attempt to draw your
attention, it is one of the most fascinating specimens in the
room. In the centre case is a large specimen of-native copper,
cemented by cuprite, having the form of an arch ; its attractive
appearance is much enhanced bv its reflection in the mirrored
bottom of the case. Here is aEo a specimen of black ferro-
manganese conjoined stalactites, about nine inches long, and
four inches wide, covered on one side with implanted crystals
of white Smithsonite (zinc carbonate), giving a grand effect by
reflection in the mirror. Here is a crystalline aggregate of
azurite (blue carbonate of copper), showing the graceful form
of a swan having its head thrown back, as though in the act
of swallowing a fish. Ihe under beak has been partly broken


away, otherwise the resemblance is complete. Here again are
several specimens of delicate stalactites with interlacing rods
and columns, composed of limonite and psilomelane, in form not
unlike miniature temples, ruined cathedrals, and burnt forests.
In other instances the bulk of the structure has been removed
by solution, leaving a skeleton frame which has been sub-
sequently bound together by various forms of cerussite (lead
carbonate) ; many of these are too complicated in structure to
be easily described. For instance, here is one whose ironstone
frame resembles a five-barred gate, resting partly on end, in a
slanting position, supported by stalactites of divergent crystals
of cerussite, some of which interlace and partly pass between
the bars, the whole being nicely tinted with psilomelane,
forming a striking picture. Here is malachite, with a sheen
and structure of velvet, having bluish transparent crystals of
topaz quartz showing through it, giving it a very pleasing
appearance. In other specimens are beautifully formed
crystals of (blue) azurite on (green) malachite.
Any hard-hearted practical observer, who could divest
himself of the feeling of doing injustice to the many by the
selection of a few, as the most beautiful types, would probably
select the native copper, hedyphane, and cerussite as those
most worthy of the place of honor. The native copper occurs
in various fantastic and imitative forms, often as connected
bunches or bundles of four, or eight-sided rods, with joints at
irregular intervals, from which other similar rods branch out.
Often these at their extremity are crowned by bunches of
crystals, having the form of partly opened buds or stunted
leaves. These latter also often occur along the sides of the
rods or at their joints. Another, arborescent form occurs
often as miniature forests, with the trunks, branches, and foliage
of the trees truly represented, even to the smallest details,
together with their undergrowth of bush and herbage, with
boulders and jutting rocks rising above the latter. Though,
perhaps, the greatest success in imitative forms has been
achieved by Nature in the frond formation, in these the native
copper has taken the form of leaves, principally those of the
fern, in which the stem passes up through the leaf-like structure
with its diagonal supports. The imitation is even carried to
the crimpling of the leaves around their margins. When
these different formations occur together, as the last two often
do, the effect is really grand. You have then the forest trees,
the bushes and herbage, with ferns in a most pleasing com-
bination.
Hedyphane, a chemical combination, consists of lead, lime,
arsenic, chlorine, and phosphorus, passing into mimetite on the


one hand, and pyromorphite on the other. The crystals are
generally small and light colored, implanted on limonite or
ferro-manganese. They are usually stained in very bright
colors by some arsenical combination. Those who admire bright
colors find their attraction here.
1 have left the carbonate of lead (cerussite) crystals to the
last, for the reason, insufficient perhaps, that I cannot do them
justice in a short description such as this. Their various forms
of crystallisation —from the fine silky fibrous to the divergent,
from the delicate web-like threads to the stout twin crystals,
and the different combinations of the several forms together —
would require the pen of a master with the descriptive power
of a literary genius. Their colors too, varying from the clear
white to the grey, yellow, red, green, and black, would be no
easy task to describe. The embolite specimens are also very
quaint and valuable. Some of them are very clean, and
resemble delicate corals, others have the honeycomb form,
whilst others are merely massive, of large size and great
beauty. Finely cut cubical crystals occur in each of the
different forms, also implanted upon lead, iron, maganese, zinc v
and copper.
“The Advertiser,” Adelaide, 25th June, 1892.
The Aldridge Collection.
An Enthusiastic Mineralogist.
[by our own reporter.]
There is not a more valuable collection of silver, lead, and
copper specimens in any public or private institution in
Australia, nor probably a moie unique assortment to be seen
in any part of the world than that owned by Mr. Edward W.
Aldridge and contained within the walls of the Duke of Corn-
wall Hotel, Argent Street, Broken Hill. No other part of the
universe, perhaps, ever offered such scope for the operations of
a mineral collector as Broken Hill has done during the last
half dozen years, and no more enthusiastic collector ever
engaged in the work of putting together an extensive, compre-
hensive, and beautiful assortment of mineral objects than Mr.
Aldridge. He came to Broken Hill about four and a half years
ago, and almost immediatly after his arrival became impressed
with the enormous variety of the cupriferous,
and lead ores which were being daily brought to light from the
mines along the wonderful lode, and as soon as an opportunity
offered he formed the nucleus of the collection which has now
attained such perfection. In the early days of the field people


parted with their specimens much more freely than they do
now. It was an easy matter then to get a fairly good lot of
. samples together in a few days, but with most of those who
undertook the work of collecting, the fascination was but
temporary, and very few people indeed have continued to
accumulate objects right up to the present time. There are
fewer collectors now, and fewer specimens obtainable, but Mr.
Aldridge has never ceased to add to his magnificent collection
whenever and wherever opportunity occurred. Those portions
of the great lode which are now being worked, and from which
a number of the mining companies are able to pay dividends,
notwithstanding the low market value of silver and other
sources of trouble, present fewer chances for the mineral
collector to add to his store, and besides this those who are
regularly engaged at the mines have themselves awakened to
the extieme value of the beautiful bits of nature’s handiwork
which are occasionally met with. Consequently the Aldridge
Collection, even had no new specimens been added to it during
the last two or three years, has steadily increased in value. It
may here be pointed out that the collection contains about
3,000 specimens, every one of which was obtained in the
Barrier district, and there is not a duplicate to be found among
the whole lot. The exhibition is one of the principle “ lions ”
of the silver city, and no visit from metropolitan residents
could be regarded as complete without a few hours being spent
in Mr. Aldridge’s handsomely adorned chamber. The local
people, who by the way have interested themselves con-
siderably in the accumulation of the specimens, and assisted
the collector in completing various classes of ores, spend much
of their spare time among the cases, and Mr. Aldridge is always
anxious to make anybody’s visit enjoyable and profitable.
With such exquisite taste hive the specimens been arranged,
with such care are they looked after, and so complete and
comfortable is everything about the museum, that it is quite
an easy matter to spend a few hours thefe without becoming
wearied, and no one (even if his tastes do not run in the
mineral groove), can fail to'appreciate the enormous amount of
time and money which must have been expended to bring the
concern to such a state of perfection. It must not for a
moment be understood that the collection is made up entirely of
of gifts. Many of the lumps of ore have had to be paid dearly for
as they could not be obtained merely for the asking. Then the
fortunate proprietor has had to make frequent visits to the
capitals in connection with the work of beautifying the apart-
ment in which the the samples are accommodated. Cases and
mirrors, magnifying glasses, and reflectors of the most elaborate


description have been provided. Some of them were imported
direct from the old country, and altogether Mr. Aldridge has
had to go to his pocket pretty frequently.
And now as to the value of the collection. This is a
matter upon which opinions may differ considerably, according
to the amount of appreciation with which the collection is
viewed. In some quarters its value would be based upon the
quantity of silver and other metals contained in the ores, but the
collector —he who finds music and beauty in every stone, and
can fully appreciate the delicate touch of nature —could never
overvalue it. To such a man every specimen is a study.
There is a sentiment expressed by every piece of ore, and a
picture is presented which could never be wrought by human
hand. Mr. Aldridge has frequently been asked what he values
the collection at as it now stands, and like most other people he
hesitates to say. He started picking up specimens as a pastime,
but alas ! he now looks upon the result of his efforts with the
cold eye of one who is conscious of their great value, and it
would take a few thousand pounds to get them from him. Mr.
C. W. Marsh, a well-known local mineralogist who has resided
on the field for several years past and is now engaged in classify-
ing the Block 10 collection of specimens for the Chicago
Exhibition, has been busily employed for nearly six months
past in arranging and classifying the ores. This will give
some idea of their extent. Mr. Aldridge has been
consulted with regard to sending his collection over to the
World’s Fair to be held next year The New South Wales
commissioners a few w r eeks back approached him and offered
to pay all the expenses of removing the collection to Chicago
and to cover it by insurance to its full value. It is not, how-
ever, yet decided whether the Americans will have an opportunity
of viewing the collection. So much capital has Mr. Aldridge
invested in the show and so little neglect wmuld be required
to rob it of much of its beauty that, he does not care to let it
go out of his possession. No doubt if arrangements were made
w r hich would enable him to accompany the collection across
the big pond, with all expenses paid, he might be induced to
go and take the concern with him. Even then it is likely that
the removal of the specimens w T ould result in some of them
being damaged beyond repair, and the proprietor would
naturally insist on being insured against loss.
.On entering the chamber in which the collection is
arranged the visitor is confronted wdth a large number of
elaborately fitted up and mirrored cases in which the specimens
are contained, secure against atmospheric influences and the
ravages of the dust, for which, as everybody knows, Broken


Hill is notorious. It is a well lighted compartment, and has a
most commanding view of the town and the mines. Ihe walls
are tastefully decorated, and rare photographs of the principal
claims in early days —photos which are now unobtainable —are
plentifully hung about. Some of these are most interesting,,
and date back to the end of 1886, before the mines had assumed
such an important position as they now occupy. The centre
case, which is the most prominent feature about the is a
most effective and costly piece of furniture, and the mirrors
which are hung about in all directions, and the black and
crimson floors of the numerous cases impart to the place a
decidedly rich appearance. The walls are lined with capacious
cases of all kinds, and these are thickly stocked with specimens.
The first case to which the visitor’s attention is directed runs
along the western wall of the room, and contains about 60a
pieces of ore. Crystallised lead forms the most beautiful and
striking specimens in this case. Many of them could not be
replaced if anything happened to them. Some of them are so free
from extraneous substances that if they were dealt with in the
furnaces they would yield at the rate of 80 per cent, of metallic
lead. There are twin crystals in fibrous and radiating forms
some discolored with copper and alumina, and others incrusted
with ferro manganese or stained by organic acids. A few
beautiful specimens of chromo pyromorphite, phosphate of lead,
vanadanite, mimetite, jordanite, aurichalcite, and embolite
or chloro-bromide of silver —one of the purest forms in which
the precious metal is found —is to be observed in many of the
pieces.
Opposite the door there is a case in which some of the
most valuable specimens in the collection are placed.
One of these is the celebrated Treasure specimen. Nearly
everybody remembers the wonderful Treasure slug. Some
prospectors camped upon a huge lump of silver standing out
from the ground, and it was some time before they discovered
the value of their camping-place. Then they took two tons of
silver off in only a few pieces, and since then nothing of any
importance has been found on the claim. Mr. Aldridge’s lump
of the stuff weighs 12 lb., and is roughly valued for its silver
contents at about £2O, but of course as a specimen it is worth
a great deal more than that figure. Very fine specimens of
malachite, studded with crystals of cerussite, argentite ore
carrying about n,ooooz. of silver per ton, and crystals of
azurite and malachite in combination. A lump of aurichalcite
—copper and zinc carbonate in such a complicated form that
neither metal can be distinguished —is a prominent feature about
the case, and jalpaite —a mixture of silver and copper sulphide,


carrying about 8,000 oz. of silver to the ton, brognaiidite, a
sulphide of lead, silver, and antimony, also very rich, make up a
nice group. Then there is covellite (another mixture of three
different metals), melaconite, stephanite, and a block of chloro-
bromide of silver varying between 8 and 10 lb. Another lump of
the same class of material formed a pait of a slug found in the
Purnamoota district, in the early days, which was sawn in halves
to allow the prospectors to place a value upon it. Some exceed-
ingly pretty embolite and cerussite which came from the mines
along the line are shown in the same portion of the collection A
very fine case of small but handsome specimens is placed im-
mediately beneath the southern window, which admitsa first-class
light, and allows of each object being distinctly seen. The case it-
self is very cleverly constructed in such a manner that neai ly
everv portion is transparent. It has a mirrored bottom and three
glass shelves. Silver, lead, zinc, copper, iron, and mercury speci-
mens are here shown, and for the purposes of effect and safety the
most delicate of them are mounted on plaster of paris pedestals.
Near by there is another case containing some crystals of lead
embedded in chloride of a very bright and striking color.
These are looked upon as some of the most unique objects in
the collection. In the same case there are some excellent
samples of linarite—a combination of copper and lead—and a
number of rich pieces of embolite. One of the latter consists
of alternate layers of silver, copper, and manganese. Bright
blue lumps of azurite and red oxide of copper are shown to the
best possible advantage, and some compound twin crystals of
lead with malachite and quartz make a very interesting exhibit.
The adjoining receptacle encloses a great many kaolin specimens
carrying mercury in various forms. Mr. Aldridge has managed
to secure for this branch of the collection a number of pieces of
onofrite —a selenide of mercury, with silver, cinnabap, and
iodide, and chloride of mercury. There is much silver in all
the specimens, either in the form of embolite, iodide, or native
silver, and in many of them the three forms are found together.
Some beautifully colored chromo-phosphate of lead specimens,
give this section of the collection a very striking appearance.
Pure white crystals of lead in all sorts of fantastic and delicate
forms, are strewn about among the richer pieces' of stuff, and
these with the blue and green copper ores and other specimens
of bright hue, are tastefully scattered around in such a manner
as to show, that Messrs. Aldridge and Marsh have not been
so particular in arranging the specimens regularly according to
to their contents, or any other rule recognised in museums, as
they have in getting them to show effectively. There is one
case, however, which is devoted almost entirely to native silver


specimens. Native silver is found here in every conceivable
form from powder to nuggets. There are a number of glass
jars containing this precious form of metal and all kinds of ore
are thickly encrusted with it. Kaolin specimens coated with
iodide of silver fully a quarter of an inch thick, such as cannot
be obtained in the mines nowadays, here find a resting place,
“A jeweller’s shop” this case has been called, and it well
deserves the title. More specimens of aurichalcite, of a most
delicate character, slugs of native silver, bromide of silver ;
strontianite —carbonate of lime in various imposing forms—
kaolin and carbonate of lead, with embolite, iodide of silver and
mercury, zinc carbonate, quartz crystals ; magnesite—carbonate
of magnesia—with aragonite, barytes, and hundreds of other
kinds of material dragged from the underground workings of
the mines, are exhibited in other cases, which can only be just
referred to in such a short article. A lot could be written
about the oxide of antimony, cervantite, rhombohedral crystals
of calcite, grotesque stalactites of iron, making perfect models
of ruined cathedrals, &c., but space will not permit. Reference,
however, must again be made to the centre case of the
collection, which has already been touched upon. It contains
the choicest and prettiest specimens in the room All the
colors of the rainbow are there represented malachite
presenting the appearance of velvet ; crystals of cerussite, as
fine as silken threads laced together in the most peculiar style
imaginable ; frail but beautiful pieces of oxide of iron ; bunches
of chloro-bromide of silver, looking like so much green wax ;
elegant specimens of smithsonite, chrysocolla, limonite, and
cerussite, stained with ferrous oxide of iron ; native copper,
with its crystalline branches partly coated with malachite, and
rare stalactitic specimens of iron, with implanted crystals of
anglesite, and embolite, have carefully been arranged side by
side and full written particulars about every specimen have
been placed alongside. One of the most exquisite objects in
the case is a piece of azurite, in the form of a swan. Only a
few of the specimens have here been mentioned, but they will
serve to convey some idea of the magnitude of the collection,
and the enormous amount of work which has been involved in
classifying them.
There is one impression which is invariably left upon the
minds of all thoughtful persons who inspect the collection. It
is this, that however proud Mr. Aldridge and the people of
Broken Hill may be of it, and however much it has come to be
regarded as a feature of the town, it is a pity that it is allowed
to remain in private hands, and particularly in a town which—
important as it has become —is by no means on a level with


the metropolitan cities for show purposes. As a source of
education the Aldridge Collection cculi not be surpassed, and
were it provided with accomodation in Adelaide, Melbourne,
or Sydney this purpose would be served far better than in its
present position. It has been frequently urged that the Collection
should become a national institution, and be placed where it
would be more useful than now. As previously
indicated Mr. Aldridge has always allowed the collection to
remain open for free public inspection, but while remaining in
private hands there is no telling how long this privilege may
be continued. If taken up by one of the Governments
there would be a guarantee as to its permanence. It is
peculiar that although Broken Hill has attained a
world-wide reputation on account of the magnitude of its
mineral resources the district receives scarcely a mention in any
of the mineralogical books published. Ihe place wants adver-
tising more completely than has yet been done, and the collection
under notice would do this admirably. It is likely that at an
early date Mr. Aldridge will visit the capitals with a portion of
the show. Even this will teach the people a good deal more
than they yet know about Broken Hill—a place in the Chicago
Exhibition would go much further. Colonials who have
recently returned from the old country state after visiting the
principal museums there that in none of them can be found
such a complete, beautiful, and unique mineral collection than
that which now occupies such a comparatively obscure position
at the Duke of Cornwall Hotel, Argent Street, Broken Hill.
In going through the collection Mr. Marsh came across a
great many specimens which, so far as he has been able to
ascertain, are entirely new or rare to Australia. Of these he
has prepared the following list :
LEAD.
Phosgenite—Chloro carbonate of lead.
Lanarkite —Sulplio-carbonate of lead.
Matlockite Sulpho-chloride of lead.
Kampylite —Chloro-arsenate of lead.
Hedyphane —Chloro-phospho-arsenate of lead, with lime.
Percylite—Hydrous-chloride of lead and copper.
Linarite —Hydrous-sulphate of lead and copper.
Sartorite —Arsenical sulphide of lead.
Chromo-pyromorphite—A chromo-chloro-phosphate of lead.
Jordanite —Lead arsenical sulphide.
Boulangerite —Lead-antimonial sulphide.
COPPER.
Erinite—Hydrous arsenate of copper.
Atlasite —Hydrous chloro-carbonate of copper.
Chalcotrichite —Red oxide of copper.
Bournonite—Copper-lead antinionial sulphide.
Pilarite —Alumino silicate of copper.


ZINC.
Aurichalcite—Hydrous zinc copper carbonate.
H> dro-zincite (hydro zinc carbonate), apparently derived from
the decomposition of the above, by separation of copper.
SILVER.
Bromyrite—Bromide of silver (seldom free from chlorine),
lodyrite—lodide of silver.
Stromeyrite - Copper-silver sulphide.
Jalpaite - Silver-copper sulphide.
Dyscrasite—Antimonial-silver.
Pyrargyrite—Antimonial-silver sulphide.
Proustite —A rsenical-sil ver sulphide.
Stephanite—Antimonial-silver sulphide.
Brognairdite—Lead-antimonial silver sulphide.
Polybasite—Silver-copper sulphide, with antimony and arsenic.
MERCURY.
Onofrite—Sulpho-selinide of mercury ?
Calomel- Sulpho-chloride of mercury ?
lodide of mercury.
Since the aforegoing articles were written further value
has been added to the Collection, Mr. H. Mayfield having been
engaged in assaying those specimens rich in silver, lead or copper,
or where combinations of different metals occur, Cards giving
such information proving of great Interest to those inspecting
the Collection.




