

Asiatic Intelligence.-^Malacca.
2. Of these one shall be president of
the committee, one secretary, and one
treasurer.
3. The committee shall meet on the
sth of every moon at the Anglo-Chinese
college, at seven o’clock in the evening, for
the managementof business ; except when
the fifth day falls on a sabbath, in that
case the meeting to be held the following
day, at the same hour.
4. All things about which there is a
difference of opinion shall be decided by
a majority of votes, the president having
a casting vote,
5. All money to be paid into the hands
of the secretary, who after carrying it to
account, shall deliver it over to the trea-
surer. The treasurer to lay out the mo-
ney to interest for the benefit of the so-
ciety.
6. No money shall be paid out by the
treasurer, except by an order signed by
the secretary and three members.
7. The subscriptions shall be collected
on the 2d of every month.
8. The supplies shall be given out on
the sth day of each month, from nine to
ten in the morning. Those who obtain
supplies must come at the same time to
receive them ; if they delay beyond the
fixed time, they must wait until another
month.
9. The committee shall all give their
services gratis ; but, if necessary, they
may hire a man for one day, monthly, to
collect the subscriptions.
10. A general register shall he kept, in
which the names of subscribers, state of
the funds, number, name, age, place,
and circumstances of the persons relieved,
shall be inserted.
11. A general annual meeting of all the
subscribers shall fake place on the sth of
the first moon of every year, at eleven
o’clock in the forenoon, at the Anglo-Chi-
nese college, at which the report of the
proceedings for the year, state of the
funds, &c. shall be read, and new officers
elected, or former ones continued.
12. The committee for the time being
are jointly responsible for the funds.
13. The committee shall prepare, at the
expense of the society, whatever books,
paper, &c, may be necessary.
V. Subscribers.
1. Any persons subscribing one fanam
and upwards per month, shall be con-
sidered a member of this society.
2. Any person giving a donation of five
dollars and upwards, shall be an honorary
member, and may sit and vote in the
committee meetings.
3. Any two or three subscribers have
the privilege of recommending to the
committee any distressed object.
4. Any person putting off the payment
of his subscription for two months suc-
cessively shall be no longer considered a
member, but his name struck off the list.
It may not be superfluous to remark at
the close of this paper, as an encourage-
ment to acts of beneficence, that this
society owes the commencement of its
funds to the lady of an English gentleman
in the H.E. I. Company’s service in
China. Several years ago she committed
a sum of money into the hands of a friend
who has now gone the way of all the
earth, to be bestowed for the relief of the
poor. Of that money forty dollars (about
jglO.) have been given to assist this so-
ciety. Bv various contributions in Ma-
lacca the fund amounts to about 160
dollars, which sum is laid out to interest.
Some of the principal Chinese in the
place, among whom the Capt China, or
Chinese magistrate, is to be reckoned,
are subscribers; the whole number of
monthly subscribers does not yet exceed
fifty-five; the sums of money subscribed,
though small compared with what is given
in some parts of India for similar pur-
poses, will not appear contemptible if re-
duced to European money. The sub-
scriptions vary from about two-pence
English, or a little more than one stiver
Dutch, to one Spanish dollar, or about
five shillings sterling, per month. The
lowest will amount to about ,half-a-crown
a year, which is fully as much as could
be expected from labouring people, who
live almost entirely on What the labours
of each day bring in; and the highest
will amount to about three pounds ster-
ling annually, which is as much as we
generally see on the subscription lists of
benevolent societies in Europe. But this
method of assisting the poor is quite new
in these parts ; considerable sums of mo-
ney are indeed distributed monthly in va-
rious Indian colonies, both English and
Dutch : but these generally flow from the
liberality of rich individuals, or from
large legacies left on purpose, or from the
interest of unappropriated funds. The
society has already two old men on its
books, both uufitto labour, and destitute
of friends and every other means of sub-
sistence ; one is aged eighty-seven, and
the other ninety ; and there are seve-
ral applications from poor widows with
large families. Should any of our read-
ers feel disposed to assist this benevolent
object, any remittance, however small,
made to the Capt. China,Tsang-yew-leang,
or to the editor of the Hindoo-Chinese
Gleaner, in the name of the Malacca,
Tsee-kwun-tseeh-hwuy, will be thank-
fully received and committed to the care
of the committee.— Gleaner, Oct. 10,
1819.


SINCAPOOR.
PRICE CURRENT.
June 2 6t/i, 1820.
Drs.
Beetlenut per pikul .. ... 3
Canvas per bolt 12
Cocoa Nut per pikul 8|
Elephant’s Teeth.. per do 80
Rice, Patna per bag 4J
Do. Moongy.... per do 3§
Do, 5iam...... per pikul 2
Wheat, D00da.... per bag 4£
Ghee per maund 12f
Gunnies per 100 12|
Opium, Patna.. ..per chest .... 1330
Opium, Benares.. per do 1335
Piece Goods, Gur-
rahs >per corge 45
Sanda Sahans .... per do, 75
Patna Chintzes.... per do 30
Tatfeties per do. ........ 140
Saltpetre per bag 8$
Raw Silk, China .. per pikul 500
Sugar, Siam, Ist
sort per do 7\
Do. 2d do per do 5§
Do. 3d do per do 4
Sugar Candy, Ist
sort per do 15
Tobacco Segars ..per 1000 2\
Paints, white .... per lb 25
Green per do 1
Yellow per do. 25
Black per lb 25
Red per lb 25
Patna Grain per bag 3$
Benjamin Head ..per pikul 30
Do. Belly..per do 15
Do. Foot per do 5
Banca Tin per do 17
Camphor, Ist sort, per do 1560
Dammer per do 2
Mace, Amboyna .. per do 300
Nutmegs per 1000 7£
Pepper per do 12£
Rattans per pikul 3
Sago, Ist sort .... per do 3
Do. 2d do per do 2
Wax per do 43
Birds’ nests per catty 45
Fishmaws per pikul 60
Shark’s Firs per do 20
Tortoiseshell ....per do 450
Beer in bottle .... per dozen 13
Claret, French....per do 15
Madeira per do 15
Port per do 12
Champagne per do 20
Brandy per do 15
Rum, Jamaica.... per do 15
Hollands Gin ....per can 15
Hams and Cheese.. per do
Linseed Oil per gallon 3
Anchors per cwt 13
Brass Guns per catty
Bottles per 100 2
Drs.
Canvas, Europe ..perbolt 16
Chalk per pikul
Coals per do
Copper Sheet .... per do
Do. Bolt per do
Do. nails per do
Do. Cordage per do
Gunpowder per lb 2§
Iron,Swedish square per do
Do, Flat per do 6$
Do, Bolt .per do 8
Do. English sq..per do
Lead Pigs per do,
Do. Sheet per cwt 6f
Patent Shot per hag 3
Pitch
Tar. America .... per barrel 7§
Tin Plates, I. C. .. 200 in case .... 17£
Turpentine Spirits per gallon 4
Steel, in Tubs per tub 7
Broadcloths per yard 3§
Flannels per do
Hats each
Chintzs’, good patterns
Cutlery, table sets each 40
Earthenware
Oilman Stores 30
COURSE OF EXCHANGE.
Government Bills on Bengal at 206 lacs
12 rs. per 100 Spanish dollars, to 30 do.
do. Private do. do. to do. Private Bills
on China, to 30 do. do. to par. Do. on
Madras, to 30 do. do. 220 Rs. per 100
Spanish dollars. j/j /> ;J
NEW SOUTH WALES.-VAN
DIEMEN'S LAND .
DISCOVERY OF LAKE WARREWAA.
The Tuscan has brought letters and pa-
pers from Port Jackson to the 7th of Sept.,
by which we learn that the indefatigable ex-
ertions of Mr. Throsby, who ascertained
the route to the fine country beyond the
Blue Mountains, have again been crowned
with the most gratifying success. In a
letter of the sth of Sept., to a gentleman
in town, he says :
“ You will see I am in a fair way of ve-
rifying my prediction, that ere long a route
would be continued as far to the southward
on our continent,as Twofold Bay. The lake
now discovered is full 160 miles S.S.W. of
Sydney, to which an open carriage road will
be clear in a month. The country is beau-
tiful, and fully equal to ray most sanguine
expectations, for all the necessary pur-
poses of colonization. Picture to yourself
large extensive downs, not plains, some
as large as from 50 to 60,000 acres, with-
out a tree, every where covered with fine
grass for sheep or cattle, and well watered.


partly by rippling streams, partly by
chains of ponds, in all directions. There
are many such plains, of different sizes,
and the hills and broken country around
are thickly clad with excellent timber.
It is, in fact, a most desirable country,
and, before next Christmas, I confidently
anticipate, we shall prove that the snow
and rain which falls on the mountains
and high country seen to the S.W. have
an outlet to the sea. The lake is called
by the natives Warrewaa, and is stated
by them to empty its waters in a souther-
ly direction, where we perceive an open-
ing in the high land, on its west margin,
by a river they call Murrum-hid-gee. The
lake runs from N. to S. about 30 miles,
and extends in breadth from two to ten
miles, its margin abounding in the most pic-
turesque bays and points.” —Lond. Paper.
PRINTING PRESS.
In 1818 a printing press was set up in
Hobart’s town, Van Diemen’s Laud, New
Holland. The first book from this press
is the history of a fugitive exile, named
Michael Horne, who at the head of twen-
ty-eight other runaways disturbed the
tranquillity of the colony for six years.
The work derives importance from the
singularity of this circumstance and from
the story.— •lbid.
CHINA.
Th** following proclamation, furnishes
a curious and amusing specimen of politi-
cal and commercial sagacity on the part of
the Chinese Gov. at Canton, in providing
against an expected scarcity of grain there.
“ Proclamation, issued by the viceroy
and hoppoof Canton, declaring the terms
on which foreign ships may bring rice,
from the date of the proclamation, being the
25th year of Kea King, 2d moon, 30th day
(April 12th, 1820), till the end of the 10th
moon of the same year (Dec. sth, 1820).
“ Yuen , the viceroy of Canton, &c.,
with Ah, thehoppo, hereby issue a joint
proclamation to the Hong merchants,
howqua and the others, requiring them
to inform themselves fully of its contents.
“The province of Canton not producing
much rice, depends entirely on rice brought
from other parts of the country, and is
supplied by these continued streams ;
otherwise the people are subjected to the
evil of a dearness of provisions.
“ At the town of Canton, the price of
rice has been recently gradually rising, in
consequence of little rice arriving from
other places ; and it becomes proper to
take precautions.
« VFe, the viceroy and hoppo, find that,
during the 51st and 60th years of Keen
Lung, and during the llth and 14th years
of Kea King, foreign ships brought rice to
Canton to sell, and the fees for searching
were remitted.* But the vessels which
arrived at Whampoa, and which brought
(with the rice) any goods chargeable with
duty, or carried any, however small the
quantity, away, it was required of the Hong
merchant to enter the name of the ship, and
enter with his own hands such chargeable
goods in a book, to which was affixed the
seal of Gov., and the whole reported to the
board at Pekin ; therefore, no ships bring-
ing rice can add thereto the smallest
possible quantity of cargo without for-
feiting the claim to a remission of charges ;
this rule applies both to her entering and
her leaving the port.
“During the 11th and 14th years of
Kea King, when the merchants were or-
dered to buy foreign rice, it was resolved
that if foreigners chose voluntarily to bring
rice, and anchor with it at Whampoa
(audit was the fact that they came express-
ly for the purpose of bringing rice, and
they had no other sort of goods what-
ever) then it would be granted to remit
the measurement and other charges, but
they would be ordered to leave the port
empty. If they either brought or took
away cargo, then, as with all merchant
vessels, they would be required to pay the
measurement and the charges.
“ As the price of rice cannot now be re-
duced to its level, it becomes proper to
adopt the measure resorted to in the 11th
and 14th years of the Kea King; and so
any detriment either to the people’s pro-
visions, or the revenue of the country, be
avoided.
“We now issue a proclamation, and
further send this proclamation to the
Hong merchants, requiring them to enjoin
this order on all the factory chiefs of every
country, and on all foreign ships, requir-
ing their obedience thereto.
“ If foreigners choose voluntarily to
come with rice alone to Canton, and have
on board no other goods, the measure-
ment and other charges will be remitted
to them; and after they have sold the
rice, they will be allowed to go empty out
of port, but they will not be permitted
to make babbling statements that they
must put in cargo to ballast the vessel, in
the hope of evading the duties.
“ Further, state authoritatively to the
said factory chiefs, that from the day of
issuing this order, to the end of the 10th
moon, is the time limited, within which
they may bring rice, and have the charges
remitted ; but beyond that time, any ves-
sel bringing rice to Canton, will be liable
to the measurement, and other charges of
merchant ships, and no pretexts or en-
• In the original, the usual words used for duties
are not inserted ; because, in China, there is no
duty on food, either for the mind or body,—viz.
books and rice. But certain fees are paid (by
vessels carrying grain) to the custom-house offi-
cers ; these seem here referred to.


treaties for a remission of these, will be
regarded, but will incur criminality that
will be found disadvantageous to the par-
ties offending.
“ Report to us the manner in which
you have executed the above orders.
“Hasten! Hasten!!
“ (A special edict.) “ Kea King.
“25th year, 2d moon, 30th day.”
[Mad. Gov. Gaz. Sept. 28.]
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
It is stated by the Nautilus, from Chi-
na 14th Oct., bound to Havre, that 22 of
the Company’s ships had arrived at Can-
ton. The one not arrived is supposed to
be the Lady Melville, as she did not sail
from Madras to Bengal before the 24th
of Ang.
MAURITIUS.
PREVALENCE OF THE SLAVE TRADE,
It is stated, on this subject, in the four-
teenth report of the African Institution,
that as soon as Maj.gen. Hall, whose vigo-
rous measures had for a time checked the
traffic, had quitted the colony, many ves-
sels of light burthen were sent out for
slaves to Madagascar, Mozambique, and
elsewhere. These had even returned and
sailed again upon similar voyages; and
there is reason to apprehend, that at no
period was the slave trade carried on to a
greater extent, at the Mauritius, than it
was for some time subsequently to the de-
parture of Gen. Hall.
The lowest computation makes the
number of new slaves imported in the
single month of last June, to exceed 700 !
and the persons directly engaged, or other-
wise interested, in this inhuman traffic,
(comprising a great part of the population
of the island), are said to have increased
in activity and daring beyond all former
precedent.
Instances of a flagrant nature are ad-
duced. Circumstances at length occurred,
which induced the acting governor of the
island, Maj.gen. Darling, to issue a pro-
clamation, in July of last year, announc-
ing his determination “ to prevent, by
legal, but severe, measures, those daily
violations of the law, which, though pub-
lic and notorious, no one would assist in
repressing, and but too many were ready
to protect and conceal.”
The trial and conviction of three slave
dealers, at the Old Bailey, were stated in
the thirteenth report. Other convictions
have since taken place•
In January last, two other persons,
named Alex. Villemont and Jas. Alex.
Carrol, charged with similar offences,
committed in the same island were tried,
under another special commission at the
Old Bailey, found guilty, and severally
sentenced to 14 years' transportation. It
appeared, from the statement made to the
jury by the counsel for the crown, that
two others were likewise implicated in the
transaction, and had been sent to England
for trial. Several slaves were also sent
as witnesses against them ; hut owing to
their ignorance of the religious obliga-
tions of an oath, hut too natural to per-
sons who are the victims of this inhuman
traffic, the prosecution against those pri-
soners was abandoned.
Although the Directors cannot but re-
joice in the issue of these trials, because
they hope that it will furnish a salutary
lesson to the planters of the Isle of
France ; yet they are sensible that there
is much hardship in the course at present
pursued, of bringing persons from so great
a distance, to undergo their trial in this
country, provided means can be devised
for securing a fair and impartial trial on
the spot. To this point the Directors
have anxiously turned their attention,
and they trust that means may be found
to obviate the very great inconvenience
and hardship of the present system.
FREEDOM OF THE PORT.
A proclamation has been issued by Ro-
bert Townsend Faiquhar, Esq., governor
of the island of Mauritius, granting the
freedom of that port. It mentions, that
his Majesty's ministers being anxious to
extend, without delay, to the Mauritius
and its dependencies, the benefit of those
enlightened principles which govern their
measures with reference to commercial
relations with foreign powers, have di-
rected, that the trade between the island
and its dependencies shall be conducted in
such a manner as shall give general satis-
faction to the inhabitants. Certain regu-
lations are affixed to the proclamation of
his Excellency, and are laid down in six
distinct articles. —London paper, Dec. 21.
STATE OF THE CUHRENCV.
By the Phoenix, Captain Weynton, a
Mauritius paper of the 30th of September
has arrived, which contains a speech de-
livered by bis Excellency Governor Farqu-
har to the General Assembly of Commerce,
and of the inhabitants of that island, upon
the depreciated state of the currency,
which he found, on his return from this
country, had sunk to a discount of 36 per
cent., upon its nominal value. He de-
clares the bank, however, to be in a state
