

-P
StbPl
QOV-
wi
INA BOY
CICELY HAMILTON
PUBLISHED
For The Nina Boyle Memorial Committee
By MARIE LAWSON.
52/54, High Holborn, W.C.I.


THE NINA BOYLE MEMORIAL FUND.
PATRONS.
MRS. JESSIE ADAMSON, M.P.
THE VISCOUNTESS ASTOR, M.P.
MRS. CAZALET-KEIR, M.P.
THE VISCOUNTESS DAVIDSON, M.P.
THE EARL OF GLASGOW, D.S.O.
PROFESSOR W. E. GYE, M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.S.
THE RT. HON. F. W. PETHICK-LAWRENCE , P.C., M.P.
Miss MEGAN LLOYD GEORGE, M.P.
MRS. V. LAUGHTON-MATTHEWS, C.B.E.
THE RT. HON. LORD NOEL-BUXTON, P.C., M.P.
Miss ELEANOR RATHBONE, M.P.
DR. EDITH SUMMERSKILL, M.P.
Miss IRENE WARD, M.P.
Miss ELLEN WILKINSON, M.P
APPEAL COMMITTEE.
Chairman-. Miss CICELY HAMILTON.
MRS. HELEN ARCHDALE.
MISS FLORENCE BARRY (St. Joan's Social and Political Alliance).
MME. BOLOGNE-HEISER.
EDWARD FULLER, ESQ. (Save the Children Fund).
MRS . ELSA GYE (Suffragette Fellowship).
MISS MARIE LAWSON .
Miss E. PICTON-TURBERVILL, 0.8. E.
MISS PIEROTTI (National Union of Women Teachers).
Miss MARIAN REEVES (Women's Freedom League).
THE HON. MRS. RYDER ("Never Again" Association).
MISS MADGE TURNER (Association for Moral and Social Hygiene).
MRS. WESTBROOK (National Women's Citizens Association).
HON. TREASURER.
MISS MARIE LAWSON, High Holborn House, 52/54, High Holborn
W.C.i. Phone: Holborn 0634.
HON. SECRETARY


NINA BOYLE
I first made acquaintance with Nina Boyle as a member
of her audience —somewhere about the year 1910, in
the days of the Suffrage agitation. By that time I had
heard most well-known speakers for the Cause—some of
them many a time and oft—and had reached the stage
when I attended meetings from a sense of duty rather
than a need of conviction. In all likelihood I expected
to be slightly bored by the repetition of arguments long
grown familiar; that, at least, after some years' exper-
ience of "the Movement" was my attitude at most
suffrage meetings. If so, I must have been agreeably
surprised when Nina Boyle began to speak—for well
I remember the impression made on me alike by her
speech and herself. For here was a woman not only
sincere—(after all, most suffragist speakers were sincere)
—but possessed of sharp wit and sharp sense; a woman,
moreover, whose fluency and Tightness of word and
phrase told of natural talent for the platform. Whether
you agreed with her or whether you disagreed, she
was a speaker to listen to and laugh with!
It was on the platform that Nina Boyle was at her
best, but her talents were by no means confined to it.
She was a woman of many abilities—organizer, writer
and publicist; in her pre-suffrage days in South Africa
she made herself a name as a journalist. Nor was her
fund of argument and anecdote for use on the platform
only; she would dispense it as readily to an audience
of two, over cups of tea, as she would to an assembly of
a thousand. Hear her telling her experiences of whatever


nature —setting them before you in swift, vivid word-
pictures —and you could only listen and enjoy. Small
wonder that a publisher once suggested a book
on the lines of her "tea-table talk"; a book which*
oddly enough, she could not bring herself to write.
It was after her return from her long absence in
South Africa that she became prominent in the English
Suffrage Movement; she joined the Women's Freedom
League and gave herself up to its work. She became a
member of the League's Executive Committee; toured
the country as one of its speakers and organizers, and
took part in its militant action. More than once the
result of her militant activities was appearance in the
dock and a subsequent sojourn in gaol; whence, like
most of her companions in political law-breaking, she
emerged to continue her work for the cause with the
same vigour as before. For several years all her
energies were given to the struggle for Votes for Women,
and she was on a speaking tour in the West of England
when the breaking out of a greater struggle—the First
World War —deranged the plans of more than suffrage
societies. For Nina Boyle, as for many others, that
meant, before long, a diversion of energy from suffrage
agitation to the needs and service of the country.
In 1918, the last year of war, came the passing of
a measure that extended the parliamentary franchise to
women, and most of those who had demanded the measure
in the past were content —at least for the time being—
with so great a step in advance. Not so Nina Boyle;
and it was characteristic of her that she took advantage
of a Yorkshire by-election to get herself nominated as
parliamentary candidate—the first time in Great Britain
the name of a woman had appeared on a nomination
paper. There was a hitch, however, the nomination


papers were not in order, some technical error having
been made by the Keighley electors who had signed
them—an error which barred her from the contest.
In some respects the dashing of her hopes was not without
its compensations; so, at least, it seemed to those of
her friends who knew that Nina, adventurous as ever, had
been ready to plunge into the fray of the election with
very little money wherewith to meet its expenses. Had
funds been available, she would probably have tried her
luck again, but perhaps it was as well that she never
entered Parliament. She was too independent in thought
and speech, too intolerant of any deviation from prin-
ciple, to make real and permanent success in a career
that calls for patience as well as compromise.
From the clash of English politics she turned to
relief work—in post-war Europe—with the ' 'Save the
Children Fund." Almost from its outset she was on
the Council of the Fund, and, from that time forth, till
the ending of her life, it was one of her major interests
•—and interest with her meant always activity of service.
She was one of a party that travelled to Russia, on behalf
of the fund, in the black year 1921; carrying relief to
the stricken areas where untold thousands were starving.
In those early days of the Soviet Union, travel in Russia
meant cold, hunger and risk as well as daily hardship;
but to hear Nina talk of her personal experiences in that
adventure was to realize how indomitable was her sense
of humour! I remember how she chuckled over the
reminiscence of what should have been a Russian meal:
a hard-boiled egg that, its shell being cracked, revealed
a yolk that was coal-black as well as odoriferous. When
she turned away from the repulsive object with a shudder,
the Russian lady who acted as interpreter asked, did
she not intend to eat it?" "Certainly not " was


Nina's reply, "the thing is rotten." "In Russia,"
said the lady reprovingly, "an egg is an egg!"—and
promptly proceeded to consume the dainty, and appar-
ently found it satisfactory.
It was not only on relief work and as a member of its
Council that Nina Boyle served the cause of "Save the
Children;" till accident, by crippling her, put a bar to
travel, she was one of its most effective speakers. In
schools she was said to be especially popular; it was,
I suppose, her vigour and optimism, as well as her wit,
that made instant appeal to the young.
The fracture that left her permanently lame and
dependent on crutches did more than cut her off from the
platform in which she excelled and delighted; it left
her also a legacy of pain. Her last few years were
darkened by suffering as well as anxiety—while to one
of her active temperament, inaction itself must have
been a sore trial. But neither inaction, ill-health, nor
financial worry could break her stubborn courage or
lessen her capacity for interest in the work of the world.
When the ' 'Never Again'' Association came into being
she gave it whole-hearted support; she had always, I
think, been doubtful of the wisdom of our British
disarmament. Her South African experiences had made
her a champion of the subject women of the coloured
races and her interest in their freedom never waned.
To the end she was a fighter, a jester, an enthusiast—
as those can testify who heard her speak at the
lunch, held in February, 1943, in celebration of
five and twenty years of Women's Suffrage. That
was her last speech, made a few weeks before her death—
by a Nina Boyle as trenchant, as witty, as astonishingly
fluent, as the Nina Boyle who once fought the battle of
enfranchisement.


For some years before she died she was my neighbour
so I sometimes dropped into her basement flat for a talk;
and listening to her argument for this or that, I used to
think that her mind, her temperament, had not aged a
bit since first I knew her. Elderly she might be in
body, but never elderly in mind; for all her crutches
and her seventy-odd years, the old fire of the Suffrage
days still burned in her; she put into her advocacy
of that she deemed right all the energy of youth —and
sometimes its fiery impatience! And she was never so
obsessed by her own griefs and worries that she could not
forget them if her sympathies were roused, or her indig-
nation stirred by some manifestation of injustice . . .
I remember one evening, not long before her death,
looking in, to ask how she was ? She had, I know, been
anything but well and was worried about more than her
health. But I doubt whether, during the succeeding
hour, I heard as much a s a word concerning her personal
troubles; a story of suffering had just reached her ears
—of needless suffering endured by wounded men —and
her pity flared up at the thought of their helplessness,
her pity and likewise her anger. That was Nina Boyle
all over; ready, to the last of her life, to take arms
against oppression and champion the underdog whose
need was greater than her own.
She was through and through disinterested —and
there are not so many of her type in the world that her
friends are likely to forget her .... "Steel-true
and blade straight"—so Robert Louis Stevenson once
described his wife. And it is not, I think, flattery of
Nina Boyle's memory to borrow the terms for her use.
CICELY HAMILTON.


(SrOL
A ✓?
/
The Nina Boyle Memoria
The Memorial will take the form of an Annual Lecture
—the lecturer for each year to deal, from an expert point of
view, with one of the problems in which Nina Boyle was so
deeply interested. In this way it is hoped to make a per-
manent contribution to the work to which her life was
devoted and at the same time to perpetuate her memory.
i. Women's citizenship in all its aspects.
2. The establishment of the right of women of the
coloured races to physical and spiritual freedom.
3. The work of the Save the Children Fund.
4. The danger to Europe of militarist domination.
These are some of the causes to which—in sickness as
well as in health —Nina Bolye gave disinterested service. We
might ask support for this Memorial on account of her work
for any one of them, but we prefer to base our appeal on the
words of the Right Hon. F. W. Pethick Lawrence, P.C.,
M .P., namely, ' 'to do homage and reverence to the memory
of a very gallant woman."
On behalf of the Nina Boyle Memorial Committee.
CICELY HAMILTON, Chairman.
ELSAGYE, Hon. Secretary.
MARIE LAWSON , Hon. Treasurer.
Please address contributions to the Office of the Hon.
Treasurer.
Miss Marie Lawson,s2/54 High Holborn, London,
W.G.i. ('Phone: HOL. 0634).
