

NINETEEN DAYS' TERCOURSE
WITH THE PASSENGERS
OF
THE GOVERNMENT EMIGRANT SHIP
BLONDE,
DETAINED BY CHOLERA IN THE PORT OF LONDON
FROM AUGUST 31st TO SEPTEMBER 18TH, 1849.
BY THE VISITING SECRETARY
OF THE
PRAYER-BOOK AND HOMILY SOCIETY.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED AT THE SOCIETY’S OFFICE,
ALSO BY HATCHARDS, SEELEYS, AND NISBET.
1850.
Price 3d.


LONDON:
W. WATTS, CROWN COURT, TEMPLE BAR.


PRAYER-BOOK AND HOMILY SOCIETY,
INSTITUTED MAY 1812.
OFFICE, EXETER HALL, LONDON.
HIS GRACE THE MOST REV. LORD ARCHBISHOP
OF CANTERBURY.
His Grace the Most Rev. Lord ARCHBISHOP of YORK.
The Eight Rev. Lord BISHOP of WINCHESTER.
The Right Rev. Lord BISHOP of CHICHESTER.
The Right Rev. Lord BISHOP of CASHEL.
The Right Rev. Lord BISHOP of CALCUTTA.
The Eight Rev. Lord BISHOP of MELBOURNE.
The Eight Rev. Lord BISHOP of VICTORIA, HONGKONG,
The Right Rev. Lord BISHOP of RUPERT’S LAND.
The Right Rev. Lord BISHOP of MADRAS.
mrrStSrnt,
THE EIGHT HON. LORD BEXLEY.
'Fkr-mwstoents.
The Most Noble the MARQUIS of CHOLMONDELBY.
The Most Hon. the MARQUIS of BLANDFORD.
The Eight Hon. the EARL of CHICHESTER.
The Right Hon. the EARL of GAINSBOROUGH.
The Right Hon. the EARL of RODEN.
The Eight Hon. LORD VISCOUNT LOETON.
The Right Hon, LORD CALTHORPE.
The Right Hon. LORD ASHLEY, M.P.
The Right Hon. Sir G. H. ROSE, Bart., M.P.
The Right Hon. H. GOULBURN, M.P.
The Very Rev. the DEAN of BANGOR.
The Ven. C, J. HOAEE, M.A., Archdeacon of Surrey.


Committee.
P. CARTHEW, Esq.
CAPTAIN PARKER.
COLONEL FRANCKLIN.
J. HARDY, Esq.
G. B. HART, Esq.
J. E. HEATHCOTE, Esq.
J B. HINDMAN, Esq.
R. KENNION, Esq.
©reagurer,
M. LEACH, Esq.
J. P. PLUMPTRE, Esq., M.P.
W. SISSON, Esq.
H. SMITH, Esq.
J. SPERLING, Esq.
J. C. SYMES, Esq.
I. T. TATHAM, Esq.
Secretary,
JOSEPH WILSON, Esq. Rev. C. SMALLEY, Jun., M.A.
Wishing &c.
MR. THOMAS SEAWARD.
30ej)OSitarg, Collector,
MR. JOHN CORFIELD. AIR. J. C. BOWLES.
*,* The Society is wholly dependent on Voluntary Con-
tributions.
It has a Special Fund for Emigrants and Seamen.
A Special Fund for Ireland has recently been opened:
its chief design is to furnish the Irish-speaking people with
the Publications of the Society in their own language.
Subscriptions and Donations to the General Fund, or to
either of the Special Funds, will be thankfully received
in London at the Society’s Office, No. 1 Exeter Hall;
at Messrs. Hoard’s, 37 Fleet Street; Messrs. Williams
and Co., Birchin Lane; Messrs. Hatohard, Piccadilly;
and Messrs. Nisbet and Co., Berners Street.
Remittances from the country may be made by Cheque
crossed with the words “ Messrs. Robaets and Co. by
Post-Office Orders, drawn on the Strand Office in favour
of Mr. Thomas Seaward, and forwarded to the Society’s
Office; or through a Banker to the Society’s Account with
Messrs. Hoare, 37 Fleet Street.
Contributors are requested to name the Fund for which
their Donations or Subscriptions are intended.


NINETEEN DAYS’ INTERCOURSE, &c.
Active sympathy and Christian love have frequently
been called into exercise in the operations of the Prayer-
book and Homily Society, especially amongst the
thousands of Emigrants leaving their native land for a
distant shore. But in no instance have these virtues
been more needed than by the afflicted individuals, an
account of whose case occupies the following pages;
and on no former occasion (if we may judge from ap-
parent fruits,) has their exercise been more eminently
blessed by God.
The Emigrants who sail from the Port of London
are usually detained only three or four days between
their arrival from the country and their departure from
the Thames: in this case, however, the period was
greatly protracted, and the intercourse of the Society’s
Visitor with the Emigrants was similarly prolonged,
under circumstances of deep interest. It has been
thought right to lay before the Public a detailed account
of the Visitor’s proceedings, as contained in his own
Journal, that the real nature of the Society’s work may
he more widely known, its Missionary character evinced,
and the importance of its labours attested.
The J ournal (which is, in fact, a report laid before


the Committee) commences with the Visitor’s first
introduction to the people at the depot at Deptford,
and details the proceedings of each succeeding day
until the final departure of the ship.
Friday, Aug. 31—Having learned that a portion
of the Emigrants who were to sail in the Ship Blonde
(bound to Sydney, New South Wales) were assembled
at the depot at Deptford, I proceeded to that place in
the evening. As usual, the first business was to
obtain the names of the people, with such other cir-
cumstances respecting them as might be useful in
visiting them.
Saturday, September I—During this day the people
were embarked, and therefore my visit to them in the
evening was paid on board ship, at the place where
she was moored in the river. I learned with much
satisfaction that some of the officers were persons with
whom I had had pleasing interviews when this ship
was engaged for a similar purpose last year. The Chief
Mate, who was one of them, gave an encouraging ac-
count of the former voyage, and bore a willing testimony
to the results of the Society’s attention to the Emigrants
with whom he had last sailed. The people, he said,
had been remarkably orderly in their behaviour, and
had not failed to observe the promises they had made
of attending to their religious duties : for this purpose
the books given them, especially the “ Family Prayers,”
had proved essentially useful: the only person who


had given any trouble on the voyage was married on
their arrival, and the others quickly obtained situations.
Having understood that the ship would be detained
in the river until a large body of Emigrants arrived
from Scotland, and finding that all was in good order
on board, arrangements w 7 ere made for holding Divine
Service on the following day ; and I then expressed a
wish to address the people at once, preparatory to the
duties of the Lord’s-day.
The Chief Mate—a well-disposed, and, I trust, a pious
man—said, “I am thankful for that.” Ten minutes
had hardly passed, when, by his activity and the kind
co-operation of an agent of the Commissioners, the
people were arranged in due order. They were in-
formed for what purpose they were assembled, and
invited to unite in singing a hymn. They acquiesced
with readiness and good feeling.
Prayers suitable for the occasion were then offered
up, including the Confession and other selections from
the Liturgy.
The people then took their seats, and an address
was given ; first, on the novelty of their position on
board ship, the prospects of their voyage, &c. ; then,
on the near approach of the Lord’s-day, and the duties
it involves.
Afterwards their particular attention was called to
1 John iv. 7. They were exhorted to “ love one another,”
from the motive urged by the Apostle, viz. that “ love
is of God.” The following w'ords supplied an oppor-
tunity of referring to the evidences of love in the heart


of man ; “ Every one that loveth is born of God,” and
he “ knoweth God,” and his desire is to love God and
man. A few words on the affectionate tone in which
the Apostle introduces all this, calling them “ Beloved,”
closed the Address.
Then followed the Prayer, “ O God, who hast pre-
pared for them that love Thee such good things as
pass man’s understanding, pour into our hearts such
love toward Thee, that we, loving Thee above all things,
may obtain Thy promises, which exceed all that we
can desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.”
The whole concluded with singing three verses of
the Hymn— “ Come, let us join our cheerful songs,” See.,
Sec. The spirit in which the hymn was sung gave
evidence that the party were refreshed by this unex-
pected religious exercise. The Mate and other officers
of the ship expressed their thanks, and promised to
have all things in order betimes on the following
morning.
Sunday, Sept. 2 —On reaching the ship with my
Assistant this morning we found Her Majesty’s In-
specting Officer on board, who, although much indis-
posed in bodily health, had most kindly come down
to encourage the work.
When all things were arranged, Lieut. Lean, R.N.,
in his official capacity, read the Prayers, taking a
portion of the Order for Morning Prayer: it devolved
upon me to read the Lessons, and to give the Address :
the subject was, The narrative of the Woman of


Samaria, recorded in the Gospel of St. John, chap. iv.;
which so strikingly illustrates the compassion of
Jesus to poor sinners. We proceeded to notice
the woman’s desire that others of her own country
should know and believe in The Messias, who had
revealed himself to her: “ Come see a man which
told me all things that ever I did: is not this the
Christ?” An attempt was then made, by producing
various passages of Scripture, to prove that our only
hope, for time and for eternity, lies in a reception of
this truth, that Jesus is “ The Christ.”
A Hymn was sung, and a short Prayer offered. The
attention of the people, as usual, was very devout.
After Service the Emigrants dined ; most of them
were English people. They were all in good health,
and much enjoyed their first Sunday dinner on board
ship.
In the afternoon the Emigrants were again visited,
and the married people were formed into companies of
two or three messes united, taking care not to inter-
fere with the arrangements made by the Agent of the
Government Commissioners. A short Address was
given to each company, on unity for all good pur-
poses, and on uniformity, as far as possible, in all
religious exercises; after which bo'oks of Family
Prayers were distributed amongst them to aid them
in daily social prayer. They all agreed to attend to
their religious duties, and expressed their thanks for
the kindness shewn them.
Tuesday, Sept. 4—On this day the Assistant Agent


went on board to supply tlie English people with copies
of the Book of Common Prayer, at a reduced price;
and to present every mess, in the name of the Society,
with a Book of Select Homilies.
Wednesday, Sept. s —The Scotch people, in number
about 100, having arrived, I first obtained their names,
and then went to the ship. Having been informed
that one of the young women had been much affected
by the Address delivered on Sunday, I proceeded to
the single women’s compartment, and made inquiry
how they had occupied themselves since Sunday. The
young woman alluded to replied, “ We have endea-
voured, Sir, to follow your kind advice, by begin-
ning and ending each day in reading the Scriptures
and uniting in prayer with the help of your Family
Prayer-book.” This led to further conversation with
the party which formed the first mess. It consisted of
about ten individuals, all of whom appeared highly
respectable: two were of the seed of Abraham according
to the flesh, and two or three others, including the
Matron, (a sickly person,) appeared to be decidedly
pious characters. The young Jewesses had chosen two
of the more pious young women to be their companions
during the voyage.
In their religious exercises the Matron had com-
menced, for Morning Service, the reading of the Book
of Genesis, when the Jewesses joined them in reading
the Scriptures. For Evening Service they commenced
with the Gospel by St. Matthew, when the Jewesses sat
by and heard the Scriptures read, “To the Prayers,”


they said, “ forasmuch as they are addressed to
Almighty God, we devoutly listen.”
“ O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.”
Thursday, Sept. 6—This being the day for embark-
ing the Scotch people, there was too much confusion to
allow of any thing more than private conversation.
Some of the children had diarrhoea, probably in con-
sequence of drinking water from the river, which
had been strongly forbidden. The ship was towed to
Gravesend.
Friday, Sept. 7—Proceeded to Gravesend with the
expectation of paying a final visit, to distribute books
amongst the Scotch folk, and to give an Address to
the whole company on Christian Unity. On arriving
at the ship I was grieved to perceive officers and
people alike dejected and cast down. They had three
cases of cholera on board the ship, and some of the
other Emigrants appeared to be sickening with the
same complaint. The most prompt attention was given
by Her Majesty’s Inspecting Officer, who is also the
representative of the Government Commissioners. He
summoned the Surgeon of another ship, then lying at
Gravesend, to confer with the Surgeon of the Blonde;
and the three eases having been declared to be Asiatic
cholera, he immediately started for London to report
the .case to the Chairman of the Commissioners, who,
with the Secretary and Agent, quickly proceeded to
Gravesend to make more minute inquiry.


Saturday , Sept. B—The people who were apparently
in health were ordered to be separated from those who
were sick, and to be taken back to the depot at
Deptford.
In the evening of this day I received a letter which
bad been written at the express desire of one of the
Government Commissioners’ Agents, (Mr Richard
Cooper,) inviting me to visit the people at the depot
on the following day.
Sunday, Sept. 9—On the way to the depot this
morning I met several of the Emigrants going to
Church; but I found about 140 Scotch people who
were very disconsolate, and evidently discontented.
Mr. R. C. was most anxious that I should assemble
the people, that I might give them an Address, which,
combined with Prayer, he felt assured would be very
beneficial to them.
A discussion took place upon the difficulties which
presented themselves in holding Divine Worship in
an unlicensed room. The Commissioners’ Agent urged
his appeal for an Address, in the name of all the “ Civil
authority with which he was investedand, at the
same time, promised that he would not delay to make
known the circumstances of the people to the Rector
of the parish, and invite him to give them a regular
Service whenever he might be disengaged from his
parochial duties. We at length agreed that the pre-
sent was a case of urgent necessity not contemplated by
the law, and it was therefore determined to invite the


people to join in Prayer, and to hear an Address. For
this purpose I went amongst them, as they were stand,
ing in groups about the premises, and entered into
conversation with them. At first they were unwilling
to pay any attention; but, after a while, some heads of
families yielded, and a general invitation being given,
all retired into their mess-room.
When they were arranged in their seats I informed
them that on the previous Sunday we had joined in
Divine Worship with some of their companions on
board ship; but that there w r as a difficulty in holding
a similar Service on shore : I referred also to their
being for the most part Presbyterians ; and then added
that, at the particular request of the gentleman to whose
kind care they were committed by her Majesty’s Com-
missioners, I was about to give them an Address, not
at that time calling upon them to attend any particular
form of Divine Service, but to engage in such religious
exercises as, under God’s blessing, might prove profit-
able and comforting to them.
The company were then invited to seek by private
prayer the presence and grace of the Holy Spirit to
assist them in the duties and privileges in which they
were about to engage. Most of them followed the
O D
example given them, by veiling their faces with their
hands to engage in private prayer.
I then proceeded to point out to them the duty of
humbling themselves before Almighty God, especially
upon such an occasion as the present, when His afflict-
ing hand was heavy upon them, and called upon them


to join in singing a penitential Psalm, commencing
thus:—
“ Shew pity, Lord; 0 Lord, forgive ;
Let a repenting rebel live :
Are not Thy mercies large and free ?
May not a sinner trust in Thee ? ”
&c. &c. &c.
The 39th Psalm was then read. A few observations
were made upon it, and the serious character of their
position pointed out, no one knowing who should be
next called to suffer under the mighty hand of God
(for some of those brought from the ship had been
since taken with cholera). I then proceeded to speak
of the bad conduct manifested by some persons on their
passage up from Gravesend, especially of one indivi-
dual who, the previous day, had been swearing because
of the circumstances which had befallen himself and
his companions.
The 51st Psalm was read, and a few practical obser-
vations were made upon it.
Then was sung a Hymn, commencing
“ God moves in a mysterious way,
His wonders to perform&c. he.;
which contains the folio win £ words :
“Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take,
The clouds ye so much dread,
Are big with mercy, and shall break
With blessings on your head.”
After singing this Hymn they were reminded that
it is written in the Holy Bible, u Call upon me in the
day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.”


The Address followed, and the whole proceedings
were concluded with the prayer —“ O God, who hast
prepared for them that love thee,” &c., and singing the
Doxology—“ Praise God, from whom all blessings
flow.” In this manner we endeavoured for two hours
to vary the employment of the time, in the hope that
their attention might be arrested, and their minds pre-
vented from resting exclusively on their troubles. This
secondary object appeared to be attained, for many of
them expressed great thankfulness for the religious
exercises, wishing them to be repeated.
Sunday Evening. On returning to the depot this
evening I had the pleasure of meeting the Rector of
the parish, who, although he had taken two full
Services at the Parish Church already, kindly gave
a third at the depot.
I afterward took occasion to speak to those persons
who were not present in the morning, commending
them for going to Church ; but cautioning them upon
various points wherein it appeared that some of them
had failed in the practice of Christian duties. I con-
cluded by inviting them to meet again in that room,
should the Lord permit, on the following evening.
Monday, Sept. 10 —This evening I proceeded to
Deptford, where the Assistant Agent had already ar-
rived. Cholera cases had increased, and several of the
people were suffering from diarrhoea ; but on the house
bell being rung, those who were able quickly assembled
A Hymn was sung, the eighteenth chapter of Luke


was read, and Prayer was offered. The attention of the
people was then called to the very serious and solemn cir-
cumstances under wdiich they were placed; and to the
merciful providence of God towards them in the midst
of their affliction. It was true that they were home-
less, yet they had an asylum provided for them : they
were amongst strangers, yet those strangers proved
their best friends : they were sorely afflicted, yet they
had far greater attention paid to them, and many more
comforts than they could have had, under ordinary cir-
cumstances, had this severe affliction fallen upon them
at their own habitations, and amongst their own people.
At the same timethey were assured,that, if they conduct-
ed themselves with propriety, they would see that Her
Majesty’s Government Commissioners, and the gentle-
men who actedunder them, would not suffer them to want
any thing that was needful for them; and they would
find parental care and watchfulness extended to them
whilst they remained under the roof where they then
dwelt. They had (it was observed) already had suffi-
cient proof of the truth of this assurance by their actual
experience. And (which is to be valued more than all
temporal comforts) they had been encouraged to meet
together at the Throne of Grace, and, as an example
and encouragement to them, one or both of the conduc-
tors of the establishment had joined with them in their
religious exercises, believing that it was a duty incum-
bent upon all persons immediately connected with them
to lay their case before Almighty God in humble
prayer and with faith in the promises of His Holy Word.


The subject of prayer contained in Luke xyiii.
I—l 4 was then practically considered, not in the
method of preaching; for, as I observed at the time,
I had not received authority “to go and preach the
Gospel,” but desired only (in that spirit which influ-
enced many of the first Christians ) to teach the Emi-
grants how to spend their leisure time on the voyage
usefully, by searching the Scriptures, and inquiring
whether the things declared to them were true or false.
The greatest attention was paid to this subject. At
the close of it a word of sympathy was offered, to
soothe them in their sorrows; and a promise was
given that, if life and health were spared, I would visit
them every evening for prayer and meditation on God’s
Word: for this the people expressed themselves as
very thankful. The two Jewesses and their Christian
companions in particular testified their gratitude, espe-
cially for the religious Services, and spoke feelingly of
the kind attention of the people of the house, and all
connected with them.
Tuesday, Sept. 11—After singing a Hymn, a selec-
tion of Prayers from the Liturgy was used.
The word of instruction was taken from the first
part of the 19th Homily, “Of Prayer;” to which
were added some reflections upon Jer. viii. 22 —“Is
there no balm in Gilead ? is there no Physician there 1
Why then is not the health of the daughter of my peo-
ple recovered ? ” Reply—Because of unbelief, hard-
ness of heart, and contempt of the word of promise.


Christ said to the Jews, “ Ye will not come onto
me,” &c. The Address was concluded with the Prayer
at the end of the first part of the Homily —“ God, for
His great mercies’ sake, so work in our hearts by His
Holy Spirit, that we may always make our humble
prayers unto Him as we ought to do, and always obtain
the thing which w r e ask, through Jesus Christ our
Lord : to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
be all honour and glory, world without end. Amen.”
The same untired attention was given to the address
as on former occasions. The people began to take
great interest in these engagements.
This evening a person was taken very ill with cho-
lera during the religious exercises: every possible at-
tention was given to him.
After the Address, whilst inquiring into the various
cases of sickness in the house, I witnessed the earnest
carefulness which every one in the establishment mani-
fested for those who were sick. As the various stages
of disease were reported, suitable remedies were admi-
nistered, with much thought for the patients; so that
‘ Saves Court’ (the ancient designation of the Emi-
grant depot) became to these strangers a home, a
nursery, and an infirmary. In all these respects it
was probably as well calculated to secure the comfort
and well-being of its inmates as any establishment in
the kingdom. There were at this time a very conside-
rable number of persons sick.
Wednesday, Sept. 12—This evening the people were


met in their mess-room for prayer and meditation upon
the Scriptures. The Emigrants appeared to take fresh
and increasing interest in the exercise as it was daily
renewed.
After singing an appropriate Hymn, and reading the
34th Psalm, the whole company engaged in humble
prayer.
The subject taken for meditation was selected from
Malachi iii. 16, 17: “ Then they that feared the Lord
spake often one to another: and the Lord hearkened,
and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written
before Him for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon His name. And they shall be mine,
saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up
my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth
his owm son that serveth him.”
In the course of the Address references were made
to Psalm xxxiy., Isaiah Ixvi. 2., 2 Chron. xxxiy.
26—28., Psalm cxlyii. 11., Psalm ciii. 13., and other
passages of Scripture, concluding with 1 Pet. i. I—9.
We closed with a Hymn and a Collect.
Thursday, Sept. 13—The labours of the previous
days were continued. This evening an improvement in
the health of the people was reported; there were then
only four cases which were considered “ dangerous.”
The Service was commenced with singing the lively
hymn—
“ Grace, ’tis a cheerful sound,
Harmonious to the ear,” &c.
“ Grace first contrived the way
To save rebellious man,” &c.


Then followed the Collect (as upon other occasions
before reading the Word of God): “Blessed lord,
who hast caused all Holy Scriptures,” &c. The chap-
ter read was the 17th of St. John’s Gospel. Prayers
followed; and afterwards a meditation on the chapter
read.
Finally, they were strongly urged to Christian
Union; and this evening’s exercise concluded with the
Hymn, “ Salvation, 0 the joyful sound,” &c., and a
short prayer taken from the Liturgy.
The people signified their thankfulness. The Jew-
esses and their Christian companions said they had
kept their seats nearly the whole afternoon, for the
purpose of securing them in the evening, to join in the
religious exercise, and hear the Address.
Friday, Sept. 14—At the hour of prayer a Hymn
was sung, and the 20th of 2d Chronicles was read as
an appropriate lesson.
The Prayers for this evening were, the Confession of
Sins, and a selection from the Service for the Visita-
tion of the Sick, as arranged in the Society’s Family
Prayer-book (except the Benediction). A child having
been taken ill with cholera on the preceding night, the
“ Prayer for a Sick Child ” was used; and there was
also added, “ the Form of Prayer set forth by authority
to be used during the prevalence of the Pestilence.” The
address was upon the appointment and the important
duty of the observance of the Sabbath. This subject
was considered scripturally, under a variety of bear-
ings, as follow:


THE SABBATH DAY.
RECORDED IN
1. Its original establishment .... Gen. ii. 2, 3.
2. Its recognition as God’s Holy ) j x 14.
Sabbath 3 ’
3. The observance of it, al xx g
moral obligation 3
4. It is to be sanctified, or set x
apart, as a day sacred to v Dent. v. 12—15.
God 3
5. God wrought a miracle that 4
his Sabbath-law should V Ex. xvi. 4,19 —30.
not be broken 3
6. It was given as a sign be-
tween God and his people > „ -1017
whom he sanctifieth .. .. j X ' XXXI,
7. By command of God, the-v
Mosaic law gave a penalty /
of death to those who Y Ex ’ xxxv ' 2 > 3 ‘
broke the Sabbath-law .. J
8. That law was put in force, Num.xv. 32—36.
9. See also the acts of Nehe-) , ... ,
miah } Neh -
10. Its observance is united with
the reverence of the sane- ( Levit. xxvi. 2.
tuary, and the obedience I Levit. xix. 3.
to parents J
11. Blessings are promised to) Is. Ivi. 2,6, 7.
those who observe it .... 3 Is. Iviii. 13, 14.
The Emigrants were exhorted, at the conclusion of


the Address, to take heed when they found that they
had much labour and prosperity in Australia, that they
observed strictly the first day of the week, in grateful
memory of their Saviour’s resurrection, and set it apart
as holy unto God, and for the nurture and refreshing
of their souls.
The greatest attention was given to this Address,
and the gratitude of the people induced the hope
that many of them had received the truth in the
love of it.
Saturday, Sept. 15 —It had been agreed that this
evening should be given up for the people to prepare
themselves and their children for the duties of the
Lord’s-day.
Sunday, Sept. 16—Those persons who did not go
to a place of Public Worship this morning were assem-
bled in their mess-room for prayer, and the reading of
the Lessons for the day, followed by a published ser-
mon by the Rev. R. Whytehead, on the text, “ God is
light, and in Him is no darkness at all.” As usual, the
greatest attention was given. This excellent sermon
is to be found in the “Protestant Preacher,” Yol. I.
Sunday Evening —This evening the Rector of the
parish, after his Morning and Afternoon Services,
again very kindly visited the depot. All the Emi-
grants, except four in the Infirmary, were assembled.
After the prayers the Rector read a sermon, selected
from a published volume by the Rev. J. Stevenson,


entitled, “Christ on the Cross,” upon the words, “ Thou
hast heard me.” (Ps. xxii. part ofver. 21.) At the end
ha specially called the attention of the assembled peo-
ple to its suitableness to their present circumstances,
for they had trusted in God, and he had heard their
prayers. He also mentioned that he was happy to
learn there was such an improvement in their general
health as encouraged a hope that they would soon be
able to proceed on their voyage.
A Hymn was sung, and the Rector concluded the
Service with two appropriate Prayers taken from the
Liturgy, and the Blessing.
Monday, Sept. 17—This day the people had been
very busily occupied in washing their clothes. One
young woman, from Scotland, appeared particularly
active. She was impelled by the best motives,
being anxious to finish her work, so as to attend, for
the last time on shore, the religious exercise in the
evening, which she said she had, with her companions,
so much enjoyed during the former week. She was a
tall and athletic person, of the race of giants, having on
each hand six fingers, and on each foot six toes, “four-
and-twenty in number.” She had expressed a wish to
speak to me in the morning, that she might fulfil her
desire of testifying her gratitude personally for the
instruction she had received every evening during the
former week. Mrs. Cooper brought her to me, and
she behaved in a very humble and becoming manner.
The people were much engaged in packing up their


clothes for re-embarkation; but immediately they
heard that prayer was to be offered they at once
assembled.
An appropriate Hymn was sung; a short Address
was given; and they were informed that on the follow-
ing day they would, if it were the will of God, meet
their companions on board the ship Blonde, on which
occasion they would be called upon to unite with them
in general thanksgiving to Almighty God for the
great mercies they had received. We concluded with
prayer and thanksgiving.
Some of the people immediately afterwards came for-
ward, and said they desired to return their most sincere
thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Cooper, Sen., to Mr. Banks,
and especially to Mr. Richard Cooper, one of the Com-
missioners’ Agents (under whose special superinten-
dence the arrangements at the depot had been con-
ducted), for the great kindness they had experienced,
and the marked and unwearied attention bestowed
upon them night and day during their sickness and
distress. But as they said they could not express in
language the gratitude of their hearts, I was requested
to speak for them. I readily acquiesced; and con-
cluded by desiring all those who wished to give their
hearty thanks to the parties named to hold up their
hands : they were perfectly unanimous. The cloud of
hands held up on the occasion was truly touching.
During the whole of the period above recorded—
that is, from Sept. Bth—the people left on board the
ship were the objects of unceasing care. There were


two Surgeons to attend them night and day; and in
the unavoidable absence of Lieut. Lean, R.N., his prin-
cipal Assistant, Mr. E. A. Smith, R.N., visited the ship
at Gravesend every day, and sometimes twice a-day.
And here it may be mentioned, that Mrs. Dickey,
Matron of the British Ladies’ Emigrant Association,
visited the females at the depot every day during the
pestilence and sickness.
No deaths occurred at the depot, but seven persons
died on board the ship.
These facts are stated, not only to prove*to the Com-
mittee the philanthropic benevolence of Her Majesty’s
Government Commissioners, and the unwearied atten-
tion given by their several officers, to our fellow-coun-
trymen in their deep distress (the affliction having
fallen upon the Emigrants after they were taken under
their protection for the voyage) ; but also to shew that
the Christian sympathy which was called into exercise
in the work of the Prayer-book and Homily Society has
been, under God’s blessing, of essential benefit to the
Emigrants of the ship Blonde, and that to an extent
which cannot be fully known in this life.
THE FAREWELL DAY.
Tuesday, Sept. 18—Proceeded to Gravesend. As
soon as the people could be got into order, after the re-
embarkation of those from Deptford, they were all
assembled between decks.
A Hymn was sung; and after the Collect for the
Second Sunday in Advent, the 103 d Psalm was


read. Then, kneeling down, the people joined in the
Confession of Sins, the Lord’s Prayer, and other
prayers chosen from the Liturgy, including the Thanks-
giving Prayer upon Recovery from any Dangerous
Sickness, the General Thanksgiving, and concluding
Prayers.
In the address the people were reminded of the mer-
cies of God towards them, and the literal fulfilment of
the Scripture, which, when sickness first fell upon
them, was brought under their consideration—“ Call
upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee,
and thou shalt glorify me.” It was observed that
they could bear witness, from their own experience, to
the truth of that precious promise. They had called
upon God day by day in their trouble; God had de-
livered them ; and now they were assembled to praise
Him for His goodness. They might indeed adopt the
language of God’s ancient people, and say, “ Ills
mercy endurethfor ever.”
In addressing the whole body of Emigrants, their
attention was directed briefly to 2 Cor. xiii. 11—
“ Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of
good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the
God of love and peace shall be with you.”
Finally, brethren, farewell. God Almighty prosper
your voyage, and draw out your love towards Him
daily more and more. May He give you good suc-
cess in all your lawful undertakings! Be respectful to
the Captain, and to all the officers of the ship. Make
yourselves well acquainted with the Government Re


gulations. Attend to all the directions of the Surgeon-
Superintendant. Let your conduct throughout the
voyage prove your obedience to God, and to those
who have the rule over you, and you shall do well.
May God guard you, and protect you! may He guide
you in safety to your desired haven ! Farewell; fare
ye well!
In a final short Address to the single women, in
their own compartment of the ship, I directed their at-
tention to the words of the Prophet Jeremiah —“ Come,
and let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual
covenant, that shall not be forgotten.” They were
once more exhorted to concord and union. And on
presenting a Bible with marginal references (through
the kindness of a friend) to the Matron, for the parti-
cular use of Mess No. 1, which included, as may be
recollected, several Christian young women of decided
piety, and the two Jewesses, I pointed out to them
the profitable mode of using the book; and impressed
upon them the necessity for prayer to God for the
grace of His Holy Spirit to enlighten their under-
standings. The whole party were most grateful. One
of the young Jewesses said, “I wish you were going
with us, Sir.” Her sister, and several others, expressed
the same. The Matron then requested that a Clergy-
man, to whom she was much indebted for his Christian
advice, might be assured that she finally left England,
happy in the little company of Christians and Jewesses
around her, who would read and study the Scriptures,
and unite with her continually in prayer; and they all


hoped, on their arrival at Sydney, to inform their
friends of God’s goodness and mercy towards them
throughout the voyage.
Amongst the large number of nearly 300 people, of
mixed characters, it must be expected that some would
he less orderly than others. Instances of misconduct
were more than once detected; but upon a short and
faithful expostulation given to the men on board ship
by the Commissioner’s Agent, many voluntarily came
forward in a body to offer an apology, and promised
greater watchfulness for the future. There was, how-
ever, a preponderance of brighter characters; and
these, towards the evening, whilst the ship was getting
under weigh, came up in groups to offer their hands in
final farewell, thanking us for the instructions they had
received, and for the constant attention paid to them.
Upon leaving the ship, together with the Assistant, the
people lined both sides of the vessel, and gave several
hearty cheers, huzzaing, with farewell, farewell, as
their ship dropped down toward the sea.


APPENDIX.
The Missionary Character of the Society’s operations amongst
Emigrants is apparent from the foregoing Narrative; the
Annual Reports of the Society shew that its work amongst
Seamen deserves a similar designation.
The extent of its field of labour, and the varied character of
its work, will he seen from the following statement.
The Society was instituted in 1812: before that period the
Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion and the Ordination Services
were not found in small-sized Prayer-books, and were compara-
tively unknown ; whilst the Homilies of our Church were almost
forgotten.
The Society commenced its labours by printing the Articles
and binding them up with every Prayer-book issued from its
depository: this was continued for several years. The same
course was pursued with the Ordination Services for a much
longer period. It thus became the means of causing the Articles
and Ordination Services to be inserted in all Prayer-books
issued from the Presses of the Universities.
The difficulties experienced by Presbyterians and others who
are unaccustomed to the use of our Book of Common Prayer,
when they attempt to follow the order of the Public Services of
the Church, have led the Society to print a book of Arranged
Services.
The Book of Family Prayers, for the Morning and Evening
of each day in the week, has proved eminently useful both at
home and abroad. Its price places it within the reach of all
classes.


Besides calling attention to the Homilies, and thus indirectly
promoting their circulation through other channels, the Society
has issued several thousand copies of Homilies in Volumes,
besides about two millions of single Homilies as Tracts.
There are many other works, which, having been “ set forth
by Authority,” come within the limits of the Regulations of the
Society. Of these the straitness of its income has permitted
the publication of only the three following:—
Dean Nowell’s Catechism (in English). This is the Larger
Catechism referred to in the 79th Canon.
Bf. Jewell’s Apology for the Church of England; with a
copious Index. This valuble book was originally written in
Latin. A translation into English was ordered to be kept in
every Parish Church in England and Wales. In foreign
countries it was held in such reputation, that it was translated
into German, Italian, French, Spanish, Dutch, and Greek, very
soon after its first publication.
The Life of Wickliffe from Foxe’s Acts and Monuments.
Four years after its formation, the Society took a leading
part ill the systematic translation of the various works autho-
rized by our Church into foreign languages, and has ever since
proved itself a useful auxiliary in direct Missionary operations
in various parts of the world. The following alphabetically
arranged list shews that much has been done; had not the
income of the Society been painfully restricted, many other
doors of usefulness might have been entered, and the funds
which other Societies have been compelled to assign to printing
and translating, set free for the enlargement of their direct
Missionary work.


Most of the works noted in the following list are on sale at
the Society’s Depository; the exceptions have an asterisk placed
after them; some are out of print, and others were printed abroad.
Arabic : Portions of the Book of Common Prayer; including
the Order for Morning and Evening Prayer, Collects,
Communion Service, &c. Also the Ist Homily.
Armenian : Three Homilies.*
Benoalee : One Homily.*
Chinese : The Liturgy ;* also two Homilies.*
The Lord Bishop of Victoria has kindly consented to superin-
tend the Society’s operations in China : a considerable sum of
money has been placed at his Lordship’s disposal for this purpose.
Danish ; First, Second, and Third Homilies.
Dutch ; Prayers selected from the Liturgy; and Nine Homilies.
Finnish : Three Homilies.*
French : The Book of Common Prayer, a handsome Edition,
in octavo. Also, a Manual of Prayers from the Liturgy;
Occasional Services ; and Five Homilies.
German ; The Book of Common Prayer (a new Edition,
revised). Also Morning and Evening Services; Nine
Homilies, and the Thirty-nine Articles.
Greek (Modern) : The Second and Third Homilies.
Hebrew (Rabbinical) : The First and the Twenty-fourth
Homilies.
Hindustani : The Book of Common Prayer ;* and eight
Homilies.*
Hindui : The Book of Common Prayer (Printing partly at
the expense of the Society). Also two Homilies.
Indo-Portugdese : The Book of Common Prayer; and four
Homilies.
Irish : Two Editions of the Book of Common Prayer,* with
English in parallel columns (published many years ago).
Selections from the Book of Common Prayer; also
Second and Third Homilies. A new and carefully-
revised edition of the Book of Common Prayer is now
passing through the press.


Italian ; Morning and Evening Services, Litany, &c. ; and
five Homilies. A newly revised Edition of the Book of
Common Prayer will be published immediately.
Latin : The Thirty-nine Articles, newly printed after com-
parison with the well-known copy in the library of
Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.
Malay : Prayer-book*
Manks: Six Homilies, and the Thirty-Nine Articles of Re-
ligion.*
Persic : Portions of Prayer-book, including Morning and
Evening Services, &c.
Polish : The Book of Common Prayer.
Portuguese ; Manual of Prayers from the Prayer-book. Also
two Homilies.
Spanish : The Book of Common Prayer, a revised edition.
Also Morning and Evening Services; and five Homilies.
Swedish ; Three Homilies.*
Turkish : The First Homily.*
Welsh ; The Book of Common Prayer. Also the three first
Homilies.
*** A Brief View of the Society’s operations during the
year 1848-49 may be obtained (gratis) at the Society’s Office,
No. 1 Exeter Hall. A Copy will be sent by Post to any person
forwarding his address, with a Penny Stamp enclosed.
PRINTED BY W. WATTS, CROWN COURT, TEMPLE BAR.
