

Bombay, 28 ih May 1823«
Mv Dear Fenwick,
In compliance with your wishes to state wliat occurred
in ray late conference with Mr. «John Ashburner, as well as
in order to enable yon to satisfy your friends, that your con-
duct on that occasion has been in every respect becoming
vour character as a Ci en lie man & a man of Honour, I shall
endeavour to make as concise and distinct a statement us
.possible of what, then, took place.
Jdpr this purpose I refer you to the following statement.
And am*, My Dear Fenwick,
Yours very sincerely and faithfully,
J. R. STEUART.
i I. ~i>
■ S T A TEMENT.
' Havin* been directed by Mr. Fenwick to call on Mr. John AsbbUr-
ner for an explanation of his behaviour to Mrs. Fenwick on board of
the Hannah on her Passage Bombay, I met him by appointment
about 4 o’Clock on Thursday the 15th instant, and on acquainting him
with the nature of my message, he expressed a wish that his answer
should be given in the presence of his brother, Mr. Wm. Ashburner,
and Mr John Williams; to this I assented, and on these Gentlemen be-
ing called in, I staled the terms which I understood from Mr. Fenwick
to have been used towards Mrs. Fenwick, Respecting the exact words
there was some disagreement, but whatever the words were, Mr. .lohn
Ashburner refused to retractjhem, and hisfriends, Mr. Wm. Ashbur-
~ner and Mr. JThn that He had been justified in.
behaviour to Mrs. Fenwick uy the conduct of that Lady, whick was
asserted to be such, that Mr. Fenwick, after hearing it, could never
* think of espousing her cause, and they therefore wished Ihatthe com-
munication of this circumstance should be made to Mr. Fenwick, pledg-
ing themselves to prove the truth of their allegations, and wishing to
place before me evidence, of SU that they laid to Mrs. Fenwick’s charge.
My reply, was that this appeared to me to be a business with
m which I had no right Jo meddle—l was there merely as the friend of Mr.
Fenwick, who, feeling injured, had deputed me to ask for
in the propriety of which suggestion he acquiesced ; after their depäf»
lure I received a note from Mr. John Williams, acquainting me that,
as Mr. John Ashburner’s friend, he should have a communication tö
make me; —in the interim I received a second visit from Col. Baker,
who expressed very great anxiety to prevent this affair from proceeding
to extremities, and at his suggestion I penned a declaration which met
his entire approbation, and which we thought would be satisfactory to
all parties; but, allho’ I understood from Col. Baker that he had sub-
mitted the paper to the consideration of the parties, as I heard nothing
more regarding it, I conclude it wa«s not approved of by them. The
communication alluded to by Mr. Williams reached me the same af-
ternoon—in it he called upon me, before I allowed matters to proceed
to extremities, to make Mr. Fenwick the communication I had alrea-
dy declined,and invoked upon me alone all the unfortunate consequenc-
es likely to result from the proposed meeting, did I persist in Con-
cealing from Mr. Fenwick the nature of the accusation against Mrs,
Fenwick.
With this letter before me, I felt that ray own character might be
made liable hereafter, to the imputation of obstinacy and a culpable
concealment from my Principal—l therefore resolved to consult with
Dr. Wallace, a most intimate friend of Mr. Fenwick and his family,
and was by him advised upon the above consideration alone and after
having satisfied himself that the other party persisted in their allega-
tions, then, to make Mr. Fenwick a communication of Mr. Williams*’
letters.
All this was accordingly done, and Ï had to regret that I had not
I done it sooner, as much delay and disagreeable discussion would have
I been avoided ; for Mr. Fenwick, after reading the letters with the
greatest composure, affirmed to me in the most solemn manner “ hi«
I full conviction of the correctness of Mrs, Fenwick’s» conduct.
1 “ which was too firmly rooted, he said, to be shaken for a single mq-
“ ment by the assertions of mere Strangers, however bold and di-
“ rect they might be ; that he had too great a regard and respect for
« the character of his Wife (who as far as he could learn had in
“ every thing conducted herself entirely according to the injunction*
r “"of himself and her family at home) to allow himself to listen to
“ imputations so contrary to the conviction he felt in his own breast,
“in fine, that be considered the present, an aggravation ofthe past
“ Injury, and was more fully bent, if possible, on satisfaction than
! “ he had yet before been.”
The latter part of these bis sentiments, he committed at my re-
quest to writing, in order that 1 might transmit them to Mr. Wil-
'■ liaras;this was done next morning (Sunday the 19th) and I fixed
a time and place for the meeting, which was appointed for the en-
Fenwick, who, feeling hi »fielt injured, had deputed me io ass Tory gui morning (Monday) at 7 o’clock.
reparation, and it was not fer- me to constitute myself the judge ot williarns acknowledged the receipt of ray above communi-
lady’s conduct, neither did Î consider myself justified in inter- cat j (m and s t a t e d that as Mr? John Ashburner was out at Breakfast, he
fering with Mr. b enwick s. domestic concerns. ... - ic i * had sent for him to return immediately.
Mr. William Ashburner then stated that perhaps his fraternal feel- Between IS and 1. I was called to Mr. Fenwick’s Bungalow, where
ings prevented 4tim from taking a correct view of the case—-that lie j f oun( ] ]\fr. Frskine, with whom it appeared an information had
was naturally fmwiUing that his brother should expose hi rase f without been iod dof the intended Duel by Mr. William Ashburner.
just grounds, but that he w*s equally unwilling (were it judged neces- Qn * relurn home , \ rece ived about 4 past 3, a letter from Mr*
sary that satisfaction ought to be given to Mr. henwick) to prevent Wi jj iams re plyi n g to my communication, and complying with the
his Hftther %om going out. meeting.
"Under these circumstances he proposed to be allowed to consult J. vuW unconnected with any part of Mr. Fenwick’s conduct on
to «1 K
with Colonel Baker, by opinion he was willing to be guided—-
id this I assented and a meSing at ray house was agreed upon next
looming. We'accordingly fluet again, viz. Mr. William Ashburner,
Sr. Williams and myself, dfed shortly after we Were joined by Colonel
Aa Baker ; this last named gentleman stated it to be his opinion that after
what had occurred, it was incumbent on Mr. John Ashburner, either
to apologise to Mr. Fenwick or afford the satisfaction demanded. He
farther stated.that he did not think the communication proposed to be
► rbade thro’ me to Mr. Fenwick was one that with propriety could
Ibis occasion, I think it my duty to add that Mr. William Ashburner
Jias gent me a * declaration upon his Honour, that both his Brother
Lid Mr. Williams were quite ignorant of his proceedings and inten-
tions Mr. Williams has also made me a solemn declaration that both
himself and Mr. John Ashburner had not the least suspicion of what
rW as doing, but he avoids answering a question put to him, whether he
had or had not communicated to a third person, my letter appoint-
ing the meeting.
Î cannot close this statement in which I ha ve avoided all exprès-,
be made. , , ~ . . , . , ~ , ~ (Yum 0 f oninion. and confined myself as much as possible to facts,
Upon this Mr.-\vliliam Asubumer sai \ is ) ro uer s^ ou c without bearing testimony to ihc decision, and to the generous and
*,J!t lliesatisT&ctnni required, riMb 1»”»=« »"I V, • „hidi hare .clu.ted Mr. P.irnlct in hi. onducl,
alioa, and recommended that he should depute some ether Gentleman, J. R« SIEUART*
national* library
OF AUSTRALIA
,'yf
