

CHAPTEKS |
ON TH* |
1
JEliif ffafiig,
. BY THE
REV.THEOPHILUS TAYLOR,
WESLEYAN MINISTER.
Price Sixpence.




CHAPTERS
ON THB
CLASS MEETING.
BY THE
Ml. THEOPHILUS TAYLOR.
1858.




PREFACE.
The matter contained in the following 1 pages
first appeared in the Melbourne “ Wesleyan
Chronicle,” in the form of “ Papers on the
Class Meeting.” When they were first
penned we had not the slightest idea of their
ever being published in a separate form, hut upon
their completion it was suggested and urged
by several friends, in whose judgment we had
every confidence, that to print and circulate them
in the form of a tract might he productive of
great good to the Wesleyan Societies and Con-
gregations —hence the appearance of this little
book. We claim no other consideration for it
than that of being a plain statement of our views
on the important subject on which it treats.
Had health permitted it was our intention to
have revised, enlarged, and to have endeavoied


to make it more worthy of public notice. But
deeply afflictive circumstances have prevented
this; it is, therefore, simply a reprint of what
has already appeared. Our single aim in this
humble effort is to be of service to sincere
enquirers after Truth; and we humbly commend
it to the blessing- of the Great Head of the
Church, with earnest prayer that this end may
be realised.
Ballarat,
December 6th, 1858,


CHAPTERS
... , . . -T, ,)■ l l m/I ■ <l'i
ON THE
CLASS MEETING.
CHAPTER I.
On the 14th of August, 1786, Mr. Wesley published
a short paper, entitled : — u Thoughts on Metho-
dism.” His first thought was : —“ lam not afraid
that the people called Methodists should ever cease
to exist, either in Europe or America But lam
afraid lest they should only exist as a dead sect,
having the form of religion without the power.
And this undoubtedly will be the case, unless they
hold fast the doctrine, spirit, and discipline with
which they set out.” More than seventy years
have since rolled away. Methodism still exists.
Not as a “ dead sect,”' for she has yet upon her
“ the dew of her youth.” Her characteristic spiri-
tuality and power remain undiminished. Her
influence extends not only over Europe and Amer-
ica, but is established in lands far remote, and of
which her founder knew hut little. The reason
is obvious. The u doctrine, spirit and discipline,
which her fathers bequeathed, have been faithfully
maintained by their children. The inference is
equally plain. That if we would hand her down
to posterity, with vigour and life unimpaired, we
must do likewise. Her doctrine and discipline
must not only be defended when assailed, but
faithfully enforced, when the heartless and luke-


warm would, by neglect, endanger their efficiency
and continuance. At all times we have need to
fear concerning this ; for there is in us “an evil
heart of unbelief in departing from the living God.”
And when the heart is estranged from God, the
ties which bind to the observance of Christian ordi-
nances, if not entirely broken are but very slender.
At the present, in these colonies, there is special
danger. A restless desire of change agitates the
bosom of society generally, and the church is not
above its influence. On the part of several a
disposition manifests itself to set aside some of what
are called the peculiarities of methodism ; includ-
ing the Class Meeting in the number. That there
are some peculiarities which may be modified, or
even set aside, with advantage is not at present
questioned. But wise men discriminate. The
Class Meeting is not one of them. Though no
higher pretension has been claimed for it than “ a
prudential arrangement,” yet it is an arrangement,
based upon principles too scriptural and important
to be touched for slight reasons. Leaving the
consideration of these principles to a future chapter,
it is enough now to say, that, considered as a part
of Methodist discipline, it stands pre-eminent in
importance. To its influence and operation, as a
means of grace, are mainly to be attributed those
spiritual effects and conquests which have so
strikingly characterised the history of Methodism ;
and which have proved her, above all dispute, to
be an instrumentality “ mighty through God to
the pulling down the strongholds.” This is un-
questionably the secret of her strength,—the
cementing power—the sinews which have held the
Body firmly together through all the storms of
more than a century.
As an efficient means of exercising pastoral
oversight and preserving the purity of the flock,
its claims cannot be overstated. The sagacious Mr!
Wesley saw this from the first. Southey has


observed with as much truth as force : “ The
constitution of Methodism, like most forms oi
government, had arisen out of accidents an
circumstances, but Wesley had availed himself ot
these with great skill, and made them subservient
to his views and purposes as they arose. lne
circumstances which gave rise to the formation of
the societies into classes strongly illustrate this
remark. “ The origin of these classes, says
Watson, “ was, however, purely accidental, lhe
chapel at Bristol was in debt; and it was agreed
that each member of the society should contribute
one penny a-week to reduce the burden, lhe
Bristol society was, therefore, divided into classes ;
and, for convenience, one person was appointed to
collect the weekly subscriptions from each class
and to pay the amount to the stewards. us
the necessity of adopting some scheme for collect-
ino- finance was the “ accidental circumstance
which called forth the idea. This purpose is still
served by the arrangement; but it was at once
seen that this same arrangement was admirably
adapted to serve higher ends, and was from that
time incorporated as an integral part ol tie
Methodist economy, and used to promote the
incomparably greater interests of vital piety and
godly discipline. Mr. Wesley’s observations on
this point are too important to be omitted. After
enumerating the many disadvantages and diffi-
culties under which they labored, prior to the
establishment of this institution, he goes on
«At length, while we were thinking of quite
another thing, we struck upon a method for which
we have cause to bless God ever since. .
It was done. In a while some of these informed
me they found such and such an one did not live
as he ought. It struck me immediately,— this is
the thing, the very thing we have wanted so long.
I called together all the leaders of the classes,
and desired that each would make a particular


inquiry into the behaviour of those whom he saw
Wee! q,’ Je J did so - Many disorderly walkers
were detected. Some turned from the evil of
saw Hith Cr! Tnd £ j Man f
reverence” «i t ’ iqjoicea unto God with
reverence. 11 can scarce be conceived what
advantages have been reaped from this little
prudential regulation. Many now happily'
peiienced that Christian fellowship of which thev
lad not so much as an idea before. They began
to bear one another’s burdens ’ and 7 if 8 !
‘ care for each other.’ As they had dailv 7to
intimate acquaintance with J 0 they ha/ l
t e . n e de ?:llr;°" fo, ;r h ° tC
things, who” h?He dhfrcSsfh llim ? iUI
m b to the effectual working in the measure nf
loveT” Part ' mCreaSed unto the edifying- itself in
CHAPTER If.
Henceforward d°Ltt S" *'*&’
institution ,of Wesleyan Methodism,
tinued so to the present time. But in this there
was no introduction of a » principle. Though
it became developed under new and peculiar
circumstances, and was moulded into a somewhf
new constitution, yet the thing- itself is as ft'
Ohristiamtv. No sooner was the attention of Mr
yes ej’s practical mind turned to it than t
clearly perceived it to be so. “ Upon reflect Z
he remarks, “ I could not but observe til • Jp
very thing- which was from the be«inninff of
Christianity. * * * * * A ue b inning- of
As soon as any of


these” (namely the hearers of the apostles) “ were
so convinced of the truth as to forsake sin ana
seek the gospel salvation, they immediately joined
them together, took an account of their names,
advised them to watch over each other, and met
these catechumens (as they were then called) apart
from the great congregation, that they might in-
struct, rebuke, exhort, and pray with them, and
for them, according" to their several necessities.
The facts here brought out are worthy ol being
deeply pondered. Because there are not wanting
even now a-days —persons who should know
better, yet understanding not whereof they affirm,
have presumed to censure the practise as at least
an objectionable peculiarity of Methodism ana
some even as anti-scriptural and popish. There is
also, besides these, another class of individuals,
who, entertaining vague and incorrect notions of
its nature, history, and importance, though anxious
to enjoy the benefits of church communion,. have
hesitated and stood aloof, simply because of their
dislike to the restraints its observance involves.
Here we may remark by the way, that few have
ever become members of the Class Meeting who
have not had to resist similar feelings. Mr. Wesley
says of those in his day, u Some viewing it in a
wrong light, not as a privilege (indeed an invalu-
able one) but rather a restraint, disliked it on that
account, because they did not love to be restrained
in anything. Some were ashamed to speak before
company. " Others honestly said, “ I do not know
why, but Ido not like it.” To those who yield to
such feelings a word of caution may be useful.
Let it be remembered, then, that whatever form of
church arrangement we may prefer and adopt,
religion itself is heart discipline. u Then said
Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow me ” Self-indulgence in any degree or
form is altogether incompatible with spiritual life.


A nature described by such phrases as “ the old
HkT’wVl ’’ ? he bod J° f si n,” and such
like, while unrenewed, is certain to set itself against
the requirements of Christ’s holy gospel It
oag:ht, therefore, to be a serious question with
persons who cherish dislike to the Class Meeting
whether the same feeling- indulged will not lead
them to neglect the restraints of private prayer,
seal chmg the scriptures, and every other indis-
pensable act of piety. Certain it is that neither
Christ nor heaven are to be won by reclining on beds
of ease. The following scriptures are express and
emphatic on this point“ Strive (or agonize) to
tbe flpl’ h i 1! I ? gh V 6ate ; M “ If > live after
the fleshye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.”
Mortify, therefore, your members which are
upon the earth.” « Fight the good fight of faith ”
Bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.’ Thus we see that not only
is the waywardness of our nature to be restrained
but every principle of evil must be crucified and
slam Attendance at the Class Meeting is often
the first step in this process of mortification. Let
this be taken, and used as a means to bring the
soul to Christ: its design is then entered into;
and its end answered when pardon and peace are
realised and perpetuated.
But to return to our former remark. The Class
Meeting in its principle, or even form, is neither
novel nor peculiar .. We have seen that something
very much like it obtained amongst the first
Christians. Dr. Paley was of the same opinion.
. . immortal u Evidences,” describing the re-
ligious practices of the early Christians, he per-
tinently remarks : “ Perhaps their mode of life
m its form and habit, was not very unlike the
vmtas Jratruim or modern Methodists.” Other
pious men—prelates and puritans— at different
periods have likewise either practised something


similar, or have expressed themselves in terms
upon which we are content to rest the defence of
the practise. It was adopted by Baxter, at,
Kidderminster. Bishop Taylor not only enjoyed
it, but carried it in strictness much farther than
it was ever enforced by Wesley, himself. In his
“ Holy Living,” chap, ii, sec, 4, he writes : “To
the same purpose it is of great use, that he who
would preserve his humility, should choose some
spiritual person to whom he shall oblige himself
to discover his very thoughts and fancies, every
act of his, and all his intercourse with others, in
which there may be danger, that by such an open-
ness of spirit he may expose every blast of vain
glory, every idle thought be chastened and lessened
by the rod of spiritual discipline.” &c., &c.
When Wesley was in Georgia he consulted with
his companions in what manner they might be
most useful to the flock at Savannah. It was
agreed ; “ To advise the more serious among them
to form themselves into a little society, and to meet
once or twice a week in order to reprove, instruct,
and exhort one another. 2nd. To select out of
these a smaller number for a more intimate union
with each other, which might be forwarded,
partly, by their conversing singly with each, and
inviting them together to Mr. Wesley’s house;
and this, accordingly, they determined to do every
Sunday in the afternoon.” Thus, long before the
idea of becoming the founder of the Methodists
had entered his head, Mr. Wesley, with the ap-
proval of his companions, became a Class Leader.
The truth is that the practice is so consonant with
the genius of vital piety that wherever the latter
is enioyed, the former either obtains, or its. neces-
sity is felt. Objection, therefore, to this institu-
tion, either as'an innovation, or an unnecessary
custom, can have no place Both in principle and
practise it is in perfect harmony with the practical
Christianity of all ages, Its constitution is simple,


and is based upon the immutable principles of our
social and spiritual nature, and its relations to the
Supreme Being. In short, we reg-ard it when its
spirit is fully entered into as a living embodiment
of the earnest, vital, and practical godliness
taught by the Saviour and his Apostles.
, design is utility , and Utility of the highest
kind. A recent writer has very properly remarked
that u all our institutions have received their
character from the superior importance attributed
to the work of God in the heart. This is specially
the case with the Class Meetings. Many invidious
things have been said of the character of Mr.
Wesley’s “ views and purposes.” But if there
ever was a man, since the Apostle, himself, who
could truthfully appropriate his words, surely Mr.
Wesley was he : “ Warning every man, and teach-
ing every man, in all wisdom, that we may present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Whereunto I
also labor, striving according to his working,
which worketh in me mightily.” Every movement
of his was directed by this rule, and aimed at
this object, and nothing- in Church government
was regarded as of the slightest importance which
did not contribute to this holy end. To help each
Christian “ to work out his own salvation,” and to
promote scriptural peace, unity and purity in the
flock is the sole design of the Class Meeting. Its
admirable adaptation to effect this we reserve for
future consideration.
CHAPTER 111.
To say that man is a social being-, and that the
Class Meeting is peculiarly adapted to meet the
requirements of his social nature, is to say but
little. It is all this. But it is a great deal more.
The Gospel not only recognises man as he is, but its


provisions are adapted to raise him to a state and
character quite new. His social instincts and
relations are clearly disclosed and defined, as is
also their condition as impaired and degraded by
the power of evil. By the power of grace in the
heart, the damage sustained by these noble powers
is fully repaired. But the effects of the process
are something far beyond mere reparation. New
spiritual elements are introduced. Christianity
sublimates our social nature —sanctifies it to its
own ends —ordains new relations as a scope for its
exercise, and brings it within the loving embrace
of the Divine Being. “ That which we have seen
andheard declare we unto you, that ye also may
have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is
with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ.
Such is the exalted view of Christian fellowship
given by the beloved disciple, —the intercourse
between natures sanctified to love the Lord with
all the heart, and one another with unfeigned love.
It is beside our purpose to dwell upon the incom-
parably higher and more sacred character of such
communion to mere social intercourse. But
without the latter man cannot be happy. Neither
can a Christian enjoy heavenly life except by the
constant outgoings of his renewed nature in com
munion with God and saints.
The Class Meeting is an arrangement designed
and adapted to meet the wants of our sanctified
social nature. It is in this fact we find its real
excellence In the spiritual exercises of the class,
the depressed soul realises in its highest applica-
tion that, as “ Iron sharpeneth iron ; go a man
sharpeneth the countenance of his friend. Let
the Methodist hie to his class in never so dejected
or exultant a frame, he finds intercourse with such
as can share his conflicts and his joys, and feels
irulv, u As in water, face answereth to face, so
the "heart of man to man.” All the advantages
derivable from social life in general are found in


religious fellowship, but in a far more extended
end elevated degree. As far as Christian principles
“ d eS“ in excellency those wh<L source
earthly so much more elevated, refined and
pure are his enjoyments who can say, “If we
walk m the light as he is in the lightf'we have
ellowship one with another, and the blood of
Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin Observe
the Scriptures quoted associate the peculiar
blessedness of which they speak with fellowship
And throughout the sacred volume it will be found
that the highest elevation of spiritual joy is ever
iepresented as the portion of the “Two or three
gathered together in His name.” Seclusion-
monasticism—loneliness comports not with the
found tp haiaCt n °{ re %* on —neither is true jov
found there. On the other hand J 7
Joy is an import; joy is an exchange ;
Joy flies monopolists; it calls for two’
Rich fruit! heaven planted! never pluck’d by one.
Needful auxiliars are our friends, to give
To social man true relish of himself.
Full on ourselves, descending in a line,
Pleasure’s bright beam is feeble in delight •
elight intense is taken by rebound,
Reverberated pleasures fire the breast.
01 friendship’s fairest fruits, the fruit most fair
Is virtue kindled at a rival fire,
And emulously rapid in her race.
But would we have correct views of
ClirC aPPreCiati ° n ° f tlle Tth.
Blass Me etmg we must step in and briefly ofl
at one or two details. Here we find o f 7 g
assembled who are sincereTv d f ? W pevsons
the Christian race Tt SladSTh T**
v Qod a Aff avity and e r rience in ** twr„f
prayer he briefly rehtes L'owTexperien^ -"th” 11
proceeds to hear from each a siXS^


replying with such instruction, encouragement,
admonition, or exhortation as the case may require.
Thus every shade of Christian experience its hopes
fears, comforts, conflicts, joys and sorrows—which
constitute the peculiarities of the “life of faith '
are elicited from week to week for the benefit
of all. . ,
We step outside a moment and meet with a
newly-awakened soul earnestly pushing his
enquiry, “ What must I do to be saved ?” He
turns to his Bible, the sanctuary, pious books, &c.
Many have found salvation in the prayerful use of
these. But here is one whose conscience is deeply
smitten with conviction —he is d-stressed and
agitated with the anguish of a broken heart —
deliverance is delayed, and he is naturally turning
for help to those who understand his case. He
turns not in vain to our Class Meeting; for on the
door of entrance is inscribed, “ All who desire to
flee from the wrath to come” may enter in. He
enters, and finds to his comfort those who have
experienced his conflicts and trodden step by step
the way before him. With open arms he is
received, counselled, and encouraged. The nature
of that faith which realizes pardon and peace is
simplified to his mind, and by the prayers and
faith of such as have “ power with God” he is
mightily helped in his efforts to take hold of the
promises. Moreover, he receives express directions
concerning the way in which he must go. T. he
pitfals and snares thrown athwart it by the enemy
are pointed out. He is cautioned not to turn to
the right or to the left lest he should get into the
town of carnal security , and be lodged with Mr.
Legality—a most terrible tyrant and tormentor.
The “ wicket-gate,” over which is written, “ Knock,
and it shall be opened unto you,” is the one object
discovered to his view, and thither he is uiged
with all speed “to run for his life.” Thus directed,
<sm he goes. If, subsequently, he be so unfortu-


nate as to faH into the hands of ill advisers-slin
into the slough of despond”-or stumble upon
Smai, the weekly class comes round, and his new
f iends are again at hand to help him out of his
tioubles and set him right; nor will they, if he be
m earnest, cease their anxieties and attentions till
hi A f V“
him as a child of God and heir of Heaven
scarcely necessary to say thatthose who have passed
through al this are in a position best to estimate
menr To all °J i aid ™ d oncourage-
we would say-? r ; e it f «•
CHAPTER IV.
In the case supposed in our last chapter we hod
an illustration of the direct advantage of the class
meeting- to individuals, in a peculiar stao-e of exoe
nence. Did space allow, we might reft? tn 1 P
other phases of Christian experience in which bene-
fits as express and real are derived: but we mu«t
now rapidly glance at a few of the more o- e “era
™7lT’ h thlS inStitUtion is ada P^ d to secure*
and which are lost m religious meetings of a more
vague indefinite character. W e fill mention !
. and Love in the Church The
Divine character of these graces, and the indispen
sable necessity that they should be experienced Cd
exhibited by the church, in order tn S-f?
and extension is felt and acknowledged by all true
eSSe " Ce ° faU is » on™
Yet when the fullest joy is given,
The same delight we prove
In earth, in paradise, in heaven,
Our all in all is love.”


Whatever, therefore, feeds, strengthens, and per-
petuates Christian love, also promotes scriptural
peace, and binds yet closer the bond of perfectness.
The spiritual exercises of the class do t us. t
cause—lst. In them the believer is brought into
direct fellowship with the Father and with the bon,
through the divine Spirit. “He that dwelleth in
love dwelleth in God, and God in him. 2nd. The
chillino- effects of worldly intercourse are counter-
acted. ° The sincere Christian desires, that, even as
the vestal fire, so the fire of love in his heart should
ever burn. But the world without is a cold region,
and of its rough wear he is often sorely battered.
In the communion of saints all is dissipated an
the holy fire rekindled and fortified, Brd. Our
knowledge of one another is increased, and thus is
laid a sound, and solid basis of mutual attachment.
Class meetings,” says an eminent author, ‘ favoi
that decision, and fixedness of purpose which lie at
the foundation of true moral excellency, they
cherish also that intimate knowledge of character
amono- Christians which inspires mutual confidence
and esteem. ‘As they had daily, a more intimate
acquaintance with’ says Mr. Wesley, ‘so they had a
more endeared affection for each other, the war-
mest sympathies are thus exerted in numerous
bosoms, and the communion of saints is delightfully
verified, whether ‘they rejoice with those that
rejoice’ or ‘weep with those that weep.’ Bet love
be thus cultivated and exerted, then shall we behold
a church *‘ keeping the unity of the Spirit, m the
bond of peace.” . »
11. Effective pastoral oversight, and purity ot
the flock. On these two points we quote from Or.
Sandwith; — ~
u ln the government of religious, as well as
political associations, Mr. Wesley evidently thougnt
that the great aim was to effect a sort of patriarchal
or paternal superintendence of the whole com-
munity. Dr. Southey has ably illustrated this


°ss A fr “£i±
commonwealth.’ It is emmll,r„r„ ~ - 1 f a
munity. I„ „„ other way Meed tha^v U » “T
««SS» aSf’pSSjl’dntiSrf
Hence“SLp m „rS of elf S2 s
for their faithful pfrsonal superinSenee ‘InZ
leat™™er“ U af wh“h ’S ““ “‘T""**- ° f
is established between
* * * b Thp 6 ° f a 7 dl / eCt paStoral superintendence
r pastoral functions are still more fnllv
discharo-ed by the quarterly visitation of the dassef
to overlook the rest W u r weredesired
they walked worthy of the Gospel * AndYT he J er
hisltltsZ It t Same
the obaervation of the* nStXf tn" t
tain rehSo°«s Sa f 7 ty to ° wil l enable him to ascer-
and searching- personal enquiry.” 1
“S' tuSaf tat» SM oT d by thia
space forbids that we shoffd “ en tion ie'Tf
readetthaTk fts "£
o ~ io Li n we Ct ’ 7 “‘“tent
its snirit flrif/f further, and maintain that in
Bpmt ” d essence 11 ® expressly recognised and


strictly enjoined in the Word of God. We contend
not for forms , yet we are at a loss to conceive how
the spirit of the following 1 scriptures could be de-
veloped in a form differing in any material point
from the modern Class Meeting.
u I am a companion of all them that fear thee,
and of them that keep thy precepts.” Psl. cxix. 63.
u Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will
declare what he hath done foi* my soul.” From
the two passages it is manifest that the Psalmist
was an associate of others of like mind, and that
he was in the habit of inviting them to listen to his
religious experience. And is it an unnatural in-
ference to suppose that they in turn would relate
theirs? In such a case they had what would an-
swer to the Class Meeting’. In the time of Malachq
also, it is said : — 11 They that feared the Lord and
thought upon his name, spake often one to another .’
New Testament language is still clearer to the
point : —“ But exhort one another daily, while it is
called to-day, lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin.*’ Heb iii. 13. “ Let us
consider one another to provoke unto love and good
works, not forsaking the assembling ourselves to-
gether, as the manner of some is, but exhorting
one another, and so much the more as ye see the
day approaching.” Heb. x. 24, 25. “ Confess your
faults One to another, and pray for one another,
that ye may be healed; the fervent
prayer of a righteous man availeth much.” James
v. 16. Now here we have distinctly enjoined upon
us—mutual spiritual conversation, mutual care,
mutual exhortation, mutual provocation, mutual
confession and mutual prayer. But how can
these duties be discharged except in connection
with some such arrangement as a Class Meet-
ing? The casual intercourse of daily life affords
neither sufficient nor suitable opportunities for
duties so spiritual. We leave others to answer
the question in their own way : but it papears to


us that a number of true believers met, and enter-
ing into the spirit of the Methodist Class Meeting
are conforming themselves to the letter of these
apostolic injunctions.
CHAPTER V.
There is a custom connected with the Class
Meetmg °f such great importance to the interests
ot the Church, that we cannot conclude these chap-
ters without a brief allusion to it. We are the
more impressed to do so, because we have been
long convinced that a want of due attention to it
on the part of our members, materially diminishes
the financial resources of the Church, and conse-
quently retards her progress. We refer to the
practice of weekly contribution at the Class
Meeting, to the support of the ministry. We have
seen that the importance and advantage of periodi-
cal and systematic contribution was the circum-
stance m which the institution itself originated.
Ihe object and design of the meeting has been
greatly enlarged and spiritualized, yet this pecu-
hanty, as being an essential part of practical
Christianity, remams as an indispensable element
ot it And we need not quote a rule, which every
Methodist knows, that from the beginning every
member, whose circumstances have allowed, has
been required to contribute a stated sum weekly
and quarterly. We are sure that every thinking
person will feel that the reasons which led to the
commencement of the practice, are equally strong
m favor of its being retained and perpetuated”
tfut, it is well known, there are vast numbers of
our people, who habitually neglect to observe the
rule, under the influence of the idea that a laro-ef
sum paid quarterly will answer the same purpose,


Without giving any reasons why it will not, we
will simply say that experience has proved it does
not. Those who have the best opportunities of
testing it, testify that upon an average, those
classes in which the rule is faithfully observed,
contribute double the amount of those where it is
not. And we would ask, is this a matter of light
importance, when we remember that an increase of
funds would be followed by an increase of agency
and a strengthened church ?—ought we not to use
every means to effect such an object? We ask
forbearance if we venture another remark on this
subject, but we are certain of its truth, and there-
fore speak:—the same indifference which lies at
the root of the neglect of weekly, also in many
cases leads to forgetfulness of quarterly payments.
There is scarcely a quarterly meeting held —a
meeting at which all the circuit finances should be
passed in review by the brethren present, where
the accounts can be balanced and closed, because
there are several members who have not paid.
Thus there is a deficiency of resources and the
business left, to say the least, in an unsatisfactory
state. We hope these remarks will be taken in as
good part as they are made ; and trust a word to
the wise will result in a renewal of attention to
these very important matters. Many conclusive
reasons might be advanced why the subscription
should be paid weekly, but we will just mention two
which have ever appeared to us sufficient. First :—
Circuit expenditure is, to a great extent, current.
Sums have to be advanced during the quarter;
and it would often happen that if the Stewards or
Ministers did not advance, the machinery would
be seriously crippled. Weekly payments would
produce current income, and the case would be
met. Secondly :—lt is in perfect harmony with
scriptural rule on the subject of giving. “ Upon
the first day of the week, let every one of you lay


by him in store, as God hath prospered him, that
there be no gatherings when T come.”
In conclusion, we have endeavored to bring 1 , in
a brief form, a few of the more important con-
siderations, connected with the history, design,
advantages, and importance of the Class Meeting’
before the attention of our readers. And now
dear friends, suffer us to urge its constant and
aithful use upon your adoption. We need scarcelv
obsei ve that it is valueless unless properly used.
Io you, who profess and call yourselves Wesleyans,
it is of the first importance you should give all dili-
gence in attending to your class. It is so because of
its bearing upon your own spiritual state. But it is
a most equally so, because of its influence upon
the mind of your leader, the entire class, and the
general prosperity of the Society. Have not you
\ ourself felt the chilling effect of a meagre atten-
dance ? Beware of allowing your connection with
the Great family,” to be merely nominal!
Best not in the more outward ordinances of re-
lgion. The soul that “ hungers and thirsts after
lighteousness,” feels } the need of something more
than these, even the “ communion of saints.” The
essence of piety is found in “fellowship one with
another.
“ The riches of his grace,
In fellowship are given,
To Zion’s chosen race,
The Citizens of heaven,
He fills them with the choicest store,
He gives them life for evermore.”
“ To rest in outside communion with the church
is nothing better than a slender preference for one
form of Christianity over another.” *< To abandon
or lower the Class Meeting would go far to abne-
gate the very principle which it embodies.”*
But this great privilege may be greatly abused.
* Steward.


It is never more so than when it is regarded as the
end instead of the means. It is to be feared that
many when they have gone so far as to join this
brotherhood, lull themselves to rest with the idea
that they now do all that is required of them.
Fatal delusion! “ Christ in you the hope of glory
realised by living faith on the son of God is the
great end of all our “ cares and pains.” We
beseech you to use the class as a means only to
the attainment of this end, or it may prove a
curse and not a blessing. The exercises of the
Class Meeting are intensely spiritual, hence it is n«
place for the careless trifler or the insincere. No
one ought to he found here who does not sincerely
and earnestly desire to flee from the wrath to come.
And to make profitable use of it, it is essential
that the mind be kept in a spiritual state. “To be
spiritually minded is life and peace.” If we wouC
only strive to “ rejoice evermore, pray without
ceasing, and in everything to give thanks,” then
with what, joyful steps we should hasten to our
weekly repast ! And a repast it would prove
indeed. “ A feast of fat things full of marrow, ol
wines on the lees well refined.” Non-attendanc4
upon Class Meeting is often an evidence of spiritual
decline. We cannot therefore be too diligent it
testing our feelings as to how we regard our duty
on this point. “ Watch and pray lest ye enter
into temptation.” And “ exhort one another daily,
while it is called to-day; lest any of you ha
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.”
HYMN.
Jesus, thou soul of all our joys,
For whom we now lift up our voice,
And all our strength exert,
Vouchsafe the grace we humbly claim,
Compose into a thankful frame,
And tune thy people’s heart.


While in the heavenly work we join,
Thy glory be our whole design,—
Thy glory, not our own:
Still let us keep our end in view,
And still the pleasing task pursue,
To please our God alone.
The secret pride, the subtle sin,
0 let it never more steal in,
To’ offend thy glorious eyes ;
To desecrate our hallow’d strain,
And make our solemn service vain,
And mar our sacrifice.
To magnify thy awful name,
To spread the honors of the Lamb,
Let us our voices raise ;
Our souls’ and bodies’ powers unite,
Regardless of our own delight,
And dead to human praise.
Still let us on our guard be found,
And watch against the power of sound,
With sacred jealousy ;
Lest, haply, sense should damp our zeal,
And music’s charms bewitch and steal
Our hearts away from thee.
That hurrying strife far off remove,
That noisy burst of selfish love,
Which swells the formal song;
The joy from out our hearts arise,
And speak and sparkle in our eyes,
And vibrate on our tongue.
Thee let us praise, our common Lord,
And sweetly join with one accord
Thy goodness to proclaim :
Jesus, thyself in us reveal,
And all our faculties shall feel
Thy harmonizing name.
With calmly-reverential joy,
O let us all our lives employ
In setting forth thy love;
And raise in death our triumph higher,
And sing, with all the heavenly choir,
That endless song above!




