

VERCINGETORIX,
OR
LOVE AND PATRIOTISM.
A
LYRIC DRAMA,
IN THREE ACTS.
BY
HENRI KOWALSKI.
THE ENGLISH LIBRETTO BY
J. LAKE, B.A.
(Performed in English for the first time, at the Town Hall, Melbourne,
on September 24, 1881.)
Melbourne:
W. H. WILLIAMS, PRINTER & PUBLISHER, 83 QUEEN STREET.
1881.
Price Sixpence .


NOTE.
The copyright of this Libretto has been purchased by Mons.
Henri Kowalski, to whom the entire rights belong.


THE ARGUMENT.
The story of Vercingetorix is told at length in Csesar’s eighth book of the
“Commentaries ” on the Gallic war, where we find Vercingetorix, as chief of
the tribe of the Arverni, rallying under his standard all the northern tribes of
Gaul, in order to make a supreme effort to expel the Roman from the land.
Keltic scholars derive the name from Ver-cim-ghedo-righ, or “ Captain of a
hundred heads ” — i.e. , great captain. He is elected king by the tribes, and
announces that his policy is to burn every homestead and weakly-fortified
town, to destroy all forage, and to make a desert of the country, so as to
starve the enemy. The city of Avaricum (modern Bruges) is exempted from
the decree, at the request of its burgesses, as the fairest city of all Gaul, and
sustains a long but fruitless siege. At last Vercingetorix is shut up in Alesia
{modern Alise), where, with 70,000 men, he foils the Romans for many
months, while 30,000 Gauls harass Csesar’s rear. When the town capitulates,
the patriot Vercingetorix, to save the lives of the citizens, surrenders
himself a willing captive to Csesar, by whose orders he is finally put to death
during Csesar’s triumphal procession up to the Roman Capitol. Plutarch tells
us how Vercingetorix, with all the gallant gaiety of his nation, clad himself
in his most splendid armour and mounted his noblest charger. Csesar had
drawn up his troops, and had seated himself at the head of his lines to
receive the captives. The Gaul, thus gaily caparisoned, caused the gate
of his encampment to be thrown open wide, and galloped forth into the
open space in the attitude of a warrior charging. Having approached close
to the proconsul’s chair, he dexterously wheeled round, and, again return-
ing to the same spot, sprang to th'e ground, and laid his arms at the feet
of the conqueror. Here he maintained a dignified silence, until Csesar
ordered a Roman guard to take him away and reserve him for his triumph
at Rome. We may add that, in the year 1879, a colossal statue of him
was set up by the citizens of Alise on the heights above the town, since
they regarded him as the emblem of patriotism, and remembered him as
the only general who had ever vanquished Csesar in two pitched battles.
Upon this authentic military history it has been necessary for operatic pur-
poses to engraft a love story Vercingetorix is betrothed to Luctera, a Gallic
maiden, with whom at the same time a Druid priest, Ambrokind, is illicitly
in love. When Luctera repulses the latter with scorn, he concocts a story of
an oracle having revealed to him that a virgin must be sacrificed by fire on
the dolmen, or altar of the Druids, in order to propitiate the gods and dis-
comfit the enemy. When lots are drawn the Druid contrives that the lot
shall fall to Luctera, and then secretly he offers to save her life, by collusion,
if she will accept his love. Being still indignantly repulsed, he betrays the
gate of the city of Alesia to the Romans, in order to revenge himself on
Vercingetorix. But his treachery is exposed by the latter just as the
sacrificial rites are in preparation, through information obtained from a
Roman captive ; and by decree of the multitude, the Druid is slain, there
and then, by Ambiorix, the lieutenant of Vercingetorix. The general then
surrenders himself to the Romans, and Luctera falls dead with grief at his
departure. The drama opens with the representation of a harvest-home
festival on the plains of Gaul, and the interest of the plot depends upon the
scenes between Luctera and Vercingetorix, and on the mental struggle
between faithfulness in their mutual love or self-sacrifice to the salvation of
their country. The French drama was written by M. Mainiel, and in the
English libretto the original plot and construction have been maintained, but
the various songs have been freely treated, partly by translation and partly by
the adaptation of new and original matter. The ruggedness of much of the
metre has been compelled by the necessity of adaptation to music already
written.


VERCINGETORIX.
a lyric drama, in three acts.
MUSIC
BY HENRI KOWALSKI.
English Libretto by J. Lake.
glramatis |)*rsona:
Luctera ... ... ... The Betrothed of Vercingetorix.
Vercingetorix ... ... General of the Tribes of Gaul.
Ambrokind ... ... A Druid.
Ambiorix ... ... A Gallic Chief.
A Country Lass.
A Young Peasant.
An Old Shepherd.
Druids , Warriors, Women, Peasants, &>c.
Sams :
Act I. —A fertile valley in the neighbourhood of Gergovia .
Act ll. —An ancient forest near Alesia.
Act lII. —An open square in Alesia, close to the ramparts. In tht
distance the Mountains of Auvergne.


VERSINGETORIX,
A LYRIC DRAMA.
ACT I
SCENE I.
Orchestral Introduction. —Pastoral.
Tlte Harvest Home. — Shepherds, Peasants, and Country Lasses, crowned
with ears of corn and garlands of cornflowers.
Chorus. Oh, lovely Peace, who crown’st the year with gladness,
Beneath whose smile the valleys laugh and sing—*
Sweet Child of God, dispelling care and sadness—
Protect our homes beneath thine angel-wing !
A Country Through all the sky is ringing
Lass. The lark’s triumphant song,
Till his seraphic singing
Wakes all the feathered throng!
On every flower the cluster
Of dewy crystal gleams,
All radiant with the lustre
Of rainbow-tinted beams.
O’er field and fell and fountain
The sun hath shed his ray,
All golden grows the mountain —
Shepherds ! behold the day !
Chorus. Oh, lovely Peace! who crown’st the year with gladness,
Beneath whose smile the valleys laugh and sing—■
Sweet Child of God, dispelling care and sadness—
Protect our homes beneath thine angel-wing 1
A Young In ev’ry foaming vat is flowing
Peasant. The mantling flood of purple wine,
On all the verdant slopes are growing
The olive-gardens and the vine !
Hail to the bounteous Heaven!
Praise to the bounteous Hand !
That vernal sun and shower have given
To all the teeming fruitful land! [


Chorus. Oh,lovely Peace! who crown’st the year with gladness,
Beneath whose smile the valleys laugh and sing—
Sweet Child of God, dispelling care and sadness —
Protect our homes beneath thine angel-wing !
flourish of trumpets is heard in the distance and fires blaze out on
the mountains .]
An Old Above the distant hills the camp-fire smoke is curling,
Shepherd. The army of the Gauls its banner is unfurling ;
I hear the clash of arms, I see the flash of lances,
The furious trumpet sounds, the Gallic standards
wave,
Now halts the glittering host —a warrior advances —
'Tis Vercingetorix ! the bravest of the brave !
SCENE 11.
’Vercingetorix. Shepherds ! to arms ! for the groan of your nation,.
Oppress’d by the foreigner, swells to the skies !
Wide though the Roman may spread desolation,
Out of the ruins let heroes arise !
Proudly Avaricum hurls her defiance,
And closes her gates to the armies of Rome ;
Stout hearts and walls are her only reliance,
Fighting for country and children and home !
On, then, to battle, and hew down the foeman,
Till the rivers are red with the blood of the slain !
Soil’d is our land by the touch of the Roman;
Pour forth his heart’s blood and wash out the stain !
Chorus. On, then, to battle, and hew down the foeman,
Till the rivers are red with the blood of the slain !
Soil’d is our land by the touch of the Roman ;
Pour forth his heart’s blood to wash out the stain !
\lbuctera, the betrothed of Vercingetorix, appears and the crowd disperses.
SCENE 111.
Luctera. Upon a mossy stone,
Where cooed the turtle-dove,
We two sat all alone,
When first we told our love.
We promised then to be
For ever leal and true,
That you would love but me,
And I love only you !
Duet. Though trumpets call away
To cruel war’s alarms,
Oh rest, my love, and stay
For ever in my arms !


Vercingetorix. Here, by these skies I swear,
And by the Gods above,
Pure as the summer air
To keep my vows of love !
Against the Roman foe,
With stalwart heart and hand,
At duty’s call I go
To fight for Fatherland !
Duet. The trumpet calls away
To cruel war’s alarms,
Yet love would bid me stay
For ever in thine arms !
{The Druid, Ambrokind, attended by Priests, and follotvedby the multi-
tude, advances towards Vercingetorix and his warriors.']
SCENE IV.
Ambrokind. Restrain your ire, ye Gauls ! When from the oaks
around
The mistle-berry falls on consecrated ground;
When, o’er the distant hills, the hostile trumpets blow,
And all misfortune fills our country’s cup of woe,
The sacred rites require a virgin should be given,
In sacrifice of fire, to appease the wrath of Heaven !
Then draw the lot!
Vercingetorix. Ah ! stay ! thou cruel Druid priest!
(advancing). Is there no other way the bond may be released ?
Ambrokind No way ! and Velledah, whose altar ye profane,
(with jnenaces). Shall wreak his wrath in war, on you and all your train !
Vercingetorix. So be it! Here we stand ! and raise our battle-cry,
To fight for Fatherland, and, fighting thus, to die !
[Vercingetorix marches off haughtily,followed by his warriors and by the
multitude. Luctera, plunged in grief, remains motionless and pensive,
seated on a rocky boulder. Ambrokind approaches her slowly, and
stands contemplating her with rapt gaze.]
SCENE V.
Ambrokind What name is this I hear
(aside). She mutters in her woe ?
Her lover’s ! Him I fear —
My most accursed foe !
(To Luctera.) I love thee, Luctera !
I love thy haughty smile !
Be thou my guiding star,
And shine on me awhile!


Luctera How dare’st thou, in hallowed garments array’d,
( rising with With face by Time’s wrinkles all withered and worn,
scorn). Insult, like a coward, a poor helpless maid,
Whose heart-strings, alas! are all bleeding and torn
Ambrokind I love thee, Luctera !
{ with emotion) I hold thee in my spell!
Luctera Away ! I say. Away !
(with energy) My hate no words can tell!
My curses on thee stay,
As deep as deepest hell!
Ambrokind. Heaven ! what do I hear ?
(in despair.) Ah ! thou bid’st me go !
Thou shalt ever fear
Me, thy deadliest foe !
[.Luctera flies in terror.']
SCENE VI.
Ambrokind. Then go, by me accurs’d, thou source of all my woe!
(gloomily.) With thee is fled my dream of happiness below!
And yet I loved but her! Ye furies ! Even now
She thrills my rival’s soul, with kisses on his brow!
Another’s is the joy, by her own will to press
His kiss upon her lips, and taste her soft caress !
He ever sees his heaven in her eye !
Then aid me, Hell! For vengeance he shall die!
And oh, my country, source of all his power !
My land no longer ! I curse thee from this hour !
Now swept by anger’s flood,
Caesar, to thee I pay the vows of my allegiance !
My vengeance shall be wreaked by thee and by thy
legions,
In weltering fields of blood ! (Exit.)
SCENE VII.
X The multitude re-enters, with the warriors who are ready to march to
raise the siege of Avaricum.]
Chorus. Already the army of Caesar advances,
And fierce flash the gleams on their murderous
lances!
In vain all their boasting;—with valour unvaunted,
Our heroes shall face them and fight them undaunted!
So stout are our hearts and so fierce is our cry,
We thirst for the battle and fight till we die !


MILITARY MARCH.
Chorus The yellow Tiber’s banks have seen our standards
{finale). wave,
Upraised by Brennus’ arm, our leader bold and brave!
Then be the valiant sons of such a valiant sire,
For Rome shall be your prey, and Caesar’s star retire !
Ye Gauls ! arise and lead, triumphant o’er the plains,
The haughty sons of Rome, all captive bound in
. chains!
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II
[An ancient Forest lighted by the rays of the rising sun.]
ORCHESTAL INTRODUCTION.—REVERIE.
SCENE I.
Luctera. Through leafy grooves and vales, where glows the
golden morn,
And swells the praise of all the feathered choir,
I roam and dream, with bleeding heart and torn,
Of the idol my eyes desire !
Oh Spring, whose birds are sweetly singing
Their everlasting songs of love !
Till earth with joy as full is ringing
As reigns in blissful realms above !
In vain thy happy songsters, flying
Above me, flutter bright and gay !
My heart has never ceased from sighing
Since he I love was torn away !
SCENE 11.
Vercingetorix Once more, dear Luctera, thy sunny smiles awaken.
(entering.) But, ah ! what woe ! the foe has won the day !
For in this dreadful hour, by all the Gods forsaken,
Avaricum has fallen, our only hope and stay !
, 7 jL . CLF . R . A ‘ Beloved heart ! the foe may be victorious !
- as P ln & n ' n But what care I, since thou art spared to me.
in her arms.) 1
Vercingetorix. Blasphemer, know, when tempests tower o’er us ;
My Fatherland must claim my love, not thee !


{The soldier's covenant and administration of the oath. Entry of the
chiefs of each tribe : the Bituriges, Bellovaci, Eburones, Carnutes,
Atrebates, Caletes, Aulerci, VeloCassi, Senones, Cadurci, Treviri, Sf c-
They carry standards , on which are embroidered branches of the
sacred mistletoe. They surround Vercingetorix .]
Vercingetorix. Illustrious chiefs ! Swear each of you and al'i,
By gods above and shades below,
Fearless to face the foe !
For God and right,
To win the fight,
Or fighting fall !
Chorus of e swear t we SW ear !
Chiefs.
Vercingetorix. Then poison all the fountains !
Lay waste your homes ! —no stay ! no pause !
Chorus of We swear the oath, for our dear country’s cause !
Chiefs. The foe shall find bare rocks and barren mountains.
Vercingetorix. And swear no more to see your children or your
wives
Till victory has snatchedyour country from the foe!
Till Massilia’s marsh has heard their parting wail
of woe !
And all the land is free, bought by your blood and
lives !
With such an oath as this the Roman foe must fly !
Chorus of We swear ! we swear! we swear ! the Roman foe
Chiefs. shall die !
Vercingetorix. You need a chief. Propose and choose him now !
Chorus of Be thou our leader ! None so brave as thou.
Chiefs. Tremble, Ctesar ! the lamp of Gaul is lighted !
To-day shall see once more her standards wave;
Her hearts and arms are once again united
To hurl thee and thy legions to the grave.
SCENE IV.
{Entry of the Druid; all the chiefs malce obeisance to him. Entry of the
women. ]
Ambrokind To-day the Augurs slew a sacred milk-white steer,
( solemnly). And my own hands set free the gurgling crimson
flood ;
Then spake Almighty Thor to me, his holy seer :
“ The altar on the plain must drink a maiden’s
blood !”
Vercingetorix. Ah ! fearful fate ! shall this be done ?
Ambiorix. This our land, with sorrow laden,
Shall be saved by a maiden !
Happy she the chosen one !


Ambrokind. Happy fate for her foretold—
Glorious death and lasting fame !
Bring the holy casque of gold —
Draw the lot and tell her name !
[Amibiorix draws forth one- of the square slips of papyrus and shows it to
Ambiorix. ’Tis Luctera ! ' the chiefs.']
Ltjctera. Oh, horrid fate !
Vercingetorix. My own dear love! Oh, barbarous law !
But if the gods have passed the word
That we must part,
This wicked priest shall feel my sword
Pierce through his heart !
Universal This sacrifice must be
Chorus, To set our country free !
Vercingetorix. Her tender, heart must crave
More mercy from the brave !
Ambrokind. She must die !
Vercingetorix. Druid ! thou liest!
Ah, tremble not! My dearest, fondest heart!
[ Clasping Luctera in his arms, he stands, sword in hand, ready to defend
her.]
QUARTETT.
Vercingetorix. To shield Thee now, my arm shall wield the mighty
brand,
E’en all the fiends of hell for Thee I dare withstand!
The druid Ambrokind against thy life hath striven!
For love of Thee, I dare defy the wrath of Heaven!
Luctera. Ah ! not for me avails thy keen uplifted brand,
Since fate decrees that I must die for Fatherland !
I love Thee, but I love the laws the Gods have given!
Thou losest Luctera, —she wins the joys of Heaven !
Ambiorix. Refrain with impious speech from thwarting Heaven’s
command,
And for the foeman’s heart reserve thy mighty brand!
For Luctera must die, —thus hath the lot been given ;
Thy sacrilege will bring on us the wrath of heaven !
Ambrokind. In vain thy arm is raised, and powerless is thy brand,
(ironically.) To save thy Luctera, who bows to Heaven’s command.
The bonds of earthly love, by Heaven’s command,
are riven,
And on thine impious head shall fall the wrath of
Heaven !
Chorus. His arm protects her now, and mighty is his brand r
For love of her he dares ’gainst Hell itself to stand !
His sacrilege invokes on us the wrath of Heaven !
The altars call for blood, then let the blood be given !
END OF SECOND ACT.


ACT III
ORCHESTRAL INTRODCTION.
\_An open square in Alesia. close to the ramparts ; on the right a Dolmen,
or druid Meal altar ; in the distance, the mountains of Auvergne.
SCENE I.
Vercingetorix. Oh thou, who art my sword and spear to day,
( To Be swift to hear and swifter to obey !
Ambiorix.) Thou know’st the traitor’s part this wicked priest doth
P^y;
He fain would slay my Luctera, but at my sign
Strike him deep through the heart!
He hath played the traitor’s part.
Good Gaul, the Avenger’s guerdon shall be thine !
He hath betrayed his dying Fatherland !
The traitor ! and the hostile Roman band
Surround Alesia, beleaguring her walls !
Farewell my dreams of glory,
And happiness in life !
Mine is the old, old story,
Of vainly striven strife,
For now the Gallic standard before great Caesar falls!
[ Vercingetorix goes away; Ambiorix conceals himself at one of the sides
of the open square. Arrival of the procession for the sacrifice : druids,
warriors, women and young maidens. The latter are arrayed like
Luctera, in a white peplum Luctera has her head covered with a long
white bridal veil. Solemn Processional march.']
SCENE 11.
Chorus of Maiden ! when cruel Death
Maidens. Blasts, with his icy breath,
Life’s sunny ways,
Give to the Lord of Heaven,
What He to thee hath given,
Glory and praise!
Brave child of bravest sires,
Unto the raging fires
Heroine, thou giv’st thine own heroic soul!
Thy fathers’ shrines to save,
Thou marchest to the grave,
And for thy bridal bells the knell of death
must toll !


I [Ambrokind approaches Luctera. The priests and warriors stand aside .}
Ambrokind Yet if thou wilt but hive me,
{ suppliantly ). It is not too late ;
Luctera, I can save thee,
E’en now, from thy fate !
Luctera I rather would be clasped by Death with arms of
(with ice
indignation). Than thy accursed arms !
Ambrokind . ,
(furious). Then P a y the sacrifice !
Aubiorix It shall truly be paid with thy traitorous blood !
(aside). Thou art child of the devil, not prophet of God !
Trio. — Luctera , Ambrokind, Ambiorix.
Luctera. Even now ! now, while I stand in the gloom of night,
He tortures me ! he, who should bring me the
blessings of Heaven !
Far away, through the blue heavens, I cleave my
flight.
Farewell to the earth and the joys that its flowers
, have given 1
Farewell! ye meadows and flowery land !
Sweet meadows, for whom I must die 1
Oh grant, ye Gods, that the foeman’s hand
May never upon them lie !
Ambiorix Thou wicked, lying prophet, the hour of wrath is
(threatening the come !
druid). For oracle perverted thou now shalt meet thy doom!
Before thy murd’rous lancet our Luctera’s veins can
part,
My sword shall find its scabbard and sheath within
thy heart!
Ambrokind Ye Gods ! she escapes me ! and rather would die,
(in despair). Than be my bride ! The fates will brook no more
delay;
The altars call for blood ! And fate must have her
way!
Luctera! I adore thee ! The fates I defy !
[ They drag Luctera away to the altar ]
Chorus. Now pay the sacrifice
The god’s above demand ;
For victory waits on those
Who bow to heaven’s command !
The maiden’s blood must flow,
And in that self-same hour
Our weakling hearts shall glow
With new-created power.


[Ambiorix rushes forward, sword in hand, and rejpels the sacrificersi]
Chorus. What madpess now ?
What wouldest thou ?
Ambiorix I come to save the darling of Vercingetorix, for she
(recitative). is innocent.
Chorus. Blasphemer of our rite,
To death, to death be dight !
Luctera. Alas ! the hour is come !
I feel my spirit quail
Before the approaching doom.
SCENE 111.
Vercingetorix. Avaunt ye ! Avaunt ye !
( brandishing Cowards ! Avaunt ye !
his sword). Insatiate mob !
Who thirst for blood, nor heed a woman’s cries.
The first who dares advance—he dies !
Full Chorus. 'Tis Vercingetorix !
Vercingetorix. Who for the truth and right
Unveils the traitor’s plot and overthrows his might!
A captive Roman guard revealed to me to-day
This wicked priest for gold had promised to betray
The gate of the Senones.
Oh, guilt of deepest dye !
Enthralling thus, for gold, a peoplo who defy
The foreign yoke;
Ambrokind
( seeing he is Ah ! then let me bear my fate !
discovered).
Vercingetorix. People! reply.
Chorus. Yes, the traitor shall die !
The warriors rush upon the Druid. Ambiorix outstrips them, and\
strikes him with his sword. The Druid falls, and the tumult abates.
Vercingetorix. Soldiers ! these shouts, our defeat are proclaiming,
And I dread, since the mountains are smoking and
flaming,
That our confederate host is vanquished ! Fatal
day !
Great Csesar’s star is risen, but I will ever stay
Faithful to Fatherland ! and I accept the omen,
Which bids me bow my pride before the haughty
Roman !
I go a willing slave !


Luctera. Oh cruel, double death !
Beloved heart, when thou hast saved my life,
To lose thee yet again ! Oh vain and empty strife !
Ah ! this would be again to die!
Vercingetorix. To die ! to die ! my own beloved heart!
Here, all around thee, the meadows are singing,
Loud the blue skies with the lark’s song are ringing,
Thou shalt not surely die!—Away these tears!
Luctera. Oh, deep despair !oh cruel Fatherland !
Oh, horrid fate ! which rends my heart in twain !
If heaven demands a victim, here I stand,
For joy in life can ne’er be mine again !
(.Repeat the last verse in duet.)
Vercingetorix. People ! to save your lives, I dare e’en death to brave!
I go to Caesar’s camp, a willing captive slave!
Oh, sweet the joys of love and fame in hero story,
But sweeter joy were mine, to barter life for glory !
My blood shall freely flow to set my people free,
And from my ashes grow the Tree of Liberty !
[Luctera falls lifeless at his feet, and Vercingetorix Icneels beside her. ]
Full Chorus Great Velledah! clothed in glory and power,
(finale). Oh, deign on this martyr thy blessings to shower!
Full oft hath his sword been upraised on the foeman !
Full oft hath he baffled the pride of the Roman !
[To Veringetorix, as he departs .]
But if thy death, brave chief, alone may please great
heaven,
Our hearts and arms and lives to avenge thee shall
be given !
The End.


W. H. Williams, Printer, 83 Qifien street, Melbourne
Melbourne International Exhibition, 1880-1.
1,
&
AGENT FOR
SBASID AWARD.
All the models of this celebrated maker just unpacked.
35 COLLINS STREET EAST.
J. J 3 Als I J'l ©
Begs to inform his friends and the public that he has opened,
ex late shipments, some Very Superior
PIANOS & ORGANS,
Selected by himself when in Europe, from the most celebrated
factories.
The durability of these instruments is fully guaranteed,
and the variety of price—from /35 upwards—gives everyone
a favorable opportunity of securing a thoroughly good instru-
ment.
A Great Number of Pianos to select trom
FOR HIRE
AND
Terms made for purchasers by Instalments.
R. J. PALING,
35 COLLINS STREET EAST. 35
NOTICE.
We the undersigned, beg to announce that Mr. R. J.
PALING, of Melbourne, and Mr. W. H. PALING, of Sydney,
are our SOLE AGENTS FOR AUSTRALIA, and all our
pianos are labelled Aucher Bros, conjointly with Paling & Go.
Paris, Nov. 25, 1866. L. & J. Aucher Freres.
Agents for Erard, Henri Herz, Anchor, Trost, Kirkman,Jdand,
Eundt, Gerhard Adam, Goebel, See-
