

COLONIAL & INDIAN EXHIBITION OF 1886.
By Authority of the Executive Commissioners in Queensland
HANDBOOK
QUEENSLAND GEOLOGY-,
BY
ROBERT L. JACK, F.G.S., F.R.G.S.,
BRISBANE :
WARWICK AND SAPSEOR», PRINTERS AND LITHOGRAPHERS, EAGLE STREET.
1886.




COLONIAL & INDIAN EXHIBITION OF 1886
By Authority of the Executive Commissioners in Queensland
HANDBOOK
QUEENSLAND GEOLOGY
ROBERT L. JACK, E.U.S., F.R.G.S.,
Government Geological Surveyor.
BTITSBANE :
WARWICK AND SAPSEGRD, PRINTERS AND LITHOGRAPHERS, EAGLE STREET.




PREFACE
The following pages, written at the invitation of the Executive
Commissioners in Queensland, are intended to serve as a guide to
the Geological Map on the scale of 16 Miles to an inch, forwarded
to the Colonial and Indian Exhibition of 1886.
The labours of Aplin, Daintree, Gregory, and Rands have furnished
copious details bearing on the geology of the colony. My own efforts
have been directed, during the last eight years, to a Geological
Survey. This work could not possibly be carried on systematically
by the methods in use among the geological surveys of older
countries. The vast extent of the colony, the long periods of drought,
the difficulties of internal communication, and the hostility of the
natives, must be taken into account in estimating the value of the
results achieved by my predecessors and myself. The two last evils,
however, are decreasing year by year, with the extension of railways
and the progress of settlement. For example, the York Peninsula,
where, in 1879, my companions and I left the northernmost camp of
our countrymen, 'on the Mclvor River, to see them no more till we
had run the gauntlet of several tribes of blacks (a horse having been
killed under me, and a spear driven through my neck), and reached
the settlement at Somerset, is now covered with squatting runs, while
a telegraph line is being laid to connect Cooktown with Somerset.
It is fair to say that urgently-required field-work prevented my
beginning this hand-book till the time allowed by the Commissioners
for its completion was well nigh exhausted. To the shortness of the
time must be attributed many of the inaccuracies inseparable from
“raw haste.” In fairness to the draughtsman (Mr. Gustav von
Wehrs) it must also be said that when I put the map in his hands
there was no time for such an artistic reproduction of it as would
have been satisfactory to himself.
I must acknowledge my deep obligations to Mi'. Robeit Etheridge,
junior, of the Natural History Department, British Museum,
formerly of the Geological Survey of Victoria, and afterwards my


colleague on the Geological Survey of Scotland, for the unwearying
kindness with which he has, ever since my arrival in Queensland,
assisted me, by preparing and determining my palaeontological
collection. To Professor H. A. Nicholson, D. Sc., Ph. D., &c., of the
University of Aberdeen, William Carruthers, Esq., F.R.S., Y.P.G.S.,
&c., Keeper of Botany, British Museum, Sir I. William Dawson,
C.M.G., F.R.S., &c., Principal of McGill University, Montreal, and
Dr. Henry Woodward, F.R.S., &c., Keeper of Geology at the British
Museum, I am indebted for similar assistance.
In addition to the writings of my predecessors in the Geological
Survey (drawn for the occasion from the limbo of official reports),
and of ray present colleague, Mr. W. H. Rands, A R.S.M., F.G.S., I
have to acknowledge my obligations to the works of the Rev.
W. B. Clarke, Charles Moore, Esq., F.G.S., Robert Etheridge, senior,
Esq., F.R.S., the Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods, F.G.S., F.L.S., Norman
Taylor, Esq., formerly of the Geological Survey of Victoria (the
latter of whom has kindly favoured me with the use of his valuable
notes on Hann’s Exploring Expedition in Cape York Peninsula).
Messrs. Leichhardt, Macgillivray, Byerley, Jardine, Hodgkinson,
Mulligan, Dalrymple, and a host of others. One aim of the present
volume is to form a sort of bibliography or index to the literature of
the subject with which it deals.
Collections of fossils and specimens which must materially aid
in the unravelling of the geological structure of Queensland have
been presented to me by Mr. James Smith, of Rockhampton,
Mr. R. C. Ringrose, of Charters Towers, and many other gentlemen.
R. L. J.
Geological Survey Office,
Townsville, 18th February, 188 G


CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION. PAG e.
Distribution of Formations ... ... ... ... 7
CHAPTER I.
Slates, Schists, Gneisses, &c., age undetermined. —Part of Charters
Towers Gold-field—Star River Silver Mines—Dry River Silver Mines—
Part of Watsonville Tin Mining District—lrvine Bank Silver Mines —
Tableland between Kingsborough and Port Douglas—Sellheim Silver
Mines —Gold Diggings of the Suttor—Slates adjoining Bowen River
Coalfield, with Argentiferous lead-lodes—Clermont Copper and Gold
Mines—Nebo Gold-field—Cape River Gold-field—Gilbert and Woolgar
Gold-fields—Croydon Gold-field—Cloncurry Gold and Copper Mines—
Normanby Gold-field ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
CHAPTER 11.
Burdekin Beds. —Broken River Beds —Burdekin Downs and Fanning
Limestones—Reid Gap Limestone—Mount Wyatt—Marble Island—
District South of Marlborough—Raglan—Langmorn—Norton—Cania
Cooingal—Morinish, Ridge-lands, Black-fellows Gully and parts of
Rosewood and Crocodile Gold-fields—Raglan, Calliope, Cania,
Nanango, Pikedale, Canal Creek, Thanes’ Creek, Talgai and Lucky
Valley Gold-fields—Copper lodes on Doe River and at Pikedale—Man-
ganese at Gladstone—Hodgkinson Gold-field—Palmer Gold-field ... 19
CHAPTER 111.
Dotswood Beds. —Koelbottom Copper Mines 31
CHAPTER IV.
Gtmpie Beds. —Gympie Gold-field—Yarrol Beds —Training Wall Quarries,
Rockhampton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . , 33
CHAPTER V.
Star Beds.— Mount Wyatt—Canoona—Broken River—Drummond Range 37
CHAPTER VI.
Bowen River and other Coal-fields. —Bowen River Coal-field—Lower
Series —Bedded Traps—-Middle Series —Upper Series—Oakey Creek,
(Cooktown)—Endeavour River (Cooktown) —Little River (Palmer-
ville) —Stuart’s Creek (Townsville) —Palmer River—Mount Mulligan—
Dawson, Comet and Mackenzie Coal-field—Styx River —Clermont
auriferous conglomerate—Burrum Coal-field—Stewart’s Creek, Wycar-
bah, and Rosewood (Rockhampton) ... ... ... ... .. 43


CHAPTER VII.
Ipswich Beds. —lpswich Coal-field ... ... ... ... 60
CHAPTER VIII.
Rolling Downs Formation. —Coal Seams —Gypsum—Hot Springs—
Artesian Water ... ... ... ... 64
CHAPTER IX.
Dbsebt Sandstone. —Coal, Opals, Springs—Maryborough Beds ... .. 76
CHAPTER X.
Tertiary. —Basaltic lavas—Mount Morgan Gold Mine, an extinct Geyser 78
CHAPTER XI.
Post Tertiary. —Extinct Marsupials, &c. —Auriferous drifts near Rock-
hampton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 84
CHAPTER XII.
Serpentine. —Gold Chrome Iron—Cawarral and Canoona Gold-fields—
Copper at Barambah Creek and Mount Coora —Part of Kilkivan Gold-
field 88
CHAPTER XIII.
Granite, Syenite and Porphyry. —Age and mode of occurrence—Charters
Towers Gold-field —Ravenswood Gold, Silver, and Antimony Mines —
Etheridge Gold-field—Marengo Gold-field—Black Snake Gold-field —
Milton Gold-field —Crododilo Gold-field —Herberton Tin Mines —Tin
Mines of Thompson’s Creek, Pinnacle Creek, Oakey Creek, Tate River,
Dry River, Nettle Creek, Return Creek, Rudd’s Creek, Kangaroo
Hills, and Bloomfield River —Cannibal Creek Tin Mines, Stanthorpe
Tin Mines —Kilkivan Mercury Mines—Mount Perry Copper Mines
Gold in Porphyry at Ban Ban ... ... ... ... ... ... 89
CHAPTER XIV.
Basalt and Diorite. —Traps interbedded with Dotswood beds—Traps
interbedded with Bowen River Coal-field —Basalts of Stanwell —
Basalts of Peak Downs —Basalts of Toowoomba Range—Basalts of
Endeavour and Mclvor Rivers —Basalts of Mulgrave River —Basalts
between Mulgrave River and Herberton —Hot Spring—Basalts of
Herbert and Burdekin Valleys—Basalt overlying Desert Sandstone 102
CONCLUSION.


INTRODUCTION.
The eastern third of Queensland is tlie remnant of a lofty table-land,
composed of hard materials, which have resisted denudation, and
culminates, at an elevation of 5,438 feet, in Mount Bartle Frere.
This table-land is the chief seat of the mineral wealth of the colony.
The table-lands end in a series of escarpments, or in a short and steep
slope down to the Pacific Ocean, or its raised beaches. This elevated
tract generally robs the rain-charged clouds which rise up from the
Pacific, and a fairly watered and well timbered country is the result.
The generally indifferent character of the soil accounts for the fact
that the grasses, though fair, are not first-rate for pastoral purposes.
Where, however, basaltic plateaux occur, agricultural soils of the
highest quality are produced. These are often covered by dense
tropical jungles, and give rise to copious streams of perennially run-
ning water. The falls of the Barron River are probably unequalled
in picturesqueness. At present almost inaccessible, they will in a
few years (on the completion of the Herberton railway) be admired
by crowds of the lovers of nature.
Besides granites, partly of plutonic, and partly of metamorphic
origin, this coast region presents a series of stratified rocks, of which
the older members are more or less metamorphosed. Of newer dates,
and recognisable by their fossil contents, and their relations to one-
another, are formations related homotaxially to the Devonian, Car-
boniferous, Permian, Jurassic, Cretaceous, and Tertiary rocks of
Europe, igneous rocks of various ages and recent formations.
The western interior presents a totally different aspect. The table-
land slopes gradually westward, and falls away towards the Gulf of
Carpentaria, and the south-western boundaries of the colony. The
greater part of the interior is covered with soft stratified rocks of
cretaceous age, which weather into a fine soil, supporting nutritious
grasses, but almost treeless. The rainfall over this region is, how-
ever 1 , comparatively small, and the water-courses are ill-defined, and
dried up to water-holes during the greater part of the year. At


intervals, portions of the interior are covered with detached table-
lands of what has been aptly named “ Desert Sandstone,” supporting,
as a rule, only spinifex grass and stunted timber. The evidences
that this formation once covered the whole of the western interior are
unraistakeable, and it is matter for congratulation that it has been so
extensively denuded as to lay bare, over an immense area, the rich
soil-producing cretaceous rocks. Between the Desert Sandstone and
the recent deposits, is a series of drift-deposits, containing the remains
of gigantic extinct marsupials.
In the following chapters, the various formations which tell a part
of the geological history of the colony, will be described in such
detail as the limits of the work will permit.


CHAPTER I.
SLATES, SCHISTS, GNEISSES, &c.
(age undetermined.)
It will be seen from the map, that a vast area of the loftiest ranges of
the colony, extending from the boundary of Hew South Wales along
the eastern side of Queensland, northward to Lloyd’s Bay, is composed
of schists, slates, gneisses, &c. These stratified rocks are capable of
numerous subdivisions, which can only be indicated at present. The
time has not yet arrived for a complete unravelling of the complex
structure of this series of formations. The geologist often sighs for
the simplicity of ancient geological methods, which would permit him
to mass as “ azoic ” everything which has not yet yielded evidences of
life, and is assailed by the temptation to assign horizons to the fos-
siliferous localities in accordance with the proportions of European
types furnished by them. But it is soon found that no classification
based on this principle will hold good for any large area. The strata,
consisting originally of limestones, conglomerates, siliceous, and fels-
pathic sandstones, clay shales and mudstones, are generally thrown
into sharp folds, and are often locally metamorphosed into marbles,
quartzites, greywackes, mica, and talc schists, Lydian stone, &c.; or,
still further, to the utter obliteration of their originally stratified
character, into serpentines, diorites, hornblende, and tourmaline —-
gneisses, porphyries, granites, &c.
The granites and syenites of Charters Towers appear to be the
ultimate stage in the metamorphism of the series of stratified rocks
described on page 15 of my report “ On the Geology and Mineral
Resources of the District between Charters Towers Goldfield and the
Coast.” (Brisbane : By Authority, 1879.)
These rocks are older than the Burdekin beds. They are all meta-
morphosed in a greater or less degree. The metamorphism must have
taken place prior to the deposition of the Burdekin beds, pebbles and
granules of the metamorphosed rocks forming the material of which
the conglomerates of the latter series are built up.
These once horizontal beds are now thrown into broad folds, and
probably do not occupy more than one-fourth of the surface over
which they were deposited. The stratified rocks occur to the north
and west of Charters Towers. They consist of quartzites, slates, and
shales. The slates do not differ from the shales in mineral compo-
sition —mainly silicate of alumina, with a high percentage of peroxide
of iron—but simply in being intersected by cleavage-planes. Both
the slates and the greywackes are, as a rule, highly impregnated with
iron, being in places “ iron-masked ” to such a degree that they migtt
almost be taken for weathered clay-band ironstones. Occasionally,
where the greywackes are fresh and contain little iron, they somewhat


resemble blue limestone, while their joint-surfaces are often coated
with calc-spar. A conglomerate of small quartz-pebbles, enclosed in
a matrix of fine sandstone (mainly of felspathic materials), coloured
dark red with peroxide of iron, is met with in two places between
Charters Towers and the Burdekin.
In these stratified rocks no fossils have as yet been detected. Mr.
R. Etheridge, senior, states* that the Broken River limestones
(“ Burdekin Beds ”) which he calls “ Siluro-Devonian,” are the lowest
fossiliferous rocks in Queensland. But the latter beds are undoubtedly
of much more recent date than the rocks last above described. The
Rev. W. B. Clarke (erroneously, I think) ascribes to Mr. Etheridge
the view that “ nothing lower than Siluro-Devonian has been found in
Queensland.” No older fossils have been discovered, but lower and
older stratified rocks most certainly have.
The Band of Hope, Rose, Shamrock and Thistle, and Great Britain,
auriferous Reefs lie in this area.
Over an extensive area in the Star district stratified rocks older
than the Burdekin Beds have suffered a high degree of metamor-
phism. Their dip and strike are still recognizable, although a state
of semi-fusion and plasticity which has supervened has permitted of
the partial re-arrangement and crystallization of their component
minerals
A very coarse quartzite grit or fine conglomerate is seen in Cattle
Creek near its junction with Keelbottom River. On the hill North
of this a felspathic slate appears to pass gradually into a pale yellow
el van or felstone. There is reason to believe that the slate is of
volcanic origin (a fine tuff). Before Cattle Creek emerges from the
hills to the North of the Star Road, it exposes sections of slates,
greywackes, and coarse quartz conglomerates. On the Star Road, a
mile west of Keelbottom crossing, a soft mica-schist occurs, traversed
by numerous veinlets of quartz. Similar schists, together with
quartzose grits, occur on the western head of Cattle Creek. A region
of quartzose micaceous schists is traversed by the creek falling into
the Little Star River below the Etheridge Road.
The mountainous region whence Melon, Scrubby, and Dinner
Creeks, and the north head of Cattle Creek, take their rise, is com-
posed of hornblendic schists and gneisses, with some quartzite beds.
From this locality must have been derived the gold found in the
alluvial deposits of these creeks, where they emerge from the hills.
Prepared slices of the gneiss of Dinner Creek, examined under the
microscope, show that the rock is essentially composed in about equal
proportions, of hornblende crystals (generally passing on the edges
into the condition of viridite) and blebs of quartz, with rare crystals
of plagioclase felspar, the whole being, so to speak, “peppered ” with
minute opaque specks of magnetic iron. Sometimes cubical specks
of iron pyrites are visible to the naked eye.
* Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of London, vol. 28, p. 384.


Occasionally beds of shales, &c., appear to have been baked,
shattered and recemented in the form of hard breccias of Lydian
stone, jasper, &c. Examples of this phenomenon are to be seen in the
Round Mountain (East of Mount Frederick), and in the hills east of
“The Springs ” in Speed Valley.
On referring to the map accompanying ray Report on the District
between Charters Towers and the Coast it will be seen that there is
no regularity either in the dip or strike of the schists, &c., of the
Star District. There is evidence of a very considerable degree of
disturbance from forces exerted in various directions, and probably
at different times. All that can be said with certainty is, that both
the metamorphism and the disturbance had been effected before the
deposition of the “ Star Beds,” afterwards to be described.
Over the whole of the metamorphic area of the Star (not the “ Star
Beds ” proper), quartz reefs are numerous, and the soil is strewn with
quartz fragments. None of the reefs, however, appear to have been
successfully worked for gold, in spite of the presence of alluvial gold
in the gullies.
In this region there has recently been discovered an extensive
series of lodes, containing lead oxides, carbonates, sulphates, and
galena, all yielding a high, percentage of silver. The silver mines
will probably soon rise to importance. Among these rocks of un-
determined age may in the meantime be included: —
(1) The Dry River Silver Mining District (Newelltown, near
Herberton). The country is greywacke and slate (the latter some-
times black), nearly vertical with a north and south strike. In
Spring Creek is a bed of blue limestone showing on weathered
surfaces traces of coralline structure. The mines are described in my
report on the “Tin Mines of Herberton, Western and Thompson’s
Creek Districts, and the Silver Mines of the Dry River.” Brisbane:
By Authority, 1883.
The Try-no-More Lode runs west 30 deg. north, and underlies
south 30 deg. west. The prospecting claim has three lodes, one of
which is the continuation of the Try-no-More. McFadden’s or
Paddy’s Lode runs west 15 deg. north, and underlies slightly to
south 15 deg. west. ♦
The Silver Streak is worked on a continuation of McFadden’s, and
another lode occurs in the claim running south 30 deg. east.
The Target runs east 10 deg. south, with an underlie at 60 deg. to
south 10 deg. west. The Silver Valley runs south and south-
east. The Target No. 1 Last runs east 10 deg. south, and
underlies south 10 deg. west. The Caledonian runs west-north-
west. The White Star runs west 30 deg. north, and underlies south
30 deg. west. The Rainbow runs north-west, and underlies slightly
to south-west. The ores of McFadden’s, the Silver Streak, the Silver
Valley, the Caledonian, the White Star and the Rainbow are chiefly
galena. In the Try-no-More the ore is a very complete one —copper-
pyrites and steel-grey marcasite, galena, and zinc-blende in a quartz


matrix. In the Prospecting Claim, the cap of the continuation of the
Try-no-More, is a red ferruginous gossan, with carbonate of copper
and a gangiie of slaty breccia. The cap of another lode protrudes 10
or 12 feet above the surface, and consists of red “ tile ore ” and green
and blue carbonates of copper. A third lode on which a shaft had
been sunk 55 feet at the date of my visit (Nov. 1882) had a gossan
containing green carbonate of copper. The copper ores appeared to
be giving place to zinc-blende and galena, with pyrites, as far as I
could see down the shaft. Dennis’ Tunnel Claim had a red ferru-
ginous gossan with galena and carbonate of copper. Short’s claim
had a cap of red gossan showing large lumps of galena, some blocks
reduced by decomposition to sulphates and carbonates of lead sur-
rounding small nuclei of galena. The Target contained yellow oxide
and grey carbonate of lead and galena, and is said to have yielded also
some argentite (sulphuret of silver).
In all of the above mines the lead ores yield on assay a proportion of
silver, which will prove highly remunerative when the mines are
connected by railway with the coast.
(2) The Slates, &c., which form a narrow belt between the granite
of Watsonville and the stanniferous porphyry of the range to the south.
In this belt are a number of mines in which copper and tin ores are
intimately associated. Among these are the Wyatt, Shaughraun,
North Australian, Good Friday, Grand Secret, Ironclad, Crucible,
Ulster, and Come-by-Chance.
The Wyatt claim is in a country of greywackes and shales, which
dip at a low angle to the south-west. The greywackes, as seen in a
cutting on the right bank of Jamie’s Creek, are somewhat impregnated
with green carbonate of copper; and a thickness of about 4 feet of
shales has been pretty nearly replaced by green and blue carbonate of
copper. A little way up the hill is a shaft, 25 feet deep, reaching to
the same level as the bottom of this cutting, but not connected with
it. From the bottom of this shaft massive copper pyrites were
obtained.
The Shaughraun adjoins the Wyatt further up the Creek. The
copper ore occurs among the bedding-planes of hard fine-grained
quartzose and micaceous shales, which dip to the south-
west at 15 degs. The ore is mainly “ tile ore ” (ferruginous red oxide
of copper), iron ochre, and red and blue carbonate of copper, with
some lumps of pretty pure red oxide of copper. A little tin ore is
said to be mixed with the copper ore.
The North Australian lies to the east of the Shaughraun, in grey-
wacke and shale country, which dips at 35 degs. to the south-west.'
The tin ore occurs in “ heads ” or joints, at right angles to the dip of
the greywackes and shales. The ore has a distinct character of its
own. It is fine-grained, grey, and friable, but occasionally finely
crystalline on faces. The grey colour results from the presence of
steatite in the interstices between the particles of ore. The “ blow ”
or outcrop, when first discovered, stood several feet above the ground,


and the ore has been worked in an opencast 10 or 20 feet wide and
extending about 50 feet north-north-west to south-south-east. About
£50,000 worth of ore has been produced from this mine up to the
end of 1885.
The Good Friday lies on the south side of Jamie’s Creek, in hard
greywacke and jasperised clay-slate country. It underlies to east 40
deg. north at an angle of 70 deg. It was worked opencast for
about 100 feet. At the south-east end of the cutting a vertical shaft
strikes the load at 40 feet and follows a shoot of ore for about 30 feet
to the south-east. This shoot of tin ore, whose section averaged 8
feet square, underlay at 45 deg. to the south-east, till, at a shaft 60
feet from the north-west end of the cutting it was about 30 feet deep.
At the shaft it was somewhat deflected, and extended horizontally to
the 40 feet shaft above referred to. The ore is in large blocks,
massive and pure, sometimes consisting of aggregates of minute
crystals, and associated with brecciform masses of steatite and noble
serpentine.
The Grand Secret is on the opposite side of the gully from the Good
Friday. In a shaft 47 feet deep, tin ore was found all the way down,
on a foot wall which underlay a little to the north-east. At the bottom
of the shaft the ore is seen, sometimes in lumps of considerable purity,
with only a slight admixture of quartz. Oftener the ore occurs loose
in a soft ferruginous matrix.
A tunnel on the claim is crossed by a narrow dyke of soft elvan,
decomposing to kaolin, and sparingly containing fine crystals of tin
ore. The greywacke adjoining the elvan contains a little tin ore.
The Ironclad adjoins the North Australian to the north-east, but
differs widely from it in its characteristics. Near the southern end
of the claim is the “ copper shaft.” It was sunk on a deposit of car-
bonate of copper and ochres, which ran mainly east and west, and
underlay to the south in alternating shale and greywacke country. In
the latter the deposit was contracted, and in the former it was wide
and diffuse. About 70 feet up the hill, to the north, another lode is
seen. Its cap was red gossan and carbonate of copper. This lode was
followed in labyrinthine open-cast and other workings till it communi-
cated with the “ copper shaft ” at a depth of 30 feet. Shortly below
the cap the copper ore began to be intimately and extensively mixed
with tin ore in small grains. The outcrops of two other strong lodes
of copper carbonates are seen on the property.
The Crucible lies north of the North Australian, and west of the
Ironclad. A shaft has been sunk on the bank of a gully intersecting
the claim, on a lode running north, 30 deg. west. The cap contained
tin ore, but immediately beneath the surface the tin ore was found to
be mixed with carbonate of copper and copper pyrites. At 20 feet a
level was driven 40 feet to south, 30 deg. east, and tin ore was found
all the way. Below the level copper pyrites prevailed.
On the opposite side of the gully a tunnel strikes, and follows
irregularly to the west, a belt of greywacke and shale country impreg-


nated with copper oxides and carbonates, in and adjacent to the
bedding-planes.
A shaft was sunk 60 feet higher up the gully on a cap of red gossan
and blue carbonate of copper. A large quantity of ore was raised —
copper and iron oxides and green and blue carbonates. Some of it
showed 13 per cent, of tin ore, although very little was visible. At
30 feet a level was driven 20 feet to east-south-east, and 60 feet to
west-north-west, which appears to be the direction of the lode or
cupriferous zone. In the west-north-west level the copper ore keeps
pretty nearly in the bedding-planes, but near the end it appears to
occur in a true lode, running west, and underlying slightly to the
north. The east-south-east level contains much iron peroxide and
not much copper ore.
In a 40-feet shaft, near the north corner of the claim, a little tin
ore is seen among copper and iron ochre. The deposit appears to
underlie to the east. A little to the west, in a shaft, the brittle grey-
wacke and shale country on the top of a decomposing elvan dyke
(running north-west and underlying at 70 deg. to south-west) is
impregnated with tin ore.
In the Ulster claim is a north and south dyke of chlorite (altered
diorite F) partly decomposed and disguised by peroxide of iron. The
dyke contains quartz and tin ore. The country is very hard massive
greywacke.
In the Come-hy-Chance the only regular deposit of tin ore is one
of about 15 inches wide, extending west-north-west, and underlying
at 80 deg. to the north-north-east. A shallow shaft has been sunk
on it. Elsewhere the tin ore occurs irregularly among the country
rock, which is much altered greywacke, copiously veined with
steatite, and graduating on the one hand into serpentine, and on the
other into quartzite.
(3) The Silver Mining District of Irvine Bank. —Here lodes
of galena, recently discovered in slate country, have already afforded
a large yield of silver, and the mines are being rapidly developed.
The Albion Mine has yielded also large quantities of horn silver
(cerargyrite).
(4) The table land of slates and schists, crossed on the road from
Kingsborough to Port Douglas, and extending north-eastward from
Anderson’s homestead to the coast; and probably a large area of
similar rocks extending along the seaboard to north and south. \
(5) The Silver-Lead Mining District of the Sellheim River, and
Charlie’s Cieek (a tributary of the Suttor), with the alluvial gold
diggings of the head of the Suttor. In the year 1884 120 tons of ore,
valued at £2400, were shipped from the Sellheim River.
In 1885, according to Mr. G. P. Storey, the following quantities
were sent from the Sellheim District:—


Pyramid Lode
TOKS.
166
Boimy Dundee
... ... 50
Birthday Gift
17
Porphyry Creek
3
General Gordon
6
Sunrise
3
Other Lodes at Pyramid
20
Do Bonnie Dundee
10
Argentine
3
(6) The slate and schistose country, containing argentiferous lead
lodes, on the east side of the Bowen River Coalfield,
(7) The talc and mica schists and slates, of the Clermont District
with their copper and gold mines.
Descriptions of the famous Peak Downs Cojpper Lode, and some of
the auriferous reefs, will he found in Daintree’s “ General Report
upon the Northern District.” (Brisbane; By Authority, 1870.)
My colleague, Mr, Rands, is at present making a geological survey of
the district. The yield of gold from the Clermont field in 1884 was
275 ounces.
(8) The Nebo or Mount Britton Goldfield, which yielded in
1884 to 19 reefers and 21 diggers 500 ounces of gold. This is about
one-fourth of the yield of 1883, the decrease being attributed to the
drought. The Warden refers, in the “ Annual Report of the Depart-
ment of Mines,” to the finding of a 60-ounce nugget on Moonlight
Creek.
(9) The Cape River Goldfield appears to belong to a series of
rocks older than the oldest known fossiliferous rocks of Queensland.
The field is thus described by Daintree: —*
“ The auriferous area indicated by the term ‘ Cape River Diggings ’
would include a very large extent of country, if the continuity of
the same rock-formation were a guarantee of equal mineral wealth
throughout. Payable gold deposits have, however, up the present
time, been confined to the south-eastern outcrops of a vast thickness
of schistose rocks developed on the Cape the north-western extension
of the same having failed to yield the precious metal in remunerative
quantity to the projector.
“ The approximate thickness of this auriferous series may be
arrived at by assuming the mica-slates of Mount Devonport to
represent the base, and the schists of conglomerate gully the top, of a
continuous system of strata, dipping south 25 degrees west, with an
* Eeport on the Cape Eiver Diggings, and the latest mineral discoveries in
Northern Queensland. Brisbane: By Authority, 1868.


average inclination of 45 degrees. The distance between these
points would give a thickness of more than seven miles of solid rock,
in the debris of all positions of which gold has been discovered.
“The extension on the surface of this vast body of rock-material
may be easily followed from the south-eastern extremity of Mount
Devonport, up to and beyond Mount Courtenay, until it disappears
under the lava table-land west of the Walker River.
“No fossils have as yet been, or are likely to be, found in these
beds, on account of their metamorphic character throughout. The
only assertion to be made in regard to their age is—that rocks of a
similar character further north are unconformably overlaid by others
containing abundance of upper silurian fossils. [Broken River:
(Burdekin Beds.) R. L. J.]
“ The entire series may be subdivided into characteristic upper,
middle, and lower groups.
“ Upper. —The upper is distinguished by the hardness of the
material of which it is composed. The Barrier Range, forming the
watershed between the Cape and Rankin’s Mistake Creek, is a monu-
ment of the durability bf its quartzites and silicified mica-slate, single
bands of which can be traced for miles along the course of the range,
becoming marked features in the landscape. The higher points of this
ridge are elevated fully 1,000 feet above the bed of the Cape River,
and 2,600 feet above the level of the sea.
“Moran’s, Green’s, Long’s, Golden andNuggety Gullies, all traverse
these rugged quartzites, and the ravines yielding payable gold, about
three miles west from the Black Mountain, have their sources in the
westerly extension of the same rocks.
“ Middle. —The middle is in direct contrast to the above described,
in regard to the durability of its rock constituents, except where
traversed by extensive dykes, as at and around Mount Remarkable.
It has yielded easily to the action of the elements, and the alluvial
deposits of the Cape River owe their thickness and extent to this
cause.
“ Soft thin-bedded mica-slates, with occasional bands of silicified
mica and hornblende schists, from the low undulating ridges through
which the southern tributaries of the Upper Cape take their course.
“ Specimen Gully and its branches have hitherto been the only
attraction of the miner throughout its entire extent.
tf Lower. —ln the lower subdivision, laminated granite, mica, and
hornblende slates are interstratified, and it is in this portion of the
series that transmutation of the schistose rocks is most marked;
indeed, near the junction of the schistose and granite rocks, so great
has been the alteration that it is difficult to say where the schists end
and the granite commences.
“ The Upper and Lower Cape Diggings, Chinaman’s Gully, &c.,
are situated within the limits of this lower group; the reef on Mount
Devonport at its very base.”


In a newspaper report recently published it is stated that Messrs.
L. Davis & Co., Brisbane, have made the following assays of quartz
from Croydon :—
ozs. dwts. grs.
(1) Iguana Reef
6 10 16 to the ton.
(2) Better Luck
... 21 4 16
(3) Lady Mary, Ho. 1
... 13 1 8
(4) Do.
... 8 3 8
(5) Caledonian
... 13 1 8
(10) The Gilbert and Woolgar Goldfields are in rocks of a
character similar to those of the Cape River.* Bismuth-carbonates
and argentiferous galena are found in the gilbert goldfield. The
Woolgar produced in 1884, 1796 ounces of gold from 1734 tons of
stone.
(11) The Croydon Goldfield, between Georgetown and Norman-
ton, has only been discovered within the last few months, blow that the
summer rains have set in, and water is plentiful, a formidable “ rush ”
has taken place. From a report by Mr. W. Samwell, Goldfield
Warden, to the Mines Department, 14th December, 1884 ( Queenslander ,
January 9th, 1885 J, the following description is taken : —•
“ The centre of the present mining operations is located in an
undulating flat, running out from the broken ridgy country, between
ridges and hillocks, into the plain or low-level forest country, which
stretches away towards the shores of the Gulf. This flat has alternate
layers of clay and heavy sand on its surface, and bands of granite,
sandstone, conglomerate and auriferous quartz traverse it in all
directions. The geological features of the district appear to be about
the same as the Etheridge Goldfield —the country right away south,
by the heads of the Norman River, to about abreast of the Woolgar,
being but a continuation of the Etheridge, Gilbert and Woolgar
auriferous country. This country runs out to the north-west in long
spurs, broken ridges, and chains of isolated hills, feathering away, it
may be said, in the low-level forest and lake country, extending from
the foot of the hills —‘ once foreshores of the sea ’ —on to the present
mangrove-fringed salt-pan shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria.”
(12) The Cloncurrt District. —In this region a large area is
covered by highly-inclined slates, quartzites, and greywackes, with
occasional crystalline limestones—unfossiliferous, so far as I have seen,
with the exception of a doubtful fossil at Mount Euri. A pretty full
description of the copper and gold mines will be found in my “Report
on the Geological Features of Part of the District to be Traversed by
the Proposed Transcontinental Railway” (Brisbane: By Authority,
1885). Mr. W. O. Hodgkinson and E. A. Kayser in Official Reports
dated 1876 (Brisbane: By Authority), give exhaustive accounts on
the same subject.
* See Daintree’s “ Report on the Gold Discoveries in the Gilbert Ranges ”
(Brisbane : By Authority, 1869), and his paper on the Geology of Queensland
(Quarterly Journal Geol. Society, London, vol. 28, p. 271).


Towards the Mount Douglas Gold Mines the country is studded
with peculiar rugged knobs of granular quartzite, which I suspect
represent the discharge pipes of geysers. The most striking features
of the country, however, are mountains of pure specular and magnetic
iron ore. One of these, Mount Leviathan, is about 200 feet high
and a quarter of a mile in diameter at its base. Another, Mount
Pisa, forms a remarkable leaning peak, overlooking the Great
Australian Copper* Mine.
The Great Australian and the Argylla seemed destined to rank
among the most important of copper-producing mines; when railway
communication with the coast shall have made their remunerative
working possible. Both have enormous quantities of very rich ores
(red oxides and green carbonates) with a good deal of native copper.
Besides the cluster grouped around the township, important copper
mines occur at Pumpkin Gully, Mount Norma, the Dugald River,
Duck Creek, Sunday Creek, Dobbin’s Creek, &c. A very long lode of
iron and lead ores —the latter containing silver —occurs on the Dugald.
Gold occurs in the alluvial wash of Pumpkin Gully, associated
with native bismuth. In the Uncle Tom reef, Pumpkin Gully, gold
occurs in quartz, calcite, and chalyhite. The carbonates of copper in
the Flying Dutchman and Homeward Bound Lodes contain a good
deal of gold. The Gilded Rose mine, at the head of Fisher’s Creek,
among flaggy talcose sandstones and shales, has yielded gold from
pyrites for a number of years hack. A reef on "W eatherly Creek is
said to give good returns.
At the “ Top Camp ” the country is of chloritic slate and greywacke,
in nearly vertical beds, striking south-east and north-west. The slate
forms bold features on the hill tops, often standing up in fantastic
knobs. The stratified rocks are frequently pierced by enormous dykes
or reefs of quartzite, which stand up in lofty walls on the crests of
the mountains. Here in the Mary Douglas, and other reefs, a good
deal of gold was got, associated with native bismuth. The Mary
Douglas quartz is very peculiar, being coated with botryoidal and
stalagmitic manes of glossy-black limonite. From the Mary Douglas
Hill there radiate in all directions gullies and flats which have
yielded alluvial gold extensively —at one time employing 400 men.
All the gold was heavy and nuggetty. One nugget, found in China-
man’s Flat, weighing 28 lbs.
(13) Normanby Gold Field. —The Normanhy Range, near Bowen,
consists almost entirely of tourmaline-porphyry, a compound of quartz
(for the most part amorphous), black mica (sparsely), and large or
black crystals of tourmaline or schorl. The whole rock is mixed up
with minute crystals and streaks of iron pyrites, and streaks and
veins of serpentine. Occasional specimens may he found showing a
passage from greywacke to tourmaline-porphyry.
The principal reefs lie along a line running south 44f deg. east
along the heads of the gullies draining the south-western side of the
Normanby Range. A less important parallel line of reefs intersects


Hungry Gully and Green Creek, striking towards Oakey Creek on the
north-west. The reefs on both lines invariably underlie to the north-
east. The reefs were abandoned whenever the water-level was reached,
as the gold could not be extracted from the “ mundic.” Specimens of
mundic taken by me from the Welcome reef (pale iron pyrites and
copper pyrites) assayed for 8 ozs. 9 dwts. 20 grs. of gold, and
1 oz. 12 dwts. 6 grs. of silver to the ton. The field is at present
abandoned.*
CHAPTER 11.
BURDEKIN BEDS*
To this group may be referred the limestones of the Clarke River,
and its tributary, the Broken River, and the limestones of Burdekin
Downs, Terrible (Arthur’s) Creek, and the Reid Gap. These, as
having yielded the majority of the fossils which have as yet been
scientifically examined, may be regarded as the types of the forma-
tion. Mr. R. Etheridge, senr., in 1872, in his appendix to Mr.
Daintree’s paper, in the “ Quarterly Journal of the Geological
Society ” (xxviii., p. 323), pronounced the Broken River beds “ the
lowest fossiliferous deposits in the Queensland area,” and regarded
them as “ Lower Devonian, or Siluro-Devonian.”
Broken River —Limestones —The late Mr. R. Daintree observed
(“ Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of London, vol.
xxviii., p. 290 ”), “ On the Broken River the entire Devonian system,
as developed in Queensland, could be easily and satisfactorily
mapped. The branches of this river cut right across the strike, and
the bare edges of the rocks are often exposed over the intervening
ridges from creek to creek. Well marked beds of interstratified
conglomerates seem to retain their character over large areas. On
the track from the Broken River to the Gilbert diggings, Devonian
rocks several thousand feet thick may be observed, as they are
continuous in dip without being repeated for at least 5 miles across
the strike, with an everage inclination of 60 degrees.” Unfortunately
I have never had an opportunity of visiting this interesting region.
The Broken River limestones have yielded the following fossils, as
determined by Professor H. A. Nicholson, and Mr. R. Etheridge, junr.,
of the British Museum (“ Annals and Magazine of Natural History,”
September, 1879.
* See “ Report on the Norman by and Marengo Goldfields. By Robert L.
Jack, Brisbane.” By Authority, 1879.


SPONGIDA (STEOMATOPOROIDEA.)
Stromatopora. 1
1 Occurs also in Arthur’s Creek —very like Devonian species of Devon and Eifel.
CLASS ACTINOZOA.
Genus Favosites.
Favosites gothlandica, var. Goldfussi, Edwards and Haime. 2
2 Corresponds strikingly with that met with in Corniferous Limestone of
North America.
Favosites gothlandica, Edwards and Haime. 3
3 Closely resemble F. epidermata, from Corniferous Limestone,
Genus Heliolites.
Heliolites porosa, Goldfuss. 4
* German and British Devonian rocks ; also. Fanning, Arthur’s Creek, and
Burdekin Downs.
Heliolites Daintreei, Etheridge, jnnr., and Nicholson.
Heliolites, sp. ind.
Heliolitesplasmoporaides, Etheridge, jnnr., and Nicholson
Burdekin Downs and Fanning Limestone. —Abed, or rather series
of beds, of limestone occurs on the Burdekin River, resting on granite,
attains the remarkable thickness of 7000 feet before it is succeeded
(conformably) by the sandstones, &c , afterwards to he described as
the Dotswood Beds. Its outcrop forms a horse-shoe bend, which
embraces a large tract of country between Dalrymple and Ravenswood
Junction Railway Station.
From a collection forwarded by me, Messrs. Nicholson & Etheridge,
Junior, have determined the following:—
SPONGIDA (STEOMATOPOROIDEA).
Stromatopora. Arthur’s Creek. 5
Caunopora. 6
8 Like some of the Devonian species of Devon and Eifel. Occurs also at
Broken River.
Species distinct from C. placenta, Phill, the characteristic Devonian form,
from Devonshire.
CLASS ACTINOZOA.
Genus Alveolites.
Alveolites (pachypora) sp. ind. Arthur’s Creek.
~ sp. ind.
Genus Heliolites.
Heliolites porosa. Goldfuss. Arthur’s Creek and Fanning River,
also, Reid River.
Genus Araeopora. Nicholson & Etheridge, jr.
Araeopora australis. Burdekin River.
Genus Pachypora.
Pachypora, sp. ind. Fanning River. 7
’ Also Reid River.


Genus Trachypora.
Trachypora, sp. ind. Arthur’s Creek,
Genus Aulopora.
Aulopora repens , Edwards & Haime. Arthur’s Creek.
Genus Lithostrotion or Lonsdaleia.
Lithostrotion, (?) Arthur’s Creek.
BRACHIOPODA
Genus Spirifera.
Spirifera curvafa. 1
1 Middle Devonia, Schlotheim (?) Panning River.
Spirifera , sp. ind. Fanning River.
Genus Atrypa.
Artypa reticularis , 2 Linn. Fanning River.
A. desquamata, 3 Sow. Fanning River.
2 Upper Silurian and Devonian.
3 Middle Devonian.
Genus Rhynchonella,
Rhynchonella, sp. ind. Fanning River.
Genus Orthotetes.
Orthotetes CrenisfriaA Fanning River.
4 Upper Devonian to uppermost Carboniferous.
REID GAP LIMESTONES.
About thirty miles from Townsville, on the Northern Line, the
following strata are seen capping a hill on the western side of the
railway:—
Hard sandstones and fine grained hardened sandstones (almost
quartzites), with limestone in bands along bedding planes, say 80ft.
Blue limestone (base concealed by talus), varying from dark blue
limestone to white saccharine marble, say ... ... ... ... 60ft
On the jeastern side of the railway another hill top is capped by—
Hardened white sandstone; a quartzite, partly conglomeratic 3ft.
Sandstone; thickness uncertain; blue corralline limestone, say .. 30ft.
On the hill tops, west of the railway at Double Barrel Creek, the
following section is seen :
Dark blue limestone, full of corals; the lower part only divided by
partings of quartzite, at least ... ... ... ... ... 200 ft.
Alternate quartzite, limestone, and marble bands, say ... ... ... 100 ft.
Blue greywacke ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Ijft.
Alternate quartzite and limestone bands ... ... ... ... ... 40ft.
Dark blue greywacke ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... sft.
Scrub, perhaps covering ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20ft.
Limestone, with quartzite bands ... ... ... ... ... ... 40ft.
Fine grained dark blue greywacke ... .. ... ... ... ... 4ft.
Impure saccharine marble, with dark streaks ... ... ... ... 15ft.
Dark blue coralline limestone, about * ... ... ... ... ... 60ft.
* “ Geological Features of Part of the Coast Range between Dalrymple and
Charters Towers Roads.” By R. L. Jack, Brisbane : By Authority, 1879.


These strata rest unconformably on greywackes, &c., probably of
the same age as the stratified rocks west of Charters Towers, among
which are interstratified some thick beds of brecciated volcanic ash.
The Reid limestones are now extensively quarried for mortar, which
is made use of principally in Townsville. They are well adapted for
building stones, especially the white marble, which the Bishop of
Northern Queensland proposes to use in his Cathedral.
In 1883 I commissioned Mr. Eric Edelfelt to make a collection of
fossils from the Reid limestones. The collection was sent to Mr.
Robert Etheridge, junior, who kindly supplied me with the following
list and notes (hitherto : —
Genus Heliolites.
Heliolites porosaA Goldfuss, sp. Regan’s and Benwell’s Quarries.
1 “ Would indicate a horizon in the Middle Devonian, as it is found in that
of both South Devon and the Eifel/’—E. E., Jr. —Occurs also at Arthur’s
Creek and Fanning Eiver. —E. L. J.
Genus Ctstophyllum, Lonsdale.
Cystophyllum Americanum , 2 var. (nov.) australe.
s “ A typical fossil of Hamilton Group of North America, which is Middle
Devonian.” —E. E., Jr.
Genus Campophyllum.
Campophyllum Gregorii, sp. nov. Regan’s, Philp’s, and Benwell’s
Quarries.
Genus Cyathophyllum.
Cyathophyllum, sp. Regan’s Quarry.
Genus Pachypora,
Pachypora meridionalis. N. &E.
Genus Aulopora.
Aulopora, sp. Regan’s and Philp’s Quarries.
Genus Alveolites.
Alveolites alveolaris , 3 de Koninck. Regan’s and Benwell’s Quarries.
3 Alveolites alveolaris, de Kon., and Coenites expansus, de Kon., indicate a
relationship with the Yass beds of New South Wales. —E. E., Jr.
Alveolites alveolaris , var. Queenslandensis, Etheridge and Foord.
Regan’s Quarry.
Genus Amplexopora,
Amplexopora? Koninckii, Etheridge and Foord. Regan’s Quarry.
Genus Coenites.
Coenites, sp., like G. expansus, de Koninck. Regan’s Quarry.
SPONGIDA (STEOMATOPOEIDEA).
Genus Pachystroma, Rich, and Murie.
P achy stroma, sp. allied to P. densum, Rich. Regan’s Quarry. 4
* Corniferous Limestone of North America.
Of the fossils of the Burdekin group, some are new to science. Of
the remainder, two ( Alveolites alveolaris, de Kon., and


expansus, de Kon.) indicate a relationship with the Yass beds of New
South Wales (classed as upper Silurian), but the great majority
correspond more closely with the lower and middle Devonian of
Europe and America.
With the Burdekin group may be classed :
(1) A series of blue and grey slates and shales, around Mount
Wyatt, containing the following fossils, presented by Mr. Daintree to
the Melbourne Museum, and determined by Professor M‘Coy (who
regarded them as upper Silurian) as follows :
Chonetes sarcinulata.
Orthis, allied to 0. rustica.
Heceptaculites.
Leptcena, sp. undet.
The “ lepidodendron beds ” rest on the upturned edges of the blue
and grey slates and shales.* See page posted.
(2) The blue limestone of Marble Island, in the Northumberland
Group, which appear to be very like the Reid limestones. It is
extensively used for mortar in Brisbane.
(3) It is with considerable hesitation that I class, in the meantime,
the greater part of the palaeozoic rocks south of Marlborough as
belonging to the Burdekin beds. It is quite likely that, among the
highly inclined and much distributed rocks of this region, strata will
yet be found separable, on account of their fossil contents, and their
stratigraphical relations, from the rest, and of different ages. But
fossiliferous limestones, appparently identical with the Burdekin beds,
are so common in the whole region, that the attempt to separate them
from the other strata, which, after all, present only the negative
evidence of the absence of fossils, has proved hitherto a task beyond
our powers. Attempts have been made in limited areas; but I do
not think that sufficient evidence has as yet been accumulated to
warrant the conclusions which have been drawn.
The rocks of this district mainly consist of micaceous talcose and
chloritic schists, slates, argillaceous shales (sometimes locally altered
to Lydian stone), quartzites, greywackes, sandstones, grits, conglo-
merates, and limestones.
Daintree refers to the occurrence of “ casts of Spirifer ” in Devo-
nian slates and shales at Lucky Valley, and the head of the Rosenthal
Creek.
My colleague, Mr. W. H. Rands, in his “ Report on the Goldfields
of Raglan, Calliope, Milton, &c.,” (Brisbane : by Authority, 1885),
announces the discovery of encrinites in a limestone at Mount Holly.
From a limestone near Langmorn he obtained an Aviculopecten resem-
* General report upon the Northern district, by R. Daintree (Brisbane : by
Authority, p. 7.)


bling A multiradiatus. In a limestone at Three Moon Creek near
Cania Goldfield he found
Petraia or Cyathophyllum,
Terebratula,
Avicula,
Edmondia.
Collections of fossils from the limestones at Rockhampton, Raglan,
Langmorn, Horton, Cania, Coonigal, &c., have been made by Mr.
James Smith, of Rockhampton, and Mr. Rands, and are now in the
hands of Mr. R. Etheridge, Junr., for determination.
In this region are the gold-fields of Morinish, Ridgelands, Black-
fellow’s Gully, part of Rosewood Goldfield, part of the Crocodile
Goldfield, and the Goldfields of Raglan, Calliope, Cania, Nanango,
Pikedale, Canal Creek, Thane’s Creek, Talgai, and Lucky Valley.
The following Reports, &c., may be referred to for descriptions of
the above fields ;
Progress Report of the Government Geologist for South Queensland. Aplin.
Brisbane : By Authority, 1869.
Report on the Auriferous Country of the Upper Condamine, embracing the
Diggings at Talgai, Thane’s Creek, Canal Creek, and Lucky Valley, by C.
D’Oyley H. Aplin. Brisbane: By Authority, 1869.
Progress Report on a portion of the Rockhampton Mining District, by R.
Daintree. Brisbane :By Authority, 1870.
Report on the Geology of part of the Districts of Wide Bay and Burnett,
by A. C. Gregory. Brisbane: By Authority, 1875.
Geological Features of part of the South-Eastern District of Queensland,
by A. C. Gregory. Brisbane: By Authority, 1879.
Raglan, Calliope and Cania are minutely described by my colleague,
Mr, Rands, in an Official Report (Brisbane : By Authority, 1885).
Hanango is described by him in a Report not yet published. A good
deal of information will be found in the Warden’s Reports, and the
Annual Reports of the Department of Mines.
Copper Lodes are found on the Dee River and at Pikedale. Anti-
mony Sulphides have been extensively worked at Neerdie. Lodes of
Binoxide of Manganese occur at Gladstone, but the market for this
metal is too limited to encourage the working of the mines.
(4) In this division I place, till the production of further evidence,
the
HODGKIHSON GOLDFIELD.
This Goldfield has been described in detail by the writer in a report
to the Minister for Works and Mines (Brisbane : By Authority, 1884),
accompanied by two maps.
The Range known as “ The Granite,” or Hann’s Table-Land,”
divides the goldfield from the slates and schists of the Coast range. It
is possible that the same formation originally extended on both sides
of the granite table-land. If so, the coastward portion has suffered
metaraorphism in a much greater degree than the inland portion.
The latter unquestionably looks newer than the former, and if both


existed side by side, it is not easy to see how one escaped the meta-
morphism which the other underwent. The age of the coastward
slates and schists, however, has not been settled, nor is likely to be
without a more detailed examination than has yet been attempted.
Let this question be settled how it may, the fact remains that the one
region (very little metamorphosed, and presumably the newer, if
there really be any difference) is rich in auriferous reefs, while the
other (highly metamorphosed and presumably the older), though far
from destitute of quartz reefs, contains but a trifling amount of gold.
The stratified rocks of the Hodgkinson vary in fineness from shales
to conglomerates. At the one end of the series the shales consist of
pure blue clay, sometimes (as for instance at the Rob Roy mine)
blackened by carbonaceous matter. The clay is divided into thin
plates or laminae by the planes which mark the pauses in the process
of deposition. Slaty cleavage is not entirely unknown, but it is so
rarely met with, and so uncertain in its direction, that it may be
presumed that pressure of the sort which results in the production of
cleavage has been very feebly exerted. Alternating with the shales
are strata of greywacke, whose materials are essentially the same, but
have not suffered comminution to the same extent. The greywackes
bear to the shales the same relation which sand bears to mud. The
component grains or granules are partly derived from a basic felspar
and partly from a hornblendic rock. The felspatho-hornblendic
matrix contains minute flakes of mica and grains of quartz. The
mica and quartz have apparently been derived from a pre-existing
granite rock. According to the frequency and size of the quartz
grains, the greywackes pass by fine gradations into grits and con-
glomerates. The latter, however, contain, in addition to quartz
pebbles, pebbles of quartzite or hardened siliceous sandstone, porphyry,
Lydian-stone, dark shale, and limestone.
By carefully noting the dip and strike of the strata wherever they
appear at the surface in gully or hill-top, and laying down their degree
and direction on the maps, a tolerably clear idea of the structure of
the goldfield has been obtained. The different strata do not present
such marked characteristics that they can be traced with confidence
for long distances, although some of the conglomerates in Glen
Mowbray have been followed for more than a mile. Conglomerates,
however, are from their very nature —being the product of strong
currents and powerful attrition —apt to be of very local occurrence.
Within the area embraced by the large map (the neigbourhood of
Thornborough and Kingsborough), it will be seen that there is a
marked connection between the geological structure and the physical
features of the field. That this holds equally true of the outside
districts, I have no doubt; but a study in detail of the whole district
would have occupied too much time, and would imply the use of
maps which do not exist, and could only be made with months of
labour in the field.
By following the vermi! lion lines on the maps it will be seen that
the strata strike on the whole from north-west to south-east, their


denuded edges coming to the surface in that direction. The dip is
usually towards the north-east, and at a high angle approaching the
vertical. But the lines denoting the outcrops of the strata, it will be
seen, bend or “ bag ” southward along an axial line passing to the
west of the township of Thornborough. It is impossible to estimate
exactly the thickness of the series of strata to which the Hodgkinson
Goldfield belongs, as neither top nor bottom has yet been detected,
and, moreover, the apparent thickness may be exaggerated by un-
suspected replications among the denuded beds, but a minimum
thickness at least may be arrived at with some confidence by assuming
that, allowing for replications, and even for possible faults, the
average dip to the north-east is no more than 65 degrees. On this
assumption a thickness of 4000 feet may be presumed for the strata
cropping out between the Vermillion line representing the horizon of
the Amy More Mine and the north-east edge of the large scale map,
as measured to the south-east of Kingsborough, Measuring down-
ward from this same horizon at Peak “IST,” in the Mount M‘Gann
Range, south-west-ward to Mount Grant (a line where the apparent
thickness is not affected by the bending or bagging above referred
to) a further thickness of at least 17,000 feet of strata is met with.
The detailed “study in stratigraphy” which the preparation of the
large scale map implies, has revealed nothing to suggest the idea of
any break in the continuity of the deposition of the whole series of at
least 21,000 feet of strata, unless it be the gathering at the head of
Columbia Creek of a portion of the series which, at the mouth of
Caledonia Creek, only five miles distant, measures (at 65 degrees of
estimated average dip) about 10,000 feet, into a space which can
contain (although the strata are vertical) no more than 1300 feet.
But I am inclined to think that the phenomenon may be explained by
a thinning out of the sediments towards the south-east, though
possibly the effect may be aided by a fault having a down-throw to
the north-east.
The nearly parallel valleys of Caledonia Creek (Glen Mowbray) and
the Hodgkinson River are bounded on the right or north-eastern side
by the Mount M‘Gann Range, and on the opposite side by the Mount
Robert Range. These ranges have had their trend determined
indirectly by the forces which compressed the strata of the district
from south-west to north-east, and threw them into long folds from
south-east to north-west. After the strata had been compressed into
nearly as small a compass as they would go into — i.e., till they became
nearly vertical—the further operation of the same pressure resulted
in the formation of fissures along lines of weakness; which lines of
weakness were found in the bedding planes dividing the upturned
strata from one another. These fissures, which are nearly, but not
exactly, parallel with the outcrops of the strata, have been filled with
a rock of great hardness, which, by its power of resisting denudation,
has given rise to the Mount M‘Gann and Mount Robert Ranges.
Both of these ranges occur in zones in which the hard rocks in
question are closely grouped together, while the intervening softer


“country” has been channelled by the Hodgkinson River and
Caledonia Creek into deep valleys.
The material with which the fissures are filled, forms veins or
dykes, from 3 to 40 feet in width, of pure silica, in almost all of its
various forms. It frequently resembles quartzite, and occasionally
passes into ribbon jasper and calcedony. The veins are often so
laminated parallel to their sides as to suggest that they may be beds
rather than veins; but the mode in which they now and then cut
across the adjacent strata, although preserving a general parallelism,
sufficiently disproves this theory. Crystallisation is comparatively
rare, and the lamination seems to imply by no means segregation of
the silica from the surrounding strata, but rather deposition of silica
during the passage of copious sheets of hot water charged with the
mineral in solution. The veins (which they hardly are in the usual
sense of the word), as laid down, in blue, on the map, are very
striking ; but in nature they are more remarkable still. They can be
followed from hill top to hill top, forming at times rough insurmount-
able walls a hundred feet high—as, for example, in the peaks west of
Mount Tenison Woods, In other places denudation has left their
remains on hill sides or hill tops in the form of huge cubes of hard
quartzite, from which the surrounding softer rocks have crumbled
away. These cubes stand up weird and solitary, like the “perched
blocks” of alpine and arctic lands.
The linear persistence of the veins in question is very remarkable.
One, for instance, has been traced (with a few breaks) from Mount
McCann to the head of Tyrconnel Creek, a distance of over 6 miles.
The two veins intersecting Mount Robert have been followed for 4
miles each. In these, and many other cases, the tracing of the veins
was abandoned for no other reason than that the limit of the map had
been reached. Similar veins, it may be here observed, have been
noted by me in the Cloncurry and Leichhardt region, where they
attain still more gigantic proportions. The veins of the Cloncurry
and Hodgkinson resemble the dolerite dykes of Scotland and Ireland
more than the ore-charged reefs of Australia. The Hodgkinson
veins, I have been informed, contain rare and minute quantities of
gold. I have not been able to verify this information, and I suspect
that the gold may have come from reefs adjacent to the veins.
Specular iron ore, brown haematite, and binoxide of manganese, are
not uncommonly found in cavities of the larger veins ; but I have
never seen either in payable quantities.
Regarding the age of the stratified rocks of the Hodgkinson Gold-
field, it may be as well, before reviewing the evidence, to shake our-
selves free of all pre-conceived ideas on the subject. On the
authority of various geologists, the auriferous rocks of Northern
Queensland have had attributed to them ages varying from Lower
Silurian to Devonian. It is not, however, a question of authority,
and the proofs of the age of New South Wales or Gympie rocks have
no bearing on the age of rocks separated by 10 or 12 degrees of
latitude, and whose connection with them has never been treated.


In a conglomerate on the hillside opposite the Glen Mowbray
machine occur some large oval pebbles, or shingles of black shale.
The shingles strongly resemble the graptolite shales of Victoria and
the uplands of the south of Scotland. But they also are quite indis-
tinguishable from the beds of dark shale which lie beside, and
geologically both above and below the conglomerate bed in which
they occur. I split open a great number of the shaly shingles in
search of graptolites, but without success. They yielded, instead, a
number of red-like plant impressions, invariably too indistinct for
determination.
Hear the northern boundary of the township of Thornborough is
the Chance Tunnel. The locality is about a mile south of the con-
glomerate in Glen Mowbray, and the strata cut in the tunnel occupy
a horizon which may be estimated at 4,620 feet below that of the
conglomerate. They consist for the most part of dark-blue shales
(commonly but improperly known as slates) with alternations of hard
gritty greywackes and a few bands of fine conglomerate. The fine-
grained greywackes yielded a “ petrified snake,” which was sent to
the Brisbane Museum, and pronounced by Mr. C. W. De Vis to be a
Lepidodendron, probably L. australe of McCoy. I visited the spot
afterwards and saw some flattened stems and twigs, which may have
belonged to Lepidodendron, but from which all the characteristic
markings had disappeared. My visit left no doubt in my mind
regarding the bona fides of the discovery. T found among the shales
numerous casts of crustacean or molluscan tracks, some reed-like
plant-impressions, and a fragment of carbonised wood.
Even if the shale pebbles, or boulders, or shingle (as the case may
be) of the Glen Mowbray or other similar conglomerate should in
future yield recognisable fossils, I should not necessarily regard the
fossils as “ derived ” from some older formation which had been
upheaved and subjected to denudation during the period marked by
the deposition of the conglomerate. On the contrary, I should believe
the fossils to be of practically contemporaneous origin. I believe the
plant-remains of the Glen Mowbray shingles must have been derived
from a shale bed which formed a part of the same formation. In my
field experience nothing is more certain than that fragments of a
shale bed will be found in any succeeding bed of conglomerate. The
explanation is, I believe, to be found in the sun, drying and peeling
off of flakes of the shale and their subsequent partial rounding by
attrition. I say this by way of caution against hasty conclusions
from future discoveries. In the very probable event, for instance,
of the disco very in shale shingles of a determinable fossil—say
Lepidodendron australe , the conclusion would be that the conglomerate
containing the shingle was deposited in a geological age subsequent
to the deposition of the shale containing Lepidodendron australe. This
conclusion would be erroneous.
At the intersection of the road from Thornborough to Glen Mow-
bray with that which leads up to the Pioneer and Tichborne mines,
is the outcrop of a bed of conglomerate in which pebbles up to 6 or 8


inches in diameter are packed in a matrix of greywacke. Of these
some are greywacke, the majority quartz, and a fair proportion blue
coralline limestone. Similar limestone pebbles are found in con-
glomerates in a number of places —■ e.g ., on the hill west of the City of
Dublin reef, on the roadside in Glen Mowbray, near the junction of
the Thornborough and Kingsborough roads, in the gully west of the
shambles in Glen Mowbray, and in Tyrconnel Creek north of the
Honest Lawyer.
As in the case of the shale pebbles of the Glen Mowbray conglome-
rate, I considered it very doubtful whether the fossils in the limestone
pebbles were really “ derived ” from an older formation.* In this
view I was subsequently confirmed by the discovery, about a mile and
a-half south-west of Beaconsfield, of a conglomerate with similar
pebbles containing similar fossils, almost immediately adjoining a
limestone bed which had been quarried for mortar for the Antimony
Smelting Works at Northcote. This bed is vertical, four feet at least
in thickness, and strikes north-north-west, as do all the strata in the
neighbourhood. The limestone was found to contain a number of
shells and corals, but among these I could only recognise a Betzia and
Gyathophyllum helianthoides, Goldf.
The corals, which weather out in relief from the limestone pebbles
of the conglomerates, may therefore be ranked as contemporaneous
with the strata of the goldfield. They include, I believe, many genera
common to the Reid limestone, and the Burdekin limestone. Betzia
radialis, Phillips, occur in the Star beds. Another species ( 1 1'. Salteri)
is met with in Yarralumla (Yass beds, N.S.W.) Cyathophyllum
helianthoides has been recognized in the Yass beds.
The Star beds are characterised by the occurrence of Lepidodendron
australe, McCoy, which has never been traced in Queensland, upward
into the productive portion of the Coal measures. It will thus be
seen that according to the palaeontological evidence the homotaxis of
the Hodgkinson rocks may be anywhere, from Upper Silurian to Lower
Carboniferous. The Lower Carboniferous appears to have the
strongest claim, according to the plant-remains, while the corals seem
to favour more the Lower Devonian. The Hodgkinson strata, on the
other hand, have suffered greater metamorphism and disturbance
than the Star beds, and less than the Burdekin and Reid beds. They
are, I suspect, part of the missing strata between the Star and the
Reid beds.
The auriferous reefs are well defined, and are divisible into two groups
or orders. Those of the first group coincide in their strike with the
strike of the strata in which they occur. To this group belong the
Tasmanian, North Star, Outward Bound, Amy Moore, Vulcan,
Britannia, Caledonia, Forget-me-Not, Von Moltke, Lady Mary, Mark
Twain, Rob Roy, Garry Owen, Tyrconnel, Black Prince, Henry
Grattan, Commodore, Lizzie Redmond, Hero, Pioneer, Hope, and
others. In all the members of this group a general law may be
* See Report of the Dept, of Mines for the year 55.


To end of
year 1877
OUNCES.
... 59,516
5?
1878
... 44,435
55
1879
... 33,675
55
1880
... 25,096
55
1881
... 15,308
55
1882
• ••
... 12,495
55
1883
... 7,505
55
1884
7,245
observed. They underlie at right angles to the dip of the strata.
This circumstance can only mean that the fissures were produced by
the same pressure that upturned the .strata. Each stratum would
break along a plane of least resistance, which would be found at right
angles to the planes of bedding.
The second group which comprises the Bismarck, King Atilla, Lady
Anne, Providence, Flying Pig, Tichborne, Idaho, Explorer, Great
Northern, Devon and Cornwall, Empress of India, Alliance, Mowbray,
Honest Lawyer, Fourth-of-July, Columbia, and Eureka, runs mainly
north and south, and at right angles to the lines which denote the
outcrops of the stratified rocks. Their underlie is always to the
east. It is probable that they belong to a period subsequent to the
first series of fissures.
The gold occurs in a matrix of laminated quartz, without much
pyrites or galena (except in the case of some of the mines of the eastern
Hodgkinson). There is, consequently, little difference in the produc-
tiveness of the stone above and below the water level. Blanks are
met with here and there in most of the reefs — i.e., spaces containing
neither gold nor quartz, but only a brecciated gangue of sandstone
and shale fragments. The gold almost always recurs in rather narrow
“shoots,” most of which die out (although the quartz may continue)
at less than 400 feet in depth. There is, however, no reason to doubt
that at greater depths other shoots will yet be discovered.
In addition to the reefs around the township of Thornborough and
Kingsborough, Deep Creek, Woodville, the Eastern Hodgkinson, and
Northcote are or have been important centres of mining industry.
Antimony lodes occur at Woodville and Northcote. At the latter
large smelting works have been erected.
The following returns of the yield of gold from the Hodgkinson
are taken from the Annual Report of the Department of Mines for
1884. The returns from the Mulgrave Goldfield are included:—
The returns include a quantity of alluvial gold, which gi'adually
decreased from the first year. The field is at present in a depressed
condition.
(”5) The Palmer Goldfield presents the same features as the
Hodgkinson and is probably of the same age ; but as it has not yet
been geologically mapped, I cannot describe it. It has several beds
of limestone, but these appear to have proved hitherto unfossiliferous.
The Palmer has produced a larger quantity of alluvial gold than any


other field in the colony. The returns are given in the report of the
Department of Mines for 1884 as follows ;
OUNCES.
To end of year 1877 ... ... ... ... 839,000
1878 120,233
1879 90,000
1880 65,433
1881 51,960
1882 37,339
1883 24-089
1884 15 637
CHAPTER 111.
DOTSWOOD BEDS.
The limestone of the Fanning River is the lowest bed of a basin of
stratified deposits. These consist for the most part of grey, brown,
and greenish flaggy sandstones and gx-eenish shales. A few beds are
white and well suited for building purposes. From one of the white
beds I obtained a single specimen of a plant, which I submitted to
Sir J. William Dawson. It proved to be a new species of the genus
Dicranophyllum and was described as D. australicuvi. *
The upper portion of the Fanning limestone (a calcareous shale)
contains impressions of the same plant.
The sandstones containing the above plant are the lowest beds of
the “ Dotswood” series described by me in 1879. f
In Keelbottom Valley, near Dotswood, the strata of this formation
dip to the east at 30 degs., and form distinct ridges across the road
and in the bed of the river. Taking into account its high dip and
the extent of ground occupied by its outcrop, the series must be some
thousands of feet in thickness. Beds of brown felspathic sandstone
alternate with conglomerates and red (white-spotted) shales. The
conglomerates contain pebbles up to 6 inches in diameter, the majority
of which are of pink porphyry, a few being of hardened white sand-
stone or quartzite The porphyry pebbles, as well as the felspathic
sandstones and the gritty felspathic matrix of the conglomerates,
clearly prove that the deposit was derived, as a whole, from the waste
of volcanic or metamorphic materials. It bears a striking resemblance
to the lower old red beds of Perthshire, Scotland.
* Note on New Brian (Devonian) Plants, Q.J.G.S. 37, p. 306.
t Report on the Geological and Mineral Resources of the District between
Charters Towers and the Coast. Brisbane, 1879.


The beds on the left hank of the Burdekin, opposite Dalrymple, are
of a character essentially similar to those of Dotswood. They consist
of reddish and chocolate-coloured sandstones, which are often cross-
bedded, and sometimes flaggy, with faint ripple marks. In places
they enclose little pellets of chocolate-coloured shale. Bull ferru-
ginous spots are common in the interior of the sandstone. The
shales are occasionally greenish, but the red and chocolate-coloured
beds predominate. The red and chocolate-coloured shales frequently
weather spheroidally, and are dotted with white spots.
The little hill called Mount Keelbottom consists of a pale pinkish
porphyry, with a base of acidic felspar, crystals of orthoclase felspar,
and water-clear blebs of quartz. The porphyry has a quasi-schistose
structure, especially noticeable on weathered surfaces. The same
features may be observed in the hill immediately opposite Dalrymple,
where a series of escarpments coincides in direction with the outcrop
of the sandstone beds. It is more than likely that the porphyry is a
metamorphosed volcanic tuff. Whether it is interbedded with the
sandstone strata, or is of older date, is a question which I am not
prepared to answer at present.
A visit to the Keelbottom River, in June, 1879, enabled me to
include, in the Dotswood beds, the greater part of the Keelbottom
Valley up to the junction of Speed Creek, and a considerable portion
of the hilly region known as Table Top Downs. Leaving the east-
ward bend of the Keelbottom River, between the Plum Tree Inn and
Speed Creek, to ascend the hill on the eastern side of the valley,
several low-ridges are crossed, composed of grey-greenish and brown-
ish sandstones, dipping at about 30 degrees to east-south-east. The
sandstones are generally in not very thick beds, are hard and tough,
and occasionally weather spheroidally. Some of the red beds are
easily recognisable as having been derived from the waste of the
granite. All the sandstones have a greater or less admixture of
felspathic granules with the siliceous. Towards the base of the hill
the sandstones become more conglomeratic than in the valley, the
pebbles being of porphyry, quartzite, quartz, and various metamorphic
rocks (gneiss, slate, &c.) The steep slope of the hill is of conglo-
merate. Rear the top is a thick corspicuous stratum of yellow cross-
bedded sandstone, capped by amygdaloidal dolerite, about 10 feet in
thickness. The dolerite is again surmounted by yellow sandstone.
The strata, when followed in ascending order at right angles to their
outcrops, become gradually more and more mixed up with trappean
beds (varying from dolerites to porphyrites) till, towards the
Panning, the intercalated sandstones are scarcely met with. These
ancient lava beds, especially the porphyrites, are cupriferous over a
wide area. Large masses of native copper are found in the Keel-
bottom Copper Mine.


CHAPTER IV.
GYMPIE BEDS.
The County Each, of the Gympie Goldfield, is a series of strata
on the eastern side of the Mary River, dipping at an average angle of
22 deg. a little to the north of east, with a regularity more frequently
met with in coalfields than in Australian goldfields. The uppermost
bed of the auriferous series is a limestone, at least ten feet in thick-
ness, which can he traced from the railway line, near the cemetery,
to the South Glanmire Block. The grey shales and sandstones, under
which the limestone disappears to the east, appear to he entirely out
of the goldfield. Below the limestone, however, to the west, the out-
crop of a zone of rocks, intersected by a number of auriferous reefs,
has given rise to a mining industry of great importance.
The rocks in question consist chiefly of grey shales, black pyritous
shales, greywackes, sandstones, grits, and conglomerates. The sand-
stones are often slightly calcareous ; the conglomerates are a mass of
pebbles or boulders of all sizes up to a foot in diameter. These are
generally well rounded, but in many cases the angular condition of
the fragments in the grits and conglomerates suggests a volcanic
origin. It is remarkable that the strata of the field present alternations
of sedimentary rocks, which have undergone no alteration, with others
which have become indurated and semi-crystalline.
The presence of “ greenstone ” has been a stumbling-block and a
bugbear to the miners since first they were pointed out by Daintree
and Aplin. The evil has increased in the course of years, owing to
the tendency to conclude that green stone was “ greenstone.” A short
visit to the field, in July last, satisfied me that whatever may have
been meant by “ greenstone ” in the earlier days, the term is now
applied indiscriminately by many of the miners, and some geologists,
to varieties of volcanic ash (?), sandstones, and greywackes having a
greenish tint, but presenting, in a greater or less degree, the granular
texture characteristic of sedimentary rocks. One geologist, several
years ago, published a map in which the whole of the strata of the
field were ingeniously divided into “ Eossiliferous Greenstone,” and
“ Unfossil if erous Greenstone.”
During my visit to the field, I saw a few instances in which
“ greenstone ” (not in dykes) could hardly be attributed to the meta-
morphism of sedimentary rocks, and appeared, from its relation to the
latter, to be really intrusive. It is a dark green crystalline rock, which
probably was a dolerite or diorite, but even in microscopic sections
it is much “ masked ” by viridite.
The richest deposits of gold occur in the reefs where the latter
intersect “ black slate ” country. This is so well recognised that the
fact has influenced the system of mining on the field. For pros-
pecting purposes, a vertical shaft is generally sunk in the vicinity of a
reef, till it strikes a band of black slate. A crosscut is then driven to


To end of year
1877 ...
OUNCES.
... 625,000
55
1878 ...
... 41,564
55
1879 ...
... 38,453
55
1880 ...
... 43,072
55
1881 ...
... 67,861
55
1882 ...
... 50,312
55
1883 ...
... 64,812
55
1884 ...
... 112,051
55
1885 ...
... 86,832
catch the reef. Four principal zones or horizons of hlack slate are
recognised on the field.
The majority of the principal reefs, such as the Great Eastern,
Glanmire, Columbia, Wiltshire, Sraithfield, Wilraott, Phoenix, March,
Golden Crown, Maori, Alma, Lady Mary, Caledonia, Hilton, Cali-
fornia, Hil Desperandum, Louisa, Perseverance, Excelsior, and Alliance,
have a general north, or north-north-west bearing, and underlie to the
east, with an inclination which is nearly at right angles to the dip of
the strata. The Helen Harkins has a north and south bearing, but
underlies to the west at 65 deg.
The most important cross reefs are the Monkland, which bears
north-west, and underlies south-west, and the Inglewood, which bears
north-north-west, and underlies north-north-east.
The matrix of the gold is generally quartz, and not unfrequently
calcite.
Two shafts are within a few feet of 1,000 feet in vertical depth;
two more are to be sunk, with the aid of a Government subsidy, to
1,000 feet.
A second bed of limestone is seen on the right bank of the Mary,
near the mouth of Tucker’s Gully, and appears to be nearly at the
base of the auriferous strata. *
The field is disturbed by several important faults. One of these, in
the line of Phoenix Street, I have calculated from the horizontal
“ throw ” of the upper limestone, to have a downthrow of 528 feet to
the north.
Hone of the reefs on the north side of this flat are recognised with
certainty on the south side. A map of the reefs, constructed with
great skill and care by Mr. Harry Rosser, has recently been published
by the Government.
The yield of gold from Gympie, from its opening in 1867, is given
in the “Annual Reports of the Department of Mines ” as follows :
Many of the articles published by the Gympie press contain valuable
information regarding the peculiarities of the mines, and deserve a
better fate than the ephemeral currency of a newspaper. The follow-
ing official reports may be consulted on the geological and mining
features of the Gympie goldfield:—
Report of the Government Geologist for South Queensland (C. D’Oyly H.
Aplin), Brisbane : By Authority, 1868. Report on the Geology of the Districts
of Wide Bay and Burnet; by A. C. Gregory, Brisbane: By Authority, 1875.


Daintree’s paper on the Geology of Queensland contains notes on Gympie.
Professor Liversidge has made an analysis of the Gympie “greenstone,” which
is given in the Transactions of the Royal Society of New South Wales, Bth
December, 1880.
Mr. Daintree’s collection from the Gympie goldfield formed the
subject of a valuable paper by Mr. Robert Etheridge, senior.* He
describes the following fossils :
POLYZOA.
Fenestella fossula , Lonsdale.
Ceriopora laxa, Eth.
BEACHIOPODA.
Productus cora, D’Orb.
Spirifera bisulcata, Sow. var. acuta.
~ vespestilio, Sow.
„ dubia, Eth.
~ undifera, var. undulata, Romer.
Strophomena rhomboidalis, var. analog a, Phillips.
LAMELLIBEANCHIATA.
Aviculopecten limaeformis , Morris, sp.
~ imbricatus, Eth.
multiradiatus, Eth.
Edmondia concentrica, Eth.
~ obovata, Eth.
GASTEROPODA.
Plurotomaria carinata, Sow.
Euomphalus, sp.
In McCoy’s Prodromus of the Palaeontology of Victoria (Decade I.
p. 38) the author refers to his Lepidodendron australe (the same
plant which was described by Carruthers as L. nothum Unger) as
having been found at Gympie. There appears, however, to be a
mistake here, as Mr. Carruthers describes the plant without mention-
ing any locality more definite than “ Queensland,”f while Mr.
Daintree refers to the specimens sent to Mr. Carruthers as coming"
from “ Mount Wyatt, Canoona, and the Broken River.” We may,
therefore, leave Lepidodendron australe out of the question as affecting
the age of the Gympie beds.
Mr. Daintree, on lithological, and Mr. Etheridge, on palaeontological
grounds, agree in regarding the Gympie beds as Devonian. Mr.
Etheridge’s list, however, when closely analysed, appears to point to
a different conclusion.
Of the 14 fossils specifically determined by Mr. Etheridge,J six are
* Q.J.G.S.L. xxviii., p. 317.
t Q. J. G. S. xxviii., p. 350.
J Ceriopora (?) laxa , Eth., Spirifera dubia, Aviculopecten, imbricatus, Eth., A
multiradiatus, Eth., Edmondia concentrica, Eth., and E. obovata, Eth.


of species either new or doubtful ;* four are European carboniferous.
Onef of the new species is most nearly allied to an Irish carboni-
ferous species. OneJ ranges in Europe from Silurian to carboni-
ferous, while only one§ is exclusively Devonian. The balance of
evidence appears to be much in favour of a homotaxial relation with
the European carboniferous.
In their paper on “ Palaeozoic Corals from Northern Queensland” ||
Messrs. Nicholson and Etheridge, Junior, describe anew species of the
genus Stenopora from Gympie.
The late Rev. W. B. Clanked gives the following list of fossils
“ capable of identification” from Gympie.
Nucula.
Fenestella.
Solarium.
Spirifera.
Orthonota.
Edmondia.
Stenopora.
Producta.
In an appendix (xvi. c) to Mr Clarke’s “ Sedimentary formations”
Piof. de Koninck adds Spirifer Strzlecleii, de K , to the Gympie list.
I have recently sent to Mr. Robert Etheridge,' Junior, a large
collection from Gympie. The fossils have not yet been named, but
Mr. Etheridge writes me that he inclines to regard them as mainly
carboniferous.
In his Fossil Flora of the Coal Deposits of Australia ” (p. 99),
the Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods adds to the list a plant like Cordaites
australis, M‘Coy; and (p. 119) Cordaites australis , M‘Coy (?). The
latter is also found in the Drummond Range, at Bogantungan.
The following fossils from Gympie are in the Queensland Museum,
Brisbane:—
Pecten, sp.
Heliolites porosa, or Heliopora, or Astrcea porosa, Goldf.
Alveolites vermicularis, M‘Coy.
Pleurotomaria rotunda, Eth.
Streptorynchus Davidsoni, Eth.
Spirifera, all. to S. bisulcata, Sow.
S. „ S. striata, Sow.
S. convoluta, Phillips.
Streptorhynchus ( Orthotetes ) crenistria, Phill. 1
1 Common in the Bowen River Coalfield,
* Productus cora, D’Orb., Spirifera hisculata, Sow., Aviculopecten limaeformis,
Morris, and Pleurotomaria carinata, Sow.
t Ceriopora laxa
X Strophomena rhomboidalis, var. anal. Phillips.
§ Spirifera undifera, var. undulata. Eomer.
|| Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist, for October, 1879, p. 276.
IT Sedimentary formations of New South Wales, Fourth Edition, 1878, p. 20.


Atrypa ( Spiriferina ) reticularis, Homer.
Productus longispinus, Sow.
Athyris concentrica, Vox’Buch.
BtringocepTialus Burtini, De France.
Astrcea porosa.
In Mr. Rands’ “ Report on the Goldfields of Raglan, &c.”
(Brisbane: By Authority. 1885), reference is made to a series of
limestones and sandstones close to Yanot Station, containing the
following fossils. So many are common to the Gympie beds that it
seems advisable to class the deposit as of the same age :
POLYZOA.
Fenestella.
Betepora.
Geriopora.
BEACHIOPODA.
Spirifera undifera.
S. Undata ?
Strophomena rhomboidalis.
S. sp.
Productus.
Bhynchonella.
LAMELLIBEANCHIATA.
Aviculopecten.
GASTEEOPODA.
Fleur otomaria.
CEPHALOPODA.
Casts of Orthoceras, with central siphuncle.
Some Mates containing fenestella, &c., from the Training Wall
Quarries, Rockhampton, forwarded by Mr. James Smith, so much
resemble some of the Gympie beds that, in the meantime, I map a
small area as of the same age.
CHAPTER Y.
STAR BEDS.
The Star Basin forms a small area (about 36 square milesj at the
junction of the Big and Little Star Rivers, tributaries of the Upper
Burdekin. Disposed with only a gentle dip, and consisting of
unaltered stratified rocks, it forms a striking contrast to the surround-
ing granites, gneisses, slates, and schists. The latter, occurring


between the Star and Keelbottom Rivers, and forming the “ country
rock ” of the Star Goldfield, and the now much better-known silver-
field of Argentine, as well as the stanniferous porphyry of Running
Creek, are of much older date than the rocks named by me, in 1878,
the “ Star Beds.”
The base of the Star beds is a coarse, hard siliceous sandstone or
grit, with quartz pebbles. This grit is well seen in a hill to the
south of the road, miles south-south-east of the Star Station, over-
lying the granite of the comparatively low country, and dipping to
the west at an angle of 120 degrees, the grit presents an escarpment
to the east, which rises to the height of about 200 feet. A good
section of the same beds is seen in Horse Creek —their total thickness
cannot be less than 300 feet.
I estimate the total thickness of the Star Beds at 1,200 feet.
From a careful survey made in 1878, I am enabled to furnish the
following table of strata :
Feet.
Green shales, and fine hard calcareous sandstones (Little Star River, at
ford on Coppermine road) ... ... ... ... ... 20
Coarse conglomerate (Little Star River, at mouth of Horse Creek) ... 15
G ap ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
Shales and dark-blue sandstones (Horse Creek, south of station paddock) 20
Horse Creek, near crossing of Star road [ Calcareous sandstone and shales* 20
° ( Thin limestones* ... ... 5
Cap 30
Coarse conglomerate (Little Star River, north of ford, on Copper Mine
road)... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
Cap 35
X ["Blue shales, with ironstone noddules,* and thin limestone bands ... 85
® Thin, hard calcareous sandstone and shales* ... ... ... 65
g Thin, hard sandstone and shales ... ... ... ... 40
id , Cap ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
1 Sandstone and shales, confused ... ... ... ... iqo
g Good blue limestone ... ... ... ... ... 3
o Shales and hard sandstone* ... ... ... ... 20
LHard sandstone, in part weathering spheroidally ... ... 25
Probable gap ... ... ... ... ... 25
C Hard, yellow sandstone, calcareous band, and hard shale 15
Brock’s Creek, j Gap ... ... ... ... 10
(.Limestone ... ... ... ... 22
Probable gap ... ... ... ... gg
Green shales* (Corner Creek) ... ... ... ... 20
Sandstone (Mouth of Sandy Creek) ... 20
Gap ... ... ... ... ..’ "■ 35
Bluish Calcareous shales* (West fork of Sandy Creek, near Grave) 15
cap _ :::
••• ••• ... ... ... ... . 190
Grits and conglomerates (Horse Creek, and hill to south. Dinner Creek’
and Little Star River Granite) ... ... ... 300
Total
... 1,200
The beds in the above table marked with an asterisk have proved
fossiliferous. L
Mr. Robert Etheridge, jun., furnished a report, in 1878, on my
collection of fossils, which has, however, never been published, as I


have long cherished the idea of procuring a more extensive collection.
Mr. Carruthers, of the British Museum, examined and named the
plants. The following is their list: —
Lepidodendron nothum (Unger) ? Carruthers.
(L. Australe, McCoy.)
Plant, allied to Cyclostigma.
Catamites ?
ECHINODERMATA.
Crinoid stems, Indet.
POLYZOA.
Fenestella.
ACTINOZOA.
Corals, Indet.
BRACHIOPODA.
Spirifera Urei, Fleming 1
1 Not distinguishable from the British carboniferous species ( 8. Urei.
Fleming), more especially the Devonian variety, unguieula, Phillips.
Spirifera , allied to S. bisulcata, Sowerhy 2
2 A carboniferous species.
Spiriferina, sp.
Athyris, sp. like A. piano sulcata, Phillips.
Retzia, sp., allied to R. radialis, 3 Phillips.
s A carboniferous species.
Strophomena rhomboidalis, Wilck (?)
Orthis, species 1, large common form, resembling 0. resupinata,*
Martin.
4 Carboniferous
Orthis, species 2, small form, resembling Streptorhynchus.
Chonetes, sp. 1, like G. Hardriensis, Phillips.
Chonetes, sp. 2, resembling C. Hardriensis, Phillips (Davidson)
and C. polita, McCoy.
Ehynchonella (?) spr
LAMELLIBRANCHIATA.
Aviculopecten, sp. 1.
„ sp. 2.
„ sp. 3.
„ sp. 4, section Eilchondria.
Entolium, sp. near E, Sowerbii, 5 McCoy.
5 Carboniferous.
Leda ( Nuculana ) sp. near Nuculana bellistriata, Stevens, Gardio
mospha or Posidonomya.
GASTEROPODA.
Natica (= Naticopsis, McCoy) sp. allied to N. variata, Phillips.
Natica or Macrocheilus, sp.


Kiiomphalus (?)
Bellerophon sp.
Porcellia puzio, Leveille.
Loxonema or Murchisonia.
CEPHALOPODA.
Orthoceras, sp. 1
„ sp. 2
CRUSTACEA (TRILOBITA).
Phillipsia (?)
In addition to the above, which have been determined by Messrs.
Etheridge, junior, and Carruthers, Mr. Philip W. Pears, lately Warden
of the Ravenswood Groldfield, has presented to the Survey Collection
a number of specimens from Corner Creek, the locality which yielded
to me the greater part of the fossils included in the above list. Mr.
Pears’ collection includes two well-marked specimens of Lepidodendron
australe, McCoy, Knorria, like K. imbricata, Sternberg.* Betzia,
Spirifera (identical with that described by Mr. Etheridge as allied to
8. hisulcata, Sow.) an impression of part of an encrinite, a coral or
fenestella, and a perfect specimen of Phillipsia , Portlock, the latter
bearing out the conjecture of Mr. Etheridge.
In “ Mines and Mineral Statistics of Clew South Wales,” 1875, p.
132, Mr. Wilkinson observes that “ below the Lower Marine beds of
the Hunter district are beds of shales and sandstones, with several
species of Gyclopteris, Knorria, Sigillaria, Stigmaria, Lepidodendron,
&c. They occur near to, and probably in association with, beds of
marine fossils, which have been described as Lower Carboniferous.”
There is every probability bf the identity of these Hew South
Wales fossiliferous beds with the Star beds. As the former lie beneath
the Hunter River beds (= our Bowen River series), there is a little
difficulty in assigning to the Star beds a lower horizon than that of
the Bowen River coalfield —a position warranted by the palaeontolo-
gical evidence.
MT. WYATT.
“ Slightly inclined grits and sandstones of the Upper Devonian
Lepidodendron beds, rest on the upturned edges of a series of blue
and grey slates and shales, which have yielded fossils determined by
Prof. McCoy, and were referred by him to the Upper Silurian.”f
CANOONA.
As Daintree mentions that Lepidodendron nothum —( L. australe,
McCoy) was found at Canoona, a small area is coloured on the map
as the equivalent of the “ Star Beds.”
BROKEN RIVER.
Daintree refersj to the Broken River as one of the localities from
* Lower coal measures, Arkansas.
f Daintree. “ General Report upon the Northern District. Brisbane :By
Authority, 1870, p. 7.
X Q. J- G. S., London, vol. 28, p. 289.


which Mr. Carruthers detected Lepidodendron nothum, Unger—
(L. Australe, McCoy). It maybe surmised that the Lepidodendron
beds occnr in a horizon equivalent to that of the Star beds, and
separable from the beds which have yielded the corals described by
Mr. R Ethexudge, Senior. (Burdekin Beds.)
DEUMMOND EANGE.
The Central Railway affords admirable sections of the strata of the
Drummond Range. Three miles and a half east of Pine Hills station
(248 f mile peg), yellow gritty sandstones and shales are seen dipping
at 7 degs. to the west, a dip which would carry them beneath the
desert sandstone.
At 243 miles similar sandstones dip to the south at 12 degs.
From Hannam’s Gap (235 miles) to Bogantungan (227 miles) the
strata consists of finely laminated fine-grained blue-grey sandstone,
and blue, grey, and greenish, and occasionally purple shales. Thick
beds of hard gritty white, yellow, or bi’own siliceous sandstone occur
at intervals. From Hannam’s Gap to Bogantungan the strata, dip at
an average angle of about 2 degs. to the east (a little steeper than the
grade of the railway). At Bogantungan is the centre of a synclinal
trough, and as far eastward as Withersfield the dip is towards the
west. The total thickness of the series is probably not less than
2000 feet.
Lithologically, the rocks of the Drummond Raxxge do not, as a
whole, bear a very strong resemblance to the Star beds ; but their
fossils appear to place them on the same horizon. It is, however,
possible tlxat the Dotswood beds may' be partly represented in the
Drummond Range. The following list is taken from the Rev. J. E.
Tenison-Wood’s “ Fossil Flora of the Coal Deposits of Australia,” and
his reporlrto the Minister .for Lands on “ Coal on the Central Railway,”
(Queensland, 7th August, 1883) :
Lepidodendron australe , McCoy (Bogantungan).
Knorriastadium (f)’(Drummond Range).
Cordaites australis , McCoy (?) (Bogantungan).
Cyclostigma australis.
Stigmaria (Gyclostigma ) (?) (Drummond Range).
Catamites radians.
G. varians.
Fexm resembling Neuropteris gigantea, Sternb. (Bogantungan).


CHAPTER VI.
BOWEN EIYEB AND OTHER COALFIELDS.
The series of rocks culminating in the Bowen River Coalfield
commences with a thick bed of coarse volcanic agglomerate, seen
near the head of Pelican Creek. It forms a hill, which presents a
steep escarpment to the north, and a gentler slope to the south. The
escarpment is traceable for some distance to the west and north-west.
The agglomerate is made up of angular, or but little rounded,
pebbles and boulders of porphyrite and dolerite, and rests on an
uneven surface of granite.
What I have named the Lower Series (I) of the coalfield is com-
posed mainly of white and yellow sandstones, with some beds of
conglomerate. The latter contains pebbles of quartzijbe and yellow
porphyry, derived from the adjacent metamorphic country. A few
are of porphyrite. The thickness of the series is estimated at 880
feet.
The lower series passes beneath the bedded trappean rocks of
Mount Toussaint, Mount Divlin, and Mount Macedon, which are
described under the heading “ Basalt, Diorite, &c.
The Middle or Marine Series (II.) of the coalfield overlies the
trappean beds, without any mark of a serious break in the continuity
of deposition. The trappean and sedimentary beds have been
disturbed from their originally horizontal position, at the same period
and in the same degree. The activity of the volcanic forces must
have considerably diminished before the deposition of the marine
series began, for neither lavaform nor ashy beds occur again in the
history of the coalfield. But that the volcanic activity of the district
in question did not entirely cease for a long time is proved by the
fact that molten rocks of the dolerite type were again and again
injected along lines of weakness in the sedimentary rocks.
I estimate the total thickness of the marine series at 1,848 feet.
The series consist of alternations of grey and yellow sandstones, and
blue and grey shales, with here and there bands of reddish ferru-
ginous (probably once calcareous) sandstones, sometimes varying to
sandy, impure ironstones. The ferruginous sandstones are store-
houses of marine fossils, which occur also, though more sparingly, in
the shales and grey sandstones. In the latter, the shells are almost
always calcareous, and contrast strongly with the siliceous and
felspathic sandstone matrix. In the ferruginous sandstones, on the
other hand, the fossils are always casts. The shales and grey sand-
stones are frequently pierced by rootlets, in the position in which they
grew. A few beds of conglomerate are met with, chiefly in the
lower portion of the series. The included pebbles are generally of
granite, slate, schist, quartzite, &c., with a few of porphyrite. The
pebbles, which are not always well rounded, have a remarkable
tendency to arrange themselves in groups or heaps, as if they had


been dropped from the floating roots of trees, or, more probably, from
floating ground-ice. Large isolated boulders of granite, &c., occur
here and there in the midst of strata of fine sandy or muddy material.
Portions of the silicified trunks of coniferous trees are occasionally
found lying horizontally in the strata.
Three seams of coal (besides some carbonaceous beds, hardly
deserving the name,) are seen in Pelican Creek. One, the Garrick,
is 4 ft. 7 in. in thickness. It is partly burnt by an intrusive sheet of
“ white trap.” Where it is least affected by the igneous rock, it is a
fair bituminous coal, but contains a good deal of sulphur.
About 20 ft. below the Garrick seam, a second seam is seen in the
bed of the creek. It is 1 ft. 9 in. thick, with two bands of clay, each
1 inch thick. This seam is clean and fresh, and has been used for
steam purposes in the pumping engine attached to the diamond drill,
for which purpose it has proved well adapted.
A bore (No. 1) was put down with the diamond drill last year, at
the expense of the Government, under the direction of Mr. S. Hester,
on the left bank of Pelican Creek. I examined the cores, and made
a section, of which the following is an abstract:—
FEET. INCHES.
Loam and Clay ... 4 0
Loose Rock ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 0
Fine-grained buff micaceous Sandstone 61 0
Mud seam, hardening downwards into black micaceous
Shale 1 0
Fine-grained dark grey micaceous Sandstone, with Plant
impressions ... ' 0 6
Dark sandy Shale ... ... 0 6
Soft Clay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 1
Soft Coal (no core) ... ... ... h ... ... 1 0
Burnt Coal f Garrick Seam 1 6
Mixed white Clay and Pyrites > Gamete seam 0
Burnt Coal ... ... ... ... J ... ... 2 4£
Fire Clay 0 1
Sandstones with streaks of carbonaceous Shale ... ... 33 11
Conglomerate ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 0 3
Gritty Freestone, with carbonaceous streaks and Plant
impressions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 70 9
Fine-grained grey Shaley Sandstone... ... ... ... 4 0
Burnt Coal 2 0
Clay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 1
Coal (inflammable) ... ... ... ... ... ••• 1 0
Clay 0 1
Burnt Coal ... 2 9
White Trap 0 8
Dolerite ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 0 8
Sandstone and Conglomerate ... ... ... ... ... 0 6
Coal 3 4
Fine-grained blueish-grey and shaley Sandstone, with a
coaly streak ... ... ..£K 19 11
Coal, good (no core) ... ... ... ... ... ••• 0 6
Gritty Sandstone with dark streaks ... •••if ••• ••• 69 6
Coal, good (no core) ' 0 3
Carried forward ... ... ... ... 286 3


FEET. INCHES.
Brought forward... ... ... ... ••• 286 3
Dark blue Shale and burnt Coal, occasionally shaley, and
full of Pyrites ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 2 3
White Trap, passing downwards into Dolerite 0 6
Dolerite ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 5 0
White Trap, involving Coal ... •• • 4 0
Blue-black Shale with Coal streaks and Glossopteris ... 5 0
Black Shale with Plant remains 1 6
Dolerite, involving Coal 2 0
Burnt Coal 0 6
White Trap and burnt Coal 0 9
Calcite Geode with Pyrites Crystals „ ••• 0
Burnt Coal ••• 0 01
White Trap ... . 0 01
Burnt Coal ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 1 2
Black Shale with 6f lossopteris ... ... ... ... ... 0 6
Coal, good ... ... 5 51
Breccia of fragments of hard white Clay and black Shale
with coaly streaks 6 7
Coal, good ... 0 2
Black Shale 3 3
Coal, good ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 0 6
Black Shale with Plant remains 3 6
Coal, good ' »... 0 1
Black Shale with Plant remains 0 11
Coal, good ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 6
Black Shale with Plant remains and Breccia 7 8
Dolerite, passing into white Trap at top and bottom ... 1 10
t... 0 1
Black Shale with Plant remains ... ... ... ... 2 2
Breccia 1 1
Coaly layer ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 5
Black Shale with Plant remains ... ... 0
No record ... 6 8
Amygdaloidal Porphyrite of the bedded Trappean series,
between series i. and n. ... ... ... ... ... 39 6
390 6
The most interesting feature of this bore is the presence, at the
base, of the marine series, of a considerable thickness of strata, con-
taining Glossopteris, and undoubtedly on a lower horizon than the
sandstone overlying the Garrick seam, which contains marine fossils.
Near the “ Garrick ” seam, but apparently divided from it by a fault,
is the “ Kennedy ” seam, I foot 6 inches in thickness. Its position in
the series is probably higher than that of the Garrick seam, but,
owing to the supposed fault, this is uncertain.
The Lower , or Marine series , corresponds lithologically and palaeon-
tologically with the “ Upper Marine beds, Lower Coal measures, and
Lower Marine beds ” of the New South Wales Coal measures.*
The Upper (mainly Freshwater) Series (ill.) of the Bowen coalfield,
is exposed in Jack’s Creek, the Bowen River, from the mouth of
* See “Mines and Mineral Statistics of New South Wales, 1865,” and the
Rev. W. B. Clarke “On the Sedimentary Formations of New South Wales,”
4th Ed., 1878, p. 66.


Cockatoo Creek to Beesley’s old camp, Cockatoo Creek, Rosella Creek,
Plum Creek, &c.
In Jack’s Creek a considerable thickness is seen of greenish-grey
sandstones which contain trunks of large coniferous trees, lying
horizontally, as if drifted. The trunks occasionally retain some of the
branching roots. They are silicified to a black flint, sometimes partly
opalised. One tree was found to measure 31 feet in length. Frag-
mentary plant remains in a carbonised condition are also common.
Near the mouth of the Creek a thickness of 20 feet of fine, grey,
argillaceous sandstone bands, with plant remains and grey shales, is
seen cut into and overlaid by an intrusive sheet of dolerite. In one
place at the base of the dolerite a 5 feet seem of burnt coal (“Mac-
arthur Seam”) was seen. In Macarthur Creek, on the opposite side
of the Bowen River, the following section of the Macarthur seam and
associated strata is to be seen:—
FEET. INCHES.
Dolerite ... .. ... 12 0
Burnt Coal 0 2
Grey Shale ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 0
Burnt Coal with shaly layers 1 7
Hard, grey, ferruginous Sandstone 0 4
Burnt shaly Coal ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 7
Grey-brown Sandstone with plants 3 in. to ... ... ... 0 7
Grey Shales ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 3
Darker Shales, with coaly laminae ... ... ... ... 0 9
Bituminous Coal ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 1
Grey Sandstone ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 1
Coal with-Shale laminae, the coal laminae of fair quality
1 ft. 2 in. to ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 9
Fire-clay with root-lets... ... ... ... ... ... 0 4
Dark Shale ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0
Grey-brown ferruginous shale —a mass of Glossopteris ... 0 4
Brown Shale ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 5
Grey-brown ferruginous Shale —a mass of Glossopteris ... 0 3
Grey Shale with Glossopteris, &c. ... ... ... ... 4 0
Grey Sandstone, thin bedded, with plants 30 0
60 2
The Daintreb seam lies near the base of the series, and is seen in
the river just below the mouth of Rosella Creek in the following
section: —
FEET. INCHES.
Dolerite, the lower part “ white trap” 25 0
Gap, room for ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 0
Burnt Coal —partly columnar, somewhat coked in part;
veins and pockets of “ white trap” in upper part;
concretions of ironstone in joints; nodules of decom-
posed pyrites; Glossopteris recognisable in parts ... 3 7
Black Shale 0 1
Burnt Coal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 3
Black Shale ... 0 1
Burnt Coal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 6
Carried forward 39 6


Brought forward... ... ... ... ... 39 6
Black Shale 0 1
Burnt Coal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Blue-grey Shales ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2
Stony burnt Coal, with silky plant debris 0 6
Light, porous, crumbling Coal, with concretionary nodules
of better quality 0 8
Coaly Shale ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 0 2
Light brownish-black laminated Coal (some of the laminae
rather oil shale than coal) ; fair quality ... ... 7 0
Blue-black Shales ... ... ... ... ...' ••• 2 3
Good Coal ... 0 3
Good Coal
Dark blue Shales with Phyllotheca, &c. ... ... ... 10 0
Flaggy brown Sandstone with plants 0 10
Ironstone ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 1
Blue-grey Shales... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 6
Brown Sandstones with ferruginous concretions ... ... 0 3
Brown flaggy Sandstone with plants 1 6
Grey Shales with a H inch band of clay-ironstone ... 4 0
70 7
The “ Hayilah” Coal seam, near the station of that name, is among
the uppermost beds now remaining of the Freshwater series. It is at
least 15 feet thick, but is burnt and rendered partly columnar, by a
sheet of igneous rock, which takes the form of dolerite where it over-
lies, and of “ white trap” where it comes in contact with the coal. A
great thickness of greenish-grey sandstones with fossil trees underlies
the Havilah seam.
It will be seen from the analyses which follow that a portion of the
Daintree seam, 7 feet in thickness, is of fair quality, while the 3-inch
band below is of good quality. The latter would be suitable for
steam-making and metallurgical purposes.
The outcrops of several other coal seams occur in the fresh water
series. They happen to be accompanied by the hard rock which
destroyed them, and to this circumstance they owe their exposure to
observation. The outcrops of only a small proportion of the strata
are seen in natural sections. The chances are ten to one that seams
of good coal will have their outcrops denuded, and covered up with
alluvial deposits. Such seams can only be discovered by boring. The
Government have lately set the diamond drill to work on a bore
through the outcrop of the Havilah seam. The total thickness of the
Freshwater Series is estimated at not less than 1,000 feet.
On the road from Havilah to Byerwin, a mile above the crossing
of Rosella Creek, a marine bed is intercalated among the strata of
the Freshwater series. As will be seen from the lists which follow,
this marine bed contains a number of fossils common to the Lower
Marine Series. This fact is very interesting taken in connection
with the circumstance that Glossopteris lived on from the base of
the marine to the top of the freshwater beds.


ANALYSES
OP COALS.
§
o
<u
u
H o
-3 2
t»3
>»
W
41*81
85-25
19-89
Total Fixed
Seam.
Sp. gr.
Water
Volatile Carbon,
Kennedy
Garrick
1-46
1-45
1-40
1-12
1-23
0-99
49-79
14-28
46-60
Do., nodular part ...
5 ft. sjin. seam, at Bo9ft. 6lin. bore
below Garrick Seam
Ift. 9in. seam in bed of Pelican Cr’k,
67-58
11-54
20-25
61-57
17-03
below Garrick Seam
23-61
59-09
15-04
FOSSILS OF TYPICAL DISTEICT
I. Lower Division
Has yielded no fossils as yet.
11. Middle or Marine Series.
PLANTS.
Glossopteris, near G. ampla, Dana.
CLASS ACTINOZOA.
Stenopora 1 ovata, Lonsdale.
Stenopora Jackii, Nidi, and Eth., jnnr.
1 Genus confined to Carboniferous or Permio-Carboniferous formation of AuS'
tralia and Tasmania.
CLASS POLYZOA.
Fenestella fossula, Lonsd.
Protoretepora Koninckit, sp. nov., Nidi, and Eth.
Protoretepora, sp. indet.
CLASS BEACHIOPODA.
Spirifera glabra, Martin.
„ convoluta, Phillips.
~ Parwinii, Morris (?)
Orthotetes crenistria, var. senilis, Phillips.
Product us subquadratus, Morris (?)
~ hrachythoerus, G. Sow.
Strophalosia Glarkei, Etheridge.
„ Gerardi, King (?)
CLASS PELECYPODA (LAMELLIBEANCHIATA.)
Aviculopecten subquinquelineatus, M‘Coy.
„ sp. ind.
Peterinea macroptera, Morris.
Notomya ( Mceonia ) recta, Dana.
Pachydomus (?) carinatus, Morris.


Pachydomusg lobosus, J. de C. Sow.
Scmguinolites, sp. ind.
~ sp. allied to S. undata , Dana.
~ or 8. Mitchellii, De Koninck.
CLASS CEPHALOPODA.
Ooniatites micromphalus, Morris.
111. Upper (Mainly Freshwater) Series
PLANTS.
Olossopteris Browniana (Brongniart)
„ (linearis M‘Coy.)
Phyllotheca australis , Brong.
Araucaryoxylon Nicholi, Carruthers, sp. nov.
A marine bed in the Upper (mainly freshwater) Series has yielded
the following :*—
CLASS BEACHIOPODA.
Orthotes crenistria , var. senilis , Phillips.
Productus brachythoerus, G. Sow.
CLASS PELECYPODA
Pachydomus, or astartilia, near A. cyprina , or A. cytherea, Dana.
CLASS GASTEEOPODA.
Indeterminable fragments.
CLASS CEPHALOPODA.
Ooniatites , sp., ind., near G. striatus Dana.
In No. 1 Bore on Pelican Creek (Middle or Marine bed) Glossopteris
was seen in the core. From the occurrence of Glossopteris in the
middle and upper divisions and the repetition in the marine bed of
the upper (mainly freshwater) division of many of the fossils of the
middle division, there appears to be no doubt of the continuity of the
series. The divisions correspond most accurately with the classifica-
tion of the New South Wales Coalfields, as worked out by Mr.
Wilkinson.f
The Queensland Upper Series corresponds with the Upper Coal
measures of New South Wales (Newcastle, Wollangong, and Bowen-
fels beds), characterised, by the occurrence of silicified coniferous
wood, Glossopteris and Phyllotheca, while the Middle or Marine series of
Queensland agrees with the Upper Marine beds, Lower Coal measures,
and Lower Marine-beds of New South Wales.
Although the divisions made out in the Bowen River coalfield are
of the highest importance in their bearing on a co-relation with the
New South Wales field, the fossils of both the fossiliferous divisions
* The Eev. J. E. Tenison-Woods (“Fossil Flora, p. 53,”) says: “I think I
recognised Sphenopteries lobifolia, Morris., among my specimens from the
above bed —probably at the Melbourne Exhibition of 1880.”
f Mines and Mineral Statistics of New South Wales, 1875, p. 129.


(II and III) may, for the reasons above given, be massed together in
considering the age of the deposits. We may add to the above list
the list given by Mr. R. Etheridge, Senior, from the Bowen River *
(Daintree Collection).
StreptorhyncJius Davidsoni, Eth., sp. nov.
Broductus Clarkei, Eth , sp. nov. 1
1 Afterwards named Strophalosia Clarkei by E. Etheridge, Junior, from com-
plete specimens in my collection.
Spirifera striata, Martin.
~ convoluta (?) Phillips.
~ allied to 8. hisulata, Sow
The conclusion drawn by Mr. R. Etheridge, Junior, after a careful
examination of my Bowen River fossils is that they occupy “ a high
position in the palaeozoic series, and that all purposes would best be
served by regarding them as of Permio-Carboniferous age,”f
In this finding I cannot but concur. The occurrence of Glossopteris
Browniana in the Bowen River beds may appear to present a diffi-
culty, as the. Rev. J E. Tenison-WoodsJ points out that this species
“ is found in beds as high as the Jurassic in India, and is a common
fossil in lower Mesozoic formations there.” The same author observes §
speaking of the Upper Newcastle beds (Division 111, Bowen River
beds) : “In the present day the Australian flora is several epochs
behind Europe, then it must have been a little in advance.”
OAKEY CREEK COALFIELD, COOKTOWN.
The deposit contains silicified wood very like that found in the
Bowen River Coalfield, and Glossopteris Browniana in abundance.
From the wide range of the latter plant it would be unsafe to de-
termine the age of the field on its evidence alone. In the meantime,
however, we may provisionally consider the deposit as the equivalent
of the Upper or Freshwater Series of the Bowen River Coalfield to
which it bears a marked lithological resemblance.
The strata consists, for the most part, of greenish-grey sandstones,
dark blue shales and fire-clays. They have suffered a good deal of
disturbance, being frequently on edge, or inclined at high angles.
The thickest seam of good coal which has yet been met with (on Coal
Creek) is 14 inches.||
The Rev. J. E. Tenison-Wood the occurrence in the
Oakey Creek beds of Phyllotheca (indica, ?). In a subsequent work,
* Q. J. G. S. 28, p.p. 333 et seq.
f On a collection of fossils from the Bowen River Coalfield, &c., Royal Physical
Society of Edinburgh, 18th Feb., 1880, p. 57.
I “ Fossil Flora,” p. 20.
§ Op. Cit., p. 21.
|| See “Report on Explorations in Cape York Peninsula, 1879-80.” By Robert
L. Jack. Brisbane : By Authority, 1881.
IT Proc. Linnean Soc. New South Wales, Vol. vn., p. 95.


however,* he says —“I now wish to state that, after a careful
examination, there is no evidence that the specimens belong
exclusively to Phyllotheca.
ENDEAVOUR’ RIVER COALFIELD, COOKTOWN.
Coal is said to have been discovered in the valley of the Endeavour.
This may be a continuation of the Oakey Creek field, but I have not
yet seen the place, nor obtained any definite information regarding it.
LITTLE RIVER COALFIELD, NEAR PALMERVILLE.
As regards Palaeontological evidence, the ■ Little River coalfield is
in the same position as the Oakey Creek field. Glossopteris is abun-
dant, but, beyond this, only some impressions of tree-trunks have
been observed.
The Coalfield occurs in a peculiar position. It has been wedged, by
two faults, into the midst of an older series of greywackes, slates,
quartzites, &c. After having been subjected to such a degree of
lateral compression, that its strata were inclined at high angles, it was
covered over by a cake of “ Desert Sandstone.” This cake has been
subsequently cut through by the Little River (a tributary of the
Kennedy), exposing the coal measures and the older stratified rocks.
The coal-bearing strata consist mainly of blue and dark shales,
gritty sandstones, and fire-clays.
The coal seams are numerous and thick. One is 20 feet in thick-
ness, another 18 feet, two are 8 feet each, two are 6 feet each, and
four are 3 feet each; but all of these thick seams are of poor quality.
They appear to have been from the first much mixed with muddy
sediment, and to have had their volatile matter driven off by the
pressure which resulted in the uptilting of the beds.
An eight-feet seam, on the bank of the Little River, near Bower-
bird Gully, was analysed by Mr. Karl Staiger as follows :
Moisture, with a little Gas ... ... ... ... ••• 18 - 32
Carbon ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 65 - 94
Ash ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ••• 15’74
100-00
I analysed specimens from a seam eight feet thick, on Dave
Creek, with the following result: —
Water 0'919
Volatile Hydrocarbons ... ... ... •... ... 9 - 388
Fixed Carbon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58"606
Ash ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 31-087
Sp. gr. 1-37.
100-000
* “ Fossil Flora.”


Near the junction of the Little River with the St. George River,
the following section is seen :
FEET. INCHES.
Coal, good ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 7
Dark grey shales... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 6
Coal, good ... 0 7
Dark shales ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 0
Decomposed carbonaceous ironstone 0 3
Coal, fair ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 7
Grey shales... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 4
Dark gnarled shales 0 3
Grey shales and sandstones, with a few bands of oolitic
ironstone (1 to 2 inches) and marks of fossil trees ... 20 0
This coal, on analysis, gave much better results than any of the
thicker seams. In fact, it is a coal which, if of workable thickness,
would take a high place among coals used for steam and smelting
purposes.* The following is the analysis :
Water 2763
Volatile hydrocarbons ... 26*197
Fixed Carbon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 62*998
Ash ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8*042
Sp. gr. 1*32.
100*00
STEWART’S CREEK, TOWNSVILLE.
At the 6| mile peg on the Northern Railway, near Townsville, a
cutting exposes some beds of conglomerates, sandstones, shales, and
fireclays, which have yielded Glossopteris. A sheet of porphyry is
intruded among the strata. Similar beds are seen on the Aboriginal
Reserve. And a dib driven horizontally into the beds (a very ineffec-
tive method of prospecting among horizontal has exposed beds
containing Glossopteris and Sagenopteris in large numbers.
A few of the adjoining land owners have commenced boring for
coal in the large coast flats on the right bank of Stewart’s Creek.
The surface of the ground here is about 35 feet above the sea level.
The drift has been found to be unexpectedly deep. It has been
pierced in one place at a depth of 110 feet, and the bore is at present
in hard fine grained siliceous sandstone at a depth of 142 feet. This
sandstone is believed to belong to the coal measures.
PALMER RIVER.
In Notes on the Geology of Hann’s Exploring Expedition, with
which Mr. Norman Taylor has obligingly furnished me, the following
passages occur: —“ At Camp 16 on the Mitchell River (camp 78 on
the return journey) I found in the river bed fragments and blocks of
coal shales, with thin seams of bright coal, and on searching carefully
I discovered pieces of a whitish indurated shale containing indistinct
* See “Report on the Little River Coalfield/’ By Robert L. Jack. Brisbane :
By Authority, 1882.


plant remains, and an undoubted fragment of Glossopteris. (The
shales are identical with some in the Blue Mountains of New South
Wales north of Wallerawang, and again at Tallawang north of Gul-
gong). About a mile south of this camp is a low table-topped rise
consisting of horizontal white and grey shales and a chertz-looking
rock, with fragments and stems of plants, and traces of Glossopteris ,
in situ. This rests on porphyry, which forms a series of rocky hills,
two miles further south, extending seven miles south-easterly to the
foot of and overlooking some high table-topped carboniferous ranges
(composed of sandstones, grits and conglomerates, with silicified
wood) in that direction.”
In view of this evidence I cannot help regarding the Mount
Mulligan table-land on the Lower Hodgkinson (which I had formerly
classed with the Desert Sandstone) as a continuation of Mr. Taylor’s
“ Carboniferous Range.”
DAWSON, COMET, AND MACKENZIE.
An enormous tract of country extending from 21° 30' to 26° 10' S.
lat. is covered with strata which are apparently the equivalent of the
Bowen River Coalfield.
Daintree remarks (Q. J. G. S. 28, p. 285) that numerous outcrops
of coal have been observed on the above-named rivers.
From Cracow Creek on the Dawson (25° 30' S. lat.) Mr. Etheridge,
Senior, detected in the Daintree collection :
Ohonetes Cracowensis, (sp., nov.) Eth.
Pleurotomaria rotunda , (sp., nov.) Eth.
The Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods (Fossil Flora of the Coal Deposits
of Australia, p, 63) found Sphenopteris lobifolia, Morris , near Cracow
Creek. From Wealwandongara * Creek, Nogoa River, Mr. Etheridge
detected in the Daintree collection:—
Productus or Sfrophalosia.
Streptorhynchus.
From the head of Roper Creek, east of Clermont, Mr. Etheridge
detected in the Daintree collection: —
Streptorhynchus Davidsoni, (sp., nov.) Eth.
Spirifera striata, Martin.
~ convoluta (?) Phillips. 1
~ allied to 8. hisulcata. Sow. 1
Productus (Sfrophalosia), Clarkei. 1
1 In Mr. Daintree’s list (p. 286), but not included in Mr. Etheridge’s list.
The Rev. W. B. Clarke says :—fMy own collections, received in
1874, from Queensland, contain some interesting additions, which
arrived too late to form part of the Daintree collection. Among
these specimens from the head of Bee Creek, Fort Cooper (near
* The only place I know with a name resembling this is Wealwandangie. South
Springsure.
f Sedimentary formations of New South Wales (p. 33d


Elphinstone), I find Pecten, Spirifer, Trochus,, and magnificent
specimens of Productus, and a variety of usually associated shells ;
and with them in the same brown ferruginous grit and shale-beds
well depicted Glossopteris, and some other plants, one of which
appears to be a Dictyopteris .”
Mr. Clarke refers* to fossils from Mantuan Downs (south-west of
Emerald), sent by him to Professor M‘Coy, and pronounced by the
latter to be Productus, like P. calva, and Strophalosia.
Mr. Clarke quotes (p. 34) a letter from Mr. Daintree, dated
January 22, 1870, in which the latter says:—“ That on the Macken-
zie River, near the junction of the Isaacs, the coal measures are
highly inclined —Glossopteris the common fossil; but running up
Roper’s Creek they gradually become horizontal, and at the top of
the Roper’s Creek watershed, horizontal beds of sandstone and sandy
limestone are the only rocks exposed in section full of Hunter River
fossils, Producti, &c.”
The following are in the Queensland Museum, Brisbane
Actinocrinites (Dawson River)
Cyathophyllum (Banana Creek south of Rannes.)
Favn sites ~
Productus > „
Sphenopteris, sp., Dawson River.
Taking the large coalfield as a whole, it has yielded the following
fossils :
PLANTS
Glossopteris.
Dictyopteris (?)
Sphenopteris lobifolia, Morris, s. sp.
ACTINOZOA.
Cyathophyllum.
Favosites.
ECHINODEEMATA.
Actinocrinus.
BEACHIOPODA.
Chonetes cracowensis, sp. nov. Bth.
Productus, or Strophalosia.
Productus ( Strophalosia) GlarTcei , Eth.
P. like P. calva.
S trep torhynchus.
Spirifer a striata , Martin.
~ conroluta (?) Phillips
~ allied to S. bisulcata , Sow.
PELECYPODA.
Pecten.
* “Q.J.G.S., vol. 18, p. 246.’’


GASTEROPODA.
Pleurotomaria rotunda (sp. nov.), Eth.
STYX RIVER.
Coal occurs in the valley of the Styx, Broad Sound.
CLERMONT DISTRICT.
Daintree describes in 1870 * the Cement Hill, near Clermont,
whose auriferous wealth has again excited attention within the last
few months, as follows:
“At ‘ The Springs,’ about sixteen miles from Clermont, the most
interesting occurrence of gold, in a scientific point of view, was met
with. A pebble conglomerate, 20 to 30 feet thick, has been sunk
through, on to a bed of yellow shale, and payable gold found at the
junction of the two strata. In the shale are .beautifully preserved
impressions of Glossopteris. This plant-bed has an inclination of 5
deg., and from the bottom of the only shaft not deserted at the dig-
gings, a drive has been taken some 80 feet, following the dip of the
‘ Glossopteris shale,’ and the overlying cement yielded gold enough to
induce the owner of the claim to pursue the work with spirit. My
impression is that these cements are really the representatives of the
shingles of the great carboniferous sea. At ‘ Hurleys,’ small patches
of a sandy shale, with imbedded Glossopteris are also found, together
with cement, similar to that at ‘ The Springs,’ and even in this, car-
boniferous fossils can be detected.”
Coal is found at Blair Athole, a few miles west of Cement Hill,
One good seam is 2 to 3 feet thick.
BURRUM COALFIELD.
The reports of Mr. A. C. Gregory form the most important contri-
butions to the literature of the Burrum River coalfield. The follow-
ing is taken from his “ Report on the Burrum Coal Mines.”
Brisbane: By Authority, 1879: —
“ The channel of the Burrum is cut through the upper horizontal
sandstones into the carboniferous rocks, the banks being steep, and
exhibiting the stratification and outcrops of coal for a distance of three
miles downwards from the crossing of the road from Maryborough to
Bundaberg.
“ The surface of the country is formed by a horizontal sandstone, of
much later date than the carboniferous deposits, and though the
absence of fossils may render it difficult to give its correct geological
position,, it most probably belongs to the ‘ Desert Sandstone.’
“ So far as the exploration of the coal has been affected, the coal
measures consist of thin bedded brown sandstones and shales. The
average dip may be taken as I in 8 at the crossing of the Maryborough
* " General Report upon the Northern District.” By R. Daintree. Brisbane :
By Authority, 1870, J). 3.


road, and gradually decreasing to 1 in 12 three miles to the north-
east.
“ The upper seam of coal which has been explored, is that worked
in Beaufort and Howard’s mines, on the left bank of the Burrnm.
These shafts cut the coal at about 60 feet from the surface, the seam
being 4 feet thick, all good coal, nearly free from band.
“ Under the Beaufort seam there is about 30 feet of sandstones and
shales, then a second seam of 2% feet, known as ‘ Lapham’s ’ seam,
which was worked on the right bank of the river. There is then
about 50 feet of sandstone and shale, a third seam of very hard coal, I
foot thick, then about four feet of shales, and the main Burrum seam
is reached. The coal in this seam is 4 feet thick in Whitley’s shaft,
about ly miles to the north-west of the river, and 5 feet in the bank of
the river where it was first worked.
“ About 100 feet beneath the Burrum seam there is a fifth seam,
known as ‘Watson’s’ seam, 3 feet thick, which has been worked on
the right bank of the river, and produced good coal.
“ Four small seams, varying from 1 to 2 feet, exist below Watson’s
seam, with accompanying sandstone and shale, having a probable
thickness of 600 feet when the North Hartley seam is reached,
having a thickness of 4 feet of good coal, which was worked on the
left bank of the river, a little below the crossing of the road.
“ Under the last seam two small seams of If and 1 foot are visible,
with 100 feet of sandstones, which form the rocky base on which the
road from Maryborough to Bundaberg crosses the Burrum River.
“ The carboniferous strata which are open to view present an
aggregate thickness of about 1,000 feet, with five workable, and eight
small, seama of coal, within an area of about 4 square miles, while
there is evidence that the carboniferous formation extends north to
the Burnett River, and south to Maryborough, though the seams yet
discovered in these distant localities are not of sufficient thickness to
be worked with profit.
“ Geologically, the Burrum coal belongs to the palaoozoic period, as
Glossopteris is abundant in the fireclay which rests on the upper
seam of the coal.”
In spite of the scarcity of sections, there is so little doubt of the
continuity of the ‘ coal measures ’ from Noosa to the mouth of the
Kolan River, that I have no hesitation in including the whole district
in the Burrum Coalfield.
In an oldpr report,* Mr. Gregory says : “ The slates and serpen-
tines of Widgee and Kilkivan terminate at the watershed between
Wide Bay and Munna Creek, on the road from Brooyar to Miva; and
carboniferous rocks and boulder beds overlap the older rocks, except
at a few points where granite and slate are visible, indicating that
the strata have no great thickness to the south of
Munna Creek.
*On the geology of part of the districts of Wide Bay and Burnet. Brisbane :
By Authority, 1875, p. 3.


“ At the northern bend of Munna Creek, about two miles from its
junction with the Mary River, there is a large outcrop of coal at the
bottom of a high bank. The seam is 6 feet thick, with a band of
2 feet of black shale, and 2 feet of coal under the shale The coal is
covered bp a thick bed of brown sandstone.”
(In an appendix, Mr. Gregory gives the following analysis of the
Miva coal:—
Volatile in coking, 23*6; fixed carbon, 61; ash, 15*4; coke, 76*4;
carbon in coke, 80 ; Ash in coke, 20.)
“ To the north-west the coal dips under beds of white clay, covered
with coarse white and red sandstone, and it seems that the Miva coal is
just on the south-east margin of the carboniferous formation, which
occupies the lower valleys of the Mary, Burrum and Burnett Rivers.
In the fine-grained sandstones over the coal, some fossil stems were
found, varying from 1 inch to 6 inches in diameter, but altered to
oxide of iron, similar to those common in the Ipswich coal beds.
There were also imperfect traces of ferns, but all so imperfect as to
be insufficient for the determination of the species.”
Mr. Gregory further observes {loc. cit , p. 5) : “On the south side
of the Burnett River, about eight miles above Bundaberg, a seam of
coal, 8 inches thick, is visible on the bank of the river. This is
covered by about 80 feet of brown sandstones and shales, the top of
which forms the level country near the Burnett River. The seam of
coal where exposed dips to the south-west about 7 degrees ; but the
strata are nearly horizontal, a quarter of a mile to the north, where
they show a good section on the steep bank of the river.
“ Fossil impressions of plants are abundant; but with the exception
of the bases of leaf stalks, and some fragments of the leaves of a plant
allied to Zamia, or Cycas, none were found in sufficient preservation
for the determination of species. As these remains of Zamia-like
leaves are similar to those found in the coal beds of the Upper
Brisbane, near Colinton, where they are associated with Pecopteris,
Tceniopteris, and Otopteris , it may be inferred that the Burnett and
Brisbane River coal beds are of the same age.
“ There are numerous outcrops of shales and other carboniferous
rocks on the steep bank of the river ascending to Bingera Station,
12 miles above Bundaberg ; and at the junction of Pine Creek, 3 miles
higher up, three seams of coal are exposed in the face of the bank,
which is about 100 feet high. These seams are only 6to 8 inches
thick and widely separated by shales and sandstones. Some good
specimens of coal have been found at this point in the river drift, and
indicate that there is a much thicker and better seam of coal below
the water level.
“In the bed of Pine Creek miles from its junction with the
Burnett a seam of coal, 15 inches thick and of good quality, is ex-
posed, and a shaft has been sunk at a spot 220 yards to the south of
the outcrop. The coal dips 6 degs. to the south. About a mile
higher up Pine Creek, there is another seam of coal, but it is only
two or three inches thick.”


Bridge Seam...
DEPTH.
40 ft.
THICKNESS.
2 ft. 0 in.
Lapham ,,
220
3 0
Burrum ,,
255
3 6
Watson’s ,,
395
3 6
Hartley’s ,,
575
4 0
Dr. Robertson quotes the following analysis of the
Seam by Dr. D. March :—
“ Torhanelea ”
Ash
2-04
Carbon (fixed) ...
.. 69-96
Gas, Oils, Tar, &c.
...
.. 27-00
Sulphur
•90
Water (Hygroscopic) ...
Heating Power, 99'96
•10
100 00
In “ Report on the Coal Deposits of the West Moreton and Darling
Downs District,” Mr. Gregory gives the following analysis of the
Pine Creek Coal; —
Volatile in coking, 34'3 ; Fixed Carbon, 57’5 ; Ash, 6 - 2; Coke,
63‘7 ; Carbon in Coke, 90S ; Ash in Coke, 97.
In “ Geological Features of the South-Eastern Districts of Queen-
land.” (Brisbane : By Authority, 1879), Mr. Gregory mentions (page 7)
a coal seam at Tiaro on the Maryborough and Gympie Railway.
In Mr. Aplin’s “ Report on the Geological and Mineral features of
a part of the Southern and Northern portion of the Burnett District ”
(Brisbane: By Authority, 1870), references are made to the occur-
rence of coal measures in several places, which have aided us in the
mapping of the Burrum field.
The following section is given in a report by Dr. J. R. M. S.
Robertson, M E., F.G.S. :
The Rev. Julian E. Tenison-Woods* classes the Burnett River
deposits as “ Rhaetic or Lower Lias” and the Burrum deposits as
“ Upper Lias (?)” Of the latter he remarks (p. 18) : —“ I have seen
no well-preserved plant remains from these beds, but they seem to me
to be beneath the Ipswich coal seams and above those of Burnett
River.”
In the Proceedings of the Linnean Soc. of New South Wales, vol.
vii. p. 95, the same author quoted Phyllotheca (indica ?) as occur-
ring in the Burrum beds In the “ Fossil Flora,” however, he says
(p. 38) :-“I now wish to state that, after a careful examination,
there is no evidence that these specimens belong exclusively to
Phyllotheca.
On p. 58 ( loc. cit .) Mr. Tenison-Woods notes the abundant occur-
rence of Sphenopteris (Aneimoides) flabellifolia (sp., nov.) var. erecta,
Tenigdn-Woods, in a blue shale on the Burnett River, “ about half-
way between Bundaberg and five coal seams which abut on the river.”
On the Fossil Flora of the Coal Deposits of Australia. Sydney, 1883.
E


On p. 96 ( loc. cit.) the same author described a new species Jean-
paulia hidens, T.-Woods, from the Burnett River.
A Sphenopteris from Bundaberg is included in the collection in the
Queensland Museum.
From the meagre list of fossils gathered from the writings of the
above-named authors, two of the species being new, another doubtful,
(though, if genuine, common to the Bowen River and Indian coal
beds) and two not specifically determinable (though one — Glossop-
teris—is of a genus common to the Bowen River and Newcastle coal
measures), it would be rash to form an opinion as to the age of the
Burrum Coalfield. But two large collections,' one made by my
colleague, Mr. Wm. Henry Rands, and the other by myself, are now
in the hands of Mr. R. Etheridge, Junior, for determination, and will
be displayed at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition. It will be well
to wait for the determination of these collections before assigning a
distinct position in the geological scale to the strata under considera-
tion. I may say that the plants of my collection appear to me to
have a general mesozoic facies. Some of them appear to be identical
with Ipswich forms. From the association of such plants with
Glossopteris and Phyllotheca (indica ?) I am inclined to regard the
Burrum as occupying a position intermediate between the Bowen
River and Ipswich coalfields.
Mr. Rands has recently observed strata belonging to the Burrum
coal measures in Litabella Creek. This is the northmost outcrop of
the series, so far as is known; but I think it more than likely that
the level country adjoining Rodd’s Bay is also covered with the
same formation.
STEWART’S CREEK, WYCARBAH, AND ROSEWOOD,
ROCKHAMPTON.
A very remarkable deposit occurs between the Central Railway at
Stanwell and Mount Lyon. A vast series of bedded basaltic rocks is
here met with, having a slight general dip to the north. Between
and beneath the beds of basalt, dark carbonaceous shales, thin seams
of impure coal and sandstones occasionally crop out. One ferruginous
sandstone, near Mount Laurence Homestead, to which I was guided
by Captain Christoe, in December, 1885, is full of well-preserved
plant remains. Glossopteris Browniana is abundant, as is also
Taeniopteris Daintreei. In one block the two plants, hitherto
regarded as characteristic, one of the palaeozoic, and the other of the
mesozoic coal beds, lie side by side. Sphenopteris also occurs The
specimens will probably be displayed at the Colonial and Indian
Exhibition.
This is undoubtedly the deposit alluded to by the Rev. J. E.
Tenison-Woods, in a report to the Minister for Lands, dated 7th
August, 1883 (published in the “ Queenslander” newspaper), in the
following terms: —“Proceeding westward from Rockhampton, the
country consists of nearly level alluvial soil for some 20 miles. [Slates,
Ac., are, however, seen at intervals as far as Gracemere.—R. L. J.]


The few elevations that occur are of volcanic rock, with very
rarely a few indications of stratified deposits. These strata are
probably portions of the marine palaeozoic carboniferous rocks, which
are well represented by an abundance of fossils at what is called the
Agricultural Reserve, at some distance north of the railway line.
The fossils are mostly marine shells of well-known species, and as
such, are found in the lower carboniferous rocks of Europe, especially
in the North of Ireland. In Tasmania, beds of the same age are
occasionally associated with seams of good coal.”
At Wycarbah Railway Station, 24 miles from Rockhampton, a hard
fine-grained volcanic tuff is associated with the basaltic rocks. This
tuff contains numerous fern impressions, which appear to me to be of
mesozoic types. A fine collection of these has been made by the
zealous labours of Mr. James Smith of Rockhampton, and forwarded
to Mr. R. Etheridge, jun., for identification, and will be displayed at
the Exhibition.
Mr. Tenison-Woods refers to this deposit in the report to the
Minister for Lands above quoted : —He says the fossils “ are of great
interest, showing a relation with certain mesozoic plant-beds of India,
which have never hitherto been identified outside that country.”
In “Fossil Fiora” the same author refers (pages 20, 45, 113, and
125) to plant beds at Rosewood, West of Rockhampton, containing
Ptilophyllum oligoneurum (sp. nov.), T. Woods.
Vertehraria towarrensis (sp. nov.), T. Woods.
Sequoiites (?) australis (sp. nov.), T. Woods.
Pecopteris.
Equisetum.
Regarding the Stewart’s Creek, Wycarbah, and Rosewood (Rock-
hamptom) deposits, as a whole,* it appears to me that we have in
them a formation of the utmost importance. It yields Olossopteris
and Tceniopteris, regarded (since Daintree’s paper was published in
1872) as characteristic, the former of the palaeozoic, and the latter of
the mesozoic coal measures, the “ marine shells of well-known species
found in the Lower Carboniferous rocks of Europe,” mentioned by
Mr. Tenison-Woods, and a rich flora of a mesozoic type. It seems
probable that here we have a series of passage beds bridging the Gap
between the Burrum and Ipswich coalfields.
It may here be remarked that nothing like an uninterrupted series,
ranging from Devonian to Mesozoic, as has been imagined by some
geologists, can be detected in Queensland. The Dotswood beds indeed
overlie the Burdekin limestones conformably, but all of the other
divisioi .6 above enumerated occur in unconnected areas. The Gympie
beds do not rest on the Dotswood beds, but on slates, &c., probably of
the age of the Burdekin beds. The Star beds rest on slate, gneisses,
schists, and granites, possibly older than the Burdekin beds. The
* But for the absence of the Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods (now travelling in
Japan), I should have wished to consult him on many points regarding the
stratigraphical relations of some of the deposits described by him.


Mount Wyatt beds rest on the upturned edges of fossiliferous slates
and shales, regarded by Professor McCoy as Upper Silurian, but
probably the equivalents of the Burdekin limestones. The Drummond
beds lie on slates, &c., which are either of the age of the Burdekin
beds or older. The Bowen River beds rest on slates and granites.
The Little River and Oakey Creek (Cooktown) beds lie on vertical
slates. The relations of the Endeavour River (Cooktown) and
Steward's Creek (Townsville) beds to the underlying rocks are at
present unknown. The “ Dawson,” “Comet,” and “ Mackenzie ” beds
rest on slates of Burdekin age or older. So do-the coal-bearing beds
of the “ Styx,” Clermont, and Burrum; and so do the Stewart’s
Creek, Wycarbah, and Rosewood (Rockhampton) beds. It thus
appears that from the Dotswood beds upwards, each of the formations
already described is separated from that which, on palaeontological
grounds, is placed next in order to it, by a great unconformability.
The record is very far, indeed, from being complete.
CHAPTER VII.
IPSWICH BEDS.
Mu. A. C. Gregory, C.M.G., in an official report,* has given a very
valuable account of the coal and other beds of this district. He de-
scribes the coal seams of Old Moggill, Lyons, Goodna, Redbank, Six
Mile Creek, Thomas’, Portion 252 Goodna, Thomas’ new mine,
Thompson’s, Bundanba, Mehi Creek, Eastwood, Tivoli, Blond and
Wright’s, Gulland’s Rocky Crossing ( Brisbane River), Walloon, Rose-
wood (Southern and Western Railway), Blackfellows’ Creek, Flag-
stone Creek (near Toowoomba), Murphy’s Creek, Spring Creek,
Hodgson’s Creek, Clifton, Allora, and Farm Creek.
Mr. Gregory remarks (p. 7) that “ the general character of the
coals found between Woolloon and Warwick is that of Cannel Coal.
It does not cake in coking; gives a large percentage of gas, or oil and
paraffin, according to its treatment at a high or low temperature. Its
hardness renders it very suitable for export. It burns very freely,
and leaves a soft white ash.
“ From the small proportion of fixed carbon, and its not caking, it
does not produce good coke, but a charred coal, which, however,
burns well; consequently it is not well adapted for blast furnaces,
* On the Coal deposits of the West Moreton and Darling Downs Districts.
Brisbane : By Authority, 1876.


though well suited for reverberatory furnaces. As a steam coal it is
best suited for stationary or marine engines, the strong blast of loco-
motives being apt to blow it through the tubes. It is a very high-
class household coal.
“In the Ipswich division the coals are bituminous, coking well; the
proportion of gas being small, and the fixed carbon large, they are
suited for forges and blast furnaces; are good steam coal when not
broken too small; but are so friable as not to bear carriage well, and
suffer from exposure to wet; so that the harder varieties, though
containing most ash, are found in practice to be most economical, in
consequence of the smaller proportion of waste.
“In both districts the coal is associated with ironstone bands and
beds of boulders, consisting of concretions of oxide of iron, which
have replaced fragments of fossil wood. The high percentage of ash
in the coal, and scarcity of good limestone, would, however, be serious
obstacles to the profitable working of the iron at the present low
prices at which it is imported.
“ On part of the North and East, and also on the South, the carbon-
iferous rock rests on Devonian slates, sandstones, and limestones, and
at a few points, on the granite.
“ There are extensive tracts of the carboniferous formation covered
by basalt, which is most extensively developed in the central part,
where it forms the summit of the Great Dividing Range; and in the
southern part there are erupted masses of felstone porphyry, forming
high peaks, such as Mount Flinders, and at Cunningham’s Gap, on
the Main Range; but the coal measures do not appear to be much
disturbed or altered by these outbursts of igneous rocks, while the
manner in which the basalt covers the slabs and sandstones indicates
that considerable erosion and denudation had occurred prior to the
basaltic period.
“ Resting on the Brisbane slates and Lucky Valley Spirifer sand-
stones and limestones, which have been classed as Devonian, and
covered by volcanic rocks, of a comparatively recent geological period
as is evidenced by the fossil plants found beneath it; the carboniferous
strata might, so far as the evidence of conterminous rocks is con-
cerned, occupy any position from the older carboniferous to the
Oolite: And it is only by the contained fossils that the real age can be
ascertained.
“ Pecopteris is the leading feature of the fossil flora, and is found in
all the shales of this Coalfield. Sphenopteris occurs in the Ipswich
beds; and Taeniopteris at Ipswich and Colinton —at the latter place
accompanied by Pterophyllum : Vertebraria at Spring Creek Darling
Downs.
“ In addition to the above, there are fragments of many other plants,
but, not in a sufficiently perfect state for their determination. Fossi-
lized wood is very abundant, and the structure indicates that much
was coniferous. There are also many short stems, from Ito 5 feet
long and 2 to 6 inches thick, the terminal summits of which are
rounded like tree-ferns or cycas, while the basis of large palm-like


Mine oe Locality.
Thick-
ness.
Volatile
in
Coking.
Fixed
Carbon.
Ash.
Coke.
Carbon
in
Coke.
Ash
in
Coke.
Tivoli Mine, North Ipswich
5-6'
26-7
66‘4
6-9
73-3
90-6
9-4
Eastwood Mine, North Ipswich
r
25-0
63-0
12-0
75-0
84-0
16-0
Thompson’s Mine, Bnndanba
5'
31.7
62-3
6-0
68-3
91*2
8-8
Goodna Mine, Woogaroo
4i'
28-8
62.2
9-0
71-2
84-4
12-6
New Mine, near Tivoli Mine
6'
30-8
61.0
8-2
69-2
88-2
11-8
Thomas’ Mine, Bnndanba
4-5'
29-8
59-2
11-0
70-2
84-3
15-7
Aberdare Mine, Goodna
28-8
57-2
14-0
71-2
80-3
19-7
Blond & Wright’s Mine, North Ipswich
26-2
56-4
17-4
73-8
76-4
236
Lyons’ Shaft, Moggill
3-4'
38-2
51-0
10-8
61-8
82-6
17-4
Brisbane Eiver Seam, Eocky Crossing
• » •
22-0
50-9
27-1
78-0
65-3
34-7
Flagstone Creek, Helidon
36-3
47-4
16-3
63-7
74-4
25-6
Blackfellows’ Creek, West Moreton,..
9'
42-4
45-6
12-0
57-6
79-2
20-8
Hodgson’s Creek, Darling Downs
44-7
42-6
12-7
55-3
77-0
23-0
Clifton Mine, Darling Downs
4-5'
47-6
42-2
10-2
52-4
80-5
19-5
Walloon. West Moreton
47-0
36-0
17-0
53-0
67-9
321
Murphy’s Slam, Kedron Brook
16-0
33-6
50-4
84-0
30.0
70-0
FOR COMPARISON.
Waratah, Newcastle, N.S.W
31-0
62-5
6-5
69-0
906
9-4
leaves closely resembling the existing Zamia in form were found near
Laidley.
“ The presence of these plants, more especially Taeniopteris indicates
the Palaeozoic Carboniferous forma-
r be classed as belonging to the
that the coal is of a later age than t
tions, and that it should rather
Mesozoic Oolite.
of a much later period than the coal
“ The superincumbent basalt is of
deposits, as shown by the fossil wood
and leaves found in the stratum
of earth, between the basalt and
the coal shales of the Clifton
Mine, while no fragments of basaltic rock have been found among the
coal strata; and there is evidence that the general features of the
country were much altered during the interval between the last de-
posit of coal and the earlier outbursts of basalt.”
Mr. Gregory gives the
this series:—
following
table of analyses of the
In a report “On the
District of the Colony of
1879.) Mr.
Geological Fe
Queensland.”
Features of
the
(Brisbane
South-eastern
By Authority,
Gregory gives the following additional analyses
coals of
Fixed
Tivoli, Ipswich
Waterstown, Ipswich
Eedbank, Goodna
Carbon.
69 to 71
Jones, Bnndanba
Thompson’s, Bnndanba
Thomas’, Bnndanba
67 to 76
68 to 77
Fluid
Hydro-
Carbon.
Water,
Equivalent
to
Combined
Oxygen.


And the following interesting table: —
Economic value of Queensland coals and woods as fuel; also, of coal from
Newcastle, New South Wales. Samples being taken from large commercial
parcels, and a two-horse power vertical engine, worked for one day with
each, and the results reduced to the quantity of water evaporated, from
75° to steam at 20lbs. per square inch, by lOOlbs. of fuel.
Description of Fuel.
Water in lbs
Evaporated
by lOOlbs.
Ash, lbs.
Cinders,
fts.
Gulland’s Tivoli, Ipswich
Bryden’s Eclipse, Ipswich
Clifton
Lyndsay’s, Ipswich
Thomas’, Bundanba
Redbank, Goodna
Waterstown, Ipswich
Smith and Levinges’, Walloon
Jones’, Six-mile Creek
Newcastle, New South Wales
Bloodwood
Swamp Mahogany...
Forest Oak (Casuarina)
Broadleaf Box
Stringybark
Ironbark .*..
Grey Gum
Spotted Gum ...
Common Wattle
Gum-topped Gum
Appletree
Mr. William Carrnthers, in his appendix to Mr. Daintree’s paper,*
gives the following list of plants from the Tivoli coalmine: —
Taemopteris Daintreei , McCoy.
Cyclopteris cuneata, sp. nov., Carr.
Sphenopteris elongata , sp. nov., Carr.
Pecopteris odontopteroides, Morris.
Cardiocarpum australe , sp. nov., Carr.
The Rev. Julian E. Tenison Woods, in his “ Fossil Flora,” gives
the following list of plants from the Ipswich coalfields ;
j Equisetum rotiferum, sp. nov., T. Woods (Walloon).
Verterbraria equiseti (believed to be rhizome of Equisetum roti-
ferum), T. Woods (Tivoli).
Phyllotheca carnosa, sp. nov,, T. Woods (Walloon).
Sphenopteris elongata , Carrnthers (Tivoli).
Sphenopteris ( Aneimioides ) flahellifolia, sp. nov., T. Woods (var.
erecta).
Trichomanides laxum,, sp. nov., T. Woods (Rosewood Scrub,
Ipswich).
T. spinifolium, sp. nov., T. Woods (Rosewood Scrub, Ipswich).
Thinnfeldia media, sp. nov., T. Woods (an. var., indica) (P).
* Notes on Fossil Plants from Queensland (Q.J.G.S., vol xxviii., p. 350).


T. australis (not described. Locality not given).
T. odontopteroides, Feistmantel (Tivoli, Bundanba).
„ ~ var . falcata (Rosewood Scrub, Ipswich).
Gyclopteris cuneata, Carruthers (Tivoli).
Alethopteris australis , Morris (Ipswich).
Taeniopteris Daintreei, McCoy.
T. Carruthersii , sp. nov., T. Woods (Tivoli).
Angiopteridium ensis, Oldham (Rosewood, Ipswich).
Podozamites lanceolatus, Lindley and Hutton (Ipswich).
Brachyphyllmri australe, var. or sp. nov., crassum, T. Woods (Ips-
wich).
Gunninghamites australis , sp. nov., T. Woods ("Rosewood, Ipswich).
There is every reason to believe in the identity of the Ipswich beds
with the Clarence River beds of New South Wales, and in their strong
Jurassic facies. There appears to be no break in the continuity of the
Ipswich beds with the great “ Rolling Downs formation.”
The following are in the Queensland Museum, Brisbane :
Taeniopteris , sp. (Tivoli).
T. Daintreei, Carr. (Cresbrook Creek and Colinton).
T. Brishanensis (Denmark Hill, Ipswich).
Gyclopteris cuneata, Carr. (Tivoli, Woogaroo (Goodna), and Sandy
Creek, Brisbane River).
Pterophyllum (?) (Brisbane River).
Neuropteris (Stanley, Main, Normanby, Ipswich).
Sphenopteris elongata, Carr. (Tivoli).
Pecopteris dent at a (Stanley Main, Normanby).
P. australis , Morris (Elbow Vale Coalmine).
P. Drumori (Brisbane and Ipswich Railway).
P. australe (Denmark Hill).
P. odontopteroides , Morris (Tivoli, Denmark Hill, Sandy Creek).
Cardiocarpum australe (Tivoli).
CHAPTER VIII.
ROLLING DOWNS FORMATION.
In following the course of the Brisbane railway, the Ipswich beds are
succeeded to the West by a series of grey shales, brown and greenish-
grey sandstones, often calcareous, with occasional limestones. It is
by no means a mountain-forming formation. Generally, the waste of
the shales forms a rich soil, which is taken possession of by the
nutritious “ Mitchell ” and “ Blue ” grasses, so highly favourable to
the rearing of sheep and cattle. In this soil blocks of sandstone
occasionally appear, the remnants of denuded beds. The surface rises


into a series of gentle undulations, not, however, of sufficient
importance to disturb the idea of a dead-level. Travelling
on the downs becomes monotonous after a few days. The sun
rises and sets over the edge of the ocean-like plain. Water-
courses are dry for the greater part of the year (except for a
few holes in their beds), and are so ill defined that it is difficult
at times to tell which way the water flows. They are marked
by a straggling fringe of timber, while the rest of the plains are tree-
less. As the streams are of this character it is natural that they
rarely cut through the soil, and consequently sections of the strata
occur only at wide intervals.
To draw a definite line between the Ipswich and the “ Rolling
Downs ” beds is quite impracticable. The appearance of beleranites
and ammonites generally marks the transition.
Although mainly a marine deposit, plant beds and coal seams indi-
cating fresh water, or terrestrial conditions, are by no means rare.
The greater part of the surface of the division known as Ayrshire,”
near Winton, is covered by fresh-water beds. At one time I indulged
the hope of being able to separate a lower, or marine, from an upper
or fresh-water series ; * but recent explorations have satisfied me that
this is impracticable, plant beds and coal seams being met with at
different horizons, and not being identifiable over large areas. It may
be said that I have not seen a single plant from the Rolling Downs in
determinable condition. The shales on which they are imprinted
crumble rapidly on exposure. Mr. Gregory, however, mentions (“ Re-
port on the search for coal between Dalby and Roma.” Brisbane:
By Authority, 1879) that many well-preserved specimens of ferns,
including Taeniopteris and Pecopteris , were found in an ironstone bed
in Bungeworgorai Creek, 10 miles above the main Western road, and
a Sphenopteris from the Bulloo River, in the south-west corner of the
colony, is included in the collections in the Queensland Museum.
A seam of coal three or four inches thick was cut in a well on the
boundary of Werna and Ayrshire Downs runs, north of Winton, at
the depth of 140 feet A second thin seam was cut between 140 and
180 feet. The following analyses show the first seam to be very near
in composition to the Lesmahagow Cannel coal, Lanarkshire.
Werna CoAL.f
Lesmahagow Coal.
Carbon 3907 39-40
Volatile 56-96 56-60
Ash 4-97 4-00
100-00
10000
* See “ Report on the Geological features of part of the district to be
traversed by the proposed Transcontinental Railway.” Brisbane; By Author-
ity, 1885.
t Transcontinental Railway Report, p. 20.


In the Government well, Winton, a coal seam 15 inches thick was
struck, at 70 feet, and another seam, 2 feet thick, at 100 feet.*
The following is an analysis of this coal:—
Carbon 52-49
Volatile 42-93
Ash 4-58
100-00
In Sheppard’s Well, Winton, a coal seam, seven inches thick, was
struck at 80 feet, and another, 2 feet thick, at 121 feet. The follow-
ing is an analysis of the latter: —
Carbon ... ... ... 30-32
Volatile 49 - 34
Ash ... ... ... ... 20'34
100-00
At Yindex Station, east of Winton, a 9-inch coal seam was cut in a
well at 75 feet, and other two seams (the upper one 16 inches thick)
between 75 and 100 feet.
Seven miles R., 15° E. of Yindex, a coal seam, 2 feet thick, was
struck in a bore for water, at a depth of 130 feet.
Coal has been found at Milta, east of Tambo (three seams in 36
feet, one seam feet thick) and on the head of Bungeworgorai
Creek, north-east of Mitchell (a thick seam) and at Dulbydilla, the
present western terminus of the Brisbane railway. In the latter
place, in a bore put down for the Railway Department, by Mr.
Falconer, grey shales, with small seams of coal, lignite and decomposed
coal, were met with from 28 feet to 83 feet 6 inches. At 350 feet a
3-feet seam of good coal lay beneath a series of green sandstones, 120
feet thick.
Many beds of gypsum occur in the Downs formation. One of
workable thickness, and of great purity, occurs near Collingwood.
Rear Fort Bowen, on the Saxby River, a spring of hot water rises
above the surface of the plain. Its overflow deposits a white incrusta-
tion which gave the following analysis :
Water 27-793
Silica ... 0-600
Chlorine 3-369
Sodium 2-183
Carbonic Acid 33-735
Soda 31-690
99-370 f
The fossils of the Rolling Downs formation have given rise to much
controversy among geologists and palaeontologists, who have pro-
nounced various localities, from limited collections, to be of ages
* Loc. cit., p. 17.
f Daintree, Q. J. Geol. Soc., vol. xxvm, p. 285.


ranging from Rhaetic up to Lower Chalk. It is remarkable that
almost every palaeontologist who has worked on Queensland materials,
has come to the conclusion that fossils from different localities must
have been mixed up, and this explanation has appeared to be specially
necessary in the case of fossils from the Rolling Downs. On the
other hand, my own explorations have satisfied me that Queensland
fossils are not more liable to this kind of accident than fossils from
other countries ; that the mixing up which has so annoyed palaeonto-
logists has been perpetrated by nature herself; that we have a con-
tinuous series of beds of enormous thickness in which, however, fi’om
the scarcity of sections, it would be impossible to map out “ horizons;”
and that the fossils from the Rolling Downs must he treated as a
whole. Shading gradually upwards from the plant-bearing Ipswich
beds, the Rolling Downs formation contains a marine (and occasionally
freshwater) fauna, representing the migration of many species which
in Europe date from Rhaetic to Cretaceous, but which cannot he
quoted as arguing a strict contemporaneity of life.
The palaeontology of the “ Downs ” was ably brought up to date
(1872) by Mr. R. Etheridge, senior, in his “ Description of the
Palaeozoic and Mesozoic Fossils of Queensland.”*
In 1862 the Rev. W. B. Clarke f noticed a suite of fossils collected
between the Balonne and Maranoa rivers. They were collected by
Mr. W. P. Gordon, from Wollumbilla Creek (25 miles east of Roma),
Amby River (18 miles east of Mitchell), and Fitzroy Downs (between
Wollumbilla Creek and Mount Abundance). On being submitted to
Professor McCoy, they were named as follow, and pronounced “ not
younger than the base of the Great Oolite, and not older than the base
of the Trias
1. Serpulae (gigantic).
2. Pentacrinus.
3. Monotis (Lias. ?).
4. Pecten (Lias. ?).
5. Lingula.
6. Myacites.
7. Avicula, new species of the section Meleagrina.
8. Lima.
9. Turbo.
10. Natica.
11. Rhynchonella.
12. Monotis (Saliferian ?).
13. Pecten (Muschelkalk?).
14. Myophoria, a typical new species (Muschelkalk P).
15. Lamellibranchiate bivalve, of a new genus, between Modiola
and Pachydomus.
16. Moeonia or Astartilia.
17. Lamellibranchiate bivalve, of a new genus.
* Q. J. Geol. Soc., London, vol. xxvm, p. 817.
t Q. J. Geol. Soc., London, vol. xvm, p. 244.


18. Avicula.
19. Small Orthoceras (?)
20. Belemnites, like B. giganteus, and proposed by Mr. Clarke to be
called B. Barklyi.
21. Area.
22. Nucula.
23. Modiola- like shell.
24. Fossil wood.
26. Lamelliferous Coral (very like a fossil from the Wianamatta
beds, N.S.W.)
26. Fossils very like fish-teeth, but considered by Professor McCoy
to be the spines of probably the suckers of No. 20.
27. Scalpellum (?).
28. Sponge
29. Belemnites (like B. paxillosus).
30. Dentalium.
Professor McCoy, in 1866,* named the following fossils from the
Flinders River, at the base of Mount Walker, near Hughenden :• —
REPTILIA.
Icthyosaurus australis , McCoy.
Plesiosaurus Sutherlandi, McCoy (allied to that from New Zealand
described by Professor Owen).
P. macrospondylus, McCoy.
CEPHALOPODA.
Ammonites Sutherlandi , McCoy (resembling A. Barandieri of the
Gault of France).
A. Flindersi, McCoy (resembling A. Beudanti, Br. of the Lower
Chalk of France).
Belemnites diptycha, McCoy (resembling B. plena of the Lower
Cretaceous beds of England).
Ancyloceras Flindersi , McCoy (equalling A. giganteus of the Lower
Greensand in size, but more nearly resembling in structure A.
Faborelli of the Lower Greensand of France.
LAMELLIBEANCHIATA.
Inoceramus Carsoni, McCoy (resembling I. mytiloides, Sow. of the
Chalk of England).
I. Sutherlandi , McCoy (identical with the English species I.
Cuvieri).
Mr. Charles Moore, F.G.S., in an important paper read in 1869,f
describes a suite of fossils sent to him by the Rev. W. B. Clarke, from
Wollumbilla, Fitzroy Downs, Mitchell Downs (Amby River), Nive
River, Upper Maranoa westof Bendango, Mount Abundance, Blythdale
(15 miles from Wollumbilla), and Bungeworgorai. The following is
his list:—
* Trans. Roy. Soc. Victoria, vol. vn, p. 49.
t Q. J■ Geol. Soc. London, vol. xxvi, p. 226.


PLANTS.
Wood. two. sp.
AMOEPHOZOA.
Purisiphonia GlarJcei, sp. nov. Bowerbank (Wollumbilla)
FOEAMINIPEEA.
Planorhulina Ungeriana, D’Orb.
P. lobatula, D’Orb.
Cristellaria acut auricular is, Ficht. and Moll.
C. acut auricular is var. langicostata, Moore (Wollumbilla)
G. cultrata, var. radiata, Moore.
Polymorphina lactea, W. and J.
P. gibba (?) D’Orb.
Dentalina communis, D’Orb.
Vaginulina striata, D’Orb.
ECHINODEEMATA.
Echinus, (spines), (Wollumbilla).
Pentacrinus australis, Moore. (Wollumbilla and Mitchell
ANNELIDA.
Serpula intestinalis, Phillips.
CEUSTACEA.
Balanus, sp.
Sp. of sub. class Entomostraca.
POLYZOA.
Lepralia oolitica, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
Polyzoon. sp.
BEACHIOPODA.
Lingula ovalis, Sow.
Bhynchonella, rustica, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
B. solitaria, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
Terebratella Bavidsonii, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
Argyope Wollumbillaensis, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
A. punctata, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
Piscina apicalis, Moore (Wollumbilla).
LAMELLIBEANCHIATA.
Avicula Braamburiensis, (Phillips).
A. simplex, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
A. aequalis, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
A. Barklyi, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
A. substriata, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
A. reflecta, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
A. umbonalis, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
A. corbiensis, Moore. (Mount Corby).
A. sp. (Wollumbilla).
Downs),


Lima Gordonii, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
L. sp.
L. sp.
L. multistriata, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
Pecten cequilineatus, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
P. socialis, Moore (Wollumbilla).
P. fimbriatus, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
P. gigantea, (Wollumbilla).
P. sp.
P. sp.
Gytherea Glarkei, Moore. (Maranoa River, and Wollumbilla),
C gibhosa, Moore. (Wollumbilla).
Thracia Wilsoni, Moore. (Amby R. and Bungeworgorai Creek)
Panopcea rugosa, Moore. (Bungeworgorai Creek).
My a Maccoyi, Moore, (between Amby and Maranoa River).
Trigonia lineata, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
Perna gigantea , Moore, (Wollumbilla).
Area plicata, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
•A. prcelonga, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
Astarte Wollumbillaensis Moore, (Wollumbilla).
Cardinia, sp.
Cardium, sp.
Goniomya depressa, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
Leda australis , Moore, (Wollumbilla).
Lucina anomala, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
L (?) australis, Moore, (Wollumbilla)
Mactra trigonalis , Moore, Nine River.
M, sp.
Modiola unica, Moore, Wollumbilla.
Myacites planus, Moore, Wollumbilla.
Mytilus injiatus, Moore, Wollumbilla.
M rugo-costatus, Moore, Wollumbilla.
M planus, Moore, Wollumbilla.
Nucula Gooperi, Moore, Wollumbilla.
N. truncata, Moore, Wollumbilla.
N, sp.
Tancredia plana, Moore, (Blythesdale).
GASTEROPODA.
Natica variablis, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
N. ornatissima, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
N, sp.
Actceon Hochstetteri, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
A. depressus, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
Belphinula reflecta, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
Bentalium lineatum, Moore, (Wollumbilla).
Solarium ? sp.
Trochus, sp.
Turbo, sp.


CEPHALOPODA.
Crioceras australe, Moore, (Upper Maranoa).
Belemnites paxillosus (?) Voltz.
B australis , Moore, (Upper Maranoa).
B, sp.
B, sp.
Teuthis, sp. (Wolhimbilla).
PISCES.
Hybodus ? (teeth and scales).
Lepidotus, (scales).
In M. R. Etheridges’ appendix, to Mr. Daintree’s paper, the fol
lowing fossils are described :
LAMELLIBRANCHIATA.
Inoceramus Marathonensis sp. nov Eth. (Marathon Station, Flinders
River).
I. multiplicatus , Stol. var elongatus Eth. (do., Flinders River).
I. pernoides, sp. nov. Eth. (do., Flinders River).
I. allied to Iproblematicus, D’Orb. (do., Flinders River).
Avicula (Ancella) Hughendenensis, Eth. (Hughenden).
CEPHALOPODA.
Crioceras or Ancyloceras.
Ammonites Sutherlandi sp. nov. Eth. (McKinlay Range).
A. Beudanti, Bong, var. Mitchellii, Eth. (Hughenden).
A. Daintreei, Eth. (Hughenden).
Belemnites, two or three sp. (Belcombe Creek, Black Downs).
PISCES.
Aspidorhynchus, sp. ?
One new species and seven genera not specifically determined,
(included in the Daintree Collection) marked “ Gordon Downs,” are
given in Mr. Etheridges list as “ Oolitic,” but are here omitted, as
if this is Gordon Downs, on the head of the Roper, near Clermont,
there is reason to believe that the deposit belongs to the Dawson Coal
measures.
Sir Richard Owen, K C. 8., describes in the Quarterly Journal of
the Geological Society of London (vol. 38, p. 178), under the name
Notocheles costata , a chelonian reptile from the Flinders River.
In accompanying Hann’s Exploring Expedition in 1872, Mr.
Norman Taylor discovered richly fossilferous deposits in the Walsh
district. From notes which he has obligingly communicated to me
I make the following extracts :
“At Camp 11 on the Walsh River a large quantity of Mesozoic
fossils were also found, and likewise at Camp 79 (return journey).
At Elizabeth Creek (near what is now Wrotham Park Station), where
mostly belemnites were found in a calcareous conglomerate. In a
creek, a short distance to the N.E. of Camp 31, on the Walsh River


(return -journey), there occur large quantities of ironstone nodules, in
one of which I discovered a fine and very perfect crustacean, which,
however, appears to have been lost, as it was not noticed by Mr.
Etheridge when describing the collection. The Mesozoic rocks here
rest on grey felsitic quartz-porphyry.’
“ In a letter from the late Rev. W. B. Clarke to myself, dated 4th
June, 1874, he says: —‘Professor Etheridge says there is no specimen
of Orthoceras in the entire series.’
“ Carruthers writes thus :— ‘ There is not sufficient to warrant
establishing a species, but the fragments point to a form of
Taeniopteris nearly allied to Stangeritesensis (Oldham and Morris
in Indian Survey Memoirs), which Schimper calls Angiopteridiensis.
We must have more materials, however, before we can be certain.’
“ The following is an extract from a letter of Mr. Theodore Staiger,
formerly Curator of the Queensland Museum, dated 18th May, 1874,
giving Mr. Etheridge’s description of the Walsh River fossils :
“ ‘ The Walsh River fossils consist of the following forms :
CEPHALOPODA
Ammonites , allied to A. clypeiformis.
Ammonites , sp (?)
Grioceri, 4 sp.
Belemnites, 2 sp.
All from nodules.
81-YALVE
SHELLS.
Myacites.
Byssoarcus.
Solemya.
Area.
Panopcea.
Ingceramus.
Hinnites.
Cytherea.
Gyprina.
Myoconcha.
Pecten.
Teredo in fossil wood,
“‘ I believe the whole of these are Cretaceous (Lower) and one
perhaps Neocomian. Most of the species are new, but to figure and
describe them would serve no good purpose, as they are all apparently
in drift nodules, and can hardly have been found in situ. I shall
always have much pleasure in rendering you what assistance I can in
these matters, but I would at the same time point out the uselessness
of sending home any fossils for determination which are simply drifted
surface specimens. The perplexing mixture of forms from Wollam-
billa, previously described by Moore, arose from this collection of
specimens from drifted nodules. The whole series will be returned
to the colony.’


“No mention is made of some fine Icthyosanrus vertebree dis-
covered on the Walsh by Warner (one of our party), nor of
my crustacean. Of the the Orthoceras I sent a drawing (natural
size) to the late Rev. W. B. Clarke, and I still adhere to my opinion
that it was an Orthoceras.
“ The Mitchell River bed is composed (at Camp 14) of thin grey
shales and brittle conchoidally fractured marly sandstones, full of
large and small flattened globular concretions. The sandstones are
full of Dentaliums (?) and small bi-valves (Leda?) ; and the concre-
tions of large bi-valves and cephalopoda (Pecten , Ammonites, &c.,)
always lying on their flat surfaces. That they have been formed in
situ by segregation of the calcareous matter round the decom-
posing animal there can be no doubt. The idea of their drift origin
is simply preposterous, as you will say should you see them.”
It is not surprising that Mr. Taylor should feel agrieved at the con-
temptuous treatment of his collection. Nodules such as he describes
are of common occurrence among the shale-beds all over the Rolling
Downs, and I have no doubt that the fossils were in situ, and am
satisfied that to figure and describe them (if still extant, and I think I
have recognised them in the Brisbane Museum), would be greatly to
the advantage of science. Mr. Skene, of Wrotham Park Station,
assures me that ammonites and belemnites occur at Elizabeth Creek
in situ. I have already expressed my opinion that the mixing up of
the Wollumbilla forms was done by nature, and not by Mr. Gordon.
Orthocera is not at all uncommon in the Mesozoic beds of Aramac,
and I have recently received a specimen from the Rev. T. W. Ramm,
of Hughenden, which surely belongs to that genus.
In his paper “On a Collection of Fossils from the Bowen River
Coalfield,” &c., Mr. R. Etheridge, junior, described in 1880, under the
name of Crioceras Jackii, a new species of Cephalopod, broughtTrom
the Tate River by Mr. A. C. Macmillan.
The following specimens from the “ Rolling Downs ” are in the
Queensland Museum, Brisbane :
Hamites or Hamelina (Towerhill).
Belemnites, sp. (Towerhill).
Hamites, sp. (Ward R.).
Belemnites, sp. (Ward R.).
Ammonites, sp. allied to A. rhima, Stol. (Barcoo River, near Tambo).
Ancyloceras, sp. (Rodney Downs, near Aramac).
A., sp. allied to A. Theobaldinus, Stol. (Bowen Downs, near
Muttaburra).
Pinna, sp. (Bowen Downs, near Muttaburra).
Inoceramus fernoides, (Bowen Downs, near Muttaburra).
Aspidorhynchus, sp. (O’Connel Creek).
Icthyosaurus.
Vertebrae of Shark, (Richmond Downs).
In accompanying the Transcontinental Railway Expedition, in
1881-2, I made a collection of fossils from the Rolling Downs, which
was sent to London. lam indebted to Dr. Henry Woodward for a


description of a new neuropterous insect [Geological Magazine, New
Series, Decade 3, vol. I, p. 337] and to Mr. Robert ■ Etheridge,
junior, for the identification and description (not yet published) of
the rest of the fossils in the following list: —
PISCES.
LOCALITT.
Otodus (fangs and tooth) ... ... ... ... ... 12
0. apendiculatus, Agassiz ... ... ... ... ... 16
Small vertebrae of a teleostean fish ... ... ... 16
Lamna (portion of tooth) ... ... ... ... ... 17
EEPTILIA.
Posterior costal plate of a chelonian ... ... ... 16
INSECTA.
JEschna Flindersiensis, sp. nov., Woodward ... ... 1
LAMELLIBEANCHIATA.
Ancilla Hughendenensis, formerly Liversidgei (Avicula
Hughendenensis of R. Etheridge, senior) 1,7, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17
Pseudomonotis semi-gJohosa, Stol. var. ... ... ... 11
P. BocJcwoodensis , Eth., ... ... ... ... ... 11
Inoceramus Garsoni, McCoy,... ... ... ... .. 3, 5
I. Sutherlandi, McCoy, ... ... ... ... 3, 6
I. Pernoides, Eth., ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
I. 3rd sp., ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
I. undet.
J. 2, 4,10,11,13
Amusium sulcatellum, Stol. (var.) ... ... ... ... 11
Unio (sp. 1) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
TJnio (sp. 2) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
GASTEEOPODA.
Natica, sp. nov., ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
CEPHALOPODA.
Fragments, ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
BeJemnites, ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,12,19
LOCALITIES.
1. Flinders R., 7 miles above Marathon Station.
2. Flinders R., 7 miles below Marathon Station.
3. Flinders R., 3 miles above Richmond Downs Station.
4. Flinders R., at Richmond Downs Stockyard.
5. Flinders R., 13f miles below Richmond Downs Station.
6. Flinders R., 21| miles below Richmond Downs Station.
7. Neelia Creek, at the crossing of the Cloncuiuy Rd.
8. Cloncurry Rd., at Julia Creek.
9. Cloncurry Rd., 1 mile west of William R.
10. Cloncurry Rd., 8 miles west of William R.


11. Rockwood Station, Landsborough R.
12. Stone Hut, Rockwood Ck., Landsborongh R.
13. Rockwood Ck., junction with Landsborongh R.
14. Landsborough R,, 5£ miles N.N.W. of Rockwood Station.
15. Landsborough R . near the head of Jirking Ck.
16. Kamilaroy Station, Leichhardt R. (Limestone)
17. Leichhardt R., 9 miles from the mouth of Gunpowder Creek
(Limestone).
18. Sheppards’ Well, Winton.
19. Government Well, Winton.
Mr. Etheridge observes (MS. Notes), “We may conclude with
moderate certainty that your Queensland beds are of upper cretaceous
age, and perhaps represent that portion known as the lower chalk of
England, and the Cenomanian Group of continental geologists.”
In addition to the fossils last above described, a considerable col-
lection has recently been made by me from Tambo, Blackall, Aramac,
Nive River, Mitchell, and other localities in the Mitchell, Warrego,
and Maranoa districts. Mr. Robert Sefton, the well-known explorer
and prospector, has recently presented to the Geological Survey Col-
lection a gigantic ammonite from the Walsh River, 15 miles above
the telegraph station. Mr. R. Sexton, C.E., has presented a suite of
fossils from the neighbourhood of Mitchell, which includes two speci-
mens very like Ammonites Beudanti. Mr. Daintree mentions* the
occurrence of Belemnites on the Dugald River, Cloncurry district.
In his Report, dated 14th December, 1884, on the Croydon Gold-
field, Mr. Samwell thus refers to a fossiliferous region in the neigh-
bourhood of the rush:—“ Below Croydon station-house and the hill
called ‘ the Springs ’ there are several isolated hills composed of fos-
siliferous rocks, in which are found great quantities of sea-shells,
slugs, worms, etc. In one of these hills, which we particularly
examined, we found, next to the sea-shells, impressions of sandstone
showing the impressions of land-flora, ferns predominating. Near
this sandstone, and partly intermixed, on a precipitous slope of the
hill, are what appear to be limestone rocks. In these hard rocks are
seen the tracks of birds and other animals, the fossil remains of fish
and lizard-like reptiles, and flora of the most exquisite description.”
It is evident that very important material is here available. Mr.
Samwell has kindly promised to send me his collection of fossils.
Between Roma and the Gray Range, the Downs formation is covered
in many places with the debris of the extensively denuded “ Desert
Sandstone.” The open plains, so characteristic of the Downs further
North, in such places is changed to stunted scrub or brushwood.
Many of these scrubs are chiefly composed of mulga and boree—
timber which during the drought, which has prevailed for the last
three years, have saved the lives of thousands of cattle, which would
otherwise have perished owing to the failure of grass. A little army
* Report on the Cape River diggings, and the mineral discoveries in Northern
Queensland. Brisbane : By Authority, 1868.


of axemen has been at work felling the trees, whose leaves are much
relished by stock.
The subject of an artesian water-supply for the West has recently
engaged the attention of the Government. As the rainfall on the
Downs themselves is not sufficient to saturate the strata, my belief is
that a supply must be sought for at the junction of the “ Rolling
Downs Formation,” and the underlying palaeozoic rocks. Such a
supply would be drawn from the rains which fall on the palaeozoic
ranges of the Eastern part of the colony The first experiment is to
be made at Blackall, with a Pennsylvanian beam borer capable of
penetrating 2500 feet.
CHAPTER IX.
DESERT SANDSTONE.
This remarkable formation must at one time have covered at least
three-fourths of the colony of Queensland, as well as a great part of
South and Western Australia. The waters in which it was deposited,
had for their eastern shores the cordillera of palaeozoic rocks, which
look down upon the Pacific. The deposit filled up the inequalities of
the denuded surface of the rocks of the “ Rolling Downs; ” while the
Mackinlay and other ranges lifted their peaks as islands above the
waters.
The base of the Desert Sandstone on the Western side of the Cor-
dillera rests unconformably on the “ Rolling Downs ” formation, at
an average elevation of about 1800 feet above the sea level. In the
South-Western part of the colony its elevation is probably not more
than 1000 feet. In the York Peninsula it steals gradually down-
ward, till it reaches the sea at Temple Bay, and covers the Peninsula
from the Pacific to the Gulf of Carpentaria. In the East, important
fragments of the Desert Sandstone rest, at a considerable elevation,
on the Bowen Rarer coalfield, and on the auriferous rocks of Cania
and Croombit. At Maryborough and Moreton Bay, sandstones which
have been referred to the Desert Sandstone come down to the sea
level. The formation has suffered extremely little disturbance. It is
almost always found in horizontal beds, which form table-lands, with
terraced edges. It consists mainly of siliceous sandstone and con-
glomerates. Among the sandstones thin beds of coal occur to the
North of Cooktown. A thick bed of coal or oil shale has recently
been discovered on Bullock Creek, near the Northern Railway. The
sandstones are mainly white; but red beds are largely developed in


the York Peninsula. The latter form fair pastoral country, but the
greater part of the formation justifies the name of “ Desert Sand-
stone,” given to it by Daintree. It grows, as a rule, worthless grasses,
mainly spinifex, and is thickly covered with rather stunted timber.
Opals form the chief commercial product of this formation. They
occur in nodules of feruginous siliceous sandstone and siliceous
ironstone. Although the majority do not exactly meet the definition
of “ precious opal ” insisted on by jewellers, they are not less
beautiful. A change in popular fancy, or the eradication of prejudice,
is all that is required to make the Queensland Opals as valuable as the
most appreciated gems from Hungary. Among their chief sources
are the Opal Range, the Winton, the Mayne River, the Canaway
Range, Bulgroo, Nickavilla, and Listowel Downs. A fine collection
is to be displayed by Mr. Bond at the Exhibition.
The Desert Sandstone attains a thickness of 300 to 400 feet on the
West slopes of the Coast Range. In the West of the Colony, how-
ever, it dwindles to 50 or 60 feet.
The Desert Sandstone affords a most impressive instance of
denudation. The most casual observer, standing on the edges of one
of its table-lands, cannot fail to be struck with the obvious former
connection of the terrace-edged table-lands which meet the eye on all
sides. This formation, geologically so new, is left only in isolated
fragments, and does not cover, in Queensland, one twentieth part of
the area over which it once extended.
The desert sandstone has yielded little but plant remains, chiefly
fragments of silicified wood. Mr. Norman Taylor, late of the
Geological Survey of Victoria, who accompanied Hann’s Exploring
Expedition, however, found in it, at Battle Camp, near Cooktown,
some fossils which Mr. Robert Etheridge, senr., described as “ a
Hinnites like H. velatrix, and an Ostrea like O. Scnverbyi, Eth.” Mr.
Etheridge, however, thought that the fossils were drifted specimens,
lying on the surface; which Mr. Taylor assures me was not the case.
In confirmation of Mr. Taylor I have the unquestionable testimony of
Mr. A. C. McMillan that he himself had seen fossils in the locality
referred to by the former gentleman. In any case, however, the
fossils are insufficient by themselves to determine the age of the
deposits.
In his paper on the Geology of Queensland the late Mr. R, Daintree
first referred in 1872 to a series of rocks occurring at Maryborough,
and containing fossils which, in the appendix to Daintree’s paper, Mr.
Etheridge, senr., named as follows :
Cyprina expansa, Eth.
Trigonia nasuta, Eth.
Crenatula gibbosa, Eth.
Shell resembling Lucina ( Codallia) percrassa, Stol.
Cucullcea robusta, Eth.
C. costata, Eth.
Nucula quadrat a, Eth.
N gigantea, Eth.


Tellina Mariaeburiensis, Eth
T. sp.
Avicula alata, Eth.
Natica lineata, Eth
Panopcea sulcata, Eth.
Mr. Etheridge placed the Maryborough beds (which lie in the
Burrum River Coalfield) below the Hughenden and Marathon beds.
There is, however, no stratigraphical evidence whatever in support of
this, and it is obvious from the number of new species, that the
co-relation of the Maryborough beds with any European horizon rests
on very insecure grounds.
Mr. Gregory* says that the Maryborough beds merge upwards into
the Desert Sandstone, which “appears as a thin covering to the
older rocks along the sea coast from the Burnett River to the Logan
River.” If we could be sure of the identity of the “ thin covering ”
with Desert Sandstone the relations of the Maryborough beds woul d
be clearer; but the point is a doubtful one. lam inclined to regard
the “ thin covering ” as a newer deposit than the Desert Sandstone —
possibly post tertiary. But the solution of the difficulty must await
the production of further evidence.
I have, in the meantime, coloured the Maryborough beds, pro-
visionally, as Desert Sandstones, but the arrangement is merely a
temporary convenience.
Leaving the Maryborough beds out of the question, the only direct
evidence bearing on the age of the Desert Sandstone is that it lies
unconformably on the “ Rolling Downs ” foundation. It may be the
equivalent of the Upper Cretaceous.
In the arid Western interior the table-lands of Desert Sandstone
serve one useful purpose. They are “ sponges ” which absorb the
rainfall, and let it out in springs at their junction with the under-
lying more argillaceous rocks of the “ Rolling Downs.” Some of
these springs were still active, at the end of 1885, after three years of
drought.
CHAPTER X.
TERTIARY,
The raised beaches near Brisbane and Townsville contain fossils
which have been classed as tertiary. I find it, however, impossible to
give a list which would be of any value in the present state of our
knowledge.
* Geological Features of the South Eastern Districts of Queensland-
Brisbane : By Authority, 1879.


Mr. A. C. Gregory, in his “ Report on the Geological Features of
the South-eastern Districts of Queensland.” Brisbane: By Author-
ity, 1879, refers to certain localities in which the “ carbonaceous rocks
of the Mesozoic period had been long exposed to erosive action, and
had become covered by a vegetation which included plants of the
tertiary period —as at Clifton mine on Darling Downs, where, under
30 feet of basalt, large pieces of fossil wood were found, so little
altered that it split and warped several inches on being exposed to
the air. It was associated with woody seed-vessels (Gonchotheca
turgida).”
It is probable that many of the auriferous and stanniferous drifts of
the colony date from tertiary times.
Auriferous gravels are seen north of Cania Goldfield, on the lofty
watershed between the Burnett and Dawson, capped by isolated
basaltic table-lands; these drifts I suspect to be of tertiary age.
Mr. Norman Taylor classes the auriferous drifts of the Palmer as
tertiary. On the Cape River Mr. R. Daintree divides the auriferous
drifts into “ alluvial ” (Recent) and “Pliocene,”* on what evidence
he does not say. Mr. Aplinf describes “ made hills ”of pebbly quartz
drift of “ older date than the existing valleys ” of the Gympie district.
The identification of gravels in Queensland with the drifts of Vic-
toria, from mere resemblance, seems to me to be rash.
The quantity of stream tin obtained from the Stanthorpe district
has been enormous. The stanniferous drifts are doubtless of the same
age as those on the New South Wales side of the border, which are
described by Mr. T. W. Edgeworth David,J as older Tertiary.
A large area is covered by flows of basaltic lava, probably of tertiary
age, to be afterwards described.
About 22 miles south-south-west of Rockhampton, near the
head of the Dee Creek, a tributary of the Dawson River, is the now
famous Mount Morgan gold-mine. I visited this mine in October,
1884, and the following description is taken from the Official Report.
Brisbane : By Authority, 1884.
In the immediate neighbourhood of Mount Morgan, the “ country rock"
consists mainly of blueish-grey quartzite —a fine-grained siliceous sandstone,
now more or less vitrified—full of minute crystals of iron pyrites and specks of
magnetic iron ore, greywackes of the ordinary type; hard fine-grained sand-
stones of mingled siliceous and felspathic materials, now somewhat indurated;
and, lastly, occasional masses of shale, hardened to a flinty consistency, and a
few belts of serpentine. As the stratified rocks in this particular locality
appear to have been in thick beds, and as their metamorphism has gone a
considerable length, it is not easy to be certain of either dip or strike. The
stratified rocks are, moreover, interrupted and intersected in every direction
by dykes and other intrusive masses of dolerite (itself altered by the substitu-
tion of viridite for its augite or olivine), rhyolite, and other igneous rocks, the
intrusive masses apparently occupying as much space as the remnant of the
original stratified formation itself.
# Report on the Cape River Diggings, etc. Brisbane : By Authority, 1868.
t Report on the Gympie Goldfield, Brisbane : By Authority, 1868.
X Progress Report, in Report of the Department of Mines, New South Wales
for 1884, p. 153.


This country rock is traversed by reefs of the ordinary description, as, for
instance, the Golden Spur Eeefs, the Crow’s Nest reef, and the mundic reef, all
of which contain a pretty fair amount of gold.
Mount Morgan itself contains gold in a very unusual —I believe, a quite un-
precedented—formation.
Aneroid measurements give the altitude of Eazorback as 900 feet; of Hall
and Company’s offices, near No. 1 machine, as 705 feet ; and of Mount Morgan,
as 1,225 feet above the sea level. The mine is at the summit of the mountain.
The work (apart from prospecting or exploring operations) is carried on in
two quarries or faces. No. 1 cuts into the hill from a level of about 25 feet
below the summit, and is designed simply to remove the top of the mountain,
for the purpose of passing it through the stampers. No. 2, or Magazine
Quarry, presents the aspect of a “ sidling” road, cut out of a steep hill, and
attacks the auriferous deposit at a level of about 100 feet below No. 1.
The central portion of the upper cutting is a large mass of brown haematite
ironstone, generally in great blocks (up to some tons in weight) with a stalac-
titic structure, as if the iron oxide had gradually filled up cavities left in the
original deposit. The ironstone contains gold of extraordinary fineness, which,
however, after a little practice, can be detected in almost every fresh fracture.
The ironstone is more or less mixed with fin e siliceous granules. Gradually, to the
right and left of the central mass, the silica more and more replaces the iron-
stone. It is a frothy, spongy, or cellular sinter, sometimes so light from the
entanglement of air in its pores that it floats in the water like pumice. Fine
gold is desseminated throughout this siliceous deposit, as well as in the iron-
stone. Near the west end of the cutting is a vertical dyke of kaolin, mixed
with fine siliceous granules, passing into pure kaolin, with some silicates of
magnesia, including a fine variety of French chalk. I selected a number of
specimens as characteristic of the various deposits of the upper cutting. These,
when assayed by Mr. Karl Staiger, gave the following results :
No. s.—Stalactic brown haematite, from middle of cutting; 6oz. lldwt. gold
per ton.
No. 6.—Siliceous sinter, veined with quartz; 4oz. sdwt. gold per ton.
No. 7—A mixed mass of ironstone and silica from the level of the road, east
of the dyke; soz. 3dwt. gold per ton.
No. B.—lronstained siliceous sinter, from the west side of dyke; lOoz. 14dwt.
gold per ton.
The lower or magazine face presents a sort of fan-like arrangement of its
various materials. In the centre is a band (almost vertical) of brown haematite
in large “ bombs,” with a mammilated botryoidal or sometimes reniform
appearance. To the right (east) is a neax-ly vertical deposit of aluminous iron
ochre, followed by a mass (still nearly vertical) of red haematite in large cel-
lular bombs. To the east is a broad mass of loose ironstained siliceous and
aluminous material, which begins to lean eastward like the outer feathers of a
fan. A great mass of loose earthy red haematite, another of brown haematite
weathering to iron ochre, another of red earthy haematite, and another of
brown haematite in large (ton) blocks, appear in succession as the cutting is
followed to the east. The magazine (near the east-end of the cutting) is exca-
vated in a fine white siliceous earth, and the cutting ends with a mass of soft
earthy aluminate. Beginning from the west side of the nearly vertical mass of
brown haematite first described, we pass in succession in going westward a band
of yellow ochre, a broad belt of light siliceous sinter, ironstained, and contain-
ing some angular fragments of the quartzite of the “ country rocks,” a belt of
similar siliceous sinter mixed with earthy red haematite, and finally a broad
mass of loose siliceous sinter traversed by siliceous veins, and containing some
angular fragments of the “ country rock,” the members of the series leaning
more and more fan-fashion to the west as they recede from the central vertical
bands. At the end of the cutting is a mass of magnesian and aluminous
silicates, which is probably the prolongation of the dyke seen in the upper
quarry. Mr. Lyle, the manager, informed me that he had got “ prospects ”in


every part of this cutting, with the exception of the siliceous earth at the
magazine. This was corroborated by my own observations. I ground and
washed a great number of specimens (of my own selection) from both the upper
and lower cutting, and from every variety of material, and was surprised and
delighted with the prospects obtained, in most cases from stuff which miners
would regard as most unpromising.
Mr. Staiger’s assays of characteristic samples selected from the lower cutting
yielded gold as follows :
No. I.—Brown haematite, 3oz. 6dwt. per ton.
No. 2.—Bed haematite, 6oz. 16dwt. per ton.
No. 3. —Aluminous rock from west of dyke, no gold.
No. 4. —Siliceous sinter from among the aluminous rock,
3oz. 15dwt. per ton.
Down the hillsides to the north, west, and south, a similar deposit is every-
where met with —a frothy or spongy matrix, sometimes aluminous, and some-
times siliceous, generally ironstained, and occasionally associated with large
masses of red and brown haematite; but gold has as yet only been obtained
from a few places away from the hill-top, although naturally there has been
vigorous prospecting (so far as possible in an unusually dry season) wherever
the “ formation ” resembled that of Mount Morgan. Perhaps the deposit on
the slopes is more aluminous and less siliceous, and contains less of iron oxides
than on the hill-top; but these are the chief differences, and the formation has
evidently one origin throughout.
After a careful study of the whole formation, I have come to the conclusion
that nothing but a Thermal Spring, in the open air, could have deposited the
material under consideration. The frothy siliceous sinter agrees in every re-
spect with the deposits of New Zealand and Iceland geysers, and of the still
more wonderful hot springs of the Yellowstone National Park, so graphically
and scientifically described by Dr. A. C. Peale. (“ Twelfth Annual Report of
the United States Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories, Part
11. Section 2,” “On the Thermal Springs of Yellowstone National Park/’
Washington: 1883). The “frothy” and cavernous condition of the siliceous
sinter of Mount Morgan, may be accounted for by the escape of steam, while
the silica was yet (after its deposition on the evaporation of the water), in the
gelatinous condition so frequently observed in the deposit of hot springs. The
aluminous silicates represent the familiar outbursts, and flows of mud. The
iron oxide appears to have been deposited in some cases along with the silica
and alumina, and in others to have been deposited later —its solvent fluid hav-
ing been, as it were, injected into the interstices, vesicles, and caverns of the
silica and alumina. In some cases it may have been originally pyrites, as it
now and then occurs in cubical hollows. Calcareous sinter is very common
in siliceous springs, and its absence from Mount Morgan, must needs imply
the local absence of limestones among the rocks from which the spring was
fed. The silica would be found abundantly in the quartzites, and the alumina
in the shales and greywacks of the coimtry in the neighbourhood, and possibly
both silica and alumina may have come in part from a deep-seated underlying
granite. The gold, and to some extent the iron, may have been dissolved out
of the iron pyrites of such reefs as the “ Mundic Beef,” seen in Mundic Creek;
the gold possibly by chlorine produced by the contact of hydochloric acid, derived
from the decomposition of chlorides, with manganese, which occurs sparingly
in the form of pyrolusite along with the ironstone of Mount Morgan.
Several rhyolite dykes run from north-west to south-east, through the
mountain.
That the deposit left by the thermal spring is newer than the altered
stratified rocks through which it has burst is obvious ; and that it is even newer
than the much later date, when the rhyolite dykes filled up fissures in the
stratified rocks, is proved by the fact that the dykes are clearly seen in some
instances to be covered over by the siliceous, aluminous, and ferruginous
deposits of the springs.


But yet another circumstance helps us in our endeavour to ascertain the age
of the outburst of the Mount Morgan hot spring. About a mile to the west of
the " mountain ” is a mass—apparently about 150 feet in thickness —of hori-
zontal bedded sandstone, undoubtedly the " desert sandstone.” It rests ap-
parently at this point on a mass of rhyolite, but in other places it may be seen
lying on the upturned edges of quartzite and graywacke strata, similar in
character to those of the “ country ” around Mount Morgan. The base of this
formation is a fine volcanic dust. The upper beds are coarsely gritty, and for
the most part siliceous, varying from white, to brown and red, and containing
occasional pebbles of quartz and quartzite. The base of the desert sandstone
I should judge to be about 100 feet lower than the summit of Mount Morgan.
Standing on the sandstone cliffs, so as to look to the east, past the south side
of Mount Morgan, the observer can descry across the valley of the Dee the
familiar contour of horizontal-bedded sandstone cliffs stretching North and
South. As nearly as can be judged by the eye they are on the same level as
the cliffs on the opposite side of the valley, and there can be no doubt that
the valley has been carved out of a once continuous cake of horizontal sand-
stone. The question arises, “Was Mount Morgan an island in the sea, or lake
in which the sandstones were laid down P ” In that case the hot spring was
older than the desert sandstone*.
The answer is easily made. Had there been shores to this sea or lake where
Mount Morgan now stands, the sandstone in the neighborhood would have
been full of pebbles of sinter and ironstone derived from the waste of such
easily degraded rocks. But I saw none such, and I believe they do not occur.
The hot spring then was newer, and not older, than the desert sandstone.
In many places in the north, the valleys carved out of the desert sandstone
became theatres of volcanic activity. Among such places are the Maclvor
River, north of Cooktown, and the Mulgrave River, near Cairns. There
volcanoes burst out near the heads of the valleys and filled the lower reaches
with flows of basaltic lava, to which we owe some of the richest agricultural
land in the colony. Another form of volcanic activity was developed at the
same period near the head of the Dee Valley. After the desert sandstone had
been uplifted, and the carving out of the present valleys had been carried on
for long ages —in fact till the valleys had nearly acquired their present
contours, basaltic lava flowed down the valleys over the upturned slates of the
Maclvor and over the auriferous drifts of the Mulgrave, and a geyser of
enormous proportions spouted fitfully in the valley of the Dee, carrying with
it not only water, but in all probability chloride of gold.
The Mount Morgan geyser as well as the Maclvor and Mulgrave volcanoes,
probably date from tertiary times, and are contemporaneous with many of the
basalts which cover auriferous drifts in Victoria.
In the presence of so much ironstone a precipitant for the gold need not be
far to seek. Protoxide of iron was probably present in sufficient quantities to
perform this important function, but it may have been aided by tannic acid
derived from vegetable matter accumulated in the basin. Several instances of
the occurrence of vegetable matter in the basins of hot springs in the Yellow-
stone regions are recorded in the Report already quoted. Precipitation of the
gold by means of tannic acid would accord better with the confinement of the
gold to the basin or crater of Mount Morgan (to be afterwards alluded to), than
precipitation by ferrous oxide.
The siliceous sinter, alumina, and ironstone of the overflow deposit merge
into one another by insensible gradations. The outer boundary of the overflow
deposit is, in some places ill defined, as the “ country rock ” is frequently im-
pregnated with aluminous, siliceous, and ferruginous material, so as to be
distinguishable with difficulty from the unmixed deposit. That the deposit
does not extend far to the east of Mount Morgan, is owing simply to denudation,
the deposit having been removed from the steep slope of the hill on that side.
In such active geysers as are accessible to observation, we find a narrow
pipe or fissure, terminating upwards in a crater-like cup or basin. The Great


Iceland Geyser, for example, has a pipe 12 feet in diameter, which has been
sounded to a depth of 70 feet. I have seen no satisfactory explanation of the
necessity for a cup, nor can I suggest one; but, all the same, the repeated
occurrence'of the cup evidently takes place in obedience to some natural law.
It may be taken for granted that the Mount Morgan geyser was no exception
to the rule, and I believe that that upper portion of the mount, where ironstone
predominates, and to which gold is almost confined, represents a basin, occa-
sionally filled with a fluid in which silica, iron, alumina, manganese, and gold,
were held in solution, to be deposited when the bulk of the water from time
to time withdrew into the pipe or the subterranean reservoirs with which the
pipe communicated. The overflow of the ejected fluid left a siliceous, alumi-
nous, and ferruginous deposit on the slopes of the hill side, but the gold does
not appear to have been deposited to any extent beyond the limits of the basin.
It may be remarked that “ prospects ” of gold have been obtained in a few
localities in the overflow deposit. In such cases it may be a question whether
the gold was carried down with the overflow, or whether it emanated from some
of the subsidiary springs, which, in such cases, as our experience of active
geysers has shown, are pretty sure to break out in the vicinity of the main
outflow.
Dr. Leibius, of the Sydney Mint, has contributed a paper on Mount Morgan,
to the Royal Society of New South Wales (2nd July, 1884). I cannot do better
than quote some of his observations :
“While, from a geological point of view, the occurrence of this gold is highly in-
teresting, the character of the gold obtained is not less so. Lock, in his work on
gold, published in 1882, says, ‘No gold has yet been found in nature unalloyed with
silver.’ Yet this gold from the Mount Morgan mine, of which, since February
last, already over 10,000 ounces have been received, as retorted gold, at the
Sydney Mint, is found to be free from silver—a minute trace excepted. I have
brought some of this retorted gold out very thin, to show its toughness. It
assays 99 - 7 per cent, of gold; the rest is copper, with a trace of iron. Gold
assaying 99'7 per cent, is worth <£4 4s. Bd. per ounce. Gold from the same
mine, received at the Mint, assayed as high as 99 - 8 per cent. It is as far as I
know the richest native gold hitherto found A not less interest-
ing, though less satisfactory, fact is this —that only about half the gold is
extracted by the ordinary quartz-crushing and amalgamating machinery.” Dr.
Leibius continues : —"The Capricornian says—‘The tailings which are being
stored are said to contain as much gold as is saved, and as they will be sub-
jected to treatment at a future date, the result will be highly advantageous to
the owners.’ Having the small quartz-crushing machinery erected at the
Sydney Mint under my charge, I have had an opportunity of testing this fact.
In November last we received, through Mr. Hall of Sydney, 458 lbs. of this
ferruginous quartz, part of it consisting of picked stone. It was carefully
crushed and amalgamated in the Chilian mill, with 240 lbs. of mercury; thus,
7 - 44 ounces of gold, assaying 991 - 5, were extracted. Another lot, weighing
174 BSs., was similarly treated, and 12 - 12 ounces of gold extracted —assaying
998 - 2. Thus, lot 1 gave gold at the rate of 3932 ounces, standard, per ton of
quartz, while lot 2 gave gold at the rate of 169’86, standard, per ton of quartz.
In lot 1, gold at the rate of 46 ozs. 2 dwts. 12 grs. per ton was left in the tailings;
while in lot 2, the tailings assayed 64 ozs. 5 dwts. 18 grs. of gold per ton. Both
lots of tailings were now mixed, and passed for 2 hours in the Chilian mill, with
240 lbs. clean retorted mercury. Only 1*66 oz. of gold, assaying '9Bl, were,
however, obtained by this treatment. The tailings were dried, and found to
weigh 476 lbs., containing gold at the rate of 41 ozs. 18 dwts. 16 grs. per ton;
or, in about 476 lbs. tailings, no less than 8 ozs. 17 dwts. 3 grs. gold. I have
brought some of those tailings here. Under the microscope there is no gold
visible. I thought that if the oxide of iron were removed by boiling the tail-
ings in hydrochloric acid, and the solution filtered off, the gold might more
readily be discernable in the boiled-out residue. I found, however, that this
was not the case, and that 1,000 grs. of tailings thus boiled in strong hydro-


chloric acid, by which about 20 per cent, was dissolved, gave me only 073 grs.
of pure gold, while 1,000 grains of the original tailings, not boiled out, gave
1'306 grs. of gold, the same as when boiled within nitric acid. The loss of gold
by boiling in hydrochloric acid was, no doubt, due to the action of this acid
upon manganese in the ore, whereby chlorine gas was formed —a ready solvent
for gold. That the ordinary amalgamating Chilian mill did not extract all the
gold in the stone, I can only attribute to the supposition that the oxide of iron
has literally coated some of the fine gold, thus preventing it coming in contact
with the mercury.”
CHAPTER XI.
POST TERTIARY.
The late Mr. R. Daintree, in his paper on the Geology of Queensland
(p. 274) says :
“ Prom the Gulf of Carpentaria, in the North, to Darling Downs, in
the South, the fossil remains of extinct mammalia have been found in
breccias and indurated muds, which are representatives of the beds
of old water-courses, through which the present creeks cut their chan-
nels. At Maryvale Creek, in lat. 19° 30', good sections of these old
brecciated alluvia occur. The fossils from this section, as determined
by Professor Owen, are :
Diprotodon australis.
Macropus titan.
Thylacoleo.
Phascolomys.
Nototherium.
Crocodile teeth, etc.
“ Imbedded in the same matrix occur severel genera of mollusca of
species undistinguishable from those inhabiting the Maryvale Creek.
My friend and late colleague, Mr. Robert Etheridge, junior, has com-
pared these with the recent forms, and finds them to consist of —
GASTEROPODA.
Melania pagoda.
M. area.
M. suhimhricata.
M. moesta.
M. sp.
Limncea rimosa.
Phyhsa truncata.
P. sp.
LAMELLIBEANCHIATA.
Corhicula australis.
TJnio, sp.


“ The fact of these older alluvia forming both the bed and banka of
the present water-courses goes to prove that Diprotodon and its allies
inhabited the Queensland valleys when they presented little difference
in physical aspect or elevation from that of the present time. The
crocodile (Crocodilus australis ), however, had then a greater range
inland than it has now. A study of these Diprotodon- breccias
leads to the conclusion that the remains were chiefly entombed in
what were the most permanent waterholes in seasons of excessive
drought, and that the animals came there in a weak and exhausted
state to drink and die, just as bullocks do under similar conditions at
the present time. No human bones, flint-flakes, or any kind of native
weapon, have yet been discovered with the extinct mammalia of
Queensland.”
In his Report on the Geological Features of the South-eastern Dis-
trict of Queensland,* Mr. Gregory gives the following description of
the “ Older Alluvial or Fossil Drift ” :
“ The deposit is restricted to the valleys descending westerly from
the main range dividing the waters flowing to the east coast from
those which flow westerly to the Darling and Murray rivers. Its
limits are not well defined, but it forms the banks of the present
water-courses, near the summit of the range, and extends down them
to the level plains near the banks of the Condamine River, where it
appears to attain a depth of more than 100 feet, as fragments of
bones have been obtained at that depth in sinking wells.
“It may however, be observed that though the fossil drift is only
found on the western waters in Southern Queensland, there are rich
deposits in bone drift on eastern waters of Peak Downs in the central
district.
“ This alluvium is remarkably rich in fragments of bones of extinct
animals, including Diprotodon australis, Macropus Titan, Thylacoleo,
Phascolomys, Nototherium Bfc.
“ The bones are associated with fragments of shells of Unio and other
fresh-water mollusca similar to those now found in the present water
courses, but more massive in structure. Basaltic pebbles, sand and
mud, the stratification of which indicates intermittent currents flow-
ing down the present valleys, such as now result from the annual
rainfall, but of much greater volume.
“ Although the greater part of the bones are broken into fragments,
and show evidence of being drifted and water-worn, there are some
which prove that many animals cannot have been deposited before
decomposition in the localities where their remains are now found
grouped together.
“ The general condition under which the bones are found indicates,
that what are now broad valleys and plains, were originally extensive
marshes with watercourses flowing westward into lakes, and that
the gradual filling up of the lake-beds with drift, and the deepening
of the channel of the Condamine River which drains the country,
* Brisbane : By Authority, 1879.


conjoined probably with a gradual decrease in the annual rainfall,
have combined to change a swampy country covered with coarse
weedy vegetation into open downs and plains, producing short grasses
totally inadequate for the support of animals with the heavy frames
and peculiar teeth which characterised the majority of the ancient
occupants of the district.
“ There is no trace, either in the Darling Downs or any other part
of Queensland, of any violent convulsion of nature which would be
adequate to cause the total destruction of the Diprotodon and co-
occupants of the country, and it seems most probable that their ex-
tinction resulted from a gradual change of climate, and more effectual
drainage through the deepening of the channels of the water-courses
—aided, perhaps, by some slight changes of level. Few satisfactory
traces have been found of the vegetation of this period, though some
fragments of what appear to have been woody seed-vessels are met
with in the bone drift, but their condition is not sufficiently perfect to
admit of any definite conclusions. The general character of the
vegetation may however, be surmised from the form of the animals,
the structure of their teeth, and the mode in which they are worn
by feeding on it. These data suggest coarse reeds and aquatic
plant, such as would be too succulent and liable to rapid decay for
their preservation as fossils, while the absence of wood and ferns,
which are so abundant in the older coal strata beneath, indicates that
there was little or no forest.
“ One remarkable feature of the older alluvium is, that the fossil
bones are only found in the detritus of the basaltic rocks. Alluvium
of the same age, derived from the carbonaceous and Devonian series,
have not as yet been found to contain remains of the extinct animals.
This may have resulted from the superior fertility of the basaltic
lands, which would be capable of producing abundance of food, while
the comparatively sterile soil derived from the older formations would
not furnish suitable vegetation for the sustenance of the massive
quadrupeds of that era.”
Professor Sir Richard Owen, K.C.8., described [“ Quarterly
Journal Geological Society,” London, volume 14, page 541] Zygoma-
turus Dilobus, Macleay, from King’s Creek, Darling Downs. A
further description is given in vol. 15, page 168 ; and on page 176, Sir
Richard announced the identity of species with Nototherium Mitchelli,
Owen. A further description of the same species was given in vol.
38, page 394. Professor Huxley, in the “ Quarterly Journal Geolo-
gical Society,” London, vol. 18, page 423, describes a new genus of
Diprotodon under the name of Diprotodon minor , from Gowrie on the
Darling Downs.
Sir Richard Owen’s large work on the “ Extinct Mammals of
Australia” (1870), contains descriptions of a numerous fauna from
the Darling Downs.
The Brisbane Museum contains remains of the following :
Macropus titan , Owen (Darling Downs).
M. ajfinis, do. do.


M. tellus, De Vis (Darling Downs).
M. ajax, do. do.
M. gouldii, Owen do.
M. achilles, De Vis do.
M. subducens, do. do.
Ammonodon, n.g., do. do.
Protemnodon anah, Owen do.
P. antaeus do. do.
do. do.
P hector, De Vis do.
P. ulysses, do. do.
P. mimas, Owen do.
P. trilohus, De Vis do.
P. hercules, do. do.
P. nanus, do. do.
Bhysodon aeneas, do. do.
Apsilodon ccesar, do. do.
Sthenurus Atlas, Owen do.
S. hrehus, do. do.
S. pan, do. do.
Pachysiagon ferragus, do. do.
Halmaturus latidens, De Vis do.
H. prior, do. do.
H. nuncius , do. do.
H. lapsus, do. do.
Petrogale exoleta, do. do.
Palorchestes azael, Owen do.
P. haal, De Vis, do.
Procoptodon goliath, Owen do.
P. magog , De Vis do.
P. sampson, do, do.
P. rapha, Owen do.
P. pusio, do. do.
Brachalletes palmeri, Owen (Chinchilla).
Sthenomerus, De Vis
Nototherium victories, Owen.
Diprotodon australis, do. (Piltonand Kings Creek, Darling Downs).
Dinornis queenslandice, De Vis (King’s Creek).
The occurrence of Piprotodon in the gold drift of Gogango Creek,
near Rockhampton, is noted by Mr. Daintree in his “ General Report
upon the Northern District” (Brisbane: by Authority, 1870).
A portion of a lower jaw of a species of Diprotodon, pronounced by
Mr. R. P. Ramsay, Curator of the Australian Museum, Sydney,
to be probably the young of D. Australis, or perhaps a new species,
was found by Mr. T. Buckland on the bank of the Burdekin, opposite
Gilgunyah Head Station.


CHAPTEE XII.
SERPENTINE.
An extensive belt of Serpentine is described by Mr. Daintree* as ex-
tending at intervals from Mount Wheeler to Marlborough. Mr.
Daintree observes: —
“ Hitherto, in older mining countries, serpentine has not been con-
sidered an ore-bearing rock to any extent. Here however, not only
do paying quartz reefs lie in it, but at Block’s claim under the moun-
tain, and at old Canoona, it is proved that gold exists in the rock
mass itself; and I have no hesitation in asserting that the whole of
the gold taken from the last named diggings has been derived from this
source.
“ Chromic iron and chrome ochre are distributed over this serpentine
country, and with a small proportion of titanic iron form the black
sand so troublesome to the digger.
“ Very numerous outcrops of copper ore have been discovered in this
district, which may be divided into three classes.
“ Ist. Those derived from the decomposition of thin pyritous veins,
carrying a small amount of copper, which by decomposition and re-
precipitation, have formed surface layers of rich ore, and have im-
pregnated the joints and cavities of the bounding rock to vaiying
depths with earthy blue and green carbonate.
“ This class of vein is however generally represented on the surface,
by a hard iron band, stained and coated with copper ore but, is more
worth prospecting for gold than copper,
“ 2nd. Where the rock itself is pyritous and the pyrites decomposing,
stains the joints and cavities with copper ore sometimes for a con-
siderable distance from the source of the ore itself.
“ 3rd. Deposits of true copper ore, in a matrix of quartz calcspar,
&c., with at least one defined wall, promising to become in depth true
lode.”
After describing the Mount Wheeler reefs, Mr. Daintree remarks
that the ridges around the mountain are “ composed of ‘ Serpentine,’
passing into diallage rock and gabbro,” Schiller-spar being also not
an uncommon constituent.
In a subsequent reportf the same writer refers to the serpentine
of the Cawarral district as “ evidently an intrusive rock, and not an
altered sediment.”
The occurrence of serpentine with copper infiltrations at Sandy
Creek, a tributary of Barambah Creek is noted by Mr. Aplin in his
report on the Burnett District. (Brisbane : By Authority, 1870).
* “ Progress Eeport on a portion of the Rockhampton Mining District.”
Brisbane : By Authority, 1870.
f“ General Eeport upon the Northern District.” Brisbane: By Authority,
1870.


Mr. Gregory notes* the occurrence of copper lodes in Serpentine
at Mount Coora Auriferous Reefs, in Serpentine Country in the
Kilkivan district are mentioned in the same report.
CHAPTER XIII.
GRANITE, SYENITE, AND PORPHYRY.
In giving a single colour to these rocks, on the ground of their litho-
logical relationship, the highest purpose of a geological map is not
served. In some regions Granites and Syenites are clearly metamor-
phic. In others, whether originally of metamorphic or of plutonic origin,
they are covered by the oldest fossiliferous deposits of the colony.
Sometimes they are intruded among the earlier rocks. One boss of
granite on the Norman River appears to have been intruded among
rocks so recent as the Desert Sandstone. Sheets of quartz-porphyry
in the neighbourhood of Townsville have been intruded among rocks
containing Glossopteris, and presumably of the age of the Bowen
River Coalfield. Mr. Gregory refersf to “the extensive development of
the porphyritic rocks which, rising through the Carbonaceous strata
[lpswich beds], form the range dividing the valley of the Mary River
from the Maroochy River, and extending in a southerly direc-
tion, exhibit those remarkable outbursts known as the Glasshouse
Mountains.”
The same author thus refers to the porphyries of the Moreton and
Darling Downs districts^: —“ The porphyry consists of a pale-brown
paste with minute felspathic crystals, though it sometimes varies so
as to consist of very small grains of quartz with minute cavities, con-
taining oxide of iron, resulting from the decomposition of pyrites.
Occasionally it is vesicular, and has the aspect of trachyte.
“ The age of this rock is greater than that of the basalts, which cut
through and overlay it, though it often occurs that the basalt has
found vent through the same fissures as the porphyry, and formed
spurs to the more elevated masses of the older igneous rock, a feature
which is especially developed on both sides of the Main Range, near
*Report on the Geology of part of the Districts of Wide Bay and Burnett,
Brisbane : By Authority, 1875.
f Report on the Geology of part of the District of Wide Bay and Burnett.
Brisbane : By Authority, 1875.
I Report on the Geological Features of the South-eastern Districts of Queens-
land. Brisbane : By Authority, 1879.


Cunningham’s Gap, where Mount Cordeaux, Mount Mitchell, and
Spicer’s Peak are porphyry, and the subordinate ranges basaltic.
“On the other hand the age is less than that of the Carbonaceous
Series [lpswich beds], as the porphyry in all cases is found superim-
posed on the sedimentary strata.
“ The porphyritic rock is chiefly developed in the southern
portion of the Moreton district, where it forms all the remarkable
peaks on the Great Dividing Range from the head of Laidley Creek
to the southern boundary of the colony, and thence along the Mac-
pherson Range, which separates the Logan River from the Clarence,
Richmond, and Tweed rivers.
“ The general aspect of these hills is a succession of sharp peaks,
formed by the upheaval of portions of strata, with a change of angle,
one side of each hill being a nearly even slope, with a steep escarp-
ment on the opposite side. The steep side, however, shows a colum-
nar structure, which is vertical, and not a right angle, with the slope
on the opposite side of the hills. Some of these peaks, as Mount
Barney, Wilson’s Peak, Mount Lindsay, and Mount Mitchell, have an
altitude of 3000 and 4000 feet, and show the porphyry to exceed 2000
feet, but in every case resting on carbonaceous rocks [lpswich beds].
Though the porphyry sometimes flowed over considerable areas in
thin sheets, and shows a cellular structure, yet the greater part must
have been less fluid when erupted than the basalts.
“Besides the principal mass between Cunningham’s Gap and
Mount Lindsay, there are several detached points of eruption, as
Knapp’s Peak, Mount French, Mount Edwards, Flinders Peak, and
Mount Goolman, all situate to the South of Ipswich ; Mount Esk, on
the Upper Brisbane River; Kangaroo Point, Bowen Terrace, and
Spring Hill, in the town of Brisbane ; also the Glasshouse Mountains.
“In the town of Brisbane the porphyry is erupted through the
Devonian slate, fragments of which are disseminated through the
porphyry, while portions of silicified wood are embedded in the lower
surface of the erupted mass.”
I may observe that I am inclined to regard the Kangaroo Point
and Bowen Terrace rock as an altered brecciform volcanic ash, rather
than as a crystalline rock.
CHARTERS TOWERS GOLDFIELD.
In my Report “ On the Geology and Mineral Resources of the
District between Charters Towers and the Coast,” (Brisbane: By
Authority, 1879), are the following passages: —
“ The Granites, Syenites, and Porphyries represent the highest
degree of raetamorphism observed in the district. They form the main
mass of the coast range, and indeed of the high grounds generally.
To the Granites belong Magnetic Island, the part of the coast range
between Mount Frederick and Mount Black, together with the greater
part of the gently undulating table-land from Thornton’s Gap to
Dotswood, the back of the range drained by the heads of the Ross,


Reid, and Houghton, much of the comparatively low-lying country at
Charters Towers and Millchester, some of the pinnacles to the west of
Towers Hill, the rolling downs between Towers Hill and the
Pyramids or Seventy Mile Range, and some isolated masses in the
Star district.
“ The Charters Towers Granite has a matrix of cream-coloured
felspar, in which are disseminated crystals of orthoclase felspar,
quartz, mica (biotite), and hornblende; also chlorite, iron pyrites, and
some (microscopic) garnets. Charters Towers Hill best deserves the
name Syenite. The main masses of porphyry are Mount Stewart,
Castle Hill, Mount Louisa, Mount Bohle, the Range at the head of
Running Creek (Star Country), and the Pyramids or Seventy Mile
Range.
“ Although presenting no very essential lithological difference, the
granites and syenites on the one hand, and the porphyries on
the other, yield to the influences of sub-aerial denudation in
different manners, and give rise to characteristic types of scenery.
The porphyry ranges are hard-featured and abound in bold escarp-
ments and precipices. The rock is full of joints, which divide
it into sharp angular pieces. The granites and syenites on the
other hand have a more regular system of jointing, dividing the
rocks, for the most part into huge cubes and parallelopipedons.
When in the course of denudation these are brought to the surface,
they peel off in rudely concentric layers, the angles are softened, and
the masses assume at length a somewhat globular form. The
country occupied by granite and syenite is characterised by rolling
downs, with abrupt towers or peaks, like the ‘tors ’ of the Forest of
Dartmoor. In spite of these distinguishing characteristics, which are
noticeable on the large scale, no very sharp line can be drawn on
lithological grounds between the gx’anites and porphyries, as they
merge into one another.
It appears most probable that the granites and porphyries were
produced during one continuous period, the porphyries predominating
towards its close, as porphyry dykes not only intersect the granite,
but also the auriferous veins in granite country, and are even found
cutting through the Devonian (?) x’ocks of the Star basin.”
As has already been remarked, the granite and syenites of Charters
Towers, appear to represent the last stage of the metamorphism of
certain stratified rock which occur to the nox’th and west of the
gold-field.
It is a circumstaxxce worthy of remark that the richest aurifei'ous
reefs occur in the most highly metamorphosed x’ocks, near their con-
tact with the least metamorphosed rocks of the district.
Charters Towers bids fair to px-oduce shortly the largest output
of any gold-field in Australia. It reached in 1885, 134,650 ounces,
which may be estimated at about one forty-sevexxth part of the pro-
duction of the whole woxdd. The reefs have no uniform bearing, but
appear bo take as a whole, a sort of arrangement in the form of a
horse-shoe, of which the reefs foi’ming the western limb bear from


Year 1872 (a few months only)
ounces.
20,064
1873
59,835
' 1874
52,872
1875
62,214
1876
58,068
1877
66,479
1878
72,189
1879
83,275
1880
85,298
1881
82,324
1882
79,595
1883
69,555
1884
109,335
1885
134,650
N.N.W. to S.S.E., and those forming the eastern limb from N.N.E.
to S.S.W. All of these underlie at low angles eastward, northward
or westward towards the axial line of the horse-shoe. Some of the
most important reefs are cross-courses, such as the Day Dawn and
Queen. Down to a variable level, generally less than 100 ft., the gold
was “ free ” in a gangue of granitic debris and quartz mixed with
“ brown-stone ” or decomposed pyrites. Below that level, the gold
occurs in quartz with a “ mundic ” composed of pyrites, galena and
zinc blende.
The Day Dawn Company has paid £155,000 in dividends. The
deepest shaft on the field is the “ Hope ” —3ooft. vei'tical and 502 on
the underlie. The Day Dawn Prospecting Company, has a shaft
704 ft. on the underlie. The Day Dawn Block has sunk 480 ft. verti-
cally.
The progress of the Charters Towers field since its discovery, in
1872, is shown by the returns given in the Annual Report of the
Department of Mines.
RAVENS WOOD GOLDFIELD AND SILVER MINES.
At and around the Township of Eavenswood, the country rock is a
grey syenitic granite in which hornblende accompanies or takes the
place of mica Sometimes the amphibole takes the form of actinolite
instead of hornblende. A tolerably sharp line divides this granite
from masses (One Mile Hill, &c.,) of red course-grained granite,—a
mixture of large flesh-coloured or pink orthoclase felspar crystals,
roundish globules of quartz, and hexagonal mica. The best reefs lie
within the area of the grey syenitic granite. There are distinctly two
systems, the one running north and south, and underlying to the
east, and the other running east and west, and underlying to the
south. The north and south system comprises the Shillmaleer,
Mellnauer, London, General Grant, and most of the most prominent
reefs of the field. Most of the reefs have a quartzose gangue, and
contain iron and copper pyrites, zinc-blende, galena, and other


minerals, in addition to gold. This complicated “ mundic,” when
exposed to alternate atmospheric and aqueous influences, is decom-
posed, the metallic compounds being oxidised and the gold set free;
consequently the field was a favorite “ poor man’s diggings ” till the
water level was reached. At that level, however, most of the mines
suffered a severe check, as it was found impossible to save more than
a small proportion of the gold with the appliances then on the field.
The products of some of the richer mines, such as the General Grant
and Black Jack (one of the east and west reefs), were for a time sent
to Europe for treatment; but many of the others which had paid well
in the “ brownstone ” did not produce a sufficient quantity of rich ore
to yield a profit after paying expenses, of which the heaviest item was
the carriage to the coast. The opening of the Ravenswood railway
has however cheapened the cost of carriage considerably, and local
smelting works have been erected, capable of extracting the gold from
the pyrites. A new era has dawned upon Ravenswood, which will in
future compete with the foremost gold-fields in the colony.
A large lode of argentiferous galena has been worked for some
years at the One Mile, and has proved very rich.
The lode has recently been cut in a vertical shaft, at the depth of
650 ft. The Warden, Mr. John Archibald, says, in his Report for
November (last, that at this depth the gangue is 5 feet wide. The
ore is exceedingly rich, “Assays giving by ordinary fire process from
600 oz. to 5,000 oz. of silver per ton. The rich ore is contained in a
vein from 6 inches to 12 inches thick near the hanging wall, and,
singular to say, contains the merest trace of lead. The formation
(gangue) below this ore is intersected by small galena veins. . . .
About 6 tons of this rich vein have already been raised. . . . Mr.
Merry, a gentleman connected with the Ravenswood Gold Smelting
Company, and formerly with Messrs. Vivian & Company, of
Swansea, by profession a practical analyst, has, at my request, very
kindly placed at my disposal an exhaustive analysis made by him of
this valuable find :
“Copper ... ... ... 16*25
Antimony ... ... ... 26*30
Silver ... ... ... 15 - 35 = 5,013 ounces.
1r0n... ... ... ... 8*49
Zinc ... ... ... 8*75
Sulphur ... ... ... 17*02
Siliceous matter ... ... 7*31
99*47 per cent.”
Several silver (argentiferous galena) lodes and some antimony lodes
occur between the One Mile and Mount Wright.
The Gold produced at Ravenswood, according to the Returns of
the Department of Mines, has been as follows: —


To end of Year. Ounces.
1877 201,400
1878 13,252
1879 15,744
1880 13,445
1881 10,195
1882 8,711
1883 13,000
1884 14,192
The amount of silver and lead ore raised in 1884, from Ravenswood
and the Star, was 4,186 tons, valued at £33,727.
ETHERIDGE GOLDFIELD.
The Etheridge Goldfield lies mainly in granite country. It is,
unfortunately, situated at a distance from the coast. The general
opinion among experienced miners is, that when connected with the
coast by railway, it will prove one of the richest fields in the colony.
The Returns from the Etheridge and Woolgar are mixed up in the
Reports of the Department of Mines. They are as follows
To end of year. Ounces.
1877 143,000.
1878 7,396.
1879 15,498.
1880 20,368.
1881 23,020.
1882 18,431.
1883 18,967.
1884 19,886.
MARENGO GOLDFIELD.
In this region, a low table-land, a spur of the Clax-ke Range, project-
ing to the north, divides the head waters of the Bogie from the valley
of the Dee. The lithological description of this limited area may be
applied to the whole of the range between the Burdekin and the
coast —essentially a white granite, in which the mica is sometimes
supplemented and occasionally replaced by hornblende; frequent
bosses of intrusive pale pinkish felspar-porphyries and occasional
small areas of gneiss and mica-schist, and of unmetamorphosed, or at
least still recognisable shales and greywackes. The Black-and-White
Hill and the One Mile Mountain are of typical granite. “The
Brothers” are composed of a very tough dark-blue syenite, weather-
ing black. Mount Marengo affords an example of the intrusive
felspar-porphyry.
The field was opened in 1871. The reefs were worked down to the
water-level, and abandoned.
BLACK SNAKE GOLDFIELD.
This field is described as follows by Mr. A. C. Gregory, in his
“ Report on the Geology of Part of the Districts of Wide Bay and
Burnett ”:—


“ The Black Snake and other adjacent goldfields are on thin veins
of quartz, which traverse the granite, and contain iron and copper
pyrites, with a little gold and siJver. The quartz and pyrites being
much decomposed near the surface when the reefs were first opened,
there was a considerable quantity of free gold easily exti-acted by
crushing and washing; but, in sinking, the rock was not only harder,
but the pyrites interfered with the crushing, by cutting the gold with
its sharp angles, and at the same time it acted chemically on the
mercury in the battery, forming a crust, over which the smaller
fragments of gold passed, and the production of the precious metal
did not pay the expense of working. Subsequently attempts were
made to extract the gold, silver, and copper from the pyrites, by col-
lecting it below the crushing machine, and smelting it in furnaces,
which were erected on the spot at great expense; but the results do
not appear to have been satisfactory, as the works are no longer in
operation.”
Samples of the Black Snake stone, which I have seen, have a good
deal of zinc-blend, and altogether bear a considerable resemblance to
the Ravenswood ores. They are said to assay very well, and the
experiment of smelting will probably be renewed.
MILTON (NORTON) GOLDFIELD.
This goldfield is minutely described in his “ Report on the Gold-
fields of Raglan, Calliope, and Milton,” (Binsbane: By Authority,
1885), by Mr. Rands, who gives a geological map, on which the
various reefs are laid down.
“ The formation is a grey medium-grained granite, consisting of
orthoclase felspar, quartz, biotite mica, and hornblende, which passes
in places into a syenite, and in others into porphyry.
“The granite is in the form of an eruptive ‘boss,’ which rises
through, and sends out veins into the surrounding slate country.
“ On ascending the highest peak of the Bald Hills to about 300 feet
from its summit, there is a layer of intrusive granite about 30 feet
thick, dipping, in all probability, with the formation, at a high angle
to the north-west, having intruded along the planes of bedding.
“ The granite is intersected by gold-bearing reefs and volcanic
dykes of diorite, porphyry, and dolerite. These dykes are of more
recent date than the reefs, as they cut through the reefs; but there is
no evidence to show to what period they belong.”
The gold is contained in a fine “mundic,” consisting of iron and
arsenical pyrites, zinc-blende, and galena in a gangue, in which quartz
and occasionally calcite are mixed up.
The total returns from Milton Goldfield for 1884 were 7883 ounces
of gold, from 2766 tons of stone.
CROCODILE GOLDFIELD.
This goldfield, with the exception of a few reefs is in syenite coun-
try. Among its most important reefs are the Hector, Who’d-have-
thought-it, Block and Pillar, Hit or Miss, Union, and Windsor. The


reefs yielded well in the “ brownstone,” and the workings are now
being carried into the “mundic.” The gold occurs in very white
pyrites. The field, after a period of depression, is rising into import-
ance. The deepest shaft is 150 feet. The Mount Morgan deposit is
in the Crocodile Extended Goldfield, but is treated under the head
“ Tertiary.”
HERBERTON TIN MINES.
The Herbert Tin Mines were only discovered in 1880. They occur
in a rock which, although difficult to describe (owing to its varia-
bility) is easily distinguished from the true granite of the Walsh. It
is a porphyry or granite, in which granular quartz predominates.
There is little felspar, and very little mica. This “ country x’ock ”is
traversed by a number of large “ elvan ” dykes —compact, highly
silicated yellow or pinkish felspar, with blebs of quartz. The elvan
sometimes passes into quartzite, and is sometimes veined with quartz.
The quartz has in places rather large quantities of arsenical iron
pyrites. Cavities in the elvan dykes are occasionally coated with blue
carbonate of copper. The “elvan” dykes are not on this field, as they
are in Cornwall, prolific sources of tin ore ; indeed the “ Three Star”
and “Herberton Ironclad” elvans are almost the only known cases of
stanniferous elvans, although in some cases (e.g , Erin-go-Bragh and
Southern Cross) the elvans appear to have re-opened the stanniferous
dykes, and permitted of a further local deposition of tin ore.
The main deposits of the tin ore are in a series of metamorphosed
igneous dykes. These dykes consist mainly of quartzose chlorite
and quartzose serpentine. They were probably at first intruded
among porphyry rocks as quartz diorites, or as rocks more or less of
basaltic type. The tin ore occurs in floors, veins or pipes among the
joint-planes of the dykes. The dykes have no ruling direction.
The ore (binoxide of tin) is very rarely crystalline, but occurs
either as large amorphous masses almost chemically pure, or inter-
mixed with the dyke rock. Sometimes, as in the Bradlaugh claim,
the ore is so finely disseminated through the dark chlorite matrix as
not to be visible to the naked eye, although the specific gravity of the
stone serves as a guide to its metallic contents. Fluor spar and
wolfram are associated with the tin ore in a few of the mines. In
some cases the dykes appear to be replaced in parts by reef quartz,
among the interlacing crystals of which the ore is imbedded. The
matrix of the ore at the Wheal Vohr, is massive penninite or hydrous
talc. In this case copper pyrites occur along with the tin ore.
In my “ Report on the Tin Mines of Herberton, Western and
Thompson’s Creek districts,” (Brisbane: By Authority, 1883), full
descriptions are given of the Great Northern, Erin-go-Bragh, Cottais’,
Southern Cross, Dawn of Hope, Irish National Land League, Sag-
gaorth, Defiance, No. 1 East Great Northern, General Grant, Nelly
Grant, Ly-ee-Moon, Home Rule, Herberton Ironclad, St. Patrick
No. 1, St. Patrick, St. Patrick Block, Young American, Chance,
Foys’ Chlorite, New Zealand, New Zealand West, Lottery, Irish Girl,


North Star, Welcome, Cornstalk, Nova Scotia, Great Eastern, Wild
Irishman, No. I Wild Irishman, Syndicate, Hopeful, London, Alma,
Glanmore, Star of the South, Brisbane United, Black King, Orient,
Shamrock, Three Star, New Dalcoath, Monarch, Leviathan, Brad-
laugh, Phoenix, Scotsman, Birthday, Levant, Wheal Yohr, Day
Dawn, True Blue, Black Chief, Silver King, Clyde, New Chum, Sur-
prise, Nancy Lee, Louisa, Poor Stroller, Big Ben, Maori Chief, Queen,
Perseverance and St. Mungo Claims (Herberton) ; and Ulster, Come
by Chance, Leinster, Glencairn, Pride of the West, St. Patricks’ Day,
Parnell, Herbertina, Try Again and Chance, Day Dawn, St. Kilda,
Victoria, Argyle, King of the North, Excelsior and Watson’s Folly,
Anna Parnell, T. No. 1 East, Boulton’s Folly, Dreadnought, Stewart’s
T., Queen of the West, Great Western, No. 1 West Great Western,
Boundary, Caledonian, Mountaineer and King of the Ranges Claims,
(Watsonville).
The above-named Watsonville lodes occur in a continuation of the
Herberton porphyry range. On the northern slope of the range, is
the belt of slate and greywacke country already described as contain-
ing lodes in which tin ores and copper ores are intimately associated.
This belt of stratified rocks divides the stanniferous porphyry from a
true granite in which no tin has yet been discovered.
At Thompson’s Creek, the Tasmanian, Pompeii, Vesuvius, Chester-
field, Colossus, and Giblets mines occur, in dykes similar to those of
Herberton and Watsonville, Tin lodes are also found on Emu Creek.
Stream and lode tin are also obtained from Pinnacle and Oakey
Creeks. On the Tate River, and on the Dry River, Nettles or
Annitt Creek, Return Creek and Rudd’s Creek (all tributaries of the
Herbert River), stream tin has been obtained in large quantities.
At Kangaroo Hills, and the Star, stream tin has been obtained in
porphyry country on tributaries of the Burdekin. At Return Creek
and Kangaroo Hills, very promising lodes have been opened. Stream
tin has been found underlying basaltic lavas in the neighbourhood of
Herberton.
Carbonate of bismuth and copper ores have been discovered be-
tween Return Creek and Kangaroo Hills.
According to the reports of the Department of Mines, the Herberton
District produced up to the end of 1883, 12,505 tons of lode tin,
valued at £109,740, and 600 tons of stream tin, valued at £25,200.
In 1884 the quantity raised was: lode tin 1902 tons valued at
£68,474; and stream tin 450 tons valued at £16,200. The correctness
of the return for 1883 has, however, been called in question.
At Baird’s Camp, on the Bloomfield River, about 9 miles from the
upper landing, and 13 miles from Bauer’s Wharf, stream tin workings
have recently been opened, and appear to promise well. The tin ore
is probably derived from the granite country of Mount Peter Botte.
CANNIBAL CREEK TIN MINES.
At Cannibal Creek, South-east of Maytown, tin lodes have been
recently opened. They occur in granite country. The yield of


alluvial tin from this district, in 1883, was 199 tons, valued at
£10,119, and in 1884, 70 tons, valued at £3,556.
STANTHORPE TIN MINES.
The alluvial deposits of Stanthorpe district have, as has already
been stated, yielded large quantities of tin ore.
The district consists —at least as far South as Ballandean —mainly
of granite, composed of grey or pinkish orthoclase crystals, quartz in
granules and mica (muscovite). The component minerals, especially
the felspar, vary greatly in frequency of occurrence as well as in size.
The region in question presents the usual features common to granite
country. It forms a table land at an average elevation of a little less
than 3,000 feet above the sea The high grounds rise in soft undula-
tions, where the granite is decomposed to a considerable depth, with
an occasional isolated “ tor ” or mass of granite in huge blocks,
undecomposed, but with their asperities rounded off. The summit of
the range which divides Queensland from Nev South Wales presents
a chain of such “ tors,” often continuous for some distance, but with
frequent gaps where the rock has been disintegrated. By such gaps
the range may be crossed almost imperceptibly in many places.
The heads of the streams which drain this sort of country are
shallow and swampy. Where the streams attain any magnitude they
find it easy to wander among the soft decomposing surface of the
lower granite country. The Severn, therefore, and its tributaries,
such as Quartpot Creek, have exceedingly tortuous courses and deep
alluvial deposits.
By far the greater part of the stream tin is in fine grains, of the
size of a pin’s head and under, and almost always reveals under the
lens some trace of an original crystalline condition. It contains a
large proportion of the “ ruby ” and “ amber ” varieties. Together
with quartz granules it forms, as a general rule, the matrix of a coarse
imperfectly cemented conglomerate or gravel of quartz and granite
pebbles. The pebbles are often rather squared than rounded. They
are not of a nature to retain striations well, but the shape of some of
them leads me strongly to suspect that their attrition might, in the
first instance, have been due to glacial action. The crystalline
fragments of felspar, which have frequently been carried into the
wash along with the quartz and tin-stone, have in most cases decom-
posed into a stiff Kaolin, which sometimes helps to keep the wash
together.
The tin-wash is, for the most part, confined to the layer of gravel or
unconsolidated conglomerate lying directly on the bed rock. This
gravel is generally overlaid by a varying thickness (up to 25 feet or
more) of gritty sand, which is occasionally interrupted by thin layers
of gravel (with streaks of tin-stone) or of clay.
After an examination of the alluvial workings (in 1882) I concluded
that the tin-stone, in its original matrix, must have been in the form
of crystals, rarely of large size. The ore was probably concentrated
by the weathering of its matrix —whether reef, lode, or dyke—and of


the encasing granite country, during a long period of gentle subaerial
denudation, when the rains were never sufficiently heavy to remove
the tin, or even the larger quartz stones, from the hillsides where they
were left by the decay of their matrix. To this there apparently
succeeded a limited period of heavy rainfall, or possibly of snow,
whose melting produced a rush of water sufficiently strong to
“sluice ” the general surface of the hill country, and to deposit its
heavier materials (including the tin-stone) in the upper reaches of the
Severn and its tributaries, while carrying off its finer particles
to the plains of the South West. To the now current period belong
the accumulation under temperate conditions, of the existing surface-
wash on the hill sides (moderately rich in tin ore), and the deposi-
tion of the sand (almost destitute of tin ore) which overlies the tin-
wash in the streams.
Two distinct types of tin-bearing rocks are met with in the district
—quartz reefs, and igneous dykes.
The reefs are best developed in the ridges on the left hank of
Quartpot Creek, nearly opposite Sommerville’s homestead. Here are
the outcrops of at least seven reefs or veins, four of which bear north-
north east, one north-east, and one east and west. They are of highly
crystalline quartz (sometimes smoky), and all contain much wolfram
and moderate-sized crystals of tin, the latter almost always confined
to faces and joints. Such reefs are apparently the sources of some
of the coarser stream tin which is locally met wich.
The dykes are composed of granular quartz, fine scaly lithia-mica,
and small crystals of tin-stone, and form a rock much resembling the
stanniferous Greisen of Saxony. They seem to have been erupted in
a molten condition (bringing up the tin-oxide with them) among
fissures in the granite. The tin-stone bears, in some samples I have
seen, a proportion of 5 or 10 per cent, to the general mass of the rock.
Dykes of this character are seen at various points in the range on the
boundary of the colony, between the heads of Kettle Swamp and
Sugarloaf Creeks. They run at varying angles from north-north-east
to east-north-east, coinciding in their direction with a system of
joining, which characterises the granite. The tin ore crystals of the
dykes are precisely what, with a little attrition, would form the main
mass of the stream tin of the heads of the Severn.
In spite of the riches of the alluvial deposits of Stanthorpe, no
payable tin lode has yet been found on the Queensland side of the
boarder.
The literature of the subject comprises the following papers:—
“ Report on the Queensland Tinfield,” by W. C. Hume, 1874.
“ Report on the Mineral Discoveries on the Head of the Severn River
and its tributaries,” by A. C. Gregory (Brisbane : By Authority, 1872.)
“ Report on the Geological Features of the South-eastern Districts
of Queensland,” by A. C. Gregory (Brisbane : By Authority, 1879.)
“ Report on the Stanthorpe Tin Mining District,” by W. H. Rands A
(In Annual Report of the Department of Mines for 1883).


MOUNT PERRY COPPER DISTRICT.
Mr. Gregory’s Report on the Wide Bay and Burnett district con-
tains descriptions of the Mount Perry copper lodes. The same mines
are described by Mr. Rands in his Report on “ The Goldfields of
Raglan, Calliope, Milton (Norton), and Cania, and on the Mineral
Deposits in the Burnett district ” (Brisbane : By Authority, 1885), as
follows:
“THE MOUNT PERRY LODE
“Was the first copper lode discovered in the district. The outcrop at the
surface can be traced by a very red gossan, for a distance of three-quarters of
a mile, a point close to the Mount Perry Railway Station. It first crosses a
low ridge, then across a small gully, and on across the high ridge which forms
the watershed of Sandy Creek. The white granite of which this ridge is com-
posed, is jointed in a north-westerly direction, and contains large crystals of
black mica and some hornblende. Large boulders of it stand out all over the
hill.
“ Seven shafts have been put down on this lode, of various depths; the main
or engine shaft is now between 800 and 900 feet deep. The course of the lode
is north, 37 deg. east; and where it is at present being worked (to the south-
west of the main shaft) hades to the south-east about 8 degrees.
“ Near the surface the ore consists of green carbonate and azurite, and at
thirty feet deep of rich red (suprite) and grey oxides of copper, and below this,
depth of yellow ore and copper pyrites. The pyrites is contained in a veinstone
of quartz and calcite, each of which predominates in turns. To the north of
the main shaft much iron pyrites has been met with, mixed with the copper
ore.
“At the present depth, the lode is about four feet in width. The width of
ore is about ten inches on an average, with a casing consisting of a mullock of
broken granite on either side.
“ The lode is intersected by several cross-courses, and is faulted by some of
them.
“ The main shaft is sunk on the chief of these cross-courses, which runs in a
west, 15 degrees north, direction, and underlies 12 degrees to the south, dis-
placing the lode thirteen fathoms to the east on its north side. This cross-
course is composed of granite debris, with two veins, one of quartz and the
other of calcspar. These veins must have been produced by subsequent open-
ings and fillings of those openings and along the original line of fissure.
“ About 100 yards to the north-east in the gully is a second cross-course,
displacing the lode one fathom; and still, about 100 yards farther, a shaft is
sunk on a third, which displaces the lode three fathoms in the same direction ;
and, again, in the railway cutting close to the station, is a fourth, running in a
north-westerly direction, which must have displaced the lode for some distance,
as it cannot be seen in the granite face of the cutting on the other side of the
railway. This last is very wide, but varies much. It consists of a highly
siliceous clay (containing about 75 per cent, of silica), and has evidently been
formed of granite debris. It is quarried and used as a fireclay for the smelting
furnaces, some hundred of yards away from the point where it faults the lode.
“A small vein of similar character to the lode is running a little more to the
east of north; it, too, can be seen in the railway cutting, and is faulted by the
cross-courses.
“ There are also numerous other cross-courses which, though they do not
displace the lode, yet often affect the ore in the lode, either by breaking it up
into strings,-or by displacing it from one side of the lode to the other. At these
points of intersection the lode is usually enriched.
“ A dyke of orthoclase porphyry runs parallel with the lode, and is displaced,
teo, by the Cross-courses.


“Two dykes of dolerite also cross the line of lode in a north-westerly
direction.
“ This mine, notwithstanding the very low price of copper, is still being
worked; smelting works are attached, and two furnaces were at work. At
present the copper is being sent away in the form of coarse or blistered copper.
The refining furnace is in course of reconstruction, having been taken down to
give land necessary for the railway works.
‘ ‘ The Canterbury and Normanby mines are on adjacent selections to the north.
Rich yellow ore was obtained from the Canterbury, containing 33 per cent, of
copper ; and the Normanby has from three to four feet in width of ore, but a
large amount of iron pyrites mixed with it. These lodes are also intersected by
cross-courses. Smelting furnaces were erected on the Normanby claim.
“ Twelve miles nearly due west of Mount Perry are the Mungai Lodes.
They have an east and west course. The country is actinolite schist. Blue
and green carbonates of copper are being raised by the Mount Perry Company
for smelting with their ores.
“ Three miles to the west of the Mungai is the Potosi Lode. It bears east
and west, and contains galena, with copper and iron pyrites and a little zinc-
blende in a gangue of quartz and barytes (heavy spar). The outcrop is of
a yellowish red gossan, and from its general appearance it is not unlikely to
contain gold. I do not know the amount of silver contained in the galena.
The shafts have fallen in. A dyke of porphyry runs in a north-easterly direc-
tion about 200 yards east of the main shaft. Between here and the Reid’s
Creek reefs there are several similar lodes containing argentiferous galena.
“ The Wolca Lodes are situated six miles north of Mount Perry. Among
the principal mines were the Victoria Company’s. On their selections two
parallel lodes, running north, 40 degrees east, and underlying slightly to the
north-east, have been worked. They contain rich pyrites in a quartz and
calcareous veinstone. The granite vein contains hornblende in the place of
mica.
“ From the heap near a lode, a little to the north of these, I obtained some
large crystals of azurite and quartz, evidently from a drusy cavity.
“The Wolca Company’s Lode, bearing east 10 degrees north, is at first
perpendicular, and then underlies 12 degrees to the north in a fine-grained hard
granite. The lode runs over the ridge rising from Drummer’s Creek. On the
east side of the ridge it has been worked by means of tunnels driven into the
hill. Several other lodes in this district have been prospected ; their positions
and directions are shown on Map No. 2.
« The Allendale Lode, seven miles from Mount Perry, has a west 35 degrees
north course, and underlies slightly to the south. It is intersected by a dyke
of porphyry. The gossan from this lode contained 15 dwts. of gold per ton.
“ Two miles to the north, again, is the Fortunatus. The shaft is 60 feet deep - r
its course is 15 degrees north of east, and it underlies 5 degrees to the south.
The ore is a rich sulphuret, containing 30 per cent, of copper in quartz and
calcite, but is very narrow, however, at the depth of 60 feet, being only six
inches in width.
“The Waverly Lode, a little to the north of this, produced some rich ore.
“ In the paddock of Wombah Station are the British Lion, Mulgrave, and
Albert Lodes, running in a north-westerly direction. They are of the usual
character. The granite adjoining the first of these has carbonates of copper
disseminated through it.
« Th e Cambria Lode is from a mile to a mile and a half east of the Edina.
It was first taken up as a copper lode, and then worked for gold under the name
of the “All Nations.” It has a north-east course. A small battery was
erected here, and several hundred tons of stone put through, which averaged
about one ounce to the ton. The gold contained much silver, the average
value being £2 10s. per ounce.
“ Between the Cambria and Boolboonda Hill there are several quartz reefs
which have been worked for gold; one, which I traced for some distance.


running north., 60 degrees east, in a fine-grained syenitic granite. Some of
them have a north and south bearing, and are in micaceous schists. They
yield from 15 dwts. to a little over 1 ounce of gold to the ton.
“ The New Moonta Copper Lode runs north 55 degrees east, and underlies 7
degrees to the north-west. It has been sunk to the depth of 100 feet. The
shafts are in a dilapidated condition. I was informed that the ore was 18
inches in width at the bottom of the shaft. The country is of schists and a
fine-grained syenite.
“ Nearly all the copper lodes in the Mount Perry district contain gold to
some extent. Those in the neighbourhood of Boolboonda, however, contain
the most.”
In addition to the mines above described, copper mines occur in
granite or porphyry country in many other localities which are
indicated in the map. The deposits will he found described in the
writings of Aplin, Daintree, Gregory, Falconer, Rands and others.
The occurrence of gold in a matrix of felspar-porphyry (probably a
dyke) at Ban Ban is noted by Aplin in his “ Report on the Burnett
district.” (Brisbane : By Authority 1870).
KILKIVAN MERCURY MINES
These mines have yielded a considerable quantity of cinnabar. The
mercury manufactured from this deposit is preferred by the amalga-
mators at Gympie to the best article of its kind imported.
“ Report of the Warden of Gympie gold-field, for 1877.” The
mines are in porphyry country.
CHAPTER XIV.
BASALT AND DIOBITE.
Under this head are massed a number of rock-formations of very
different ages, and of varying origin.
The oldest bedded traps hitherto recognised in the colony are the
dolerites and prophyrites interbedded with the Dotswood beds.
Next in order come the traps of the Bowen River. The sandstone
beds, which form the lower series of the coal-field, pass beneath the
bedded trappean rocks of Mount Toussaint, Mount Divlin, and Mount
Macedon. The traps present a very different aspect according as they
are viewed from the dip or rise side. In the one case the long easy
slope generally coincides with the surface of a bed. In the other,
terraces alternate with almost perpendicular cliffs. Over con-
siderable areas, beds of basalt, and melaphyre decompose to a rich
black soil. The amygdaloidal porphyrites form a lighter soil, better
adapted than the other for the cultivation of grapes and fruit trees.


It is difficult to find a specimen of the trappean rock which has not
obviously undergone considerable alteration. I sliced, and examined
with the microscope a specimen from Mount Macedon which appeared
more than usually fresh. The ground-mass showed a tangled web of
very minute interlacing labradorite crystals, the interstices being
filled up with specks of magnetic iron. The augite crystals are
generally represented by a zeolitic pseudomorph (prehnite ?), although
occasionally a nucleus of augite may he detected in the centre of an
altered mass. The rock was, in all probability, originally a dolerite.
In Strathmore Creek the trap is exceedingly amygdaloidal, and is
full of cavities, which contain prehnite, thomsonite, analcime, and
laumonite. With the prehnite carbonate of copper is frequently
associated.
The volcanic activity of this district does not appear to have ceased
till after the deposition of the upper coal measures, as sheets of
basalt altered to “ White trap,” where they come in contact with
carbonaceous rocks such as coal seams, have been again and again
injected along the planes of bedding of the stratified rocks.
The basalt of the Stanwell district near Rockhampton, appear to be
interbedded with stratified rock containing Glossopteris, Tasniopteris,
&c., and some beds of volcanic tuff associated with the basalts are
marked with impressions of plants apparently of lower mesozoic
type.
A very extensive area of basaltic lava-flows, and peaks which may
represent the orifices in which the lavas had their source, is crossed
by the Central Railway between Cometville and W ithersfield, and
bounds the Dawson and Isaacs Coalfield on its western side. The
rock of the peaks was described as “ domite ” by Leichhardt, who was
struck by their resemblance to the extinct volcanoes of the Auvergne.*
These basaltic rocks form the rich soil of the Peak Downs. Geodes
of calcedony are very common in the basalts. The zeolites, chabasite,
mesotype, and analcime are rarer.
Daintree observes in his paper on the Geology of Queensland
(Q J. Geol. Soc , London, vol. 28, p. 313) that “The southern vol-
canic areas —viz., Peak Downs and Darling Downs, etc., agree with
the ‘ Lower Volcanic ’ of Victoria, which have been ejected through
fissures, and have in no case a very extensive flow beyond the lines of
fracture through which they issued.”
The basaltic rocks of the Toowoomba Range are thus described by
Mr. Gregory, in his “ Report on the Geological Features of the
South-eastern District of Queensland
“ The rocks which were formed immediately previous to the older
alluviums are of igneous origin, being basalts, which, in the portion
of Queensland under consideration, form the most important feature
of the country, not only as occupying the summit of the watershed
between the eastern and western waters, but also on account of the
* Journal of an overland expedition from Moreton Bay, to Port Essington
London, 1847.


fertility of the soil resulting from their decomposition, as at least three-
fourths of the land which has been cultivated with any degree of
success is derived from these igneous rocks.
“ The basalt varies very much in character. At Burleigh Head,
Point Danger, and Tambourine Mountain it presents well-defined
hexagonal columns, sometimes fifteen feet long and three feet diam-
eter ; more frequently it is simply massive, some parts being very
hard, and others soft and friable. Occasionally it is highly vesicular,
the spheroidal cavities being filled with zeolites. This difference of con-
dition does not seem to result from any variation in the chemical con-
stituents ; but from the state in which the material was ei’upted, the
softer rock having apparently been ejected in the condition of aqueous
mud, and the harder in actual fusion. Near Rosewood, fragments of
coal are enclosed in basalt, but the heat has only been sufficient to
partially evaporate the bitumen. In the Tivoli Mines, Ipswich,
a dyke of basalt has altered the coal to a hard cake, while on the
railway line, near Highfields, the sandstone has been baked to a depth
of three inches, by a superincumbent mass of basalt.
“ This igneous rock may be referred to a very recent date in the
tertiary area ; for though the date cannot be deduced from included
fossils as with sedimentary strata, yet the carbonaceous rocks of the
mesozoic period had been long exposed to erosive action, and had
become covered by a vegetation which included plants of the tertiary
period, as at Clifton Coalmine, on Darling Downs, where, under
thirty feet of basalt, large pieces of fossil wood were found, so little
altered that it split and warped several inches on being exposed to
the air; it was associated with woody seed-vessels (Conchotheca
turgida).
“ The outburst of basalt appears to have occurred after the physi-
cal features of the country had nearly assumed their present form,
resulting from the prior disturbance and extensive denudation of the
mesozoic strata; the eruption no doubt added to the height of the
principal ranges by accumulation; but there was little (if any) dis-
turbance in the inclination of the strata it burst through.
“ There are no centres of Volcanic action in the form of craters, or any
evidence of explosive issues of gases with the fluid rock; but it issued
from numerous fissures, and, spreading horizontally, covered exten-
sive areas in the first instance. This was followed by several subsequent
outbursts from the more prominent points of eruption, and eventu-
ally formed hills, which occasionally exhibit horizontal layers, having
the general appearance of stratification. The force with which the
melted rock was ejected seems to have been limited to what must
have scarcely exceeded that necessary to counterpoise the pressure of
the adjacent higher masses of the older formations, so that each
group of erupted hills has an average maximum of elevation, and
present flat tops, which bear the appearance of being the fragmentary
remains of an original table-land.
“ Near some of the centres of eruption there are considerable de-
posits of limestone, apparently a tufa resulting from springs of water


rising through the basalt. This limestone contains much silica, in
the form of semi-opal and chalcedony; but there are no traces of
organic remains.
“ The basalt is chiefly developed along the western slope of the
Great Dividing Range, extending from Jimbour Station south-
easterly to Warwick —a distance of 100 miles, with an average
breadth of 26 miles. On the eastern side of the Main Range it forms
the central part of the Little Liverpool Range, extending from near
Cunningham’s Gap noi’th, to the Brisbane River at the junction of
the Logan Creek —a distance of forty miles, though the northern
part is not continuous, but a series of basaltic hills, which cap the
carbonaceous rocks. The bold escarpments of the Main Range, near
Toowoomba, are basalt, resting on carbonaceous sandstones.”
In the Northern districts we have an immense development of lava-
form basalt.
A period subsequent to the deposition of the Desert Sandstone has
been marked by great volcanic activity. Basalt has emanated for the
the most part from volcanic centres, which occur generally in the
form of dome-shaped unwooded eminences near the heads of the
valleys which have been denuded out of the sandstone table-lands.
Conspicuous among these are the “ Sisters,” at the head of the Endea-
vour, the “ Piebald Mountain,” Mount Morgan (Cooktown), etc.
These hills do not present a crateriform appearance, but are mere
rises, marking the site of the lava eruption, which has spread around
them when situated on level ground, or escaped in glacier-like coulees
down the valleys. These points of eruption bear in fact such rela-
tion to the lava-flows as the similar foci in Auvergne bear to the
basalt there. Cotdees of basaltic lava have flowed from the foci
above referred to down the valleys of the north and south forks of the
Endeavour river, and have radiated out from Mount Morgan and other
centres to the east and north, over the flats between the mountains
and the sea, where they form by their decomposition a chocolate-
coloured soil of great depth, peculiarly fitted for agriculture.
When the basalt has decomposed into soil on the spot, it gives rise
to open well-grassed country, almost bare of trees. Where, on the
other hand, the soil has been re-deposited in alluvial flats on the sides
of the river courses, it is usually covered by dense tropical jungle.
The surface of the basalt coulees, as well as of the dome-shaped
centres of eruption, are frequently scoriaceous in a marked degree,
forming spongy masses, light and porous as pumice-stone. Occa-
sionally the basalt of the coulees is columnar, as at the Waterfalls in
the Endeavour, between Williams Station and Brannigan’s. There
the basalt is of the usual character, but contains occasional horn-
blende crystals, and much olivine. It also contains lievrite in geodes.
Gate’s Look-out is a volcanic centre of a different character the
deep-seated stump or “neck” of a crater, which once discharged
showers of ashes. It forms a conspicuous mountain of tuff, and can
be seen from Isabella Creek to cut through the escarpment of a thick
bed of the Desert Sandstone. The rock is an agglomerate of volcanic


debris, with a certain rnde bedding—courses of larger alternating
with courses of smaller bombs —having a dip to the east at about 15
degrees. That the bombs are not detached fragments of an already
consolidated rock, but have been consolidated from a molten mass while
whirling through the air, is proved by the spherical envelope of
vesicular basalt which invariably enfolds them. The interior of the
bombs, which range from an eighth of an inch to a foot in diameter,
is a mass of black and green crystals of augite and olivine.*
Probably of the same age as the volcanic rocks of the Endeavour
and Mclvor, are the coulees of basaltic lava which partly fill up the
valley of the Mulgrave River. On ascending from the Mulgrave on
the western side of the valley, the edge of a series of basaltic rocks is
seen resting on granites and the schists and slates of the Mulgrave
Goldfields. These basalts, in horizontal beds, form a table-land, at
an elevation of between 2,000 and 3,000 feet, which extends from the
brow of the coast range to the base of the hills in which the
Herberton Tin Mines are situated This table-land is covered with
the most magnificent tropical jungle, through which hardly a ray of
sunshine can penetrate. The basaltic soil and a heavy rainfall have
combined to produce in this region an almost incalculable wealth of
cedar and other valuable timber. The luxuriant beauty of these
forests beggars description.
“ Such primal naked forms of flowers !
Such letting nature have her way ! ”
A great Crater Lake is to bo seen in the middle of this table-land,
between the head-waters of the Barron and Johnstone Rivers.
Flows of basalt are also met with in the valleys of the Herbert and
Burdekin, and give rise to the rich alluvial sugar lands at the mouth
of these rivers.. A hot spring occurs in the basaltic country, near
Woodleigh Station.
The granite range, dividing the Burdekin and Flinders waters, is
crossed by the Townsville-Hughenden road at an elevation of 3040
feet above the sea level. It is flanked on the eastern side by deposits
of basaltic lava extending to Dalrymple on the Burdekin. On the
western side similar basaltic lavas extend to Tatoo Camp, seven miles
above Wongalee Station. Here, at an elevation of 1840 feet, the
lowest bed of basalt is seen resting on the Desert Sandstone. Out-
liers of the basalt occur between Porcupine Creek and the Flinders,
as far as Mount Beckford.
It is highly probable that these basaltic lavas, of which all that can
be said with certainty is that they are newer than the desert sand-
stone, are, as Daintree conjectured,f “ contemporaneous with the
upper volcanic series of Victorian geologists, probably of Pliocene
Tertiary age.” They may, like the Victorian basalts, cover rich
* “Report on Explorations in Cape York Peninsula/ 5 1878-9. By R. L. Jack.
Brisbane : By Authority, 1881.
t Q. J. GL 8., London, vol. xxviii., p. 313.


auriferous alluvia. We have already seen that they cover stanniferous
drifts in the neighbourhood of Herberton.
Dykes and intrusive masses of basalt and diorite intersect almost
all of the stratified and most of the plutonic deposits in the colony.
Some masses mapped as “ Diorite ” ( e.g. that of Mount Frederick
near Townsville) are most probably metamorphic rock.
CONCLUSION.
The aim of the preceding pages has been to give a plain matter-of-
fact account of the present state of Queensland geology. The writer
hopes to publish in a year or two, with the co-operation of Mr. Robt.
Etheridge, junior, a complete Geology of the Colony.
In that work the fossils which are only named in the present hand-
book, as well as many others which are now under examination, will
be figured and described.
The reader may draw his own conclusions as to the origin of the
metalliferous deposits; the relations of the Colonial formations to the
European; the introduction of extinct and living animals and plants
to the Australian area; the Australian range (in time) of forms of
life more restricted in better known lands ; the mingling of forms in
a single Queensland formation, which elsewhere have to be sought
for in two or three; the incongruities which generally exist between
the faunas and floras of most of the Queensland formations ; the dates
of the mountain chains, and the former connection of Australia with
Continental land. These and other large questions could not be
discussed in the present handbook.
Warwick & Sapsford, Printers, Eagle Street, Brisbane.


