

?Pnv^
~L~I- (o V
CURIOUS RESULTS
s|jiplgittj| initial to
AS SEEN IN
“SUPERNATURAL RELIGION.”
Hfk>lCilOo& **AMS
AN ADDRESS
ißox cj
Delivered before the Congregational Union, at the Half-Yearly
Meeting, held at Ballarat, April 12, 1875.
KEY. J. LEGGE., M.A.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
MELBOURNE: GEORGE ROBERTSON.
1876.
SECOND EDITION. PEICE SIXPENCE.




CURIOUS RESULTS
Sceptical Criticism to |tsrif.
Fathers and Brethren in Christ,
We are once more assembled in the name of God, and with
prayer and supplication, seeking to take measures for the spread
of the Gospel in our land. Changes not a few have occurred in
our ranks since our annual meeting in October. But we thank and
praise the Lord of the churches, that the band of his servants has
not been diminished by the hand of death. Some, indeed, have
been left desolate in their homes, and bereft of life’s tenderest
and strongest sympathy in their work, but even they, as believers
in immortality, rejoice, though as men they grieve.
When I last addressed you from the chair of the Congregational
Union, I chose as my subject “ The Attitude of Modern Science
to Biblical Theology.” In that address I sought to clear the
ground for theism ; to show that some popular scientific views
(even if they were true) in no way clashed with the belief in the
Creator. I sought to point out that under all the generalizations
of science there lay traces of a unity, a plan, and a progress,
guided by intelligence and lit up by benevolence, which, to my
thinking, promised some day a grand vindication of the doctrines
of theism, from the very ranks that are now supposed to frown
upon it in hostility.
When, however, all this is done, we are simply left with the
bare conviction that there is a God—great, wise, beneficent. But
whether he connects himself with the moral life of man ; whether
he has ever revealed himself, and whether any or none of the
religions that obtain among men are given by inspiration from
him, is a most momentous but unanswered question. In other
words, “Has God given any farther light to us than is discover-
able in earth and element, in sun and star, and soul of man ? ”
And if he has, where are we to find it ? In Confucianism,
Buddhism, the Koran, the Shasters, or the Scriptures of the


Hebrew race ? All except the last I am sure I may at once
pass by, with the remark of Paley—“ If the Christian religion be
not credible, no one with whom we have to do will support the
pretensions of any other.” The subject of my present address
then is—
“ The Attitude of Modern Sceptical Criticism to the
Historical Credibility of Christianity.”
It is the natural sequel of my last essay. It is a theme of the
most vital interest to all sections of the church. Our Christianity
comes to us through certain ancient writings. These purport to be
the work of men who were contemporaries —who had seen and
heard the things recorded. And this is just such evidence as all
the greatest affairs of the world —of politics, judicial proceedings,
and history, are based upon. “ Historical evidence,” says Sir
George Cornwall Lewis, “ historical evidence, like judicial evi-
dence, is founded on the testimony of credible witnesses. Unless,
therefore, an historical account can be traced by probable proof
to the testimony of contemporaries, the first condition of historical
credibility fails.”
Now it is to do this that I have set myself. lam aware that
I have chosen a subject but little suited for a public address. I
know I am about to lead you through a mass of tangled quotations
and misquotations, and to run through mazes where it is next to
impossible for unassisted memory to keep note of the landmarks.
My only vindication is that in these days when the most reckless
and sweeping statements are made against the whole circle of
Christian truth, it is demanded that somehow, somewhere, and
from some position of acknowledged responsibility, a full, round
denial should be given, with proof appended. I have thought the
chairmanship of our Union was no unfit place; and if the present
hearing be rather grievous than joyous, still it were well the thing
were done. I must, therefore, I honestly tell you, ask for
patience, and if I have erred, for pardon.
I. The first part of my address will be short; it is to show
that the facts of Christianity can be traced back on the pages of
Pagan writers to the days when the Apostles were living.
11. The second part will be to show that the Gospels which
record these facts can be traced back by quotations and allusions
to the very days of the Apostles.
It is on this point that we shall come into collision with a
school of sceptical critics, who assert that there is no trace of our
Gospels for nearly 200 years after Christ. And the value of their
arguments we shall presently see.
I. The Facts op Christian History can be traced up to
the Days of the Apostles, on the pages of Heathen Writers.


1. We shall take first as our guide the well-known Tacitus,
the "Roman historian, who wrote about 70 years after Christ’s
death. In his history, which all the world accepts as genuine,
he describes a persecution of the Christians which had taken
place at Home about 40 years before: —“ The founder of that name
(i.e., the Christians) was Christ, who suffered death in the reign
of Tiberius, under his procurator Pontius Pilate. This pernicious
superstition, thus checked for awhile, broke out again, and spread
not only over Judea, where the evil originated, but through
Rome also, whither everything bad upon the earth finds its way.
Some who confessed their sect were first seized, and afterwards
by their information a vast multitude were apprehended. Their
sufferings at their execution were aggravated by insult and
mockery ; for some were disguised in the skins of wild beasts and
worried to death by dogs, others were crucified, and others were
wrapped in pitched shirts and set on fire when the day closed.”
Here the most impartial of Pagan historians tells what took
place in 64 a.d., or 30 years after Christ’s death, about the
very time that Paul was in Rome. He knows all about Christ
being put to death under Tiberius, about Pilate, the persecution
that scattered the Apostles, and the breaking out at Pentecost.
And what is much to the purpose, he says, —“ a great multitude”
—ingens multitude) —of Christians were apprehended at Rome.
Now, if a vast multitude were apprehended, of course a still
greater number existed at Rome ; and this was within 30 years
after Christ’s death. Christianity must have been existing in
Judea for a considerable time. Tacitus brings us into direct
contact with apostolic times; in fact, his statement carries back
the origin of Christianity to the usual date of Christ’s death.
2. Again, Seutonius, writing of the same period (Nero’s reign),
says, “ The Christians, a set of men of a new and mischievous
superstition, were put to death.”
3. Again, we find Pliny the Younger, governor of Bithynia, in
103 a.d. (i.e. some 40 years or so after Paul had been there),
writing to the Emperor Trajan, “ There are many Christians of
every age and both sexes ; nor has the contagion of the super-
stition seized cities alone, but smaller towns also, and the open
country.” “ Some when seized denied Christ; some confessed ;
others said they had abjured him 20 years ago ; ” which shows
that Christianity had been there for many years. There had even
been time for the spread and then the decline of Christianity, for
Pliny says : —“ The temples, which were once deserted, now begin
to be frequented ; and the sacrifices, after a long intermission, are
again revived.” And all this was written within 70 years after
Christ’s death, within 36 years after Paul was in the province,
and almost at the very time when John the Apostle was teaching
in Ephesus. It is needless to say that the prevalence of the


faith, its partial decay, and the revival of Pagan worship, here
described, demand at any rate the 36 years between Paul
and Pliny.
I think we have made good the statement that Pagan testi-
monies carry back the facts of our Gospels to the very days of
the Apostles.
But all this is so familiar to many of you that I pass on to
another line.
11. Oue New Testament 'Wettings aee quoted by Weitees
AMONG THE EAELY ChEISTIANS EIGHT UP TO THE LIFETIME OF
the Apostles.
It is here that, I am sorry to say, I must draw you into a
region of minute investigation, and often vexatious and seemingly
trifling criticism, in order to hunt down the misstatements and
misrepresentations of certain schools of sceptics.
The period immediately succeeding the Apostles would not
likely be a literary but a preaching age. The work was but
beginning ; men had not time to record ; to save souls was a far
worthier work than to be a historian. We should not expect to
find literary remains abundant, nor are they. Remember, too,
that owing to the absence of printing, and the comparatively
unlettered state of the first Christian converts, and owing to the
wide separation of the early Christian communities, copies of the
G-ospels and Epistles which had been written would be few and far
between. Some churches would have Matthew’s Gospel, and not
Mark’s. One writer would possess Luke, and not John. It
would be many a day in those times of scanty literature and
private persecution and public opposition before any thing like a
full collection of our Gospels and Epistles would be compiled and
secure universal acceptance. We should therefore expect but
few literary productions among these immediate successors of the
Apostles, and we should err greatly if we expected each one pro-
fusely to quote from every one of the Gospels and Epistles in our
New Testament. The writers who followed the Apostles are
called the Apostolic Fathers; and their writings are generally sup-
posed to extend from the year 68 a.d., when many of the Apostles
would be alive, to the year 160 a.d. Then comes Justin Martyr,
a.d. 147, and some minor writers, and then Irenaeus, 177, when
even the most sceptical turn of mind is silenced. For Christianity
had by that time laid hold of the philosophic mind, and treatises
poured from Christian pens in huge tomes, and scripture was
quoted with such fullness, that Lardner says : —“ In the surviving
works of Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, and Tertullian, who
all lived in the first two centuries, there are more and larger
quotations of the small volume of the New Testament than of all
the works of Cicero, by writers of all characters, for several
ages.”


The Apostolic Fathers quote Scripture.
Close to the apostolic age we have the following writings :
The Epistle of Clement of Rome, the Epistle of Barnabas (not, I
think, the Apostle’s companion), the Epistle of Poljcarp, and the
Shepherd of Hermas. I omit the less important and more
doubtful names.
Now I am not going to hang your faith, nor my own either,
upon these Fathers. I should have a perfectly sufficient historical
evidence for the credibility of the New Testament if they had
never written ; but I want to show you the style of criticism
which denies that there are any traces of our Gospels in these
writers. You shall judge for yourselves what epithets it merits
when we have gone a little way. It is not Christianity only, but
all history, that would crumble into dust by the application of their
tests and rules. We shall begin then with the Epistle of Clement,
The date of the Epistle is variously given, ranging from 68 a.d.,
by Tischendorf, to 125 a.d., by the author of Supernatural
Religion. Donaldson says : —“ All antiquity is unanimous in
ascribing it to the Clement mentioned by Paul in his Epistle to the
Philippians.” By those who do not belong to the sceptical school
it is placed just after the times of the majority of the Apostles,
and within the lifetime of the Apostle John. Plainly, then, if
there are quotations in it from our G-ospels, our Gospels must
have existed in apostolic times. This is just the question at
issue between us and the sceptical school. Now, in this letter,
we have the following passages that are usually deemed quotations
from our Gospels. I will only give a few, and I will quote side
by side from our own G-ospels :
Cl.—Be pitiful, that you may be pitied.
Matt. —Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Cl.—Forgive, that it may be forgiven you.
Luke.—Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.
Cl. —As ye do, so shall it be done to you,
Luke.—As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to
them likewise.
Cl.—As ye give, so shall it be given to you.
Luke. —Give, and it shall be given to you.
Cl. —As ye judge, so shall it be judged to you.
Matt.—For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged.
Cl. —With what measure ye mete, with the same shall it be
measured to you.
Matt.—With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to
I shall not quote any more of these lists from the Apostolic
Fathers. I have counted 37 from our New Testament writings
altogether, some of them exact, some inaccurate.


“ Supernatural Religion ” denies that these are quoted
from our Scriptures.
But now I wish to show the style of criticism adopted by those
who try to disprove the existence of our Gospels in the first cen-
tury. The author of Supernatural Religion , after giving these
quotations, says : —“ It must be evident to anyone that the words
cannot be derived from our Gospels.” Why so? we ask.
Because there are differences of grammatical structure, words
omitted, words introduced, and fragments of sentences brought
together which in our Gospels are far apart. In a word, the sen-
tences are rarely exact, and, therefore, says this high criticism
“ they cannot be derived from our Gospels, but from some other
writing now lost.” Well, I said to myself, I shall accept your
canon. I shall apply it, and see what results follow. And now
I call you to remember that the rules of criticism which I am
going to adopt are not mine. They are the rules by which this
writer arrives at the conclusion that our Gospels did not exist for
170 years after Christ. And his first rule of criticism which we
shall adopt and apply is that when a quotation differs from our
Gospels it must be traced not to them, but to some other book.
I shall apply it to modern sermons and see whether on this
principle even their quotations can be derived from our New
Testament. I trust that you will excuse my frequent use of the
pronoun “I.” I have thrown my argument into the form of
personal narrative, to enliven what would otherwise be a dry
discussion.
If “ Supernatural Religion ” be right, Colenso does not
quote our Scriptures.
Colenso is a mathematician, I said, and likely to be exact.
I’ll try him first. So, taking up his Natal sermons, I had hardly
dipped into them, when I came on a reference to Jeremiah xxiv.
29, but as there are only 10 verses in that chapter in our Bible,
it wan quite clear that the words could not be derived from our
Scriptures. The bishop was plainly using another copy of the
Scriptures, with 29 verses in that chapter. It wont do to lay it
to the printer’s charge, because the same might be applied to the
transcribers of the quotations in the Apostolic Fathers. Then in
quick succession came quotations of Isa. Iv. 10, 1 Cor. i. 15, 16,
Matt. xvi. 4, Luke xi. 29, all somewhat different from our version.
I turned specially to a sermon on the “ Fallibility of the Scrip-
tures.” Surely, I said, that will be mathematically exact. When,
lo! the very text at the head of the sermon differed from our
English Scriptures. I turned to another sermon, where the good
bishop tries to show that the New Testament writers were not
very careful in what they quoted. Surely, I thought, the alge-
braic accuracy will come out here, for he will for his own sake be


careful to give the ipsissima verba without omission, alteration, or
insertion ; when, to my consternation, the text at the head of
the sermon, which ministers usually transcribe with all possible
care, contained two variations from our English text. And in
the course of the sermon, Mark viii. 12 had two variations, and
2 Cor. iv. 6, no less than four. Why, Bishop Colenso, I thought
to myself, if you were not a mathematician, I should say that
you were misquoting Scripture ; hut you are a mathematician,
and accepting as I do the critical rules of “ Supernatural
Religion,” I see how it is, you quoted not our Bible, but some
other bible containing these variations. And so it was not our
Scriptures that you called “ fallible, ” and full of insertions, but
that other bible which you were using. 0, comforting but un-
expected fruits of this higher criticism ; you did not mean our
Bible after all.
If “ Supernatural Religion ” be right, Mr. Binney does
NOT QUOTE OUR SCRIPTURES.
Then I turned from mathematical inaccuracies to see how the
canon would apply to a preacher of spiritual power, intent on
the spirit and not the letter. I chose our revered apostolic
father, Mr. Binney, and turned to his well known beautiful dis-
course on “ Salvation in fullness and salvation by fire.” After
Colenso, I will not say that I was surprised at the result. I found
on the second page of the sermon the two texts from which it
was preached. One text was quoted as coming from 2 Peter i. 11,
but part of the quoted words were from the 10th verse Dot the
11th. Ah,l see,according to the canon of “Supernatural Religion,”
our great preacher was using a copy that divided the verses
differently from ours. It was surely an unwise thing, but still
Then came the other text, 1 Cor. hi. 15. Here the case was
very complicated, and holding fast, as I did, by the critical rules of
“ Supernatural Religion,” my faith in Mr. Binney’s good sense was
sadly shaken ; for on the second page the text was quoted word
for word with our version, but on the other side of the leaf it
contained what “ Supernatural Religion” would have called “ an
important variation.” Confounding supposition! Mr. Binney
had evidently first used our authorized version, and then for some
reason which, I fear, can now never be ascertained, he had laid
it down and taken up a different copy. The supposition was
fully borne out. As I got on through the sermon I found Matt,
xxv. 41, with 5 variations ; 2 Cor. iv. 17, with 3; 1 Cor. xii. 26,
with 4 ; and 1 Cor. iv. 5, with 6 points of difference. True
enough some of them were very trifling, but as “ Supernatural
Religion” would say, and does say again and again, men have no
business to trifle with such serious words; and neither a mathe-
matician like Colenso, nor a reverent scholar like Mr. Binney,


would trifle. Their quotations cannot be derived from our Bible;
so we stand by our rule, they were quoting from some unknown
copy of the Bible. You will pardon me for dragging you through
this mass of trivial criticism. I think it trivial too, but then it
is a fair specimen of the bulk of volume 2 of Supernatural
Religion , and it is the very method and style adopted by the whole
Tubingen school of unbelievers, from its founder Baur down to
his unknown disciple whose rule I have been applying. Where
the hare goes the hound must follow, and we are not out of the
wood yet.
If “ Supernatural Religion” be right, then he himself
DOES NOT QUOTE OUR SCRIPTURES.
The next step is to apply his own rule of criticism to the author
himself. For, I said to myself, if there are numerous differences
in structure and words and sometimes in sense in his quotations
of Scripture, then, plainly, on his own showing, he was quoting
from some other New Testament than ours ; and if so, he is wel-
come to say or do what he likes with it; but only it will comfort
to think that it was not my New Testament, for of course he
“ never was referring to it.”
I had not read far when I found the statement that “in
Mark i. 1, a quotation from Malachi is ascribed to Isaiah,” but
in our English and Greek New Testament this quotation is
in the second not the first verse. I concluded, in the words of
“ Supernatural Religion” himself:—“ This quotation is clearly not
from our Gospels, but is derived from a different written source,”
which divided the verses differently. I had no sooner began to
examine his quotations, however, than I found that, like certain
wary publicans, who dislike police inspection, he had provided a
backdoor for escape from the charge of inaccurate quoting, for he
says he will vary from the authorized translation whenever he can
make the sense clearer to English readers. This, of course, covers
a multitude of inaccuracies ; and we can only catch him when he
makes differences that plainly could not be made for the sake of
clearness, or when he varies from the Greek text. But we mujt
be most stringent in marking those deflections that do exist;
first, because he has opened this door of escape, and secondly,
because a man who writes hundreds of pages on the inaccuracies
of others should be proportionately accurate himself. Nay, I
consider it is fair to assert that every misquotation in Super-
natural Religion is equal to 100 in the Fathers; for they were
intent mostly on the sense, but he, a critic, on the letter. His
book “ was the work of many years.” He knew that divines
would search out fevery inaccuracy. He had at his elbow the
Scriptures, clearly printed, divided into verses ; he had commen-
taries and concordances; every thing in fact, and every motive
for literal accuracy ; while they were hurried writers, addressing


not critics, but Pagans or popular assemblies, and probably had
but detached parts of Scripture, and no concordances at all. I say
every misquotation of his is equal to 100 of theirs.
I find first, then, a number of, to my mind, trivial variations,
which could not possibly be meant to make the sense clearer; e.g.,
Mark ix. 42, he puts little ones “ which,” when our version has
little ones “that.” Now if “Supernatural Religion” had been
commenting on this change he would have said—“ A writer who
preferred to put ‘ little ones which,’ instead of £ little ones that,’
must be dated some 150 years back from our day, for it is about
that time at any rate since usage was in favour of ‘ which.’ ” That
is to say, he himself, if he prefers which to that for clearness’ sake
he himself must be put back to the time when it was clearer, i.e.
to about the year 1720 ; or, if his quotation be exact, it is not
from “ our Scriptures, but from some other written source.”
There is another supposition, of course, viz., that he quoted from
memory, and erred ; but as that explanation would let the Gospels
into the first century, it is not to be entertained for a moment;
so we leave him the choice of dating himself 150 years back, or
of quoting from another written source than our New Testament.
But to continue. In Luke ii. 4, he says, “ And Joseph went up
to Bethlehem,” our version has “ And Joseph also went up.”
The Greek has “also.” Not a single existing MS. omits the
“ also,” but our author omits it. Plainly, to use his own words,
his quotation “ cannot be derived from our Gospels.” Further
on our author quotes certain words as from Ps. xxii. 22, when in
our Bible they occur in verse 18, and not 22. Now if any one
else had done this I should have been inclined to say the sound
of Ps. xxii. led him to put down v. 22 by mistake for v. 18 ; but
then it is not any body else that did it; it is “ Supernatural
Religion,” who never gives the Apostolic Fathers the benefit of
such a doubt, and who therefore would never claim it for himself.
Plainly he was using a copy of the Psalms whose verses were
differently divided from ours. Again, “ Supernatural Religion”
quotes from Matthew v. 44, “ Them which curse you —them which
hate you but our English version has “ Them that curse —them
that hate.” He cannot say that he clears the sense to an English
reader, in the year 1875, by using “which” for “that” after a
person. Therefore, he is either quoting from some other trans-
lation, that had the word “which,” or as we said before, if he is
translating it himself, and prefers “ which” to “ that/’ we must
insist on dating him back to the English readers of about 1720.
Again, in Luke vi. 34, he translates, “ For sinners lend to sin-
ners but our English version, and the Greek too, has “ also,”
“ For sinners also lend to sinners.” Treating him as he treats
the Fathers, we ought to say that he used a copy where “ also”
was omitted. But now I ask your attention, for a strict appli-
cation of the canon leads to some very instructive results here.


As I have said, our Luke has “ For sinners also lend to sinners.”
Now “ Supernatural Religion” gives a Greek sentence as Luke’s,
which being translated reads “And sinners lend to sinners;”
and then he professedly gives the English translation of his
Greek sentence, but it reads, “for sinners lend to sinners.”
Now his own rules lead to these conclusions —first, that his Greek
sentence was not quoted from our Luke, because it omitted
“ forand, secondly, that his English sentence was not derived
from his own Greek, because it omitted “ also ;” i.e. he first gives
a Greek sentence, and instead of translating it, he prefers to
translate some similar one, borrowed from I don’t know where.
Remember that it cannot for a moment be admitted that he
blundered in his quotations, for that would admit the free quota-
tions of the Apostolic Fathers to be from our Gospels.
The Canon op “ Supernatural Religion ” in difficulties.
I shall wind up this part of my subject by giving just one
other illustration. I confess that I almost gave up the canon of
“ Supernatural Religion,” which I had embraced when I came upon
it. It is from his criticisms on Justin Martyr, a.d. 147, just
after the age of the Apostolic Fathers. Ido not know how many
quotations from the New Testament occur in this writer. They
are very numerous. “ Supernatural Religion ” devotes just 100
pages to their demolition. 1 find him quoting one in reference
to the Lord’s supper. It is from Justin’s Apology , and Justin
introduces it with the words “ The Apostles have thus transmitted
to us what was enjoined on them by Jesus; ” and then follow
words which are very like those recorded by Luke, but not
identically the same. It is just such a quotation as any of us
would make from memory if asked to repeat the Saviour’s words
at the last supper. But “ Supernatural Religion ” waxes in-
dignant at the very idea of Justin quoting from memory. He says,
“ Justin is giving an account of the most solemn sacrament of
his religion.” “ Here, if ever, we might reasonably expect accuracy
and care.” Justin says, “ The Apostles have thus transmittedand
“ Supernatural Religion,” commenting on the force of “ thus,”
says, “ that Justin professedly quoted literally.” Now what
ought we to infer if “ Supernatural Religion” himself, in
this very case, first announced that he would quote literally,
and then failed. Here we have him straining the word “thus”
to mean “ professedly literal quotation ; ” and then, because
it is not “literally” quoted from our Gospels, declaring that
it is derived from another gospel. Now when “ Supernatural
Religion” goes in so strongly for verbal accuracy, I say to him in
his own words, “Here, if ever, we might reasonably expect accuracy
and care; ” and if I find you, “ Supernatural Religion,” diverging
from literal accuracy in your professed quotations of our Gospels,
I shall apply the canon short and sharp, and declare that you


were not quoting “ from our Gospels, but from some other written
source.” Well, I found our author using this preface to a quo-
tation from Luke : —“ The account of the episode from Luke is
as follows ; ” and then comes a quotation, with the usual marks,
divided into verses as our own Luke is, and said to be from Luke
xxii. 17-20. Now I say, “ Here, if ever, we might reasonably ex-
pect accuracy and care.” Well, I find he attributes to Luke the
words “ I will not henceforth drink of the fruit of the vine.”
Now our Luke has not the word “ henceforth ”at all. (Certain
MSS. have “ henceforth,” but as they have other things which
“ Supernatural Religion ” does not give, he cannot be quoting from
them.) I read on, and found him quoting as from Luke, “ This
is the new testament in my blood ;” but our Luke has the word
“cup.” “This cup is the new testament.” Not one single
MS. known to exist omits “ cup ;” but “ Supernatural Religion ”
introduces “henceforth,” and omits “ cup,” in a critical argument
where his whole reputation and his whole reasoning hung on the
most verbal accuracy. “ Here, if ever, we might reasonably ex-
pect accuracy and care,” “ direct quotation ” in a professedly
“ literal quotation ;” but we do not find it, therefore, most plainly
“ Supernatural Religion ” was not quoting from our Luke, but
from “ some other written source ;” probably from the “ Gospel
according to the Hebrews,” now lost, but from which he over
and over declares “ the Apostolic Fathers probably quoted.’’
“ Supernatural Religion ” then was not quoting our Gospels ; he
was not even referring to them. O rare canon of
criticism ! If it be reliable, then, it is not even our New Testa-
ment at all that this author is attacking. It is some other gospel;
some fifth gospel, unknown to the world; known only to this re-
morseless critic, who first quotes it, and then tears it in pieces.
Leave him with it. If his canon of criticism be reliable, it is not
our Grospels he has touched. If his canon be not reliable, then
it wont hurt our Gospels, even though it touch them. Either
way we can calmly and quietly and reverently take up the book
which is to us the Word of Life, and say, “The hand of man
hath not and cannot hurt thee.”
The Canon breaks down.
So I was reasoning with myself, when the canon that I had
adopted from “ Supernatural Religion,” and which I had applied
with such unexpected and consoling results —first to Colenso,
then to Mr. Binney, and then to the critic himself —I say the
canon fairly broke down. For I found that the “ henceforth” in
his quotation of Luke did occur in Matthew , which he had evi-
dently been reading along with Luke. Similarly the word “ cup,”
which he had omitted from Luke, I found was omitted by Matthew.
He had plainly been reading the Evangelists together, and had


quoted or misquoted from memory. And when I turned over the
leaf all doubts were gone, for I found there the words of our Luke
verbatim et literatim —“ This cup is the new testament in my
blood.” That is to say, on the two sides of the same leaf, the
same passage from Luke was quoted in two different ways. It
was as clear as day “ Supernatural Religion” meant honestly
enough to quote our Luke, but he did it from memory—and so
did Clemens Romanus, and so did Polycarp, and so did Barnabas,
and so did all the early Fathers. The canon had fairly burst and
destroyed the man who was using it.
If it did not, all Histoet would beeak down.
The author of Ecce Homo somewhere says that a man of mere
books, who does not correct his theories by the ordinary experience
of mankind, would fairly astonish the world when he came to
apply them to life. Now this is just what this writer and the
whole of the destructive school —Baur, Schwegler, Hilgenfeld, and
the rest —have done. They have applied certain rules of criticism
to the Scriptures which no history could stand. They have thus
conjured up a vast host of difficulties, few of which are real.
It reminds me of the way in which an English traveller says he
once saw a Chinese town garrisoned. Every soldier was sup-
posed to have a lantern by him on the wall; and so when the sun
set a couple of men went round and lit up some 500 lanterns
on the bulwarks. The whole efficient force thus amounted to
two lamplighters and 500 lanterns. Such is not unfrequently
the effective force which these men muster in their cause.
The fact is, if their rules be good, all history is impossible. I
daresay that a judicious application of them to this address
would show that (despite every possible care to be accurate) I
was quoting neither from our Scriptures nor yet from the book
called Supernatural Religion. I think I would undertake to make
it tolerably certain by means of them, that the copies of the
Argus and Age, which commented on our revenue returns about
a month ago, were not both composed in Melbourne, perhaps
neither of them ; that they probably were written at different
periods, and described widely distant stages of Victorian politi-
cal and commercial progress. Now it is pretty certain that a
style of criticism which could do that, or anything like that, is
the most arrant nonsense, call it by what high sounding name
you choose. History, distant history, dissolves into chaos under
it. It is like studying astronomy with the microscope and not
the telescope. And if you will pardon a personal reminiscence,
I once tried that. As a boy I had a great passion for astronomy,
but I could not afford to purchase a telescope. I had, however,
a microscope of about 120 magnifying power. And one day the
bright idea struck me that I might examine the far-off stars with
my microscope, if I could only place them beneath the tube ; and


so when evening came, with boyish ardour, I placed a table in
the yard, laid a mirror on it, so that I could apply my tube to
the image of a distant star, now brought down upon my table on
the mirror’s face. I adjusted my strongest power, and with a
heating heart looked down the tube, and lo ! a dim, blurred,
winged, shimmering patch of light was all that I could get. If
a man is to study the far distant with a microscope, he must
first gather all its rays in the speculum of common sense; he
must allow the scope, the spirit, the whole facts of the case, and
not any one tiny fact to shape the image for his eye. It may
seem to some a waste of time to occupy this occasion with
criticisms on such a book, but again I would say, it were well that
these charges were met from a public place; and remember that
in dealing with this writer, we are really dealing with a school,
a method—the method adopted by a whole host of writers who
have assailed the Scriptures in the same style of atrocious folly.
Now it is useless to make sweeping general charges of reck-
lessness, unfair straining, of omissions, suppressions, unwar-
rantable inferences, and such like, without giving proof of them ;
and, therefore, I proceed to examine some of his other supposed
proofs, that those early writers knew nothing of our Giospels, but
used some other book or books.
Asserted Contradictions sometimes prove Agreements.
He asserts over and over that there are facts recorded by the
Fathers which are not found in our Gospels, and from this he
infers that they did not use ours, but some other gospel. Now
this is half a truth and half an unwarrantable assumption. If
the facts are not in our Gospels, of course they derived these
facts from some other source, but surely that does not prove that
they did not use our Gospels. For instance, if two gentlemen are
discussing the news of the day, and one quotes, with some vari-
ations, a sentence from the Ballarat Star, and then mentions, as
from the newspapers, a fact which is not to be found in the Star,
surely the proper inference is that he read both the Star and also
some other paper, say the Courier, which contained the fact
mentioned. But “ Supernatural Religion ” would insist that
both the quotation and the fact must be derived from some news-
paper that contained both.
And so, by this screw-pressure criticism, he gets together
a number of facts and sayings which he declares are not in our
Gospels, and concludes that Justin did not use our Gospels. The
chief ones that admit of brief treatment are these, and the
others are like unto them :
-1. “Supernaturalßeligion”puts it thus: —“Upon two occasions,
Justin distinctly states that the Jews sent persons throughout the


world to spread calumnies against Christians.” “ This circum-
stance,” he says, “is not mentioned in our Gospels.” The calumny
referred to was that they had stolen Christ’s body. Now Matthew
makes the chief priests tell the soldiers, “ Say ye that his disciples
came by night and stole him away. . . . And this saying is
commonly reported among the Jews until this day.” I think
common sense would not hesitate to make this the thing that
Justin referred to. If, however, “ Supernatural Religion” thinks it
is not exact enough, I would just point out that he has dealt quite
as inexactly with Justin in this very passage. He asserts that
“ Justin distinctly states that the Jews sent persons throughout
the world." He then gives Justin’s own words, Avhen, lo! it is
“ throughout the land" i. e. of Judea. The word cannot mean
both the world and also the land of Judea at the same time. And
I am afraid if Justin here stated a fact which is not in Matthew,
“ Supernatural Religion” first states a fact that is not in Justin,
and then quotes him in support of it—all in ten lines !
2. Again, The Epistle of Barnabas says, “ We keep the eighth
day with joy, in which Jesus rose again from the dead, and when
he had manifested himself, ascended into the heavens.” Now,
plainly, what the writer meant here was that it was on the eighth
day, i.e. the day after the seventh or Sabbath day, that Jesus
rose from the dead, and that it was also on the eighth day that
he ascended. But, no ! “ Supernatural Religion” will insist that
it means that it all took place in one day, because then it is “ in
contradiction” with Matthew. Now, if a man were to say, “I
keep the 3rd of May with joy, because on it I was born and
ordained and married, and my eldest boy was born,’’ I wonder if
“ Supernatural Religion” would insist that it was all on one day.
3. Justin says of Christ in Grethsemane, “There was not a
single man to help him.” “Supernatural Religion” reminds us
of Peter and the sword, and says, “ This contradiction further
tends to confirm the conclusion that Justin employed another
gospel.” If “ Supernatural Religion” had read a few verses more
he would have found “ that they all forsook him and fled.” It is
just possible I think that Justin was referring to that, but un-
fortunately for “ Supernatural Religion” the contradiction be-
comes an agreement.
4. Again, Justin says, “ All his friends forsook him after his
crucifixion.” And now “ Supernatural Religion ” remembers
Matthew’s words, that “ they forsook him bejore his crucifixion,”
because it gives him another “ contradiction.” He conveniently
forgot Luke xxiii. 49. “ Ail his acquaintance stood afar off be-
holding these things.” Isn’t it just possible that they forsook
him in the garden, as Matthew says, and afterwards returned,
and then, as Luke says, at the sight of the crucifixion their hearts
failed them again, and they “ stood afar off,” forsaking him after


his crucifixion. There are many other similar “ contradictions,”
but some of them so tangled it is not possible here to touch them.
We have done enough. Such stuff as this wont hurt us. The
only danger is, as I have already said, that there is such an
amount of suppression and perversion and bold assertion, that
any man taking up the book alone, without sifting every state-
ment, would certainly be convinced. But let a man sift it, and
he very shortly acquires an utter distrust of the writer’s assertions,
and a suspicion of every one of them is forced upon him, until
he has verified them for himself. I could give many more than
I have, but attention and patience and time have their limits.
Curious Results of the Sceptical Method.
When one makes this charge of unfairness and dishonesty,
proofs should be produced. Take a few of a miscellaneous
character.
1. Justin gives a number of facts about the birth of Jesus,
but says nothing of the angels appearing to the shepherds.
“ Supernatural Religion ” concludes “ Justin apparently does not
know anything of it.” Now, I ask, is it not the sheerest nonsense
to say that what a man didn’t state, he therefore didn’t know.
Is a man bound to give the whole of the play when he quotes
Hamlet ?
2. “ Supernatural Religion ” says, “In the narrative of the
baptism there are many peculiarities which prove that Justin did
not derive it from our Gospels. Thrice he speaks of John sitting
by the River Jordan. ‘He cried as he sat by the River Jordan
‘ while he still sat by the River Jordan;’ ‘ for when John sat by
the Jordan.’ ” “ This peculiar expression,” says “ Supernatural
Religion,” “ so frequently repeated, must have been derived from a
written gospel.” 0 wonderful critic ! you are forgetting your
canon about verbal accuracy. It must have been derived from
three written gospels, for it is quoted in three different ways !
3. Again, the shifts to which this canon of literal quotation
drives him are sometimes as amusing as dishonest.
The Epistle of Barnabas has these words, “ Let us beware lest
we be found as it is written, ‘ Many are called, but few chosen.’ ”
Now Matthew twice has “Many are called, but few are chosen,”
and Westcott, and the majority of writers, have regarded Barnabas
as quoting Matthew. But “ Supernatural Religion ” has special
reasons for denying this, because the quotation begins “ as it is
written,” which was the general way of quoting Holy Scripture,
and so this would prove that Matthew was then not only in
existence , but quoted as scripture , and so he tries to trace it to some
other source. But the nearest phrase that he can find in all


ecclesiastical antiquity is a sentence from the apocryphal Book of
Esdras, “For many are created, but few shall be saved.” Now
just look at the plight into which this stickler for accurate quo-
tation has got himself. He finds in Barnabas, “ Many are called,
but few chosen.” He finds in Matthew, “ For many are called,
but few are chosen,” but he wont admit that Barnabas is quoting
Matthew; and away go “ Supernatural Eeligion,” and Orelli,
Hilgenfeld, and Strauss, and Scholten, and Yolkmar, and Weiz-
sacker, and Bretschneider, and the host of them, and hunt up the
sentence, “ Many are created, but few shall be saved,” and come
back flaunting it as the original of Barnabas’s “ Many are called,
but few chosen.” oye sticklers for words, ye seven wise men of
Gothan, to what grand self-consistency ye come, “En quo dis-
cordise (verborum) vos miseros perduxit” —To what depths of
misery have these discrepancies of the words brought you !
4. Again, the words “as it is written ” bring out the magni-
ficent fairness of these critics. When it goes before a quotation
from Matthew, it is absolutely worthless; but when it goes before
a quotation from an apocryphal book (which once or twice it
does), it shows that he quoted “ the Apocrypha as Holy Scripture.”
Even if it be sometimes prefixed to quotations from the Apocrypha,
it is rather too bad to give it all the benefit of being Holy Scripture,
and poor Matthew none.
5. Again, he tries to discredit our Gospels by saying the
Epistle of Barnabas “ quotes largely from the Old Testament, but
nowhere mentions any book or writer of the New Testament.”
Beautiful honesty ! he does not state (though it is a fact) that
with one exception, Barnabas “ nowhere mentions any book or
writer” of the Old Testament any more than the New, when he
quotes their words. No ! because if that would prove that Bar-
nabas was using another New Testament, it would prove that he
used another Old Testament too.
6. Again. I have shown you that from the difference be-
tween our Gospels and the quotations in the Fathers, he insists
that they used other Gospels. Our grandly candid critic
did not, however, state (though it is a fact) that the very
same inaccuracies marked their quotations from the Old Testa-
ment as from the New. No! because if the differences proved
another New Testament, they proved another Old Testament;
proved that, to use his own words, “ these early writers avoided our
Gospels ” and our Old Testament books ; “ and if they knew them
at all, systematically made use of other writings.”
“ O noble judge ! O excellent young man!
O wise and upright judge!
How much more elder art thou than thy looks ! ”


Possibly, “ Supernatural Religion” may exclaim, with tbe perplexed
Shylock —“ Is that the law ? ” With Portia, we reply —
“ Thyself shalt see the act 5
For, as thou urgest justice, be assured
Thou shalt have justice, more than thou desirest.”
Justice! ay, but what shall we say of the wretched dishonesty of
suppressing these facts ? It ought to have been stated that the
“ profuse quotations from the Old Testament” were as inaccurate
as those from the New. It ought to have been stated that, with
one exception, Old Testament writers are no more mentioned than
New, when quoted. Why was it not stated ? It could not be
ignorance; it could not be forgetfulness ; it certainly was to the
point; it was not impartiality. No! it were a simple sin to mince
words. It was the most contemptible, downright dishonesty.
Tolerance and calm dissent have their place ; but I say it is moral
cowardice to call such suppressions by any but their true name —
deliberate dishonesty, a contemptible unfairness which infects the
author’s reputation with suspicion ; and I say this, not because I
have a sympathising audience, but because I have proved it.
His Method gets him into a “ Fix.”
I shall close my references to “ Supernatural Religion” with
one more illustration to show the “ fix” he gets himself into.
Tou will remember that, while he discards our Gospels as the
source of these quotations, he is continually bringing forward a
“ Gospel according to the Hebrews” as the real source. We
know well enough that it existed in early times, but the way in
which “ Supernatural Religion” derives every thing from it re-
minds us of the schoolmaster whose geographical ideas were
somewhat shady. “ Boys,” he said, “we may conveniently divide
the world into three parts —England, Europe, and the rest; and
when you are asked where any place is, look first in England.
If you do not find it there, then examine the map of Europe, and
if you do not find it there, you may safely conclude it is some-
where in the rest of the world.” So to “ Supernatural Religion”
this “ Gospel according to the Hebrews” is “ the rest” —the pro-
lific source of every quotation. Now it is rather too bad to give
such antiquity and universal acceptance to this lost “ Gos-
pel of the Hebrews,” seeing, that as far as I can find, nobody
mentions it till Clement of Alexandria, about the year 194, and
the first man who tells us he had seen it is Jerome, about 392.
Besides “ Supernatural Religion” himself mentions two different
copies of it which differ from each other very widely. But now
we shall grant him all he wishes about this gospel; we shall
admit that all these early writers quoted it, only it, and that
continually, and we shall see what a “ fix” he gets himself into.


I want to show that he jams up all these quotations from this
lost gospel close to the time of Irenseus, when we come to the
most distinct and express historical testimony that only four
G-ospels were acknowledged in the church, and these four were
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. This is the way then that he
gets into the “ fix.” There are some fragments of a writer called
Athenagoras, which contain scripture quotations. “ Supernatural
Religion” dates him 177. The date is very important. This
man’s quotations “ Supernatural Religion” traces, as usual, to the
“ Gospel according to the Hebrews,” or some other lost gospel, but
that of the Hebrews is the pet one. And every writer, according to
him, has been quoting these lost gospels, and not ours, up to this
year 177. Now, Irenseus, another early Father, is by most
scholars (except this school) placed in that year. “ Supernatural
Religion,” however, manages, by his usual screw pressure, to get
him back to the year 190. Now, in this year (190) Irenaeus gives us
the most full and explicit statement that there were four, and
only four, Gospels accepted by the church. “ Supernatural Re-
ligion” admits that in that year Irenseus wrote a book, with a long
chapter, entitled, “ Proofs that there can be neither more nor
fewer than four Gospels.” He calls the Gospel “ four-faced ;”
compares it to the four regions of the earth, the cherubim with
four faces. He says, “ The church is disseminated over the
whole earth ; but the column and support of the church is the
Gospel and spirit of life. It was then befitting that it should
have four columns, spreading abroad incorruptibility, and vivifying
humanity.” “We have shown,” he says, “by very many
and very powerful reasons on the one hand why there
are not a greater number than four, and also why there
are not fewer.” He then names the four Gospels accord-
ing to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. He quotes them
continually. He even tells us how each Gospel began and
how it ended. It was just as ours do. Nothing could possibly
be clearer than that this great and venerated Father had our
Gospels, quoted them, and asserted that throughout the church
over the world, they, and they only, were held to be “ the Gos-
pels ;” and all this is in the year 190, according to “ Super-
natural Religion ” himself. And now recall the other statement,
which he will insist upon, viz., that Athenagoras, in the year 177
(the date is his own), and everybody up to the year 177 have
been quoting from the “ Gospel of the Hebrews,” or some other
now lost, and never from our Gospels. The pinch is this, that
everybody up to 177 has been revering and using this Gospel of
the Hebrews; but 13 years after, in 190, we find that no other
Gospel than our four was deemed genuine by the church. Why,
I ask, what happened during these 13 years to the Gospel of the
Hebrews? What became of its universal esteem and use?


Did its pages all become a blank ? Did some “ Supernatural
Religion ” arise in those days and smash it (he was more suc-
cessful than his successor in our time) P What strange
infatuation seized the church, that in 13 years it gave up
what all its defenders had been using up to the year 177
as the word of God, and took to something else ? Ay, and
that something else , that it. took to — those four Gospels , men-
tioned by Irenaeus — where on earth did they come from in those
13 years P The writers up to 177 had not quoted them;
as far as “ Supernatural Religion ” can make out, they did not
know them, or, to use his own words, “ all the early writers avoid
our Gospels, if they knew them at all, and systematically make use
of other works.” “ They do not in any case afford evidence even
of the existence of our Gospels ; ” and yet, in 13 years, here they
are, and are alone in the possession of the field of Christian
belief, like Minerva, full armed, full developed at their birth, and
received from Jerusalem to Trance. What did become of the uni-
versal veneration for the “ Gospel of the Hebrews ? ” Where did
the universal veneration for our Gospels come from between 177
and 190 ? Why did the world change its sacred books without
any assigned reason ? Why did this so-called conservative
principle —religion,— why did it suddenly cast to the winds its
venerated records, and take up with four new Gospels of whose
existence “ Supernatural Religion ” cannot find a trace 13 years
before ? Talk of miracles. Here was a miracle without anybody
to work it. Talk of the difficulties against our orthodox super-
natural religion, they are bagatelles compared to the difficulties
against this man’s supernatural religion.
The Indictment against Christian Evidences having failed,
the Charges must be withdrawn.
I must now leave the polemical field. There are difficulties
both in the interpretation and in the historical evidences of
Christianity. It would be very strange if there were none. But
the objections of this school spring from their own wrong method,
not from the facts of the case. Any average scholar could go
through almost every other page, like the forester, “ blazing ” the
arguments that are to fall before the axe of his own criticisms.
If I have treated his method with ridicule, it is because, when
applied to his own book, it proved ridiculous. If I have charged
him with dishonest suppression, it is because no motive but dis-
honesty could account for the suppression. And now let us
remember that it is not with the man we are really concerned, it
is with his method of criticism. By that method the whole Tubin-
gen school assail the Scriptures. If their method then miserably
fails, the old fortress of Scripture evidence stands intact. A
court of criticism has been constituted; the charge, that our


Gospels did not exist for a century and three-quarters after
Christ, has been heard, and it has jalien to the ground. Scripture
evidence is acquitted, and every charge has, therefore, to be
withdrawn; and, therefore, we are free to assert —
We ee-asseet —the Evidences oe Cheistianitt.
We therefore assert with tenfold firmer confidence than before
this book appeared, “ that the historical books of the New
Testament are quoted or alluded to by a series of writers,
beginning with those who were contemporary with the Apostles,
or who immediately followed them, and proceeding in close and
regular succession from their time to the present; that they are
quoted as having an authority that belonged to no other books ;
that they were very early collected into a distinct volume ; that
they were soon distinguished by appropriate names and titles of
respect; that commentaries were written on them ; harmonies
formed out of them, and translations of them made into foreign
languages; that they were held as authoritative by both heretics
and the orthodox ; that they were attacked by Pagans as being
the records on which Christianity was founded; that formal
catalogues of them were soon published ; and, lastly, we also
affirm that this cannot be said of any of the other early Christian
books that are not included in our New Testament.”
A ll men, however, know that the exemplification of a principle
is the most convincing test of its worth or worthlessness.
Literary and historical evidence pale their ineffectual fires before
the ruddy glow of a Christianity which proves itself fit to cope
with temptation, to comfort sorrow, and to elevate the low levels
of mere secular wisdom into the sublimity of moral obedience
and spiritual sacrifice. To live Christ is the best proof of
Christianity. Nor does this demand the literal reproduction of
his career, the isolation, the homeless wandering, the severance
from political life. Ear less does it require us to assume the
cowl and beads and asceticism of the friar or the monk. Rich
or poor, lettered or ignorant, holding a post on the mountain top,
or buried in the shadows of the mossy glen, every life may re-
ceive and obey his spirit in helpfulness and holiness, in self-
renunciation and self-devotion to the nobler ends of human
existence, and the establishment of a kingdom of righteousness
amongst men. And thus shall we best show what Christ was,
and translate the Gospels into life.
James Curtis, Printer, Armstrong Street, Ballarat.




