

THE
ABORIGINES
OF
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
WITH A
VOCABULARY OF THE DIALECT OF THE
ALICE SPRINGS NATIVES.
BY
W. H. WILLSHIRE,
Mounted Constable First Class, Officer in charge of Native
Police at Alice Springs, McDonnell Ranges,
Central Australia.
Port Augusta :
D. DRYSDALE, PRINTER, COMMERCIAL ROAD.
1888.
Dedicated to, and Published by permission of,
W. J. PETERSWALD, ESQ.,
Commissioner of South Australian Police Force.


THE
ABORIGINES
OF
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
WITH A
VOCABULARY OF THE DIALECT OF THE
ALICE SPRINGS NATIVES.
BY
W. EC. WILLSHIRE,
Mounted Constable First Class, Officer in charge of Native
Police at Alice Springs, McDonnell Ranges,
Central Australia.
Port Augusta
D. DRYSDALE PRINTER,COMMERCIAL ROAD.
1888.
Dedicated to, and Published by permission of,
W. J. PETERSWALD, ESQ.,
Commissioner of South Australian Police Force.


THE ABORIGINES
OF
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
INTRODUCTORY.
The manners, customs, rites, and language of an
aboriginal race which dies out wherever the white man
obtains a firm footing, are matters which well deserve
attention and recordance at the hands of those who have
opportunities for so doing ; but unfortunately the pioneers
of civilization are as a general thing too much occupied
in overcoming difficulties, and striving to promote
material interests, to have either the inclination or the
leisure to devote to such matters. Their stirring and
hardy life is not calculated to encourage literary labors ;
and the patient and persistent inquiry, necessary in
eliciting from the natives explanations and descriptions of
their tribal laws, rites, and ceremonies, and in compiling
vocabularies of their languages, is but seldom found in
the pioneer—who is pre-eminently a practical man. That
something should be attempted in the way of preserving
an historic record of such a doomed race as the Australian
aboriginals, is admitted on all hands ; and in the elder and
more settled colonies, where the blacks have either died
out, or exist as a half-caste race in process of extinction,
efforts have been made rather late in the day to preserve,
for the benefit of posterity, such meagre records of the
aboriginals as can be collected. With regard to Central
Australia, however, though the Transcontinental Telegraph
lino traverses it, and railway commucation has been, and
is being, pushed into the interior, by far the greater pro-
portion of the natives are in a perfectly primitive state.
There are “ camps’’ of semi civilized blacks in the vicinity
of the few and widely separated telegraph and cattle
stations, whore something may be learned of aboriginal
rites and languages —but not without patient and persistent
inquiry ami research can much be extracted from the
Australian native. Having been for the last seven years
stationed as a police officer in Central Australia, and


having, morever, been entrusted with the formation of a
native police contingent at Alice Springs, the author of
this little work has had, in a measure, forced upon him the
study of the native habits and tongues ; and though the
task was to him a congenial duty, and whenever practic-
able, by camp fires, under the shade of huge gums at
lonely water holes, by native wells, and in precipitous
gorges of the McDonnell Ranges, he took rough notes
week by week, month by month, and year by year—yet
he was not so ambitious as to contemplate the publication
of what he had learned, until by a report in the Adelaide
Observer of September 4, 1886, he saw that the Royal
Geographical Society of Australasia was anxious that all
available information on such matters should be made
public, and that anything done in the wny of preserving
the languages of the aboriginal races was regarded as
deserving of encouragement. The Society hoped that
everyone in the colony of South Australia who was in a
position to help in this work would do so, and that in time
a good and complete vocabulary of Australian aboriginal
languages would be compiled. This encouraged the
writer to persevere in his researches and to arrange the
materials which he had collected, with a view to their pub-
lication in an unpretentious form on his first return to
regions ef civilization.
PERSONAL.
Before proceeding to deal with the general question of
the aboriginals of Central Australia, a brief sketch of
personal experience may be laid before the reader, in
order to give an idea of the conditions and circumstances
under which the writer’s information was gathered.
I was sent up to Alice Springs telegraph station in
December 1881, to take charge of a then newly formed
police camp at that place, which is situated on a fine gum
creek, the Todd, at a distance of 1036 miles by mail
route from Adelaide. At that time the Police Camp was
without an officer, M.C. Shirley, who had previously
been stationed there, having been removed to Barrow’s
Creek, 200 miles further North. Shirley, poor fellow, after-
wards lost his life in a search expedition after a man
named Radford,who was reported murdered by the blacks.
Ilis party consisted of Messrs A. M. Giles, J. Hussey,
A. Phillips, J. G. Phillips, John Reece, a black tracker
named Barney, and another blackboy, and all
died of thirst except Mr. Giles, who is now
telegraph station master at Tennant’s Creek, and
Barney ; and I had the melancholy duty of
searching for the bodies of the four who succumbed,


finding and burying of those of Phillips and Shirley after
a fortnight’s search. This was in |IBB3. When the Daly
River murders took place in 1884 the authorities decided
to form a Native Police corps in Central Australia, the
task being entrusted to me. I succeeded in organizing
and getting under full control this corps, which was
equipped at a cost of about £6OO, I then took the
native troopers through to Port Darwin, and worked them
on the Roper and Daly rivers for ten months, M.C.
Wurmbrand in the meantime taking charge of the Alice
Springs Police Camp. In 1885 I handed over to M.C.
Power, in the Territory, charge of the corps, and went back
to the Alice, taking with me only a Peake blackboy whom
I met in the Territory, and who was anxious to return to
his own country. Ho died, I regret to say, of some
internal complaint, two days after we reached the Alice.
In the same year the police camp was moved from the
telegraph station to the Heavitree, four miles south of
the Alice, where it has since remained, and where a police
station is now to be built, for up to the present time it has
been a “ camp” merely, my quarters consisting of wurlies
constructed of boughs ; while the police stores have teen
kept in a large surveyor’s tent. I organised another corps
of black troopers, consisting of six regularly paid boys,
with a number of pro and tern auxiliaries, there being
about 200 natives camped regularly at the Heavitree ; and
though my duties often called me away for hundreds of
miles, and I was quite alone, so far as Europeans were
concerned, I never found the slightest inroad made on
the stores, it being quite sufficient to leave a blackfellow
in charge.
DESCRIPTIVE.
Alice Springs, it may here bo stated, is on
Tennant & Love’s Undoolya station, which runs about
7,000 cattle, the homstead being 12 miles east of the Over-
land telegraph line. The country is well watered with
creeks in which large permanent water holes exist, and
supplies of the precious fluid may also be found in the
abrupt and precipitous gorges of the McDonnell Ranges,
which, in detached groups running North and South,
extend over a considerable belt of country to east and
west of the telegraph line. This country has recently
attracted great attention on account of the ruby discoveries
to the eastward of the Alice, and it may be as well to gjve
here an outline of its general features and characteristics.
It is a rangey country for the greater part, with extensive
flats between the hills, the soil being formed for the most
part of the detritus of worn down rock. The ranges are


of red and brown sandstone, with occasionally a white
rock, from which the natives carve pipe bowls. The rain-
fall is good ; it was 16.92 inches in 1885, and for the
previous 11 years had averaged 11-312 inches. Conse-
quently the feed and vegetation are very much superior
to those of the dryer country further South. Salt and
cotton bush abound, but the blue bush is not found there,
and there are many varieties of luxuriant and succulent
grasses and herbage—the red Flinders grass, Mitchell’s
grass, geranium, creepers, &o. Big timber grows in the
creek bottoms and valleys—gum and box trees principally ;
the summits of the steep and almost inaccessible ranges
are covered with spinifex, and patches of mulga grow on
their sides. Game is plentiful, kangaroo and euro abound,
the rock and bush wallaby are found in considerable
numbers, and there are dingoes in legions—all red in
color. As to feathered game, it is oven more plentiful
than marsupial—teal, widgeon, black and wood duck, and
the little white crested grebe, haunt the many fine water
holes in the creek beds ; black and white cockatoos,
bronze-wing pigeons, parrots of many kinds—ring-necks,
blue bonnets, and goolahs, furnish the natives with many
a meal ; for the aboriginal snares them in numbers, though
he is not sufficiently advanced in sporting ingenuity to
have contrived a net for such purposes. The fertility of
the soil and the natural richness of the country may bo
judged from the flourishing condition of Hermannburg,
the Lutheran mission station on the head waters of the
Finke River, about 90 miles west of the Alice. There is
a splendid garden, with vines and fruit trees planted
therein, and such an abundance of vegetables—turnips,
carrots, cabbage, lettuce, pumpkins, melons, &c.—that the
missionaries actually feed their blacks (of whom there are
a great number camped at and around the station) on
garden produce, with an occasional bullock slaughtered
for beef. There are about 6,000 sheep and 600 head of
cattle and horses, on the mission reserve, which is an
excellent piece of country, having 25 miles of frontage
to the binke river ; but though sheep do well there, the
price of cartage is prohibitive, so far as wool transport is
concerned ; the rate last year was £3l a ton to Hergott,
without back loading. The Hermannburg sheep are
however shorn—by a teamster, who does the work for the
wool, which he carts down country when going for stores
for stations in the Alice district. With the extension of
the Transcontinental railway, sheep farming will doubtless
become remunerative, but in the meantime it does not pay
in Central Australia, though the missionaries (there are
four of them with their wives and families at Hermannburg)
THE ABORIGINES OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.


ore prospering and want for nothing—as indeed is their
desert, for they are not unmindful of the injunction to be
hospitable to strangers, though there is not much chance
of their “ entertaining angels unawares."
PASTORAL.
The Alice Springs district is at present pre-eminently
a cattle and horse breeding country; and at this
juncture it may not be misplaced to give a list of
the occupied runs thereabouts, with a few remarks
thereon, so that the reader may understand what
“ a neighbor” means in Central Australia, and how
the pastoral settlement of the far interior progresses. In
the first place there is the Undoolya run, on which the
Alice Springs telegraph station and Heavitree police camp
are situated. It is the property of Messrs Tennant and
Love, and runs about 7,000 head of cattle, the head station
being about 12 miles east of the Alice. Idracowie (Grant
and Stokes) also a cattle station, is about 80 miles south
of the Alice, and is under the management of Mr R.
Coulthard. Owen’s Springs (Elder & Co.) is 40 miles
south-west of the Alice, and is a horse breeding station
(managed by Mr C. Gall, J.P.) ; the natives in this locality
are much addicted to cattle killing, and are otherwise
“ bad.”. Mount Burrell, belonging to the same
proprietors as Owen Springs, is also a horse breeding
station. It is managed by Mr A. Brieden, and is situated
about 75 miles from the Alice in a southerly direction.
Bond’s Springs (Willoughby and Gordon) is a cattle station
situated 12 miles north of the Alice, and managed by Mr
T. Williams. Anna’s Reservoir (Murray and Spence) lies
120 miles north of the Alice, and is a cattle station
managed by Mr Mazotte. The blacks are very “ bad” on
this run, are very fond of beef, and indeed once carried
their audacity to such a pitch as to burn down the station,
nearly £1,600 worth of stores being destroyed. Glen
Helen, 115 miles from the Alice in a westerly direction, is
at the head of the Finke river, and about 25 miles from
Hermanoburg. Mr James Macdonald is the manager, and
the run is devoted to catte, of whom the blacks spear a good
many in the gorges of the ranges. Erldunda(Warburton and
Tomlin) is in charge of Mr. R. E. Warburton, and is a cattle
and horse run. It is situated 160 miles south-west of the
Alice, in a district where the blacks are very bad indeed,
being not only great cattle killers, but on occasion
attackers of stations. Indeed it is only a few months since
Erldunda was “ stuck up” by the natives, who were how-
ever repulsed by Mr. Warburton; and two of the aggressors
were afterwards captured by M. C. Wurmbrand and the
native troopers.


Tempe Dowds (Pattersou, Chewings & Co.) is a cattle
station, 175 miles North-West of the Alice, managed by
Mr. R. F. Thornton. It is much troubled by native cattle
killers, having been speared quite recently.
Henbury, owned and managed by Mr. E. W. Patkes,
a cattle station about 100 miles west by north of the
Alice, is in a “ quiet” neighborhood, so far as blacks are
concerned—cattle spearing not being in vogue to any great
extent there.
Such is the state of settlement in Central Australia, and
such are the ueighbours--black and white—of the resi-
dents in Central Australia ; though as gem seekers are now
docking to the ruby fields, as gold has been found,
and as the Transcontinental Railway is to be pushed
on to Anglo Pole, the old state of things will probably
not be long in giving place to one which will be
marked by a great increase in European population and
the extension of pastoral enterprise and settlement.
THE ABORIGINALS.
It is very possible that I may find critics who dispute
my premises and disagree with my conclusions with
regard to the aboriginals of Central Australia; but while in
such a brief sketch as the present one, it would be im-
possible to enter minutely into the details of native life
and lore, still what I state herein as facts, are facts—not
second hand reports —but were gathereddnringyears of close
study and communion with the natives, and from a more
intimate acquaintance with “ wild” blacks than falls to the
lot of either explorers or even pioneer settlers. At all the
stations on the Transcontinental telegraph, line there are
aboriginal camps, occupied by numbers of semi-civilised
natives, who almost invariably wear shirts, beginveterately
for “ tucker” and tobacco, and who for the most part are
exceedingly lazy and cunning. The new chum falls
an easy prey to these accomplished mendicants,
for not even the Egyptian or Syrian clamorer for
“ backsheesh” can rival them in scientific mendicancy.
The natives are classified by themselves into four families
or groups, which divisions and distinctions are found in
every tribe or large camp. They are designated “ Pultarra,”
“Coomarra,” “ Perula,” and “ Aponunga,” the groups
having been evidently formed in days long past, by some
aboriginal Solomon who understood the evils of “iuand
in” breeding, and who cast about for some effective means
of keeping stamina] of the'race, and found
it in prohibiting close inter-marriages. Thus, when a
Pultarra youth is “ made a man” and is eligible for
connubial bliss, he must look round for a (Joomarra girl to


take as a lubra; and if there be none eligible and
obtainable in his own camp, he sets forth, like Miss
Hannah More’s “ Coclebs in search of a wife”—though
his adventures do not bear any very striking likeness to
those of Hannah’s now almost forgotten hero—who, by
the way, was a most insufferable prig. a
Coomarra man can only take a Pultarra lubra to wife
unless he is equal to the commission of a crime which
in aboriginal ethics ranks as incest. The “ Ferulas and
“ Aponungas” stand in the same relation to each other as
the Pultarras and Coomarras, and can intermarry. The
Australian natives, like some South African tribes, trace
descent on the female side, and probably for the same
reason—there can be no doubt whatever as to the maternity
of a child, whereas the paternity may be a very open
question. The family groups referred to above are
perpetuated hereditarily—not in direct line, but by inter-
missions. Thus the children of a Pultarra mother are
neither Pultarras nor Cooraarras, btlt are Ferulas ; while
the children of an Aponunga mother are not Aponungas
or Ferulas, but Coomarras, and so the lineage and family
groupings run.
At the age of seventeen the youths, who till then are
called “ Apraurrikas,” are circumcised, and are then call d
“ Arilta,” and are eligible as husbands. The newly made
Arilta is of course in a few days looking out for a wife.
He pitches upon some girl of the requisite family, and
makes proposals in due form—not to her, but to the old
men and women of the tribe. If they smile on his suit,
well and good ; if rejected, however, he does not wear
the willow, but takes up his spears and walks off to some
other camp, and continues his quest until he secures an
eligible partner; and if he cannot get a wife in formal
and regular fashion, he may bo driven to the sad necessity
of stealing one—and it is quite on the cards
that his dusky Helen may be the casus belli of a
sanguinary encounter which is celebrated at corrobboree
or round the camp fire by the aboriginal Homers
of the island continent. The Apmurrikas, when they reach
a certain age are subjected to a further operation, the
object of which is apparently to check the undue increase
of population and to maintain the physical standard of the
future race. I might write at some length on this subject,
but in a brochure of this kind, designed for general reading,
it would be better not to touch further on the matter.
The natives are absurdly superstitious, and it is interesting
to note how greatly the younger men are under the
influence of their elders, and how the latter, with astute,
selfishness have availed themselves of superstition in orde


to secure for themselves extra privileges and the best of
the game. In fact the Pacific system of “ taboo” largely
prevails in Central Australia ; the young men and women
must not eat turkey, kangaroo tail, or any bush dainty that
is scarce and difficult to obtain. The girls are told, and
believe, that if they eat turkey or kangaroo tail, the moon
will cause their breasts to swell and bleed. TheApmurrika
is enjoined to abstain from similar dainties, under penalty
of remaining beardless all his days. A black boy of about
18 years, who travelled with me from Port
Darwin to the Alice, objected to eat turkey on
these grounds, and to break down his superstitious
fears I insisted, and stood over him while he slowly
worked his jaws through the worst part of a turkey I had
shot. I must confess that I acted the “ old man nigger”
on this occasion, having taken the breast and choice parts
of the bird for my own share. My boy informed me that
only “ Arilta” (circumcised young men) could eat turkey,
but after violating the greedy law of the old men, he
laughed to find that no , evil consequences followed.
Whether belief in a “ personal devil” bo considered super-
stition in these days, I know not, but if it be, the blacks
are superstitious enough in all conscience ; for they take
fright at his tracts—or what they believe to be his tracks.
Two lubras and two littie girls some time ago came across
the tracks of camels, about 150 miles east of Undoolya,
and forthwith bolted to their camp with the news that the
devil was on the loose. A fortnight afterwards I caught
the niggers and their lubras, and was by them gravely
warned that “Arumya” (the devil) was about. They
walked with me for two days to show me his tracks, and
following them I came to a tree marked D L, 15, in diamond,
which at once informed me that I had struck one of
David Lindsay’s camps.
If a nigger dies, after the burial is over his friends and
relations never speak of him again, and show fear if a
white man should happen to do so, and imploringly
beseech him, in the best English at their command, “No
you call him,” which seems to indicate not only a belief
in a future life, but in the power of the deceased to “ revisit
the glimpses of the moon,” and make things unpleasant for
the survivors, should the names of the departed be
breathed on earth. If an aboriginal is ill, the rest will tell
you that some other nigger “ gave him a bone,” and they
all firmly believe that the invalid has a bone in him. If
the sick man dies, the individual suspected of having ad-
ministered the bone is “in for it.” A party is organised to
hunt up the culprit, offer him battle, and if possible,
kill him.


The nomadic instinct of the natives is unconquerable ;
they will not remain long in one place, but wander to
fresh hunting fields and water-boles, returning however,
to favorite spots. The missionaries on the Finke complain
that white men sometimes entice their boys and girls to
leave the station ; but the complaint is founded on a mis-
apprehension. The fact is, that it is the natives who
follow white men who come to a place of which the
former are *• tired.” They will leave a place under such
circumstances, and take the first favorable opportunity to
indulge their roaming instincts, which become stronger
the more they are attempted to be suppressed. Natives
will leave a place where they are well treated and well off
in every respect, merely because they are asked to remain
there ; they “ slide” to the next station, stop there a few
weeks or months, and then again do the disappearing
trick, revisiting their old quarters. lam positive that the
blacks who were said to have been enticed from Herraann-
burg by white men, left for the reason given above. For
instance, I remember a lubra named “ Yunda," whom I
had promised the Rev. Mr. Kempe to send back to the
mission station from Alice Springs. She cried, and begged
me to let her remain, but after much persuasion I in-
duced her to go, it being my duty, as a police officer, to
assist and back up the missionaries as much as possible.
At one time I thought that the natives were very easily
astonished, but when I took ray black boys across the
northern half of the continent and shewed them Port
Darwin, all the astonishment evinced was by me. I ex-
pected them to be surprised ; but neither the big waters,
the ships, steamers, nor houses, could throw them in the
least off their heads. They were perfectly impassive, and
in extreme disgust I went back and bought a monkey
(price seventeen shillings) and brought him down on my
shoulder, with his hands full of bananas and his ivories
busily engaged upon the fruit. He fetched the trackers—
they fairly roared ; at first two of them were rather
frightened and took Jacko for the devil, but soon discarding
the supernatural view of this quadrumanous phenomenon
they directed every spare moment to cultivating his
society. They would squat opposite him and exchange
grin for grin by the hour together—and in fact I believe
that they respected him. Poor Jacko, I took him back
with me to Alice Springs—a thousand miles on a pack
horse—in safety, but while I was away somebody put
him on a horse and fastened him by his chain, to test his
riding capabilities ; and the result was that the poor
animal’s brains were dashed out against the rocks. In
fact 1 had very bad luck with the living mementoes


brought back from that trip to Port Darwin. In addition
to Jacko, a valuable dog I took back to the Alice with me
died soon after arriving there ; and ray black boy “Jack
Harrison,” a native of the Peake, only survived the
journey from Port Darwin to the Alice by a few days.
Another fact worth recording is that the “ Arilta ’ draw
peculiar designs on flat upright rocks—rude imitations of
water holes with emu or kangaroo tracks all around them ;
also straight red bars with black borders, and octagon
shaped figures, divided into sections, with black dots and
kangaroo tracks in each—red ochre and charcoal being
the ingredients of the aboriginal palette. These drawings
are intended to illustrate the state of affairs at permanent
water holes during the dry season, when kangaroo and
emu hang about water, and the black-fellows lie in ambush
to spear them. Rude imitations of the moon and the stars
appear in these illustrations, signifying that it is only
when they appear that the animals will come to drink.
These drawings are called by the Alice Springs natives
“ En-dull-inga” and they are “ taboo” to lubras —as I
have personal means of knowing In March 1883 j when
coming from Ourarainna through the Emily Gap, throe lubras
followed close behind my horse, saying that they were
going to Alice Springs. Just as I reached the entrance
to the Gap, five blackfellows appeared and ordered the
lubras to go over the range —as no women were allowed
to go through the Gap. The range was 500 feet high,
and as the lubras had walked 25 miles that day I told the
blackfellows that they should follow me through the Gap.
At first they assumed defiant and bellicose attitudes, but I
cleared them out and passed on, followed by the lubras,
who, to my great astonishment, picked up some rags,
bushes and grass, and made coverings to their faces,, and
walked blindfolded, by the sound of the horse’s footsteps
and my black boy’s voice, through the Gap. When they
had passed the place in the Gap which is adorned with
“ Bn-dull-inga” drawings, they told mo that no women or
boys were allowed to look at these rude pictures, which are
to be seen on the rocks in all gorges and around rocky
waters. I have a few of these drawings made on paper
by a blackfollow who used to work for me; but they
are more singular than intelligible.
Infanticide is a very common crime with the
natives—indeed I should say that it is committed by at
least 60 per cent of the lubras. One of the Police Camp
lubras, engaged in carrying water from the well for
garden and domestic purposes, told mo that she had had three
“ queis” and two “ weis,” and that she had killed three of
the five children on the day of their birth. Her words


were :—“ Me bin keepom one boy and one girl, No good
keepem mob. Him too much wantem lockout. Another
one lubra kill 'em piccaninny all day along bush. ’Spose
him ketch ’em more than two, no like him. Too muohee
mob one fellow mother.” One of the pioneers of the
Overland Telegraph line told me that he once called a
lubra up from the blacks’ camp to sweep out his two
rooms, and on her arrival noticed that she was enceinte.
All at once she knocked off sweeping, went off to some
rocks about 70 yards distant, disappeared, and in a short
time came back to her sweeping—in the interval she had
given birth to a child and murdered it! I know of several
other cases of child slaughter, but none of so rapid and
business-like a character as the one cited above. Then
again, notwithstanding the denials of the missionaries,
there is no doubt about the fact that cannibalism is
practised by the natives to some extent. The Herrmann-
burg missionaries declare that the tribes about their
station are not cannibals; perhaps they are not, or
perhaps they keep the practice from the missionaries ; but
if the statements of natives themselves are worthy of
credence, the tribes between Alice Springs and Powell’s
Creek are cannibals. George King (who afterwards died
of thirst on the plains north-east of Tennant’s Creek) once
told me that, while looking for horses 30 miles east of the
Tennant’s Creek station, he came across a small mob of
blacks—mostly lubras. He rounded them*up in order to
ascertain if they had seen any horse tracks, and then dis-
covered that two old lubras were carrying portions of a
cooked child. He dismounted and examined the parts
carefully, finding them to be legs, with the feet on, and
arms, well burnt. The lubras explained “No busby
tuck out sit down ; father bin kill ’em the “quei” (little
girl). Only eat ’em piccaninny when big fellow hungry.’
The same thing has occurred as low down the country as
Charlotte Waters—so I have been informed by the blacks
themselves. The particular form of infanticide which the
lubras most affect, is to fill the infant’s mouth with sand,
and strike it on the head with a stone or yam stick.
HUNTING.
Their style of hunting is as follows :—The natives go
with their lubras to the best kangaroo grounds, well
knowing that the kangaroos have little “ pads” or tracks
along which they habitually travel. Littie “ breaks” or
ambushes of boughs are constructed close beside the pads,
in which the natives crouch with spear and boomerang in
readiness. The lubras then go to “round up” the kangaroos,
getting on the further side and driving them towards the


ambushes. The kangaroos of course take to their
“ Uworras” or pads, and the lubras coming along steadily
behind, the animals do not hurry themselves, but hop
gently along, sitting up at intervals, looking around, and
sometimes commencing to feed, offering an excellent
“ pot" shot with the spear to the squatted native; but
more frequently the animal is speared whilst hopping past
the “ break.” Up rises the black-fellow as the kangaroo
comes within easy range, the spear is launched with
lightning like rapidity, and away goes the “ arrnra” with
the shaft sticking out of his body, and occasionally tripping
him up—for the barb, a piece of sharp mulga, strongly
secured with kangaroo tail sinew—keeps it firmly in the
wound. After him goes the hunter, following up with
the relentless persistence of a blood hound, until ex-
hausted by loss of blood, the kangaroo “sits up” and the
native can approach near enough to launch another spear
or administer the coup de grace .
As to “ beef hunting” the natives, when inclined that
way, generally lie in wait behind bushes near the pads of
cattle leading in to water. When a beast comes by, a
sharp, strong mulga spear, hardened in hot ashes and
scraped to a fine point with stone knives, is thrust into
its belly. The native seizes the wounded animal’s tail and
holds on till it drops exhausted, or gets away ; but there
are other niggerp stationed along the pad, ready to pick
up the running and repeat the spear thrusts if necessary.
Many of the station waters in this country are in gorges
in the ranges, and there the cattle-killers have
splendid opportunities of exercising their spear throwing
muscles, and keeping their “ eye in” at moving target
practice. The beasts are practically between stone walls,
and as the spears are thrown downwards, they are driven
with great force into the unfortunate beasts, which
have no chance of escape. When an animal falls, the
natives take what meat they want, and generally go to
the top of the ranges, which are between 300 and 400
feet high, to cook it; not because they prefer an airy
situation for their meals, but because they do not want
such visitors as native police or station hands to drop in
and take “ pot-luck" without warning. A watch is kept,
and if any such unwelcome intruders are to be seen
below, the natives pack up some cooked bullock and make
for the most inaccessible parts of the ranges. Sooner or
later, of course, the stockman discovers the slaughtered
beast—the crow is safe to point out the carcase to him—
and then the tracks of the cattle killers are picked up, and
followed. It may bo days after before the police are
informed of the facts; and when on the track of the
THE ABORIGINES OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.


marauders they may go ten or twelve days without over-
taking them. The tracks always lead to water, but
very often only to scanty rock holes which will not supply
the horses ; sometimes good permanent water holes are
found, and then again little native wells, affording a very
small supply—for what is not enough for ten horses is
plenty for a large mob of blacks. Tracking is a matter
which has caused me many days’ anxiety, and consequently
is one in which I take a deep interest. The Native Police
start from the scene of the murder orfromtbe carcase of a
slaughtered beast—as the case may be—on tracks that
are generally some days old. The offenders may be quite
unknown to the black troopers, but when once they have
seen and scanned the tracks, they can identify by them
the natives who made them ; and if any offender ts known,
his track at once reveals his name. r,l he tracking goes on,
day after day, from water to water, until the spoor
becomes fresher, and at last appears only one day old.
The ranges are carefully scanned with held glasses tor
the smoke of camp fires, or other indications of aboriginal
life. Still on the tracks, the next discovery is last night s
camp, with fires still alight. The chase iei getting
warmer now —and as the children say in their
seek” game—the pursuers are presently “burning. Ashes
and bits of cinder, that have dropped from the faresticks
which wild blacks carry from camp to camp, appear on
the tracks, which are fresher and are clear of the grass
and leaves which are blown over old footmarks, then
a very lean dingo or two is seen (wild dogs always
follow blacks from camp to camp, and the natives catch
and tame their pups). Next a few very old lubras appear
in sight, carrying young pups, and the “ Pichi (vessels
hollowed out of pieces of timber and used for carrying
small supplies of water.) The route taken by these old
women indicates the locality of the offenders, and the
pursuing party abandons the tracks and divides, one
section galloping off at full speed to get round the fugitives
and cut off their retreat, while the other section spreads
out and closes in. This is called “ rounding up; and
when the operation is complete, and the natives are
effectually “ bailed up,” they commence the usua string
of lies and evasions. The offenders invariably lay the
blame on some tribe which lives in an opposite direction-
oven though the black police may have tracked them from
the scene of the murder or outrage to the very spot where
they are bailed up-ofton with the stolen beef in their
possession, with the clothes of the murdered man on their
bodies, or with knives, tomahawks, towels and blankets
which they have taken from their victims, or from a


“ looted’ hut or camp. But sometimes the “rounding up”
process cannot be accomplished ; the natives take to the
ranges, and a hot pursuit follows. When half way up the
ranges the natives generally throw away their weapons
if warmly pressed ; sometimes they retain their spears
and boomerangs, but not often ; and it is only after one
of these chases that there is a chance to collect native
weapons, by going back over the ground when the
scrimmage is over. The blacks for 100 miles both east
and west of the Alice will fight like demons at first, and
it behoves the pursuers to keep a sharp look out for flying
spears, both on their own and their horses’ accounts. At
Powell’s Creek I was once very nearly scalped by a boom-
erang. I had bailed up in a sandy creek a big powerful
blackfellow, carrying two boomerangs and a shield.
When I was within 30 yards of him he let fly one
boomerang and promptly followed it with the other, which
took a round turn and came back in rear at my head.
That blackfellow “ knocked me out” in two rounds—and
then cleared. There was another warregal blackfellow
higher up the bank, who looked on grinning. I pre&ume
ho was the “ referee’—and awarded the fight to his mate.
But he did not stop to explain his decision to me, leaving
summarily for a thick mulga scrub in the vicinity with a
promptitude which prevented me from asking his verdict.
However, he was in too big a hurry to take his spears and
stone knives with him, and though the defeated party, I
was left in possession of the ground and the spolia opima.
UNGUAL.
The blacks select very peculiar names for their children.
Ihus I know a lubra named “Yerra Quasha” —the first
word moans an “ ant’and the second “water”—the com-
bination giving the woman the name of the “ Water Ant.”
Another was called “ Opera Inyenta Arinya”—which being
interpreted means, “ One gum tree in a gorge.” One
blackfellow is named “ Egive Ecnurra” (big boned);
another “ Bullara” (the rainbow) ; a third “ Earlia Quarta”
(an emu egg). Others are styled “ Paira” (a frog) ;
“ Ericha” (the eagle) ; “ Urippa” (the spider) and “ Ad-
junpa” (the iguana), A “ quei” (girl below marriageable
age)at Alice Springs rejoices in the almost unpronounceable
name of “ Arilltomurrelltannia” which means “ rain that
blackfellows cause to come by making a corroberree.”
Anna’s Reservoir is called “ Ungola,” a blackfellow is
“Atwa,” bullocks are “ Bailaqua,” and killing is called
“ Indinnika.” When these words are strung together,
we get the following sentence, “ Ungola Atwa Bailaqua


Indinnika” —that is to say “ The Anna’s Reservoir blacks
killing cattle-” A wild black will understand the sentence
immediately, and probably answer “ Itcha’ (no)
“ Hunga” means “ you”; “ Alidgera” is “ walk, Ot-torn-
orra” is “ Alice Springs”; and thus we get ‘‘You walk
Alice Springs” (Hunga Alidgera Ot-torri-orra). Appa
iebba” means “ come back”; “ hunga ungutala you
thirsty.” “ Polipa” is shoulder and “ marma” is pain—
my shoulder pains. “Ec-nurra” is long, and “ alta is
hair —longhair. “ Upmoa” is snake and “ Iperta is hole,
snake hole. “ Ourapilla” is black and “ Yeranda is
cockatoo—black cockatoo. It would be however, useless
and wearisome to dwell further on this subject, as the
native names of birds, trees, animals and places can be
found in the appended vocabulary. The chief thing is
to put the words together and say them quickly. Amd 1
should bo remarked that in pronouncing native words, they
almost invariably end with a vowel sound ; and in thosle
words in the vocabulary which do not end with a vowei,
the stress must be put on the “ er” or “ ar” which is the r
last syllable. Of coarse this is only my way of spelling,
but it is founded on long study of the native peculiarities
of pronunciation. Many of the words in native
language represent two things. Thus, “ Ericha is an
eagle and also “the arms,” “ Arrurer” means the
breast” and also “ the kangaroo.” “ Poora” stands for both
tail and lightning. When I first came to Alice Spriings, in
1882, it struck me that every blackfellow had a d fferent
language, because if one boy told me the name of thing
was so and so, another boy would give me a d’flferenl
name for the same thing. It was hard to understand
who was right; for instance, “ Arunga” means euro, and
“ Arrurer” is kangaroo, and as the natives say them, they
sound similarly. “ Arrurer” also means “ sit down.
“ Apurta” means a stone, and “ Inyenta” is “ one, and
a big stony hill the natives call “ Apurta Inyenta.
“Ec-nurra” is big, and “goobata” is small, “ Atwa Ec-
nurra ’ means a big man,” and “ Ara-gudgea (roobita is a
small lubra. The Alice Springs natives place all their
attributive phrases after the name of the subject, and in
this they onlv follow the practice of all Australian natives.
The vocabulary appended has been compiled from the
lips of natives of the Alice Springs district, and therefore
would not fit in with the Barrow Creek or Charlotte
Waters dialects. Ido not therefore profess in this little
work to give anything like a comprehensive or general
account of the aboriginal tongues. All I can, and profess
to do, is to give the results of my own researches on the
subject, prosecuted under considerable difficulties, and


with steady persistence during six years of my life, spent
among the natives of Central Australia. Nature did not
apparently intend me for a philologist, and my only
excuses for this little contribution to “ native literature”
are the almost virgin nature of the subject, and the call
which has been made upon those who know a little about
it, to place the information they have gleaned at the
service of the public.


APPENDIX I.
VOCABULARY.
Allright
A kiss
A creek
A hole
A leaf
Along
A belt
A poor lubra
Arm pits
An Emu
A boil
A crow
After you
A gap
A bag
Ants
A broad
Breathing
Butterfly
Boomerang
Bullocks horns
Bunged eye
Bullock
Big road
Big rat
Big rat
Bank of creek
Bone
Big lizard
Boomerang
Beet wood
Behind
Blowfly
Bouilli tin
Cull-la
01-dorry-e-way
Lerra
Ip-erta
II-
111-
111-lippa
Ho-jo-her
E-lun-ba
Ear-li-er
En-goord-na
Ung-appa
Uc har-come-barra
Un-dia
Yer-quit-ta
Yerra
Yar-lara
In-jerima
Unde-lablab
Yerra-wa
You-rula
Aik- ner-wonga-mal
Bail-a-quar
Chep-a-Larra
Er-taig-wa
Er-wa-chea
En-gorra
En-gwar-nar
Elloi-jerra
3 Ilia
111-gin-ga
In-gurr-na
Im-borra
Jam-peter


Big lire
Big owl
Big spear
Broke
Big Water
Big rat
Big girl
Baby girl
Black Beetle
Bush tucker
Boots
Bladder
Beard
Bush wallaby
Brother
Boy
Both knees
Bush Tucker
Billy can
Black Cockatoo
Blanket
Bat
Currants
Calf of leg
Camp
Club
Centipede
Come to play
Crooked
Cotton bush
Cockatoo parrot
Corroberie Ornament
Cranky
Curlew
Clouds
Chin
Dark
Dry wood
Dry wood
Duck
Dog
Daylight
0- nurra
Orra-Curra
Orum-bera
01-
Quach ec-nurra
Qual-par
Quei-marla
Quei-Marla-goobita
(Jura tita
liar kee
Tin a-bulka
Towa
Un-in-yer
U-wurta
Uc-kill-yer
Wee hi
Umbra-a-terra
Un darng a
Wol bitta
Yer-randa
I-tit-i-ka
In-gee-bra
Ung-o lar
Por-denpar
Upnaurra
Un-gorra
Ua burika
U-london a
Un-giver ta
Ero-terret
Et-nin-berra-jarra
Go-derra
I-rita
Moul yera
O-kol-yer
Orod-i na
Ing-wa
Er-linya
Er-nar
Wonger-er
Uc-null yer
Ing-wolima


Pry
Dust
Dew
Drinking
Disease
Desert oak
Deep
Eyelashes
Ears
Earth
An eagle
Egg
Frog
Fat
Finish
Fish
Finger nails
Fall down
Fingers
Flame
Food
Forehead
Father
Go back
Golah
Good fire
Grass
Gum Tree
Grasshopper
Grey Geese
Heavy
Hungry
Horse
Hat
Honey
Half
Hic-coughs
Hold him
Having connexion
Ice
Having intercourse
Jew Lizard
Er-rurra-ga
Hole-munda
Ild-murra
Ten-ju rnar
Yerra-kincha
Yerra-ooppa
Yep-per-ta
111-pilla
111-par
Ou-rilla
Er-richa
Quar-ta
Pair-a
Un-der-er
Chen-ka
Erra-bung-a
Gepp-morra
Ig-nura
II-
Ler ip-ma
Min-near
01-ler
Uc-ne-er
Coll-um-bum
111-
In-nicb-ika-alar
Nar-ma
Opera
Ungee-gungee
Urra Quarra
En-borra
Hung-i-a—quar
Inga-go-dill
Mor-quirta
01-damper
Oticha
Rou-malla
Terra-que-mal
Ult-nun-de nerrina
El-lul-ger
In-yerra-mal
Ul-ger-quarra


Little girl
Little finger
Limestone
Lightning
Large pigeon
Mud dirt
Magpie Lark
Moon
Magpie
Midnight
Moa-hawk
Mosquito
Medicine
Native string
Necklace
Natives tobacco
Neck
No got
Offspring
Oppossum
Owl
One arm man
Pigeon
Playing
Parrot
Porcupine
Pine Tree
Piss
Roof of mouth
Red
Rainy sky
Raining
Rainbow
Rushes
Reeds
Road
Skin water bag
Spear tree
Small
Salt
Salt water
Shame
Quei
Coorika-a-Oooric
Oura-ta
Poora
Pul-kerra
Bitter
Yerra Colungee
Et-nin-ger
Orrer-poora
Od-neler
Orrer-cai-equa
U-winnia
Un-gwarl-yer
Un-doo-eata
In-tin-ne
In-gwarl-pa
Er-ring-er
Wee itcha
Co-roka
Un-dud na
0-
111-jewd-ika
Bor-ri-da
Era- Cuna-lerme
El-pa-ga
In-narlinga
111-luka-a
Um-boa
In-berik-na
1-
Quasha-ul-kurre
Quasha-un-de-ma
Bull-arra
Unga-runya
Uc a-liebra
U-worra
At-tower
Et-nurra
Goob-i-ta
]ll-lua
111-lua-quaslia
In-yerra-alcrim


Spinifex
Splinter
Southern Cross
Shin bone
Small snake
Shallow
Seeds
Sneeze
Stone knife
Swearing
Small snake
Soft down feathers
Swing
Shake
Skin
Sugar ant
Spear
Saltbush
Sundown
Small bird
Small water
Smoke
Swimming
Stars
Snake not poison
Small lizard
Shoulder
Spider
Shadow
The Sky
Sister
Sleep
Stick
Snake
Stink
Stone knipe
Tickling
Thatching grass
The ribs
Tit of breast
The naval
The head
I-yout»
In-den-ima
Kurillia-oura-picha
Jorxer
I-pel-cherar
In-berra
Labba-Walla
In-jar-ac-na
Mer-tanta
O-lum-ber-a
111-perra-cha
Un-tita
Uc-nulla-mull
Uc-uun a-lemera
Yen-par
Yer-amba
Yerra-charta
Yer-reea
Ouraka
Chip-pi-er
Quash-a-booga
Quitta
Quasha-yerra-pich-ica
Quar-allia
Un-dit-ier-ker
Un-ger-ter
Ungunyer pollipa
U-woppa
Un-doolya
Ul-kurra
Ung-ger-rear
Un-gwyn-dei
Un dover
Up.mor
Un.ditter
Un-da
Tuck-a-tuck
111-pell-paj
W 01-ter
Wool-edge-alla
Yeppa
Cop-i-ta


The gums
To spit
Thunder
Tail
The Crane
The wrist
Thumb
That way
To whistle
Testicles
The feet
To kick
To-morrow
To-day
The arras
Turkey
Toe nails
Very dark
Wattle
Whore
Water
Wait awhile
Wood
Wind
Wurley
Wallaby
White
Wooden trough
Wire grass
White Coca too
Wasp
Womans breasts
Wet
You walk
You liar
Yes
Chel-ka
PillTer
Pob illia
Poora
Ober-mal-ni
Molta
Maiga-ma-ig-wa
Nar-quar
Ober-nil-i-mer
111-litta
In-ger
111-gull-denem
Ing-wondala
111-yetta
Er-richa
Er-two-er
Gepp-morra
Ing-war-ec-nurra
En-durra
Etra-keet-rika
Quash a
Oura-ka
Oura
Lil-ka
111-ta
Era-war
Elul-char
Tinna
E-lil-ger
Un-gut-nerra
Un-dene-ya
Wool-edge
Un-dunga
Hun-ar-algia-egar
Orra-jerra
Yonga
Names of those who have been in the Native Police
and those that are in it at present.
Corpl. N.C. Archie
N.C. Collins
N.C. Peter
A-cork-nill-shi-ga
Heelya-murra
01-dear-a-boka


N.C. Dick
N.C. General
N.C. Willie
N,C. Sambo
N.C. Wilkie
N.C. Fred
N.C. Maticle
N.C. Bob
Will-yer-roo
Penne-boka
Arrah-ka
Yer-quitta
Chick-illya
Ot-tinna
Hee lowa
Tn-door-ima
Names of Places.
Barrow Creek
Powells Creek
Tennants Creek
Tong i-narye
Bi-mi yon
Chink er-rar-ger-o
Lubra’s Names.
Un-durika-on ber-in-yer
An-gorra-in-yer
Urn budger-inyer
Joriga in-yer
Quc-on-ber in-yor
Hol-dol-yer
1-tich-a ba
Un-durra
El-lorra
En-borrer
Er riclia
Chant hungar
Earlier
Onje-amba
Nell-sbin-|e-jerra
Okori-oker
Wal-a-quar
A-ril-to-nurrell-taunier
Opera-inyenta-a-rin-yer
Ic-min-yer
At tinga-licker
111- luricka
Quar-tar
01 dear a-booka
A-carea*quar
Yerra-quasha
Qnart-al-kiT-jnyer
Chun-ka
Oticha
In-yella-nar-rinmick
An-gorra to-put-arinya
Gell-go-rinmick
Yabba-naka
I-jewdra
Orra-lin-ga
Qrra-citta
Ot-nail bitta
E-pity-ke-oka
111-carn-a-ka
Quci-rong-inya
Alker-ill-get
Al-lirra-cumba
A-looka-it
Ac-narl-coll-bar
El jarura
Mair beri-ber-in
Jell-bert
Hoi don-dite
In-nung-en dra
Alla-copra
En-un-der-inya
Nee-youdee-youd
Early-en-ber-inya
IJn-della


Un durricher-ko-sinnier
Qual-ger-inyer
I-cheta
Ourinnia
A-gibbert
Chick-cargo
At-nine be-oak
Tedal cook
Wool-badge
Kian-durra
I-gelba
Elloi-jcrra
Names of Places near Alice Springs, and within a
radius of a few hundred miles.
Alice Springs
Annas Reservoir
Allens Water
Alice Racecourse
Burt
Duck Ponds
Ellery’s Creek Station
Ellery’s Creek crossing road
Emily Gap
Glen Helen
Hermannsburg
Henbury
Heavitree
Jay Camp
Jessy Gap
Loves Creek
Mount Sonda
Mount Giles
McDonnell Ranges
Mt. Gillen
Mt. Burrell
Native Well
Near Loves Creek
Near Temple Bar
Near Alice Racecourse
Nwen Springs
On the Todd Creek
tt tt tt u
tt a n a
tt tt u ti
it tt tt tt
tt tt tt tt
tt tt tt tt
tt tt it it
Ot-torri-orra
Un-go-la
Oro-ginnia
An-nowa-nunga
Boringa
Narla
Upmor Gubbita
Putta-putta
Un dur-ika
Mong irna
Un-durry-cr
At tonga
Um-lmdge-ra
New-a-bit-ika
At-no rinya
In-diarico
Rich-up-ma
Qarta-tooraa
Un-dricha
A-luck-o-yell
He-liah
Ar-ruel ta
Hull-go rulepa
Um borl-ga
Yer-arra
In-nang-ga-goon
111-yer-hamraeria
Urra-kylia
Ippetee-irima
At-null-ga
I derika
Ig-no-ringa
111-ga-tea
Wee-itch


Police Reserre
Painta Springs
Simpsons Gap
Strangwajs Range
Sandy’s Camp
Temple Bar
Wigley
At-nilja-at-nilya
At-no-rambo
0- a jcriba
1-
Joriga
Harry-ell
Lalta
AROHAIO TERMS.
At -nar
Ad-neal-a
At-teala
En in-ber
Purra-en gima
111-litta
At-nin-yerra-gee
At-nar-ec-nurra
At nar-lic
Hetra-ketra-kar
At-nar-un-ditter


APPENDIX II.
THE ATTACK ON BARROW’S CREEK
TELEGRAPH STATION.
As an addendum to this little work it has been considered
advisable to give a brief account of the murderous attack
made by the aboriginals of Barrow’s Creek on the telegraph
station at that remote inland spot, in the early days of the
Overland Telegraph line’s existence. The narrative has
been prepared from the statements of Mr. S. Gason, now
of Bellana, who was stationed at Barrow’s Creek as a
mounted constable, at the time of the attack.
Barrow’s Creek is about 1,240 miles distant from
Adelaide, lying some 40 miles north of Central Mt. Stuart,
and in 1873 its telegraph station had not long been opened,
the nearest stations to it being Alice Springs, 200 miles
south, and Tennant’s Creek, 150 miles north. The station
was a substantial atone structure built in the form of a hollow
square, an open quadrangle occuping the centre, access to
which and to the rooms ranged around it, was afforded by
a large galvanised-iron gate. There were no doors, and
the windows, though protected by iron bars, were not
glazed. The roof of the structure was of galvanised iron,
but a little hill adjacent afforded a vantage ground whence
spears could be thrown into the open, central quadrangle.
Loopholes had been pierced in the walls, through which
to discharge fire-arms in case of attack, but they were
placed go high up in the wall as to be practically useless.
Denso scrub of bastard mulga and undergrowth encircled
the station, but it had been cleared away all round for
about 20 yards from the walls, leaving, however, ample
ambush ground for a native “surprise party,” ns the
“effective” range of the native spear, when thrown with the
woomera, is about 50 yards.
The attack was made on Sunday evening, February 23,
1873, and without the slightest warning. There wore at
the time eight,individuals ! at the station —Mr. Stapellon,
in charge (killed) ; Mr. E Flint, operator ; James Maddox,
blacksmith ; Alexander Murdoch and John Franks, lines-
men (latter killed) ; Samuel Gason, mounted constable ;
Si Jim, Chinese cook, and Jimmy, a blackboy frotp the


1 eako, MC, Qason hid only a week before arrived at
the station; and Mr. Stapolton had two months before
succeeded iVIr. Watson as station-master, having come
down the line from the Katherine (1,770 miles north of
Adelaide). The natives had been troublesome while Mr;
Watson was in charge of the station, having amused
themselves by occasionally cutting the telegraph wires,
burning down the poles, and spearing the station horses,
ihe Postmaster-General had in consequence given direc-
tions that every effort should be made to conciliate the
natives, thinking that by kindness they could be diverted
from practices which threatened to materially interfere
with the utility of the line. These instructions were
carried out; the natives, who were numerous in the locality,
were allowed to congregate about the station ; they were
presented with a quantity of old clothes, and some rather
damaged flour, and in addition were from time to time
given small articles of little value which struck their
fancy. So far, however, from this generosity securing the
friendship of the natives, it had the effect of stimulating
their cupidity, and they only awaited a favorable
opportunity to possess themselves of all the treasures
wnich the station contained. On Saturday, February
22, they judged that their opportunity had come ; for on
that day a lino-repairing party of 11 men, under Mr.
Tucker, started northward from Barrow’s Creek. There
were some 200 natives above the station on that day, and
apparently they concluded that, weakened by so large a
withdrawal of its garrison, it would fall an easy prey to
them. No attack was made that night, the policy of the
natives being to Jet the outgoing party get far enough
away from the station to prevent it being re-called.
It was Sunday evening, 8 o’clock ; supper was over, and
all the people of the station were outside the building,
sitting on the outer ledge and watching the dusk deepen
into the mirk of a moonless tropical night. Mr.Stapelton was
silting on an empty keg about 50 feet from the gale, by
which alone access to the station could bo gained and
which was round the corner from that side of the building
where the men were congregated. Suddenly, without a
sign or sound of warning, a shower of spears came from
the dense scrub, tangled undergrowth, and long grass
which encircled the station. Wild yells rang through the
startled air, and dusky forms showed themselves by
scores —between the white men and ti e station gate, inside
which were their arms and ammunition. The blacks,
whose camp was half a mile distant, had stealthily
advanced through the scrub, made a detour round the


station, and attacking from the further side, cut off their
intended victims from their fortress and armoury. Mr.
Stapleton got his death wound in the first volley —a spear
struck him on the hip, penetrating the abdominal cavity,
and puncturing the bladder, and he also got a graze in the
side from a second spear. Mr Flint was badly speared in the
thigh, and M.C. Gason was crippled by a heavy blow on
the hip from a missile club. Tire spears rattled against
lire walls and roof of the station ; the yells of the blacks
rose higher and shriller j and in the blackness of night,
unarmed and shelterless, the white men thought their last
hour was truly come. All sprang to their feel and rushed
not in the direction of the gate —whence the spear
volley came—but round the opposite corner of the station,
expecting the blacks to follow. But the natives were
playing a waiting game. They did not pursue, but massed
themselves opposite the gate, waiting for their prey some
superstitious dread or timorous fancy preventing them
from entering—as they could easily have done—tho
station, and thus sealing the doom of their victims. When
the fugitives rounded the third corner of tho station and
made for the open gate, they found the natives ranged
eight or nine deep about 15 feet from the entrance, with
spears poised in readiness. There was nothing for it but
to run the gauntlet, and Franks was tho first to make the
rush A voliey of spears gretted him as he ran through
the gate, and, pierced through the heart, tho impetus
of his rush carried him through the quadrangle to the
station kitchen, where he fell dead on the floor. Mr. h lint
came next, and the fugitives stopped for a second to give
a yell which provoked a second shower of spears, and
between the volleys all made their way into the sheltering
enclosure without sustaining any further serious wounds,
though the black-boy, Jim, was grazed on the head by
a spear, and received several scratches on the body,
besides gelling a spear through his fingers.
The natives, still afraid to trust themselves inside the
building, kept up their volleys of spears through the open
gateway the barred windows, and from the little eminence
adjacent’ into tho quadrangle. MO. Gason got his rifle
and revolver and commenced firing through the loop-holes,
though not, so far as he could ascertain, with any effect;
the uninjured members of toe party also fired, and when
tho spear showers slackened, the wounded were attended
to. Mr. Slapelton knew he had got his death wound, and
after terrible sufferings through the night, died painlessly
on Monday at 8 p.rn. Mr. Flint had a terrible spear
wound in the thigh, but while lying on the sofa in the


operating room, “spoke” Alice Springs and Tennant’s
Creek stations with a pocket instrument, which M.C.
Gason connected for him at the open window where the
station instrument stood. In half an hour word came
from Alice Springs that there was no force available there
to send to the rescue, neither was there at Tennant’s
Creek. The only chance of rescue was to recall Mr.
Tucker’s party; and that could only bo done when ho
should connect and “ speak” by pocket instrument, which
might not be for days. So passed an anxious vigil, and
when day dawned, parties of 20 or 30 blacks were to be
seen all around ; spears came every now and then ; but
under cover of a brisk lire the body of Franks (which was
rapidly becoming decomposed) was taken outside the
station and buried in his blankets. The dying station-
master was aroused by the firing, asked the cause, and on
being informed, said, “ You need not trouble much about
me. Bury me in my blankets. Give my love to my
wife, and send my papers down.” He died at 8 that
evening, and next morning was buried as he had directed,
under cover of a fusilade from the station, the blacks
still lying around, and immense numbers of spears being
hurled at the station, some with flint, and others with
wooden barbs, and some plain pointed. Still the natives
did not cut the wires, which was what the beleaguered
party most feared, nor did they spear any of the horses
belonging to the station. Constant watch was kept, day
and night, against surprise and to catch the first signal of
coming help. There was plenty of water and provisions
in the station, and an abundant supply of medicine. The
late Dr. Charles Gosse was hourly consulted in Adelaide
by wire, as to the treatment of Mr. Flint’s woan 1. His
(high had swelled up to an enormous size, the natives
having poisoned their spears by steeping the barbs in the
decomposing entrails of kangaroo. On the third day
the symptoms were so bad that Mr. Flint was not expected
to live, and it was feared that mortification was about to
set in ; but he lay resolutely in his blankets opposite the
the doorway, revolver in hand, to lend his aid if necessary
to repel the hourly expected rush of the natives. How-
ever, he pulled through ultimately, and for fourteen years
subsequently remained on tbo line, and was at the time of
his widely regretted death from typhoid, in 1887, station
master at Strangways Springs.
On Wednesday Mr. Tucker “ spoke,” and was informed
of the attack. His party of eleven men promptly turned
back ; they were 80 miles from Barrow’s Creek, and their
equipment comprised only two saddles. The bare-backed


ride was, however, rapidly ridden, and at 10 o'clock on
Thursday night they arrived at the Barrow’s Creek station,
having been attacked 20 miles to the northward by the
natives, who saluted them with a volley of spears which
wounded several of the horses, as tney went through a
belt of dense scrub. There was rejoicing in the station
when the jingle of hobbles and quart-pots was heard in
the darkness of the night, and the beleaguered party know
help was at hand; and for the first time that night since
the attack was made, they slept.
Next morning a party of 13 men sallied out to hunt
the murderers ; but they had vanished. The arrival of
the rescue party was the signal for their departure ; and
though their tracks were followed and some of their camps
found, the dense scrub proved a secure fastness, and the
murder of Stapleton and Franks remained unavenged.
The only casualty which the natives were known to have
sustained, was the loss of a man who was seen to fall to a
rifle bullet on the Wednesday succeeding the attack.
Natives were constantly seen and fired at during the
siege, but the intervening scrub shoots diverted well
directed bullets, though probably the lire of the besieged
produced more effect than they were aware of,
Such was the attack on the Barrow’s Creek telegraph
station, over fifteen years ago ; but tdough the “ warregal”
blacks of Central Australia not uuirequently attack
stations, waylay solitary travellers, and spear cattle and
horses, there has never since been an attack of equal magni-
tude or attended by such fatalities ; and now that there is
an effective native police contingent in the heart of the
continent, it is certain that murderers could not escape
with similar impunity,


