

HOW THE PEOPLE OE ENGLAND
WERE TRICKED OUT OF
THEIR NOBLE INHERITANCE IN THE
WASTE LANDS OF AUSTRALIA.
[Being Chapter IV, Vol. 2, of the Rev. Dr. Lang's Histoeical
and Statistical Account of New South Wales, feom the
Founding of the Colony in 1788 to the Peesent Day.]
Volition:
SAMPSON LOW, MALSTON, LOW, & SEATTLE,
CROWN BUILDINGS, 188, FLEET STREET.




CHAPTER IV.
HOW THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND WERE TRICKED OUT OF
THEIR NOBLE INHERITANCE IN THE WASTE LANDS OF
AUSTRALIA BY COLONIAL SQUATTERDOM, BACKED UP
BY IMPERIAL IGNORANCE AND FOLLY.
“Ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the priest, and
ye are gone away: and what have I more ? and what is this that ye
say unto me, What aileth thee ? ” —Judges xviii. 24.
“ Blessed be the Lord, my strength, which teacheth my hands to
war, and my fingers to fight.”—Psalm cxliv. 1.
“ The heroic work of colonization,” as it was happily desig
nated by Lord Bacon, consists in transferring the surplus
population and capital of the mother country to some
suitable colonial field. It is the planting of a germ which
may grow up in due time into a great Christian nation.
Now, that New South Wales is a suitable field for the
planting of such a germ—that it is eminently so in coifi-
parison with most of the other colonies of the British
Empire—no person who knows anything either of its
physical character or of its material resources, as developed
in the preceding pages of this work, can possibly deny; and
it is equally undeniable that there has never been a period
in the history either of the mother country or of the
colonies in which the “ hferoic work ” is more needful, on
the largest possible scale, than it is now.
Previous to the year 1831, it had been the policy and
practice of the Imperial Government to promote the
“heroic work of colonization” in New South Wales,


which then included Victoria and Queensland, by giving
free grants of land, with other indulgences, to emigrants of
suitable character and qualifications; but in that year this
practice was discontinued, at the instance of a school of
colonial reformers, headed by the late Edward Gibbon
Wakefield, who recommended, and succeeded in getting
adopted and established, the practice of selling the Waste
Lands of the colonies by-public auction, at not less than a
certain minimum price, and devoting the proceeds to the
work of colonization, by sending out suitable labourers to
the colonial field.
That minimum price was at first fixed at five shillings an
acre; afterwards at twelve shillings; and subsequently,under
the Australian Land Sales Act of 1842, at a pound an acie,
at which rate it remains to the present day. By that Act it
was further provided that at least one half of the whole
amount accruing from the progressive sales of land in the
colony should be appropriated in defraying the cost of the
emigration of families and individuals from the United
Kingdom, who had not the means of paying their own
passage out.
This mode of disposing of the Waste Lands of the
Colonies and of appropriating the proceeds of the sale for
the promotion of emigration, constitutes what is called the
Wakefield principle, as contra-distinguished from all other
modes of disposing of colonial lands; and I have much
pleasure in expressing my belief and conviction that that
principle is one of the most important discovexies of modern
times, and justly exxtitles its authox' to a distinguished place
among the benefactors of mankind. Differing as I do
pi’etty widely from Mr. Wakefield on cex’tain importaxxt
points connected with the Art of Colonization, some of
which I have adverted to at considerable length in another
work, 1 and differing also as I do from that gentleman iix
1 “The Coming Event; or, Freedom and Independence for the


some of the mere details of his system, as applied to the
pastoral colonies of Australia, I deem it an act of justice
thus to record my entire approval of all the real essentials
of the Wakefield principle, and my unfeigned respect for
its author, as one of the greatest benefactors of suffering
humanity.
In the year 1835, when the revenue arising from the
sale of the Waste Lands of New South Wales had begun
to assume an aspect of importance, 2 I published a series
of articles in the “ Colonist,” a weekly journal which I
had established in Sydney at the beginning of that year —
demonstrating the transcendent importance of appropriating
the whole of that revenue, beyond what might be required
for the survey of the land and for the aborigines, for the
promotion of emigration to the colony from the United
Kingdom; as such an appropriation would not only increase
the free population of the colony at a very rapid rate, but
raise the moral tone of its society, and speedily obliterate
all traces of its convict origin.
This idea—that of appropriating the whole of the Land
Revenue for the promotion of immigration—took such hold
of the colony at the time that a large public meeting was
held in Sydney, under the presidency of the Chief Justice
of the period, the late Sir Francis Forbes, for the express
purpose of earnestly recommending to the Colonial Legislature
to maintain the important principle inviolate, and to urge
its adoption upon the Home Government. A Select Com-
mittee of the Legislative Council on immigration, of which
Sir Francis Forbes was Chairman, was accordingly ap-
pointed in that year, and the following was its Report,
which I subjoin, in consideration of the great importance of
Seven United Provinces of Australia.” Sampson Low and Company,
London, 1870.
2 That revenue, which had amounted to 44,8161. 145. 9d. in 1834,
had risen in 1835 to 89,7071. 15s. lOci.


the subject to the mother country, as well as to all the
Australian colonies: —
“ The first immigrants were induced to embark their fortunes in
this distant colony, under the promise of receiving free grants of
land, and in the confidence that the same policy would be continued
as the best means of settling the country. If it had since been
deemed expedient to sell the lands in lieu of granting them as before,
it was considered by the inhabitants merely as the conversion of
capital into another form, and they thought that the proceeds of the
sale of land should be applied to the same purpose to which the land
itself was applied, namely, the encouraging and promoting of immi-
gration. If there were any justice in this argument, it derived
additional force from the circumstance that the colony was made the
receptacle for the outcasts of the United Kingdom, and was, conse-
quently, loaded with a vast disproportion of immoral people. That
the colony had derived many advantages from the transportation of
convicts could not be denied, but the system had brought with it a
long train of moral evils which could only be counteracted by an
extensive introduction of free and virtuous inhabitants, and the only
means by which the colony could safely rely for accomplishing this
vital object was the revenue arising from the sale of lands. It was
for these reasons that the Committee were anxious to record their
opinion, as well as that of the whole community, that the funds
arising from the sale of lands should bo appropriated exclusively to
the purpose of introducing a moral and industrious population —that
they consider this appropriation alike indispensable to the present
interests and future prospects and character of the colony—and that
they regard the opinion formerly expressed by the Secretary of
State for the Colonies on this subject, and approved by the Lords of
the Treasury, in the light of a pledge by His Majesty’s Government
that the Crown Lands should be held sacred to the promotion of
immigration.”
And so thoroughly did the Imperial Government of the day
sympathize with these views and feelings, and so strongly
did they hold and maintain the principle in question, that
when a letter was addressed by the Board of the Treasury
to the Colonial Office, of date 13th August, 1838, “ex-
pressing a hope that the whole of the Land Revenue will
not have been appropriated exclusively to the purposes of


emigration, unless it shall have been ascertained that the
produce of the other branches of the revenue will be such
as to render it unnecessary to apply any portion of the
Land Fund to the Ordinary Expenditure of the Colonial
Government,” Lord Gleuelg, then Principal Secretary of
State for the Colonies, observed, in his letter to Sir George
Gipps, transmitting a copy of this Treasury Minute, of
date Downing Street, 28th August, 1838: 11 It must be dis-
tinctly understood that it is only in the event of a deficiency\
in other branches of the Revenue, in providing for the Ordi-
nary Expenditure of your Government, that Her Majesty's
Government can sanction any portion of the Land Fund
being diverted from the purposes of Emigration .”
In the meantime, as the Land Revenue was rapidly in-
creasing in amount and importance, a distinct Department
was created by the Imperial Government, under function-
aries designated “ Emigration and Land Commissioners,
for the superintendence and management of emigration
generally to the Colonies. Under these functionaries the
Australian Land Fund was appropriated for the promotion
of the emigration of reputable families and individuals of
the various mechanical employments required from time to
time in the Colony, as also of unmarried females having
relations to protect them in the emigrant ships, of farm
labourers and shepherds.
In this way there was a vast amount of emigration
effected to the colony of a most valuable description, at the
sole cost of the Land Fund of New South Wales during
the next twenty years ; there having been imported on one
occasion during that period upwards of twenty-five thou-
sand emigrants, whose passage out was paid exclusively
from that Fund, in eighteen months. There were, doubt-
less, great abuses allowed to prevail in the Immigration
Department through the neglect and mismanagement of the
Local Government, during the administration of Sir George


Gipps, of which I have detailed the particulars in their
proper place; but the aspect and character of the colony
were, notwithstanding, wonderfully improved, and, as con-
vict immigration had in the meantime been discontinued in
the year 1840, there was no further cause of grievance from
that source.
But a fatal change was unfortunately effected in this
admirable system —so beneficial alike to the mother country
and the colonies—through colonial cupidity on the one
hand, and imperial ignorance and folly on the other. And
I have no hesitation in stating it as my decided opinion,
that that change was owing entirely to the influence
and efforts of the late Mr. Wentworth. I have already
had occasion to observe that during the greater part, if
not the whole period of Sir Charles Fitzroy’s adminis-
tration, Mr. Wentworth was the virtual dictator of the
colony. We have lately (Tuesday, 26th May, 1873),
been giving that gentleman’s remains, which had been
brought out from England by his own desire for interment
in the colony, a public funeral; and I have no desire to
dispute his title to the honour, of which, indeed, I cordially
approved. But as a distinguished Frenchman once said,
when requested at a great public meeting in the south of
France to express his sentiments respecting the first Napo-
leon, shortly after his death in St. Helena, “ When I think
of all the good Napoleon did for France, I cannot speak ill
of him; but when I think of all the evil he did to France,
I cannot speak well of him so would I say of Mr.
Wentworth, “ When I think of all the good service he
rendered to New South Wales, I cannot speak ill of him;
but when I think of all the evil he has done to the colony,
I cannot speak well of him.”
In the year 1813, Mr. Wentworth, along with two other
colonists of the olden time, long since deceased, performed
the memorable feat of crossing the Blue Mountains, which


till then had been deemed impassable, and thereby threw open
to the colonists, in a time of,peculiar emergency, the vast ex-
tent of fertile country beyond them. He published an account
of the colony, which served materially to bring it into notice
in the old world at a comparatively early period of its
existence, and he also published a Prize Poem of great
merit, entitled “Australia,” when a student at one of the
English Universities, His efforts for the establishment of
Trial by Jury and of Free Institutions for the Colony were
energetic, long-continued, and ultimately successful, and
he was the Founder of the Sydney University. But by
one fatal act —an act of alleged patiiotisra, in which, in an
evil hour, the Imperial Government unhappily concurred —
he has done incalculable evil to the colony, and thrown
it back in the march of improvement perhaps half a een-
tury.
At the time when the land-selling system of Mr. Wake-
field superseded the previous system of free grants, a solemn
pledge was given by the Imperial authorities that the funds
arising from that source should be appropriated for the
promotion of emigration, and they had been so appropriated
accordingly from the year 1831; the change effected by the
Australian Land Sales Act of 1842 consisting merely in
declaring that at least one half of the proceeds of the laud
sales should be appropriated in that way.
But no sooner did Mr. Wentworth acquire the virtual
management of the State than a series of efforts was made
at his instance by the Legislature of the colony, to obtain
the complete command, only of all the waste laud of
the territory, but of all the revenue arising from its pro-
gressive sale. On the assembling of the Legislative Council
of 1851, Mr. Wentworth obtained a Committee to prepare
a remonstrance against the Constitution Act of 1850, which
had then just arrived in the colony; and one of the principal
grievances which that remonstrance submitted was the


retention of the whole power over the waste lands and land
revenue of the colony in the hands of the Imperial Govern-
ment. That grievance, or rather the claim founded on it,
was as follows :
2. “ That the revenue arising from the public lands,
derived as it was wholly from the value imparted to those lands
by the labour and capital of the people of this colony, was as
much their property as -the ordinary revenue, and ought,
therefore, to be subject only to the control and appropria-
tion of the Colonial Legislature.’’
Earl Grey’s reply to this remonstrance of the Legislative
Council was received in the colony in July, 1852; and I
subjoin that portion of it which relates to the claim of the
Council to the entire control of the waste land, and the
land-revenue of the colony, in which, I am happy to state,
I entirely concur with his Lordship.
“ With regard to the administration of the waste lands, it was his
duty not to withhold the expression of his decided dissent from the
doctrine that the waste lands of New South Wales, or the revenue
derived from them, were, in any reasonable sense, the exclusive
property of the inhabitants, or that their representatives ought to
have, as of right, the control and disposal of that revenue. The
waste lands of the vast colonial possessions of the British Empire
were held by the Crown as trustee for the inhabitants of that empire
at large, and not for the inhabitants of the particular provinces
divided by arbitrary geographical limits in which any such waste
lands might happen to be situated. Otherwise, this consequence
would follow, that the first inhabitants of any of those vast pro-
vinces, if possessing those representative institutions which arose, as
of right, in ordinary British colonies, would be indefeasibly entitled
to the administration of all the lands and land revenue of the great
unexplored tract called a province, of which they occupied the ex-
tremity, wholly without regard to the interests of the nation, which
had founded the settlement, perhaps at great expense, in order to
serve as a home for their own emigrants, and as a market for their
own industry. When and on what conditions it might be desirable to
transfer the control of the waste lands of a colony to the local legis-
lature was, in his belief, a question of expediency and not of right


—of expediency respecting both, to the local community and to the
people of the empire at large, whose claims required joint considera-
tion and mutual adjustment. But while such were his views, as to
the right under which the revenue was administered, he willingly
acknowledged that it was the essential duty of those who adminis-
tered it to regard, in a special manner, the interests of those who
had established themselves on the spot, and whose purchases afforded
the fund to be so disposed of, and he believed that this object was in
a high degree attainable by the existing arrangement.”
I have always maintained, daring the whole course of
my Parliamentary life —from the Ist of August, 1843, when
I first entered the Legislature of the colony, till the close
of the year 1870, when I voluntarily ceased to occupy a
seat iu our local Parliament —pi’ecisely as Earl Grey does
in this passage, viz. that the waste lands of the colonies ai'e
not the property of their actual inhabitants, but of the
whole people of the British Empire, and that they ought to
he administered by, and for them, exclusively. I confess,
indeed, I uniformly stood alone in giving expression to
such sentiments, but I never hesitated to do so notwith-
standing, on all suitable occasions. 3 The waste lauds of
3 Tbe following passage from a very able pamphlet, entitled
“ Bush Essays,” by Capricornus, published in Edinburgh, by Adam
and Charles Black, in 1872, bears testimony to my uniform efforts in
the Parliament of New South Wales, in favour of the principle that
the waste lands of Australia were the property of the people of
England, and not of the actual colonists of any of the Australian
colonies. I have no idea who the writer is, but he is evidently a
highly intelligent person, and has in all likelihood been a resident in
Queensland.
“ The point may here with propriety be raised—For what pur-
pose was the Crown title of the waste lands handed over to the
colonies by the Imperial Government ? Were the lands to be held in
trust for the purposes of colonization ? or were they handed over
merely as assets to be managed for the profit of the one million of
people then in Australia ? Every candid mind must admit the first
supposition to be the only just one, but this is a view of the matter
by no means approved by the colonists, and the different Govern-


the colonies I have always regarded as an invaluable
possession of the British people, to be administered, if we
had only had men of common sense and common honesty to
manage them, for the benefit of myriads of the British
people. But, I am sorry to say, they are so no longer.
They have been recklessly thrown away by titled fools and
madmen; and the people of England, and especially her
virtuous poor, are now thh sufferers.
Besides the remonstrance of the Legislative Council,
already referred to, a petition to the Queen and Parlia-
ment was agreed to by the House, on the motion of Mr.
Wentworth, in 1851, of which the following was one of
the clauses; —
“ In order that Her Majesty’s confidential advisers might have no
excuse for the continuance of these abuses, the Council unhesi-
tatingly declares that they were prepared, on the surrender to the
Colonial Legislature of the entire management of all the revenues,
territorial as well as general, and on the establishment of a Consti-
tution among the colonies similar in its outlines to that of Canada,
to assume and provide for the whole coat of the internal government
of the colony, whether civil or military, and to enact an adequate
Civil List during the life of Her Majesty, and for five years after Her
Majesty’s demise, instead of the sums appropriated in the Schedule
to the Imperial Act, 13 & 14 Viet.”
That is, for the paltry amount of the Civil List of
the new Constitution Act of 1850 —62,5002. a year—the
British Government were modestly asked to sign away
to the Legislature of New South Wales the whole terri-
torial revenue arising in all time coming from the noble
ments have invariably acted as if the main purpose for which the
lands were held was to raise money to be spent among their con-
stituents. Only one member of a Colonial Assembly has, to the
writer’s knowledge, maintained the contrary principle consistently.
He who held this honourable position was the Rev. Dr. Lang, of
Sydney.”—“Bush Essays,” by Capricornus, page 43. Adam and
Charles Black, Edinburgh, 1872.


possession and inheritance of the British people in the
waste lands of Australia. - And the British Government,
represented as it was at the time in the Colonial Office by
Sir John Pakington and the late Duke of Newcastle,
assented at once to this modest proposal, and did the deed
of folly and madness that virtually disinherited myriads of
the people of England, apparently without consideration
and without compunction. For Earl Grey, having retired
from office early in the year 1852, and being succeeded
by the Duke of Newcastle, as Principal, and Sir John
Pakington, as Under-Secretary for the Colonies, Sir John
replied, as follows, to the Petition and Remonstrance of the
Council of New South Wales ;
“ Coinciding with Earl Grey that the transference of the control of
the lands to the Local Legislature was a question of expediency and
not of right, he had arrived, after full consideration, at the conclusion
that, under the new and rapidly-changing circumstances of New
South Wales, the time had come at which it was his duty to« advise
Her Majesty that the administration of these lands should be trans-
ferred to the Colonial Legislature, after the changes in the Constitu-
tion had been effected which were adverted to in the Petition.”
Sir John Pakington’s despatch was accompanied by one
from the Duke of Newcastle, confirming “ the promise that
as soon as a New Constitution had been passed by thb
Legislature of the Province, and had received the approval
of Her Majesty, the disposal of the waste lands, and the
appropriation of the fund accruing from their sale and
management, would be placed, without reserve, under the
supervision and control of the Legislative authority of the
colony.”
The grand turning-point in the history of the Australian
colonies was the advent of Responsible Government, and
the establishment of popular institutions in the year 1856.
A draft constitution had been drawn up by the Legislative


HISTORY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Council of New South Wales, in the year 1853, 4 which was
approved of and enacted by the Imperial Pailiamcnt in
1855 ; the colony granting Her Majesty a Civil List, and
Her Majesty conceding in lieu of it to the Colonial Legis-
lature all the droits of the Crown, and in particular all the
waste lands of the colonial territory, in absolute and pei-
petual possession. Now, I have no hesitation in stating
—as one of the Representatives of the people in the Legis-
lature of New South Wales for upwards of a quarter of a
century —that if the rights and intei’ests of Great Hr itain, as a
great colonizing power, had been taken into consideiation
in the proper quarter on that most important occasion, a
very different arrangement and one of transcendent impoit-
ance to the mother country might have been effected with
perfect facility. The importance of emigration, both to the
mother country and to all the Australian colonies, had then
been so long and so extensively acknowledged, that if the
Secretary of State for the time being, whose bounden duty
it was to haA r e duly considered the rights and inteiests of
both parties in the case, had merely insisted on attaching to
the Imperial Act a proviso to the effect that one half of the
funds accruing from the sales of all waste lands in the
colony should be appropriated, for a certain period at least,
to the promotion of emigration from the United Kingdom,
the arrangement would have been most cordially acceded
to by a very large majority of the colonists of New South
Wales.
As one of the main objects of colonization is to provide
an eligible outlet for the redundant population of the mother
country, it might indeed have been taken for granted that
Great Britain would never have denuded herself of the
power which the possession of the waste lands of Australia
4 I happened to be in England at the time, and had, consequently,
no share in its authorship.


had justly and legitimately placed in her hands, without
providing for the carrying out of this great object. At the
General Election in New South Wales in the year 1861,
several of the candidates put forth the idea, which veiy
soon became the policy of the Government and Legislature,
that, as the discovery of gold would send out plenty ol
emigrants to the colony, no part of the Land bund ought in
future to be appropriated for immigration purposes. Bui
Great Britain had a deep interest in preventing the possi-
bility of any such policy being enacted. She had a deep
interest, on behalf of her industrious and virtuous pool, in
insisting upon the continuance of the arrangement, foi the
appropriation of at least one halt of the Land F und for the
promotion of emigration from the United Kingdom.
To revert to the despatches of the Duke of Newcastle
and Sir John Pakington in reply to the proposal of Mr.
Wentworth and the Legislative Council of New South
\Y a l es —the paction that was thus concluded between Mr.
Wentworth and the Colonial Legislature on the one hand,
and the Duke of Newcastle and Sir John Pakington on the
other, was finally ratified and confirmed by the Imperial
Parliament in the Act 18 and 19 Viet. Chapter 54, which
was passed on the 16th July, 1855. Lhe two clauses em-
bodying the arrangement are as follows: — \
“ Clause 11. The entire management and control of the waste
lands belonging to the Crown in the said colony, and also the appro-
priation of the gross proceeds of the sales of any such lands, and of
all other proceeds and revenues of the same, from whatever source
arising within the said colony, including all royalties, mines, and
minerals, shall be vested in the Legislature of the said colony.
“ Clause L. The said several sums mentioned in Schedules A, B and
C, shall be accepted and taken by Her Majesty, her heirs and succes-
sors, by way of Civil List, instead of all territorial, casual, and other
revenues of the Crown (including all royalties), from whatever
source arising within the said colony, and to the disposal of which
the Crown may be entitled, either absolutely or conditionally, or
otherwise howsoever.


Pensions chargeable
. £13,950
Schedule C. (in process
of extinction since 1862).
Public Worship .
. £28,000.”
“ The three Schedules above referred to are as follow :
Schedule A,
Salaries of Public Offices . • £20,550
Schedule B.
For the paltry amount, - - therefore, of 62,500/. a year, as a
Civil List to Her Majesty for the payment of the salaries
of the Civil Officers of the colony, the control of the waste
lands of the colony of New South Wales and of all the
revenue to accrue from them in all future time was hal-
tered away by the Duke of Newcastle and Sir John Paking-
ton, in the paction which the Act in question merely con-
firmed. Lord John Russell was then Principal Secretary
of State for the Colonies; but his Lordship had no alterna-
tive in the matter, and could only ratify and confirm the
bargain which his predecessors in office had made.
To enable the reader to understand the real nature of the
change which this fatal measure was destined to effect, it
will be desirable to contrast the amounts which the colony
of New South Wales actually contributed for the promotion
of emigration from the United Kingdom to Australia during
certain periods of her past history with what she is con-
tributing now. From the reports, therefore, of George F.
Wise, Esq., Agent for Immigration in New South Wales,
it appears that during the nineteen years that had elapsed
from 1838 to 31st December, 1851, when Victoria had just
become a separate colony, New South Wales had con-
tributed from her Laud Fund for the promotion of emigra-
tion from the mother country to Australia the sura of
900,329 Z. 2s. 6d., and that during the eight years that
elapsed from that period till the 31st December, 1859, when
Queensland was also separated from New South Wales, the
same colony had contributed towards the same object


996,7262. 11s. 6d., and that during the ten years that fol-
lowed the separation of .Queensland, her contribution
towards the same object had been 200,1122. Is. Id.
During the eight years that preceded the separation of
Queensland, the annual contribution of New South Wales
for the promotion of immigration to her territory, was,
therefore, 120,8402. 3s. 11c2., but during the ten years that
succeeded that event, her annual contribution towards the
same object was only 20,1112. 4s. Id. The change, there-
fore, that had been effected under the Imperial Act,
although not immediate, was very speedy in its operation;
and I can testify from my own personal knowledge that,
during the whole of these ten years, the Ministry for Lands
in the Colony was in the hands of functionaries who,
although of different political parties, agreed so thoroughly
with the Wentworth policy, that they were altogether
opposed to the voting of any amount whatever for the
promotion of immigration; and it was only through a sort
of compromise that a vote was given at all for that object—
in the very questionable form, too, of assisted immigration,
of which I shall have occasion to speak presently.
Such, then, was the splendid patrimony which the people
of England have unhappily lost through the act and deed
of their own Government, or rather, I should say, of titlqd
fools and madmen, in whose incapable hands their best
interests had been unfortunately placed. I have experienced
much obloquy myself in the Colonial Parliament in advo-
cating the rights of the people of England in this matter of
the waste lauds all along, but I uniformly stood alone in
doing so for twenty-five years past.
It is quite impossible to calculate the amount of evil that
this fatal measure has entailed both upon the mother
country and upon all the three colonies of New South
Wales, Victoria, and Queensland; for it affected them all
equally. The imperial authorities had had sufficient


warning as to what would be the line of action of the
Colonial Legislators, as soon as they should obtain the
coveted power over the waste lands of the colony; for, at
the instance of Mr. Wentworth, the Select Committee of that
year, adopting the Report of the Legislative Council of 1850,
had actually declared that it was no part of the duty of
the colonists to pay for the importation of emigrants. The
following extract of a letter from Earl Grey to Sir Charles
Augustus Fitzroy, then Governor of New South Wales, of
date, “ Downing Street, 27th May, 1851,” embodies the
resolution of the Legislative Council of that colony on the
subject, and places the matter in its full and proper light
before the reader:—
“ I have received your Despatch of the 31st December last, for-
warding an Address from the Legislative Council of New South
Wales to the Queen, setting forth the amount expended on immigra-
tion from the Land Fund since the year 1836, and the debt incurred
upon it for the same object, setting forth the advantages derived
from that outlay to the mother country, and urging that it is no part
of the duty of the colonists to pay for the importation of emigrants.” —
“ Council Paper.”
This allegation of the Legislative Council of 1850 vir-
tually embodied the three following propositions :
Ist, That the waste lands of the colony were as much
the property of the colonists as their own goods and
chattels.
2nd. That the past expenditure of any portion of the
funds derived from the sale of these lands on emigration
from the mother country was a positive grievance to the
colony, and a misappropriation of its funds ; and,
3rd. That it was the mother country that derived the
exclusive benefits accruing from such emigration.
In short, the squatters, who then ruled the colony, under
the leadership of Mr. Wentworth, in virtue of an electoral
system which I have shown above was characterized by


downright chicanery and fraud, had no desire for the settle-
ment of the country with ja numerous, industrious, and
virtuous population from the United Kingdom. They
desired to have it reserved exclusively for their sheep and
cattle.
Knowing all this, therefore, as they either did, or ought to
have done, when the monstrous claim and assumption I have
detailed, and Earl Grey’s patriotic response to it were then of
so recent a date, I maintain that it was a flagrant dereliction
of duty, and something even like a virtual betrayal of trust,
on the part of Sir John Pakington, whom I consider the
principal offender in the case, and His Grace the late Duke
of Newcastle, to ignore all this, and to throw the splendid
inheritance of the people of England—the whole continent
of Australia, I may say —into the hands of these selfish and
designing men. Had the Imperial authorities of that period
only reserved for the mother country the control of the
expenditure even of one half of the Land Fund, for the
promotion of emigration from the United Kingdom, which
they could certainly have done, at the time in question, with
perfect facility, what a splendid result would have been
realized ! Tne population of New South Wales, instead of
being only very little above half a million, would now, I
have no doubt whatever, have been upwards of a million,
while, instead of the contemptibly small amount, and the
paltry character of the actual immigration we have had
for twenty years past, we should have had hundreds and
thousands of families and individuals from the mother
country, of a superior character, and with ample means
to enable them to effect a settlement in their adopted
country.
I have always maintained, as the result of my own
experience and observation, that the only sure way to settle
a country like Australia, is to offer the intending emigrant
a bonus , in land, equivalent in value, at least, to the whole


cost of his passage out. The prospect of possessing a piece
of land one can call his own, is the powerful magnet for
attracting the intending emigrant to. any country beyond
seas, otherwise fitted for his habitation. It was my earnest
desire and endeavour to get that principle recognized and
established in New South Wales, in connexion with the
settlement of a large body of thorough Protestant emi-
grants in Moreton Bay; which was then a part of that
cclony, that induced me to make a series of efforts in
the years 1847, 1848, and 1849, which issued in the
settlement of about six hundred thorough Protestants in
what is now the colony of Queensland. I had spent these
three years in England, lecturing all over the United
Kingdom, on the advantages of emigration to Australia;
sending out three ships with these emigrants to Moreton
Bay, now Queensland, and as many in other three ships to
Port Phillip, now Victoria, I had had no pecuniary
assistance from the Government, either Imperial or Colo-
nial ; and I had expended of my own proper funds, in
bringing the undertaking to a successful issue, not less
than five thousand pounds, which is still represented by a
mortgage on my remaining property. For this peculiar
service to my adopted country I was virtually treated as a
criminal by the Squatterdom of the Legislative Council of
1850, after their utmost efforts to exclude me from the
Council had proved unsuccessful, while the principle I had
endeavoured to establish was sternly repudiated. But in
ten years thereafter, when Queensland had been separated
from New South Wales by the Imperial Parliament, the
principle I had thus advocated was established as the law
of the laud by the first Parliament of the new colony—with
what results I shall now show.
At the period of its separation from New South Wales,
on the 10th of December, 1859, the population of Queens-
land was 25,146; but, through the land system, established


by the first Parliament of the colony, which guaranteed a
bonus of thirty acres of land to every emigrant who had
paid his own passage out, or had it paid for him by others,
the population of the colony had more than quadrupled
itself before the close of the first decade of its existence;
for, in December, 1869, it amounted to 107,000.
Precisely the same result followed the adoption of the
same principle in the colony of New Zealand. For, in a
despatch from Earl Granville to Sir George Bowen, the
late Governor of that colony, we are informed that whereas
the population of New Zealand, in 1857, was only 49,800,
it had amounted, in 1867, to 227,810; that is, considerably
more than quadruple its amount at the commencement of
the decennial period. The attraction, in both cases, was the
land; the terms offered to the emigrant in New Zealand
being still more liberal than in Queensland ; for, instead of
thirty acres, as in that colony, the bonus in New Zealand
was forty acres per head.
In New South Wales, on the contrary —a country, with
at least twenty times the resources of Queensland, at the
period of its separation, and with an unlimited extent of
waste land, available for the promotion of immigration, but
in which there was no bonus in laud held out to the
emigrant—the increase of the population from immigra-
tion, during the same decennial period, was only 34,817;
that is, only about a tenth part of its population at the
commencement of that period. And of that increase,
16,623 persons consisted of what were called assisted im-
migrants; that is, persons whose relations in the colony had
paid about a third of their passage-money for them, the
rest being supplied by the Government.
The total number of immigrants who arrived in New
South Wales, under the regulations for assisted immigration,
during the decennial period extending from 1860 to 1870,
was as follows, viz.:—


Their religion,—
Protestants of all denominations.
. 6,301
Roman Catholics . ' .
. 10,296
Other persuasions .
26
From England and Wales .... 3,225
Scotland ...... 1,061
Ireland ...... 12,219
Other countries . . . . . 1! 8
16,623
16,623
Besides, while the immigration into Queensland and
New Zealand comprised a very large number of persons
and families of respectable standing in society, who, for
years in succession, introduced into Queensland, in par-
ticular (and, I believe, the same thing took place in New
Zealand), an amount of British capital, of not less than
twenty thousand pounds sterling a month, or nearly a
quarter of a million sterling per annum —a circumstance
that sufficiently accounts for the rapid development of the
sister colony, and the successful formation of a whole
series of vigorous and promising settlements to the north-
ward—the great bulk of the immigrants into New South
Wales, during the decennial period indicated above, were
of a semi-pauper class, who, instead of coming out to
develope the resources of the colony with their imported
capital and labour, like thfe immigrants into Queensland and
New Zealand, came out chiefly as candidates for employ-
ment in the police force, or as turnkeys and warders in
gaols, or as mere messengers and menial servants in every
Government department in the colony. And being chiefly
Roman Catholics, of the humbler classes, from Ireland,
they came out also to subject us and our institutions to the
domination of certain ultramontane zealots, whose mair


object is to transform our noble colony into a mere province
of the Popedom.
Reverting to the mere amount of our immigration, and
without reference to its character for the ten years,
extending from 1860, inclusive, had New South Wales
only made the same progress in the “ heroic work of
colonization,” and afforded a corresponding amount of relief
to the mother country, as Queensland and New Zealand did
during the ten years in question, her population would now
have been not less than 1,346,288, while the immigration
into her territory would have amounted to not less than
70,000 a year.
It will surely not be alleged that either Queensland or
New Zealand was a more eligible or more promising field
for emigration from the mother country, twelve or fifteen
years since, than New South Wales. Our climate is un-
questionably more congenial to the constitution of English-
men than that of Queensland, especially in the settlements
to the northward of Brisbane; and we have had neither
Maori wars nor earthquakes to frighten us, as in New
Zealand. Why, then, have we, the colonists of New South
Wales, fallen so far behind these two younger colonies in
the march of improvement—in the “ heroic work " of
colonization ? Why, the humiliating fact is to be ascribed
entirely to our having repudiated the principle to which
the wonderfully rapid advancement of these colonies was
unquestionably due, that of offering a bonus in land to the
intending emigrant, to induce him to come out to the
colonies.
The following is the Decennial Return of the number of
Immigrants who arrived in the Colony from the United
Kingdom, for ten years, commencing with the year 1863:


Statistical Register of New South Wales for 1872,
This Return would certainly be peculiarly discreditable to
New South Wales, were it not capable of the easiest ex-
planation, in the fact that the colony has for wenty years
past been unfortunately deprived by iniquitous legislation
of the grand source of population which it would otherwise
have had in its waste lands. Compared with the time when
the immigration under Imperial management amounted to
upwards of twenty-five thousand in eighteen months, that
is more than thirty years ago, it would seem that for ten
years past —I may rather say twenty —the colony has been
going down in the world, as far as immigration and its
position in the eye of the general public are concerned. It
was formerly, as I believe it is still beyond all comparison,
tbe first of the Australian colonies; it has now, it would
seem, lost its prestige in public opinion, and has actually
sunk, in the estimation of people in the old country, to the
third place in the group; Victoria, and even Queensland,
having got before it in the race, and taken up its proper
position. Every person who has anything to say on the
subject is quite sensible of this state of things; but,


strangely enough, nobody seems to be aware of its cause.
The following is an extract of a letter on the subject to the
author, by an old respected colonist, Sir Charles Nicholson,
Bart., of date, London, 2nd October, 1869 :
“In looking at the condition and prospects of New South Wales
from a distance (but with an interest that has suffered no diminu-
tion in consequence of absence), I see much that I most deeply
regret. Without caring much about the conflict of parties, or the
ascendancy of any particular class of men or politicians in the
Government, I cannot close my eyes to the fact that the increase of
the population of the colony, from immigration from Europe, during
the last few years, is one that is scarcely appreciable. Up to within
the last ten years, the population of New South Wales went on in-
creasing steadily and progressively, with infinite advantage, as we all
know, to the individual emigrant, and to the community with which
he became ingrafted. Why a system so calculated to promote the
happiness and well-being of all should have fallen into abeyance I
know not.”
The Registrar-General also speaks to the same effect, as
follows, in his preface to the Census of 1871 :
“ Although the addition of 43'64 per cent, to our population in the
decade must be a welcome fact, it should be noted not only that the
rate of increase has not been maintained during the last few years,
but that there has been a very noticeable retrograde movement in the
progress of our population.”
It is perfectly amazing, however, how men of the highest
intelligence in every other respect have failed to recognize
the real cause of this unnatural and long-continued depres-
sion of the colony, in the matter in question, and are ever
and anon suggesting for a remedy everything but the right
one. It was, doubtless, natural for the Hon. John Robertson
to suppose that his famous Free Selection Act would attract
multitudes of people to the colony, although I gave it as my
opinion in Parliament at the time, which he has since found
to be perfectly correct, that it would do nothing of the kind.
The Hon. John Bowie Wilson, who alternated with Mr.
Robertson for several years as Minister for Lauds during


the last decade, had an equally valueless Holloway’s pill of
his own, in maintaining that all that was necessary in the
case was to reduce the minimum price of land to five
shillings an acre. Mr. Parkes’ (the present Premier) specific
was to send fit and proper persons to England as lecturers
on the colony, with plenty of papers and pamphlets about it
to circulate everywhere. 5
Accordingly, in the Session of 1861, Mr. Parkes moved
in the Legislative Assembly, on the 2nd of May, of that
year, “that this House will, on Friday next, resolve itself
into a Committee of the Whole, to consider of an Address
to the Administrator of the Government (the Right Honour-
able Sir John Young), praying that His Excellency will be
pleased to place upon a Supplementary Estimate for the
present year a sum of money not exceeding 5000/., to estab-
lish Emigration Agencies and Lectureships in Great Britain
and Ireland; such money to be expended as near as may be in
the following manner: — 20001. for salaries for twelve months
of two Lecturers and General Agents, 1000/. for travelling
expenses for such Lecturers, 500/. for Shipping Agencies in
principal ports, 1500/. for printing in cheap and popular form
copies of Land Acts and other trustworthy information
relating to this colony.” This motion having been passed by
a large majority, Mr. Parkes and Mr. Dailey, two of our
very ablest men, were deputed by the Government of the
s Mr. Parkes does not seem to have lost faith in the virtue of the
pamphlet specific even yet. A Mr. Charles Robinson had, at the
instance of the Local Government, written an able pamphlet, en-
titled, “ New South Wales, the oldest and richest of the Australian
Colonies,” which was printed in Sydney at the public expense during
the past year, and of which Mr. Parkes had caused 100,000 (a hun-
dred thousand) copies to be forwarded to the Agent-General in Eng-
land, for circulation throughout the United Kingdom. I have learnt
incidentally that these pamphlets, which nobody seems to care for in
England, are piled up in tens of thousands of copies, like unsaleable
goods, in the Agent-General’s office in Westminster.


day to proceed to England as lecturers on the colony, as
an eligible field for emigration, and did so accordingly.
There was much —everything, indeed—expected from
this movement, not only by the lecturers themselves, but by
the Government and the public; all classes of persons
throughout the colony confidently anticipating as its certain
result a speedy and extensive immigration from all parts of
the United Kingdom into New South Wales. But I felt
assured from the first, although I happened to be in England
at the time, that the effort would prove, as it did eventually,
an utter failure ; for, with all the imposing apparatus
provided for them by Act of the Provincial Parliament, the
mission of these gentlemen did not issue in sending out a
single emigrant to the colony. 6 There was no blame at-
tachable in the case to the lecturers. They were the ablest
and best men that could have been selected for their
mission, and they doubtless discharged their duty ably and
well; but, like the Children of Israel in Egypt, they were
sent to make bricks without straw; for all they had, in
addition to their own eloquent and graphic descriptions of
the country, to induce thousands and tens of thousands of
the people of the United Kingdom to come out to New
South Wales, was a gratuitous distribution of certain
printed copies of Mr. Robertson’s Free Selection and Land
Acts!
It was long, however, before either the Parliament or the
public could be brought to admit the possibility of failure
in the great effort they had thus made. On the 29th of
July, 1862, after a speech in which I showed that there
was something else needed to induce an extensive emigra-
tion from the mother country to this colony than the passing
of the Lands Acts of 1861, and the mission of Messrs.
« It is alleged, indeed, that there was one emigrant to the colony,
as the result of this expensive mission, but the fact has been dis-
puted.


Parkes and Dailey to England, I moved, in the Legislative
Assembly,—
That, in the opinion of this House, it is expedient
and necessary that additional facilities, besides
those implied in the Lands Acts, should be aiforded
for the promotion of the immigration into this
colony of reputable and industrious families and
individuals from the mother country and the con-
tinent of Europe.
That it should, therefore, be enacted that every
immigrant, whether male or female, of from four-
teen to fifty years of age, arriving in the colony
direct from Europe, or the person or persons
paying his or her passage, should receive, on his
or her arrival, or be held entitled to, twenty
acres of any such land as may be open at the time
for free selection under the Lands Acts, as a free
gift, and to other ten acres at the end of two years
thereafter, if he or she should then be resident in
the colony; and that half that extent, or ten and
five acres respectively, should be allowed for each
child of from one to fourteen years of age; pro-
vided that immigrants arriving in the colony with
five or more children shall not be excluded from
participating in this arrangement, although up-
wards of fifty years of age.”
But this motion was negatived by fifteen to ten; the
House being of opinion that they had done all that was
requisite in the matter by appointing the mission of the
previous year. But both the Parliament and the public
were at length constrained to acknowledge that the mission
of Messrs. Parkes and Dailey had entirely failed.
What, then, has been the grand secret of the failure of


New South Wales as well as of the remarkable success of
the other two neighbouring,colonies I have mentioned
above ? Why, it has been entirely the land and immigra-
tion system of that colony, as compared with that of
Queensland and New Zealand. For, while the colonists of
New South Wales have been relying on their superior
climate, their vast extent of eligible waste land, and their
excellent Free Selection Legislation, these two colonies
have, in accordance with the practice of other highly
intelligent communities, and particularly that of the United
States, been holding out to the intending emigrant a
tangible bonus in the shape of a free grant of land. This,
I maintain, has been the powerful magnet, in connexion
with not a little salutary trumpeting and puffing at home,
that has proved so attractive in the case of these two
colonies, while New South Wales has been left “ alone in
her glory,” and nobody at home has ever been making the
slightest inquiry about her.
To bring this matter to a conclusion : Ever since the
fatal concession by the Imperial Parliament, at the instance
of Sir John Pakington and the late Duke of Newcastle, of
all control over the waste lands of New South Wales, to the
Local Legislature —a mere clique of squatters, at the time the
paction ivas made, under the leadership of Mr. Wentworth—
the colony has been suffering under the curse of squatterdom to
the present day. From that period, immigration at the
expense of the Land Fund virtually ceased; and the Fund
itself, having thenceforth been regarded as part of the
ordinary revenue of the colony, has been expended on
everything but its proper object, immigration.
Had the control of the waste lands remained in the hands
of the Imperial Government, to the extent even of one-half
of the Land Fund, or, in other words, had Mr. Wentworth
and his squatter majority kept their larcenous hands off the
property of the nation; or if Sir John Pakington and the


late Duke of Newcastle had done their duty to their
country, as Earl Grey did so shortly before, in refusing to
hand over to a mere handful of squatters the noble in-
heritance of the people of England in the waste lands of
Australia, —what a splendid possession would have been
secured for all classes of the people of England, and
especially for the humble poor, for nearly twenty years
past! Had the same farms been held out to the emigrant
to New South Wales, as was done in Queensland and New
Zealand, the progress of the colony would have been rapid
and extensive, almost beyond conception. Thousands of
reputable families, with ample means to enable them to
form comfortable homes for their households, would have
emigrated from the United Kingdom, and settled in all
parts of the territory ; carrying out with them numerous
families of domestic servants, labourers, and shepherds, for
whose passage out they would have received a sufficient
payment in land, while the trade of the colony would have
doubled its present amount long ere now.
Only consider what such a state of things would have
realized during the present year. When spending a few
days on clerical duty in Wagga-Wagga (the Claimant’s
country), 315 miles south-west of Sydney, in December
last, Mr. Baylis, the Police Magistrate of Wagga-Wagga, in-
formed me that there were actually applications in the Land
Office of the district, for the purchase of 800,000 (eight
hundred thousand) acres of land, at the minimum price of
a pound an acre, in Riverina alone, that is the tract of
country lying between the Murrumbidgee and the Murray
Rivers ; one gentleman from Victoria having applied for
50,000 (fifty thousand) acres on his own account, and
deposited in the office, agreeably to the regulations, six-
pence an acre towards the cost of survey. In accordance
with this information, the Hon. J. S. Farnell, the present
Colonial Minister for Lands, stated in the Legislative


Assembly, so recently as on the 13th of November, 1873,
that “it was expected that in the year 1874, should the
surveyors be able to survey sufficient land, not less than a
million sterling would be realized from the sales of land.
But of this vast revenue, which belongs of right to the
people of England —at least to the extent of one-half and
not to the people, far less to the squatterdom, of New
South Wales, the whole amount that was voted for im-
migration for the present year —in the very questionable
form, too, of assisted immigration —was the paltry sum of
50,000/., that is only a twentieth part of the anticipated
land revenue !
The Hon. Henry Parkes, the present Premier, requested
me, before leaving the colony, in April last, to aid the
Local Government in their efforts to promote emigration to
the colony daring my stay in England; and Sir Charles
Cowper, the Agent-General of the colony, seconded the
expressed wishes of the Premier, on my arrival in London.
But I could not consent to identify myself in any way with a
system of emigration of which I entirely disapproved ; and
the failure of Mr. Parkes himself, and his able coadjutor, Mi.
Dailey, as lecturers on Australia, in 1861, was by no means
encouraging. In the Session of 1868, when Mr. Robertson
was Premier, and a sum of 30,000/. had been placed upon
the estimates for assisted immigration, both Mr. Parkes
and I denounced that system so strongly and so success-
fully in regular speeches on the subject in the Legislative
Assembly, tbat the vote was negatived, and the item with-
drawn from the estimates for the two or three following
years, as the reader will see from the blanks under these
years in the Decennial Return, at page 146. I then de-
nounced the system in question for this reason particularly,
that the notorious preponderance of Irish Roman Catholics
of a certain class, with which the Assisted .Immigration
system had been supplying us for years before, in com-


parison with the number of Protestant emigrants from
England and Scotland together, was a virtual device for trans-
forming the colony into a mere province of the Popedom.
I denounce it still for another and much stronger reason, as
being a mere contemptible sham or pretext to conceal from
the public the Grand Larcenous procedure of the Legis-
lature of the Colony, in appropriating for their own local
objects these nineteen years past the noble inheritance of
the people of England in the waste lands of Australia.
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
GILBERT AM) RIVINGTON, PRINTERS, ST, JOHN’S SQUARE, LONDON.
