

THE EXECUTIVE
IN A
FEDERATION.
BY SIR RICHARD CHAFFEY BAKER, K.C.M.G.,
Chaiman of committees of the Federal Convention of 1897.
Adelaide:
C. E. BRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE.
1897.




THE EXECUTIVE
IN A
FEDERATION.
BY SIR RICHARD CHAFFEY BAKER, K.C.M.G.,
Chairman of Committees of the Federal Convention of 1897.
gUrlaiirf:
[•:. MRISTOW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH TERRACE.
1897.


THE EXECUTIVE IN A FEDERATION.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTION.
The questions which it is proposed to investigate are—
(l) What form of Executive will secure that responsibility
of its members to the people and their representatives
to which they have been so long accustomed, and at the
same time work harmoniously and effectively with a
Legislature established on the federal principle ?
(2) How will the people of the various colonies regard any
departure from the Cabinet system of Executive ?
To those who are not familiar with the debates in the Federal
Conventions of 1891 and 1897, the following extracts from a speech
made by the author in the Convention of 1897 may serve as an
introduction:—
“ The first question that suggests itself to my mind is this : Is
an Executive based on the Responsible Ministry system— the
Cabinet system —consistent with true Federation ? I know that
in the debates that have taken place in these colonies during the
past six years it has, to a considerable extent, been assumed that
we will at all events commence with the Cabinet system. There is
one notable exception to that view 1 , and that exception is a gentle-
man whose opinions are of great weight. Sir Samuel Griffith
has said—
If it is accepted as a fundamental rule of the Federation that the law shall
not he altered without the consent of the majority of the people, and also of a
majority of the States, both speaking by their representatives, why should not
the same principle be applied to the no less important branch of the State
authority—the Executive G overnment ? One mode is suggested
by the American Constitution, which requires that the first appointment of the
Ministers of the State must be with the approval of the Senate.
“To this point —a most important point—l venture to direct
the earnest attention of the members of this Convention. lam
fully impressed with the necessity that wherever it is possible we
should adhere to those political ideas which are engrained in the
minds of the people, and that, whenever any modifications are
proposed, such modifications should be genetically connected with
the form of government with which they are familiar. A Con-
stitution should be of historical growth, and not be manufactured.
1 This i* an under statement of the case. Dr. Cockburn, Hon. J. H. Gordon, Hon. Inglis
Clark, Hon. G. W. Hackett, the author, and others, have always contended that the Cabinet
system of Executive with Federation was incompatible.


“But we are now assembled here to frame an instrument of
union which is absolutely different from those forms of government
under which we have lived, to adopt a form of government based
on political ideas with which the people are not familiar; and to
import into a federal form of government the Cabinet system of
Executive is to form a patchwork paper Constitution, and try an
experiment which has never been tried before.
“ I am afraid that if we adopt this Cabinet system it will either
kill Federation or Federation will kill it, because we cannot conceal
from ourselves that the very fundamental essence of the Cabinet
system of Executive is the predominating power of one Chamber.
We know that from experience in all these colonies. We know,
too, that it will be impossible for the Cabinet system to be carried
on if the Ministry are obliged to have majorities in both Chambers.
What was it that led up to the Federation of Canada ? Before the
resolutions were adopted in the Canadian Convention which led up
to that so-called Federation, there existed a state of affairs which
throws a lurid light upon this question. Upper and Lower
Canada had been united under one government, but the divergence
of race and religion of the two peoples —the French and the
English —who constituted the population of the two Canadas was
so great that it brought about in effect two Executives and two
Parliaments. No Ministry could exist which had not a majority of
the representatives of the French people, and had not also a majority
of the representatives of the English people. There were in
effect two Premiers, two Attorneys-General and two Lower Houses.
The result was that between 1862 and 1864 five Ministries existed,
each lasting for a short period, and each utterly unable to do any-
thing ; and it was this state of affairs which led to the two Canadas
desiring a Federation rather than that unassimilated unity which
the fear of the United States had forced upon them. Will not the
same state of things prevail here if it is provided that a Cabinet
system of Executive should be obliged to have majorities in both
Chambers ? If they are not obliged to have majorities in both
Chambers, and if one Chamber is to be the predominant power in
the Federation, what becomes of the whole principle of Federation?
Supposing the Executive is the creation—and the Executive is in
essence the creation of one Chamber of Parliament in all our
colonies —of the House of Representatives, what will be the result?
Undoubtedly, that the powers of the Senate will wane until it
becomes only a dignified appendage of the House of Representatives.
That is not what we want; at all events, it is not what I want. I
do not think it would be safe for any colony which desires that
state rights should be fully recognised, and state interests fully
protected, to enter into a so-called Federation in which the Execu-
tive was the creation of one branch of the Legislature. Such a
state of things would be utterly' incompatible with the very essence
of Federation. ,
“No doubt Canada will be quoted as a practical refutation of my
argument; but can a system of government in which the members
of that branch of the Legislature which is supposed to represent


the states are nominated by a successful partisan leader be a true
Federation? As Mr. Gold win Smith observes, the barefaced pro-
position that one branch of the Legislature should be nominated by
the leader of a party is almost incredible, when we consider that
Canada proposed to form a federal form of government. I am
quite sure that no one who has studied this question of a federal
form of government will contend that the essence of Federation
exists in Canada, and, judging by the newspaper reports, the state
of affairs that exists there is anything but, satisfactory. lam quite
willing to admit that there are many advantages in the Cabinet
system, and that many disadvantages have shown themselves in
these forms of the Executive which have been adopted in Fede-
rations, notably in America; and I do not wish in any way to
dogmatise on this question, because I am perfectly aware of the
great difficulties surrounding it. I have only thrown out these
suggestions for consideration by members of this Convention, so
that when we get to closer quarters the matter may be more care-
fully considered, and discussed more in detail, and so that we shall
not assume as a matter of course that we should adopt that form
of Executive with which we are so familiar.” 1
CHAPTER II.
FEDERATION.
The most far-reaching and important political discovery of
modern times—the direct action of two Governments, the central
and the local, on the individual citizen —was a pivotal event in the
world’s history. 2
The fundamental ideas which underlie the form of government
necessary to give effect to this discovery —the division of powers
and the double citizenship—are the basic principles on which all
federations rest.
Hitherto a number of more or less divided and contiguous states
have accreted into federations, but there are signs that the reverse
process may take place—that the federal idea may be applied to
reconcile the wish of various portions of an homogeneous and
unified empire or kingdom to remain united, establishing and
maintaining in its different parts those different laws and customs
which different soils, climate, and popular characteristics demand.
Hitherto Federation has been a compromise between the desire
to Unite and the desire not to unite; it may also in the future recon-
cile the desire to remain united and the desire to separate.
It develops nationality, yet gives full scope for the greatest
possible development of local home rule. It is fitted for the
needs of modern societies, inasmuch as it renders possible cen-
1 Some of the sentences have been transposed.
2 C. V. Robinson.


tralization and consequent efficiency in those matters on which the
existence of a nation depends, and gives full scope in all matters
of social and domestic concern for the democratic idea of “ Go-
vernment by the people, for the people, in sight of the people.”
Federation is the diagonal of the forces of centralisation and
decentralisation. 1
1 The formula of the parallelogram of forces is illustrative of a true Federa-
tion and of those bastard forms which approximate to it.


But in order to possess and maintain these characteristics a
Federal Constitution must be complete in all its parts. It must he
so framed as to secure an equilibrium between the forces of centrali-
sation and decentralisation, between nationality and home rule,
and its Executive must conform to the federal idea as well as its
Legislature. There are three types of so-called federations in
existence, of which, however, one only realises the theoretic and
ideal.
Ist. The Canadian, which most nearly approximates to unity.
In Canada the national element overshadows and almost annihilates
the states element. In the so-called Canadian Federation the
people are considered as one people, so far as the legislative and
executive powers delegated to the Central Government are con-
cerned. There is an Upper and a Lower House, and the Low'er
House appoints and dismisses the Executive, who in turn actually
appoint the so-called Federal Senate, which is supposed to
represent and uphold the interests and rights of the states.
2nd. The American and Swiss Federations, in which an equili-
brium between the people as one people and the people grouped in
states is maintained, and in which the national and the provincial
elements, or centripetal and centrifugal forces, balance each other.
3rd. The German, which most nearly approximates to confede-
ration, and in which the states element almost annihilates the


national element, the Reichstag, or National House, being inferior
in power and limited in its functions as compared with the Bun-
desrath, or Council of the States.
Neither of the two great National Australian Conventions of
1891 or 1897 have framed the proposed instruments of government
on the lines of either of these three existing types; both instru-
ments are compromises between the American and the Canadian
systems, but in both the same radical defect occurs—the Executive
is appointed, dismissed, controlled by, and responsible to one of the
Houses of Legislature. What is called the Cabinet system is the
Executive, and however disguised this may be it means the omnipo-
tence of the House of Legislature, to which the Executive
responsible. Ought not we—ought not the smaller states, at all
events —to look this fairly in the face, and, before agreeing to any
form of Executive, consider what will be the result ? Ought we to
agree to any form of Executive which will result in the Federal
Senate becoming subsidiary to the House of Representatives ?
No doubt the guardian of states rights and interests—the Senate
—-will theoretically possess considerable powers: but time and
experience have shown that no constitution —written or unwritten—
is exactly what its authors intended it to be, and that even if in the
beginning of its existence it may approximate to the intention of
those who framed it, evolution and the forces which are behind
warp and alter its scope and effect. As Mr. Woodrow Wilson
says of the American Constitution :
There has been a constant growth of legislative and administrative functions,
and a steady accretion of precedent in the management of federal affairs, which
has broadened the sphere and altered the functions of the Government without
perceptibly affecting the vocabulary of the constitutional language—ours is
scarcely less than the British—a living and a fecund system.
If the Executive is solely responsible to the House of Repre-
sentatives, will not the “constant growth of legislation and admini-
strative functions and the steady accretion of precedent” in the
management of our federal affairs result in the subordination of the
Senate to the combined forces of the House of Representatives and
its committee, the Executive ?
The relationship of the Executive to the Legislature is the
crux of the whole question of states rights and mterests. If you
give to one House the absolute control of the Executive—if you
so arrange that that House shall appoint and dismiss the Execu-
tive—it does not matter what theoretical powers you give to the
other House, the House which controls the Executive will rapidly
assume to itself all power, and the other House will degenerate
into a ceremony. The power to alter Money Bills no doubt
may give a semblance of power to the Senate, but it will only be a
semblance. We call the British Constitution and the Constitution
of these Australian colonies bi-cameral, but the British and all
other constitutions in which nominated Upper Houses and the
Cabinet system exist are really uni-cameral, and those other colonial
constitutions in which the Upper Houses are elected are verging,
in that direction.


As preliminary to further investigation, a short epitome of the
constitution of the Executive in the four so-called existing federa-
tions, and of its relationship to the respective Legislatures, may not
be out of place.
CHAPTER III.
EXECUTIVE IN CANADIAN FEDERATION.
The form of Executive in Canada is based on the British fiction
that in England the Queen, and in British colonies the Queen’s
representative —the governor—is the Executive. Nominally the
governor of Canada at. his pleasure appoints and dismisses mem-
bers of the Executive Council, and acts on the advice of such
Council or of some one of its members. We all know this to be a
sham ; that the Governor-General has no real voice in either the
appointment or dismissal of his so-called advisers ; that they are
dictators whom the Canadian House of Commons practically
appoint and dismiss, and the Governor-General is only their dignified
mouthpiece.
The real Executive —the premier and his colleagues—practically
appointed by the Canadian House of Commons, appoints the mem-
bers of the (so-called) Federal Senate, appoints and removes
judges, lieutenant-governors of the provinces; commands the
militia ; has the power to veto any provincial law ; and (except in
rare cases) dissolves and prorogues the Legislature, and has the
exclusive power to originate Money Bills, and to pardon offenders.
How it can be argued that such a form of Executive is consistent
with a Federation it is difficult to conceive. The essence of re-
sponsible government is the omnipotence of one chamber ; the
essence of a Federation is the equality of the two chambers. How
is it possible to reconcile two irreconcilable ideas ? Such cen-
tralised power and blending of positions is incompatible with the
existence of Federation. 1
As Mr. C. V. Sobinson (one of a band of able writers who
contribute articles on federal questions to the Philadelphia
Philosophical Society), speaking of the Canadian Federal Con-
stitution, says :
The Canadian Legislature is nominally bi-cameral but actually uni-cameral,
like the British, and supreme within the Government. The cause is in part the
appointative life tenure of the senators, but mainly the Cabinet system. As
France has learned to her sorrow, that system invariably turns the Upper
House into a dignified appendage of the Lower.
1 Mr. Foster in his work on the “ Constitution of the United States,” page 299, observes :
—“ In these (Governments where the Cabinet system of Executive prevails) the Legislative
and Executive functions are both exercised by the same body, which has absolute power
over the judiciary.”
Mr. C R. Lowell, late United States Ambassador to Great Britain, has written“ If the
powers of the National Government, both Executive and Legislative, were united in one
body that body would most certainly abolish the authority of the states considered as
Governments with independent political rights.”
B


From the very institution of the Canadian Federation the
influence and power of the Senate ha< steadily declined, not from
any 7 lack of talent in its members, but because of the inherent
defect in its constitution. l I have shown elsewhere how the
people of Canada were partly coerced partly 7 juggled into the
acceptance of this bastard Federation.
CHAPTER IV.
EXECUTIVE IN AMERICAN FEDERATION.
The English writers on the American Constitution have with-
out sufficient investigation accepted the view that the Federal
Constitution was as far as possible a copy of the English
Constitution. Inter alia , it has often been stated that the Re-
sponsible Cabinet system of Executive was not in existence in 1787,
which is correct, and that if it had been it would probably have
been adopted by the Convention of 1787, which is incorrect. For
nearly 200 years before the Declaration of Independence (in 1777)
the Americans had gradually been developing forms of govern-
ment founded on the original charters from the British Crown
to those trading corporations which had founded and settled some
of the American colonies, and in other cases on similar charters
incorporating and regulating the government of those adventurers to
whom the British Crown had granted the ownership of the soil.
These charters, from their vagueness, afforded ample scope for that
adaptation to local needs and requirements and to those changes
which time and evolution demanded, 2 and above and beyond this,
during the ten years which elapsed between the Declaration of In-
dependence and the Philadelphian Federal Convention (1877 to
1887), the thirteen states of America had been compelled to radi-
cally modify their constitutions in consequence of the change from
dependencies of Great Britain into sovereign states.
So far as the American Constitution possesses elements of English origin, it
drew these elements not from the contemporary institutions of Great Britain,
bur from the institutions of the states and colonies in which in long process of
time English elements had already become adjusted to American needs and con-
ditions. 8
The fundamental idea which actuated the framers of the
American Constitution was to keep the Executive entirely apart
from and uncontrolled by the Legislature. They were also greatly
afraid of giving the President or his Ministers any opportunity of
corrupting the Legislatures.
1 “Manual of Federation,” 1891, p. 53, et seq.
- “ Assemblies were not instituted, but grew of themselves,” Bawdoin, ch. 11, 126. “In
the year 1619, a House of Burgesses broke out in Virginia.”
3 W. C. Moreley, “ Genesis of a Written Constitution,” 533.


The American Executive was an adoption of the principle of the
first Constitution of Massachusetts, of which the following is the
ruling clause :
In the government of the Commonwealth the legislative department shall
never exercise the executive and judicial powers, or either of them ; the
Executive shall never exercise the legislative and judicial powers, or either of
them ; the judicial shall never exercise the legislative and executive powers, or
■either of them, to the end that this may be government of laws but not of
men. 1
The power of Executive was approved of, not from any fancied
resemblance to the British model, but, on the contrary, in spite of
such fancied resemblance. The careful attempt in the Federalist
to show that no such resemblance existed shows the state of public
opinion—
In fact, the opponents of the American Constitution found their strongest
arguments in pointinr out analogies to the British Constitution in order to
secure its rejection ; the delegates were tilled with the idea of the separation of
powers, and Wilson, who moved “ that a national Executive to consist of a
single person be instituted,” expressly repudiated the British model.' 2
The Americans certainly succeeded, and succeeded only too
well. a
They builded better than they knew. They disassociated the Executive so
completely from the Legislature as to make each not only independent but weak
in its own proper sphere. The administration does not even work as a whole.
It is not a whole ; it is a group of persons each individually dependent on and
amenable to the President, but with no joint policy and no collective respon-
sibilitv ; its branches are unconnected —their efforts are not devoted to one aim,
do not produce one harmonious result.
The Legislature has to raise the revenue by taxation and appro-
priate the manner in which it shall be spent. As the members of
the Executive have no seats or votes in either branch of the Legis-
lature, and no responsibility to it, and as they may hold, and some-
times do, opinions totally at variance with the majority of Congress
•on the vital political questions of the day, a practice arose which
long ago became settled, and still continues, of managing the
finances of the country by means of Standing Committees of both
Houses, which meet and discuss in secret.
In the House of Representatives one committee (the Committee
of Ways and Means') raises the revenue. Two other committees
(the Committee on Appropriation and the Committee on Rivers
and Harbors) spend the money. Neither has any responsibility or
connection with each other; and the matter is still more compli-
cated by the Senate, which has the power of altering Money Bills
(which it frequently exercises), having also its Committees of Ways
and Means and of Appropriation. Mr. Justice Story says :
1 By our system in force (in America) the heads of departments are precluded
from preparing or conducting their own measures in the face of the nation in
the course of debate, and are compelled to submit them to other men, who are
either imperfectly aquainted with the measures or are indiferent to their
success or failure. Thus that open and public responsibility for measures which
1 Foster, “ Constitution of the United States,” p. 299.
2 Elliott, IV., 3)9, 11, 422, Federalist, No. 63. 3 Bryce. 4 Story, 96.


properly belongs to the Executive of all Governments, and especially to a
Republican Government, as its greatest security and strength, is completely done
away.
1 So long as the debit side of national account is managed by one set of men
and the credit side by another set, both working separately and in secret, with-
out public responsibility, and without intervention on the part of the official who
is nominally responsible ; so long as these sets, being largely composed of new
men every two years, give no attention to business except when Congress is in
session, and then spend in preparing plans the whole time which ought to be
spent in public discussion of plans already matured, so that an immense budget
is rushed through in a week or ten days, just so long the finances will go from
bad to worse, no matter by what name you call the party in power. No other
nation attempts such a thing, or could attempt it, without soon coming to grief.
Our salvation thus far consists in our enormous income, with practically no drain
for military expenditure.
It is not in financial matters alone that the evils of this too great
severance of the Executive from the Legislature is felt, but in all
legislation under this system.
There were in 1888 fifty-four standing committees in the House
of Representatives, to one or other of which each Bill introduced
is referred. No discussion takes place on the second reading.
The proceedings of the standing committees are secret. If the
committee does not like the Bill it is not reported ; if it does,
immediately it is reported (as a rule) the chairman moves a notice
which precludes amendment.
The evil effects which have resulted from this mode of pro-
cedure are as follows :— 2 It
1. Destroys the unity of the House as a legislative body.
2. Prevents the capacity of the best members from being
brought to bear on any one piece of legislation, however
important.
3. Cramps debate.
4. Lessens the cohesion and harmony of legislation.
5. Gives facilities for the exercise of underhand and even cor-
rupt influences.
6. Reduces responsibility.
7. Prevents press discussion, and lessens the interest of the
nation in the proceedings of Congress.
8. Deprives the country of the opportunity of being informed
and enlightened by debates in Congress.
9. Throws power into the hands of irresponsible chairmen of
committees.
One of the most injurious effects of the American system is the
want of publicity. This seems extraordinary in a country teeming
with newspapers, whose reporters are most energetic and unscru-
pulous in discovering items for the public, but as a rule members of
Congress themselves are ignorant of the provisions of all those Bills
which are not of an important party nature. 3
1 Bryce, 177. * Bryce, 155. et seq.
3 £x. gr.~— The Silver Bill in 1871 was in the hands of the regular committee for two or
three years, yet neither the public nor the members knew anything about its provisions,
and it was generally believed that the Bill had never been before the committee.


On the other hand, the American system of Executive has certain
advantages over the Cabinet system, which may be epitomised as
follows :
1. It enables the Legislature to deal with a far greater number
of measures and subjects.
2. It minimises the system of interrogation, and thus prevents
the revelation of matters which in many cases (such as
the relations to foreign countries) had better he kept
secret.
3. It enables the working of administrative departments to be
more minutely scrutinised.
4. It educates more members for the actual work of administra-
tion.
5. Above all, it does not lower public and private life, and
scandalise all parliamentary institutions by the degrading
spectacle of the continual struggle for office between the
ins and outs.
CHAPTER V.
EXECUTIVE IN SWISS FEDERATION.
In Switzerland the members of both Houses sitting and voting
together elect an Executive of seven, to hold office for three years,
called the Federal Council, not more than one member of which
can be chosen from the same Canton. The Federal Council cannot
dissolve either branch of the Legislature, neither can either or both
branches dismiss any member of the Council. Although the Execu-
tive so chosen must consist of members either of the National
Council or Council of the States, they lose hy election the right of
voting in the Chamber to which they belong. They, however,,
have the right of speaking in either Chamber. No similarity of
views on even the most important question is required of them ;
each is individually responsible only for his own views or action to
both Houses of the Legislature. The Legislature also chooses
from amongst them a chairman, who holds office for a year, and is
not re-eligible for next year, and who is called the President, 1 but
who really is nothing more than the Chairman of the Board. The
Council alone has the right of presenting Bills 2 to the Legislature.
Instructions are given to the Council by the Legislature by what
are called “ formulats ” or motions.
The Swiss Legislature or Federal Asssembly is a unit com-
posed of two sections. Acting as a unit it judges and pardons ; it
elects the Executive, the Secretary to the Federal Council, and the
1 Freeman on Presidential Government: Short Historical Essays, 296.
2 This necessitates a peculiar Swiss institution called the “ Initiative,” by which either
branch of the Legislature or a canton, or a certain number of citizens, can demand that the
Council shall introduce a Bill dealing with any given subject.


General of the Arm}'. By section 85 of the Constitution the
choice or approval of other appointments may by federal law be
submitted to the Federal Assembly.
As a Legislature it thus conforms exactly to the federal principle.
The Executive is essentially (what in theory it ought to be) the
servant of the Legislature, who represent the federal people in
their different capacities, and by whom its members are directly
appointed, and to whom they are responsible.
CHAPTER VI.
EXECUTIVE IN GERMAN FEDERATION.
In order to understand the relation between the Legislative and
the Executive in Germany, and the working of the German Federal
Constitution, it is necessary to grasp the conceptions on which the
Federation itself is founded. The units of which the Federation
are composed -were and (subject to the federal control) still con-
tinue (with trifling excejhions) states, in which Governments are
absolute monarchies —diluted, perhaps, to a small extent by modern
republican theories, but still in all essentials based on the idea that
the King is the State. Moulded by this fact, the House repre-
senting the states (the Bundesrath) is strong; the House embodying
the national republican idea (the Reichstag) is weak. The Bundes-
rath is the centre and core of the German Federation ; the Reich-
stag is an appendage. Although the Bundesrath does not correspond
to our ideas of a Federal Senate, it to a certain extent embodies the
idea of a Council of the States. Its members are appointed by the
constituent states in such manner as each state thinks fit. As the
form of government in each state is (with the trifling exception of
the free cities of Hamburg, &c.), if not an absolute monarchy, at
all events approximately so, the result is that the members of the
Bundesrath are appointed by the kings of the separate states (as a
rule) from amongst their own executive advisers. As an illustration
of this, the Reichstag, when addressing the Bundesrath, calls it
“ Verbiindete Regierungen,” or “allied Cabinets.” Asa further
illustration of the fact that the members of the Bundesrath repre-
sent the states more as ambassadors than as members of a Federal
Senate, the Constitution provides that the “emperor shall afford the
customary diplomatic protection to its members.” The members of
the Bundesrath do not vote as such, they vote as the plenipotentiaries
of the states, the number of votes allotted to each state varying
from seventeen, in the case of Prussia with its 30,000,000 inhabi-
tants, to one for the smaller states. Any one plenipotentiary may cast
the vote for the whole state, many of whom have populations not
■exceeding 100,000. The Constitution recognises that members of
the Bundesrath vote according to instructions given by their separate


Governments. It is provided that “ uninstructed votes are not to
count,” which means that no member of the Bundesrath can ask
for delay in consequence of not having received instructions. The
Bundesrath is rather an assembly of ambassadors from free and
independent states than a Federal Senate.
Like the American Senate, the Bundesrath has important
administrative and judicial functions ; it is in some cases a final
judicial Court of Appeal. All proposed laws, wherever initiated
must be sent for final approval to the Bundesrath, even when a
proposed law is initiated in the Bundesrath itself, and passed
unaltered by the Reichstag, it must be returned to the Bundesrath
for final approval by that body, and in such final approval it
becomes law without any assent being given by the Executive.
The Emperor must promulgate such a law.
The German Federation is really a new thing with an old name.
It includes some of the fundamental conceptions of a federation,
but they are so warped and distorted by the influence of the in-
herited ideas and prejudices of its framers and its people as to
have become widely differentiated from theoretic ideals. The
Chancellor is the chief executive officer. He is appointed and
removed by the Emperor, to w'hom and to the law alone he is re-
sponsible. An adverse vote in either House does not unseat him.
The remainder of the Executive consists of eight committees. Of
these the members of two (Land Force and Marine) are appointed
by the Emperor. One, on foreign affairs, is provided for by the
Constitution itself (it consists of the plenipotentiaries of Bavaria,
Saxony, and Wurtemburg, and tw-o other members of the Bundes-
rath appointed by that bodyt ; the remaining five committees on
Customs and Federal Taxes, Trade and Commerce, Railroads, Post
and Telegraphs, Justice, and Finance are appointed by the Bundes-
rath. These committees, in addition to their executive functions,
prepare Bills and submit them to the Bundesrath. There is no
collective responsibility. If, as happened within the last few
months, the Minister responsible for the marine defences demands
more funds than the authorities on finance are prepared to grant,
the Federal Parliament has to decide between them. In the case
in question it decided in favor of the Minister for Finance, and
the Minister for Marine Defences resigned.
The Executive Committees appointed by the Bundesrath are not
the colleagues of the Chancellor, neither are they, in the full sense
of the word, his subordinates, as they report directly to and receive
instructions directly from the Bundesrath. The great preponderance
of power of the Bundesrath arises from many sources, of which,
however, not the least is its control of the Executive.
The Constitution also provides that each member of the Bundes-
rath shall have the right to appear in the Reichstag, and be heard
there at any time he shall so request. There does not appear to be
those reciprocal rights which are contained in the Constitution of
Prussia, that either House may demand that a Minister shall attend,
give information, take charge of a Bill, or otherwise aid such
House in its deliberations.


CHAPTER VII.
FORM OF EXECUTIVE.
The questions under consideration may be restated in different
words :
Ist. What is the best form of Executive in a federation ?
2nd. W r hat is the best form which the people of the Aus-
tralian colonies will bear?
When Solon was asked if he had given the Athenians the best
possible form of government, he answered, “ I have given them
the best that they can bear,” and so it must be in Australia. The
people do not and cannot know what is the best form of govern-
ment ; they' only know what at the moment appears to them to be
most desirable. As M. Taine puts it: —
1 Tin peuple eonsultc peut .0 la riguer dire la form du government qui lui plait
mais non celie dont il a besoin : il ne le saura qu’ a l’usage et il lui faut du
temps pour veritier si la maison politique est commode: solide, capable de
resister aux intemperies, approprie a ses moeurs a ses occupations a ses singu-
larites a ses brusqueries.
We have to consider not only those theoretical conditions which
ought to fix and determine the relative positions of the Legislature
and the Executive, but also the practical question —what the
opinion of the uninstructed mass of the people will be, and how
the mechanism of government will work. It has already been ad-
mitted that any new' political institution should, as far as possible,
be grounded on the ingrained ideas of the people, and that that
Constitution v'ill be most beneficial and lasting where the political
institutions under which the people have lived, and which they
understand, are as far as possible adopted, with such changes and
readjustment as circumstances require.
While fully' admitting this, it must be evident that w r e are now
throwing historical development and organic growth to the winds,
and are adopting a v'ritten alien Constitution, and it is idle to talk
about historical development and organic growth.
The political machine which has to be erected to give political
expression to the wishes of the people of Australia is an imported
machine, which it is proposed to adapt to local prejudices by
fundamentally altering one of its most important parts; but before
this is agreed to it ought to be shown that the adaptation will not
ruin the machine, and make it either totally' unworkable or, if
workable, productive of results different to those which the people
of Australia desire.
After all, what is this Cabinet Government to which we so bow
down and w'orship, and on w-hose altar some people are so ready'to
sacrifice the fundamental principles of a federation? It is, in point
of fact, a very modern development, arising out of the fact that the
British House of Commons has gradually acquired almost all the
legislative power in the British Constitution, and that the executive
power has followed the legislative. It is a form of Executive that
has been aptly described “ as becoming more and more capricious,
i Taine, “Anciene Kegime.”


uncertain, and tyrannical, more and more incompatible with the
rights and safety of minorities and individuals.” It is an extra
legal body unknown in theory, at all events, to the British Constitu-
tion and its copies, which the representatives of the people have
created, and which bids fair to devour its creators.
No doubt politicians admire and uphold that sj'stem of Executive
which has had the distinguished result, so far as they are con-
cerned, of bringing them into leading positions; but the Cabinet
system is neither admired nor respected by the people ; they look
upon it as a struggle for place and pay between the inns and the
outs, in which regard for the welfare of the people and adhesion to
principle have not been the leading characteristics.
No one who has seen the working of this system in these
colonies can fail to admit that the power of the Executive has
continually increased. Mr. Todd, in his work on the Constitution
of Great Britain, points out how' w'hat is now distinguished as
“ the Government,” was formerly designated by different names,
the Ministry being the name preceding that by which it is now
generally knowm. Is not the very fact that we call the Executive
“ the Government ” when theoretically the Government ought to
to be the Governor and the two Houses of Parliament, an illustra-
tion of the gradual growth of the powers of a body unsanctioned
by the law, the existence of which in a federation as a Committee
of the National House of Legislature must be a standing menace to
the States House.
The desideratum in a federation is an Executive working in
unison with and dependent on both Houses of Parliament ; its
members present in both branches, responsible to the Houses for all
matters of administration, and taking the lead in the initiation of
proposed measures of public policy, but which is so related to both
Houses as to be exclusively responsible to neither. What we want
is some form of Executive wdiich will unite the excellencies—
because it has excellencies' —of the Cabinet system, which will avoid
its defects, and which will at the same time possess such qualities as
wall render it consistent with, if not an absolute equality, at all
events an approximate equality, in power between the two Federal
Houses. We want an Executive which will he responsible to
Parliament, and through Parliament to the people, but not exclu-
sively responsible to one House of Parliament.
If we want a federation to be lasting, we must make the Exe-
cutive consistent with the fundamental ideas of Federation. Some
delegates seem to want a government in which numbers, and num-
bers alone, are to prevail. They forget that the best tost of any re-
publican form of government is the security offered to minorities ;
that majorities will always look after themselves ; that Federation
is a compromise between the desire to unite and the desire not to
unite ; that the Senate should be the expression of that desire; and
that unless we have a real live Senate, no matter what its theo-
retical powers may be, it will soon cease to express the federal
idea if our Constitution is so arranged that the powers which will
warp and mould it in the future are of such a nature as to inevi


tably lead to the result that the Chamber, which is theoretically a
Federal Senate, will become practically a chamber similar in power
to a Legislative Council or to the House of Lords.
One American writer seems to think that the ideal Executive in
a federation is to be found in Germany. He says —
Thus, neither the Cabinet nor presidential system is perfect. But might not
a combination unite the advantages and avoid the disadvantages of both ? Cer-
tainly such is the German. The Executive is independent, hence presidential;
the Ministers, appointed and removed by the Emperor alone, nevertheless have
a seat and voice in the Legislature ; the departments are not blended, yet the
Executive can lead the Legislature. Instead of a merely negative power, as in
the United States, we have a positive system.
Ido not, however, agree with this. The political ideas of
the German people, the foundation of their federal system, and
the forms of their local governments are so essentially different
from ours as to make any adaptation of the German form of Exe-
cutive impossible. The people of Australia would never tolerate
Ministers really appointed and removed by the Governor-General,
or any other irresponsible head.
We must look for an adaptation of the Swiss form for our ideal
Federal Executive. For centuries the Swiss have been in the van
of free peoples. They are as democratic as we are. Notwith-
standing the fact that they are surrounded by powerful and war-
like neighbors, their government is more economical than our own.
They have had more experience than any other nation in the world
in various forms of union, and their Executive is a compromise
between the American and the British, containing many of the
excellencies and omitting many of the defects of both; consistent
and working unanimously with a true federation.
In the Constitutional Committee of the Convention of 1897 1
moved the following resolutions :
Until otherwise provided by Parliament—
(a) There shall be six Ministers, to be chosen at the commencement of each
Parliament, and to hold office for three years, unless the two Houses
of Parliament shall otherwise determine.
(b) The States Assembly and the House of .Representatives shall each
choose three Ministers.
(c) A Minister shall have a seat in, and the right of speaking in, either House,
but shall have no right of voting except in the House of which he
is a member.
(d) Ministers shall be individually responsible to both Houses, and either
House may, by resolution, demand that the two Houses shall sit
together as one House to consider the conduct or policy of a
Minister.
These resolutions were not carried ; but if we desire to prevent
a theoretical federation from becoming a practical amalgamation,
our Executive must rest on some such basis as this. No doubt
any such basis would destroy that collective responsibility of
Ministers to one House of the Legislature to which we have been
accustomed, and substitute the individual responsibility of each
Minister to Parliament. But, why not ? It is true that in England
the collective has grown out of and superseded the individual
responsibility, but the individual responsibility of the Ministers at
the time it existed was to the King, and not to Parliament; and I


can see no reason why in a federation the direct representatives of
the people should not possess that power which in these colonies they
have to so great an extent handed over to a committee of one House,
and why, in all matters of policy and administration, each Minister
should not manage his own department subject to the control of
the Legislature. It no doubt will be argued that the destruction
of the quasi-corporate character and responsibility of the Executive
will bring into existence some of the evils which have arisen under
the American system.
But the American form of Executive is not advocated. When
the Swiss after repeated trials of confederation (all resulting in
failure) “ looked to America,” and adopted a true federal form of
government, they copied the excellencies and rejected the defects of
their American model —the analysis of the admitted defects in the
American form of Executive proves this. Can we not emulate
Switzerland, and with the experience of the practical working of'
true Federation in America for over 110 years and in Switzerland
for nearly fifty years, formulate a Federal Executive which will
combine the excellencies and reject the defects of both models ?
It perhaps may be considered by some tiiac too much considera-
tion has been given to theoretic ideals and to logical deductions;
that the success of a form of government is not determined by its
approach to any abstract ideal, but by its adaptation to a specific
nation, time, and geographical area ; that the genius of the British
race for self-government is so gieat that capable and experienced
men of that race will work any political machine, however defective.
In fact, Mr. Gladstone’s description of the British Constitution 1
has been more than once quoted by those whose opinions are
entitled to great consideration, presumably, to show that if we can
successfully w'ork that Constitution we can work anything. And
on this consideration the conclusion has been arrived at that we may
safely start our Federation with an Executive based on principles
antagonistic to its fundamental conceptions with the sure and certain
hope that
There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Kough-hew them how we will.
This may be so, but I confess that I would not think much of a
general who needlessly and deliberately places his army in a
position in which nothing but the most desperate courage and
sternest discipline can save it from destruction, with a view of
securing the exhibition of those qualities.
1 “ More, it must be admitted, than any other, it leaves open doors which lead into blind
alleys, for it presumes more boldly than any other the good sense and the good faith of those
who work it. The undoubted competency of each reaches even to the paralysis or destruc-
tion of the rest. The House of Commons is entitled to refuse every shilling of the supplies.
That House and also the House of Lords is entitled to refuse its absent to every Bill presented
to it. The Crown is entitled to make a thousand peers to-day and as many to-morrow ; it
may dissolve all and every Parliament before it proceeds to business ; may pardon the most
atrocious crimes; may declare war against all the world; may conclude treaties involving
unlimited responsibilities, and even vast expenditure without the consent, nay, without the
knowledge of the Parliament, but in reversal oi policy already known and sanctioned by the
nation. But the assumption is that the depositaiies of puwer will all respect one another ;
will evince a c< ns< iousness that they are woi king in a common interest for a common end ;
and they will be possessed together with not less than an average intelligence, of not less-
than an average sense of equity and of the public interest of right.”
