

MANIFESTO
AND
CONSTITUTION
OF THE
IRISH MONETARY REFORM ASSOCIATION
1941
THREE PENCE
The Nationalist & Leinster Times, Carlow.


IRISH MONETARY REFORM ASSOCIATION.
MANIFESTO
TO THE IRISH PEOPLE AT HOME AND ABROAD, AND
TO ALL CHRISTIAN PEOPLE IN EVERY COUNTRY.
Almighty God created the world (the land, etc.) for man’s use
and benefit.
His Divine Son, the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity, said
to His Apostles: “ Go ye therefore teach all nations, behold I am
with you all days even to the end of the world.”
Dr. O’Dwyer, late Bishop of Limerick, stated in 1916, “ that
whilst grass grows and water runs, there will be men found in
Ireland to dare and die for her.” Padraig Pearse declared that
“ God spoke to the Irish people through Tone.”
His Holiness, the present Pope Pius XII., in his Xmas
allocution of 1939, stated “ that all nations, great and small, strong
and weak, have a right to life and independence—the will to live of
one nation must never be equivalent to sentence of death for
another.”
Therefore, it is clear that the Irishmen and Irishwomen of
every generation who have died and suffered for Irish nationhood
were the human instruments through whom. God spoke and still
speaks to the Irish race at home and abroad. In the same manner
as God spoke to Si.. Joan of Arc: “ to gird on the sword and drive
the English from the soil of France.”
Inspired with these define admonitions, the Irish Republic was
proclaimed in 19, 6, and r itified by the votes of the Irish people at
two successive general elections in 1918 and 1921. Despite this
historic fact and alsn that the whole Irish people are a separate
and distinct people, with their own language, customs and religion,
and set clear cut in the Atlantic; yet England has partitioned this
ancient Irish nation —a crime against all divine and human law.
POLITICAL FREEDOM (?)
Our Organisation is setting before itself the task of not only
implementing the Proclamation of 1916, but of implementing the
very elementary principles of Christianity, which transcend all
human proclamations. And in this endeavour we assert plainly that
we have no use for the political freedom that has been in operation
in every country on the earth for the last 100 years. This much-
bcomed political freedom —based upon and the product of the so-
called “ free institutions of democracy,” is but a sham and a fraud,
in so far as the producing masses of humanity are concerned.
It has meant nothing for 90 per cent, of the producing masses
bit slavery, unemployment, insecurity and despair. And we have
been told here in our own State that we have the fullest possible
political freedom for the past 20 years, and, of course, under
nitive rule. Yet that freedom has been accompanied by an exact
replica of the conditions prevailing previous to 1921: viz.,
emigration (almost 1 million in the period under survey), unem-
ployment, poverty and worse, the tyranny of debt hanging over
the heads of all. Primary Schools are being closed for want of


children, teachers walking about idle, and teachers’ Training
Colleges closing their doors—and the title deeds to the source
of all wealth—the land —God’s own creation, held in pawn by the
Banks, thus abolishing all private property in land. Hence “ the
flight from the land ” is the credo of every young man and woman
able to do so.
These are the bare, naked results of 20 years of political freedom
in the 26 Counties —run by Irishmen from a Parliament in Ireland
—not from Westminster.
MONETARY CONTROL.
It is now an acknowledged and well accepted fact, after
centuries in the wilderness, that so-called democratic Government
is but a huge myth. That the control of the material wealth in
the world, in Ireland also, lies in the hands of the Bankers
That the Bankers are the de jure and de facto Government of
this country and that the legislature, judiciary and executives are
but the agents or the medium through whom the Bankers enforce
their conditions of slavery, emigration and unemployment upon the
Irish people—and thus prepare the way for red revolution leading
to Communism and a World Republic.
MONEY CREATION.
It is now also an acknowledged and well accepted public fact
—even by the Bankers themselves: —
(1) That 99 per cent, of all money in existence is Bank created
money; therefore all money is debt money. Therefore Bank debts
can never be repaid.
(2) That all Bank money is merely ink and paper; that Banks
never lend real money, only ink and paper money, and which
never can become real money unless someone borrows from the
Banks; which can only occur provided this “ someone ” brings in
personal securities, or else lodges the title deeds of his farm or
house or industry or his insurance policy with the Bank. Thus the
Banks get complete control of the souls and bodies of the people,
their lands, their houses, their very all, and thus it shall remain
until the people assert their God-given rights.
THE REMEDY.
Money is a claim on goods and services—a medium of exchange,
and is now proven beyond yea or nay to be a costless commodity,
merely ink and paper.
Our Association maintains that money can be issued in sufficient
quantity by a Government elected by the people to stem the tide
of emigration and unemployment for all time, and release the
title deeds to lands, houses and industry from the Banks.
The present system is fundamentally in error, because there
can never be sufficient money in the pockets of the people to
purchase the goods produced. Hence, poverty in the midst of
plenty—surplus goods (consequently they must be burned or re-
stricted) and surplus populations (hence birth control, euthanasia,
etc.). We maintain that production is for consumption, and when
there is an endless supply of money always available to put men
working, so there must be always sufficient money in the pockets
of the people to purchase the goods thusproduced—in the nature of
HVIWI


National Dividends, Consumers’ Credits—or call them what you
like, but they must be readily available.
THE LAND.
“ God created the land for man’s use and benefit.” There-
fore it is through the land all our economic ills must be solved.
And it is through the land, emigration, unemployment, etc., can
alone be solved. It is from the land comes the food, clothing and
shelter which are indispensable to man. It is from the land comes
everything necessary to keep the wheels of industry moving. There-
fore our Association must not and will not follow the false un-
Christian teaching of orthodox finance which says: “ Withdraw
capital and labour from the land.” How truly this has been
adopted in this country for the past 100 years, both by foreigners
and natives acting as Governments —the resultant effects on the
people being exactly similar.
That artificial costless thing called money must not be a
barrier to production from the land, because production in abund-
ance froim the lands means production in abundance from industry.
And it means much more. It means that the production of food,
clothing and shelter comes from the land in an ever increasing flow
to industrial and town workers, and when accompanied by the
National Dividen—money price will not and must not be a barrier
against purchase.
Under the present system all money comes into existence either
directly through the land or because of the land —even though it
is all debt or loan money. The farmers are the largest borrowers
as a class. Hence all other classes in the community are dependent
on the land for their very sustenance, but are as equally dependent
for money on the farmer’s ability to procure debt money from the
Bankers. And it is because of the point-blank refusal of the
Bankers since 1921 to loan money to the farmers that the country
suffered the result of “the flight ofthewild geese ” —and the poverty
and debt which ensued and which we to this day enjoy (?) and
which we must eternally enjoy unless we get complete control of
the creation of credit.
Therefore as land is the source of all wealth, and of the
issuance of all new money, land must be utilized to its fullest
extent as God willed it, viz., “ for man’s use and benefit.” It is
through the land and through the land only can emigration,
unemployment, etc., be solved or cured. And that human mech-
anism called money price must not be allow T ed to side cross God’s
own creation.
MONEY.
Money is but an artificial mechanism —just as a plough, a seed
sower, or a self binder. They well and faithfully serve their purpose,
viz., to plough, sow and reap. Man is their master, and they serve
man well under the present system. Money is an artificial
mechanism just like the plough, the seed sower or the binder, but
unlike these utilitarian implements, it is the master of man because
mankind has no control over it as over the implements in
question—and the reason why, as Pope Pius XI. says, “it is con-
trolled by the few,’’ who have no responsibility either from the
people or to the people. No adult vote, no franchise of any kind,
no change of Government, no revolution,no world war so far can
lay hands on the money changers who presently control the
issuance and cancellation of money. These unchristian financers


who issued their paper and ink money in abundance during 1914-20,
deliberately called in all this debt money and refused to print and
loan any further. They sttod adamant and calmly looked on the
poverty and debt of the people. Yet on and on this poverty must
go, and the more the people produce, the poorer and more insecure
they become.
God created the material world for man’s use and benefit, and
He gave us a code of laws governing its use and its distribution,
and the use and distribution of its production, viz., the Ten
Commandments, the Sermon on the Mount, etc. Therefore, all human
rights come from God, our Creator, and the material world we live
in. And it is because of our rights thus derived that our Association
challenges the power of the “ Money Changers ” to continue to
destroy man, and deny him the material things that are in
abundance in this world created by God for the use of all mankind.
INTERNATIONALISM.
Internationalism in language, in trade, in money, in sport,
in culture, as we know it and have known it for generations must be
destroyed. It is all part and parcel of the present soul and body
destroying system—all leading to and linked up with imperialism to
worldism, viz., the destruction of all symbols of national separatism
—and which our Association stands for and must resolutely uphold.
Internationalism in trade means free and unfettered com-
petition between nations —the exports from one country creating
unemployment in the country of entrance, which in turn forces
down prices and wages and it then becomes an export country
itself. So this vicious but deliberately well conceived idea of the
money powers goes merrily on. Result—pulling down of prices and
wages in country after country, and eventually the whole world
becomes a hot-bed for revolution and Communism, brought about
through the “ wihtdrawal of capital and labour from the land,”—
sweated prices for agricultural produce and in every country surplus
produce either destroyed or restricted —and workers also, for want
of money, unable to purchase the products of land even at their
sweated prices.
BANK HOLIDAYS.
And even here in Christian Ireland, we have to refrain from
work on what is known as “ Bank Holidays.” Holidays set aside
to do honour to the “gods of gold,” who planned and brought
about and still bring about our moral and material destruction. All
our oGvernment Departments are religiously closed down on those
sanctified days; also our primary, secondary and university schools.
How we kiss the chains that bind us And how our intelligentsia
set the headline! True, the rural population heeds them not.
From the foregoing Manifesto it can clearly be seen that the
root cause of our spiritual and material demoralization is “ Money
in the hands of the few.” That their perpetual endeavour and
activity is fundamentally anti-Christian and anti-national. That
they are, through their world control of money and with their
world-flung secret organisations the real compelling force behind
imperialism and all things evil.
Therefore, we, of the 1.M.R.A., feel fully justified in asking the
support of the Irish people at home and abroad, as well as all
Christian and nationally minded people in every country to support
us in helping to destroy the “ root of all evil,” viz., money under


private control, and we further ask their support to help us to
destroy that power on the imperialist and materialist plane for the
destruction of Irish national aspirations and separateness.
In issuing this Manifesto and Constitution we know we are
issuing a document based as closely as possible on Divine Law—
and it because of this fact that we have such confidence in its
being accepted by the Irish people. From sad experience we know
that the little minds of men divorced from Divine teaching and
inspiration have the world in its present, sad plight.
Sinne,
MICHAEL DOORLEY, President.
LIAM BOLTON, Vice-President.
SEAMUS LENNON, Gen. Secretary.
OLIVER FLANAGAN, Laoighis.
W. H. MILNER, Offaly.
CON MOLONEY, Kildare.
MARTIN NOLAN, Kilkenny.
MICHAEL COOGAN, Wicklow.
CHARLES P. NOLAN, Carlow.
IRISH MONETARY REFORM ASSOCIATION.
CONSTITUTION
To the Irish People at Home and Abroad, and to all Christian People
in every Country.
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.
THINGS SPIRITUAL.
(1) Almighty God is the Source of all spiritual and material good.
(2) God created the World (Land, Etc.) for man’s use and benefit,
i.e., for all mankind.
(3) All human rights come from God.
(4) The Family' is the foundation unit of society and, as such, has
a natural (God-given) right to a living income.
(5) The Nation is the outgrowth of the Family.
(6) Ireland is one of the oldest and most historic of Nations, and
is one and indivisible.
(a) And during 700 years of enslavement by England, the Irish
people asserted by deeds and words their God-given right
to Freedom and Independence.
(b) And, finally, in 1916 Ireland’s Independence was proclaimed


and the Irish Republic was established, and was ratified by
the votes of the Irish people at two successive General
Elections.
(7) The allegiance of all Irishmen and Irishwomen, at home and
abroad, is due to Ireland.
(8) The Irish Language to be the language of the Nation, and that
the Music, Songs, Dances, Games and Customs of the Gael be
fostered and financed as the national necessity requires.
(9) Christianity is a dual idealism, viz.: Temporal (Material) as
well as Spiritual. So also is Nationality.
THINGS MATERIAL.
(la) Imperialism is the pegafion or denial of the separateness of
Nations, and is the mass violation of the Seventh Commandment
of God, and the first step towards Atheistic Communism or a
World Republic.
(2a) That “Political Freedom,” as is known in operation in the
world, is valueless to 90 per cent, of the world’s population.
It deliberately denies the multitudes’ access to the gifts of God
that are in abundance “ for man’s use and benefit,” and' does
so in silken verbiage under tbe various names of Democracy,
Nationality and even Christianity.
(3a) That money under private control is daily violently breaking
the Seventh Commandment by withholding God’s superabundant
gifts from man. It is a Super-Government, that over-rides all
Governments and thus renders them mere pawns in its hands.
(4a) “ Money in the hands of the few ”is the weapon used by these
few (International Financiers—the Bankers) to destroy and
impoverish the multitudes, create extreme individualism, class
hatred, civil wars, world wars, and world revolution, and,
finally, Communism, thus destroying Christianity and all
national boundaries in its onward march.
MAN’S DEFENCE.
(Ib) That all Secret Organisations within Ireland be suppressed.
(2b) The right and power of the creation of all money reside in the
, Irish people—the people must assert and claim their God-given
rights and transfer these rights to a Government elected by
them.
(3b) That Private Property in Land, Houses and Industry must be
recognised and established through the surrender of the title
deeds by the Banks to the rightful owners.
(4b) That the Earth (the Land) was created by God on the First Day
to produce all that was necessary for man when he would
arrive, and whom He created on the Sixth Day.
(sb) The Land must be utilised to produce in plenty for all mankind
and must take and get precedence above all else material things,
as being fundamental for man’s existence in this world.
(6b) That man’s whole material existence in the world depends
solely upon the products of the land, and it is through the land
only can the economic ills of men and nations be solved.
(7b) Production is for consumption—primary production comes from
the land; therefore, no artificial mechanism—Bankers or


Governmental ink or paper money price—must be allowed to
restrict either production or consumption.
(8b) That it is immaterial- whether, a barrel of wheat costs £2 or
£2OO, or a bag of flour a similar cost —money costs nothing to
produce, hence it can and must be issued to produce goods
and services up to and equal to the requirements of consumption.
(9b) Emigration, unemployment and poverty can and must cease
forever by the issuance of money to put all men able to work
working, and if our population reached 100 million, there must
not be one man compelled to leave the country in search of bread
or work unless God wills it through famine or plague.
10b) The State (Systems) must be made for man, not man for the
State or Systems.
Tn »put,ting this,Manifesto ypd Constitution befnre,.tjie people, we
are putting before them a combination of the Spiritual and Material.
We deny their divorce as the present system demands and enforces
with such vigour through Christian and Pagan Governments alike.
We maintain they are vitally associated and must become in the
every-day lives of the people vitally co-operated.
We accept and put down Almighty God fundamentally as the
Source of all good, and it is because we do so that we offer with
such confidence this Manifesto and Constitution to the Irish people.
We ask the support of all Irishmen and Irishwomen for this
our Constitution.
Ireland holds a unique position in the world. She has sent her
Christian Missionaries for the past 1500 years to almost every
country on the face of the earth, and she has maintained for 700
years the fight for National separateness. This dual tradition running
red hot through the blood of Irishmen and Irishwomen to-day entitles
her to again become the Saviour Nation of the world.
The adoption and support of this Constitution enables her to
recapture her traditional past.
LIAM BOLTON, Vice-President.
SEUMAS LENNON, Secretary.
CHARLES P. NOLAN, Carlow.
CON MOLONEY, Kildare.
MTCEAL COOGAN, Wicklow,-'
29-6-'4l.
MICEAL DOORLEY, President,
OLIVER, J. FLANAGAN, Co. Laoighis.
* \V“ H. MILNER, Offaly. ’ *
W . n. M JliiNI I jtv, vjiimy .
MARTIN NOLAN, Kilkenny.
