

A CORRESPONDENCE
RELATING TO THE
DISCOVERY OF GOLD
IN
AUSTRALIA.
LONDON:
PELHAM RICHARDSON, 23, CORNHILL;
AND SOLD BY
THOMAS HARRISON, LATE J. OLLIVIER, 59, PALL MALL;
AND J. CROSS & SON, 18, HOLBORN.
1853.


A CORRESPONDENCE,
ETC. ETC.
No. 1.
Letter from Mr. Earl to the Right Hon.
Lord Colchester.
Singapore, April 10 th, 1852.
My Lord,
I have recently met with a paragraph in a work
written by a member of the Royal Geographical Society, and
dedicated to the President of the Society for the time being,
which renders it necessary that I should call to your Lordship’s
recollection an essay of mine on the Physical Geography of the
Indian Archipelago and adjacent countries, which was read before
the Society in 1845, when your Lordship occupied the Presiden-
tial Chair, and was published in the Transactions of the Society
for the same year. This paper, which gave the general results of
a series of enquiries carried on since 1830 in Australia, South-
eastern Asia, and among the intermediate islands of the Archi-
pelago, went to prove that the mountain ranges of Australia were
a continuation of the southern Asiatic ranges ; and summed up as
follows:
“ When it is taken into consideration that the primary moun-
“ tain ranges both in south-eastern Asia and in Australia pursue
“ a precisely similar direction, and that the westernmost Asiatic
“ range, if continued, would strike about the N. W. Cape where
“ the western Australian range commences, while banks extend-
“ ing from both these continents actually approach to within 450


“ miles of each other, the question naturally arises as to whether
“ these continents were ever united. This inquiry, however,
“ would lead to details of too extensive a nature to be admissible
“ in a paper of this description, and which would belong rather
“ to geology than geography, but it is well deserving of being
“ followed up, since it possesses an interest beyond that which
“ attaches to geographical matters generally ; for if it is found
“ that the mountain ranges of Australia are a continuation of
“ those of eastern Asia, we may expect that they will also afford
“ the mineral wealth for which the latter are so celebrated. Our
“ colonies in Australia are now in a condition which would render
“ the discovery of valuable minerals of the very highest import-
“ ance. The amount of agricultural produce raised in these
“ colonies is considerably above that required for the consumption
“ of the inhabitants, who are now anxiously looking about the
“ world for a market for their surplus produce, and such a market
“ would be afforded by a population employed in mining opera-
“ tions. We may reasonably expect that mineral wealth is not
“ confined to the district of South Australia. The great range
“ extending the entire length of , the N. E. coast is of a very
“ promising description, as is also the range which abuts on the
“ N. coast near the new settlement at Port Essington, and
“ which, if it preserves the same direction which is observed in
“ the other Australian ranges, may be connected with that of
“ South Australia. The Liverpool, Adelaide, and Alligator rivers,
“ the largest yet discovered in Australia, appear to have their
“ sources in this range.”— (Journal of the Royal Geographical
Society, Vol. XV. p. 364.)
Your Lordship will remember, that when the paper was read at
the general meeting of the Society, the correctness of the conclu-
sions I had arrived at was disputed by Mr. (now Sir R. I.)
Murchison, (to whom, as a member of the Council, my paper had
been previously submitted,) on the ground that had a connection
ever existed between Asia and Australia, the fossil remains of
mammals in the latter continent would have been found to corre-
spond with those of the old world. The Baron Von Buch, an
eminent Prussian geologist who attended the meeting, coincided
in this opinion, and the combined judgment of these high authori-
ties was held conclusive against my theory. The result was
reported in the London Athenseum, to which Journal I refer your


Lordship should you have occasion to refresh your memory.* I
must confess that I felt hurt at the time, that the usual practice of
Scientific Societies (which requires that all opposition to papers
read at the general meetings be deferred to the next general
meeting, and then produced on paper) should have been departed
from on this particular occasion, and the feeling was somewhat
aggravated when I found the following note by Mr. Morris, the
eminent comparative geologist, in Count Strzelecki’s “ Physical
Description of New South Wales,” a work which was published
in the course of the same year, and which goes to prove that the
fossil flora of Australia present different results from those arrived
at by Professor Owen in his theory of fossil fauna, on which the
* Geographical Society. —June 9.—Lord Colchester, President, in
the chair. • * • * The second paper read was a communication, by
Mr. Windsor Earl, ‘ On the Physical Structure and Disposition of the
Islands of the Eastern Archipelago/ These islands, says Mr. Earl,
differ in structure and elevation ; some have gently sloping shores with
soundings far out at sea, others rise abruptly from unfathomable depths,
contain lofty mountains, and, in some cases, active volcanoes, while a
third class, comprising some of the large islands, as Sumatra and Borneo,
are of a mixed character. From the south-eastern extremity of Asia
extends an immense bank of soundings, reaching to the eastern extremity
of Java, and near to the western coast of Celebes. A similar bank
extends along the whole of the northern coast of Australia and the
south coast of New Guinea. These banks have an average depth of
from 30 to 40 fathoms. The distance between the Australian and
Asiatic banks is about 450 miles, and presents an unfathomable channel.
The nature of the land in the Malayan Peninsula, the eastern side of
Sumatra, the western side of Borneo, and the northern side of Java, is
identical with that of Australia and the southern portion of New Guinea.
The direction of the mountain ranges of the Malayan Peninsula and
Sumatra is also identical with the ranges of Australia. From these facts
Mr. Earl argues the former connexion of Australia with Asia. A con-
nexion disrupted by volcanic action, as evinced by the fact that a great
volcanic belt now intervenes between the two. This belt, beginning at
the north-western extremity of Sumatra, runs along the western side of
that island, then along the southern side of Java, thence forms the group
of islands running west and east as far as Timor, after which it is con-
tinued through the northern portion of New Guinea, the Louisiade to
New Caledonia, Norfolk Island, and New Zealand ; being in form like
the letter S. This volcanic belt is joined at Flores and Timor by another
coming from Kamstchatka through the Philippines, the north of Borneo,
Gillolo, Celebes, Ceram, &c. The existence of the Teak-tree in Java as
well as on the Asiatic continent, and the discovery of the kangaroo in
New Guinea, are adduced by Mr. Earl in further proof of the former
connexion of these now dissevered lands : and the similarity in the
direction and character of the Asiatic and Australian mountain ranges
renders it probable that the latter may be found as rich in mineral wealth
as the former are known to be. The paper being concluded, Mr. Mur-
chison, the late President, took a decidedly opposite view of the matter,
and maintained that nothing short of the discovery of similar ancient
fossils in Australia and in Asia could be admitted as proof of the former
connexion of the two countries.— Atheneeum, June 14, 1845.


opposition to ray conclusions had been based.* “In instituting a
“ comparison between the species collected from the Australian
“ deposits, and those described from the Burdwan coal-field by
“ Professor Royle, we observe both the remarkable analogy of form
“ of some species, and the actual identity of others; from which
“ we may probably be led to infer that the deposition of the strata
“ containing them was not only contemporaneous, but that the
“ conditions of the flora of some portions of the Indian and
“ Australian continents, at that epoch, were not very dissimilar.”
(Physical Description of New South Wales, p. 253.)
But your Lordship may imagine my surprise when I read the
following paragraph in Mr. James Wyld’s recently published
“ Notes on the Distribution of Gold throughout the World,” the
production of a member of the Royal Geographical Society, and
dedicated to Sir R. I. Murchison as President.
“ The likeness of the New Holland formations to those of the
“ Ural has long been remarked; and Sir Roderick Murchison
“ was so strongly impressed with the fact that he felt it his duty
“ to give prominence to it, in the address which he delivered to
“ the Royal Geographical Society, as President, in May 1845.
“ He alluded particularly to the discovery of gold near Bathurst,
“ in the western flank of what he styled the great Australian
“ Cordillera; and he strongly urged the propriety of a strict
“ geological investigation, with the view of establishing gold
“ workings. Colonel Helmerson, of St. Petersburg, a member
“ of the Russian Academy of Sciences, well acquainted with the
“ Ural gold works, expressed the same opinion. These views
* The terms used by Mr. Murchison were identical, or nearly so, with
the following extract from the Anniversary Address he had delivered a
few days before. The allusion is to Professor Owen’s Heport on Extinct
Mammals of Australia, which had been read at the preceding meeting of
the British Association ;—But when we cast our eyes to Australia on
“ the one hand, or to South America on the other, then is the fauna as
“ entirely dissimilar in each, as we should expect to find it in countries
“ partitioned off by such wide seas and great natural barriers. From
“ observing the fact, that the fossil mammalian remains of these two conti-
“ nents are as unlike those of Europe, Asia, and Africa, as their present
“ quadrupeds, Professor Owen rightly concludes ‘ that the same forms
“ were restricted to the same provinces at a former geological period as
“ they are at the present day;’ and thus he sustains the views of modern
“ geologists, that in those periods immediately anterior to our own, the
“ great geographical features of the earth must have been the same as
“ those which now prevail.” —Address to the Anniversary Meeting of the
Royal Geographical Society, 26 th May, 1815, by Roderick Impey Murchison,
V.P.R.S. Sf G.S. Bfc, Sfc. President, p. 75.


“ obtained great publicity in Australia ; but it is to be regretted
“ the English Government is not in the habit of taking counsel
“ from men of science, so that the opportunity was lost of making
“ a discovery which would have thrown the same lustre on the
“ science of geology as that of the planet Neptune does on astro-
“ nomy. Sir Roderick Murchison is the sufferer from the
“ supineness of the Government in the one case, as Mr. Adams
“in the other; though to both belongs the distinction of
“ having, so far as in them lay, successfully applied the lights of
“ theoretical science to practical results.”
Criticism is an invidious task which I would have avoided had
I alone been concerned, but I owe a duty to others as well as to
myself that renders it necessary I should examine this paragraph
rather closely. I have looked through the Presidential Address
delivered by Sir R. I. Murchison at the Anniversary Meeting of
the Royal Geographical Society on the 26th of May, 1845, and
I cannot discover the slightest allusion to a resemblance between
the New Holland and Ural formations. Indeed I have always
been under the impression that this striking geographical fact had
been first ascertained by Count Strzelecki during his residence in
New South Wales. In his work on the Physical Geography of
South-Eastern Australia (p. 85) the Count quotes at length Hum-
boldt’s remarks on the geological phenomena of the Ural Chain
as being so perfectly descriptive of parts of the Great Australian
Range west of Sydney as to render further details unnecessary;
and I cannot suppose that he would have failed to acknowledge the
sources from which he derived his information had the idea origi-
nated in another. In fact data have been before the public for
years past, sufficient to shew that the Ural chain is an extension
of the Malayan and Cambodian ranges to the north-west, precisely
as those of Australia are an extension to the south-east.
The allusion to the discovery of gold near Bathurst leads me to
suppose that Mr. Wyld has confused the address to the Royal
Geographical Society with a paper by Sir R. I. Murchison which
was read before the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall in
1846, in which that fact is mentioned. The specimens reached
England about June or July of that year, and on my arrival at
Sydney in the following September I found that Mr. Thomas
Hood, who had been my kind guide and companion across the
Blue Mountain range to Wellington Valley in 1843, had opened


a copper mine on his estate at Molong, so that the question as to
the metalliferous nature of the great range of eastern Australia
had been fairly taken out of the hands of theorists.
As to the English Government not being “ in the habit of
taking counsel from men of science,” I can only say that whatever
may be the case now, it was formerly considered that any measure
for promoting geographical research which received the sanction
of the Royal Geographical Society was certain to be carried out,
and a reference to the Journals of the Society during the first
fourteen years of its existence will shew how large a portion of
the contributions were communicated by the different departments
of Government. It was at the recommendation of influential
members of the Society in 1838 that the Admiralty, by allowing
me to avail myself of the vessels of war stationed at Port Essing-
ton, afforded me facilities for prosecuting enquiries in this part of
the world that rarely fall to the lot of travellers. And the very
paper to which I have drawn your Lordship’s attention was sub-
mitted to the Society at the desire of my employers of the Colonial
Department. It is useless to speculate as to what would have
been the result had my conclusions been more tenderly dealt with,
for I very much doubt whether a mineralogical chemist with his
tests and amalgams would have been as successful in discovering
deposits of the precious metals as the practical miner with his
tin dish. And it is my humble opinion that had the discovery
been delayed for a few years it would have been better both for
the colonies and the mother country.
But your Lordship will perceive how necessary it is that I
should stir in this matter. It is clear that the Government is
blameless, therefore Mr. Wyld’s censure rests on those whose duty
it was to point out phenomena that ought not to have been passed
unnoticed by a practised observer. And as the records of the
Society contain ample proof that this duty was not neglected, it
seems to me that the proper step for me to take is to bring the
subject under the notice of the Council, who, I feel assured, will
adopt a course that will render it unnecessary for me to move fur-
ther in the matter. When Mr. Wyld’s paragraph was first pointed
out to me, I thought it possible that some change might have
taken place in the constitution of the Society since I left England ;
but on looking over some late numbers of the Journal, I am glad
to find many familiar names in the list of members, and that your


Lordship is a member of the Council. I therefore trust that your
Lordship will kindly undertake to bring the subject forward, and
with every sentiment of respect and esteem,
I have the honor to remain,
Your Lordship’s most obedient Servant,
GEO. WINDSOR EARL.
To the Right Hon.
Lord Colchester.
No. 2.
Letter from the Right Hon.LordColchester to Mr. Earl.
( Copy.)
Kidbrooke, August 2, 1852.
Sir,
I beg leave to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter dated from Singapore April 24th, and enclosing a copy of'a
printed letter* which you had addressed to me as a member of the
Council of the Royal Geographical Society, on the subject of a
paragraph in Mr. Wyld’s “ Notes on the Distribution of Gold
throughout the World.”
Circumstances having prevented me from attending the meet-
ings of the Geographical Society this year, and from having
leisure to sift the facts and dates given in Mr. Wyld’s paragraph,
I requested a friend, also in the Council, to look into the matter
before I communicated with Sir R. Murchison on the subject.
The result of this inquiry was to show that Mr. Wyld was in
error as to the date of the address in which Sir Roderick alluded
to the resemblance between the Australian and Ural chains. This
passage occurred, not in the Presidential Address of 1845, but in
that of 1844, and was consequently prior to the date of your
paper read before the Society in 1845. Upon subsequently writing
to Sir R. Murchison, he informed me that in his Presidential
Address for the present year (which I had not heard delivered and
which was not then published) he had already stated the case at
length, and that he would write to you, transmitting a copy of
this discourse, and pointing out that Mr. Wyld’s paragraph had
been inserted without his (Sir R, M.’s) knowledge, and had since
been at his request expunged from all the later copies. I trust
you will be satisfied from this explanation that no slight could
• The preceding letter was printed, and a copy forwarded to each
member of the Council.—G. W. E.


have been intended upon your exertions for the extension of
geographical knowledge of those regions, and that the case now
stands on its proper footing, without the necessity of further
notice by the Council.
The Society itself, I am happy to say, is much improved in its
financial prospects since you quitted England, and continues
actively and successfully employed in the promotion and extension
of geographical knowledge.
I am, &c.,
(Signed) COLCHESTER.
G. Windsor Earl, Esq.
No. 3.
Letter from Mr. Earl to the Right Hon.
Lord Colchester.
Hampstead, May Ith, 1853.
My Lord,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of a copy of
your Lordship’s reply to my letter of April 1852. The original
must have miscarried altogether, as another overland mail has
arrived without any intelligence of it.
I have looked through the Presidential Addresses of 1844 and
1852, and have met with a confusion of dates that I have in vain
attempted to unravel. That of 1844 certainly notices the resem-
blance between the Australian and Ural chains; but as it also
states that the former “ so far differs from the Ural and many
“ other meridian chains in having yet offered no trace of auri-
“ ferous veins,” it can scarcely have been the Address to which
Mr. Wyld referred in his “ Notes on the Distribution of Gold
throughout the World,” as Sir R. Murchison is there represented
to have “ alluded particularly to the discovery of gold near
“ Bathurst, &c.”
In Sir R. Murchison’s Presidential Address of last year, as
delivered at the Anniversary Meeting, I perceive no attempt to
correct dates in the early editions of Mr. Wyld’s “ Notes,” &c.,
although that work is distinctly recommended as an authority on
matters connected with gold regions. I therefore presume that
the following note, which appears at the foot of the page (30), and
which may have been inserted subsequent to the receipt of my
letter, contains the explanation to which your Lordship has
referred me.


“ I beg to inform any reader who may possess a copy of the
“ first issue of Mr. Wyld’s pamphlet explanatory of his gold maps,
“ that immediately I perused it I requested the author to suppress
“ his undue praise of my services, and to disconnect that which
“ had been read to the Geographical Society from what had been
“ subsequently addressed by me to the Geological Society of
“ Cornwall, The alterations were made, but unluckily the
“ year 1845 has been printed instead of 1844 as the year of the
“ original comparison, which Mr. Wyld will, of course, correct.”- —■
Anniversary Address of 1852, p. 30.
Here is another confusion of dates, a feature one does not
expect to meet with either in the writings or corrections of
geographers, with whom minute accuracy of compilation is a
highly necessary accomplishment. At the same time, the entire
incorrectness of Mr. Wyld’s paragraph with regard to the part
taken by Sir R. Murchison in promoting mineralogical researches
in Australia, is altogether unnoticed.
As the Society evidently feels indisposed to interfere in the
matter, and disinterested parties are alone competent to deal with
the case as it now stands, I feel assured that your Lordship will
see no objection to the publication of this correspondence. Under
any circumstances it will prove interesting, and perhaps instructive
to future writers on gold discoveries in Australia.
Apologising for the trouble I have most unwillingly occasioned,
I have the honor to remain,
Your Lordship’s most obedient servant,
GEO. WINDSOR EARL.
To the Right Hon.
Lord Colchester.
No. 4.
Letter from the Right Hon. Lord Colchester to
Mr. Earl.
32, Upper Brook-street,
May nth, 1853.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge your letter of
the 7th, and I regret to find that the explanation offered in my


letter of last August of the facts relating to the paragraph in
Mr. Wyld’s pamphlet, and in the Presidential Address of Sir
R. Murchison, have not proved satisfactory to you. As it is
impossible for the Geographical Society to enter upon discussions
with each of its members who, may publish some erroneous state-
ment, I do not think it is likely that they will notice the reference
in Mr. Wyld’s pamphlet to the discovery of gold in Australia,
and it does not appear to me that you are personally called on to
take any steps to vindicate your character as a geographer; but
if it should seem otherwise to yourself, and you continue to desire
to publish the correspondence which has arisen out of it, I do not
wish to place any obstacle in the way of your publishing my reply
of August 2nd, 1862, to your letter of the 24th of the preceding
April.
I am,
Your obedient servant,
COLCHESTER.
G. Windsor Earl, Esq.
No. 5,
Letter from Mr. Earl to the Right Hon.
Lord Colchester.
Hampstead, May 14 th, 1853.
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s letter of the 11th inst., for
which I beg to express my thanks, leads me to infer that your
Lordship is unacquainted with the scope and objects of the
researches I had been carrying out in South-Eastern Asia and
Australia for some years previous to the date of the paper which
was read before the meeting of the Geographical Society in
June 1845. I will, therefore, with your Lordship’s permission,
enter into a few details which might safely have been left to
future writers on Physical Geography, as the progress of these
researches is already recorded in the Transactions of Scientific
Societies of this country, and in the Journal of the Indian
Archipelago,—a periodical which has also an extensive European
circulation. I cannot now distinctly remember when the idea of
a former connection between Asia and Australia first struck me,
but it must have been some time in 1830 or 1831, when a resident


in Western Australia, as one of the objects of my first visit to the
Indian Archipelago in 1832-33, and 34 was to ascertain whether
the uniformity in the direction of the coast ranges I had observed
in Western Australia was continued in the Indian Archipelago;
which I was led to believe would be the case from the form given
to Sumatra and the Malayan and Indo-Chinese Peninsulas in the
published maps. Through the kind assistance of the late
Sir Jose d’Almeida and other residents of Singapore, I was
enabled to trace the primary mountain ranges of South-Eastern
Asia into the island of Borneo; but finding it impossible, with ray
small means, to organize a party of sufficient force to prosecute
researches farther to the eastward, I returned to England in 1835
with the view of obtaining assistance. In this I was not
disappointed, for although these eastern countries were then less
generally interesting than they are at present, I met with the
greatest encouragement from influential members of the Asiatic
and Geographical Societies, which led to my being appointed to
the North Australian Expedition of 1838. The paper in which I
drew attention to the importance of the mountain ranges as
illustrating the Physical Geography of those countries was read
before the Asiatic Society on the 4th of February 1837, and is
published in the Journal of the Society for that year.* My views
* Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, No. VII., pp. 174 et seq., in
which will be found the following passage. “ With the exception of the
“ mountains in Java, and in the islands to the eastward of it, which are
of volcanic origin, all the ranges yet discovered in the western parts of
‘‘ the Indian Archipelago, and in the intertropical parts of Eastern Asia,
“ extend from north-west to south-east; and as the hills on the west and
“ north-west coasts, and perhaps also those in the interior of the island
“ (Borneo), are of the same formation (primitive granite), it appears
improbable that they should take another direction.
“ One of the Eastern Asiatic ranges, after extending along the S.W.
“ coast of Sumatra, terminates at its S.E. point. Another runs along
“ the Malay Peninsula, is lost for a time, but appears again in the high
“ peak of Lingin, and terminates in Banca and Billiton; and a branch
“ from this separates at Pulo Timoan, on the east coast of the Peninsula,
“ and edds at Carimata, in the strait between Billiton and Borneo. Two
“ ranges traverse Cambodia and Cochin-China in the same direction, and
“ these will be found to extend to, and, perhaps, to traverse Borneo.
“ Between the Cambodian range and the mountains at Serawak, on the
‘‘ north-west extremitv of Borneo, the Natunas islands and Pulo Condor
“ form the connecting link; and as the Serawak hills run to the south-
“ east, the range is probably continued, either by a connected line or by
“ isolated mounts, until it terminates in the Gunung Ratos, near
“ Cape Selatan.
*' All these ranges abound in metals, which is not the case in Java,
‘‘ where the mountains take another direction.”


with regard to the parallelism of the Asiatic ranges were not
entirely new, as the fact had already been noticed by Mr. Craufurd
in his History of the Indian Archipelago, although I was not
aware of it at the time. But the extension of these ranges to
Borneo opened up a new and interesting course of enquiry; and I
may venture to assert that the facts brought forward were viewed
in this light by an influential member of the Geographical Society,
(the then Secretary,) who was present at the reading of the paper.
Certainly I attribute my appointment to the North Australian
Expedition, and the facilities that were afforded me for prosecuting
further researches, to the kind interference of that gentleman.
In 1838 a voyage along the entire east and north-east coasts of
Australia in H.M.S. Alligator was sufficient to show that the
mountain range was continued throughout their length ; and on
reaching Port Essington we found the northern termination of
another range, which I then thought would prove to he a
continuation of the South Australian ranges; but the subsequent
researches of my late friend Dr. Leichhardt shew that it is more
probably a branch of the eastern coast range. During the four
following years, repeated voyages in H.M. ships stationed on the
north coast of Australia enabled me to trace the primary ranges
through Timor and some of the adjacent islands to Celebes and
Borneo, thus completing the links of the chain between Asia and
Australia. In 1843 a severe attack of rheumatic fever, caught
while exploring the Lumpo Batang Mountain of Celebes, obliged
me to make a temporary sojourn in the southern colonies; and
almost immediately after my arrival at Sydney, I was informed by
a friend who had sheep stations over the mountains, that gold, in
small quantities, had been picked up for some years past by a
shepherd of the Wellington district. I was at first inclined to
disbelieve the report, as I had as yet met with no eruptive rocks
in New South Wales, but a journey across the mountain range to
Bathurst and Wellington, which I undertook as soon as J was well
enough to mount on horseback, convinced me that this necessary
feature was not wanting. T also became acquainted with another
fact, namely, that any stir made in the matter was calculated to
injure, indeed to ruin, the prospects of the sheep-farmers, unless
it had been previously ascertained by a practical mineralogist that
the metal existed in sufficient quantities to counterbalance the evils
that must ensue from shepherds deserting their flocks to search for


gold. Your Lordship will therefore perceive how necessary it was
to proceed with caution, and I still think that the course adopted,
which, had my suggestions been favourably received, would have
led to enquiry without producing unnecessary excitement, was the
best that could have been pursued under the circumstances.
I have now followed the subject down to the time in which it
came before your Lordship as President of the Geographical
Society, and very little more remains to be said. Nearly every
English periodical which reached me in Singapore during 1851
contained some allusion to Sir R. Murchison having anticipated
the gold discoveries in Australia ; but I never felt in the slightest
degree inclined to take any serious notice of a claim that would
be disposed of by the first experienced physical geographer who
came to handle the subject. Among the geological specimens
brought home by Count Strzelecki, and on which Sir R. Murchison
founded his “ anticipations,” were genuine auriferous “ constants,”
identical in character with those which led Alexander Von
Humboldt, twenty years before, to detect a resemblance between
the geological constitution of the Ural and that of the Andes of
New Granada, and which have long been held by practical
mineralogists as certain indications of gold deposits existing, or
having once existed, in their immediate vicinity, But Mr. Wyld’s
paragraph, emanating apparently direct from the Geographical
Society, (and such is still the general impression out of England,)
was too serious to be allowed to pass uncontradicted; and having
moved in the matter, I do not feel disposed to rest until the true
statement of the case has had, at least, an equally extensive
circulation.
I first became aware of the fact that Sir R. Murchison was
himself a party to the claim, subsequent to the dispatch of my
letter to your Lordship of the 10th of April, 1852. The intelligence
reached me through the Proceedings of the Geological Society
at the meeting of February 4th of that year, in which Sir R.
Murchison defends the originality of his “ Anticipations, &c.”
against a rival claim set up by the Rev. W. B. Clarke, also a
Fellow of the Geological Society. The paper of Sir. R. Murchison
which was read on that occasion also notices the fact of fossils of
known “silurian ” species having been discovered in the dividing
range of New South Wales, and which is described in the paper
as completing the resemblance between the “ Australian Cordillera”


and the Ural mountains of Asia, “the two chains being thus
“ shewn to be zoologically, as well as lithologically, similar.”
( Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society for May, 1852,
p. 135.) A little further enquiry shewed me that Sir R. Murchison,
as editor of Count Strzelecki’s work on the Physical Geography
of New South Wales, must have known the results of Mr. Morris’s
comparison of the fossil Flora of Australia some months before
he successfully opposed the views developed in my paper of 1845,
on the ground “ that nothing short of the discovery of similar
“ ancient fossils in Australia and in Asia could be admitted as
“ proof of the former connection of the two countries.” (Athenaeum,
June 14th, 1845.)
I can assure your Lordship that in bringing this matter before
the Council of the Geographical Society through the medium of
your Lordship, I have not been influenced by any desire to
“ vindicate my character as a geographer.” Whatever little
credit may have been accorded to my labours in the cause of
geographical research could scarcely be enhanced by any notice
they might receive in this country, where the distinction would
have to be shared with any gentleman who might feel disposed to
use his influence with the periodical press in sounding his own
praises, or in reciprocating compliments with friends and partisans.
As regards other countries in which the science of Physical
Geography has become developed, I had already stated my views
at length in the columns of a Journal, which, although published
in the far east, has a circulation on the continent of Europe
scarcely less extensive than that of the Geographical Society’s
publications.
Again thanking your Lordship for the unvarying courtesy I have
met with in the course of a correspondence which must have been
as disagreeable to your Lordship as it has been to myself, I have
the honor to remain,
Your Lordship’s most obedient servant,
GEO. WINDSOR EARL.
To the Right Hon.
Lord Colchester.
Pelham Richardson, Printer, 23, Cornhill.
