

3? Reuaioos fams
Box 10
What the Colonies Need.
A PLEA
FOR A
Rational Cfytwlf ofSWttalasia.
John W. Owen ,
E. S. Wioa & Son, Publishers, Bundle Street.




What the Colonies Need.
A PLEA
FOR A
John W. Owen, B.A
gibclaiiie:
E. S. Wxaa & Son, Publishers, Eundle Street.


N.B. —The Scriptural quotations in
this Pamphlet are taken from the
Revised Version.


WHAT THE COLONIES NEED:
OR A PLEA FOR A
NATIONAL CHURCH OF AUSTRALASIA.
“In one hope of your calling.”
What is it Australasia wants 1 A National Church is the great
want of the people of these colonies, because such an institution
alone can weld them into a compact and solid brotherhood. At
present such a Church does not exist in these lands. There are
Churches, it is true, and sects innumerable : all more or less
professing, indeed, to have the same end, but divided one against
the others, and sub-divided among them-
The present state of se lves, and too often deriving their chief
Eehgion m impulse from a spirit of fierce and intolerant
rivalry and partizanship. On the other hand
there is a body of considerable weight in the country, and of
undoubted ability, and also (if we put aside the initial crime of
repression of truth which might be known —Romans i. 18) of
consistent fidelity to principles. The avowed object of this body
is the removal of human affairs from any spiritual influences— the
existence of which, as realities, this school denies. Some of its
extreme leaders refuse any credence at all in the existence of GOD ;
most of this school prefer, however, to say that, though He may
exist, He is unknowable and does not interfere in human concerns.
On minor points the followers of this school, which, for our purpose,
we shall designate the Naturalistic School, differ as widely as their


opponents. But, wisely, they agree to differ, and are all firmly
united in the common conviction that the supernatural has no real
influence, and can have none, on the world of nature and of man,
as simply the highest natural product. The Supernatural Schools
hold a diametrically opposite belief ; but unhappily, and, possibly,
even because their convictions are so very real to them and appeal
to certain springs hidden in the very constitution of their nature,
do not agree to differ on minor points. And so it happens that,
though in possession of a common faith which establishes firm and
rational belief in the Supernatural, they have such exaggerated
notions as to the importance of minor theories and hypotheses,
they have come to consider the reception or rejection of them to
involve the reception or rejection of the essential faith, and conse-
quently they cannot work together, and are largely hindered by
internal dissension from presenting a solid and four-square opposi-
tion to naturalistic onslaught; and are in large measure blinded to
the most real and terribly momentous issue at question—which
issue is whether any acknowledgment of the Supernatural shall
survive at all and be allowed to influence the course of human
life. It is from the dissensions of supernaturalists that the strength
of the naturalistic school arises.
Let us, now, go on to note some of the disastrous consequences
of this state of things.
First and foremost is the loss which accrues to religion itself.
Consequences.— Its P ower among men is weakened, and its
i. External. nse all but gone. For the very object of
Loss of religion is to bind man to GOD, and to
any restrain man from evil. But where, in the
real religious clashings of sectarian zeal, and amid the
heated and discordant shoutings of party-
watchwords, shall the GOD to whom man should be united be
found 1 And how shall a bold front be opposed to evil for its
conquest, when the very forces which should show themselves in
orderly array against evil are themselves, by their incessant bicker-
ings, doing evil and stirring up strife, evil’s most evil child ?
From this follows, as a natural and inevitable consequence, a
general disregard of real spiritual religion, and an impatience of the


assertion of its claims. Religion has been most sorely wounded in
the house of its friends, and comes into the
Loss of any arena of the conflict of public opinion with
public interest ~ . , , , , . . , ~
the shameful marks of internal dissension
in religion.
upon it. Let us listen to some common-sense
practical man, to some more or less cultured heathen of our day—
for heathen he is to all intents and purposes, as far as any practical
belief in the existence of GOD and of his consequent obligations to
that GOD are concerned —let us listen as this “ natural ” man
speaks. “ How,” he argues, “ can these so-called spiritual guides
have any guidance for me when they seem to have no common
principles of reliable guidance for themselves 1 How can they
impart to me any principles, or point me to any, on which I can so
rule my life and that of my household as to bring order and peace
and unity into them, when they show me an example of
interminable wrangling, agreeing apparently in nothing but spiteful
and ceaseless disagreement over matters resulting from a creed in
which—as regards essentials—they have the impudence to declare
that all are agreed 1 If they are at one on the main points, why
do they revile and denounce one another for minor considerations,
and call upon me to do the same 1 ”
They who argue (and not unnaturally) thus generally turn to
one of two courses. Either they say : “We will have nothing to do
with these brawling pulpiteers, we will be each
The door opened to one 0 £ ug our own prophet, priest and Church”
ever widening — an( j they start with a firm intention of
dissent;
“ keeping their religion to themselves,” But
this may not be, save in very rare cases, and then it becomes rather
a superstition than a religion, and that of so dwarfed and stunted a
growth as to serve no useful purpose. “Non nobis nati” is truer
of a man’s relation to the spiritual world than of his relation to the
world of sense. In most cases the man who intended to be self-
centred as regards religion imparts, often imperceptibly, his life-
principles to others, and such imparting results in the formation of
another school of thought, which soon hardens into a sect as deeply
hostile to other sects as those of older standing, whose divisions
were its original cause of birth.


Or, and this is, alas, the more common result, the arguer that
religion has nothing to teach him, because of the dissensions of
religionists, determines that he will throw
or, more commonly, re ligi on> a t any rate supernatural religion,
to positive rejection , , ~ ~ . , . ~ , . ,
overboard altogether. And in thus doing he
of the Supernatural . . .
altogether ac ts upon what is becoming a received, but
faulty, principle of modern conduct, “ Abuse
does not remove use” was, when the world was wiser, because
more godly, considered a sound principle of action —it has been
reserved for modern quackery to proclaim aloud that total
abstinence is the only sound remedy for abuse. “ Touch not, taste
not, handle not,” is the watchword of these latter-day reformers;
forgetful that that is exactly the principle which the Christian
Apostle condemned as the heretical folly of the false teachers of
his day. So this rejector of supernatural religion determines to
live his life solely among the facts of the natural world; that is
enough for him; that, at any rate, he can, by dint of patient
study, come to understand. And then, before this patient study has
gone very far, the rester in Nature and Nature’s revelations, who
had hoped to find a faith in it which should be all knowledge and.
all in accord with his reason,
Miseri quibus,
Intentata nites !
comes upon some inscrutable mystery which baffles him and the
highest thinkers of his school—and baffles them utterly. For
Science has its mysteries just as much as Revelation, and both for
the self-same reason that the Author of both is GOD, and that in
both He is unfolding the mystery of life. And then this poor
soul dashes himself against this mystery in fruitless rage; in
some cases resulting in the defiance which says: “ Yes, it is not to
be understood —the superstitious may call it GOD : I say it is a
lie—there is no GOD ” ; or in a cynical indifference which blandly
allows the mystery and even goes the length of admitting that
there may perhaps be what the vulgar call GOD behind it, but if
so the very fact that it is a mystery renders Him unknowable and
what man cannot verify by demonstrable proof does not concern
him. In a word the result is point-blank Atheism, qr more


plausible, but no less dangerous, Agnosticism. How deeply this
poison, in both its forms, is engrained in the souls of men of this
age and this land let every-day utterances and actions bear
witness ! And yet it is the poison of poisons—that which makes
deadly the very sources of being, and, when once it has impregnated
the veins of natural life, is a certain prelude to irretrievable national
decay—unless One, in mercy and judgment, intervene. “He that
delivered Me unto thee hath the greater sin,” said the Lord
JESUS to Pilate; and may not the infidel with equal justice say
the same of those whose unholy disputings have caused him,
whether angry or callous, to stand in the desolation in which he
finds himself to be.
But to turn now from the consequences to those without the
pale of Supernatural belief, let us note the effects on those within.
Doubtless these effects are as many as they are pernicious, but for
our present purpose they may be all included
ii. Internal. under one, which is at the base of all the
These consequences: , , . , . e
summed up in ...
... , , them all, because it violates most foully that
religious dishonesty. ’ ~
truth which must form the ground principle
of any real religion. Religious dishonesty is meant. Who shall at
all estimate, save Him Who notes these things in His book, the
numberless dishonesties and consequent violation of moral sense
and spiritual instinct for which religious dissensions are directly
and indirectly responsible among teachers and taught alike 1 Think
but for a few minutes of minds perverted and warped from truth,
of half-truths magnified into whole principles, of points of view
which make against some favourite and popular dogma of the
schools wilfully suppressed, of a Bible raised to an infallible book-
idol and made its own witness, of scriptures torn from their
meaning to serve the writer’s ends, of inconvenient passages glossed
qver and explained away, of mistranslations —well known to be
such—obstinately clung to because they support views which a truer
rendering would show to be false. Think again of creeds being
made the tyrants of thought instead of its index; of prayer-book
matter and chapel formulae being left in a state of corruption
through baneful verbal conservatism and blind subservience to a


• -i • \ f
ridiculous cry that the good old usages shall not be touched; of
certain assertions in the prayer-book and as many, if not more, in
the extemporary prayers of the Nonconformists adhered to
passionately, though a confessedly true and reverent criticism has
proved them utterly unfounded ; of other assertions which mere
lapse of time has rendered unfitting and in some cases absurd; of
rubrics and acts of ecclesiastical discipline, made by fallible men
and altered by fallible men, being now-a-days invested with quasi-
inspired authority and regarded as decisive of most vital questions;
of a collection of Articles and systems of divinity still held to bind
consciences, which, however valuable from antiquarian and
ecclesiological aspects, do by no means represent the best and
highest theology of which we are capable; of hymns, often
introduced by nobodies and in many instances breathing the most
vapid nonsense, still sung in the worship of GOD because they
have caught the popular taste (no very creditable criterion), or for
the yet more miserable reason that the tunes to which they are set
are grateful to sensuous ears. Think but of these things, and then
see what dissension has done to promote dishonesty.
Think, again, that this virus of dishonesty is introduced into
youthful minds from the very beginning by the distinctly sectarian
teaching of most of the Sunday Schools—especially where such
schools are under the management of ignorant, half-educated
teachers, bent at all hazards on getting their views of what saving
truth should be, and not the facts of the true Christian and
Catholic Faith, into a young child’s mind. Then, cast a thought
at the dishonesty which these divisions cause among people
generally. The ministers of various denominations may manage
to keep pretty much apart—not so their people. It is impossible
for them to do so. Every-day life throws them into intimate
relation, and for the sake of peace religious conviction is tampered
with, and a general indifference, falsely called religious toleration,
ensues. The very governing body prides itself on standing aloof
from any religious considerations; it
Sits as GOD, holding no form of creed.
Contemplating all;
and the educational system of these colonies is, as a direct


consequence, so framed as to rear a younger generation which looks
on religious conviction as a thing to be profoundly distrusted —a
thing which, at any rate, every one has full right to cherish or
neglect, exactly as his will dictates.
Truly, to a pretty pass have the squabblings of professional
religionists and the conceit of ignorant will-worshippers, too proud
to learn, and yet quite unfit to teach, brought this unfortunate
world! Doubtless there are countless honourable exceptions —
men, existing in all the denominations, who, in spite of turmoil and
snares, honestly hold to the facts of the Christian Faith and to
Truth as they are enabled to deduce it from those facts. There
are such men, and we rejoice to know it, and thank GOD for
them. They are the salt of the earth ; and here, in this Australia
of ours, they form the germs whence the future National Church
of these colonies is to grow. But they are the exceptions, not the
rule —and this is emphatically asserted, without any fear of
convincing contradiction by any thinking men who have at all
looked below the surface of what is called religious life. Such
are the evil fruits of dissension. Is it not time for union—is
there not, indeed, necessity for raising a truly National Church in
our midst?
What, however, do we mean by this National Church of which
we speak ? Do not the various Churches already existent among
us compose it ? To the first question a lucid
What is meant answer shall be essayed. But we must
“ National" Church.” P l 6™" d!s P ose o£ the second ' And
assert firmly our conviction that the existent
Churches of Australasia do not form a National Church, and never
will do so. Individually they can never form a true National
Church, because they, all of them, either fall short of truly
Catholic essentials, or else, in addition to holding such essentials,
have erected certain non-essentials into essentials—which is the
same thing as to say that they are all of them sects, and, apart
from the true Catholic faith of certain individual members of
these sects, are either schismatical or heretical. Collectively these
bodies cannot he looked upon as the National Church because they
live in and by separation, and are in a state of avowed hostility to


one another. As separate religious communities they rarely in
Australia—except in the empty phrases of certain unwise among
them—put forward any claim to be individually regarded as the
National Church ; but, nevertheless, the claim is often hazily put
forward and maintained that these separate Churches in their
aggregate do form a sort of quasi-National Church, and this notion
is supposed, when allowed, to constitute a high attainment in
liberality and tolerance. But the claim is baseless, and can never
be admitted by the really thoughtful, because it takes no notice of
the practical repression which exists among such separate bodies,
by the very fact of their dissensions, of the one essential element
—life-giving principle of any National Church —namely, that it
must itself be a branch of the Church Catholic, the true Church
of the true CHRIST, Who alone has made the existence of the
Catholic Church possible, and apart from Whom no nation is in
possession of a true National Faith. The real National Church
must be a whole and living part of the great Tree of the Church
Catholic—the true shelter for all nations —it must be united in
itself and in vital union with the rest of the Tree ; not a bundle
of dried-up twigs separate from the Tree.
And there is a further necessity for the founding of the true
National Church, which goes down and touches one of the deepest
springs of man’s nature in its entirety —freedom of the will. Man
is free to belong to the Church, or to stop out of it, at his own
proper peril. The Church was made for man, for his safety and
for his help ; but man was not made for the Church to be stowed
away in it, like herrings in a barrel, without any action on his own
part. There must, then, for a Church to be truly national, be
consent to it, and recognition of it, as the National Church on the
part of the large majority of the nation among which it is to do its
work —just as there must be consent to the true Catholic Church
of CHRIST, and recognition of duty in it and to its requirements,
on the part of those individuals and National Churches which are
the true component parts of it. Individuals and National Churches
alone can be such component parts, because such individual is one
living whole by himself, and the National Church is composed of
individuals consolidated into one man —a corporate body with


rational soul and GOD-acknowledging spirit. But distinctly
sectarian bodies, as such, cannot be members of the Church
Catholic, for their very raison d'etre is the perpetuation not of
Catholic essentials —which are simply the great facts and truths
plainly revealed by CHRIST, and open to every ordinary intelli-
gence—but of what, in their view, constitutes Catholic essentials.
They are, by virtue of refusal to accept the essentials or by virtue
of required recognition of non-essentials, in revolt against the unity
of the body; and, therefore, it must be firmly insisted upon that the
various churches of these lands retaining, in fact, their separateness,
can never be truly regarded, in idea, as forming the National
Church of Australia, because it is, as we have shown, a sine qua
non of any National Church that it shall be in vital union with the
Church Catholic, living and actuated by CHRIST, the One
Spiritual Principle of life, Who compacts the many members into
one body.
What then is a National Church 1 It is a branch society of
The notes of the the great society for the salvation of man,
true established by CHRIST, man’s Saviour, and
National Church, known as the Holy Catholic Church. Such
branches are designed to be, and may be, established in any land,
with such adaptations of formal statement of doctrine and of rites
and ceremonies as are suited to their natural requirements and
conditions, provided only that they one and all work on the
essential principles of the parent society, are in vital connection
and communion with it, and are accepted by the nations among
whom they are planted. Such acceptance must, of course, be
that of the majority. In other words, God gives the National
Church and man’s part is to recognise it and accept it as His gift.
The widest freedom of thought with regard to non-essentials is no
disloyalty to the Church or its national branches, and no breach
from its unity; the smallest erection by the will of any man, or by
the will of any body of men, of non-essentials into an essential
condition of membership is schism ; the smallest denial or neglect
of essentials, by the teaching of man, is heresy. Both schism and
heresy, as long as they are persisted in, involve exclusion from the
Church, or from any national branch of it, the loss of the help GOD


confers through it and further, of necessity, involves so much
weakening of the Church’s power to effect the good of mankind.
Before, then, we proceed to enquire what are the essentials of
tiie Holy Catholic Church, in order that we may learn what
The National Church qualifies for membership, let us ask why
a Necessity should a nation be required to acknowledge
for the well-being any necessity for a National Church 1 It
of any Nation. j s a question which requires asking and
answering on account of the state of things in which we, who
believe in CHRIST’S “good news of the kingdom ,” find ourselves
and our brother-men to be. This vast Australian Continent with
Tasmania and New Zealand have, as yet, made no such acknow-
ledgment. Nay, led away by the specious systems of modern
schools of philosophy, repeating old and outworn theories which
were shown to be worthless by the experience of the human race
long before these colonies were dreamt of in the mind of man as
having any existence on the face of the globe, public opinion has
boasted of superiority to the notion of recognising any National
Church. This is, in our view, a deplorable evil, but all the same
in treating of it we desire to be fair and just. Public opinion in
the colonies is not accused of being utterly godless. We do not
believe it is so, as a whole. Of course it is idle to deny that there
is a vast leaven of direct and positive ungodliness, in the strictest
sense of that terrible word, among us. And that leaven is the
pernicious seed of most loathsome disease in the national constitu-
tion, unless there be found strength in that constitution to throw
it out of the system—which strength, like every other good gift, is
the gift of GOD. We believe that such strength does still exist;
we believe we see signs of its existence in much genuine religious
activity, which is to be thankfully acknowledged among us; and
what we chiefly desire to do, in gratitude to Him Who has made it
possible, and in that real patriotism which would deliver men from
error and not encourage them in being content with error, is to call
that strength to the front, and put it in position to act, and act
effectively, ere it be too late—for if stifled and hidden away out of
sight it will, after the general manner of GOD’s dealings where
His gifts are abused, be removed from us. Therefore, we repeat,


we do not make the charge that colonial public opinion is essentially
godless; but we do emphatically make the charge that colonial
public opinion, misled by false teaching from within and from
without, has so acted, and continues to this hour to so act, as to
be of directly godless tendency; and unless it amend (which the
GOD of our salvation grant it power to do !) and retrace its steps,
will end in becoming altogether godless. In that case a long
farewell must bo spoken to any hope of a strong and happy
and beneficent Australia of the future. The error has been most
culpable and of clearly sad results thus far —but we most earnestly
desire to believe that it is error of head and not of heart, that the
reason of our colonists has been led astray and not their spirit.
Did we believe otherwise it would be morally useless to lay these
considerations before the thinking men of these lands. There
would be nothing to which to appeal. As it is we hold there is
something to which to appeal, and something, moreover, which
craves to be appealed to and to be set free from error. We believe
that the great heart of this English-speaking people is really sick
of disunion and disunion’s inherent weakness, and yearning for the
strength which comes from loyal association. Therefore we appeal
—sure that, though we are weak, GOD and GOD’s Truth are
strong. The error, then, as it seems to us, lies herein. It is not
that our fellow-countrymen say —in mass, that is (we have already
allowed that there is a small compact mass of opponents, whom,
holding the views we do, we are constrained to look upon as the
enemies of Australian welfare) —There is no GOD, and we have no
cause to concern ourselves about Him even if there be One, seeing
we consider Him to be unknowable. But it is this. They say—
and GOD knows (in all bitter shame be it spoken!) what provo-
cation they have had from the crimes and blunders of ignorant
and self-assertive religionists to say so —they say ; We do not deny
either GOD or our obligations to Him, but we find such wide
divergence of teaching among those who pose as our spiritual
pastors and masters ; we have found, also, such inclination on the
part of these teachers to desert their own proper sphere of activity
and endeavour to mould all life according to their own particular
leanings; and, furthermore, we have seen their factious and blind


partizan spirit to be such an element of discord in our civil and
social life that, as a nation, we decline to recognise any of them,
and as parents we desire that the State shall not teach our children
any religion. We adopt this latter extreme course, not that we at
all desire to repudiate the necessity for our children to be really
religiously nurtured, but because the dissensions of religionists have
raised such a mist of doubt as to what is and what is not real
religion, and because, they being so selfishly intent on gaining the
supremacy each for his own particular version, to admit any one
form of their teachings is to stir up the disturbing animosity of
all the rest.
A perfectly intelligible position it is, pathetic to the last degree
in its sadness, calculated, one would imagine, to touch even the
hard heart of religious rancour into a shamed repentance, and from
a natural point of view by no means unreasonable. But, for all
this, it is a grave error fraught with most serious consequences for
these reasons ;
First of all it most unnecessarily confuses sectarian and notional
systems of divinity with the essential Catholic Faith, The Church,
which lives in that Faith, is the “ Ocean of GOD’s Love,” and
its essentials are like the laws of that Love, seeing they are the
work of the world’s Saviour. Sectarian and notional systems of
divinity are but portions of the waters of that ocean congealed
into ice. It is, of course, quite conceivable, and from a certain
point of view even probable, that men wdio have mistaken little
sheets of ice for the free and open main of Truth, and on them
have built, to their own exceeding satisfaction, their temples and
drug-shops, should regard as the direst calamity the rising of that
sun in whose rays they feel that the ice must melt under their
feet and pass away with the baseless fabrics which they have been
at such pains to erect on them. “ What,” cry such as these, “shall
the righteous (meaning, of course, themselves) do if the foundations
be removed V ’ It does not seem to have occurred to them that
they may have mistaken ice for ocean, and they confidently quote
the words they so love, supremely disregardful of the fact that
those words were originally put into the mouths of men who had
been guilty of exactly similar error, Yet so it is, Catholic


essentials and Sectarian systems are as different as a living tree and
a fossilized leaf or twig of that tree ; and many of the objections
to a National Church in Australia and its fancied irapractibility
arise from the confusion which exists in men’s minds as regard
this difference.
But, again, the error we deplore, is also founded on a false
psychological basis, the correction of which cannot he ignored if
man—in all his relations —is to be considered, dealt with and
worked for. For as the individual man is, in the totality of his
nature, made up of body or sense-consciousness, soul or self-
consciousness, and spirit or GOD-consciousness, so is the true
nation (viewed, of course, as a corporate entity, totally distinct from
the disordered and lawless mobs wherein the will, not the rights
but the will , of the rabble is supreme, government a mere tool to
enregister the dictates of that will and religion, if allowed to exist
at all, a mere artifice in the hands of demagogues to influence that
will,) so is the true nation, the aggregate of individual men
bound together by real civilization, of a tripartite nature —people
(the general body), government (the rational soul), and Church
(the religious spirit). As in the individual all three parts of his
nature must be present and active if he is to truly live, so in the
real nation all three parts of it must be present and active if true
national life is to obtain.
There is yet another reason against the error of rejection of a
National Church. It is the result of throwing the three parts of
national life out of gear ; it is the result of the undue exaltation
or suppression of its respective functions that we find ourselves
in the poverty of energy and resources that, as a people, we
undoubtedly are, a poverty which has reached a state of semi-
paralysed helplessness, galvanized by pressing emergencies into
spasmodic effort to do, as we so hopelessly declare, “ something ”
instead of being able to unite in strong and persistent deter-
mination to do “the right thing.” For, as the man who lives only
the animal and natural life, and carefully ignores and suppresses
the spiritual element of his nature has, by the allowed experience
of the race, a strong tendency in the general run to become more
and more the animal merely, and even in his best elaboration is


wanting in those higher traits which can erect him above himself, a
purely ‘ selfidx ’ (this word is here used as equivalent to ‘ psychic ’
or ‘ natural ’) man, moving and confined by the world of sense and
human intelligence, so the nation which ignores its spiritual side,
its spiritual destiny, its spiritual duties, has also an inevitably
earthward tendency to become brutal and vicious, and in its
palmiest day never rises above a cold intellectuality and a prudent
man-regarding and calculated morality, never yet yielding the fruits
of useful and beneficient deed, which alone forms the true crown
of certain nations of GOD’s world, and has laid up for them
undying fame in the annals of earth and the records of Heaven.
And here, it would seem, occurs the proper place to say a few
words on a subject which will doubtless be impatiently received.
We would, however, plead for a hearing on
Catholic essentials point, and will be as brief as is consistent
pre suppose a with clearness. For it is a subject which
reliable psychological , , , .
. introduces what is to follow and serves also to
system.
connect what has gone before, and without
which it is hardly possible to arrive at a definite and intelligible
conclusion. If the Catholic Church means anything it means a
society which is designed to promote man’s salvation by keeping
alive and active in him that knowledge of GOD which is eternal
life—and which it is the very glory of CHRIST to have made
manifest. The knowledge of GOD is acquaintance with what
GOD is, as far as man’s limited capacity can comprehend him.
This is Theology. But what is man that he can attain this
knowledge : is there anything which leads us to conclude that he is
capable of attaining and retaining such knowledge 1 Of that
psychology must inform us. How man is to act on such know-
ledge when it is attained constitutes the system of Christian ethics.
And the Church militant here in earth is the sphere in which man is
intended of his own free will to act, under opposing difficulties
from the world, on true principles of conduct, through obedience
to the constitution of a nature founded in part on likeness to GOD
and capable of growing nearer and nearer to perfection in the
Church Triumphant, or of deteriorating more and more from it as
man gives way more and more to the principles of the world. In


other words right judgment as to Catholic essentials and consequent
right conduct founded on such judgment pre-supposes the existence
of correct psychological and ethical systems, which systems again
require a true theology—or knowledge of GOD as He is—as their
only sure basis; and thus we reach that deepest law of salvation
which CHRIST Himself laid down as the ultimate foundation of
entrance into the unending life which He came to impart: This is
life eternal that they should know Thee, the only True GOD, and
JESUS CHRIST Whom Thou hast sent.
It is just here, however, that most men will fly off at a tangent.
They will cry : “Ah yes, we thought so. Here is this writer
who says he wants to help us, and who has really seemed to have
some gleams of sense in what he has hitherto advanced, sinking
into a mere metaphysician; spinning out mere logomachy and
asking us to take into consideration all sorts of pedantic subtleties
for which we have neither time nor talents, nor indeed any desire
to have either. We are plain men and desire to remain so : what
we want is plain teaching, and not wire-drawn theorizing.” Well,
just exactly what the writer desires (whether he goes the right way
to work or not) is to furnish plain men with plain teaching as to “ a
reason for the hope that is in them.” It is only to “ men ” that
this can he done. To be a man demands some power of rational
thought—for that is what differentiates man from beast, just as
vitality marks the boundary between the vegetable and mineral
kingdoms. Given a certain reasonableness and then it is easily to
be understood that to furnish men with a sufficing reason and to
ask all men to work out that reason in all its details for themselves
are two very different things. The latter demand is not made
here. It is attempted to show the true principles on which such a
reason rests and their results, in order that these “plain” men
may have somewhat definite to rest upon and live by in lieu of that
vague and misty emotionalism, so commonly mistaken for religion,
which may or may not (too often does not) lead to real religion,
and certainly can never be substituted for it. Do you not see, 0
ye plain men, impatient of “mere metaphysics,” that thus, after
all you have to act with regard to nearly all matters of life 1 You
value highly and rightly as a portion of the necessary machinery of


the conduct of life the power of reasoning. And yet it is matter
of absolute fact—a thing as it really is—that reasoning cannot bo
rightly practised apart from those laws of thought which the
pedants, you despise, call logic. It is only when reasoning seems
right enough but leads to palpably wrong conclusions, and baffles
plain men to find out what is the matter, that the province of the
logician is recognised and honoured as it deserves to be. It would
be at once cruel and absurd to require of every tradesman, profes-
sional man, member of Parliament or what not, that they shall
all make long and exhaustive study of the science of formal logic,
but is it, therefore, a cruel mockery to tell them the truth and
point them to actual fact and say: “ Whether you know it or not,
your thinking can only be right thinking as it works upon certain
ascertained and verified laws, and consequently it will be your
wisdom when you feel and know that conclusions are wrong to
submit your reasonings to these laws of thought and get them to
show you where the error lies 1 This is to conquer nature by obey-
ing it. Or, again you prize highly and rightly, seeing all the bodily
functions of your children doing their proper work, which is the
same thing as to say seeing your children in good health. Are all
fathers and mothers, then, to be masters of what anatomy and
physiology have to teach 1 You know it is absurd to advance such
an idea. But, all the same, it is according to anatomical and
physiological laws that your children must live, and you must also
live, the physical life; and it is just exactly when these laws are
broken, wittingly or unwittingly, that you discover how relentless
they are, and have to send for those who have made distinct and
patient study of the working of these laws to set straight what has
gone wrong. And with respect to that impatient distrust of
“ mere metaphysics,” have you ever realized what it involves 1
No less than a denial of GOD’s existence, or, at any rate, of His
rule in the world of man, and, as consequence, a throwing of
yourselves in reality—a step from which many of you would
shrink with horror in idea —into the atheistic or agnostic camp.
For if there is no such thing as metaphysics, there is nothing
beyond or behind physics. Nature made itself, and has no higher
manifestation than matter—and you, man or woman, with all the


wondrous joy and bitter misery of which you feel yourself capable,
and with all the strange influence for good and evil which you
know you have—you, man or woman, and a shapeless block of
road-metal are, after all, one and the same thing—mere atoms
brought by blind chance into various hap-hazard conditions, which
conditions, controlled by no known will or law, being removed, the
only possible fate left is return to primal disintegrated atom-like
material chaos, out of which some blind movement or force formed
you for no purpose and no end ! Thus the boasted intellectual
superiority of the positivist sinks into the maddening nightmare of
pessimism, and its only assured and possible end is practical
annihilation. Truly a hopeful sort of conclusion to arrive at :
how unworthy of those who boast that Truth is their sole guide,
let them acknowledge ! And yet if there is nothing further than
Nature —no metaphysical region, no Supernatural—you must come
to this conclusion. It is inevitable. There are men who honestly
think, or, at least, honestly think they so think, that there is
nothing spiritual —that spiritual and sham are interchangeable
terms. Either they are right, or those who believe that there is a
supernatural world are right. Both cannot be right. If materialists
are right, supernaturalists are wrong. But this advantage still
remains on the side of the latter—and it is no slight one. If
materialists are right, nothing is of any consequence whatever, and
all of us, supernaturalists included, are in the ultimate issue
equally well or badly off—we are but mere dead matter, vitalized
by chance for no purpose, to be returned empty to our original
state of chaotic nothingness; and while in this fitful blind
existence, if, indeed, that really exists at all, neither materialists
or supernaturalists have in any real respect any superiority the one
over the other, save that the supernaturalists may, by the very wear
and tear of their senseless worry, put a quicker term to a senseless
existence, which, in itself, and from this point of view, is a distinct
gain. But suppose the materialists are wrong and the super-
naturalists right. What then 1 If there is a Supernatural after
all, if GOD really is, and has constituted man’s life so that the
Supernatural is above and below and before and behind, and
interpenetrates it through and through, has made man, in fact, a


sharer in this life, and, because man in his weakness and folly has
held down this Truth, has further made this supernatural life a
fact of revelation to man to recall him to truth and duty, and has
so revealed it, because such is the only possible way in which man
as at present existent can know anything about it (the ground
assumption, this, of all religion, that which we call Faith), then ever-
lasting life is possible, and happiness in that life depends upon our
getting into and recognising the supernatural order, coming to see
its power here, and becoming obedient to it here and hereafter —
if this is right, and materialists wrong, how then 1 Will not our
efforts have been, after all, at least so much approach to the very
purpose of our being ; so much entrance into the true working of
our being viewed in its fulness, and not from its natural side only
—and that no matter what stumblings we may have made, what
blunders we may have committed 1 Nay, may not we find that our
very stumblings and blunders have been so frequent just exactly
because we would not listen to w r hat, after all, was within the
grasp of our faculties 1 For is it contrary to reason, if a good GOD
and a bewildered race be granted (the latter common intelligence
must grant, and, as a whole, agrees that there is a GOD, Who, if
He is, must be good), to conclude that that GOD will take steps to
deliver the race from its bewilderment 1 Call such a step by what
name you please, it must he a revelation —the unveiling of some-
thing which has become covered. And, in this case, will not the
men who have been all along urging the claims of the supernatural
side of our nature upon our attention —those “merely metaphy.
sicians,” whom this modern age so dislikes, whom practical men
would fain hustle out of the way—be exactly our greatest
benefactors, though they may, in a misdirected zeal, have, perhaps,
on occasions made too little of the physical side of the question 1
But to drop mere appeal and to turn to those to whom these
words are chiefly addressed, to those who believe that man has a
GOD Who made him heir of the world to come as well as a denizen
of the world wherein he now finds himself, in other words that the
natural is underlaid and overlaid by the Supernatural, let us see
how the case stands. We are endeavouring, then, to show that it


, , „ is a grave error and fraught with serious
The psychology of G 5
Scripture at once consequences to the development of National
reasonable and ex- Life to reject a National Church, and we have
planatory. This is stated our belief that this rejection largely
not, however, the arises from ignorance of the psychological
system of popular constitution of man. Obviously till we
recognize what man is, we cannot properly
deal with him or for him. We believe it is quite possible to attain
a correct psychology. We do not say an exhaustive psychology in
all its relations and details, but of such sufficing correctness as to
afford us reasonable ground for action upon it; and though we
fully admit that every man is not called upon to work out this
particular branch of knowledge, still we consider that it is very
deep folly for any man to ignore its results when they are put
before him, and we think we see such an act of folly in the
rejection of a National Church, the very work of which, as it
seems to us, is to retain before the mind of the nation—that is to
say, of men and women notoriously prone to forget—what man is
and consequently what man’s duties are. The source whence we
gather this knowledge is the Bible, that body of progressive
Revelation which culminates in the statement of the historic fact
of the Incarnation of GOD in the Person of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. We do not, however, hold this knowledge to be
reliable simply because it is found in the Bible, for that would be
to erect that book into a tyrant over our faith rather than the
witness and support of it. But we hold to this knowledge because
it accords with what conscience in GOD’s sight tells us to be the
truth of the case, because it appears to have been what the earliest
teachers taught, because it is found on careful examination to be in
accord with Scripture, and because it affords light and gives
reasonable explanation of difficulties such as we cannot find
elsewhere ; and for want of which light and explanation men have
been found to be quite unable to do more than set up guesslike
hypotheses—doubtless not without glimmerings of truth in them—
as to what goes to make up human nature in its fulness. Unless
the Bible have some definite information with which to reward the
careful and earnest searcher for its whole spirit and teaching on the


two points of the moral and mental constitution of man the Bible
is utterly worthless as a guide for the conduct of life. That a
hitherto carefully and honestly conducted study of Revelation
should up to the present time have seemed to have arrived at
insufficient conclusions is no proof whatever that quite sufficient
conclusions are not to be found in that Revelation. That it should
be thus is just exactly what one ought to expect would be the case
in man’s dealings with a body of revealed matter confessedly
progressive, given at many times and in many manners ; especially
when we remember, as we must if we desire fairly to weigh the
merits of human systems of divinity, the constant and well-
authenticated tendency of divines to encumber and darken their
conclusions by adopting the leading ideas of the reigning philo-
sophical schools and of fathering those ideas upon the Scriptures,
thus making Revelation responsible not only for its own matter,
with all its inherent mysteries and difficulties, but also for the
fallacies and guesses of mundane schemes of philosophy as well.
Most of the modern schemes of Christian psychology are defective
for the reason last alluded to. They consist of the psychologies of
India and Greece, of earlier and later Scholasticism modified in
Biblical moulds, confined in Biblical swathing-bands, and made to
speak in Biblical phraseology—and resulting as outcome in the
Cartesian formula that man is body and soul. And so rooted have
these schemes become in the popular estimation that to doubt
whether after all they are, in any sense, correct is to lay oneself
open to the charge of removing the old landmarks and unsettling
the Church’s faith. Knowing, however, that our search for the
sure foundation of truth is honest, we are not to be turned back
from our task, and therefore we declare our belief that intelligent,
and consequently more reverent, study and criticism of Revelation
is enabling us to recover —for until the sway of Augustine the body
and soul theory was not generally predominant—and to re-establish
on surer grounds the system of psychology which is really contained
in Scripture, and which is found to furnish more adequate
explanation of the mystery of existence. And that such a
rediscovery is being made is in itself proof that there is a living
Spirit at work in the Church, and should serve to redeem religion


from that fallacious taunt which men have so often repeated that
they persuade themselves they believe it to be true —namely, that
while science is progressive religion is stationary. Between holding
the faith and standing still in it is the vast difference between being
dead and alive.
In as few words as possible we will now endeavour to show
what the psychology of Scripture really is, and, if our deductions
from Scripture are found to he correct, they will show that there
is in every man’s nature that by which GOD is knowable, that by
which man is in relation with GOD, that which makes him a
sharer of the supernatural life and of which he can be deprived
only by his own act.
Man, then, we find to be described in Scripture as a tripartite
being—component of body, soul and spirit. By his body he is
conscious of objects of sense; by his soul of mental and moral
objects, of himself, as an ego, and of his relations to others; by
his spirit of the existence of GOD and of his relation and obligation
to that GOD. This teaching as to the constitution of man’s being
is gradually unfolded in Scripture —the germs of it are to be found
in that earliest statement that “ the Lord GOD formed man of the
dust of the ground (body), and breathed into his nostrils the breath
of lives (spirit) and man became a living soul” (Gen. ii. 7); the
gradual developments of this teaching are to be traced through all
the books of the Old Testament; the full conclusions are to be
found in the New Testament, and the doctrine finds its separate
and conjoint perfection in Him, CHRIST JESUS our Lord, GOD
made man, Who as man suffered death in His body on the cross,
Whose soul was conscious of the shame, and sorrow, and suffering,
and self-sacrifice of that death, and Whose spirit was resigned into
His Father’s hands, for a glorious victory over death and sin, of
which death is the -wages ; a victory which has resulted in our
Saviour’s carrying Perfected Humanity in its threefold nature into
the very Holy of Holies. This nature of man from the hour of his
birth is exposed—because without such exposure it would be an
irrational thing, incapable of good or evil—to a two-fold tendency,
to the strivings of the flesh and the strivings of the spirit. The
soul of each man is the centre of his personality, wherein this


battle is fought out and the earthward or heavenward life embraced,
for momentous issues. It is easily intelligible that when, under
the allurements of the flesh, man first seriously bent the weight of
his inclinations earthward, put his soul under the control of his
body, that he fell and by so doing deadened the power of his
spirit to lead him heavenwards—and, as he fell in himself and in
his descendants more and more, so continued to deaden the spirit
within him that he seemed to himself, and to others judging him
with human judgment, as a mere natural or psychical man “not
having spirit” (Jude 19). Hence the need of a Revelation to
show man that, though he in his sin and folly had indeed
deadened the spirit, still GOD in His loving beneficence had so
fashioned him, so constituted his nature, that he could not kill it
altogether, and that spirit is still “ the candle of the Lord ” in
every man and survives as conscience—“ the residue of the spirit.”
The new birth which CHRIST says must occur to every man
who is to enter into real life is the quickening of the human spirit
from a merely accusing or excusing conscience (Rom. ii, 15) to the
recognised and controlling power of the life of body and soul.
CHRIST came expressly to quicken man’s spirit, and so saves the
souls and bodies of all who will. To this end He declares that the
very essence of His mission is to show men what they are by
showing them to be the children of the Father, in knowledge of
Whom and in obedience to Whom—as such knowledge and obedi-
ence are revealed in Himself —stands their eternal life. The organ of
such knowledge and the sphere of such obedience is in man’s spirit
(St. John iv. 24). Man’s immortality, therefore, does not reside in
his soul—that, as his body, he acquires (as the Traducianists affirm)
from the ordinary process of generation—but it resides in his spirit
which each man derives from GOD directly at the moment of the
beginning of his life (herein we agree with the Creationists), and is
the organ of heavenly-mindedness by which man can, if he will,
know GOD, learn to obey GOD, and so enter into eternal life.
Consequently physical death does not (as the monstrous popular
religious error, for which Protestantism is chiefly responsible, affirms)
settle man’s everlasting destiny. Death destroys the physical body,
but leaves the warfare between soul and spirit incomplete, and it


has to be carried out to its issue in the intermediate state where
CHRIST also reigns, and from the result of that warfare will, in
the case of those who attain to victory, ensue the resurrection —
which is a transformation from a natural to a spiritual body.
Such is the psychology which we find in the Bible, in its main
outlines, and we put it before our readers because it seems to us to
throw much light upon the question we are endeavouring to treat—
a question which the received psychology, asserting as it does that
that rational soul and human flesh constitute perfect man, involves
in almost insurmountable difficulty. For if there is no faculty in
any man—nor any organ of that faculty—by which he is capable
of the knowledge of GOD, how can man be blamed for not know-
ing Him ; and what a ghastly farce and mockery is it for any
Church to pretend to rebuke men for refusal to gain knowledge of
which they are absolutely incapable. If we retain the dichotomist
theory of man’s natural constitution, and yet hold that there are
men who know GOD, then we are driven to allow that those who
attain this knowledge attain it by a special and arbitrary super-
natural gift of the Holy Spirit in their particular cases—of which
gift the general run of men are, through no fault of their own,
deprived, and we find ourselves landed in the straightest and most
uncompromising form of Calvinism—a human system of divinity
which by the terrible darkening it has cast over the Catholic Truth
ofthe Universal Fatherhood of GOD proclaimed by JESUS CHRIST,
and by substituting for it the dogmatic statement of a man-wrought
theory about the adoptive fatherhood of GOD, has done more to
turn men into infidels than any other agency the Church has ever
had to fight against.
We have now shown the grounds on which we believe that the
National Church is a necessity for the well-being of national life :
and we have further endeavoured to show
The essential Faith that those grounds are based upon the very
of tlie consitution of man’s being. We have also
true Catholic ...
C 1 j stated our firm conviction that no religious
body or organization can really become a
National Church unless it is a faithful upholder of the essential
belief of the Universal Church; in other and well-known words,


unless “holding the Faith once delivered to the saints.” What,,
then, are the essentials of the Faith which the Christian, on the
warrant of its Promulgator, is hound to accept as of universal
application (St. John xii. 32) 1 When we know this we shall be in
a position to recognise what constitutes true membership in the
Catholic Church of CHRIST —with which Church, we have
already seen, any real National Church must be in vital connection,
as branch to tree, for the simple reason that what is truth for the
habitable world of man as a whole is necessarily truth for each of
those nations which go to form it. In most serious and solemn
reconsideration of this most vital question we lay down for our
sure guidance the rule of the Master Himself : “He that is not
with Me is against Me, and he that gathereth not with Me
scattereth ” (St. Matt. xii. 30); or, in other words, we desire to
accept as essential only what He has expressly declared to be
essential, and we desire, also, to reject as non-essential everything
save those declared essentials. Things non-essential we consider
we are at liberty to use or leave alone, as conscience and judgment
may direct, but we altogether and emphatically decline to have
them erected into essentials and imposed upon us as such.
In our search, then, for the CHRIST-declared essentials of the
Faith we find that His primary Revelation is the showing forth of
GOD as the Father of the race, and that this is effected by the
revelation of Himself to the race through the fads of His human
life, which facts—as distinct altogether from notions deduced from
them —are to be found recorded in the New Testament, and consti-
tute the only true and real Gospel—or Good Tidings —and are best
and most comprehensively summarized for us in the statement of
Christian Faith known as the Apostles’ Creed. The outcome of
this statement is that our Lord shows Himself to be the Everlasting
Son of GOD, made perfect man for man’s salvation, revealing to
man his relationship, and consequent obligation, to GOD, the
All-Father, through the Son and the Holy Spirit, and offering to
every man’s acceptance a place, for his personal preservation in this
true Faith, in the Church or Society consecrated to GOD, and
intended to bring about the salvation of all. The members of this
Church on earth are furnished with recognised symbols of admission


and of continued membership by their Founder Himself, Who also
gave them a model for prayer, and directed them to a body of
written revelation in which to seek light and guidance. All real
members of this Church, whether on earth or elsewhere existent,
have a true relationship in their Head to one another, and so form
a communion of the faithful, and await the attainment of the
perfection of their nature, and their resurrection in bodies adapted
to the needs of a spiritual and unending existence.
Or, let us put this outcome in another, and perhaps clearer, form
before us. The essentials of the Catholic Faith are :
i. Belief in GOD as the Universal Father Who wills the
salvation of all;
ii. Belief in JESUS CHRIST as the Son of GOD, made man
for our salvation, and actually saving, in virtue of His
Birth, Life, Death, Descent into Hades, Resurrection
and Ascension, all who turn to the Father by Him ;
iii. Belief in the Holy Spirit as the ever-present sanctifying
influence of the Father and the Son, helping men to
accept CHRIST and so to turn to the Father ;
iv. Belief in these Three Blessed and Divine Persons as the
One True and Only GOD ;
v. Belief in due and obedient use of the means which the
Saviour of man and the only Head of the Churches
appointed to keep this true Faith in man’s mind—
namely, membership in the one Catholic Church, with
its Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord’s Supper as
He ordained them, with a Liturgy moulded on the
prayer He taught and the truths He inculcated, and
with reverent and rational study of the Scriptures
according to His example and precept ;
vi. Belief in the promised outcome of faithful membership in
CHRIST’S Church—namely, man’s attainment of
perfection, and resurrection to a life which is unending.
Such are the essentials of the Catholic Faith, and therefore we
conclude that the honest believer in these essentials who endeavours,


by GOD’s help, to rule his life and to aid
The hue others to do the same in accordance with
Catholic. .
them is a true and faithful Catholic —“a
child of GOD, a member of CHRIST, and an inheritor of the
Kingdom of Heaven.” For if real trust in the Name of GOD, as
revealed by CHRIST, man’s Saviour, and endeavour to live,
through the help of GOD’s Spirit, according to CHRIST’s estimate
of the range of man’s duty, using the means of help appointed by the
Church’s Head, does not constitute a man a member of the
Catholic Church, and ensure his ultimate salvation, if he remain
faithful to this belief, we fail to see what does. But if such
qualifications be allowed to entitle to membership, who shall dare to
either demand more or be content with less 1 Man’s safety stands
in his acceptance of this true Faith, and his perdition stands in his
ultimate rejection of it —present rejection of any article of this
Faith constitutes heresy. The erection by the will of man of
anything as essential to salvation which is not contained in this
Faith is schism. Both heresy and schism are breaches of the unity
of the Church, and as such the Church dare not tolerate them as
lawful. Equally the Church has no power whatever to pronounce
sentence of unending woe on those guilty of heresy or schism;
because it has no power to know whether these sins have arisen
from ignorance or wilful perversion of truth, or whether they will
be persevered in to the end or cast aside in repentance. The
Church, however, has power, and must have power if it is to exist
at all, to exclude from its communion on earth those who openly
persist in heresy and schism; and that body which is free from
both these sins, and those individuals who are so free, alone
constitutes the true Church Militant here in earth ; and, while not
daring to pronounce any judgment as to the final doom of those
who sever themselves, nevertheless, as the true Church and faithful
to its mission, dares not neglect to make prominent the warning of
CHRIST Himself Who said : “He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved ; but he that disbelieveth shall be condemned.”
Such are, we believe, the essential conditions of membership in
the Holy Catholic Church, founded upon what we find to be the


true Faith as CHRIST revealed it, and as it
The proposed is preserved for us in the records of His Life
National Church of an( j Teaching, and in the subsequent Church
Australasia must ... ,
~. , . organization founded upon that Life and
hold this essential
C tl 1" F ’th Teaching by the men especially commissioned
CHRIST for the evangelization of the
whole world according to His own ordered plan (Acts i. 8). To
such a Faith, with the conditions it demands as its necessary
consequence, any real Church of a nation must strictly adhere.
Without a real National Church we do not believe that any nation
will ever prosper as it might, or reach the usefulness and perfection
of which it is capable. Without such adherence to this Catholic
Faith and submission to its conditions we do not believe that any
man or any woman will ever attain to the intended perfection (St.
Matt. v. 48) of his or her nature ; and, therefore, in such an
essential Faith we cannot hut conclude that every child ought to be
nourished and brought up from earliest infancy as preparative to
the rational assent and personal assumption of the responsibility of
maturer life. For we hold, as in duty bound, that it is strictly
true that “whosoever desires to be safe before all things it is
necessary that he hold the Catholic Faith,” and we hold this on the
warrant of Him who declared that it was His Father’s will that
men should be safe : Who came to do that Will as example for
all, to show out that Will as Light for all, into which Will unless a
man get it is obvious —if JESUS CHRIST is, indeed, the Saviour
of the world, which, we suppose, no Christian ventures to question—
that a man’s state must be very unsafe. We believe that this Will of
GOD for him has always been more or less before man ; that GOD
has revealed it “in many parts and in many ways” to every man
in all ages, that
“ One accent of the Holy Q-host
This foolish world has never lost; ’
that everything which men in the world have done of good and
true and useful has been in consequence of obedience to the
principles of this revelation of GOD and of His will, and that
whether the doers of these things have recognized their Divine
Source or not, Man might have recognized it; he is so constituted


that there is no inherent difficulty against his recognizing it, for he
is as regards his nature as well a child of spiritual impulse as a
child of passionate impulse. But the former side of his nature he
has by long inbred generations of neglect so deadened that it has
become almost inoperative, and the account of man’s state as a race
tallies all too sadly with that given by the early Christian writer
who speaks of him as “ selfish —not having spirit.” Hence we see
the necessity for a fuller and further revelation to teach man what
he is, what he has reduced himself to and what, by forsaking error
and embracing truth, he may yet become. Such a revelation we
recognize to have been variously and progressively made, and to
find its centre in the Incarnation of our Blessed Lord and its
expression in the Catholic Faith which is the direct outcome of
that Incarnation. For true Christianity is CHRIST, and CHRIST
only. In Him alone we find the Truth that saves, and in His
Catholic Church, which is described as His Body, that which the
Providence of GOD has caused to be instituted as a perpetual
witness of Himself, as revealed by His Son and His Spirit, in the
world of man, and by entrance into which and continuance in
which man can become free of the Truth, and so safe to go on
under the lead and guidance of His Maker and Redeemer and
King to the perfection which he is destined to attain. Man is free
to enter and free to remain in this Church until he passes from a
state'of being able not to sin into a state of not being able to sin.
This will be when man’s nature, having reached its perfection and
being altogether under the control of his GOD-inspired human
spirit, no longer has sinful inclinations —no longer desires to hold
down the truth of his being by giving way to bodily or intellectual
revolt against fact —against the absolute voice of GOD as revealed
in the true laws of man’s being. This consummation’s attainment
is the very object of man’s being brought into the Church at all,
and it is in the Church alone that it is to be attained because GOD
has so ordained. “ Outside of Me ” (that is as every scholar knows
the correct rendering of the misleading ‘ without ’ of the English
version), cries the Rescuer of humanity, “ye can do nothing ! ”
(St. John xv. 5.) To all this Body of CHRIST is offered. No
earthly power can force any man to belong to it (hence our


Lord steadfastly refused to employ force to establish it). On
the other hand no earthly power can deprive any man willing to
belong to it of a place within it (hence CHRIST left to His Church
on earth no authority whatever to pronounce any sentence of
everlasting exclusion from the Body). The deliberate exercise of
a man’s own will alone can exclude him : man can, and does,
excommunicate himself. The ultimate issue of such action is in
the hands of GOD only. He has clearly revealed upon what
principles He will pronounce His ultimate decision. It is clearly
announced to man what is before him, if, in full purpose of honest
obedience, he takes his place in the Church. He shall share in the
Life of His Saviour and His GOD (St. John xiv. 19). The fate
of those who refuse obedience and persist in refusal is as clearly
announced. They shall go away into eternal punishment (St.
Matt. xxv. 46). But while this is clear with a most terrific
clearness it is nowhere revealed when this decisive judgment will
take place, and therefore to declare that the everlasting state of
any man is irrevocably settled when his spirit and soul are severed
from his body is—however determined a conclusion of popular
Protestantism —a wicked and presumptuous lie against which the
Church must always protest (for it is only the Catholic after all
who can be a real Protestant, that is to say, one who refuses to
accept man-made deductions from revealed truth as absolutely
true). Furthermore it is nowhere declared in the record of
CHRIST’S utterances that repentance and amendment are impos-
sible. It is declared of CHRIST that He was manifested to
destroy the works of the devil (1 John iii. 8), and it is His own
emphatic assertion that “ all that which the Father giveth Me
(that Father, let us never forget, Whom St. Paul describes as “ our
Saviour, Who willeth that all men should be saved and come to the
knowledge of the Truth” —ITim. ii. 4) shall come unto Me: and
him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out” (St. John vi. 37).
If then Christian reason cannot fail to see that the generality of
men live their lives under the snares of and doing the works of
evil, and leave this earth without a sign of having renounced their
allegiance to the devil, still the Catholic Faith insists that this is
contrary to the will of GOD, not in accordance with that will, and


forbids any despair as to the ultimate fate of those deluded souls—
for CHRIST still remains true to His declared purpose of working
and will assuredly continue that work. So that the Charity of the
true Catholic has a good hope that in the case of those “ who die
and make no sign,” and of those who die avowedly unrepentant,
that they will have opportunity beyond the veil to learn—
it may well be in sterner discipline —what they refused to give
any heed to in the days of their flesh. And strong in the Faith of
the Son of GOD the humble-minded Christian dare not assume for
one instant that because, as far as his poor mortal ken goes, it has not
as yet happened that therefore GOD will in any measure fail to bring
about what He has purposed, and so is bound to believe that as GOD
purposes that all should be saved, He will assuredly, in His own
best time and way, bring about His beneficent purpose. But
equally is he bound to believe that man must come (which implies
the exercise of free will) to the knowledge of the Truth to be
saved ; and, therefore—leaving those who have gone before in
denial or in faulty expectation, and those who are still living
in error, and obstinately refusing to “ accept the truth as it is in
JESUS,” to GOD to deal with as in His wisdom He sees best —he
throws himself heartily into forwarding, to the utmost of such
powers as he possesses, the Will of GOD by doing his own personal
work in his time and place in the Church, which is GOD’s Society
for the promotion of the Truth —apart on the one hand, from the
deadening superstitions of the formalist, and, on the other, from the
blind and unreasoning bigotry of the fanatic. It is clear that, if
coming to the knowledge of the Truth is essential to man’s
salvation, the sooner a man comes the better it will be for him
individually, and the sooner a nation gets into this knowledge the
better will it be for the nation. It seems like writing a platitude
to indite these words, but in the face of present-day assertions of
the intense political wisdom of keeping clear of all religious
questions, and remembering the wholesale denunciation which is
poured forth on those who venture to express an opinion to the
contrary, an appeal to primary principles, the enunciation of which
is generally entitled, by the foolish, “platitude,” may not be
without a very direct use—and, indeed, it is the very simplicity of


first principles which give them their profundity. We conclude,
then, from the foregoing considerations that it is the duty and
wisdom of every man to take his own place as a faithful member
of the true Catholic Church of GOD, and that it is the further duty of
every man whose love for his fellows is pure and clear, and who
feels something of CHRIST’S enthusiasm for humanity—an
enthusiasm which may be traced to a law of the Spiritual
Kingdom, namely, that “no man liveth to himself or dieth to
himself ” —to assist by every means in his power to get them into
that Church also, and so to labour to bring about the sure establish-
ment of a really National Church in the land, and for the welfare
of the people where he lives. And as such an one must see, if he
thinks at all to purpose, that the two greatest obstacles against the
Catholic Church, and consequently against the establishment of any
National branch of it, are, humanly speaking, the efforts of those
who would fain eliminate any belief in revealed Truth at all, the
true spirit of Anti-Christ (2 Thess. ii. 4), and the efforts of those
who, allowing that there is revealed Truth, endeavour to deprive it
of any effectual power by their ceaseless and senseless bickerings
over the interpretation of it, the spirit of “ those of the party of
faction,” this, on which the great Apostle denounces an equal wrath
of GOD (Rom. ii. 8, 9) —he, the true Catholic, believing that the
Universal Saviour must, from the necessity of the case, have given
His Church an Universal Faith, and that, consequently, the notion
that “ true Christianity is creedless ” is a wicked absurdity, must
steadily oppose in his own person, and stand shoulder to shoulder
with his fellow-soldiers in opposing both the secularist and the
sectarian ; the former as an open and avowed enemy from without,
the latter as a dangerous and insidious foe from within—who are
both to be conquered out of love to themselves, because in the
vast majority of cases their enmity is nearly always like that of
those who crucified the Lord, “ they know not what they do ”
their tragic ignorance arising more from will-worship, impatience of
control, and the enticement of transient pleasure and the deceit-
fulness of riches, than from positive malignity of disposition,
though capable of hardening into such, and in some (as we desire
to believe) rare cases of infamously wicked men and women really


doing so. To bring in both securalist and sectarian into the
Catholic Church of GOD by every possible honest means, and,
above all, by the living example of his own duteous Church life,
is the bounden duty of every true Churchman, but it cannot be too
clearly or too often laid down that the endeavour of the peace-at-
any-price party to let in the secularist by ignoring any essential of
the Catholic Faith as essential, or the endeavour to let in the
sectarian by admitting any one of the non-essentials on which he
insists as essential, is to enact the part of a traitor to Truth, and
the more clearly it is given to any man to see and embrace the
essentials of Catholic Faith, the deeper and more repulsive must
such treachery show itself to be.
We hold, then, that the true Catholic-minded Churchman of
Australia cannot possibly regard the various heretical and schis-
matical bodies which are rife among us as in any sense forming the
National Church of Australia, and should labour with all his
power to help in the establishment of such a Church holding in
their simple and sublime majesty, the real essentials of the true
Catholic Faith; and we further hold that such a Church must be
composed —can only be composed —of those ready to live in and
die for faithful adherence to these essentials.
In thus clearly defining the essentials of the Catholic Faith,
r and bv expressing our deep-rooted conviction
Within the limits J
of these that the National Church of Australasia, if
Catholic Essentials such a Church is ever to exist (which GOD
the largest grant, if it is for Australasia’s good, as we
freedom of thought cannot but deem it to be), must hold these
not only possible, essentials in their fullest integrity —do we
but secured. mean that there is to be no allowance of
freedom of individual thought, that there is to be no toleration of
divergence of opinion as to deductions from these essential truths,
that all public worship is to be reduced to one dead level of outer
uniformity, that no men and no body of men are to be recognised
as belonging to this National Church unless wearing precisely the
same uniform, and moving mechanically to the same words of
command, and fiercely repressive of all those who decline to submit
to such an intolerable soul-slavery 1 A hundred thousand times


we say ; GOD forbid ! For the assumption of such an attitude as
this would be, indeed, the worst treachery to the cause of GOD’s
Truth of which we could esteem ourselves to be guilty : it would
be the entire subversion of the ground principle of all that the
Living Word of the Father proclaimed ; it would be the direct
contradiction of the Apostolic estimate of our high privilege,
and of the consequent injunction founded on that estimate,
which goes home with genuine ring of truth to the spirit of
each thoughtful man as right wise, right hopeful, right heaven-
inspired : “ With freedom did CHRIST set us free: stand fast,
therefore, and be not entangled again in a yoke of bondage.”
(Gal. v. 1). For CHRIST Himself said “If ye abide in My
Word then are ye truly My disciples ; and ye shall know the Truth,
and the Truth shall make you free.” (St. John viii. 31). He also
claimed to be “a man that hath told you the Truth which I heard
from GOD.” (St. John viii. 40). He defined elsewhere what
Truth is in a prayer to His Father, offered at a most solemn crisis
of His work for the human race, that His followers might become
holy through and in it —“ Thy Word is Truth.” (St. John xvii. 17).
and St. Paul affirms that the Church of the Living GOD —the Body
of true believers in CHRIST (Col. i. 24)—is “the pillar and stay
of the truth” (1 Tim. iii, 15). There is, then , Truth which is
absolute for the Christian. Within the limits of this he enjoys
entire freedom. Outside of these limits there is only license,
which, however falsely prized by an unbelieving world, is in fact,
bondage to illusion. It is the Catholic Faith which states for man
this Truth as CHRIST revealed it, and in the Catholic Faith is
contained all that is necessary for man to know for his safety here
and hereafter. What that Catholic Faith lays down (and we have
already endeavoured to show clearly what that is) must be the
charter of any true branch of the Church Universal, and must be
strictly adhered to. To affirm, however, that the Catholic Faith of
the Church Militant is final, and that it comprises all that man can
ever know, is quite a different matter, and such an assertion would
be in direct contravention of CHRIST’S own declaration : “ I have
yet many things to say unto you, but ye can not bear them now.”
(St. John xv. 12); to St. John’s teaching derived therefrom;


3 6 What the Colonies Need: or a Plea for
“ Beloved, now are we children of GOD, and it is not yet made
manifest what we shall he.” (1 John iii. 2) ; and also to St.
Paul’s dictum, which applies to all branches of knowledge : “We
know in part and we prophesy in part: but when that which
is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away.”
(1 Cor. xiii. 9, 10). Wherefore we conclude that men may, without
any disturbance of the Church’s unity, and, indeed, for the
Church’s good, for it is richest when thought is most active within
it, exercise their reason on the methods of GOD’s working and
therefrom form conclusions which bear a proper ratio to the
essential Faith (Rom. xii. 6) and put forth such conclusions for the
consideration and guidance of others, provided always that they do
not insist as they too often have, nor—as is more often still the
case —their admirers subsequently insist for them on the general
acceptance of such views as requisite to effectual Church member-
ship, and consequently as essential to salvation; provided always
too that such pious opinions (for to the Church on earth, seeing
they come from human sources, they can never rise to more than
this) do not in any measure contradict, or induce neglect of any
article of the Catholic Faith,
Such a National Church, with such a faith, at once true and
definite, comprehensive and charitable, is, we
Conclusion. believe, right possible in these Australian
lands, and would be right wholesome and
salutary, inasmuch as it would bind men shoulder to shoulder on
the side of GOD and truth and order. The chief obstacle is the
evil passions of interested religionists —compared with which
secularist opposition is as nothing. It remains to be seen whether
there is sufficient vitality among professing Christians to overcome
their passions and unite in a common cause for the good of men
and the glory of GOD. We believe it to be infinitely desirable,
inasmuch as the welfare of these colonies and the large populations
they might support depend on it for without national recognition
and worship of GOD we dare not look for national blessing from
GOD, apart from which any idea of prosperity and progress is a
dream of fools. And because we so believe we have ventured to
endeavour, by such means as are in our power, to direct public


attention afresh to this present spiritual distress, and to stir men’s
thoughts to wiser courses ; not for an instant supposing that we
have done anything more in the matter than the roughest pioneer
work, and thankful if we have at all cleared the road for abler
workmen—by the removal of obstructionist rubbish from their
way.


“ Hear and when Thou hearest,
answer, and forgive.”


subflaib,e:
E. S. WIGG & SON, PUBLISHERS,
BUNDLE STREET.






