

THE
MODERN PLAGUE
BY MARION PIDDINGTON
THK origin of the modern plague is
obscure, because it comes of ancient
parentage, and precise data cannot be
given as to its source; its true extent
also is not yet known.
Its history is not vital to the people
of Australia, any more than past wars
were our concern when the Great War
occurred suddenly in 1914. It is the ever-
present invading enemy of racial poisons
which must be attacked, and Australians
must he told that in spite of all the effort
that has been made in recent years by
the medical profession in every State for
the elimination of venereal disease, in
spitu if all the expense incurred by
Governments for the upkeep and stalling
of special wards for men, women, and
children suffering from these diseases,
and in spite of venereal disease clinics
and blood testing at the various Boards
of Health, the scourge continues its
deadly invasion into the home life of the
nation, and into the very heart of the
race.
Tlie American Medical Association,
co-operating with the Social Hygiene
Association, last year Issued 25,000
leaflets of the Metropolitan Insurance
Company’s advertisement, “The Great
Imitator,” to physicians and to the pub-
lic of the United States. This advertise-
ment says
“Mankind’s most dangerous enemy is
syphilis. It takes the form of many
diseases, masking as rheumatism, arth-
ritis. physical exhaustion, or nervous
breakdown. It may seem to be a form
of skin, eye, heart, lung, throat, or kid-
ney trouble.' Most tragic of all, it often
attacks the brain and spinal cord. It
may result in blindness, deafness, loco-
motor ataxis, paralysis, and insanity. A
lifelong tragedy. No wonder it is called
the great imitator. In certain general
hospitals as high as 30 per cent, of all
patieiUs were found to be suffering
directly or indirectly from venereal
disease. Yet many of its victims had
not known what was robbing them of
health and strength until a medical ex-
amination, including blood and spinal
fluid tests, revealed their condition.
“Syphilis can usually be cured by com-
petent physicians if detected in time, and
if the patient faithfully and persistently
follows the complete treatment pre-
scribed by his doctor. If the early stages
are neglected, cures are less certain, but
a great deal can still be done.
“It is estimated that about 13,000,000
persons—one out of ten —in the Unite(
States and Canada have, or at some time
have had, syphilis, Because of fear and
ignorance, millions of victims have been
Imposed upon by quacks, charlatans, and
blackmailers pretending to practise medi-
cine.
“A most effective way to reduce the
amount of syphilis is the pre-natal treat-
ment of mothers suffering from the dis-
ease.
“Parents and teachers owe it to those
depending on them for education and
guidance to replace secrecy by know-
ledge, frank instruction, and friendly
advice.”
This quotation has been given in full
because it sums up briefly the seriousness
of syphilis and its consequences.
Further, the public must be enlightened
as to the disease of gonorrhoea, because
this is more prevalent than syphilis and
equally disastrous to health and happi-
ness. Fifty years ago the youth of Syd-
ney bandied about the phrase with one
another, “You are not a man until you
have had a dose of the clap.” There are
many to-day using similar phrases in
ignorance of the subject. Hear what dis-
tinguished medical opinion says of gonor-
rhoea, when speaking of pre-marriage
caution : —■
“Any man or woman who has once had
a discharge, even years before, should
be thoroughly examined by a doctor, who


should have any discharge which he has
been able to express (obtain) from the
urethra examined under the microscope
for the germs of gonorrhoea. This is just
as important as examination of the blood
for syphilis.”
The American Medical Association has
performed a universal service by dis-
tributing “The Great Imitator” to the
public, thus striking a blow at the secrecy
and taboo observed by those who continue
to keep the community in ignorance of
one of the fundamental causes which
destroy human life before and after birth.
That destructive agent bequeaths to
countless thousands of individuals weak-
ened resisting powers with which to tight
future illnesses, and is responsible for
inefficient lives, and lives unhappy be-
cause of hereditary taint, or of continual
suffering throughout doomed years of
mere existence.
The truth must be told to the public,
Whose co-operation is urgently needed,
and a remedy must be sought in the
coming drive for the avoidance of pro-
miscuity and the eradication of venereal
disease.
AUSTRALIA’S PERIL.
The greatest danger of the future of
Australia lies In the apathy with which
her people In general regard the problem
at national health. Her economic wealth
is secured by her natural resources, and
in our epoch the consciences of the
people are concerned with the more equal
distribution of economic wealth, and the
gradual revival of industry on a sure
foundation of national justice. Ilut eco-
nomic wealth cannot be assured for
future generations without national
health. The public will before long rea-
lise that we are heading towards the
same disasters as have overtaken older
countries, because they have shirked the
vital question of mental, physical, and
spiritual values as a necessary part of
the equipment for achieving true pros-
perity.
The call for a national survey of health
in England to-day is proof of this conten-
tion. England is looking for the “Causes
of Uacial Decay.” Scientists have an-
nounced that deterioration has set in,
the vicious circle of neglect and costly
remedies is now complete. Expenditure
is increasing on the upkeep of asylums,
mental hospitals, epileptic colonies,
special schools for mentally deficient
children, special venereal disease wings
and wards for men, women, and children
in hospitals, venereal disease clinics, in-
stitutions for children incapable of learn-
ing at all, and other institutional pro-
vision for inadequate and irresponsible
individuals. This increased expenditure
is necessitating restriction in housing,
and in advancing normally healthy mem-
bers of tlie community to a higher stan-
dard of living.
If England were relieved to-morrow of
all her war debts, and her burden of
pauperism and unemployment benefits
amounting in 1920 to over £!MI,000,(Hi() per
annum, she would still show appalling
numbers of lives sacrificed, not only by
war, but by tlie policy of drift, which Inis
affected all nations, and is affecting Aus-
tralia. Apart from her cancer, tuber-
cular, maternal, and infant mortality bur-
dens (which are enormous), England's
record is serious in the extreme.
In one year in England and Wales
there were over 112,000 deaths from in-
fluenza. All ages were attacked, but “the
disease showed an especial ruthlessness
to early adult life, a very high peak in
the mortality occurred about age 20.”
This Is significant as showing the low
resisting powers in young men and
women.
“In one year 2SJ million weeks’ work
were lost to industry owing to sickness.
Xearly GO per cent, of the insured per-
sons are under medical treatment every
year for varying lengths of time. This
shows unfitness amongst the picked Work-
ers of the nation.
“During one year 1000 children aged
3 from various parts of England were
officially examined ; 49 per cent, showed
rickets, enlarged tonsils, adenoids, ear
discharge, dental decay, and cardiac
affection, etc.
“Of 8-year-old children, no less than
51.9 per cent, of the boys and 54.7 per
cent, of the girls failed to pass the test
for normal vision.
“Multitudes of instances of heart, lung,
and nervous defects, as well as all kinds
of deformities, were brought to light dur-
ing the routine inspections at the ordin-
ary elementary schools.” That children
of school age show need of such treat-
ment is deplorable.
“The school medical service,” says the
London School Medical Officer (Dr. Men-
zies), “is a receiver of damaged goods,
and spends most of its time and energies
in patching them up."
In 1922 there were over 123,000 insane
under care in England; in 1920 they had
increased to more than 133,000. In 1923
there were over 15,000 under care for
mental deficiency, and more than 19,000
in 1925.
Here may be seen the gradual increase
of the tragedy.


In 11(2!) there were :>()(),Odd feeble-
minded. These are nut under care, and
marriage and inter-marriage of these in-
dividuals extends the mischief. To these
figures must he added many more, viz.,
border-line eases, uneertiflahle, epileptics,
neurasthenics, and the like.
other countries are faced with the
same deterioration.
In France, M. l.yon wrote years ago,
“The statisticians can count the day,
comparatively near, when this great
nation will disappear from the map of
Kurope.” Fnthinking people exclaim,
“That is because of tier birth control.”
It is not the number of children in a
family winch brings about race extinc-
tion. It is tlie extent of promiscuity in-
dulged in which spreads “the modern
plague." France Ims laid a century of
“tolerated houses” where the youth of
France has been early corrupted and in-
fected with venereal disease. Today,
France could not face another war if she
had to depend on her white soldiers!
Germany's vitality is seriously impaired
since the days when Tacitus wrote of the
Oennan people:—
“It is generally late before their young
men enjoy the pleasures of love: by con-
sequence they are not enfeebled in their
prime, nor are the virgins married too
scbfi. Tloth pah’les wait (o' attain their
full growth. In the warm season of
mutual vigour the match is made, and
the children of this marriage have the
constitution of their parents.”
A reason for Germany’s deterioration
from this sound heritage of virility is
(he same as that of France. Both coun-
tries have participated in the Continental
system of “tolerated houses,” which sys-
tem, it is recognised to-day, must be
swept out of existence.
In every country the inroads on health
by the invasion of racial poisons is ap-
parent.
To this end Australia is heading, and
the people can prove it for themselves
by casting an eye at the efforts in every
State in Australia to deal with the same
world-wide problems. With a population
of only fii millions we have increasing
numbers of delicate, diseased, crippled,
and inadequate citizens. In one year
■IO,OOO children were treated at one hos-
pital. Is Australia preparing for the
future record of damaged goods in her
elementary schools, of increased mental
deficiency through the inter marriage of
morons and of mental deficients, of the
general breakdown in health of adult life
before or in the middle age, and of pre-
mature deaths of thousands whose resist-
ing powers against all illnesses are
lowered by the effects of early promis-
cuity? Investigation has shown that a
large percentage of these losses is due to
venereal infection as the original cause.
Venereal disease acts on the physical
organism just as starvation affects it,
and it does not matter whether the indi-
vidual is born in a palace or a hovel,
venereal disease, if neglected, will lower
the resisting powers with which to fight
for life.
THE CAUSE.
The everyday cause of venereal disease,
viz., promiscuity, is not medical in char-
acter, and for this reason the medical
profession, whose root principle is always
to deal with the physical cause of every
disease before attempting to extirpate
it, has succeeded so far in treating only
its physical manifestations. If this is
all that is to be done, the community is
destined still to see the abortive attempts
of physical science to try to cure what
it cannot avert. The multiplying toll of
premature births and deaths, and of liv-
ing deaths in the future, will continue to
he added to those of the present era of
war promiscuity, and of after-war pro-
miscuous relationships.
Hitherto the public, kept in ignorance
of the grave iiafure and, extent of .“the,
menace in our midst” except for occa-
sional startling statistics, can have no
sound knowledge whatever of the enor-
mous part it can take in rescuing the
holy land of health and happiness from
the tyranny of set, and not always dis-
interested, opinions, advanced uncon-
sciously to keep the people in ignorance
of a fundamental cause of racial de-
generacy. The Commonwealth, the
States, the Churches, parents, teachers,
insurance societies, and public-spirited
citizens can, if they will, in a very short
time convert this ignorance into know-
ledge, and they can do this by uniting
with the pioneers in the coming move-
ment for the education of the nation on
the conduct of life in these regards.
The American Medical Association is
informing the public of America as to
what it can do by way of co-operation
in the task of race preservation. The
promoters of the drive throughout Aus-
tralia for the eradication of venereal
disease have likewise determined to show
the public of the Commonwealth the
direct influence of venereal disease on
the health and wealth of the nation; its
ramifications affecting individual health
and happiness: its terrible consequences
to parental, infant, and child life; and
its progressive product of deterioration


in the germ-plasm of tiio slock.
All such destruction of human life and
energy is preventible.
THE FIRST STEP.
The first step is the prevention, in tin*
first instance, of the initiating cause of
venereal disease, and the ultimate elimi-
nation of this factor, which must engross
the attention and activity of every indi-
vidual in tlie community, especially the
parents and potential parents of the race.
Here, too, the comhined strength and
concurrent effort of Federal and State
Ministers of Health, Hospital Hoards,
Mental Asylum Hoards, social workers,
committees, organisations and broadcast-
ing talks, can lend their aid in “The
(Ireat Adventure” of finally freeing the
('omnionw ealtli from racial poisons.
MEANS AVAILABLE.
The means and facilities to this end
are available for ajl—TTiese mediums,
through which an intensive campaign of
an educational character may he suc-
cessfully carried out. Physiological re-
medies and religious fears have been the
only methods offered so far to cope with
venereal disease, and they have failed.
It is for tlie people of Australia to
inaugurate a new system based on racial
teaching from which ethical values will
result. The truths of such a system will
silence forever those hidden of
’liuimir?’TtuiTvTftise, 'whotSd' secrecy anti
prudery tire responsible for the alarming
increase in the incidence of venereal
disease, together with its derivatives.
The secrets of racial health and vitality
must he unfolded.
A NEW ERA OF HOPE.
Much is in tlie melting-pot to-day, and
hope lies in the belief that grave warn-
ings issued in regard to health (which
is, as Uuskin says, the real wealth of tile
nation) will not he forgotten or brushed
aside, hut that they will lie listened to
and courageously received by a public
eager for health reform.
A few potent instruments of achieving
this vital objective may here he men-
tioned.
The disquieting feature of failure to
continue treatment of venereal disease
until complete cure has been effected will
stimulate the social worker in every walk
of life to encourage patients to persevere
until pronounced as cured by their medi-
cal advisers.
A method of impersonal sex training
for preventing child delinquency and
promiscuity will become an integral [part
of home teaching. I.ike all teaching of
the young, this should he happy and
natural, and should he free from fear
and any alarmist suggestions.
Special [parental care may he afforded
to adolescents who have reached [puberty
without previous sex training. (Advice
tor this purpose will he given in classej
for parents only.)
Sex education touching pre-marriage
caution, and marriage itself, forms part
id a new system which, if faithfully car
ried out, promises a future of racia
health as yet unattained,
Kvery citizen is asked tip take part i
forming classes (winch may he estab
lished at the cost of a few shillings)
where complete knowledge on the avoid-
ance of [promiscuity and the eradication
of venereal disease will he made known
to the [public.
Applications for inforjnalion as to
forming classes in any town or district
will he answered by the writer, c/o. the
Fdifor, and the task nitty be immediately
undertaken of freeing Australia from the
scourge.
I’ufop-tunately, individual fear is still
.JfclSji.»» 1-errjfr teyen youjiy clujtjr' 4 ;; *50441
velmreal disease. Such fatal instruction
injures the mind and results in weakened
resolve and repression.
A Him on the subject of venereal
disease has been shown throughout the
suburbs of Sydney which depicts in de-
tail its physical manifestations. Young
children of both sexes have been per-
mitted to see tlie film.
This is the opposite of all that Is
rational in education. Knowledge and
timely advice may he imparted in a care-
fiee. matter of fact way, which builds up,
instead of undermining, tlie bright and
natural courage of the young.
Prudery, ignorance, and fear must be
superseded by clean thinking and racial
ideals.
Malaria and hookworm have been prac-
tically eradicated in every country which
lias adopted modern methods. Venereal
disease can just as certainly he banished
in every country which, as well as curing,
will also [prevent the jnodern plague.
Reprinted from “ Health and Physical Culture"
