

The Aims and Objects
OF A
Literature Society
HENRY GYLES TURNER




*


?


THE
AUSTRALIAN LITERATURE SOCIETY:
Occasional Papers?Number 3.
The Aims and Objects of a
Literature Society


Copyright 1903


QTfie Aims and Objects
of n
ITitfctatute Sotictg:
Being the Inaugural Address to the
Australian Literature Society on accepting the office of
President, 23rd March, 1903
henry gyles turner
ECHO PUBLISHING COMPANY, LIMITED
MELBOURNE




THE AIMS AND OBJECTS
OF A
LITERATURE SOCIETY
Fifty years ago, or, to ?speak by the card,"
in the English summer of 1852, there flourished
in the highly respectable parish of St. George's,
Hanover Square, an association known as the
St. George's Literary Club, of which I had the
distinction of being the honorary secretary. Its
place of meeting was in the chambers of one of the
members, over a shop in Bond Street, and from
this modest temple it proceeded to announce that
literature, grandiloquently defined by its Presi-
dent in his opening address as the embalmed
thought of the gifted of mankind, was the subject
on which it proposed to fix its profoundest
attention. We were all young, in the first flush of
youthful aspiration and conceit. I doubt if the
oldest member of the club had passed his 25th
birthday, and that is the only excuse I can offer
for the Midsummer madness which inflated the
announcement of our intentions. We declared that
while as Britons we were proud of the glorious


names of onr countrymen who had won a lofty
niche in the temple of literary fame, we were sat-
isfied that this ?winter of our discontent" com-
pared most unfavourably with the productive
aetivity of the first half of the century, and we
assumed not only that it was our duty, but also
that we had the power to dispel the lethargy
which we believed was sapping the mental charac-
ter of the age. Having but little worldly experi-
ence, and a morbid distrust of the capacity of
editors and publishers to recognise talent, we
childishly proposed to remedy this sad intellectual
debacle by extending ouy encouragement to the
development of any genius, which, because un-
known, was unable to find admission to public
favour through existing, but undoubtedly hostile,
channels. In a burst of yearning tenderness our
prospectus said :
? Many a young heart, replete with poetic; feeling and fine
sentiment, has been crushed into silence by the stern condem-
nation of some ascetic criticisms; while had popular praise
awarded his perhaps untrained fancies their due, the power of a
Gray or a Burns might have grown steadily out of his youthful
and ambitious aspirations.?
Herein you see how a fellow feeling makes us
wondrous kind. No doubt in our little score of
members there were those who had been ?declined
with thanks" by unfeeling magazine editors, or
had even been refused decent interment for their still-
born verses in the poets? corner of some obscure
newspaper. One or two had enjoyed the intoxica-
tion of seeing themselves in print for the first


time, and had felt hurt that no criticism, ascetic
or otherwise, was deigned to their productions.
Looking back through the vista of half a century,
I can only come to the conclusion that we were a
rather preposterous group of young prigs, and
though probably we did not do much harm to
anybody else ?because we had no influence ?yet
we cockered one another into mistaken opinions
of our intellectual capacity, and substituted for
right-down earnest study the fleeting gratification
of the plaudits of a Mutual Admiration Society.
I dimly recollect some of the daring things we did,
the memory of which even now makes me hot. We
arraigned Macaulay at our bar, and pronounced
him the most biassed and untruthful of historians,
whose brilliant diction was no atonement for the
mendacity of his statements and the slanderous
bent of his mind. We ridiculed Carlyle as a verbal
buffoon who aimed at wrecking the English lan-
guage for literary purposes. We decided that
Longfellow was a greater poet than Tennyson.
And, most unforgivable of all, we hoisted Martin
Farquhar Tupper on to a pedestal as one of the
first-class poets of the Victorian era ! Need I ,tell
you, after this disclosure, that the St. George's
Literary Club did not leave any permanent im-
pression on the annals of British literature, and
that out of that aspiring band not one, to my
knowledge, ever brought joy into a publisher's
counting house.


But while the enthusiasm lasted, manuscripts
poured in until the ordinary meetings were always
overweighted, and at the end of the year we de-
cided to utilise some of them by starting a modest
magazine. Then the disillusion came. The sonor-
ous periods, the ornate, not to say stilted phrase-
ology, the telling points that were wont to set the
table in a roar of applause, took on a jaded
look in print, and wore an amazing appearance
of having been dressed up for the occasion. The
public would have none of it. Even the modest
price of sixpence at which we assessed our maga-
zine seemed to promptly evoke the reply of the
?Friend of Humanity? to Canning?s ?Needy Knife
Grinder.? The articles of which the writers had
been so proud were unmistakably not wanted.
The reason was not far to seek. A great author-
ity says :
? Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom ; and
with all thy getting get understanding.?
The seeker after wisdom in this quarter realised
Thackeray?s felicitous description of George the
Fourth. When stripped of the gorgeous setting, of
external phraseological trappings, there was
nothing there. We were full of the fluent flippancy
of youth, lacking the experience of those years of
discretion?shall I say from thirty to fifty?to
guide us in forming opinions that were worth any-
thing to our fellow creatures, and greatly daring
we fell, brought back to sober reason by the pro-
saic intrusion of a printer?s bill.


Do I hear anyone saying : What is all this
ancient history to us ? If it has any bearing upon
this Society, it would seem to point out that we
have elected for our President just the style of
man we ought to have avoided ! May I plead
the consideration which is due to repentance and
amendment, and express an honest belief that the
experience which I purchased in my youth may be
of some small service in your councils ? It is to
enable me to point a moral for our future guidance
that I have so remorselessly unveiled my past.
The existence of the Australian Literature
Society for two or three years, the interested at-
tendance at its monthly meetings, the generally
modest character of its claims on the attention of
the thoughtful, its ready and grateful acceptance
of the guidance of its aims and methods by so
competent a critic as Professor Tucker ?nay, the
very fact that it has hived off from its early asso-
ciations, and taken its way alone all seem to
point to a hopeful vitality. Even more important
is the indication that the community amidst which
it has its being, is not unwilling to recognise that
there are pursuits entirely unconnected with gain,
free from the exciting rivalry of the Mart and
the Exchange, in which adult Australians can find
an attraction and a charm. It is gratifying to
realise this, for we have been repeatedly assured
by superior persons that it was not so. Many
globe-trotting critics have told us, and reiterated
it ad nauseam that in Melbourne there is no in-


tellectual life, and though there is plenty of vigour
and eagerness, there is nothing worth being eager or
vigorous about. One of that dyspeptic band, the
late Francis Adams, who lived long amongst us,
and even condescended to publish a volume of
verse in the colonies, implies that we don?t under-
stand what literature means. ?Literary Society/?
he says in the ?Fortnightly Review,? ?is the
?synonym for the company of journalists, and
?has superseded the old Bohemianism. A second-
?rate and third-rate pseudo-intellectualism reigns
?in it, and only too often it becomes a pseudo-
intellectualism of no rate at all. It finds, and
?deserves no published means of expression beyond
?that afforded in the Saturday?s conversational
?columns of the dailies and weeklies, or in the
Bulletin.? ? And we are not without our own
foolish young writers, who help to justify such
sneers by proclaiming that all that is noble and of
good report in Australia wears moleskins, and
carries its swag out back. Such as these have
conspired to deride the idea of the existence of
what they contemptously call ?culchaw,? or any-
thing that lies outside our legitimate function of
earning our daily bread.
Now, both the sneers of visitors and the
smug self-complacency of our own intellectual
prodigies are the result of ignorance. I cannot
speak for Australia as a whole, but I have been
identified with the social life of Melbourne for


nearly half a century, and, while admitting that
it holds a strong infusion of the sordid element, 1
say unhesitatingly that during the whole of that
period, nay, even before, it has never been without
a section of the community?it maybe a small
one, but still a representative proportion ?that
has had a discerning palate for intellectual food,
a selected few that have found solace in books
when the material environment has been depress-
ing and the surroundings sombre, and that have
sought by associated effort with those of kindred
tastes to make widely known those iways of pleas-
antness whose paths are paths of peace.
Was it not an anticipatory glimpse of such a
possible development that induced John Pascoe
Fawkner, when the town of Melbourne was form-
less, and void, and the blacks held corrobborees
beside the creek that flowed down Elizabeth Street,
to advertise that "mental recreation of a high
order? would be found at his hotel ? What sort of
a population do you suppose it was then living in
log huts and mud brick houses, that could be
attracted by Mr. Fawkner?s advertisement that
he provided " seven English and five Colonial
"weekly papers, seven British monthly magazines,
"three British quarterly reviews, and a very choice
"selection of books including novels, poetry, the-
ology, history, philosophy, chemistry, and a
"late encyclopaedia ??
You who consider a cosy room, a comfortable
easy chair, and a brilliant incandescent lamp as


the mere ordinary appendages of an evening de-
voted to coquetting with literature, seek that
solace in a very different spirit from that which
animated those rough men in Melbourne?s em-
bryonic days. Destitute of even the initial com-
forts of civilisation, exhausted by long hours
of daily toil in subduing the wilderness, a goodly
number of them could and did gather in the little
parlour of Fawkner?s hotel, with its hard benches
and bare rough floor, and by the uncertain
glimmer of a swinging train-oil lamp could pass
from their hard surroundings into the companion-
ship of the witty and the wise of mankind. The
cynic will say they went there because there was
nothing else to do. No well-lighted streets for a
promenade, a form of exercise so dear to the young
colonial ; no theatres or concerts, not even a
circus. The dark forest was close around them.
Their only realisable alternative was a pipe on
their doorstep, or a possible yarn with a neigh-
bour. But the hardy pioneers, like the Scotch
highlanders, were not much given to talk. They
were generally too tired to incur the labour of
struggling to arrange their limited vocabulary.
All honour then to old Johnny Fawkner, that he
not only provided them with the means of mild
mental recreation, but, like the good-natured,
fussy, managing man that he was, he kept up their
interest by spending much of his time with them,
and helping them by his shrewd common sense


and omnivorous reading over difficulties that even
the ?late encyclopaedia? left unsolved. So we had
the germs of a Mutual Improvement Society with
us from the very beginning, and when an increas-
ing population enabled somewhat higher flights
to be attempted, behold the rudiments 1 of a
Mechanic?s Institute were already in hand, destined
in its turn to blossom into an ?Athenaeum? as we
became more genteel and less in earnest. The
work initiated by Fawkner, primarily no doubt
with an eye to business, was taken up a few years
later by the man whom we Victorians have learned
to look upon as the typical friend of literature in
the colony, the active promoter and nursing father
of our Public Library, then Mr. Redmond Barry.
In the very modest house which in 1842 he occu-
pied in Bourke Street, near the corner of William
Street, he set aside one apartment free of access
at all times to the working men of the town, and
furnished it with the nucleus of a library of good
standard works, and current magazines rather
more up-to-date than the solid reading which
Fawkner had imported from Van Diemen?s Land.
The Mechanic?s Institute, which emanated from
the Presbyterian body, then the most active edu-
cational influence in the colony, was a success
from the start, and Redmond Barry delivered to
its members many ornate lectures, most of which
it must be admitted passed harmlessly over the
heads of his audiences. But, in connection with a


dozen others he kept alive an interest in mental
pursuits, and fought against that growing sordid-
ness which too often clings to the pursuit of wealth
for material ends. I have often been told by early
colonists that the period from about 1845 to the
irruption of the gold miners, was socially and in-
tellectually a most agreeable era. The attractions
of a new country, in the foundation of which
there was no convict taint, and where the climatic
conditions, and the prospects of fortune were so
promising, stimulated a very high-class immigra-
tion. It was a bright feature of those times that
large numbers of young men, scions of good
families, flocked out in unusual proportions, and
infused into the somewhat primitive surroundings
the charm of high culture and refined manners.
It will probably be a surprise to learn that as
far back as 1851, a friend of mine, who is still
amongst us, Mr William Sydney Gibbons, started
an ?Australian Literary Society/? which like your-
selves, held its monthly meetings for the discus-
sion of literary topics, not of course confined to
the Australian article, which was then practically
non-existent. It had but a brief career, for like
many other aspiring projects, it was swept away
by the wild disorganisation of society that fol-
lowed upon the inrush of the gold seekers ?an in-
vasion that stamped out everything not directly
connected with personal gain.


Well, I have tried to show you that the spark
of mental culture was kept alive through those
dark ages. I have not time to narrate the many
vigorous efforts it made to break into flame
through the medium of the numerous magazines
projected to that end, all of which succumbed to
the rampant spirit of commercialism. Let us
regard the question as settled, that in spite of the
admittedly sordid character of our surroundings,
there is a section of the community that takes
delight in literature beyond the mere gratification
of reading a novel, and let us assume, for this
occasion at least , that you represent it.
What should be your aims, and what the best
method of attaining them ? In the first place, this
society is called The Australian Literature Society,
and its raison d?etre appears to be the criticism
and discussion of the methods of those writers
who have made their mark, or sought to do so, in
this portion of the globe. Also to offer advice,
with encouragement or repression, as the case may
be, to those who seek to do likewise. The first half
of the programme is declared to be, on the show-
ing of our esteemed Mentor, Professor Tucker, a
rather narrowing process. The second involves a
fearful responsibility, and an assumed possession
of that critical faculty, the deficiency of which,
the same authority tells us, is glaringly manifest.
Take these two points in their order. ?The
student of literature,? says Professor Tucker,


?cannot afford to spend long hours with Adam
?Lindsay Gordon while Byron or Burns must
?wait; he cannot be learning Kendall by heart,
?while Catullus and Hugo and Keats are left
?neglected ; he cannot be reading and re-reading
? ?The Man from Snowy River/ while Homer has
?still so much to delight him withal. . . . Our
?horizon will be cramped. The existing literature
?of Australia after all touches life and nature at
?but a few points. . , . Put together all reputable
?work whatsoever that has been written in Aus-
tralia, and how little does it embrace of all that
?men have believed in, hoped for, aspired to, of
?their visions and ardours and ecstasies ; of their
?reasonings, ponderings, and imaginings ; of
?their discoveries in beauty and wisdom. In how
?few of the domains of mere literary art does it
?offer examples worthy for our models. We can-
?not afford to be missing all the rest.?
It is impossible to controvert this view of the
question. It is the opinion of a man whose whole
career is devoted to cultivating the companionship
of the most gifted intellects the world has known.
In that most admirable address, from which I
have just quoted, he laid great stress upon the
necessity for closely studying the works of the
great masters in the wide domain of literature, in
order that the opinions which we attempt to ex-
press in relation to the writers of to-day may
have any value at all. This of course is axiomatic
truth, but" may we not plead for some allowance


being made for personal inclination and environ-
ment ? Do you remember what that delightful old
bear, Dr. Samuel Johnson, said to Boswell when
he was bothered to read some standard book ?
?A man ought to read just as inclination leads
?him, sir ; for what he reads as a task will do him
?little good.? To a man with the mental equip-
ment of Professor Tucker, inoculated with the
traditions of an historic university, and devoting
all his time to the study and the teaching of the
work of the master minds of the human race, it
doubtless seems a very insignificant bye-road of
literature which this Society proposes to pursue.
But if we are firmly convinced that this bye-path
will develop into a highway, and that the import-
ance of that highway in the world's esteem will
be determined by the efforts which we and kindred
workers may make to clear the track of all that is
positively harmful, have we not a plain duty ?
Can we not lay the flattering unction to our soul
that we are doing more useful work while so em-
ployed, than in sitting at the feet of ?the blind
?old man of Scio's rocky isle,? and meekly as-
suming that the intellectual giants of those far off
days could have no worthy successors in our de-
generate race ? I cannot resist quoting in this
connection an anecdote which is told in Hogg's
?Life of Shelley,? of an English clergyman who
devoted his life to the reiterated perusal of a three
years' course of Greek books. He had no family,
the lightest of professional duties, a comfortable


income, and perfect health. He took his three
meals a day, his two short walks, and all the rest
of his waking hours for thirty years he gave to
Greek. Two or three times a year he read a few
pages of Virgil and Cicero, just to satisfy himself
that it was waste of time for a man who could
read Greek to read anything else. On Sundays he
turned to the Septuagint and the New Testament.
From his three years? course he never deviated.
When they were ended he began again. The only
exception was Homer, whose works were read
through every year during a summer vacation at
the seaside. To quote his own words : ?I read a
?book of the Iliad every day before dinner, and a
?book of the Odyssey daily after dinner ; in a
?month there are twenty-four week days, there
?being twenty-four books in each poem it just
?does it.? I doubt if even our friend, Professor
Tucker, would pat this worthy clergyman on the
back, for in the most favourable aspect of the
case he was devoting his intellectual gifts to the
creation of purely selfish enjoyment, and commit-
ting what the Professor described as an intel-
lectual sin, in neglecting the concomitant study of
English. After all was he not persevering in as
narrow a track as this Society seems committed
to ? His patch may have been of richer soil, but
it has produced its full fruition, and it seems im-
possible after these many centuries of exhaustive
commentary to disinter any fresh brilliancies, or
to irradiate the old with a new refulgence.


Of course it is absolutely and hopelessly im-
possible to lay down specific rules for any indi-
vidual's course of study. The multiplicity of
books has reached such a point that no man is com-
petent in a lifetime to pick out even the supremely
best, and to reject all the undeserving. It is easy
to say that Homer and Virgil, Moliere, Goethe,
Shakespeare, Milton and Bacon should form an
imperative foundation for literary study, but it is
by no means so easy to make us personally realise
the value of those we have to assimilate through
a translation.
Some forty years ago Thomas Carlyle delivered
an address to the students of the Edinburgh
University, which was entitled, ?On the Choice of
Books." It came upon me at the time when I was
trying to infuse a little method into my own read-
ing, and I rejoiced in the prospect of the guidance
of such a master mind in indicating my route.
Alas ! it proved an ignis fatuus, for brilliant as
the lecture was, it dealt with everything but its
title, and only condescended as a guide so far as
to say that there were only two kinds of books,
good books and bad books, and to deny emphati-
cally the popular idea that if an ignorant man is
reading any book he is doing better than nothing
at all. Many of you no doubt remember how, in
1886, the ?Pall Mall Gazette" induced Sir John
Lubbock to furnish a list of the best hundred
books, the publication of which converted hun-
dreds of sober citizens into most exigeant critics.


led to a controversy covering miles of printed
paper, and to the suggestion of names entitled to
the rank of ?best? that ran into thousands. The
most scathing criticism came from John Rusk in,
who contemptuously kicked out amongst others
Grote?s ?History of Greece/" ?The Confessions of
St. Augustine/' and all the writings of John
Stuart Mill, Chas. Darwin, Chas. Kingsley, and
Gibbon, though in nearly every one of the amended
lists each of these writers found some pride of
place. This makes it fairly evident that upon such
a question it is hopeless to look for unanimity
even amongst professional and assumedly compe-
tent critics.
Well, so far the members of the Australian
Literature Society have not made any public
profession of their fitness by preliminary study of
the great masters to pose as critics of the inchoate
school of Australian writers. But, before dealing
with that duty of the Society, let us for a minute
or two glance at the limitations involved in con-
fining ourselves to what our title seems to imply,
?Australian literature.
Undoubtedly it is to-day a very insignificant
tributary of that vast and ever increasing stream
of inspiration, enlightenment, and entertainment,
that flows with unprecedented volume from the
printing presses of the Northern Hemisphere. And,
let us readily admit that the relatively limited
quantity is not compensated for by any notable
excellence of quality. If we eliminate all those


volumes which have no claim to live, doomed to
early death by paucity of thought, or incapacity
for intelligible utterance, the residuum would be
so small that it would shrink from labelling itself
with a distinctive national name. If the dear old
Autocrat of the Breakfast Table had lived in
Melbourne instead of Boston, he would have hesi-
tated to say :
But few can touch the magic string,
And noisy fame is glad to win them;
Alas for those who never sing,
But die with all their music in them.
In Victoria more than five hundred people have
tugged at the ?magic string,? to the extent of
getting themselves into rhythmic print ; but
?noisy fame,? like the Levite of old, has passed
by on the other side, serene and indifferent. If we
may judge by what we see, we are justified in as-
suming that only a small minority ?die with all
?their music in them.? Let us say, without daring
to mention names, that out of the five hundred
aspiring poets, perhaps ten per cent, have evinced
in selected lines or verses, or even in an entire
poem, a legitimate claim to some measure of recog-
nition and encouragement. And further, that
perhaps a score are admittedly entitled to
take an honourable position alongside any poets
whom Great Britain or America have produced
during the last twenty years. That is not very
high praise, for the period covers a somewhat


barren era. Take our writers of fiction, whose
name is legion, and you should have no difficulty
in picking out a round dozen, whose work is
superior to the average run of the new fiction
which floods the circulating libraries of England
to-day. Even in this busy community a few men
have devoted years of study to philosophical and
scientific questions, whose researches when pub-
lished have been highly praised by the most com-
petent authorities in the old world.
The total outcome of Australian contributions
to literature calculated to do credit to its parent-
age, is, as already stated, by no means imposing ;
but a beginning has been made, and the fact that
so many have attempted, even though they have
failed, should give us some hope that the future is
not without promise. Whether the failure was due
to the fact that the seed sown was too poor to
germinate ; whether it fell upon stony places, and
took no root in the community ; or whether, as in
some instances was no doubt the case, it fell
among thorns, and the thorns which were labelled
� s. d. sprung up and choked it, are matters
which seem to be especially fitted for this Society?s
investigation.
And our hopefulness of the future is not with-
out the support of precedent. It is only about
eighty years ago that Sydney Smith in writing
on the want of literary activity in the
United States after two centuries of colonisa-
tion, declared that ? there is not one man


?in America of any considerable talent.?
To-day it is said that in the field of fiction
and light literature generally, there are more
American books sold in England than those
of local origin. We may be said to have only
emerged from the toilsome stage of colonisation
within the last fifty years, and already in this
particular field many of our writers are being
jealously shepherded by English publishers. Now,
if 'this Society, by limiting its objects to the
consideration of the works of local writers, has
so restricted an area to work upon as to narrow
its judgment and cramp its critical capacity, it
will be the fault of the members individually, and
not of the Society collectively.
There was an admirable organisation in force
some years ago, of which I have not heard any-
thing recently, called the Home Reading Union,
which aimed at a distinct course of literary culture
for its members. This Society does not undertake
that. It expects its members, by the very fact of
their joining it, to be sufficiently interested in
literature to devote time to their own cultivation
in the manner most accessible to them. And it
must be admitted that in this colony the oppor-
tunities are now many, and the facilities of access
great. The growing influence of our University,
and particularly the larger area covered by its
Extension Lectures, should be marked by a forward
step in every decade of our national life.


It is a suggestive note in Professor Tucker?s
lecture* last Wednesday evening, that he repre-
hended the practice of setting students to learn
the time-honoured opinions of eminent critics upon
great authors before they have acquired any first-
hand knowledge of those authors for themselves.
Such instruction is largely wasted effort, for what
is learned by it is not assimilated knowledge, but
only a kind of superficial cramming, in which
memory takes the place of mind.
The most brilliant diction, the most picturesque
word-painting that critic ever presented, fail to
convey their full meaning to those hitherto un-
acquainted with the subject dilated upon. The
polished periods pass with the effect of a fine pan-
orama in some foreign country, of whose customs
and traditions we know nothing, mainly pleasing
the eye and ear only. Whereas, if the author
dealt with had been a cherished object of our in-
terested study, our mind is attuned to catch the
full value of every utterance. The effect of the
vaguely apprehended foreign panorama would give
place to the simile of a trip on Father Thames,
say from Oxford to Reading, where every rood of
land and every reach of stream carries its wealth
of traditional song and story, where every sunny
meadow evokes the memory of Runnymede, and
* On ?The teaching of English Literature at the Uni-
versity,? delivered at the University on the 18th March,
1903. ?Ed.


stirs the heart and fills the brain with endless
visions of chivalric days.
The Professor said it was the function of Uni-
versity study to prepare a student for competent
literary judgment of his own, not to encourage
him to look through others? spectacles. In short,
to give him that training which shall enable him,
having the knowledge of the subject criticised,
readily to appreciate capable criticism, and, if
necessary, to controvert that which is unsound
and misleading. Can we imagine anything more
helpful to this Society than a yearly accession to
its membership of students who have passed
through so excellent a course and under so emi-
nently capable a director ? While the Society,
therefore, does not pose as an academic teacher,
it is hoped that the discussions which should
follow the reading of any papers submitted to it,
will at least tend to help in forming sound
opinions, and to make plain the grounds upon
which such opinions are based, so that if there is
a flaw in the premises it may be promptly detected.
This is the educational side of the Society?s aims.
If, on the other hand, it only meets to receive the
lecturer?s opinion upon some work of art, and if,
because that opinion is pleasantly expressed in
honeyed words of indiscriminate praise, it is con-
tent to accept the ipse dixit, and move a vote of
thanks, it is doing positive harm. In the one pro-
cess the proceedings are helpful to the members.


and should not be without advantage to the
community of letters. In the other, they are a
waste of time and possibly of talent, tending to
the adoption of obsequious opinions and mental
laziness.
This brings me to the question of the worth of
such criticism as this Society without a profes-
sional director may be expected to supply. It
cannot hope to attain the highest result, but it
can hope, if it is wisely directed, to work towards
that end. If its members are firm in rejecting all
that is trivial, all that tends to belittle or degrade
the author?s craft; above all, if they are in earnest,
they will not be without their reward. I remember
hearing our Mentor say in a lecture on ?Culture
and Cant,? some years ago, that there was a wide
difference between culture and erudition. The
latter, involving long years of serious study and
the possession of high receptive faculties was de-
nied to many. But culture, he pointed out, might
be acquired by reading, reflection, discussion, con-
versation, and travel. All these avenues, except
perhaps the last, are freely open to you, and it
rests with you to utilise them so fully as to be
ready to take your part in the Society?s work,
with advantage to your hearers and credit to
yourself. Let it then be granted that if you bring
to your task a fair foundation of common sense,
and a superstructure of intelligently assimilated
culture, you may be able without any specific gift
of erudition to help in moulding the character of


your country?s literature, and in opposing a glar-
ing tendency which much of its imaginative work
displays towards a squalid realism and a pessi-
mistic outlook.
Probably you will think I am preposterously
overrating the status of the Society you represent.
No doubt on the basis of its present numbers, and
in its present surroundings, I am open to that
charge. But you have probably heard at school
that Rome was not built in a day. We wrong no
man, and we cheerfully stimulate ourselves by
having faith in the future. This out-of-the-way
corner of the world holds great possibilities. This
generation may not see much accomplished,
possibly not even the next. But within the next
fifty years, this Commonwealth of Australia, in-
stead of being a mere outpost of civilisation with
its handful of widely sundered human interests,
will have become an important factor in the con-
sideration of all mankind. And though by reason
of that great expansion which is its manifest
destiny, its energies will be largely expended in
commercial and material pursuits, it cannot fail
to produce a literature, naturally influenced by its
environment, and distinctive in its characteristics.
I believe it will be marked by daring originality
of thought and expression ; that the present phase
of pessimism which represents the typical Aus-
tralian as ?slouching through the centuries,? will
give place to a healthier tone that will cheerfully
recognise the discipline of life ; and that when the


native-born writer gets possession of the field, he
will gradually shake off the trammels of a weak
subserviency of imitation, and make a permanent
impression in a new school. But the exuberance of
production will require severe repression. The
riotous rush into type with banal verse and vulgar
sensational fiction, demands active resistance. To
what quarter can we look for deliverance more
appropriately than from the wise supervision of a
society such as this. If it but had the power and
could organise within its ranks all the good
writers in the States, it might exercise the benefi-
cent influence which is wielded by the French
Academy in elevating literary art to the highest
point of excellence. Doubtless you are inclined to
smile at the conjunction of such names as the
French Academy of letters and the Australian
Literature Society ; but pray remember that I am
speaking of the future, not of the comparatively
unimportant body of to-day, amongst whom are
few, if any, writers. To make its judgments of
value, its influence of real use, it must win into
its ranks as many of the producers of our litera-
ture as it can persuade. Indeed, I repent me of
using that word persuade, for if the Society is to
accomplish the ends it has set before it, rather
should it be a distinction to any man to belong
to it, and the stamp of its approval should be
coveted by all makers of books.
To bring my somewhat discursive paper to a
conclusion, I will venture to ask a question, and


also to offer a suggestion. Does the community
in which our lot is cast contain a sufficient pro-
portion of persons imbued with a desire for intel-
lectual work to ensure a society such as this
obtaining substantial recognition and efficient aid?
Do not suppose for a moment that I am referring
to the question of material support, as expressed
by the number of members willing to pay a sub-
scription. My Australian experiences justify me
in saying that as far as the mere test of a small
annual subscription is concerned, you can start a
society for almost any purpose, especially if it
promises even a modicum of entertainment. No
one can justly accuse the Australian type of being
the victims of ennui, rather are they given to dis-
play an undue eagerness about trifles. There are
not at present any indications that Marcus
Clarke?s forecast of them as ? a fretful, clever,
?perverse, and irritable race,? is being verified.
But undoubtedly we have amongst us many legiti-
mate descendants of those Athenians of old, who,
the record tells us, ?spent their time in nothing
?else but either to tell or to hear some new thing.?
We are a gregarious people, and like to get together
and talk, especially about things we are not very
familiar with. Unhappily, from climatic condi-
tions, or from the indolence born of having all
our wants attended to by our democratic Govern-
ment, we soon get tired, and when the novelty has
worn oft we are more ready to try something else
than to ensure the success of what we have under-


taken by putting into it the requisite amount of
study and application.
I have seen this canker of indifference eating
into so many ?enterprises of great pith and
? moment/' projected under the Southern Cross,
that I find my faith inclined to waver, and have
been led to doubt whether our present population
is yet sufficiently emancipated from the drudgery of
that ?getting and spending? wherein ?we lay
waste our powers.? We cannot overlook the fact
that our appeal for assistance is but to a few hun-
dreds in place of the millions which are at the
command of similar institutions in the great
centres of the world?s civilisation.
But if my question is hopefully answered in the
affirmative, if you endorse Wordworth's opinion
that ?small service is true service while it lasts,?
and can look with confidence to winning a high
measure of success, then there is room for my
suggestion. If the faithful are indeed few, it is im-
perative that to obtain a hearing they should
command an united front. Their combined
strength and harmonious efforts will be necessary
to make any lasting impression on the vis inertia
of the unresponsive masses. It is to be deplored
that even this small Society has been rent by
schism, but my suggestion for union covers much
wider ground than the healing of trivial differ-
ences ; though as a preliminary step to the larger
movement that would be most desirable.


If we could enlarge our borders, and form one
strong combination of all who love literature and
desire its welfare, we might be more than justified
in de-localising our title. Apart from the devotees
of Australian literature, there are in Melbourne
societies devoted to the study of Shakespeare,
Dante, Browning, and, I believe, also Burns. The
disciples of these various cults though doubtless
exceptionally fit are relatively few. I see no
reason why a judicious federation of existing
interests and perhaps the creation of a section
devoted to classical authors, should not provide
a real Guild of Literature, and in time acquire a
hall of their own which should be a veritable
Pantheon, dedicated to all that was worthy of
perpetuation,?a temple in which, as a reminder
to the devotees of the Market that there are other
interests in life, the birthdays of the heroes of
letters, and great events in the world?s annals of
literature might be adequately celebrated. There
need be no subordination of interests in thus fed-
eralising. The various sections of the Guild would
be animated only by a friendly rivalry to make
their special topic the most alluring. A quicker
succession of evenings devoted to such meetings
would tend to increase public interest, and greatly
help in educating the interested enquirer. Nor
need this Society fear that by putting itself in
contrast with the wider field, it would necessarily
suffer eclipse.
It does seem almost impossible after three
centuries of studious criticism and devoted re-


search to find anything- new to say about
Shakespeare, and yet month by month some pleas-
ant arid often informing discussions are evoked at
the society's meetings upon the work of the king
of dramatists, and his relations to the great con-
stellation of Elizabethan writers, above whom he
shines so conspicuously. In every aspect of crea-
tive literature he stands alone, and the innumer-
able facets of his brilliant ,wit and fancy are out-
side the realm of comparison. Browning is a
poet's poet, or, rather let me say, a poet whose ad-
mitted merits are somewhat ?caviare to the
general," and are only fully recognised by the
student. His frequent involvement in expression,
and his contemptuous disregard of lucidity, render
him fitter for the study than the platform, as is
evidenced by the ignominious failure of his plays
that have been staged. Nevertheless, and for that
very reason, there are few English poets the dis-
cussion of whose work is likely to bring out more
thorough and helpful criticism, or to command a
fuller insight into poetic methods.
Being only an Englishman, I will not venture
to say anything about Burns, beyond venturing
the assumption that if the Guild is fortunate
enough to attract a fair proportion of the sons of
the ?land of brown heath and shaggy wood,"
there will be evenings devoted to the Ayrshire
poet at which enthusiasm will be the keynote of
the proceedings. The classical section, and the
general literature section will have their duties


and their opportunities ; but in the midst of all
these wide issues, when the evening comes round
for the Australian section, it will find plenty of
work to its hand, differing certainly in quality,
and to some extent in method from its co-workers.
That section- will not be dealing with the dead
and gone past. Its members have practically ex-
hausted the spoken or the written word concerning
Charles Harpur, Henry Kendall, or Marcus Clarke.
They will have to deal with a teeming present, the
tendency of which is rather to rankness than to
infertility; to weed it, to purify it, to stimulate its
best, and to stamp out its worst. If such a society
only undertakes to discuss those books which
have pleased some of its members, or have acquired
some public approval, it will come a long way
short of what should be its duty. It will do more
service in dealing firmly and promptly with bad
books, than in eulogising good ones ; in discourag-
ing a feeble mediocrity, rather than in praising
the promise of budding talent.
Whether you are able to enter into the con-
federation which I have indicated or not, your
action should be on these lines, and you must see
to it that you allow no personal bias or friendly
partiality to pervert your judgment, or tempt you
to ignore the sound principles of criticism which
lam assuming you will acquire. Many volumes
have been devoted to setting forth those principles,
and yet many men of world-wide fame as critics
have continuously ignored them. Take the in-


stance of Lord Jeffrey?s violent onslaughts on
Wordsworth, on Coleridge, and on Southey ; of
Dr. Johnson?s opinion that Fielding was ?a
blockhead;? of the opinion expressed in ?Black-
wood?s Magazine ? that Tennyson only made him-
self ridiculous by obtruding his faded and fantastic
garlands of verse upon the public. The line could
be stretched out to the crack o? doom, but
although it will have the saving grace of making
you feel that in mistakes you will be in good
company, it will not justify you in sinning against
light. There are some simple rules that will keep
you from making yourselves ridiculous. In the
domain of poetry you must not allow a catchy
jingle of diction, a sonorous rhythm, or even a
melodious sweetness to blind you to the fact that
the vital quality of thought is absent, that there
is no uplifting purpose animating and controlling
the words. The writing that does not stir within
us a sympathetic feeling, that wakes no respon-
sive chord in the nobler part of ourselves, may be
faultless verse, but it is not poetry. Any strain
whereby the vivid feeling of the writer is able to
evoke a responsive emotion in the reader has a
claim to that title whether the form be verse or
prose. And the greatness of a poet may be
measured by the depth and force of the emotions
his writing can evoke.
In fiction the line is less easy to define. And yet as
fiction is in these latter days an educational factor
of possibly more far-reaching influence than the


pulpit or the press, it must be kept clean and
wholesome if it is to produce elevating tendencies.
It is in these domains of imagination, story, and
song, that Australia will probably win its dis-
tinctive place in literature. So far we have had
no writers who have essayed to make style an
important part of their programme, no aspira-
tion towards the superb literary finish of a story
like ?Esmond,? but we have put forth a large
amount of fair and honest work, perhaps a little
too purposely tinged with Australian accessories ;
still, as a rule, stories with something to tell,
which have been told in strict accordance with the
demands of syntax and other proprieties. It can-
not be denied, however, that there are exceptions,
and there is a tendency just now to run riot in a
squalid form of realism, that is made entertaining
by a cynical attitude of ridicule and indifference
which seems to sneer at any aspiration after a
nobler type of life as savouring of hypocrisy.
If this Society ever attains the influence it aims
at, it should persistently strive against the growth
of such a hindrance to the dignity and worth of
Australian literature. Better to be counted as
only unimaginative followers of the methods of
the greatest masters of the old world, than to
initiate a new school largely distinguished by
coarse sentiment, degraded English, and bad art.
Should these general hints on the A. B. C. of
criticism, elaborated by your own common sense,
be an insufficient guide, you will find in Professor


Tucker?s address, to which I have so often referred,
an admirable working manual for your direction.
And now, finally, let me say that by your asso-
ciation in a society with a high sounding title,
you are committed to something more than even-
ings of chatty sociability, and 1 would remind
those who are in earnest that a share, however
small, in helping to raise the standard of their
country?s literature, is a work which, if well per-
formed, will ensure an unselfish pleasure to them-
selves', and add a new dignity to the community.




-
.




