

HE KANAKA
HOW THE QUEENSLAND PLANTERS GET AND
TREAT THEIR
REV. WILLIAM GRAY
WHO HAS VISITED QUEENSLAND AND WAS FOB THIRTEEN YEARS A
MISSIONARY ON TANNA, NEW HEBRIDES
PRICE SIXPENCE.
ADELAIDE:
E. S. WIGG & SON, 12 RUNDLE STREET
BY THE




HE KANAKA
HOW THE QUEENSLAND PLANTERS GET AND
TREAT THEIR
BY THE
REV. WILLIAM GRAY
WHO HAS VISITED QUEENSLAND AND WAS FOR THIRTEEN YEARS A
MISSIONARY ON TANNA, NEW HEBRIDES
SYNOPSIS
I. Introduction. —The Author’s Position—The Political Parson and
Parsonic Politician—Sources of Information—Legislation—Delu-
sions about Tropical Culture Northern Territory —Kanaka
Statistics—Sugar Industry—British Honour.
11. The Kanaka at Home. —How he Governs, Lives, Works and Dies—
Mission Work —Creed of Kanakaism —Returned Kanaka.
111. Catching the Kanaka. —lmmigration —More of the Kanaka Creed
—“Boys” and “ Marys’’—Gospel of Recruiting—This Gospel
Amplified; 1 Price; 2 Retaking a. Recruit; 3 Catching and
Marrying Marys; 4 Keeping the Sabbath; 5 Dodging Friends;
6 Catching Returns ; 7 Sacrifice of \V bite Life ; 8 Record of
Incidents —William Manson Case.
IV. The Kanaka Abroad. —Child or Man? —Character of Officials,
Procurers and Planters —Regeneration of the Traffic —Recent
Evils—The New Chum’s English Lesson —Queensland Premier in
Explanation—ln Queensland —“Signing On” —“Pin Money,”
Clothes, Tucker, Bed—Dog, Whip, Wet Days, Medicine, Certificate
of Death —Intestate Kanaka Estates and Government Revenue-
Morals, Rows and Fights—Japs v. Kanakas.
V. Two Recruiting Cruises. —(a) “Empreza”: Infectious Diseases—
Whitewashing the Traffic —Reports and Actual Facts—Lying by
Proxy, (b) “William Manson”: Native Apostles —Ordination
by the Secular Press —Phonograph and Lantern Attractions—
Successful Cruise —Charge of Kidnapping—Acquittal—Revela-
tions by Witnesses —The Press Climbing Down —-Indictment of
the Traffic —Veiled Slavery.
ADELAIDE :
E. S. WIGG & SON, 12 RUNDLE STREET
1895




•p.
HE KANAKA
I.—INTRODUCTION.
The Lecturer’s Position. —For twelve years I was a
missionary on Tanna, an island of the New Hebrides (Troup.
I went there with a mind perfectly open as far as the Kanaka
Laboiir Traffic was concerned. For the first ten years of my
life in the New Hebrides I was a silent observer of all forms of
the Kanaka Labour Traffic. And probably my voice would
never have been heard on the matter had Queensland not
renewed the Traffic in 1892. Having suffered and seen the
evils of the Traffic in the past, I was constrained to speak when
the Queensland Government renewed the Traffic in the year
just named. An intimate knowledge of what the Traffic is in
the islands would have been sufficient warrant for speaking on
the subject. But in order to have a more perfect knowledge,
when the opportunity was given me of visiting Queensland, I
laid myself out to acquire all possible knowledge in the time at
my disposal. Though convinced that however good the Traffic
might be in Queensland the goodness claimed for it there could
not compensate for the evils inseparable from it in the islands,
yet I went to Queensland determined to keep my mind open to
every possible fact in favour of the Traffic. And having been
to Queensland I would say now what I would not have said
before I went to Queensland, namely, that the Kanaka Labour
Traffic is veiled slavery.
The Political Parson. —I am neither a Defence
Leaguer nor a Labour Man. I belong to no party, but I wish
to be a teacher of the truth. I possess certain knowledge on
this question, and desire to put that knowledge at the service of
others, even at the risk of being classed with the “political
parson.” I wish it to be clearly understood that I denounce no
one for his opinions. But I claim the right to criticise both
the actions and the words of those who defend this Traffic.
Where I got my Facts. —My material has grown
rapidly, and my difficulty has been in selecting what should be
left out. Some of the material has been delivered as a lecture
in Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, and the capital of South
Australia and in some of its principal towns. Some appeared
in the Bundaberg Guardian and other papers. In Sydney a
journalist, perhaps in want of copy, took me to task for


belabouring the Kanaka Question as one dealing with hearsay
facts. I am therefore particularly anxious that all should
know the sources from which I derived my knowledge of the
Kanaka Labour Traffic.
1. I rely on my own direct contact with and knowledge of
the Traffic in the islands. The incidents cited are mostly from
my own note books. A few are from letters of my missionary
brethren. These particulars are admitted because they are as
convincing to me as if I had myself been witness of the events
my brethren have described.
2. In Queensland I obtained information in a variety of
ways. But foremost of these were official documents, of which
I brought home about a quarter-hundredweight.
3. I went about with my eyes and ears open and my' mouth
shut. I did not conceal my opinions, nor did I parade them.
In this way the amount of reliable information obtained was
surprising. Apologists for the Traffic poured information into
my ears when they were least aware of it —information that
would have been hard to get any other way. For instance, in
this way I discovered that the planters found it to be necessary
to mix their kanakas to keep them from fighting. To have a
large number of kanakas from the same place was dangerous.
4. I constituted myself a Royal Commission and took
evidence and opinions. I interrogated officials, planters,
kanakas, &c. In my search for facts I interviewed and heard
the evidence and opinion of legislators great and small,
ministers of the Crowm, preachers of the gospel, journalists,
missionaries, planters, Government officials, lawyers, doctors,
chemists, crews and captains of labour ships, working men,
kanakas, kanaka shopkeepers, members of the police force in
all ranks.* As to places I have been, my visits ranged from
the sanctum of the Colonial Secretary’s office dowui to the
odorous Chinese dens where the unemployed kanakas live, and
where all foregather. In train and mill, in field and street, in
church and court I kept my eyes and ears open and my note
book out of sight. Thus I collected a mass of information.
Some of it I simply cannot give. Some of it is doubtful, and
some of it awaits confirmation. But all that I present here is,
I am satisfied, reliable.
5. I now, as well as the facts, present the opinions that I
hold as the result of the facts presented. There should be no
difficulty in distinguishing the opinions from the facts. The
facts you are asked to accept, the opinions you can accept or
reject as you like. Some on hearing my statements have
charged me with exaggeration. Those who know what the
# The N.T. Commissioners when in Queensland examined a score of planters
and sugar-mill men, two journalists, two kanaka officials, one police officer,
one missionary, and one or two witnesses not interested in sugar production,
and not a single working man.


Kanaka Labour Traffic is have expressed astonishment at the
mildness of my statements. The mildness of statement is
deliberate on my part, and intended to meet the difficulty
people feel in accepting as true the naked facts of this Traffic.
Names and Grades of Traffic. —“Kanaka Traffic,”
“ Labour Trade,” and “ Labour Traffic ” are the names applied
to all forms of efforts made to get the native inhabitants of the
South Sea Islands to work for Europeans. I always use a
fuller name and say “ Kanaka Labour Traffic.”
In the New Hebrides and adjoining groups there are four
forms of this Traffic with distinguishing names —
1. The Interisland Labour Traffic, in which European settlers
(British, French, American, German, &c.) get natives from
islands other than that on which the labour is used and put
them to all kinds of work. They are employed as cooks,
nurses, rouseabouts, gardeners, sawyers, sailors, and even
clerks. How these kanakas are got the employer rarely asks.
In the unannexed islands there is and can be no law to regulate
it. Some employers treat the kanakas well, others could not
treat them worse. Some send their kanakas home when their
three years are up, others turn them adrift to get home if they
can. Some pay them, some do not; some feed them, some let
them find food for themselves. The treatment of the kanaka
depends on the amount of humane feelings with which his
master is blessed. The Interisland Kanaka Labour Traffic is
the most embryonic of any. All forms begin here and have the
same life history. They begin in slave hunting, and if they live
long enough they end in a Traffic regulated by Government.
2. Next to the Interisland comes the French Labour Traffic.
For a time this Traffic was forbidden. Then enterprising
Yankees and Englishmen smuggled kanakas into New
Caledonia. Being powerless to prevent the Traffic, the French
Government recognised it. Now it is under mild regulations,
but practically carried on by British subjects. The reason for
this lies in the fact that it would take a Frenchman a year to
get a shipload of kanakas, while an experienced Englishman
would fill his ship in less than a month. Thus natives are
taken from the islands and put to labour of all kinds in New
Caledonia —from being “ drawers of water ” to being miners
or butchers and bakers.
3. The German Labour Traffic is a cross between the Inter-
island and the French Labour Traffic. By it natives are
transported from their natural homes in one group to be the
helpless servants of civilised man in another group —from the
New Hebrides to Samoa.
4>. Next we have the Fijian Labour Traffic. This is carried
on under regulations made by the Governor of Fiji in virtue of
the authority of two Imperial Acts of Parliament. In this case
British ships bring kanakas from the New Hebrides and other


groups to be put to work for Europeans in Fiji. There are
only a few ships eugaged now in the Fijian, Samoan, and French
Labour Traffic. I have very little knowledge as to the treatment
kankas get in Fiji, Samoa, and New Caledonia. So far as Ido
possess knowledge the surroundings and treatment of the
kanakas in these cases are, I think, not worse than they are in
Queensland.
5. And lastly, we have the Kanaka Labour Traffic legalised
and regulated (?) by the Queensland Government. By it
kanakas* are taken from the islands stretching from the New
Hebrides in the south to the skirts of New Guinea in the
north, and as far east as the Ellice and Gilbert Groups. This
is the branch of the Kanaka Labour Traffic that is here
discussed.
Restrictions of the Traffic— In 1882 the Parliament
of South Australia passed an “ Act to encourage the introduc-
tion of Indian Native Immigrants into the Northern Territory
of the Province of South Australia.” But up to the present
time not a “ native immigrant ” has come. I have no hesitation
in thinking that the restrictions of this measure prevent
capitalists importing the “ immigrants.” In the case of Queens-
land the “ immigrants ” were there before the restrictions were
laid on them, and the “immigrants” continue there because the
restrictions are evaded. In Queensland the use of the kanaka
is confined to work in the fields. There and on board ship laws
and regulations prescribe the work and diet aud medicine and
clothing of the kanaka. The powers aud responsibilities of all
connected with the Traffic, from the Inspector down to the
cabin boy, are carefully defined. The results are pretty much
the same in all forms of the Traffic. The kanakas are got away
from the islands and earn on an average not more than sixpence
per dav. The difference between a regulated and an unregula-
ted Traffic is this. The procurers and masters are untrammelled
in the one case, and in the other they have to use their wits to
evade the regulations. These results are the fruits of an un-
flinching law. Labour of this description will not be used
unless it is profitable to those using it. In order to pay it
must be at best of the nature of semi-slavery. The reason is
that we have to deal with a class of people not able to protect
themselves. Regulations that will protect such labourers must
be prohibitive as far as the masters are concerned. Besides,
the regulation of such labour in Queensland has taken from the
labourers the only chance they had of protecting and asserting
themselves.
*“ Kanaka” is a Polynesian word which means a “man.” In the New
Hebrides “native” is the word used for the aboriginal inhabitants, except by
the French, who sometimes speak of them as “canaque.’’ In Queensland a
“kanaka” always means a South Sea Islander, and “native” always means
an Australian black.


The History of Legislation. —The Queensland Kan-
aka Labour Traffic began in 1863. In consequence of shocking
crimes connected therewith, that colony passed the Polynesian
Labourers Act in 1868. But in 1880 Queensland passed the
Pacific Island Labourers Act, which repealed the Act of 1868,
and made fresh legislation anent the matter. This is the basis
of all subsequent laws and regulations of the Kanaka Labour
Traffic in Queensland. Now there are two Imperial Acts, the
Queensland Act of 1880, amending Acts of 1884, 1885, and 1886.
Then comes the famous Pacific Island Labourers Extension Act
of 1892. An outsider hearing or reading about this parliamen-
tary measure would think it was a most elaborate Act. It con-
tains six short sections, repealing a section of the ’B4 Act about
refunding passage money of kanakas, and repealing the clause
in the ’BS Act which stopped the Traffic for six months in 1891.
The rest of this Extension Act further defines terms in the
existing Acts. To each of these principal Acts there are
schedules setting forth the forms of license, indentures, and so
on. Then there are two sets of Rules made under these Acts
by the Governor in Council. The one set are called Regulations
and the other Instructions to Government Agents. These have
been amended and added to for the last fifteen years. And they
are now as perfect and free from ambiguity as it is possible for
such rules to be. There are now seven Acts of Parliament,
eighteen Schedules, fifty-four Regulations, and thirty-eight
Instructions to Q-overnment Agents. The Acts, Regulations,
and Instructions are all so elaborate and perfect that people
wonder how it is that there can be anything wrong with the
Traffic. And defenders of the Traffic .speak as if the Laws and
Regulations and Instructions were all new and better than they
were before the Traffic was stopped for a short time in 1891.
The chief feature of the Act of 1892 was the renewal of the
Traffic. All the old Regulations are included in the present set,
and three Instructions were placed in the list of Regulations
(see No. 21, 29, and 43) and seven new Regulations (18, 21, 22,
25, 35, 42, 46) were added. None of these, except two bearing
on the variation of diet which the Government Agent has the
right to order, can secure one iota of benefit to the kanaka.
They are all of them capable of being set aside by the will of
the Government Agent. The list of Instructions has all the old
ones and twenty-two that I had not previously seen, some of
which must be new. Of this lot four (22, 23, 25, 31) may be to
the advantage of the kanaka, the rest are directions about the
Government Agent’s uniform, work, and papers.
Is the kanaka a necessity ? —The question of the
morality of the Kanaka Labour Traffic has never been discussed
on the principle of its rightness and wrongness. It has been
assumed that the existence of the Traffic is necessary, and this
necessity, it is assumed, proves that the Traffic is right. Let us


look now at the reasons which are said to constitute this
necessity.
1. White men cannot stand the work. The argument is that
Queensland has a tropical territory which can be worked only
by coloured labour. My own experience in the New Hebrides
refutes this argument. And the logical consequences of the
testimony and admissions of all the witnesses examined by the
Royal Commission of South Australia recently appointed to
enquire into the matters relating to the Northern Territory.
This is what we would expect if we compare the stamina of the
two races. It is what the facts prove throughout Queensland
where the planter works in the field along with his kanaka.
Labour in a tropical climate is hard on both white and black, but
it is harder on the black man than on the white. But people
have come to a w r roug conclusion because they place a lower
value on the life of black men than on that of white. We think
more of the death of one white man than we do of five black.
Lest this argument should fail to carry conviction I now offer
some additional facts. One set of facts is embraced in the
history of kanaka legislation in Queensland. When the matter
was debated in 1885 Sir Samuel Griffith opposed the Kanaka
Labour Traffic for the three following reasons: —“First, because
it tended to encourage the creation of large landed estates,
owned for the most part by absentees and worked by gang
labour, and so discouraged actual settlement by small farmers
working for themselves; secondly, because it led to field labour
in tropical agriculture being looked down upon as degrading
and unworthy of white races ; and, thirdly, because the perma-
nent existence of a large servile population, not admitted to the
Franchise, was not compatible with the freedom of political
institutions of the colony.” Jf these reasons were good then
they are good now. That was in 1885. In 1891 Sir Samuel’s
Government had an opposition of twelve who were in favour of
the Traffic. He was himself then against the Traffic and said
(what is true) that all the arguments brought forward in favour
of continuing the Traffic were the same in character as those
used for the defence of slavery. In some way, best known
to politicians, in 1891 Sir Samuel’s twelve opponents had grown
into a majority of ministerialists and his Government had seven-
teen opponents who were against the Traffic. But Sir Samuel
did not surrender his belief in the efficacy of white labour.
This statement occurs in his manifesto anent resuming the
Kanaka Labour Traffic, published in the Brisbane Evening
Observer , February 13, 1892 : —“ It has been proved that in
Queensland cane can be grown by white labour. lam aware
that this position is still disputed, but it is admitted by most of
the more liberal-minded planters with whom I have been in;
communication.” The Brisbane Courier (a paper that has
defended the Traffic) in a leader against myself (February 11,


1895) says —“ It is true that the once prevalent belief in the
total unsuitableness of tropical field labour for the white man
has been generally abandoned.” These are admissions by those
who favour the Traffic. And there are two other considerations
I wish to submit. First, there has been an enormous increase
in the output of sugar without any corresponding increase in
the importation of kanakas. In the end of 1891 it was said
that there were 10,000 kanakas in Queensland, but that is pro-
bably an over-estimate. Since then the number has been always
under 8,000, the average being about 7,600 per year. Yet the
output of sugar has gone on increasing every year. Small
estates, central mills, and improved processes do not account
for all the increase. The increased use of white labour must be
an important factor, and goes to demonstrate that the kanaka
is unnecessary. Secondly, where are the kanakas ? The half
of them are south of the tropical line and not north of it, where
the climate and development of the sugar industry would lead
us to look for them.
2. Some, even conceding the evils of the Traffic, contend
that the kanaka is needed on the score of cost. If this belief
were not so general as it is the Traffic would be opposed by
most people in Queensland not financially interested in the
sugar industry. Now what are the facts ? Between the year
1880 and the first half of 1887 the price of sugar fell enormously
all over the world. It was 114 per cent, higher in 1880 than in
June 1887. It has been falling ever since and has fallen this
year. If we are to believe the planter, the price of kanaka
labour has risen greatly. Yet in spite of the fall in the price of
sugar and the rise in the cost of kanaka labour, the area of cane
planted has in this period increased enofmously, and the manu-
facture of sugar has become the third industry in Queensland.
These facts were hidden by a political cry in 1890 and 1891,
which was based on the fears of the people of Queensland.
When all hope of the extension of the Traffic was given up, in.
the end of 1890 strenuous efforts were made to get an extra
supply. Labour ships ran the risk of hurricanes that they might
get men In the islands eloquent recruiters impressed upon
kanakas that now was the very last chance to “go along”
Queensland. Bundaberg, Mackay, and the Herbert Eiver were
represented as elysiums. “Y r ou getem plenty kaikai (food),
takem money, come home, buyem Snider long French trader.”
The result of this sort of eloquence was that recruiting became
brisk—almost as brisk and sure as the days of one-man one-
musket. When the time for closing the Traffic came, every ship
in the Traffic that could do so took out a license in the very last
days of the year —the beginning of the hurricane season —so as
to be out recruiting for the first half of the following year.
About the middle of 1891 these ships returned to their respec-
tive ports with a full complement of passengers and must have


stocked the kanaka labour market as it never was before nor
since. In the six months that followed, when there could have
been no special scarcity of kanaka labour according to this
political cry, sugar estates were to be sold and sugar mills
removed, all because kanaka labour could not be got ! Sugar
mills were removed, but for the simple reason that they were
built in wrong places. Sugar estates were sold, but for other
reasons than the lack of kanaka labour.* The very men —-the
planters —who were making this cry were at the same time
increasing cane fields and improving and enlarging their sugar
mills ! The planters themselves know that the sugar industry
in Queensland does not depend upon the kanaka. But they
also know that their profits depend on the kanaka, and it is for
this that they contend. Benevolence is not an attribute of the
Queensland Kanaka Labour Traffic. The moment that kanaka
labour ceases to pay the kanaka will cease to be imported to
Queensland.
3. Planters everywhere complain that the kanaka is as dear
as the white man ; but it is said he is reliable and the white
man is not. Now, alas, the kanaka is ceasing to be reliable.
One hears terrible stories about the planters’ difficulties over
white labour. But I fail to see that the Queensland sugar planter
has more to complain of in this respect than the South Austra-
lian wheat grower. The wheat grower has to put up with his
unreliable white, the Government comes to the aid of the sugar
planter with his reliable black.
All these reasons proving the absolute need for the kanaka in
Queensland have been abandoned. The latest plea for the
traffic is—
4. The benevolence of the Traffic. The kanaka is converted
in Queensland and sent home a Christian. But it is not difficult
to show that whatever may be the accidents of this Traffic, the
Traffic itself cannot be credited with any benevolent intentions.
The planters pooh-poohed the idea of converting the kanaka at
first, and though they now use this plea, only a few of them
contribute to the support of the work. Some planters are
honest enough to confess the truth—the existence of the Traffic
is simply a question of most money to those interested in the
sugar industry. It is certain that the kanaka does help the
Queensland sugar men to make more out of sugar than they
could otherwise do. And for this end a whole race of people is
to be rapidly consumed.
Kanaka Statistics. Between the beginning of the
Queensland Kanaka Labour Traffic in 1863 and the end of
1894, 50,546 kanakas have been introduced into Queensland.
* N.T. Com. Quest. 4007. “ .'‘opposing a man had two working sons, how
much cane could he then cultivate?” Ans. “From twenty-five to thirty
acres. I believe the small holdings are the best. When the laud is exhausted
the big people sell up their plantations to the small holders, and they have to
make a living out of it.”


The deaths during this period may be safely put down at
10,000 or 11,000. This, I think, does not include those who
have died on board ship to and from the islands ; and it certainly
does not include those who go home to die, whose deaths must
be credited to the effect of life in Queensland. During 1891
twelve vessels were engaged in the Traffic, having passenger
accommodation for 1,621 persons. One of these vessels was
wrecked. The number of kanakas imported w r as 1,859, of which
81 were females ; and 535 of these had been in service before
in Queensland, Samoa, Fiji, New Caledonia, Honolulu, Norfolk
Island, and Sydney. The number who went home was 803,
and the deaths for the year reported was 319, which is 36 less
than in 1893. There is consequently an improvement in the
death rate, which has fallen from 4740 to 10 62 per 1,000;
but the Registrar-General's figures are not so favourable.
Facts about Acclimatising the Kanaka. —Although
the kanaka is a tropical man, he has to be acclimatised in
Queensland. The vital statistics for Queensland for 1892 show
that the death rate in Queensland is 1206 per 1,000 of the
population, leaving out Chinese, kanakas, and all other alien
races; but the kanaka death rate is 42 - 74 per 1,000 of kanaka
population—nearly four times higher than the European death
rate, and this is a decrease of one in 2,000 as against the
previous year. The vital statistics for 1893 show that the death
rate of the whole colony, taking all races and all ages, was 13 34
per 1,000; but the kanaka death rate was 52'57 per 1,000* —
almost four times as high as the whole death rate of the colony.
The Rev. A. C. Smith in his report of a visit to Mackay, pub-
lished in the Brisbane Courier , October 6, 1894, quotes figures
to show that the death rate there is' less than it used to be.
Whatever may be the present state of matters in the Mackay
district, the Registrar’s figures for 1894 will make the death
rate for that district about 68 per 1,000. The number of deaths
in a district depends on the number of kanakas in the district.
The death rate everywhere depends on the number of new-chum
kanakas imported. The death rate rises and falls with the number
of new chums introduced. About one-third of the kanakas
imported for 1894 are old hands, which will affect the death
rate favourably both for 1894 and 1895. It is a fact well
known that the first year is a crucial one in acclimatising the
kanaka in Queensland. If he survives that year he has a fair
chance of seeing his home again. A registrar told me that an
examination of facts and figures made it probable that the death
rate among kanakas six months in the colony was as high as
180 per 1,000. Sir W. Macgregor, the Administrator of New
Guinea, has recently quoted instances where the death rate was
# The P. 1.1. Department gives the death rate for 1893 as 47 - 40. This shows
that more kanaka deaths are reported to the Registrars than to the depart-
ment itself.


as high as 200 per 1,000. It is also probable (I have not had
time to examine the figures sufficiently to be sure) that the
kanaka death rate is increased by coming south of the tropical
line. This may explain why the death rate is higher at
Buudaberg than at Mackay.
I know that it can be said that these figures are of no value
until we can show what is the death rate in the islands. We
have no exact statistics from any of the groups where labour is
recruited for Queensland, except from one or two islands ; but
these show that the death rate is about 12 per 1,000. On the
part of Tanna, known to me, I have good reason for thinking
that the death rate would be about the same. I think it would
be a fair estimate to say that on Christian islands the death
rate is about 12 per 1,000, and about 15 per 1,000 on heathen
islands where war prevails. There is no reason for thinking
that the death rate is abnormal in any of these islands. One
thing in fact is quite clear. Had the death rate there been any-
thing like as high as it is and has been in Queensland these
South Sea Islands would have been without inhabitants long
ago. But the full significance of these figures is only realised
when we remember that they represent the death rate of the
pick of the males from the New Hebrides and other groups.
Sir "William Des Voeux. —In the Nineteenth Century
for July 1894, there is an admirable article on “ Delusions about
Tropical Cultivation,” by Sir William Des Voeux, at one time
High Commissioner of the Western Pacific. I commend the
perusal of it to all who take an interest in the development of
tropical Australia and social problems. The article is a review
of and reply to Miss Shaw’s paper, “The Australian Outlook,”
read before the Koyal Colonial Institute after Miss Shaw’s
return from Australia. In this article Sir William shows that
Miss Shaw’s Autralian forecast is economically and politically
impossible. One reason that he urges is the consideration that
in less than twenty years the present labour recruiting grounds
will be exhausted (p. 44). Miss Shaw says that “ Australia has
already given us a democracy which is good. It is within the
possibilities of the future that she may yet give us an aristoc-
racy which is better.” Sir William, speaking from extended
experience and foreseeing what this means, replies —“ I confess
myself unable to conceive that an Australian democracy, what-
ever its defects, would be less desirable than a quasi-aristocracy
of planters, with its necessary complement of coloured serfs,”
and he adds —“Having been through the Southern States of
America in 1859, with slavery at its full height; having since
then had practical experience of the contract system of coloured
labour in four different colonies ; having learned what the laws
respecting the latter may become unless w r atched and checked
by a supreme authority, acting in the interest of employed as
well as employers; having seen w r hat such laws have actually


become when the vigilance of such authority has been
temporarily relaxed ; having known, moreover, what under such
a system may happen despite the best laws, and how these may
be administered in the absence of a strong superintending
control, I, after all this experience, have no hesitation in saying
that at the cost of a huge community such as that above
described, I should regard yellow ricefields, waving palms, and
teeming banana groves as very dearly purchased. Considering,
therefore, what is involved in it, I contemplate without regret
the fading of the brilliant vision which has been offered for our
admiration ; and I much prefer for Australia the anticipation of
an unmixed English race, however democratic in tendency,
even though that should mean the continuance in its natural
condition of by far the greater part of its tropical territory.”*
British Honour. —What I am concerned about is that
we as a Christian nation should wipe out these races to enrich
ourselves. Our credit as a Christian people and a nation is at
stake. Sir Samuel Griffith says that this Traffic can be carried
on alongside of British honour. There are four mission societies
carrying on work in the recruiting grounds of the Queensland
Kanaka Labour Traffic, and the missionaries throughout almost
to a man are agreed that the supply of kanaka labour under the
present regulations is not compatible with British honour and
Christian sentiment. I am personally acquainted with the
captains of the Traffic, the Government Agents, and the
recruiters. I have seen the work before the days of the
Hopeful case and since. It was thought that the Traffic
had been shorn of its flagrant abuses until the William
Manson trial in March last shattered that belief. And in
spite of this “ eye-opener ” I willingly admit that a better class
of men are now in the Traffic ; but the more I know of natives,
the more I know of “ good men ” in the Traffic, the more I
know what the Kanaka Labour Traffic was and is, the more am
I convinced that this Traffic must be at heart what it always
was and still is—a cruel, unjust, un-Christ-like demoralising
Traffic in human flesh.
lI.—THE KANAKA AT HOME.
Government is in the hands of hereditary chiefs. But there
are chiefs and chiefs. The ruling, fighting, talking, and “nuruk’’
* I commend these lines to our S. A. legislators in dealing with the problem
of our Northern Territory. Speculators have foolishly sunk capital in buying
land in the Territory, &c. Successive Governments have mismanaged its
affairs and constructed what is at present a useless railway. Officers who
have been sent to represent the Government have quarrelled with one another
and been unfit for their office. And now to get out of this mess our tropical
possession must be forced ahead at all hazards. A land grant railway must
be built because that is the opinion of a few witnesses who are utterly
ignorant of all detail of railway construction, and coloured labour introduced
to save foolish past speculators.


chiefs are all turtle eaters. And, once more, there are heads of
clans and heads of families. If it is a question of war, feast, or
death (nuruk) the line of action must be determined by the con-
federacy. Nothing can be done without the consent of the ruling
chiefs. If there is a difference of opinion the one that has the most
followers (which means votes) carries the day. The head of the
family votes with the head of his clan. The members of the family
take the word of its headman. The members of the family must
do this or separate from the family. So with the clan. If a chief
has lost the vote, he has then to consider whether he is strong
enough to resist the line of action proposed, or whether it is
best to submit. The result is practical democracy. The rule of
a confederacy of this kind does not interfere with domestic
matters. That is left to the clan and the family. ‘When a
“ boy or “ Mary ” recruits it is the head of the" family that
has a say in the matter, but the ruling chief also may express
an opinion thereon.
The Kanaka’s Farm and Work. —So much for the
Government of “Man Tanna.”f A word about his farm and
work. The ownership of land is a custom that varies a good
deal in the New Hebrides. On Tauna the inhabited parts are
portioned out to and owned by individuals. But a piece of land
would not be sold to a foreigner without the consent of all
parties concerned; who these parties may be it would take pages
to explain. On some islands the chief or the whole clan would
take the pay, on Tanna it is the individual. Whatever be the
nature of the law of land ownership, I have never known a
person to be without land he could use, I’ent free. Land is of
itself of no value except for the trees growing on it. Bread
fruit, chestnuts, Fiji plums, rose apples, cocoanuts, figs, and a
great many kinds of trees that yield food, grow with very little
or no cultivation at all. But besides this a man makes every year
from one to four plantations (according to the number of his
wives and the age of his children). These plantations vary in
size from a square chain to five or six square chains. As the
growth of vegetation in the New Hebrides is rapid and rank
these patches have to be cleared, burnt, and fenced (with reeds).
The ground has to be turned over, and on Tanna, sifted through
the fingers and thrown up into heaps three and four feet high.
On, in, and around these heaps yams and sweet potatoes are
planted.. In every available space within this reed enclosure
bananas, sugar cane, maize, hibiscus (for cabbage), melons,
pumpkins, &c. are planted. From time to time the
whole plantation has to be weeded and hoed over. Then
the yam tendrils (yards in length) have to be trained
on reed trellis work. In fact work on a plantation means
* In the Labour Traffic “ boy” means any male, and “ Mary ” any female,
f I speak of the Tannese here as I know their customs best. But what is
said here would be fairly true of natives throughout the Group.


steady labour for male and female for about nine months
of the year. Add to this house building, canoe making,
fishing, attending councils, &c. and it is plain that “lazy as a
blackfellow ” cannot be applied to a New Hebridean. But it is
in all cases work tempered with rest. To work ten or twelve
hours a day, six days of the week, from January to December,
is neither necessary nor agreeable. A native will do a hard
spell, and then rest, and then go at it again.
The Kanaka “better off’’at Home. —It is a strangely
mistaken idea that the kanaka never had wealth till he went
abroad. The kanaka at home is a Vanderbilt in point of wealth
compared with his brother in Queensland under the present
regulations. He is not the miserable starved wretch described
by recruiters. Apologists of the Traffic are very fond of trotting
out Savings Bank statistics as a proof of the kanaka’s wealth
and betterment in Queensland. One finds himself in the
Inspector’s back office confronted by a stack of bank books
belonging to kanakas. (If the money is not deposited in the
Inspector’s name, the Inspector, not the kanaka, keeps the
bank book.) Then the Inspector’s book is opened, and behold,
depositors are counted by the hundred, and their collective
wealth by thousands of pounds. This looks well for the Traffic
till one employs the arithmetical process known as division.
Then taking the figures for 1893, say in Bundaberg district, one
gets the following results :
wealth by thousands oi pounds, Phis iooks wen tor the irame
till one employs the arithmetical process known as division.
Then taking the figures for 1893, say in Bundaberg district, one
gets the following results :
Year. Kanakas. Depositors Amount, i Per Depositor. Per Kanaka.
«. ( 1892 2,810 659 £3,657 ~£s 10 11 £1 6 Oi
a£ ] 1893 2,676 546 2,923 57 3 11 10
t 1894 2,777 795 3,706 413 2| 1 6 8|
( 1892 7,979 2,685 18,641 518 10 2 6 8|
Is } 1893 7,489 1,726 14,819 811 8| 119 6f
o” i 1894 7,853 2,260 15,173 614 1| 118
Note the small sum per kanaka, and the tendency to decrease.
At home every man has houses, lauds teeming with native wealth,
pigs, fowls without number, fish when he likes to catch them,
mats, baskets, and a citizenship of no mean order. By the time
he is twenty-five years of age he can be a man with a family and
all the honour that in a native’s eyes belongs to a man in that
state. As for clothing, custom and climate enable him to
dispense with garments. Food, with a very few exceptional
cases, he has in abundance. This was the state of the kanaka
at home before ever the corrupting hand of the white man was
laid upon him. Now both for good and for evil the white man
has invaded his kingdom. But at home he pays him from
ninepence to one shilling per day of eight hours for his labour,
with from one to three meals thrown in. He is free to spend


the money he gets thus in grog (called “chain lightning” and
“ hell fire ” on account of the elevating qualities of the drink
supplied by those wicked Frenchmen; Englishmen are too
patriotic and conscientious to do such things—when there is
a missionary or man-of-war about). Muskets, powder, and
cartridges are obtainable from all nationalities. On his own
island the kanaka can keep his estate, his citizenship, his honour
and his wealth, and work off days for settler and trader for
“ pin-money.” In almost any part of the New Hebrides group
a kanaka can turn out two bags of copra in a week, get from
four to five shillings per bag in cash for it, and sacrifice nothing
of his native wealth. It is an entirely mistaken notion that a
kanaka profits by coming to Queensland for even £9 a year,
clothes and rations. For while he is there he loses all that he
had in the islands and all that his land would produce. His
wives are taken by others, his plantations run out, and he has
lost citizenship, in some islands he has lost his caste. It is
generally thought that “ Man Tauna ” has a wretched existence
at home. Well, his house is at least as good as some of the
humpies I have seen in Queensland. Some of the island houses
are a little cleaner than some of the humpies that can be seen
in Queensland.
Dread of Death. —The kanaka suffers from sickness and
disease at home, and where there is no missionary to give
medicine or a trader to sell pain-killer, he has to take his chance
with the native doctor. The dread of death is overwhelming
and fatal. But then he brings to Queensland his special liability
to sickness, his superstition, and his fatal dread of death.
These too he has to bear when away from home. It is a re-
cognised fact that the splendidly kept kanaka ward of the
Bundaberg Hospital has no special attraction for the sick
kanaka. From what I have gathered by enquiry I suspect that
the thought in the kanaka mind is that it is a place to die in,
not to be healed in.
Mission Work. —l purposely avoid making much of mission
work among the kanakas at home. Suffice to say this much.
Aneityum, Futuna, Aniwa, Erromanga, Efate, Nguna, Tongoa,
and their islets, are almost wholly evangelised. The evangel-
isation of the other islands throughout the whole field is in
progress.
In all these cases the kanaka is taught Christian doctrines, in
a native language, on his own soil, in his own life’s surround-
ings. It stands to reason that work of this kind done thus
must be the best possible attainable. Be it understood that I
say this without one thought of disparagement towards the work
of evangelising the kanaka in Queensland. Intercourse with
the men and women so engaged is enough to assure one of their
earnestness, devotion, and faith. Effort of this kind goes back
as far as 1870, when a native teacher was brought to Queens-


land with a shipment of “boys” from the Loyalty Islands. But,
of late years, the fruit of systematic, determined mission work
has undoubtedly been phenomenal. These surprising results
have probably led the joyful workers to think that their results
were unique. Since the kanaka is there Christians are in tne
path of duty and privilege, when they give him the best gift—a
knowledge of the truth —it is in their power to bestow upon him.
But, if the Traffic is wrong in itself, giving Christian instruction
to the kanaka can justify the Traffic about as much as Christian
instruction of negroes justified American slavery.
A New Kanaka. —This is how a kanaka in his home is
pictured. When he comes from his home he is a savage pure
and simple. He feels no shame at his nakedness and want of
adornment. When he returns home he does so w r ell dressed,
sporting collars, cuffs, boots, and jewellery. He takes with him
one ore more boxes well filled with clothing, a musical instru-
ment or two, perfumery and other articles of luxury he has
learned to appreciate. But what is
The sequel to this ? Admitting that the foregoing de-
scription is the average one, the average sequel is this : The cuffs
and collars, if used at all, are carried off by youngsters, who
fasten them round the leg, just below the knee, as ornaments.
The Waterbury, broken and dirty, finds its way to the trader,
who gives a trifle for it; or the inside is taken out, the wheels
strung on a thread and hung round the neck. Knives, axes,
calico, and handkerchiefs are divided among friends, and there
is hardly one of these apiece. The boxes, the keys often lost on
the road home, can be bought for 2s. 6d. They are to be seen
rotting outside in almost any shore village on Tanna. (I speak
of what I have seen.) A returned kanaka has been furiously
angry with me because I w r ould not buy his trousers, which he
declared were just my fit. He sold them afterwards to one of
my Aniwan teachers for 9d. worth of tobacco —a pair of trousers
that probably cost him Bs. or 10s. in Queensland. A coat or a
shirt is handy for cold weather. The white handkerchiefs, the
“ senet ” (perfumery), the umbrella, and perhaps the hat, are
kept. The boots have to take their chance, if they do not
happen to fit the copra trader. “ Senet ”on the hair, streaks
of paint on the face, a dirty white handkerchief round the neck,
strips of turtle shell in the ears, a belt, a sheath and knife, and
an umbrella constitute the rig of the returned kanaka at home
the day after landing. One of the last things offered to me a
day or two before leaving Tanna was one of the aforesaid
musical instruments. If I remember rightly the woman
said it cost her 15s. She would have exchanged it for a 2s.
knife. Once more, ask a returned kanaka to work, and he will
tell you he has worked so hard in Queensland that he means to
take it easy at home, I have known these fellows keep to their
word a most inconveniently long time. We forgot also to


mention the well-stocked vocabulary of choice adjectives that the
returned kanaka can throw around to the admiration and delight
of his small brother at home. This is the kanaka at home
“ again ! ”
How the Kanaka Dies at Home, —A few words
now about the kanaka at home “ for ever.” When the dread of
death and the hope of life is past, the kanaka at home, even
without the consolations of Gospel hopes, can meet death like
a Stoic. He gives his final orders. He knows that his mother
and his wife will hug the lifeless corpse when wrapped for the
tomb. He knows that his friends will weep for him, his
children lay him in the grave, his clansmen, if he give the word,
will avenge his death. The grave is dug, the corpse wrapped in
mats and laid in the grave, and filled in with care and tender-
ness. Pigs are killed and food distributed to the mourners.
A fire is lit over the grave for several nights that the departed
spirit may warm itself.
His Love for His Offspring. —Parents are passion-
ately fond of their children. Old men have come and asked
me to give them a passage that they might come to Mary-
borough, Bundaberg, or Mackay to seek some long absent son.
When told that this was impossible they have begged me to
write a letter, and send such a message as this—“ Tell Natau
that the land here is good ; the people worship ; the food is
plentiful. Tell him to come home and bury me, his father.
■My e J e is dim, my teeth are gone, my hair is white, my legs
are bad, and my days are few. Tell Natan to come home
at once if he would be in time to bury me.”
lIL—CATCHING THE KANAKA.
Had the white man never taken the kanaka abroad, he prob-
ably never would have gone of his own accord. The kanaka has
been a coloniser in past ages. What his methods were is a
matter of guess. At times, doubtless, his “ schemes ” for
colonisation were accidents in which hurricanes were main
factors. He was blown hither and thither, and then wrecked,
where afterwards he made his home. We have many authentic
accounts of individuals going to another island, but in no case
did they think a foreign land better than their own. But the
practice of emigrating is an idea for which “ slave hunting ”
is responsible. “ Slave ”is an ugly word to use, but the
historian of the Kanaka Labour Traffic, if true to facts, cannot
avoid the conclusion that it began in “slave hunting.” The
Kanaka Labour Traffic is, then, the child of “ slave hunting” iu
the South Sea Islands. The present Imperial and Queensland
Acts bearing on the Kanaka Labour Traffic are evolutions


from earlier attempts to regulate “ slave hunting ” in the South
Sea Islands. These Acts are supposed to be humane directions
for catching the kanaka.
How tlie Business is Done. —Any person that can
show that he is engaged, or intends to be so engaged, in tropical
or semitropical cultivation can obtain a license to introduce
kanakas into Queensland. The applicant has to enter into a
bond to pay to the Government £5 per head for every kanaka
introduced as his return passage money. He has also to pay
down at once £3 per head for Government expenses in supervis-
ing the introduction of kanakas. The return passage money
need not be paid till the kanakas are lauded. The capitation tax
is paid at once and refunded if the full number of kanakas are
not secured. A captain acts as agent in procuring the kanakas,
and may do so for a number of planters, and at present charges
£2O per head for getting kanakas. The captain has to obtain
a license for his ship to recruit, and enters into heavy bonds as
surety of good behaviour. When the kanakas are landed the
planter enters into an agreement, made by the Inspector, to pay
the kanaka so much per annum and give him clothing and food
according to a G overnment scale. The minimum wage is £6
per year.
More of the Kanaka Creed.— The foregoing is what
happens in Queensland; what is believed to happen on board
ship and in the islands is one thing ; what actually does happen
there is quite another thing. From an article in the Adelaide
Observer, January 14, 1893, by a special reporter, “R,5.M.,”1
now construct a kanaka creed. Here is what is believed to
happen, with some comments in parentheses:—
In the islands everyone must sleep on board the ship, except
by the Government Agent’s permission. The ship must keep
within helping reach of the boats. Recruiting must be done by
two boats with two of a European crew in each boat. The
recruiter must use no form of coercion ( stronger than pigeon
English) to get the kanaka into his boat or up the ship’s side.
(But he can continue this form of coercion all day long and day
after day.) The recruiter must make a “ bee line ”in guessing
that the recruit offering is not under sixteen years of age. He
has to cast his practised eye over the naked form for sores, game
joints, and incipient tubercle. Then he must be sure that the
kanaka is at home, and not in the employ of any European
settler or trader {the missionary is not included in the creed before
me —which may account for the way my colleague's printer dis-
appeared). if he finds a Tongoau on Tongariki ( even if he has
come over there in a boat) he must prove to the satisfaction of
the Government Agent that “he has left his native island and is
permanently residing on the island at which he desires to
engage.” Even should he repent that he has “signed on”
{signing on generally means touching the tip of the Government


Ar/cnt's pen before that functionary makes a X for the “boy")
he can tell theGoverument Agent that he is homesick, and the
boat must be sent ashore with him. A woman must recruit
with her own lawful husband, and with the consent of her
chief. No recruiting on Sundays. If any of these regulations
are not complied with the Government Agent can order the ship
to port.
The Gospel of Recruiting. — These things are all
firmly believed in Queensland. It is, in fact, the gospel of
recruiting, according to “ E.S.M.” This creed is apt to
set individuals wandering. With so many odds against
the recruiter one wonders that he catches a single kanaka.
At one thing we need not wonder, so long as the above
things are surely believed —that we who know how the kanaka
is caught are set down as With a gospel, like the
foregoing, one is tempted to play the higher critic and indicate
how much of the above doctrine was got from the acts,
schedules, regulations, instructions, Government agents, cap-
tains, recruiters, sailors, and kanakas respectively. Assuming
that “ E.S.M.” has told all he knows, I am safe in saying that
he never saw kanaka-catching as it is. I propose to supply some
omissions.
The Gospel Amplified. —Firstly, every man has his
price. With the French recruiters it is a gun for a man. We
get lists of what the kanaka costs the planter. The items given
are —Eecruiting and passage to Queensland, so much ; capitation
tax for Government expenses, so much ; return passage, so
much; “pin-money” (called wages), so much; clothing, food,
medical attendance, and funeral expenses, all so much. But I
never heard of purchase money. The French give a gun for
every recruit, young or old, comely or ugly, male or female, and
never try to evade paying the “price." The gun in question
is a nicely lamp-blacked varnished piece of gas-pipe, fitted on a
stock, as a Snider, with a genuine imitation tower and crown
brand lock. These guns are valued at £2 when sold to kanakas
in Noumea. In the islands the price to the kanaka is £3. The
same article is supplied to traders in the Group at 355. each.
The cost in Britain or America must be under 10s. each. Guns
are prohibited under the Queensland Act, but the price is paid
in axes, knives, tobacco, beads, pipes, and gold. The price varies
from £1 to £3.
Buying Human Flesh. —On one of the last trips of a
labour vessel when the Traffic was closed, sixty-four recruits
were got on one of the northern islands of the Group, and for
each of these recruits a 70 lb. case of tobacco was given. At the
end of ’9l a Queensland labour vessel was paying in cash. Two
and three sovereigns are used, as well as pigeon English, to
persuade the kanaka away from home. Every recruiter knows
that he owes his success in “ new chums ” to deceit of a kind,


bribes, native feuds, and the love of adventure. The price, 1
believe, has, on Tanna, little or no effect on the numbers who
recruit. Those who lose their sons or their brothers would
far rather have the “boy” than the Snider even. But when it
comes to the inevitable, someone will take the price of the
recruited kanaka. And when it comes to this the kanaka
prefers the “ gas-pipe ” to the American axe and “Cleveland
twist.” The natives in the New Hebrides look upon this
payment as the price of the man. Unless paid they say
that the kanaka is stolen. It stands to the credit of some
Queensland captains that they sometimes avoid thus demoralis-
ing the kanakas by not leaving the pay. And I have known a
father get the price of his son (by this time in his grave in
Queensland) when the ship and the captain who took the lad
away came back about six months afterwards. The recruiter has
to pay when catching the kanaka, whoever pays him.
How the Restrictions Work. —Secondly, a penitent
recruit can be retaken without helping him “ into the boat or
up the ship’s ladder.” Let me preface this amplification of the
kanaka creed by saying that a recruiter has to be educated in
the college of catching kanakas. There are “ wrinkles ” for
taking the penitent kanaka. My first experience of the Traffic
was a case of this kind in 1881. A vessel anchored just out of
sight of our station, word was brought to me that some boys
were stolen, and the relatives wished me to go and get them
back. The facts were, as I found, that six boys had recruited,
had rushed (they always do) into the boat, the Government
Agent informed me. They had all “ signed,” and, said the
Government Agent, “on board they shall remain.” I was quite
satisfied that the six boys were of age and willing to go.
Yet on getting ready to leave the ship I found four of the lads
ready to come ashore in the boat! This I forbade. One of them
jumped into the water and persisted in coming ashore in my
boat. When appealed to the Government Agent suggested that
we go and leave him to be picked up by the ship’s boat, a quarter
mile distant at the time! Regulation 31 reads—“lf any
islander wdio has agreed to come to Queensland afterwards
leaves the ship, or refuses to go on board of her, no attempt is
to be made to take him by force or to induce him to come by
means of threats or intimidation. If the provisions of this
regulation are violated the full penalty of the shipmaster’s
bond will be enforced.”
Bor ten years and more this regulation has survived all
revisions, and even the “ regeneration ” supposed to have been
effected by the sitting of the Royal Commission, the punishment
of the Hopeful criminals, the passing of an amending Act
and the abolition of the Traffic for six months in 1891. This
regulation stands now as then in both word and dot. “ R.S.M.”
says the Government Agentwill put any “ boy’’ashore who changes


his mind. About September last a Queensland vessel recruited
some “ boys ” near a mission station in the New Hebrides. A
native went to the missiorary to ask him to go off to the ship
and get home his “ boy.” The missionary did so, and not only the
boy in question, but some others, changed their minds and
wanted to go ashore. This was all known to the captain. As I
write now from memory, I cannot give details, but the end of it
was that several “ boys ” took French leave and went ashore in
the missionary’s boat. The price money of these kanakas was
sent back to the ship. The missionary got a letter asking for
the name of his solicitor, as the case was to be brought into
court. If true that the Government Agent will send home a
“boy ” after he has “signed,” it is plain the kanaka does not know
this, or he strangely prefers the undignified -way of swimming
ashore to asking to be put home in a ship’s boat. When there
is a racket about a “ boy,” such as the above, the Government
Agent, to my knowledge, tells the friends of the “ boy ” that the
matter will be settled to-morrow morning. To-morrow morning
finds the ship gone. The moment a captain finds that there is
a disposition on the part of a kanaka to risk sharks and swim
ashore, the anchor is up without delay.
A Dodge that Rarely Fails. —A captain many years in
the Traffic explained to me how a penitent could be taken.
“ When a ‘boy’ jumps overboard we just take a boat and pull
ahead of him, then lie between him and the shore. If he has
not tired himself swimming, and passes the boat, keep on
heading him in this way. The dodge rarely fails. The‘boy’
generally tires of swimming, gets into the boat of his own
accord, and goes quietly on board.” This was the way our
Nalau was retaken.
How Women are Caught. —Thirdly, the husband and
wife Regulation 21 (now 32) reads—“No woman is to be
recruited unless accompanied by her husband, nor without
the consent of the chief of the island, or of the village, or
district from which she is brought.” This regulation has sur-
vived the “regeneration,” and is word for word as it was. My
knowledge of many cases, and the ways of natives, warrants me
in saying that where husband and wife get on well they have no
inclination to recruit for Queensland. The married couples
known to me, who have recruited, with one exception, were
elopements. The exception couple, too, had a family reason for
recruiting. A wife or a single woman will arrange with another
man or boy to recruit first chance. When taken into the boat
the man says the woman is his “ Mary.” There is always a friend
at hand to act the “chief” and give his consent. There are no
certificates of marriage or seals of royalty such as we have.
The simplest and most profitable way is to ask no questions
about the veracity of the parties. It is, take the gifts offered
and be thankful. Space prevents me giving an example here.


How Recruiters Keep the Sabbath Holy -Fourthly,
“ heathen ships ” (as some of the New Hebridean natives call
labour vessels) now keep the Sabbath holy. The thirty-fifth
commandment saith—“. Recruiting is not to be proceeded with on
Sundays.” Practically, it makes no difference to the mission-
ary whether his head scholar is recruited on Saturday, Sunday,
or Monday. The loss is the thing that affects him. In the
days before the “regeneration” we had Government Agents
with too much conscience to sign on boys ou Sunday. One
Sunday all the missionaries were met in “ solemn conclave ” at
a mission station. A Queensland ship hove in sight, and sent
her boats in further along the coast. On their way back the
boats called at the missionary’s lauding. The Government
Agent called on the missionary, and told him the boats were
not recruiting. While the missionary and the Government
Agent were talking the recruiter was making a compact for a
band of the missionary’s scholars to recruit “ round the corner.”
As the boats left for the ship the recruiter’s boat backed in to
the reef and took the lads off. They were “ jumpers.” The
Government Agent afterwards told me that he did not allow
the lads to sign till next morning ! Then the ship was at the
other end of the island, 20 miles away.
Dodging the Parents and Friends— Fifthly, it is
most surely believed that all the recruiting is done above-board,
yet when a boat makes straight for the regular landing, one
knows that it is going to land returns, not to catch the kanaka.
The older people and the chiefs dislike the people going abroad.
If a lad tried to recruit in the presence of his father he would
be promptly pulled out of the boat. To avoid these difficulties,
and the risks they involve, the recruiter arranges to call round
the point, where the boy can get off unseen. Once a “ boy ”
has “ signed,” his agreement is like the laws of the Medes.
Here is an example from “ancient history.” A vessel arrived
at our station one day in October 1889. Next day the captain
was ashore and spent the evening with us. And let me say
here that I always treat those engaged in the Kanaka
Labour Traffic as gentlemen. So far as I know they do
not claim to be better than other men; but they certainly
are not worse. This is not the point at all. The fault is
not in the men, but in the Traffic, and like most men in the
'traffic, our friend’s talk on this occasion was chiefly of “ boys ”
and “Marys.” In a friendly way he opened out and spoke
freely of the “ wrinkles ”of the Traffic. He had very dogmatic
opinions about all the Government Agents he had sailed under.
Some of these opinions were not complimentary to the objects
of them. If the statements made were true most of the then
Government Agents ought to have been put into an inebriate
asylum, and not on board a labour vessel. Naturally, he had a
good deal to say about the high principles that governed his


own movements in the pursuit of his avocation as a labour
captain. One of these principles was that he made it a point
of never taking the scholars of a missionary. Next day a man
named Yahmar, who was then one of my scholars, went on
board the ship with his son Nauungka, a well grown but weakly
youth. Nauungka wanted to recruit but his father strictly
forbade him. But Nauungka was more than a match for his
father. Between him and someone on the ship it was arranged
that Nauungka should go ashore, the ship get under way, and
the boats then go ashore for Nauungka at a given spot, where
he would make a fire. The lad got matches from his father to
light his pipe on the way home. With these he cut through
the bush and lit the signal fire.
This story is too long to relate in full. The sequel is this.
The father was frantic over the loss of his son, and vowed
vengeance on the first labour ship that came. Nauungka died
shortly after reaching Queensland. The father went to Queens-
land to verify the report of the death of his son, which was
attributed to witchcraft on Tanna. Yahmar on returning
brought home his brother and another man, and determined to
avenge his son’s death. The result was the most disastrous war
that part of Tanna had witnessed for many years.
The New Regulations Useless. — I am aware that
these incidents happened before the supposed “regeneration.”
But if any one wants to know what the real facts are let him
read Mr. J. D. Melvin’s articles in the Melbourne Argus for
December 1892. That prophet of kanakaism accompanied the
Helena incog, on her trip that year, and described what he saw.
But read the facts, without his comments and opinions. Then
will incidents he relates tally with what I have given, showing
that the Kanaka Labour Traffic is still the child of “ slave
hunting.” It has been whitewashed, but not regenerated, and
the whitewash falls off at times.
How “Returns’’ are Caught. —Once more: Our
kanaka creed is that return boys are always landed at home.
Instructions to Government Agents, No. 11, was, and is—“ The
Government Agent is required to see that every returned
passenger is duly landed, along with his property, not only on
his own island, but at his own village or district; and on no
account must any islander be landed at any island, village, or
district other than the one from which he originally came, unless
he expressly wishes it, in which case a full explanation of the
circumstance must be entered in the log.”
The first ship that re-entered the Labour Traffic landed eight
men at Dillon’s Bay, Erromanga, instead of various places in
Weasisi Bay, Tanna. Be it known that recruiters are just as
anxious to catch returning kanakas as “new chums.” There are
a good many circumstances that favour this purpose beside
the kanaka’s love for the Queensland paradise. Bough weather


and war ai’e the recruiter’s handmaids in catching returns. Bad
weather can be imaginary as well as real. The recruiter says
to the “ return”—“What name now? Me no savee go ashore
passage belong you!” The return has to choose between
recruiting again or running the risk of landing at some other
part of his island, or requesting to be lauded on some Christian
island and wait a chance to get home. Again, war has broken
out and driven away the kanaka’s friends. Thus between
weather and war he has Hobson’s choice —to recruit or be
landed elsewhere. The eight Tannese were thus landed at
Dillon’s Bay, sent home to me in the steamer, and, to save their
lives, they were landed on the other side of our bay in a gale
by my boat and that of a trader. Details of the case can be got
in the P.I. Immigration Office. Again and again I have had to
do this sort of wmrk.
The Traffic Iniquitous. —And, lastly, my diary, kept
since 1882, covers more than 8,000 octavo pages in MS. Scat-
tered through these pages are countless records of Labour
Traffic incidents'of what has happened on Tanua alone. What
has been happening on Tanua has been happening on every
island in the Group. If similar incidents of the Traffic in
these islands, known to those who live in the island, w r ere
published, the volumes would fill a library. Yet the law could
not take hold of one in ten of these cases and say they were
illegal. So long as this is the case the Traffic will be what it
was—the cause of wrong to the natives, danger to traders,
settlers, and missionaries, and an unqualified stumbling block
to philanthropy and the improvement of these people. In
short, the Kanaka Labour Traffic is* a violation of a deeply
rooted British sentiment and a trampling under foot of the
doctrine of Jesus Christ. It has long been the pride and boast
of Britons that, as a people and a nation, we help the weak.
But here w r e have the spectacle of a single colony of Greater
Britain up to the neck in a Traffic that is a headlong race to
extinguish a whole people to sustain a single industry. One is
simply horrified at the thought that almost daily at almost
every island in the West Pacific these incidents will be re-
peated—incidents inseparable from this Traffic.
IV.—THE KANAKA ABROAD.
I hate spoken of the kanaka at home, and told how he is
caught. Now let us see what he does and how he is treated
abroad. But let me first make one or two points quite clear.
What we Teach the Kanaka. —Eirstly, if there were
no other objection, I w r ould still be opposed to the Kanaka Labor
Traffic, because I think most can be done for the kanaka at home


and in his own surroundings. (But this is not my only
objection.) All the benefits the kanaka can get in Queensland
he would get at home, even to Christian instruction. Life in
the Chinese shops, and intercourse with drunken whites may be
fascinating, but it is not elevating. If you take away the
Christian work (organised Christian work in Queensland
among the kanakas is not yet ten years old —the Queensland
labor traffic is more than thirty years old) now carried on
amongst them, there is not an iota in their surroundings in
Queensland that will elevate them in the least. They swear,
drink, gamble, and fight. You may ask me —“ Is the kanaka
not the judge of what is good for him ? ” The answer depends
on what you think the kanaka is. Is he a child or a full grown
man? I can only suppose that the people in Queensland
think he is a child. This is certainly the logic of the laws
under which he lives in Queensland. The law steps in and
defines his minimum clothing, food, and wages. The intention
of the law is, as an officer of the department said, “ to protect
the kanaka up to the hilt.” The law treats him so far as a child,
and as one that does not know what his rights are, or too weak
to enforce them. Then how can he be the judge of what is good
for him ? A kanaka is wronged and does not know it. He is
incapable of knowing what is good for him. He is more a babe
than a fool when he leaves his own laud for Queensland.
The Kanaka-Monger's Position. —Secondly, I do not
wish to be misunderstood as to my opinion of those employing
the kanaka, of those obtaining him, or of those administering
the laws. The officers of the P. 1.1. Department that I have met
have been very obliging, civil, and kind. I take them to be men
of integrity in a difficult position. The planters and recruiting
parties do not claim to be better than other men, and they
certainly are no worse than others. They are the average
people we meet every day. The attitude of these men (planters
and obtainers) is easily explained. They look upon the kanaka
as less human than the white man. Add to this self-interest,
and you have the explanation of their attitude. The actual
facts of the Labour Traffic are fugitive in the islands, on board
ships, and in Queensland too. A man with a white tie on or a
note book in his hand does not get the chance of seeing things
as they are. The only persons who can know these facts are
the planters, those engaged procuring kanaka labour, mis-
sionaries who labour for the kanaka, and the wdiite men who
labour with them. The result of one party being unwilling
to speak and the other disbelieved is that only the surface facts
are made known. At this level governors, ministers of the
Crown, journalists, and ministers of the gospel take up the
running. They get their facts from the planters and “catchers,”
and give voice to them. In turn these parties quote the opinion
of the governor, premier, bishop, and press, just as if their


source of information were independent. To find out what the
facts are a man, believing that the kanaka is his brother
in humanity, would need to go into moleskins and the
canefields.
The Restrictions a Farce.— Thirdly, I am charged
with giving ancient history. Suppose this is true, wherein lies
the difference between now and then F The planters are the
same, the captains and Government Agents are nearly the same,
and the recruiters have been connected with the trade for
twelve and fifteen years. The natives are the same. The
regulations, new printed, are practically the same. On what
ground can we expect the results to be different? The regene-
rated Traffic is barely three years old. And in that time a
clerk has been dismissed from the Government service for
touting for planters. A Government Agent has been dismissed
for not being in the boats when recruiting, and was afterwards
proved guilty of recruiting a woman without her husband. A
captain was suspended for a time for recruiting contrary to
instructions. And lastly, the William Manson revelations.
Regenerated ! It is only a matter of time, and the regenerated
Traffic will bear fruit —wild fruit too, But though there be no
breaches of law, there is as much cruelty and injustice done to
natives by acts that are legal as by deeds unlawful. The
regulations that exist are unjust and inadequate—unjust and
inadequate they must ever be.
The New Chum —But I am forgetting the kanaka
abroad. When he gets on board, no doubt he is happy. After
the first bout of sea sickness, I dare say he wishes he was
ashore. A new chum may know the number of years he is to
be away, how many blankets he will get —to the heathen the
clothes count for nothing. He knows that he will get foreign
food ; that he will get £G of money per year. But the value of
money to a new chum must be an unknown quantity. What
three years’ steady work on a Queensland plantation means he
cannot have the slightest conception. Many of higher intel-
lectual grade than the kanaka have gone into new spheres of
life, thinking they knew all about it, but have found the reality
very different to what they imagined. And much more so
must it be with the new chum kanaka.
Coaching the Kanaka for Inspection. On board
ship the new chum has to get lessons to prepare him to pass the
Inspector. This is how the lessons are given. I give a quota-
tion from “ The Gospel of Recruiting,” by Mr. Melvin of the
Melbourne Argus. The scene is on board the Helena . first trip
in 1892:
Mr. TJssher stood at the gangway they had to pass and
called them one by one by name. The recruiter stood by him
with the tobacco and pipes under his charge. The “ returns ”
were supplied without comment, but when Na Loot, our first


recruit, presented himself in answer to his name, Mr. Ussher
asked him:
“ Where you go work ? ”
Na Loot smiled helplessly, but the recruiter came to his aid
with the word “ Bundaberg.”
Na Loot took his cue, and blundered through Bundaberg.
“ How long you go work ? ” was the next question.
“ Three year,” said the recruiter, and Na Loot repeated the
answer parrot-like.
“ How much you get one year ? ” Mr. Ussher enquired.
“ Six pounds,” said the recruiter sotto voce , and the recruit
said “ sixy pounee.”
“ What you work along ? ”
“ Soogar cain,” answered Na Loot, echoing the recruiter to
the best of his ability, and then had his tobacco and pipe.
All the recruits were coached in the same way, and were told
that when they failed to answer correctly they would fail to get
their tobacco. The threat was, as I afterwards discovered, an
empty one, but it spurred the scholars to learn their lesson.
The Argus scribe did not intend to convey the idea that these
kanakas did not understand the agreement they had made. It is
not what Mr. Melvin intended. It is what the facts testify. If
the kanaka has to be drilled to pass the Inspector one is not
inclined to think he knows much about his bargain. And
when a recruit has to be examined through an interpreter how
does the Inspector know that the interpreter has not been
primed for the occasion P The incident related reveals how
the recruits on board ship are constantly under the moulding
influence of all, from the Q-overnment Agent himself down to
the recruiter.
On Board the “ Lochiel.” —That this “English lesson”
still goes on I have no doubt myself. 1 will relate what I saw
on board the Lochiel when she arrived in Bundaberg the other
day, and my readers can put on it their own construction.
When a ship arrives with recruits they are passed by the
doctor and examined, one by one, by the Inspector. In the
case of the Lochiel several “ boys” were held over because
thei’e was no interpreter, which shows that Inspector Caulfeild
is conscientious. A second examination is made by the In-
spector when the agreement is “ signed.” It was this one that
I witnessed. The Inspector calls the recruit by his name. He
says to each kanaka words to this effect:—
“This fellow master belong you,” pointing in this case, to
one of the owners of Fairymeade.
“ You work three fellow year.”
“You get him six fellow pound long one fellow year.”
“You get him plenty kaikai long this fellow master.”
“ Long one fellow year you get him four fellow shirt, four
fellow trousers, two fellow hat, one fellow blanket.” As he


names the articles the Inspector holds up a corresponding
number of fingers and theu touches the article named, which
the recruit generally has on. The new chum recruit lifts his
eyebrows to indicate that he understands, then touches the top
of the pen, and the Inspector makes a X aneut the kanaka’s
name in the agreement sheet. Old hands, and. the new chums
who have taken in the situation, are soon passed. One youth
had evidently mistaken the purport of his “ lesson in English.”
He did his best to repeat what the Inspector said to him, and
laughed after each effort. Whatever may have been the nature
of the first examination of this raw recruit there was certainly
nothing in what I witnessed to test his real knowledge.
Board and Lodging. —The whole clothing outfit for a
year will cost the planter, allowing him interest on his money,
at the outside £l. In some cases the housing is good, perhaps
in all, sufficient. What I have seen was dirty. There are no
sanitary arrangements whatever. I saw one case of feeding,
and that was good. All these matters, as well as similar matters
on board ship, are supposed to be under the supervision of
Inspectors. The quality of tobacco, salt meat, and rice put on
board labour ships I have tested. These are supposed to be
passed by an Inspector. What is known as “trade tobacco”
should run twenty-six sticks to 1 lb. It can be bought ip
Sydney or Brisbane for 10£d- P er lb- Traders in the New
Hebrides sell eight and twelve sticks for Is. I once got some
from a labour vessel which ran thirty-two sticks to the lb., and
was charged, not by weight, but by counting twenty-six
sticks to the lb. This is one of the wrinkles of the
Traffic. On another occasion I was hard up for rice,
and the Government Agent offered to supply my want.
They had, he said, a surplus of “ good ” rice on board.
Being a “ son of the manse ” I took his word for the quality,
paid him Sydney price for best rice for two quarter bags,
before I saw the rice itself. The rice was duly delivered, and I
am not using metaphor when I say that there was not a whole
grain of rice in both bags ! Few of the particles of rice were
larger than a pin’s head. I had bought rice screenings. I had
also an opportunity of dining once off a piece of salt meat
supplied to the kanakas. The kanaka said he had bought it
from a labour vessel, and being a “ Bundaberg Christian ” his
word ought not to be doubted. It was evening as we sat down
to the feast. Tom’s beef was sound, but absolutely without
taste, and tougher by yards than the proverbial boarding-house
steak.
Arcadian Plantation Life. —Here to some extent my
own observations must cease. What I give now is from
“information received.” But I do not see that this can be a
valid reason why this part of my testimony should be less
reliable than similar evidence taken by our own Northern


Territory Commission. I wish, however, to give the warning
that I am now speaking not of what I saw but of what I
was told.
At 5.30 a.m. overseers go round rousing “ boys ” out of their
humpies. Overseers are not very particular as to the methods
employed. A dog is found to be very handy for this purpose.
Kanakas shun a dog they do not know to be peacefully inclined
towards them as we do a snake. It is not that the dog bites the
kanakas, but they are afraid that he will. When the dog goes
into the humpy the kanaka comes out wdth his clothes under his
arm if he happens to be undressed. For the purpose of rousing
the kanaka the dog has the merit of being effective, expeditious,
and as humane as a stick or whip.
If a “ boy ” is known to be sick he is allowed to rest and
will receive slightly better treatment. Small planters keep no
doctor. When a “boy’’falls sick he is dosed with painkiller
and other patent medicines, and fed on ordinary rations. What
usually happens is this. When a “ boy ” falls ill with a good
part of his term to go he is carefully tended with the view of
getting him fit for the field as soon as possible. If near the end
of his time, or clearly incurable, he has to take his chance. A
doctor is called in to see the “ boy,” not with a view of curing
him, but to be able to give him a certificate as to the cause of
death when the “ boy ” dies. The Registrar is precise in this
respect; and, as one expressed it, requires to be satisfied that
the kanaka has been “ properly killed.” When the kanaka is
incurable it is not to the planter’s interest to keep the kanaka
alive. While he is ill he has to be paid, though unable to work,
and medical expenses are chargeable to the employer. I have
it on good authority that a planter will argue that it is cruel
and wrong to give delicacies to a sick kanaka when he is in-
curable. It prolongs his suffering. And of course it prolongs
the pay. “ Boys ” sham illness at times, and the overseer finds
it difficult to discriminate between sickness and laziness. A
dose of Epsom salts or machine oil is a good discriminator. The
shamming kanaka will take the canefield sooner than the nasty
medicine.
The kanaka legal scale of rations is a liberal one. At present
prices a kanaka’s food will cost inside of per day. His
clothing will cost the planter, allowing him interest on his
money, not more than 20s. for the year. Anything does for a
house from a hut made of sugar-cane leaf to a stone barracks.
On most plantations a “boy ” receives for breakfast the fourth
of a 2 lb. loaf and a pint of “ tea.” Large boilers, such as
coppers used for boiling clothes, are used for cooking the
food. The rice or sweet potatoes are boiled in one, the meat
in another, and the “ tea ” is made in the third. The tea
left by the planter’s family is in some cases collected and
boiled in the tea boiler with recently used tea leaves. This


gives substance to the decoction called “tea” that is thus
made by adding some of the cheapest ration tea. Then the
whole is sweetened with the blackest and most inferior sugar
that can be got. In addition to the bread some planters give
about two ounces of beef. Dinner is the same amount of bread
with from two to four ounces of beef (frequently rotten), sweet
potatoes, and a pint of “tea.” The evening meal is breakfast
over again. Not long ago it was a common practice for planters
to buy what is called “skallywags” to be killed for kanaka
meat. These are cattle suffering from cancer and other diseases
and are generally killed on the stations for their skins. Even
now, butchers who supply planters, save up the “ cats’ meat ”
and sell it at “ reduced rates ”as kanaka meat. The usual way
of feeding the kanaka is this. As each “ boy ” comes past, the
cook (who by law must be a white person) hands him out his
food through a window. When the cook is a new hand the “boys”
take advantage of his not knowing one kanaka from another
and present themselves a second time. When the food is done the
kanakas still come. Result —Some kanakas have a double share,
some have none, and the cook a black eye. When kanakas
work far afield their diuner is carted to them. The meat is
taken out of the pot, and put on a sack, lifted into the dray and
taken to the field. The same sack unwashed is used over and
over again. There are generally cheeky “ boys ”on a plantation
and they generally find fault with the food. Sometimes one of
these with a band of followers turns up at the Inspector’s with
their last dinner in a basket. Then a conversation like this
follows:
“ This fellow no kaikai (a Polynesian word for food) belong
* boy,’ ” says the cheeky kanaka, holding out a handful of the
“ dinner ” under the Inspector’s nose.
“He good kaikai,” ventures the Inspector.
“ You eat him,” answers the kanaka. The Inspector takes a
sniff.
“He stink,” suggests the kanaka. The evidence is too over-
whelming to be disregarded and a notice from the Inspector
reaches the planter. It is only right to say that statements of
this kind do not apply to estates like Biugera, Fairymeade, and
the Hummocks. But all the Queensland planters are not
Hibsons, Youngs, and Farquhars.
If the morning is wet the kanakas are not sent to the field.
But if the morning is fine and it comes on to rain afterwards,
the kanakas remain in the field until thoroughly wet. Going
home they lie in their wet clothes, take cold and die. A kanaka
woman has been kept at work, and had her child in the canefield.
Another worked in the rain till late in the afternoon, gave birth
to her child during the night, and was dead next morning.
Stories about planters tying “ boys ” up and flogging them are
mostly false. But any “boy” in the habit of loafing at his


work, or cheeking the overseer, will receive from that worthy a
sound thrashing on the first safe opportunity, that is, when
there are no witnesses present. To the present overseers use
the whip to keep the kanaka up to the mark in his work.
Stories about the immorality of white men and black women
are said to be greatly exaggerated if not wholly false. As to
the morality among themselves testimony varies a <jood deal.
But on two points all parties are agreed. (I) Nearly all tribal
fights, rows, and murders of kanakas are in Queensland the
result of disputes about women. A few months ago, tor
example, two “ boys ” fought over a “ Mary,” two days after the
woman’s body was found in the river. The inference drawn is
that the kanaka who got the worst of the fight and lost the
woman took revenge in murdering the woman. (2) Another
point on which there is agreement is that “ boys ” sell their
Marys ”to one another. The price ranges from £5 to £lO.
My own impression is that apart from this buying and selling,
the women are themselves fairly respectable. The immorality
takes place in the Chinese dens, where immoral w'hite women
are provided by the Chinese shopkeepers. Some features of this
part of the kanaka s life abroad are more revolting than anything
of island life that has come to my knowledge.
How the Planter Buries the Kanaka— My in-
quiries in Queensland convince me that the kanaka’s philosophy
of things is not changed by his sojourn in Queensland,
consequently he is often misunderstood, and the treatment
meted out to him must seem harsh in the extreme. What the
kanaka feels and thinks few if any in Queensland know. To
know the inner life and thought of a kanaka one must live with
him in his native surroundings at home. In Queensland he is
simply left to make what he can of his new surroundings. Death
in Queensland must be specially trying to the kanaka. It is
w r ell known to be an inextinguishable sentiment with the
kanaka to be buried at home by his friends. What of the
11,000 buried in the land of the Queen since 1863? By
whom, how, and W’here has this mighty army been hidden from
the gaze of man and saved from the teeth of the dingo P I
diligently inquired and found that little w r as known about the
matter, if w r hat I w r as told be the measure of the knowledge.
Why do so few know ? And why do those who do know hesitate
to tell ? This matter is of no consequence to the dead kanaka,
but the manner of his burial is an index of the planter’s estimate
of the kanaka s life. One person I asked about the matter
described his first experience thus :
A kanaka came to me and said—‘ Billy he finish now.’
Thinking the kanaka had left the district, I said —‘ Where he go
w r ork now?’ ‘No,’ said the kanaka, ‘he finish altogether.’
‘ What name he finish ?’ I asked. ‘ AVind belong him no more,’
wras the reply. Then I understood that Billy was dead.”


The scene of Billy’s burial as described to me was this. Billy’s
body lay in the cart entirely nude. Some kanakas were digging
the grave. The hole, I think my informant said, was eighteen
inches deep at each end with a boulder sticking up in the middle
about six inches. Into this hole the dead kanaka was put, the
head down at one end, the feet down at the other, and the
middle of the body bent up. The hole was filled in, and the
“ boys ” who performed this duty to the dead had to be sent
back again to heap stones on the grave to keep the dingoes
from digging up the corpse. This happened eight years ago, and
was then the common mode of burial. Things are now so far
improved that the body is now wrapped in calico or the dead
man’s blanket. The overseer is the “undertaker.” Two
kanakas dig the grave, and they with the overseer sign the
certificate of burial. The graveyard is not known, but it is
guessed to be the cauefield. It is attributed to a planter, when
told that “Shot-bottle” was dead, that he said, “The is
worth 2d per lb. more now that he is dead than when he was
alive. JNatives, let me add, who attended school are buried
with Christian rites when their death is made known to the
missionary. But it is a grievance with the kanaka missionaries
that the overseers do not let them know that a kanaka is to be
buried. One planter was named who always gets a coffin for
his kanakas, and has them buried in the cemetery whether they
be Christian or heathen. Kanakas who die in the Buudaberg
Hospital are buried thus at the expense of the employer or the
P. 1.1. Department.
Is the Kanaka a Slave P —The law forbids that the
kanaka shall do anything in-doors, drive a dray on the road, or
plough in the field. He can carry firewood and lay it down
at the door of the engine furnace, but he must not put it in
the furnace—a white man or a Japanee must do that. He can-
not be naturalised, and consequently he can have no franchise
nor right to make a will. As a further consequence all wages
and property of all kinds belonging to kanakas who die in
Queensland or on board ship go to the Queensland Government.
The force of this is recognised by the new regulation 46, which
provides that when a kanaka dies in Queensland during his first
term of service, a sum equal to the half of the wages due to
him, and half of the money to his credit (if any) in the Savings
Bank, is to be paid to his friends in the islands, if they can he
found. Why should the Government stick to the half? They
might as well have stuck to the whole, for the condition of find-
ing “his friends” makes the other half pretty sure for the
Government. In 1893 the value of intestate kanaka estates was
£1,131 3s. Of this sum £l9l 3s. sd. was the amount paid to
friends. In 1894 the value of these estates, after deducting
£282 Is. sd. for payments that are not specified, is £973 15s. 7d.
Kone of this money, says the report for 1894, has been paid to


“ friends,’’ “because reports received from seven Government
gents were unfavourable to the sending of this money to the
islands on account of the difficulty, almost amounting to
impossibility, in identifying the people who ought to receive it.”
In 1893 the capitation tax of £3 per head fell short of the
working expenses by £703 Bs. Iod., but the Joss was more than
covered by the balance from intestate estates, which was
£939 19s. 7d. In 1894 the capitation tax, fines, &c. fell short of
the working expenses to the amount of over £1,600. Yet 1895
is begun with a credit balance of £28,335 Is. 9d. If it were not
for the amount derived from these intestate kanaka estates, and
the £5 per head received for return passages by the Govern-
ment and saved when the kanaka dies in Qeensland, the Pacific
Island Fund would soon be insolvent. The sting of the thing
lies in the fact that these moneys go to procure more kanakas.
And it results in a war between Inspectors and the men who
keep kanaka shops. The Inspectors do their best to get “ boys ”
to deposit in the Savings Bank practically in the Inspector's
name. When the “boy” dies there is no difficulty about
getting his money. The keepers of kanaka shops represent
to the kanaka that the Government will keep the money
if he should die and try to persuade the kanaka to leave
the money with them ! Once more, it is no uncommon thing
for sugar estates to be advertised for sale with so many kanakas
on it. If Smith sells his estate he has no use for the fifty
kanakas required to work it. If they have two years of their
time to go it means to Smith a loss of about £l5 per head. Be-
sides, he must get the Colonial Secretary to sanction the kanakas
being transferred to someone else or pay their wages for the
two unexpired years. Jones buys the estate, needs the kanakas,
and gets them transferred to him. Is it likely that Smith will
give Jones a valuable asset for nothing? Smith cannot sell the
kanakas, but he can sell his estate subject to a consideration
for unexpired kanaka labour. Take into account all those facts
about the limitation of work, naturalisation, franchise, inherit-
ance, and selling kanakas on estates, and say whether the kanaka
in Queensland is a slave or not ?
The Cost of the Slack “Cattle.” —The kanaka’s wages
deserves some consideration. It is objected that it is not fair to
speak of fourpence per day, which is the legal minimum wage,
as all that the kanaka gets. The cost of getting him, his
clothing and food, should be counted too. The fourpence
per day is merely “ pin-money.” We hear a lot about the
“ nine pounders,” “ twelve pounders,” and even “ thirty
pounders.” But, like the Savings Bank statistics, these
quotations conceal more truth than they reveal. An analysis
of ninety recruits brought by the Helena from the Solomon
Islands to Queensland on November (?) 18th, 1892, gives the
following results


63 new churns
6 old „
£6 a year, or lid per day.
£8 „ „6d „
£9 „ „ 6fd „
6 „ „
15 ~ ~ ... £lO ~ ~ 7£d ~
But when the whole shipment of “ cattle ” are taken together it
is found that they have signed to work for the average wage of
sjd. per day, ten and twelve hours per day, for six days in the
week. We hear a lot about wages being £26 to £lO a year.
Through the kindness of Inspector Caulfeild I am able to
present an analysis of a bundle of agreements lying on the
table at the time [ was in the Bundaberg office. This gives us
nineteen sets of agreements with thirty-nine “ boys.” The long-
est engagement is one year and the shortest one month; the
highest wage is £3l. The length of the agreements average
under five months, and the average rate of wages is £25 2s. 6d.
per annum, or Is. fid. per day. These agreements include
rations, but not clothing. In this bundle of agreements there
was a woman for twelve months at £l2 10s., and another for
six months at £TO. But as these were so much lower than the
others they were omitted to give the average wage a better
chance. These high figures are constantly quoted. Yet it is
this that is giving the planters all the bother. The kanaka can
afford to “ walk about ” half the year. This is now the chief
charm to the kanaka. And over this point the defenders of
the Traffic are neither consistent nor unanimous. The Rev. A.
C. Smith the other night in Park Presbyterian Church, Brisbane,
pointed to these high rates of wages as evidence of the well-
being of kanakas in Queensland. Mr. Smith visited Walker-
ston last September. In a report of that visit published in the
Courier of October 5, 1891, he says—“ Kanakas are greatly
preferred, but their increasing scarcity makes some other
coloured labour necessary. I regret this.” Then he remarks
that the other “coloured labour” is found in the Japanese.
And he adds “The Japanese are very quick, smart, and
industrious.” Surely these are good qualities. Then, after
referring to Christian work and instruction among the Japanese,
he says—“ Their introduction is a matter of regret, for they
will form formidable competitors with white labourers in any
industry they please.” But before 1 comment on this let me
quote certain recent resolutions passed by the Mackay Pioneer
River Farmers’ Association—“ That the attention of the
Government be drawn to the number of kanakas idling about
Mackay and refusing to accept employment, except at exorbitant
wages, and that the Government be asked to say what shall be
a reasonable time for them to accept employment or return to
their homes.”
Combining Against the “Boys’” Exorbitant
Demands. —Apparently the wages that defenders brag about
are exorbitant. But this is not all that is asked for. “ That


steps be taken,” it is further resolved, “ to obtain the co-opera-
tion of all employers of kanaka labour in the colony with a
view to keeping kanakas’ wages within reasonable limits!” The
prices boasted of are evidently too high. In one point, however,
Mr. Smith and these planters agree. Put into plain English,
both parties mean that the kanaka is to some extent just
sufficiently stupid to do routine work and make no effort to
better himself. What the planter asks for is a man that will
do what he is told, eat what is set before him, be content with
his cheap clothes, sleep where he is put, and cost nothing
to bury —in fact, just what he expects from his horse.
Y.—TWO RECRUITING CRUISES: THE EMPREZA
AND WILLIAM MAN SON.
a. The “Empreza,” or Whitewashing the Queens-
land Kanaka Labour Traffic. —The Empreza was a vessel
engaged in the Queensland Kanaka Labour Traffic in 1893.
She left Brisbane January 12th with 153 (P) return islanders.
Official documents declare that these “returns” were then all in
“good health.” Eight days out from Brisbane the G. A. notes that
the “invalids were getting extra food.” On January 23rd a native
died from consumption. On January 27th a kanaka died from
what is described by the G.A. as “ inflammation of the bowels,”
and adds —“ His countrymen say that he was ill with something
before he left his plantation on the Herbert River.” The
“returns” all left Brisbane in “good health” ! * [Some of this
kanaka’s fellow-passengers told me that this man had dysentery
when he died, and this is what one would suspect from the
Government Agent’s record.] Three days after the vessel
landed three kanakas on Aneityum, and next day recruited a
Santo man, who had finished his time with a trader there. On
Eebruary 3rd five “ returns ” were landed on Futuna. [One of
the five was a half-caste child suffering from dysentery.
Writing under date of April 16, 1893, and referring to this case,
Dr. Gunn, our medical missionary on Futuna, says —“ A labour
vessel from Queensland brought back some natives, among them
a Futunese woman with a half-caste child suffering from dysen-
tery. . . The disease soon spread among the natives with
terrible fatality.” The result was that Dr. and Mrs. Gunn and
two of their children were at death’s door with dysentery, two
more of their children and 133 natives of the island died in
three months.] Reporting on this case the Government
Agent says —“ I beg to state most respectfully that I cannot
see how Dr. Gunn can place this charge against the Empreza ,
# The statements in [ ] are facte not known at the time in the Brisbane office.


as the people who were landed . , . had nothing the matter
with them so far as I know when they landed, but if they had
they must have caught it whilst the 'ship was at Aneityura for
two or three days. (!) They (the five ‘returns’) were landed
the day after they left Aneityum ’ (where the ship recruited
one Santo man). “Had Hr. Ghinn,” the G-.A. adds, “made
more careful enquiries and used a little common sense he would
have found that the sickness was prevalent in many of the
Southern Islands before the Empreza arrived there” (!)
That was February 3rd. Between the 10th and 13th the
Empreza landed a number of “returns” on Auiwa and Tanna,
and took twenty-four recruits from Tanna, seven of which
afterwards died on board the Empreza from dvsentery. On
February 16th five “ returns ” were landed on the next'island,
Erromanga, and one recruit obtained. [One of these “returns”
was suffering from dysentery in the last stages of the disease.
An epidemic was the result, in which forty-eight natives died.
Amd only by strict quarantining, Mr. Bobertson says, was the
disease kept from spreading further.] Next day (Feb. 17th)
a child died on board from dysentery. Two days later a
“ return ’ died from the same cause, and is declared to have
been ill before leaving Queensland. The Empreza's passengers
left Brisbane in “ good health,” remember ! On February 28th
a child died on board in Havannah Plarbour from dysenterv.
Two days later another child died on board and was buried on
Epi. Now one of the seamen was ill with this complaint and
was afterwards at death’s door. On the night of March 4th the
Empreza was dismasted off Epi in a hurricane. On the 6th a
female “return” died. She had been suffering from sores on
her leg so foul smelling that she had to be kept by herself in a
place on deck. The Empreza s passengers left Brisbane in
“ good health.” The ship was at this time back in Fila Harbour.
On March 11th dysentery was general on board. On March
13th the French doctor resident at Fila was called in to see the
“invalids.” That day a Tanna recruit died from dysentery.
Next day two white men and ten natives w'ere seen by the
doctor. Eight of the ten kanakas were Tanna recruits, and one
of them died that day. On March 22nd a “ return ” died ; on
the 23rd a Tanna recruit died ; on the 24th the second mate of
the vessel was ill; on the 30th the carpenter was ill; on April
2nd the recruiter was ill; on the 6th there were two more cases
of dysentery ; on the 10th two Tanna recruits died ! On April
12th the schooner Caroline removed the ninety-two remaining
“ returns ” from the Empreza, and landed them on thirteen
different islands in the New Hebrides, Banks, and Torres
Groups. While this was being done another Tanna recruit died
on board the Empreza, the disease became epidemic around
Fila. Mrs. Mackenzie (the missionary’s wife) contracted it
attending to the sick and died therefrom. Still later, May 21st,


a Tanna recruit, who is said to have been the first to take the
disease and to have recovered, died suddenly. By this time the
Empreza was being refitted, and the disease disappears. On
June 4th the recruits and crew are reported all well by the new
CL A. who had by this time taken charge of her.
Now, the knowledge of all these facts was in the possession
of the Queensland authorities (except those set forth in the
statements in brackets above) when the Kev. J. Gibson wrote to
the Colonial Secretary in Queensland on behalf of the Foreign
Mission Committee of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
calling the attention of the authorities to the way in which the
Empreza had infected the New Hebrides and asking
that regulations be enforced to prevent the recurrence
of such infection. At the same time Mr. Gibson called
the Colonial Secretary s attention to what were thought
to be cases of introduction of skin disease to the New Hebrides
through the Kanaka Labour Traffic. The reply consisted of a
letter from the Under-Colonial Secretary containing comments
on six different documents forwarded and some minor corre-
spondence. In these documents—
!• The existence of dysentery on board the Empreza is
admitted.
2. The assigned causes of the dysentery are various—
exposure during the night of the hurricane; infection by
recruits from islands where the disease already existed;
eating unripe fruit; drinking sea water. And an effort
is made
3. To explain and prove how dysentery came to be in the
islands. For this the March hurricane is responsible,forgetting
that they claim that dysentery was in the islands a month
before the hurricane, and on islands where its effects were
trifling. It is almost absolutely certain that the Empreza
brought the germs of the disease from Queensland. It
is beyond all doubt that she infected Futuna, Erromanga,
Efate, and perhaps Tanna and Epi. At least 200 native
lives were sacrificed and that of a missionary’s wife and
two children. And the high death-rate of kanakas in Queens-
land for 1893 (52 57 per 1,000) is attributed by the officials in
Queensland to the importation of dysentery from the New
Hebrides, the infection having been brought by the labour vessels
JHay and Lochiel. Of course the disease could not originate in
Queensland ! In the report to hand for 1894 it is stated that
this same disease “ was brought (by the Rio Loye) into the
ship at Epi, and afterwards broke out at Mon Kepos in the
Bundaberg district, where it gave a great deal of trouble in spite
of every effort to stamp it nut.” From these facts it is evident
that these ships carry infection from Queensland to the islands,
from island to island, and from the islands to Queensland. At
the very time the outbreak in Queensland in 1893 was at its


height the ten Inspectors reported the kanaka health to be
good from Dan to Beersheba.
b. The “William Manson.” —The William Manson left
Brisbane early in 1891. She took with her three Malata “boys”
—Try, Amboo-oba, and Koby. These men were sent out with
some sort of recognition as missionaries. If I mistake not, a
member of the Government presided at the farewell meeting.
The Courier followed with a leader, lauding the Traffic and
mission work among kanakas in Queensland, the comparisons
drawn not being in favour of work done in the islands by
missionaries. Kwisulia, the chief of Amboo-oba’s district, did
not object to the gospel, but he wanted it through a w r hite
missionary. There is some doubt as to how it came about, but
the end of it was that the William Manson returned to Queens-
land with these three missionaries, ordained by the secular press,
in the list of recruits for sugar plantations. Amboo-oba accused
the officers of dealing unfairly with the trio and kidnapping
others. Besides the three native missionaries, this ship carried
with her a phonograph, magic lantern and slides. The
phonograph was made to grind out messages from friends in
Queensland, inviting the stay-at-homes to come to the Queens-
land paradise. The slides, we may suppose, were helps to trade
and pigeon English to induce the kanaka to “ sign on.” The
cruise was successful and eventful. The missionary at Erakor
knew how successful, for he lost about a dozen youths out of his
school. At other places there were diversions in “brushes ”
with the kanakas, especially at Epi; and lastly, the reported
kidnapping at Malata.
The major accusation was that the captain and his officers
kidnapped three men and four women. The parties were
acquitted of this charge, on what grounds the public is left to
conjecture. Bome facts came out in the trial, which does not
surprise those who know this Traffic, that the wider Australian
public should know.
These facts are : —Five return “boys” appeared to have
“ signed on ” without attempting to settle at home —some of
them never landed. Two women recruited were “ married ”
on board to two of these re-caught kanakas. Two ladies were
honoured with a free passage round the group for a month or
two without having their names on the passenger list at all.
It was asserted that these ladies were indebted to the weather
for their passage, and to the “ discretion” of the Government
Agent for the omission of their names from the passenger list.
It has hitherto been believed that a woman was always recruited
with her husband (?) and by the consent of her chief. The
G.A., in evidence for the defence, said that the recruits “ take
their wives on board.” “ Two mouths after they had come on
board ? ” asked Mr. Power. “ Oh, yes,” was the reply! One
of the men who was said to have been kidnapped, was for some


reason sent ashore before the ship left his landing ; the other
two were brought to Queensland. Two of the women were
brought to Queensland, and two were returned. The parties
accused were acquitted, the men and women said to have been
kidnapped have been sent home, and the acquitted men debarred
from engaging in the Traffic. Even the Brisbane Courier in a
leader on the William Munson case, asks the people of Queens-
land to consider whether the light thrown on the Kanaka
Labour Traffic by this trial does not demand its abolition on
the score of abuse. But the Courier pleads for a further trial
of the traffic, as it thinks the William Manson practice
exceptional. Those of us who know this Traffic know that the
William Manson methods of recruiting are the rule and not the
exception. What is wanted is more Amboo-obas to make the
revelations.
Indictment of the Traffic. —My indictment of the
Queensland Kanaka Labour Traffic is this :
1. It generally demoralises and always impoverishes the
kanaka, deprives him of his citizenship, and depopulates the
islands fitted to his home.
2. It is felt to lower the dignity of the white agricultural
labourer in Queensland, and beyond a doubt it lowers his wages
there.
3. The whole system is fraught with danger to Australia and
the islands on the score of health.
4. On social and political grounds the continuance of the
Queensland Kanaka Labour Traffic must be a barrier to the
true federation of the Australian colonies.
5. The Eegulations under which the Traffic exists in Queens-
land are inadequate to prevent abuses, and in the nature of
things they must remain so.
6. The whole system is contrary to the spirit and doctrine of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The Gospel requires us to help the
weak, but the kanaka is fleeced and trodden down.
7. The bed-rock of this Traffic is that the life and liberty of a
black man is of less value than those of a white man. And a
traffic that has grown out of “ slave-hunting ” will certainly
remain to the end not unlike its origin.
THE END.
E. S. Wiffg & Son, 12 Eundle-street, Adelaide.




