

UNIVERSITY PRIZE POEM.
‘Captain Cook Meditating
Australia’s Future.’
Delivered at the Opening of the Great Hall of
the Sydney University, July 18th, 1859.
‘‘Veteris noil inscius aevi." Ovid.
Rev. W H. H. YARRINGTON. M. A..LL.B
Sydney : A.C. World, 1910






Opening of the Sydney University in its New
Buildings and Hall, Grose Farm,
July 18th, 1859.
(From Sydney Morning Herald, July lqth , iSyg).
Annual Commemoration of the Foundation of Sydney
University.
Yesterday tlie Annual Commemoration of the
foundation of the Sydney University was
held in the splendid Hall of that Institution,
only recently completed. At eleven o'clock a.m.,
numerous visitors began to arrive and continued
rapidly to assemble in large numbers until the
doors of the hall were thrown open and admit-
ted the expectant throng. The noble and spa-
cious apartment was almost immediately and
densely filled in every part; the organ on the
dais at the western extremity playing whilst the
many hundreds of personages present, official
and unofficial were gradually settling into their
respective place,s. Most of our principal colo-
nial families were represented amongst the au-
dience in the body of the Hall, a large propor-
tion of whom were ladies, the eastern gallery be-
low the Cambridge window being similarly oc-
cupied. Directly in front of the organ on the
raised seats sat the resident Consuls. The Leg-
islative Council was represented by Hon. Messrs.
•1. 11. Wilshirc, Edward Hunt. David Jones, Wil-
liam Bland, R. J. Want, 11. Prince, E. F. Wise,
J. McFarlane, M.D., and others. At the back
of these gentlemen sat several Reverend Minis-
ters in the various Presbyterian Churches, wear-
ing their academic robes, also Wealeyan Clergy-
men, Ecclesiastics of the Roman Catholic Church


occupied benches at the oblique angle and still
further forward were placed the functionaries
of St. Paul’s College, the Rev. H. J. Hose, M.A..
Warden, and the Revs. W. B. Clarke, M.A., W.
H. Walsh, M.A., and Robert Johnson, Senior Fel-
lows, and the Rev. A. H. Stephen, 8.A., and
Messrs. H. H. Browne, William Dumaresque and
W. T. Cape, fellows. Here also sat Mr. W. C.
Windeyer, Esquire Bedell, and near him Mons.
Du time. Among Members of the Legislative
Assembly were Messrs. J. Pemell, John Black,
Edward Flood. Hr. Williams, Rev. John Pen-
drill, M.A., John Rae, Very Reverend Dean O’Con-
nell, d. K. Heydon, W. C. Curtis, A. Lenehan,
Ven. Father Therry, -J. V. Gorman, Mr. Hugh
Kennedy, Registrar of the University of Balliol
College, Oxford. The Hon. Charles Cowper, Pre-
mier, the Hon. L. H. Bayley, Attorney-General,
Sir Alfred Stephen, Chief Justice, Sir Charles
Nicholson, Bart., D.C.L. (in his gorgeous robes),
having on his left hand, His Excellency, Sir W.
T. Denison, K.C.B. (in full uniform, wearing his
orders), and on his right, the Most Reverend
Archbishop Folding in his robe<s. To the right
of his Grace, E. Deas Thompson, C. 8., Mr. Alfred
Denison, Rev. W. Purves, M.A., the Hon. James
Martin, Q. C. and Mr. Peter Faucett, members
of the Senate, wearing academic robes, the Hon.
F. L. S. Merewether, 8.A., Rev. Robert Allwood.
8.A., Sir Daniel Cooper, Knt., Hon. H. G. Doug-
las, M.D., Hon. J. D. Plunkett, Q.C., James Mac-
arthur, B. O'Brien, M.D. The Rev., the Princi-
pal John WMolley, D.C.L., Professor John Smith,
M.D., Mr. M. B. Pell, 8.A., Professor of Mathe-


matic.s, took prominent parts in the proceedings.
The prize composition, “Captain Cook’s Medita-
tions on the Future of Australia.” was obtained
by Mr. W. H. Yarrington.
The “Empire” Newspaper of same date says :
“The Rev. Principal Dr. Woolley, who filled the
office of Dean of the Faculty of Arts, then read
the list of freshment candidates for degrees and
prize men, and then called upon the gainer of
the prize for English, verse, Mr. W. H. H. Yarring-
ton, to recite the poem. The subject, “Captain
Cook Meditating on Australia’s Future,” was de-
livered in a very impressive manner, and was
loudly applauded.
Among the names of the prizemen and Gra-
duates appear the following : —H. C. Russell,
Cecil Stephen, G Lane, W. P. Cowlishaw, F. H.
Quaife, E. Bowman, W. Perry. G. A. C. Tnnes. E.
Hunt, ,7. Garland, Wesley Tom, F. .T. Gibbes, S.
S. Cowper, .T. McLerie, J. J. Halley, R. Jones,
R. R. Terry, F. E. Rogers, W. Dixson, J. E. Bow-
den, H. T. McCarthy, W. H. Yarrington, Univer-
sity Prize Poem (Gold Medal, £2O). Master of
Arts. W. C. Windeyer, R. M. Fitzgerald, H. S.
Mitchell, W. C. Curtis, E. Lee. M. Burdekin, J.
Paterson, J. Donovan, J. Johnson, J. Kinloch.
Bachelor of Arts, S. Hawthorn. R. Jones, G. D.
Pilcher, A. Bowman, S. Burdekin, E. J. Hargraves
E. Hunt, R. Ru ( ssell, R. Want
At the direction of the Principal, Mr. Yarring-
ton then ascended the ambon or pulpit, and in a
clear and emphatic voice recited the following
poem, which was attentively listened to, and
loudly applauded at the conclusion.


UNIVERSITY PRIZE POEM
“CAPTAIN COOK MEDITATING ON
AUSTRALIA’S FUTURE”
(Delivered at the Opening of the Great Hall of the
University , Sydney).
stillness and the hush of evening lay
W O’er sleeping nature ; and the quiet bay
jj Calmly reposing, as in tranquil sleep,
Stirred not, save as the swellings from the deep
Came stealing o’er it, just as gentle breath
Lifts the soft bosom that in seeming death,
By passions all untortured, quiet lies,
Untorn by anguish undisturbed by sighs ;
So slept the waters, o’er whose face a beam
Of softest light, e’en as a living stream
Of purest silver, lay ; while from her throne
Amid the floating clouds in beauty shone
The tranquil moon; a mild and holy calm
Hung o’er the scene ; and like an incense-charm.
The fragrance that from woodland flow’rets swept—
Flow’rets that with the dews of evening wept—
Came o’er the waters with the gentle air,
Then rose to Heaven like a hallowed prayer!
Resting upon the water’s surface lay
A noble ship that in the peaceful bay
Sought from the ocean’s fierce unrest repose ;
And here her wand’rings found a happy close ;
Here, where no more the angry billow rolls.
Nor lurking rocks are feared, nor treach’rous shoals.
Hushed was each sound; nor heard the boatswain’s call
Nor hoarse command, for sleep was over all—
Sleep, peaceful sleep! The ship a spectre stood,
Floating uncertain on the air or flood,
While o’er her web-like rigging and the spars
The moonlight brooded; and the twinkling stars
Were seen the midst. Is there no creature there
Or is that ship a phantom of the air ?
No, on the silent deck appears a form ;
’Tis of a seaman whom full many a storm


Hath tossed. It is the form of him whose name,
From age to age, shall with undying fame.
To every son of this bright land be taught,
’Tis Cook 1 who treads that deck in lonely thought 1
Yes 1 there is he, of Britain’s sons the first
Upon whose view, in all its beauty, burst
This sunny land, where now we dwell ; yes there.
Gazing on all around, so still so fair,
Into his soul he drinks its quietness ;
And o’er his spirit visions dreamlike press,
Then fleeting vanish ; while his pensive mind,
Which to the past and present hour is blind.
Thinks on the future of this happy lane’
Thinks, as he gazes- on the woody irt strsi I,
Upon the time when far and wide around.
Those groves shall echo to the axe’s sound- -
Those woods, through time unmeasured that had been
Of savage life the fruitless, wasted scene;
Beneath whose spreading boughs—the opossum’s home
The kangaroo and stately emu roam—
Woodlands that oft the war-cry wild had heard,
Which, like the screaming of some dreaded bird
That floats above, strikes terror to the weak ;
Whose echo is the wailing, wild death shriek 1
He sees the time when those primaeval trees
Shall pass away as waving with the breeze,
In golden beauty, harvests rich appear,
To glad with bounty, and with beauty cheer;
He sees, with humble roof, the cottage rise -
Where dwells the peasant who, industrious, plies
With toil the fertile land ; and there his mate
The partner of his life, whose heart elate
With happiness, amid her children dwells;
Hers is the joy, that with affection swells ;
’Tis hers to soothe his mind when cares oppress.
And, with her gentleness, his home to bless.
There happy dwell they, while with plenty crowned
The village rises to the view around.
Thus, with her pictures, fancy doth beguile
The dreamy thoughts of him who prays the while
That not delusive what he sees may prove,
And that the scenes before his mind which move—
Of cities rising into pomp and power—
Of noble buildings, that with dome and tower


Shall stand for ages and with solemn spell
Recall their ancient majesty and tell
When first to God temples where high upraised,
And when with lifted hearts, in hymns was praised
The goodness that did bless:—tell of the time
When first from belfry tower was heard the chime
Of Sabbath bells ;—tell of the years gone by,
When Austral’s sons with boldness dared defy
All dangers that their onward course withstood,
Until they’d won whate’er was great and good:
Prayed he these things—which were but of the brain
Might, in reality, live o’er again!
And, as he fruitful sees fair learning’s seats
Rise in their grandeur, joyfully he greets
The sight, and as an earnest sure he prays
That these may be ; and that in future days
Sages and poets should, within those walls,
Be nurtured; and from out those college halls
Men, who in wisdom learned should watchful stand,
And guard with sacred care their native land:
That thence should come poets with souls of fire
Whom genius should with burning thoughts, inspire
To sing prophetic! Preachers, strong in God,
Who shall declare the truth of Him that trod
This earth ; whose faith through ages long shall live
And, to all nations, the sweet bondage give
Of brother’s love 1
Such are the thoughts of him
Across whose brain, in shadowy outline, dim
The future passes ; such the fervent prayer
Which for this land, so beautiful, so fair,
He offers up to God! That it may be
For ever glorious, and for ever free!
( The above poem was reprinted in the Sydney Morning Herald
at the unveiling of Captain Cook's Statue, Hyde Park.
February, 25th, 1870).
“A,C. World," Print, 275 Clarence street, Sydney.


-i"" Sum
-M3
jBl
r fW^h
r*M.vf Jr
.»JC
- m j *»-
«8
S**i*
Rh^»
5Ht5S53^
V •> CL "-*■&?. s*M
- >v. JhrW^a
5L3flWF?^vwH(
■gjgMr^psr
/ Wm
l mg
j ' '-" Vi 7 Jf L*||
1 . j VfvttPniwiin
-SU "Jtc
S&£
w^KWK^tsSfk.
|«l2£4r*5^
om jmSt^SS^mW «-♦ V f|
**» : m . ** ”* ■
1/§*&*>
vjj •* 1
♦* j
r. 'fc. J.
|&: j mNiSSSB
j
'* ’ /' * j
j-Wi^<.y r l
MgK~ up* ?f.
Landing of Captain Cook -
—Kurnell Celebration,
1901.
Reciting Dramatic Poetry byiW.H.H. V.




