

THE AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC TRUTH SOCIETY RECORD. TO f f
June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
FATHER DAMIEN
LEPER APOSTLE OF MOLOKAI
TTfV'Pr,
1054 Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for 4d
transmission by post as a periodical.


The Australian Catholic Truth Society,
143-151 a'Beckett St., Melbourne, and
C.U.S.A. House, 175 Elizabeth St., Sydney




THE AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC TRUTH SOCIETY RECORD.
June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
FATHER DAMIEN
(LEPER APOSTLE OF MOLOKAI)
CHAPTER I
CHILDHOOD
In the little Belgian village of Tremaloo near the town of
Malignes, seven miles from the historic city of Louvain, there
dwelt a humble family of the farmer class named De Veuster.
These worthy people, thrifty, hard-working yeomen stock, lived
the quiet simple life of the country, working incessantly from
sunrise to sunset, hard manual labour of the fields, tilling,
sowing, reaping, with very little intermission or distraction save
their evening rest round their comfortable fireside with a rare,
occasional visit to the neighbouring city of Louvain.
Francois and Catherine De Veuster at this time were the
happy parents of five children, and on 3rd January, 1840, a
sixth child was born and was called Joseph, after Our Lady’s
Spouse.
From babyhood Joseph seemed drawn mysteriously to holy
things and once at the age of four, being missed from his home
on a busy pattern day in the village, was sought in vain by his
distraught parents. He was found at length in the little
church rapt in meditation at the foot of the altar, a lonely
figure kneeling in the flickering rays of the little red lamp.
It would seem as if he already felt that gentle call, which was
to grow ever louder and more insistent, until it led him on in
obedient and willing response to the shore of that living death
on the Grey Island of Molokai. His natural instinct for
religion was ever fostered by the devout example of his parents,
especially of his mother.
Each evening, when the toil of the day was over, the family
assembled in the farm house kitchen, where the wood-fire
crackled on the wide hearth and the copper utensils winked
and shone in the dancing firelight. Then the mother took


Nibil Obstat:
W. M. COLLINS,
Censor Dioc.
Imprimatur:
igiD. MANNIX,
Archiepiscopus Melboumensis.
The Australian Catholic Truth Seciety,
143-151 a'Beckett St., Melbourne, and
C.U.S.A. House, 175 Elizabeth St., Sydney


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
down the great volume of the lives of the saints printed in old
Flemish and read the stirring episodes of those heroes and
martyrs. These tales so powerfully impressed Joseph and his
brothers that they even tried to imitate their glorious achieve-
ments by wandering off into the woods to become hermits with
provisions enough to last about a day. Here they were traced
by their anxious relatives at nightfall and brought back tired
and cold but with their missionary zeal no whit diminished.
As Joseph grew older he showed intense love and spiritual
understanding of the virtue of self-denial and mortification.
This he practised in secret and went so far as to lie by night
on a plank which he laid over his bed, secreting it by day,
until his mother happening to discover it, forbade the practice.
Though quite a natural boy, he always seemed a little apart
from his companions, liking to reflect and to listen to that
inward voice ever vocal within his soul. He was extremely
sensitive as all such rare natures are, and shrank under the
slightest word of reproof; but at the same time of a most
happy disposition and engaging manner, with a winning smile
that disarmed, all unfriendliness. This sunny nature was to
be one of his greatest helps when faced with the most terrible
conditions in the material and spiritual sphere that ever human
being encountered. He loved to follow the flocks to pasture
and was frequently to be seen in company with the shepherds,
earning thereby the endearing appellation of “The Little
Shepherd.”
His love of animals and sympathy for his neighbour in
trouble are shown in a moving little episode in which we see
him keeping an all-night vigil over a poor woman’s sick cow —
her sole support and which was on the point of death. When
morning dawned the animal was definitely on the road to
recovery.
His love for study seemed to indicate that he was not meant
for agricultural pursuits. His parents therefore decided to
send him to college at Braine-le-Comte, with a view to a com-
mercial career; there being no idea as yet that he would
develop a religious vocation as his brother Auguste had done.


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
CHAPTER II
THE PASSING YEARS
At Braine-le-Corate he followed his studies with the greatest
zeal. A mission there held by the Redemptorist Fathers
sowed the seed of his future vocation in no uncertain manner,
or rather forced the growth of that seed which was within
him from his earliest years. In a letter to his parents shortly
after this he hints of his vocation. His sister Pauline had
already entered religion, and Auguste had become a novice
in the Picpus Fathers. He asked therefore for their consent,
and having obtained it, he entered the same Order, the Congre-
gation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary. His education
not being sufficient to qualify him as a candidate for the priest-
hood, he had to be content with becoming first a lay-brother,
but by dint of hard work and study he was soon admitted to the
ranks of ecclesiastical students. He chose as his name in
religion that of Damien, after the saint-physician who, with
his brother, Cosmas, had suffered martyrdom; a well-chosen
name surely for him, who was later to spend his life curing
not only the spiritual but the terrible physical ills of his poor
suffering leper children. He spent his novitiate in Paris, a
zealous, holy novice practising mortification and self-denial on
every occasion, a fit preparation for that life of sublime achieve-
ment awaiting him though all unconscious of the future. These
voluntary hardships of mortification never affected his health,
being of the most robust constitution and bodily strength.
The foundation of his future work was built up here in long
prayerful commune with God, in arduous application to work
and detail, in perseverance and intense, prolonged effort,
developing a naturally strong character into a force and power,
which was to fit him for the colossal task before him —the great
act of martyrdom. This is not accomplished in a day or a
year, but is the slow and steady growth, the outcome of a long
period of daily and incessant self-immolation.


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
CHAPTER 111
DAMIEN SETS SAIL
But Damien’s great desire was for the missionary life. This
goal he never lost sight of since he joined what was primarily
a missionary Congregation. He had long taken the great
missionary saint, Francis Xavier, as his special patron, and
endeavoured to model his life on the “Apostle of the Indies.”
In 1825 Pope Leo XII had placed the conversion of the Sand-
wich Islands under the care of the Picpus Fathers, and
missionaries were despatched there from time to time. His
brother, Pamphile, now ordained, was among the number
selected to sail, but within a few weeks of his departure he
fell a victim to typhus fever. This was Damien’s opportunity.
He offered himself in his brother’s place, and though still
in Minor Orders, his superiors acceded to his proposal, and
Damien sailed in The Cross after a week’s retreat and a brief
visit of leave-taking to his home at Tremaloo.
The party, which included five fathers, met in Paris and
proceeded to the port of Bremerhaven where their sailing
vessel was ready for departure. In Paris before leaving he
had his photograph taken; it represents him with a strong face
of intense earnestness, clear steady gaze, the face of an Aloysius,
telling of latent powers of strength and endurance and burning
zeal. A slight shortsightedness had lately compelled him to
wear spectacles, which are noticeable in the picture.
Damien set sail on the Feast of All Saints, Ist November,
1863, bidding farewell forever to home and parents and country.
After five months of rough sailing in the South Seas with
terrific storms which threatened to wreck their vessel they
rounded Cape Horn and ploughed through the Pacific (which
on this occasion belied its name) and came to anchor in
Honolulu, the capital of the Sandwich Islands, on the Feast of
Damien’s patron, St. Joseph, 19th March, 1864.


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
CHAPTER IV
THE HAWAIIAN ISLANDS
This group of islands (also known as the Hawaiian) were
discovered in 1778 by Captain Cook, and even at this time
idolatry and human sacrifice were largely practised, though the
Picpus Fathers had been sending missionaries periodically for
forty years. They were lucky, however, in the fact that the
native king was favourable to them, and welcomed their arrival;
nevertheless a colossal task awaited Damien and his companions.
The islands were also covered with volcanoes, some very
active with frequent eruptions covering the ground with lava
and making travel, which was mostly on foot, no easy matter.
Before taking up his duties Damien must complete his
studies at the Island College and receive ordination. This
took place at Whitsun following his arrival in the Honolulu
Cathedral by Bishop Maigret, who was henceforth to be his
firm friend as well as superior. Next day he celebrated his
first Mass. We can well imagine the feelings of Damien on
this, the greatest occasion of his life, this, the consummation
of all his lifelong hopes and earliest desires —the signal
acceptance by God of the complete dedication of his life. At
this, his first Mass, he communicated to a large number of
natives lately steeped in paganism, assembled to testify their
belief in the One True God and the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
What feelings of awe and fervour must have filled his heart
at that sublime moment when he held between his hands the
Body of Christ brought down to earth in obedience to the
Words of Consecration,
English being the language spoken in the Islands, he took
up its study, and with his usual thoroughness mastered it
quickly and spoke it constantly in later years. He was ordered
first to the Island of Hawaii to the district of Puna, comprising
some eight villages where Christianity was very little known,
having been without a priest for several years.
His first work was to construct a church. His heart went
out at once to his people, whom he described as “Gentle,


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
pleasant-mannered, exceedingly tender-hearted, they are most
hospitable and will deprive themselves of necessities to supply
your every want if you ask a night’s shelter of them.” From
the very first he loved these, his pagan children, and in spite
of hardship and exile, strangeness of scenes and surroundings
he was happy.
Shortly after this Damien took over a much larger parish at
Kohala, which took thirty days to cover. Here he built two
additional churches, mostly with his own hands. His great
bodily strength and manual training stood him here in good
stead. The lazy natives were ever in astonishment at his
stupendous feats of strength and energy; they considered it
a miracle when they saw him carrying huge beams of wood
uphill which three or four of them together could not lift.
The bells for his church not having arrived from home as
promised, he used a horn to summon his flock to service. The
churches were usually made of timber and the worshippers
seated on mats instead of chairs or benches.
For about eight years he laboured at Kohala, and then in one
of his letters home an ominous note is struck. The beautiful
blue of sea and sky, the smiling face of lavish nature hid a
hideous poison that lurked in its midst —the scourge of leprosy.
“Leprosy,” he writes, “is beginning to be very prevalent
here. It is very rarely cured and very dangerous, being
highly contagious.”
CHAPTER V
THE SCOURGE OF LEPROSY
Unclean! Unclean! With what horror has this despair-
ing cry of the leper filled humanity down through the centuries!
Nor is the cry silent even to-day.
Leprosy, that loathsome and deadly plague for which no
cure has even yet been discovered, is as old as man himself.
Its beginnings are lost in antiquity; but authorities agree that
it originated in the Valley of the Nile, and mention is made
in the sixteenth century before Christ, in the Ebers Papyrus,
•f the scourge sweeping through the country. From there it


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
spread to Italy and was carried by the Romans, in their
invasion of the other European countries to France, Spain, and
finally to England, where, in the time of the Crusades, it spread
to such an extent that it is said that half the population was
stricken with the disease, and there were lepers in the Church,
in the State, and even on the throne. By the fourteenth
century it had almost disappeared, helped, no doubt, by the
terrible Black Death that swept over Europe carrying off almost
half of the population.
Leprosy became epidemic in the Hawaiian Islands about
the beginning of the nineteenth century, and in 1865 had
reached such proportions that an Act was passed to segregate
the lepers. A settlement was chosen in one of the smaller
islands of the group —viz., Molokai, an island seven or eight
miles wide and about thirty-eight in length. The island was
by nature admirably adapted for the purpose, being cut in
two by enormous cliffs and mountains of volcanic origin. To
this island the lepers were shipped from Honolulu, and it was
a heartrending sight to see these poor creatures being torn
by force from their homes and relatives and friends to banish-
ment and certain death in this abode of misery and despair at
Molokai.
CHAPTER VI
“I WILL GO TO MOLOKAI”
Damien had frequently witnessed the heartrending scene of
the departure of these unfortunate creatures doomed to exile
in the living death at Molokai. In the words of an eye-witness,
“These miserable beings, with a dazed look of lingering death
in their fearful countenances, were soon disposed on the deck
of a small outward-bound craft, and then in a few moments
that intervened between the casting off of the shore line and
her making for the mouth of the harbour, the pitiful wail of
men, women and children was renewed. Those on the shore
wringing their hands and tears coursing down their ashen
cheeks. Those on the departing vessel brooding for a time


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
as in dull agony, but anon an unearthly cry rang over the
tranquil sea. It was their long farewell.”
Damien, pondering on their fate, his heart torn with sympathy
and longing to help them, reflected on what their life in the
lazaretto must well be.
Faith must die from their despairing hearts with no priest
resident or regularly visiting the island. Physically and
morally they were sunk in the very depths of degradation and
abject misery; some of those his own dear converts -whom he
had himself washed in the saving waters of Baptism to lapse
once more into utter darkness.
He knew no rest, no comfort until the desired opportunity
arose to come to their aid. This chance was not long delayed.
In May, 1873, on the dedication of a new church by Bishop
Maigret at which several missionaries were assembled, his
Lordship spoke with sadness of Molokai and the fate of the
poor lepers where Government restrictions made it almost
impossible to send a visiting priest. This discourse struck
on the listening ears of Damien as the answer to his fervent
secret prayer. Here was his chance then, and coming forward
he offered himself with simple directness to his Bishop:
“Monseigneur,” he said, “if you will be kind enough to allow
it, I will go to Molokai and labour for the poor lepers whose
wretched state of bodily and spiritual misfortune has often
made my heart bleed within me.”
This declaration, this voluntary offering, which sounded so
simple, what did it mean? What but a self-imposed death
sentence; self-condemnation to a living death of fifteen years’
duration, cut off from his own kindred, surrounded by un-
imaginable horrors, shortly to be in the grip of that same dread
implacable disease that made the inhabitants of the grey island
shunned by humanity. He would be one of those forever,
he in that sense would be also an outcast. The Bishop,
though somewhat taken by surprise, knew enough of Damien’s
steadfast character to recognise that this was no rash impulse,
no wild offer made on the spur of the moment; glancing at
Damien’s eager face lit up by enthusiasm, but in whose quiet


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
and steady gaze the light of calm, undaunted purpose shone
he accepted God’s volunteer for front-line service.
Taking hurried departure for Honolulu, where a boat was
leaving that very day with its sad contingent for Molokai,
Damien and his Bishop got on board just before it sailed. So
quickly had the whole matter been decided that Damien
embarked without time to say good-bye to his friends or to
collect his clothes and personal belongings. Empty-handed
indeed he might be of material things, but oh! how full of
spiritual gifts!—the offering of himself soul, body, health, and
happiness at the feet of the Good Samaritan whose example
he would humbly follow.
As the steamer reached Molokai the wretched inhabitants
came trooping down to the shore to greet the new arrivals.
Damien beheld his new parishioners, unkempt, dirty, ragged,
in various stages of the 7 disease, maimed and limbless some of
them. The Bishop, having presented to them their new
pastor, and with a final benediction and affectionate farewell
to Damien returned to Honolulu.
CHAPTER VII
AT THE FOOT OF CALVARY
Damien was left alone. He had put his foot upon the
Calvary of his own choosing, he must climb as Christ did the
Via Dolorosa to Golgotha’s heights; there was no turning back
and he would not if he could. But that does not mean that
there was no sense of horror, no heart-sinking to almost panic
in his soul as the boat faded into the distance and he was left
alone—doomed forever in this living graveyard at Molokai.
He would not be human otherwise, and Damien was very human
and in the prime of his glorious youth and vigorous manhood
(he was now thirty-three). These feelings we can but dimly
guess. He stood thus utterly alone, unaided, with no worldly
possessions but the clothes that covered him, his hurried
departure having prevented him from securing even a change
of linen. Around him the tropical night is falling rapidly,
he must seek some shelter.


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
Approaching some of the wretched huts, which served as
dwellings for the most acute cases, he found from the terrible
condition of filth and squalor, the nauseating stench that
emanated from them, that shelter there would not be possible.
Night in the open under the clear canopy of heaven would be
immensely preferable. Looking about him for some kindly
bush or tree beneath whose friendly branches he might pass
the night, he caught sight of a large pandanus tree. Here he
encamped for the night under a sky of sapphire blue, dotted
with a million stars. What his thoughts, his feelings, his
prayers were as he lay or knelt during the long watches of the
night are known alone to his God with whom he held commune,
we can but touch reverently on the threshold of such hallowed
ground, it would be sacrilege to go further.
Let us take a brief glance around the Grey Island that is to
be Damien’s home. The island, the smallest of the group,
is cut in two by enormous precipices running north and south.
At the foot of these lies a stretch of land forming a peninsula
completely cut off by the towering cliffs from the rest of the
island. This was the site chosen for the leper settlements of
Kalawao and Kalaupapa. Well named “the Grey Island,”
the light of the sun never penetrated the rocky heights that
reared above it, while below the sea roared and foamed, flood-
ing in winter time the flat plain that held the wretched hovels
of the lepers. The soil was barren and rocky covered with
lava formations from a volcano on the island. The lepers
(about 800 in number) were housed in dilapidated huts that
offered little protection from the weather. They were made
of branches of trees covered with grass and leaves. In these
the worst and most helpless cases herded together, the less
afflicted preferring to lie about in the open in the shelter of a
wall, or rocky slope.
The condition of these wretched specimens of humanity was
truly deplorable, clothed in rags, filthy, emaciated, in every
stage of the dread disease they lay about, many of them waiting
for death; some whose very limbs had been eaten away crawled
on all fours like animals. The better cases in whom the
malady was less advanced sometimes came to the aid of those


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
in extremis; but oftener they were engaged in amusing them-
selves as best they might by gambling, and drinking a home-
brewed intoxicant made from a native plant called “Ki.”
Work there was none; for agriculture, their only resource,
was impossible owing to the untillable nature of the soil, and
there was no one to organise or instruct them in building,
carpentry, or other employment, nor raw materials for such.
The Government did almost nothing for them, but shipped
them there in their hundreds, gave them a few head of cattle
and a very small quota of provisions and told thfem to shift for
themselves for the rest.
Such were the conditions when Damien came to the Island.
Mismanagement and neglect by the authorities, the conditions
of the Island and of the lepers themselves constituted a state
of affairs of indescribable horror. Starvation, lawlessness,
and misery prevailed, the dying neglected and left to die
untended, while the others ate up all the food provided by the
Government and dosed themselves with “Ki”, which drove
them mad until the place became a veritable hell of unimagin-
able horror. .
Such was the doomed island when the gentle Damien came
to its sinister shores. Such was the task he had voluntarily
undertaken in this living graveyard—the task of reform bodily
and spiritual of these human derelicts, and if we contrast this
picture (no whit exaggerated) with the one he left behind
him sixteen years later when his beloved children laid his body
beneath that same pandanus tree with lonely, breaking hearts,
we must only pause and with awe acknowledge that God has
truly worked a miracle through his servant,'Damien.
CHAPTER VIII
DAMIEN BUILDS
Whether Damien came to the island in the first instance with
his mind made up to remain permanently is not known; but
what is quite certain is that after a short time spent there and
seeing the plight of its wretched inhabitants he resolved
definitely and finally to be one of them to the end. As he says


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
of himself later: “I made myself a leper among the lepers to
gain all for Jesus Christ.” Coming primarily as a priest for
the eternal salvation of his leper flock, Damien realised that,
if he hoped to reach their souls he must start on the lower
plane of their material needs. iVs we have seen, he was
eminently practical, possessing a large amount of that very
necessary quality in priest or layman—common-sense. This
he made haste to apply. The first work to be undertaken was
the matter of a water supply. The filthy condition of the
people was largely due to lack of water, the only supply
available being some miles away, and the lepers being mostly
incapable of fetching it from such a distance. Having dis-
covered a spring of constant fresh water not far from Kalawao,
he applied to the Government for a supply of water pipes, and
with the help of a party of the able-bodied lepers the pipes
were laid. This made a wonderful improvement in conditions,
as the cleansing of their rags could be effected, and by degrees
bathing and washing became a daily routine. He next turned
his attention to housing conditions. The recent storms and
high tides having swept away their wretched huts, the whole
community lay in the open on mats of grass and leaves, which
greatly aggravated their condition.
Damien again made application to the Government for timber
and other building materials. Soon he and willing helpers,
roused to activity by his inspiring example and wonderful
energy, were hard at work building and constructing strong
wooden dwellings—the labourers’ cottages of the settlement.
In a few years hundreds of these were dotted over the peninsula,
brightening the dreary landscape with their brightly-painted
fronts. What a miracle of material progress in such a little
time!
He next tackled the authorities on the food question.
Hitherto the supplies had been totally inadequate, and fresh
milk, so necessary to the extreme cases, was entirely lacking.
The supply under his continued demands became better and
more regular, until finally each person was provisioned with a
regular weekly ration of meat, milk, and poi (a species of
native arrowroot).


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
Their interest in life was reawakened, and with it a love of
order and beauty. They took delight in the adornment of their
houses and gardens, some of which were a pleasure to behold.
He next turned his attention to clothing. The few garments
provided annually to each leper were totally insufficient and
generally developed into raggedness in a short time, leaving
them exposed to cold and wet, which added to their misery.
Damien, by collecting stores of clothing from charitable
friends and interested benefactors accumulated the where-
withal to open clothing stores in the few villages now
established.
He then persuaded the authorities to grant an annual
allowance to each leper for the purchase of their apparel.
This, besides ensuring a better clothed community, had the
additional important effect of restoring their lost self-respect.
Thus was Damien establishing a revival of civilisation among
these poor benighted creatures. His next work was that of
hospital accommodation. Hitherto the conditions for the
treatment of the sick (or rather the extreme cases —for almost
all were sick) were deplorable. There was no hospital in any
way worthy of the name; no bandages, medicines, or medical
supplies of any kind to alleviate the condition of the poor
sufferers. The only substitute was an old disused shelter
merely used to house the dying in their last hours. Into this
they were carried in the last stages of the disease and left
there to die almost unattended.
We can imagine what horrors Damien encountered in his
endeavours to tend the sick, to lessen their sufferings, and help
them to die. With his usual energy and resourcefulness he
succeeded after a considerable time in establishing a regular
dispensary where a doctor was daily in attendance. Meanwhile
all he could do was to go about himself, with one or two
helpers, and dress the sores of the more helpless cases —
washing, bathing and nursing,- often carrying out his ministra-
tions during the long watches of the night. This, in addition
to farming, building and carpentry during the day. Often,
indeed, his bed never saw him at all, as with a hot bath and


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
a light meal he began another day. He spent much of his
day at carpentry, making all the doors and window frames of
the houses as well as all the coffins used on the island.
Up to this the poor lepers, as they died, were thrown into
the earth, often coffinless, only a foot or two below the surface,
where the wild dogs often disinterred them, causing acute
danger to the general health of the inhabitants. During his
sixteen years residence Damien is said to have made with his
own hands 1000 coffins, and to have buried 1600 lepers.
This live-wire activity of his was not long in effecting a
marked improvement in general conditions. He was then able
to direct his attention to the building of a church. He
collected some helpers from the abler-bodied men, who inspired
by his enthusiasm became willing co-operators. He had soon
a church established in both Kalawao and Kalaupapa, so that
he was able to say in 1874: “These ten years I have been on
the mission I have built a church or chapel every year.”
His keenest sympathies were called forth by the leper
children, the boys and girls of the island who wandered about
neglected and uncared for, many of them orphans and home-
less. He formed the plan of establishing schools and
orphanages for these poor waifs and strays, and in five or six
years after his landing he had the joy of seeing his hopes
fulfilled. He had succeeded in making two homes, one for
girls and one for boys, and open-air classes for those children,
who were able to reside with their parents. He was himself
their teacher, and this was, indeed, a labour of love, for he was
a passionate lover of children. To his poor orphans especially
he was both an earthly and spiritual father. Their interests
and their care were ever in his mind, and he could be constantly
seen on his daily rounds surrounded by a group of these little
ones or in the evening playing tag and ball and other games
with them. Then he was at his best and happiest, then his
laugh rang loudest. Even on his death-bed the fate of these,
his little leper-children, was his only cause of worry and
uneasiness. “What will become of my poor leper boys and
girls when I am gone,” he asked anxiously.


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
CHAPTER IX
DAMIEN’S REFORMS
There was tough work, too, for Damien in another direction
in reforming bad habits, abuses and lawlessness that existed
on the island.
The worst evil and the source of most of the other vices
was that of drink. The natives, as we have said, concocted
a vile intoxicant made from a mountain plant called Ki, under
the influence of which they became like lunatics and devils
and ran around wild, committing every kind of excess.
Gambling, impurity and every other evil could be traced to
this source. Damien resolved therefore to attack this illicit
distillation at its source and stamp it out. This was no easy
matter, as the owners of these illicit stills refused to give them
up. However, by. dint of fines and the help of the law, where
persuasion was of no effect, Damien succeeded in getting them
handed over, but not without incurring many bitter enmities,
all of which was to have its repercussion in the evil charges
some of them brought against the saintly priest after his death.
His report to the authorities in 1886 describe the conditions
he had to cope with since his arrival:
“Another source of immorality was intemperance. There
grows along the sides of the mountains a plant that the natives
call Ki, whose root when fermented and distilled yields a
highly intoxicating liquor which, owing to the crude and
imperfect distilling process, is unfit for drinking. The dis-
tilling of this liquor was being carried on to a horrible extent
when I arrived, and its consequences can be more easily
imagined than described on paper. Under its influence the
natives would abandon all decency and run about naked and
acting as though mad. ...”
“The Agent and I went around, and at last, by threats and
persuasion got the natives to give up their stills.”
When first Damien came to the Island the non-Catholics
outnumbered the Catholics, but by his colossal energy and
superhuman activity before his death the Catholics formed


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
two-thirds of the population and their church-funds and
property were considerable. Damien was a watchful shepherd,
who did not hesitate at “lifting the lazy ones on with his stick.”
It is said that on Sunday morning as he ascended the pulpit
he cast his seafching glance over the congregation, marked the
absent ones missing from their accustomed places, and Monday
morning saw him early at their huts enquiring the reason of
their absence and nothing but illness would he take as excuse.
Nor was his work confined to the Settlements alone, but
extended for a considerable time to the whole island.
Climbing the narrow trail across the mountain he organised
various parishes all over Molokai, and built several churches
for the people. His zeal in the cause of the faith was un-
bounded—it extended to all to whom he considered he owed
a duty; it was probably this fierce ardour that earned him
later, in the opinion of Rev. Dr. Hyde, the description of
“bigoted and intolerant.”
If striving ceaselessly to convert the lepers to the Catholic
faith and winning them to religion by every means in his
power—if this was being “bigoted and intolerant” he must
plead guilty to the charge. But if he meant that Damien
ever refused secretly or openly to come to the help of any poor
leper because he was a non-Catholic, the charge was utterly
false.
In the beginning his help and energy extended to all lepers
of every religion, but as the settlement developed under better
Government-control bis activities gradually limited themselves
to the members pf his own faith.
CHAPTER X
DAMIEN S APOSTOLATE
Added to his other difficulties were many in his own spiritual
affairs, among others his difficulty in finding a priest to whom
he might confess. For this purpose shortly after landing he
went to Honolulu, but on his return he was notified by the
Government that the stringency of the leper-laws forbade his
visiting the other islands again under penalty of arrest. Thus


Ji e 10, 1952 (No. 408)
cut off from intercourse with his Bishop and other priests his
difficulty forced him on one occasion to have recourse to a
striking and unusual method of confession.
The Bishop was making one of his periodical visitations of
the islands and as the steamer approached Molokai he requested
to be put ashore to enable Father Damien to make his Con-
fession. This the captain refused, saying that it was contrary
to the Government’s orders. Instead, they cast anchor close
to the shore, and signalling to the priest to approach by boat
to the ship’s side, the Bishop stood by the rail of the steamer,
while Father Damien made his Confession in French, kneeling
in the boat, separated from his confessor by a strip of water.
What a striking picture this conjures up in our minds—the
steamer anchored in the tropical waters of the Pacific, brilliant
blue of sea and sky, the Bishop leaning over the ship’s side,
his hand raised in absolution, the little boat far below where
knelt the priest—penitent reciting his sins aloud in all
simplicity and humility. Surely a striking and unforgettable
scene and typical of Damien, who never allowed any difficulty
to come between him and a definite duty.
Thus Damien went with ceaseless activity from one reform
to another, piling up a monument of work for himself, but
with the satisfaction of seeing most of his projects materialising
and his community emerging into a happy and ordered state
of life. The Grey Island, the Doomed Island, could be called
so no longer, despair was banished and a large measure of
contentment and happiness reigned instead —in the words of a
visitor: “The faces one sees are nearly always happy faces.”
Writing about this time he says:
“I am happy to say that my labours here, which seemed
almost vain at the beginning have, thanks to a kind Providence,
been greatly crowned with success.”
But the horrors his work brought him in contact with took
all the sublime charity of Damien to bear. “Many a time,”
he said, “in fulfilling my priestly duty at their domiciles, I
have been compelled to run outside. . . . One day at a
Sunday Mass, I found myself so stifled that I thought I must
leave the altar to b' a athe a little of the outer air.”


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
Later he adopted the use of tobacco, the smell of which
helped to modify other offensive odours.
“Now my sense of smell does not cause me so much incon-
venience, and I enter the huts of the lepers without difficulty.
Sometimes, indeed, I still feel some repugnance when I have
to hear the confessions of those near their end. Often, also,
I scarce know how to administer Extreme Unction.”
His great zeal for souls and Catholicity was infectious and,
led by his striking example, the results among his leper flock
were most encouraging. Whenever the little church at Kalawao
was open there was always to be seen a poor leper kneeling in
adoration, in fact, the church was never empty. He kept up
the ceremonial as best he could, using a set of golden altar-
vessels —a gift from France, and was helped in the other church
decoration and equipment by the nuns at Honolulu.
He also founded a confraternity called the Guild of Perpetual
Adoration, whose rules included prayers for the world outside
their stricken island. What a perfect interpretation of the
doctrine of the Communion of Saints.
Processions of the Blessed Sacrament were also held on the
principal feasts, these appealing powerfully to the natives,
and causing them the greatest joy in their participation. Every
leper, that could possibly do so, took part in these. Dressed
in their best, the little leper children strewed petals from their
flower-baskets on the path of the Blessed Sacrament borne by
their beloved pastor. Men and women, old and young, the
strong, the weak, marched reverent and happy singing hymns,
and bearing banners, some crippled and almost limbless
crawling bravely on all fours bringing up the rear.
Sick calls also, where Father Damien carried Holy Viaticum
to the dying, were carried out with procession and lighted
candles as in Catholic countries. Much joy and consolation
filled the heart of Damien on these occasions.
Writing in 1874 he tells of the death of one of his flock.
“His death was extremely edifying. Longing for heaven, he
was constantly repeating the words of St. Paul: ‘I long to be
dissolved and to be with Christ.’ When I came with the
Holy Viaticum to his bedside, his faith and love shone forth


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
unmistakably on his countenance. He is buried under the
great Cross I have erected in the middle of our new cemetery.
With him lie nearly two hundred other lepers, who have died
Catholics this last year and a half.”
These consolations alone made his life on the island bearable.
The bond of their common faith made a link that relieved his
otherwise intolerable loneliness, for during the first five or six
years’ residence every other inhabitant of the settlement was
a native. Often the feeling of utter loneliness was so over-
whelming that he confessed “without the Blessed Sacrament a
position like mine would not be tolerable.”
The same Divine source of consolation he ever pointed out
to his poor afflicted lepers in their otherwise hopeless misery
and despair. “Go to Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament,” he
said, “He will not fail you. He alone will receive and com-
fort you and help you to bear your affliction. He will even
turn your sorrow into joy.”
CHAPTER XI
DAMIEN—THE MAN
Thus we have touched on Father Damien’s work as a priest
and pastor, the Apostle bringing light and hope to the
abandoned leper sunk in utter darkness and despair. We
have seen him, alone and unaided, facing hopeless odds,
achieving the impossible. Where there was paganism and
depravity, by his sublime courage and influence he brought
hope, resignation and happiness.
Instead of stones he gave these poor outcasts spiritual bread,
relieving their misery by the consolation of religion and the
hope of heaven. By the example of his burning zeal and loving
sympathy he won over the poor leper to God, taught him a love
and kindliness to his afflicted brother and a respect for the
dead. This was Damien’s perfected priestly duty, for he was
above all a missionary by vocation and desire from his child-
hood days. We have seen him, too, as a pioneer in more
material things. He worked no less a miracle on the material
plane in order to facilitate his sublime object on the super-


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
natural one, for the souls of these poor afflicted ones must be
reached by first alleviating their woes and improving their
worldly condition, though never losing sight of the fact that it
was as a Catholic Missionary he had come among them,
primarily and before all—to win them to God. He was
therefore a slave in their bodily service, their nurse, their
doctor, the builder, the carpenter, the farm labourer, the
coffin-maker; the versatile and many-sided genius who evolved
order out of chaos, cleanliness, self-respect and happiness out
of abject misery, a well-ordered community in pretty villages
with churches, hospitals, and orphan-houses—and all accom-
plished practically singlehanded.
But there is yet another aspect of this marvellous leper-priest
which it is worth while to examine—Damien the man. For
saints, as we are sometimes inclined to forget, are also men
and women of flesh and blood as we ourselves, subject to the
same weaknesses and human frailties. To think that Damien
never flinched from the horrors he encountered, never shrank
in spirit from the future and its dread possibilities is to con-
template an impossible and scarcely human individual, Damien
was none of these things. He was an exemplary priest, a
perfect missionary, but he was a very human character withal.
He was no visionary or contemplative, no St. Francis or St.
Theresa, no high philosopher or metaphysician, or learned
doctor of the Church as St. Ambrose or St. Thomas Aquinas,
but a plain, simple man, whose theological and philosophical
studies were perforce cut short by the exigency of missionary
demands. He was not an ascetic except in so far as he had to
deny himself all in the pursuance of his overmastering desire —
the salvation of the leper. He was accused of many faults,
and even vices later, by Rev. Dr. Hyde and others; but these
were all refuted by an overwhelming balance of evidence as
being the lying reports of venemous enemies whom every great
reformer makes in the course of his reform. These enemies
he unwillingly made among the Government whom he had to
fight continually to force them to concede justice and humanity
to his poor leper flock. Others he made among the abandoned,
lawless elements of the community whose power he broke in


vice and drinking. These were forced to yield to his rule,
but implacable enmity later inspired them to repeat the foulest
lying tales of the saintly Damien, tales that none but the pre-
judiced, envious mind of a Hyde would dream of entertaining.
He was also accused of being dirty, intolerant' and bigoted.
It may be true that he was somewhat careless of his appearance.
A visitor to the island describes him: “His dress was worn and
faded, his hair tumbled like a schoolboy’s, his hands stained
and hardened by toil. But the glow of health was in his face,
the buoyancy of youth in his manner, while his ringing laugh,
his ready sympathy and his inspiring magnetism told of one
who in any sphere might do a noble work.”
His “intolerance and bigotry” as we have said above, can
be dismissed as the Protestant inability to distinguish between
Catholic missionary zeal and those undesirable qualities so
entirely alien to Damien’s real character.
His was a heart capable of the greatest love and devotion,
which he poured out lavishly on his beloved leper children.
He was their willing and devoted slave even to death. He
was at the same time possessed of great power and influence
over them, and though loved devotedly was also not a little
feared, though more with the fear of dutiful children to a
loving father. The erring ones often came up against his
moral superiority and had to bend before it. He was of a
happy and cheerful nature, his laugh rang out frequent and
spontaneous. His temper was quick and sometimes betrayed
him into saying somewhat unkind things; but a little later the
episode would apparently be forgotten and he would speak
as if the whole matter had passed from his mind. He had a
most lively sense of humour and could well enjoy a joke even
against himself. He was also accused of being autocratic and
high-handed and hard to get on with. To be quite impartial
there would seem to be some truth in this statement. From
time to time a priest was sent to the settlement to help him;
but they generally parted after a time having experienced a
measure of failure to get on with one another. Possibly
Damien felt that he, who had constructed all from its crudest
foundations, understood the work and the problem as no one


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
else could, and insisted on his way of handling it. This may
have earned him the title of “high-handed” and “stubborn.”
All these points but emphasise his humanness, his natural
limitations; but the consideration and acknowledgment of
these slight frailties only serve to throw into relief the height
to which his holiness soared —that lofty summit that leaves our
poor dimmed vision strained in the effort of contemplation.
But before he yet reaches that sublime peak his soul and body
must pass through the darkest depths of agony and affliction,
wringing from him the tragic declaration: “I make myself a
leper among lepers to gain all for Jesus Christ.”
CHAPTER XII
THE WAY OF THE CROSS
From the beginning of his work among the lepers Father
Damien had always faced the probability, if not certainty, of
becoming himself a leper; but up to ten years after his coming
to Molokai there was no definite sign of the disease having
attacked him. Some accounts relate to his having suspicions
that the malady was lurking in his system for many years
before any unmistakable evidence was apparent. Under the
circumstances the wonder is that it did not attack him long
before, for he had been in the closest contact with the disease
in the most advanced stages from the time he arrived in Hawaii
in 1864. However, it was not until 1884 that there was any
certainty about the matter. One Sunday about this time he
climbed the pulpit to address his leper congregation. Listening
attentively to their beloved pastor, they heard him use the
words:
“We lepers ...” This simple phrase conveyed the tidings
of the dread reality to his fellow-sufferers. He was now their
beloved apostle more than ever, one of them in the very
fullest sense. How suspicion became certainty to Damien is
related in one of his letters to his brother Pamphile, and also
to his dear friend, Brother Joseph, who tended him in his last
illness. He tells of one day when he had taken a long and
tiring walk and returning home decided to refresh himself with


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
hot foot-bath. He plunged his feet into the steaming water
—hut felt no heat, no sensation. Damien was too experienced
in the symptoms of leprosy not to recognise what this meant,
for one of the surest signs of the disease is the loss of sensation
in any part.
On another occasion, when shaving, some of the scalding
water flowed over his bare feet and he felt nothing. The dread
conviction was thus borne in upon him—he was a leper. He
was at this time but forty-four years of age, of splendid
physique, active, otherwise healthy and full of vigour. In the
course of his duties he never seemed to worry about the danger
of infection, though exercising great care in the early days of
his ministration. However, as is, perhaps, only natural,
familiarity with the disease tended to a gradual relaxing of
precautions.
This was probably unconscious or else, he found, that undue
care hampered him in his work. It seems he did relax his
precautions and lived the same unrestricted mode of life as
the lepers, taking part in their customs and social habits, often
on his rounds having to share their meals and even their beds,
besides constantly dressing their ulcers, hearing their con-
fessions and administering Extreme Unction. He seemed to
have no fear or undue anxiety of contracting the disease; once
when asked if he was not afraid of becoming infected he
replied: “If Providence sees fit to afflict me, while lam working
among the lepers, whether I am worthy or not I shall gain a
crown of thorns.”
Yielding to the urgent advice of those interested, Damien
tried many treatments and so-called cures. The “Goto” treat-
ment from Japan was being much used at the time as a means
of alleviating, if not curing, the disease. Damien followed
the treatment in a Honolulu hospital for some time; but he
was restless to return to his work, and we find him back again
after a brief space in Molokai. Shortly before he had written
to his Bishop: “. . . Leprosy has attacked me. There are
signs of it on my left cheek and ear, and my eyebrows arc
beginning to fall. I shall be soon quite disfigured. As I


June >O, 1952 (No. 408)
have no doubt of the real character of the malady, I remain
calm, resigned, and very happy in the midst of my people.”
Very shortly it was no longer a secret that Damien was a
leper. The news went out from the Island and spread like
wildfire across the world. Letters, gifts, and alms —offerings
of every kind came pouring in to Father Damien for his own
relief and the help and comfort of his leper flock. His name
was in every mouth. Protestants and Catholics alike
applauded him and exalted his sacrifice—the eyes of the world
were turned to Molokai. His own people were among the last
to hear of it, as his mother being aged and ill Damien feared to
break the news to her. It was from a Belgian newspaper the
dread fate of her beloved son came to her as she lay dying.
“Well then,” was her only response, “we shall go to heaven
together.”
Towards the end of 1888, not many months before Damien’s
death, he was visited by the English artist, Edward Clifford, a
staunch Protestant. He made a lengthy visit to the island
spending his whole days with Father Damien accompanying
him on all his journeys around the settlement, dining with him,
and chatting together in the evening as they sat on the verandah
of Damien’s little villa-presbytery, and gazed over the purple-
blue sea with a tropical moon casting its silver path across the
waters.
Then Damien would tell him of the wondrous story of his
work upon the island and thus their friendship ripened and
grew. Clifford spent Christmas at Molokai, throwing his heart
into all Damien’s Christmas plans and festivities. There was
a beautiful Christmas Mass, with Clifford joining in the Adeste
Fideles, and in the evening magic lantern pictures of the Life
of Our Lord which delighted the lepers.
Before leaving the/island Clifford made a sketch of Father
Damien, a sad testimony to the ravages the disease had made
in his one-time splendid manhood. It shows little of his
former grace and good looks except the curly hair and the
smiling mouth. The rest was sadly disfigured, hands and
face covered with ulcers, ears terribly enlarged, nose deformed


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
and the bridge collapsed—a travesty of his old vivid and
attractive countenance.
About the beginning of the New Year the Franciscan Sisters
arrived to take over charge of the female orphanage. The
change was not to be effected until after Damien’s death, which
was not now far off. Each day saw him growing visibly
weaker and less equal to his duties. But the spirit of Damien
could not easily be conquered, he was determined to die in
harness. He kept up his usual routine as much as possible,
saying his Mass daily until near the end, when his hands became
so ulcerous that he could no longer do so. This was a terrible
deprivation to him, but he accepted it as he accepted all the
rest as the Holy Will of God.
Writing to his people about this time he says:
“I am quite happy and contented and though seriously ill
all I desire is the accomplishment of the Holy Will of God.
I am still able, though not without some difficulty, to stand
every day at the altar, where Ido not forget any of you. Do
you in return pray for me, who am being drawn gently towards
the grave. May God strengthen me and give me the grace
of perseverance and of a happy death.”
CHAPTER XIII
THE ULTIMATE SACRIFICE
He kept up bravely until the middle of March, but towards
the end of the month he took to his bed. This in Damien
meant the end. But he remained steady and calm, preparing
spiritually and temporally for his approaching death, giving
minute instructions about business matters and handing over
his various charges.
For a long time he had been worried about his poor leper
children. “Who will look after my leper boys and girls when
lam gone?” he would ask. That was now arranged for by the
arrival of the Franciscan Sisters and his mind was at rest.
“The work of the lepers is assured,” he said, “I am no longer
necessary to them so I am ready to go up yonder.”


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
On 28th March he made his general confession to his confrere,
Father Wendelin, who said to him: “Leave me your mantle like
Elias, when you depart, that I may inherit your great heart,”
and Father Damien’s reply showed that even in his last hours
his sense of humour and merriment did not desert him: “But
what would you do with it, mon pere? It is full of leprosy.”
The nuns, too, after much pleading, were admitted to his
bedside (he was extremely careful lest they should risk infec-
tion) and received his last blessing. Though almost incap-
able of speech he managed to whisper: “Take —care —of—my
—boys.” Then having received their promise to do so, he
lay back happy and satisfied. He seemed to rejoice at the
thought of his membership of his religious Order and would
murmur joyfully: “How sweet it is to die a child of the
Sacred Heart of Jesus and Mary.” He had a happy convic-
tion that he would be in heaven for Easter. “The Good God
is calling me to celebrate Easter with Himself. May God be
blessed for it.”
On 2nd April he received Extreme Unction, but he lingered
on until Holy Week. On the Monday (15th April, 1899), the
end came peacefully. With a smile on his lips, as quietly as
a child dropping to sleep, Damien died. The long struggle
was over, his great heart was still, that gigantic spirit, that
mighty fire quenched at last. The long struggle was over;
humble of birth—an obscure Belgian priest—yet at his life’s
close the eyes of the whole world were turned upon him. He
died a hero and a saint.
The bell tolled its sad tidings across the Island and sorrow
and gloom settled down on his poor flock. Who could ever
take his place in their loving, grateful hearts? He was their
oldest friend, to him they owed, after God, all that they were;
had he not even given them their hope of heaven? Others
there were at hand ready and anxious to carry on the work of
Damien, devoted souls all, but he was their beloved first friend
and deliverer, who had willingly shared their lives and their
fate to the ultimate service—who had laid down his life for his
leper children.


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
They bore him to his rest on their willing shoulders in sad
procession—the nuns, his leper flock, his orphan boys and girls,
with breaking hearts and tear-dimmed eyes. They laid him
beneath the shade of the spreading pandanus tree, adjoining
the church enclosure, that same tree, whose friendly branches
were his nightly shelter for many weeks on his first coming
to his leper home. This was his own choice. A simple
monument marks the spot, on one side are the words, “Father
Damien,” on the other the inscription:
Sacred to the Memory of Rev. Fr. Damien de Veuster
Died a Martyr to His Charity for the Afflicted Lepers.
April 15th, 1889.
At Kalaupapa there is a nobler monument, a Celtic cross on
the road now called “Damien Road.” On the foot of this is
written:
“The greatest proof of love man can give
is to give his life for his friends.”
So passed the gentle Damien, leper-apostle, priest, saint and
martyr. He embraced the forlorn cause of his leper brother
and found heaven on the way. He came to Molokai, to a den
of horror and misery untold, he came impulsively, he saw
clearly, he conquered nobly, gloriously.
If Molokai to-day is a model of leper-settlements to the whole
world, if, instead of hideous suffering, depravity, misery, and
despair there is ordered cleanliness, care, and —yes, even
happiness; if the lepers there have become a prayerful people,
leading a life of comfort, holiness and civilised well-being it
is almost entirely the work of Damien. Others there may be
who completed the work, that he made possible; but to Damien
must be given the credit of the veritable miracle that was
worked during the sixteen years he laboured there.
Vile tongues have not been wanting to defame his memory
and depreciate his work, notably his Protestant contemporary,
Rev. Dr. Hyde, who wrote vile accusations in the Sydney
press a year after his death. This so outraged the feeling


THE AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC TRUTH SOCIETY RECORD.
June 10, 1952 (No, 408)
of Robert Louis Stevenson, who was personally acquainted
with Damien and his work that he sprang to his defence in
that well-known tract: A Reply to the Rev. Dr. Hyde, that
buried that gentleman for ever in a grave of obloquy of his
own making.
For forty-seven years has Damien slept among his leper
children.
But his dear lepers must sorrowfully part with the body of
their revered apostle, for it was decided to transfer the remains
to his native soil. On the anniversary of his death (15th April,
1936), the American transport ship, Republic, took charge of
the cherished casket, and brought their precious burden to San
Francisco en route for Antwerp, which was reached on 3rd May,
1936. There it was met by 100,000 people, headed by King
Leopold 111 himself and the Cardinal Archbishop of Belgium.
The body found its final resting place in the crypt of the
Church of the Sacred Hearts at Louvain, a few miles from his
own birthplace, where the grave was lined with earth and
flowers from his former grave in his beloved Molokai.
There were sorrowful hearts among his leper children in
Molokai—an empty grave, but he will have an eternal resting
place in their grateful loving hearts.


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
STEVENSON'S VINDICATION OF
FATHER DAMIEN
R. L. Stevenson’s famous letter to the Reverend Dr. Hyde,
the occasion of which is fully explained in the extracts
given below, is regarded by admirers of Stevenson as a
magnificent explosion of decent and virile indignation.
FROM ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON’S OPEN LETTER
ON FATHER DAMIEN TO THE REVEREND DR. HYDE
OP HONOLULU
Sydney, February 25, 1890.
Sir,—
It may probably occur to you that we have met, and
visited and conversed; on my side, with interest. You
may remember that you have done me several courtesies,
for which I was prepared to be grateful. But there are
duties which come before gratitude, and offences which
justly divide friends, far more acquaintances. Your letter
to the Reverend H. B. Gage is a document which, in my
sight, if you had filled me with bread when I was starving,
if you had sat up to nurse my father when he lay a-dying,
would yet absolve me from the bonds of gratitude . . .
If I have at all learned the trade of using words to
convey truth and to arouse emotion, you have at last
furnished me with a subject. For it is in the interest of
all mankind and the cause of public decency in every
quarter of the world, not only that Damien should be
righted, but that you and your letter should be displayed
at length, in their true colours, to the public eye.
THE REVEREND DR. HYDE’S LETTER
(.Published in the Sydney “Presbyterian,” October 26, 1889)
Honolulu, August 2, 1889.
Rev. H. B. Gage,
Dear Brother, —In answer to your inquiries about Father
Damien, I can only reply that we who knew the man are
surprised at the extravagant newspaper laudations, as if
he was a most saintly philanthropist. The simple truth is,
he was a coarse, dirty man, headstrong and bigoted. He
was not sent to Molokai, but went there without orders;
did not stay at the leper settlement (before he became


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
one himself), but circulated freely over the whole island
(less than half the island is devoted to the lepers), and he
came often to Honolulu. He had no hand in the reforms
and improvements inaugurated, which were the work of
our Board of Health, as occasion required and means were
provided. He was not a pure man in his relations with
women, and the leprosy of which he died should be attri-
buted to his vices and carelessness. Others have done much
for the lepers, our own ministers, the government physicians,
and so forth, but never with the Catholic idea of meriting
eternal life.
Yours etc.,
C. M. HYDE.
The Letter Analysed
DAMIEN was coarse.
It is very possible. You make us sorry for the lepers who
had only a coarse old peasant for their friend and father.
But you, who were so refined, why were you not there, to
cheer them with the lights of culture? Or may I remind
you that we have some reason to doubt if John the Baptist
were genteel; and in the case of Peter, on whose career
you doubtless dwell approvingly in the pulpit, no doubt
at all he was a “coarse, headstrong” fisherman! Yet even
in our Protestant Bibles Peter is called Saint.
Damien was dirty.
He was. Think of the poor lepers annoyed with this
dirty comrade! But the clean Dr. Hyde was at his food
in a fine house.
Damien was headstrong.
I believe you are right again; and I thank God for his
strong head and heart.
Damien was bigoted.
I am not fond of bigots myself, because they are not
fond of me. But what is meant by bigotry, that we should
regard it as a blemish in a priest? Damien believed his
own religion with the simplicity of a peasant or a child;
as I would I could suppose that you do. . . .
Damien was not sent to Molokai, but went there without
orders.
Is this a misreading? or do you really mean the words
for blame? I have heard Christ, in the pulpits of our


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
Church, held up for imitation on the ground that His
sacrifice was voluntary. Does Dr. Hyde think otherwise? ...
Damien was not a pure man in his relations with women,
etc.
. . . This scandal, when I read it in your letter, was not
new to me. I had heard it once before; and I must tell
you how. There came to Samoa a man from Honolulu;
he, in a public-house on the beach, volunteered the state-
ment that Damien had “contracted the disease from having
connection with the female lepers”; and I find a joy in
telling you how the report was welcomed in a public-house.
A man sprang to his feet; I am not at liberty to give his
name, but from what I heard I doubt if you would care
to have him to dinner in Beretania Street. “You miserable
little ” (here is a word I dare not print, it would so
shock your ears). “You miserable little ,” he cried,
“if the story were a thousand times true, can’t you see
you are a million times a lower for daring to repeat
it?” I wish it could be told of you that when the report
reached you in your house, perhaps after family worship,
you had found in your soul enough holy anger to receive
it with the same expressions; ay, even with that one which
I dare not print; it would not need to have been blotted
away, like Uncle Toby’s oath, by the tears of the recording
angel; it would have been counted to you for your brightest
righteousness. But you have deliberately chosen the part
of the man from Honolulu, and you have played it with
improvements of your own. The man from Honolulu—
miserable, leering creature—communicated the tale to a
rude knot of beach-combing drinkers in a public-house,
where (I will so far agree with your temperance opinions)
man is not always at his noblest; and the man from
Honolulu had himself been drinking—drinking, we may
charitably fancy, to excess. It was to your “Dear Brother,
the Reverend H. B, Gage,” that you chose to communicate
the sickening story; and the blue ribbon which adorns
your portly bosom forbids me to allow you the extenuating
plea that you were drunk when it was done. . . .
But I fear you scarce appreciate how you appear to your
fellow-men; and to bring it home to you, I will suppose
your story to be true. I will suppose—and God forgive me
for supposing it—that Damien faltered and stumbled in
his narrow path of duty; I will suppose that, in the horror
of his isolation, perhaps in the fever of incipient disease,
he, who was doing so much more than he had sworn, failed
in the letter of his priestly oath—he, who was so much a


June 10, 1952 (No. 408)
better man than either you or me, who did what we have
never dreamed of daring—he too tasted of our common
frailty. “O, lago, the pity of it!” The least tender should
be moved to tears; the most incredulous to prayer. And
all that you could do was to pen your letter to the Reverend
H. B. Gage!
Is it growing at all clear to you what a picture you have
drawn of your own heart? I will try yet once again to make
it clearer. You had a father: suppose this tale were about
him, and some informant brought it to you, proof in hand:
I am not making too high an estimate of your emotional
nature when I suppose you would regret the circumstance?
that you would feel the tale of frailty the more keenly
since it shamed the author of your days? and that the
last thing you would do would be to publish it in the religious
press? Well, the man who tried to do what Damien did,
is my father, and the father of the man in the Apia bar,
and the father of all who love goodness; and he was your
father too, if God had given you grace to see it.
STATEMENT
MRS. ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON
Ave Maria Press
... As to the “Open Letter to Dr. Hyde,” nothing can
make me believe that Louis ever regretted the subject-
matter of that piece of writing. To me, up to his last hours,
he spoke always in the same strain. His admiration for
the work and character of “that saint, that martyr,” as
he invariably called Father Damien, remained unchanged;
and any mention of the cowardly attack on the dead man’s
memory brought a flush of anger into his face and a fire
to his eye that were unmistakable . . .
The Advocate Press, 143-151 a'Beckett Street, Melbourne.




you have enjoyed this pamphlet
we recommend you to read . . .
“Dur Lady’s Fool”
The Rife of Father Maximilian Kolbe, O.M.Conv.
By MARIA WINOWSKA
Translated By A. Ryan, O.P.M.
This is the story of a Franciscan priest who save
his life for the father of a familu in Auschwitz
Concentration Camp,
* August, 1941. His
The story of Father cause for beatification
Maximilian Kolbe, was begun in 1948.
O.M. Conv. (Order
of Friars Minor Conventual), will appear fantastic
to many modern people. But when you read of
wonderful things in these pages which happened
only in the 1930’s and 1940’s there is no real
need to be surprised. You only need to remem-
ber that God is in heaven dominating the earth.
God Almighty can still do anything for a per-
son truly subjected to His holy Will. He did
some surprising things through Father Maximilian
Kolbe, a modern Conventual Franciscan priest.
Obtainable from—
The AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC TRUTH SOCIETY
143-151 a’Beckett Street, Melbourne, C.l
C.U.S.A. House, 175 Elizabeth Street, Sydney
