

PORT DAVEY IN 1875. and in fine weather looks both wild and boau-
• tiful. Theplainsare made gaybymaayflower-
The following paper was read by the Hon. ing plants, conspicuous among which is the
James Eeid Soott, M.L.C., at the meeting Blandfordia with its crimson and yellow
of the Eoyal Society of Tasmania, held on spikes of flowers, growing in every situation
the 13th inst, which is reported in to-day’s mar Sins °f , creeks to f the T c r. evlce ®
__ of rocks on mountain summits. Like all
Mercury: Western Tasmania, as the open ground gives
At the present time Port Davey supplies one the impression of desolation and barren-
Hobart Town with the great bulk of the ness, so on entering a forest the opposite
timber known as “ Huon Pine ” [Dacrydium extreme of rank vegetation is immediately
Franklinii ], and has done so for several years encountered. Underneath there is generally
back. That port may indeed be said to be a tall and tangled growth of wireweed
the chief seat of the pine-getting industry (Bawera) and cutting-grass, with horizontal
in Tasmania, Macquarie Harbour being scrub ( Anodopetalum) , Laurel ( Anopterus )
deserted, and the Pieman, Picton, and Cray- Native plum {Conarrhenes) and all those
croft, worked to a very limited extent, if at shrubs most conspicuous in our western
all. The pines obtained on the Forth and forests ; pinkwood, hickory, and teatree
Dove Elvers are, I believe, of a different attain a large size, gums and myrtles (Fagus)
species [ Athrotaxis selaginoides\ called “ pen- being the lofty trees. These forests are
oil pine,” or “King William Pine.” From enlivened by the climbers Billardiera and
the nature of the Port Davey district, the Prionotes, which often form festoons from
beds of timber are necessarily of limited ex- tree to tree. Bichea pandanifolia is fre-
tent; and although occasional supplies have quently met with.
been obtained for more than 50 years, and a The pines have a peculiar limitation in
steady industry has been continuously pro- their distribution worthy of remark; grow-
secuted there tor the last 25 years, still cir- ing on the margins of small streams or in
cumstances (such as a rise in prices, and the alluvial flats along the rivers, they seem
consequent influx of piners) might extinguish to be derived only from the west or south-
the trade for a time, until young trees grow west sides of the ranges. The leading
np to a size fit for market. Ido not appre- mountain chains run nearly parallel with the
hend any such result, but I hope that a few coast, about N.N. W., and no pines are found
personal observations on the locality, its along the streams running from their eastern
pine industry and forests, etc,, during a slopes. In like manner, when the Davey is
recent visit, will be interesting, even to those divided into two branches, about sixteen
who fully know and appreciate the details miles up, the western branch is called the
and hardships of the occupation of a piner. Hardwood Eiver, because no pines have been
In March last I paid a visit to Port Davey found along its course. The other branch
for a second time, having been there about which is fed from the south-west slopes of
four years previously with Mr. Piguenit, the Franklaud Eange, is well supplied, and
who -took some very characteristic sketches from it the great bulk of the timber is now
of the scenery. Though my main object being procured. Again, the range from
this time was to have some hunting and which the Hardwood Eiver derives most of
fishing, I took the opportunity of going to its tributaries, is pine-clad on its south-
the actual workings in the pine-forests, the western slopes, the streams from which ran
present scenes of labour; and I saw much into the sea near Eocky Point. In Spring
new to my personal experience, although not Eiver the same feature is observed, and also
altogether unknown to me by report. I in the originally named “ Spring Eiver ”at
therefore make no apology for presenting to the extreme eastern end of Bathurst Har-
your notice the following account of my trip, hour; and I have no doubt from the for-
On my former visit my party went and maticn of the country and my knowledge of
returned by land, along the naturally defined the Arthur and Huon Plains, that the
series of valleys and “ saddles ”or passes, Craycroft presents the same peculiarity. Of
mainly clear of forest, up the course of the Picton, Gordon, Franklin, and Pieman
the Huon, down that of Spring Eiver, and Ido not know enough to hazard an opinion,
across the Berry Head Eange—an unmis- At the highest point I visited up the
takeable route to anyone with knowledge of Davey Eiver, where Doherty is at work, are
the localities, though not without its difii- some King William Pines ’(. Athrotaxis
unities in travelling. The road from Victoria selaginoides) whose wood is much more open-
to the Craycroft is so overgrown and blocked grained than Huon pine, and of a red
tip, that the journey from Hobart Town to colour. I have no doubt that towards the
Port Davey by that route could not well be Frankland Eange they will be found in great
made now under four days, and I would not numbers.
advise a stranger to attempt it at all. On Tlie pine is not met with near the margin
the second occasion I went and returned by of the salt water, though one spot was
water, going down with Captain Lloyd in pointed out to me on the bank of the tidal
the “ Swansea Packet,” and coming back portion of the Davey, about half way
with Captain Dominey in the “ Eipple,” both between the Settlement and Hell’s Gates,
regular traders. which had been a thicket of small pine
The inhabitants were little changed during trees of several acres in extent, not observed
the four years which had elapsed. I found until a large fire swept through and killed
the well-remembered faces, and received the them. Some distance up the Crossing Eiver
same cordial welcome and hospitality as there is an untouched bed of pines,'but
before. Similar packs of half-starved dogs below it the steep banks of the river have
lifted up their voices, and “Would have stolen fallen in and blocked up all passage for
anything eatable left within their reach. floating the logs down, affording complete
The children had, of course, grown up Beyond protection to that bed of timber, unless a
recognition ; and an old resident, Mr. short tramway is made to surmount the
Bennett, had returned, and was busy build- obstacle.
ing a good-sized barge. Doherty, the oldest The river has been followed up and
' inhabitant, who has been there ever since the timber along its course gradually
1849, placed a hut at Observatory Point at cleared out until the beds which pro’-
my disposal, and Captain Lloyd lent me a duee the present supply are reached,
good whaleboat. from fourteen to eighteen miles up. To
Besides those at Port Davey settle- visit them I took the course usually followed
ment, numbering about 60, there is an by the piners, except on special occasions ;
isolated establishment at Spring Eiver, going from the settlement by boat up the
where Mr. Page was at work, but he river as far as the Pen at Brooke’s Bay, we
wat unfortunately hampered in his pro- then shouldered knapsacks and walked
ceelings by a sad accident which befell about four and a half miles to the head of
Bis mate George Baker. When up on a Long Fall, thereby cutting off a large
scaffold to fell a tree, Baker lost his balance, elbow of the river, and avoiding Hell’s
an his foot caught in one of the props, which Gates, Long-Tom Fall, and the Broken
cajsed him to swing and fall heavily against Eoad, all difficult for boats. From Long
thi butt of the tree, dislocating his left Fall we again took boat and pulled about a
sbulder. There was no opportunity for mile up a beautiful still reach, the banks
narly a month after this to get him to town studded with ferns and pinkwood in full
fa medical assistance, the shoulder remain- flower, and landed on the right bank. From
iig “ out” all the time. Dr. Crowther was this landing place is a pathway, considerably
aiplied to, but Baker had to go to the less disti ct than a wombat track, for about
Eospital for the operation of setting. Since eight miles chiefly among button grass, to
tten (owing possibly to the prior delay) thegeneral rendezvous opposite the Bark
Hole arm has been powerless, and is gradu- Hut Creek. Here the timbered flat is wide,
ally withering and decaying, extending up- and this has been one of the most prolific
wards from the fingers. The poor fellow’s beds, as the stumps testify ; and although
lays of active labour seemed at an end—the. some pioneers, Doherty, Woolley, and
nore to be deplored because he was a very others have pushed on further up the stream,
steady industrious man, with a wife depen- there are still many trees got from this
dent upon his exertions. locality, formerly overlooked or c msidered
The houses at Bramble Cove were all too difficult of access. There are numerous
unoccupied. young trees growing up, which should be
My anticipations of good sport were not preserved till they have attained a certain
fully realised in consequence of the weather, size. Here are generally several boats on
Continual storms, with a low barometer, each side of the river for persons going or
entirely precluded trumpeter fishing (for returning. Navigation extends very little
which one has to go outside the Heads), further, "except "for log-clearing. ’ There
and made boating generally attended with is a track to the settlement down the left or
more risk than pleasure. 1 visited Kelly’s east side also, but it is about three miles
Basin and the West Coast beyond it; went longer than the other, and the Crossing
np Bathurst Harbour and New Harbour River has to be forded. •
Creek nearly to Cox’s Bight; and up the The Crossing River, which comes from
Davey River to the plains known as Long- the Arthur. Range, is sometimes called
ley’s Ground and The Rookery. Kangaroo, locally the Davey River, being rather the
wallaby, wombat, ducks, and swans were wider of the two at their confluence ; and
abundant; some of the latter were then the Davey River proper is, in that case,
“monitors,” and we could pull them down called the DeWitt River, the DeWitt going
with the boat. The greatest treat, now as by the name of Badger Creek. This is
formerly, was the plentiful supply of oysters, owing, in a great measure, to the meagre
Kelly’s Basin containing the largest and information on the official map. The Davey
most easily obtained rock-oysters I have V rises between the and Wilmot
seen, and they were in prime condition/ Ranges, and flows down the wide valley to
Mounds of empty shells at various parts of the west and southwest of the Frankland
the beach gave proof that the aborigines Range, in two branches, which unite about
had also appreciated them in days gone by. a mile above Bark Hut Creek. The Crossing
While speaking of game, I must mention a River joins the Davey about two miles above
fact respeciing the wombat which coincides the Long Fall, coming in abruptly from the
with my own experience and the opinion of south-east, having burst through a high
many bush travellers. In the year 1866 the range by a narrow ravine in the same unex-
Port Davey settlers were, owing to heavy peeled manner as the united streams pass
gales, for some months without supplies of through the gorge of Hell’s Gates, instead
flour and provisions, so that they were com- of traversing the low valley which seems to
pelled to live on “ wild ” meat alone, and be the natural course. Many of the small
most of them took to hunting during that creeks have the same peculiarity, so that it
time. Their unanimous verdict is that they is difficult to make a correct topographical
very soon got tired of kangaroo or swan’s sketch of the district on a short visit. My
flesh, but could subsist on wombat without opportunities of taking observations were too
dislike; also that a meal of the latter had few to enable me to submit with any confi-
far more nutritive power than kangaroo. dence a plan to illustrate the district.
It is almost impossible to describe the The pine trees grow in the densely tim-
country round Port Davey to one accustomed bered alluvial flat in the valley of the river,
onlv to the settled portions of Tasmania, subject to frequent inundations, and varying
while the grand scenery such as Hell’s Gates, in width from about 100 to 1,200 yards, in-
must be seen to be realised. Written laud- tersected by a netwoik of creeks and channels
scapes leave no picture in the mind of a formed by the flood waters, and filled in the
stranger. The greater portion of the conn- winter months. These channels have to bo
try is open, consisting of broken ground or cleared of obstructions, fallen timber, etc.,
large flat plains between steep and lofty so that the pine logs may be floated down to
ranges, covered with button grass and inter- the main river. Tracks have also to be cut
sected by belts of timber of various shapes through the scrub, about 18 feet in width,
and sizes ; the timber is generally along the and sets of “ skids ” laid down so that the
banks of streams, or in gullies on the moun- logs may be rolled into these channels or
tain sides, though some of the ranges are into the river. Hence the forests are tra-
entirely wooded. The hills are steep and versed by numerous skid roads winding in
rugged, and show their white quartzite rocks all directions, to suit the trees successively
bare at the top, which gives many the cut down. In some places the floods occa-
appearance of being snow-clad, and through- sionally rise high enough to enable boats to
out the day they are ever assuming new forms be used and the logs floated out over the
and colours as the sunlight strikes them at a ferns and undergrowth,
different angle. Thus the country is moat pic- After the logs are cut to their proper
turesquely diversified by white rocky ranges, length and stripped of their bark, they are
wara-coloured. plains and sombre forests ; branded at the ends with the initials or mark
girth were counted large; this would repre- The following is an extract from the
sent trees over 4 feet in diameter at the butt, account referred to in Mr. Scott’s paper:—
The average seem to be 6or 7 feet in girth. “Narrative of the Overland Journey of Sir John
It is matter for consideration whether the and Lady Franklin and Party'from Hobart
supply of timber should be preserved, and Town to Macquarie Harbour. By David
the destruction of the ‘beds prevented, by Burn, Author of “Yan Diemen’s Land,
prohibiting the cutting of any trees under a Moral, Physical, and Political. ”
certain size Tuesday, 17th May, 18J$. —* * * At 2 p.m.
/, ~ . . . , a seven-knot easterly breeze enabled the Eliza
Many of the smaller trees in these forests ma k; e a bold look up for the pyramidal rock,
would make good cabinet woods if there was marking the entrance to Port Davey, and which
any demand. The pinkwood (Fueryphia now bore north. The Maatsuykers Islands
Billardierii) is hard, and has a fine colour. were rapidly shut in as we drew along the bare,
Like hickory and horizontal, the green logs leafless, rugged coast, whose fantastic points
make better camp fires than most of the dead looked dull and cheerless in the hard blue sky.
timber that can be got in the dank forests They reminded me of the iron-bound ramparts
i mi i• i /td 7 7 • that girdle the neighbourhooa of Arbroath, and
where they grow. The hickory ( Phebahum fancy % ould almost ° lead me to pictllre the cele-
Billardteru, alias Eriostemon sguamea) should brated, luckless, Tyrone Power, as he once
also be a valuable wood. It is the only stood upon one of the craggy points of the
timber except the pine which is perfectly latter, delivering with much gesticulation (for
sound and dry inside after being submerged he was a tragedian then) the oration of Anthony
for years in muddy deposits, nearly all others over Ihe body of C»sar. At 4 the heads of
being more or less rotten and discoloured. It Fo r t Davey were gained, but the wind had
i n • , , . , m, tallen light, and, although the anchorage was
is pale yellow m colour, and very tough. The , , , a ,
1. J , ~ , ’ . . , but halt-a-dozen miles distant, still the flood
ordinary size of both these is about 15 inches rushing out was so powerful that four bells of
in diameter, with straight barrels 40 or 50 the first watch had been struck ere the anchor
feet in height. They are common in all the rattled over the bows. The moon became over-
western forests, and are abundant about cast, and heavy rain fell fast.
Mounts BischO’ff and Ramsay, and round Wednesday, 18th. —A considerable quantity of
Lake St. Clair raan during the night, but the weather con-
. -r> • . • t-> ill tinned moderate, although the barometer had sunk
.Close to Observatory Point is Pebbly 'gradually f rom thirty to three-tenths thereunder.
.Beach, and on this, ever since Doherty re- Morning dawned upon a clear sky, but lesS hard
members, lumps of coal are washed up after and less dazzling than those which had gladdened
of the owner, —letters generally an inch in strong southerly weather, though no indi- the three preceding days. We were reposing
height,—punched into the wood with a smart cations of coal-seams have been discovered within the charming circular basin that forms
blow of a hammer. Doherty told me he onshore. Sandstone was reported to me as the romantic haven of Port Davey, our schooner
had known cases where as much as two found up the Crossing Eiver. Samples of tke CBntre a w dd but strikingly beautiful
inches had been sawn off the end of a log so both, with full information as to the dip and P anorama ) the quartzy mountains rearing their
branded, with a view to its appropriation, direction of the latter,havebeen promised me, ridg^brokJn
and the brands made in the above manner and I will lay them before the Royal Society into every conceivable figure and form their
were detected by putting boiling water on when I get them. Limestone occurs in the naked sides being furrowed with countless gorges,
the new faces or ends, whereby the old marks Davey Valley, protruding in various places, ravines, or gulleys. Right ahead, or N.W.'the
became visible ; —the punching process affec- bearing from each other a little to the west river Davey wound its silent course. On the
ting the fibres to an extent that a brand by of north. I found the fern Todea Africana, birboard or western hand, the low woody land
hot irons would not. but differing in habit from those in Northern caUed - Darden Point presented its sequestered
After the logs are in the river commences Tasmania. Here it grew on the steep rocky / I anot er
~ , „ , ~ , , , r , f, J the starboard hand, or about E.S.E., the en-
tile work of “clearing down” whenever banks of the Davey Eiver with hardly any trance to Bathurst Harbour and Spring River
there is a flood. The logs on their passage stem; there it is usually by the side of a was just discernible. Numerous craggy islets
down get jammed at eddies, stranded on low creek, with large stems a yard or so in guard the shore, one steep cliff showing a
banks, or otherwise detained. Two men go diameter. An alsophila is met with up seemingly extensive cavern in its perpendicular
in a dingie, one to pull, the other with an Pine Creek, but which variety I had not the *ace-
iron-pointed prodder to release the logs and opportunity of ascertaining. an °h° r was aweigh, and we were
push them into the current. The dingies The great drawback to the settlement at owni towards Bathurst Harbour, the
are of the shape commonly used about the Port Davey is the absence of all educational 0 t °n, 6 s ° uth ‘ east shore
Tj 3 f , ... . „ ri 01 Port Davey, about three miles above the
Huon,—square stem and stern, and without advantages for the children. When Mr. pyramidal rook. It is guarded on either hand
keel, so that they are quickly turned round Collis wasstationedat Recherche Bay, some of by islands of the most picturesque beauty, their
and easily guided by experienced hands, the settlers managed to send children round summits shaded with peculiarly ornamental and
Prom the narrowness of the river in many there, hut since his removal they are en- umbrageous dwarf foliage, giving to their crown
places, this is the best sort of boat for com- tirely dependent upon what the parents can same unspeakable grace that a fine head of
ing down the rapids. This work is attended impart, and as a rule there is too much hard air imparts to the human fabe divine. The
with considerable danger, and requires skill work to be done to leave any time for that ?• h J tll Wa3 Mr. Ronald
„ r • i tt T 1 i Ti • r,, J .- , , Dunn; the smaller one on the larboard or north
and presence of mind. Henry Longley and purpose. It is one of those exceptional spots side, was styled “ Kathleen Isle ” a title given
his mate Buxton were drowned in the Huon which should not be tied down to the strict by Lady Franklin, in compliment to the wife of
when so employed about three years ago. rules of our educational system. The people the writer. Some pretty, sharp, pinnacled
To the honour of the Port Davey piners, have also utterly neglected by the rocks jutting from this isle, received the appro-
they are always willing to devote part of clergy of all denominations, the latest visit pnate appellation, “ Mavourneen.” The faces
their time to show the special dangers of being that of Archdeacon Davies, on the of these islands and the circumjacent shores are
the river to anv new comer. I came down occasion of a pleasure trip in the City of ° S a -i ■ I 1 / 1 !*?’ P ack ®d) E I
from the Bark Hut Creek in one of these Hobart 15 years ago, when he held a service are nerfoSed^with^iirfif'i 6 ayers ‘
. , ~ r., j ,t> vi n l, j- are penoratea with numberless caves, every
dingies, to see the nature of the river; and at Bramble Cove, 8 miles from the settle- bight and cove developing an infinite variety
although there was only a small body of ment, so that hardly any could attend except of such deep indentations. The conical
water I enjoyed the trip. The scenery is the excursionists. lam certain that the visit hills of quartz, with the tiny patches of
beautiful, especially about the Bay of Islands of a regular clergyman would be well re- verdure minutely interspersed, give a mosaic-like
and the Davey Rapids. There are many ceived there, without any fear of such a re- character to the scene. Nevertheless, the ele-
rapids in the river,all with characteristic and ception as described (on 15th April last) by gant though rugged contour of those hills—the
well known names ; in fact every eddy or a Mr. Cameron, with reference to some parts lor 0 uous un 11 atlc T s of their sterile
, ~ , , , , ' h ~i tt , steeps—the dangerous acclivities of their
remarkable spot has a local name, as well as of the Huon district, of which he is reported scathed and frowning chasms, all combine in the
the creeks, plains, andhunting-grounds about to. have said: “In many of these places a production of a landscape singularly romantic;
the Port, which do not always coincide with minister of the gospel would be hooted.” one that in a rude clime and wintry welkin’
those on the official plans. For a florid, yet not inaccurate, description would inevitably he classed amongst the savage,
The dwellings occupied by the piners when of the scenery, I would recommend any one a designation from which the genial atmosphere
up the river are of the style known as to look up the account by David Burn of Sir Italian blue of the sky that o’er canopies,
“Badger-boxes,” in distinction from huts, John Franklin’s visit in 1842, published in '/’/ ,P r / erYe3 d- Despite its barren character,
which have perpendicular walls, while the the United Service Magazine for 1843. In be termed I soft scene, 11 every^outfine
Badger-box is like an inverted V m section, an older work, Views in Australia, published gracefully rounded—every asperity so much
They are covered with bark, with a thatch in 1824. by J. Lycett, artist to Major- subdued. Light airs and floods proved annoy-
of grass along the ridge, and are on an ave- General Macquarie, the author’s fancy carries ingly adverse to our outward progress, many
rage about 14 xlO feet at the ground, and him to the future when its shores will be hours being frittered away in the labour of a
9or 10 feet high. The sleeping bunk, raised dotted with villas and,gentlemen’s residences, few minutes. We could do no good, and were,
about three feet, occupies the whole of one James Backhouse also describes the place in ev ® n y ’ °° mpebed to anchor,
end, and can accommodate six people easily. chapter 3rd of his book on the Australian q . 30m., the gig pushed off on atrip up
The other end is enclosed by the fire-place, Colonies, having been obliged to spend 17 r i, V6r ' u it contained, consisted
... ~ . 1 n . ~ ’ . ,J Ol , Y , 01 sir John and Lady Jbranklm, Mr. Milligan,
it on high ground ; but those in the flats days there in 1832, during which the sheep M r. Giffin, second officer of the Eliza and my-
among the pine are left open in front, with were put ashore to feed. He mentions also self. About a mile above Kathleen, opposite to
the floor slabbed, and provision made for the heaps of oyster shells. a conical peak of quartz, and close to the
mooring the boat to the bedpost. Longley, But as I have endeavoured to make these anchorage the schooner had been striving to
before mentioned, kept a careful and minute remarks as short as possible, and tolimit them gain, lies “ Turnbull Island,” named after the
diary for several years, and makes frequent chiefly to my own experiences at Port Davey, interim Colonial Treasurer. It is alow, rooky,
entries illustrative of this life, such as the I shall not go into its previous history or ~r us 7 ,IP’ A 3™ at the summit and fringed at
n n • • i , • ° t /. the edge, like a friars pate. Above Turnbull
following:— industries or discuss its capabilities of ,m- some miniature bays are formed by a
1863, April 3 Went in the dingie to a stump proyement and settlement, or the probability i al . ge projecting tongue of land, bare, verdant
to make a fire to boil the kettle for breakfast. of its being a mineral district. I hope to and divided into conical swells towards the
1863, April 7;—Log getting; Longley and pay it another visit to further test the latter centre, but skirted with a leafy screen towards
Doherty cut off a log, up to our waistbands point. the wathr. Close to this point, a low, woody,
-o!>o W T t | I 'h w , „ - , ~ , ~, I shall therefore conclude by placing on circular island occupies the centre of the channel.
1863, July 4 -.—Water 2 feet up the posts of the , . mutilate a remains of the inscrin In honour of Miss Franklin’s governess, it re-
bunk this morning. Had to boil the kettle ° eived the a P pellation ’ “Williamson Island.”
on a stump. tions in the cemetery, it is reported that g pring River here becomes perfectly land-locked;
1864, Oct. 12 : —Took rations to the Badger box. a few years ago the crew of some whaling its waters expan ding, and assuming the form of
Water up to our waists. vessel cat down most of the wooden menu- an extensive hill-embosomed lake’. The day
1867, Aug. 22 Did not go to bed last night, ments for firewood ; and whereas there were hitherto, though dry, had been chilly ; Apollo
as the water was rising until daylight this about twenty as far back as 1849, there are hid his glories in a vapoury shroud, peering
now but four, only one of which is perfect. I occasionally through, not penetrating, the scene
1868, Oct. 6 Flood over the second step this was re i uctant to cre dit such a tale, but it was he seemed desirous to illume. Rounding a bare
morning. . _ . confirmed by the axe-marks on one of those Promontory on the north shore we entered a
And many others to a similar effect. stiU standin g , Two others are lying on the “Z7cshed qn - w t
Tlie men are generally employed in pine- d amo^g the heath and flowers, the Zd “Ebv N At iSI fl f
getting and rolling into the river, during , - , • ’ aneau, or a,. Dyx>i. At its ±oot a pretty little
February, March, April, and May, with s Pf where Hey were erected being untrace- fairy islet, covered with shnibs, received the
occasional visits home for rations, etc. After b6 ‘ rhe lnscrl P tlons are as follows -Jw 6 ma ™ channel, which
, , , ’ , , „ t we ascended, bore N.E whilst a verv lovelv
that they are on the .constant watch for minor branch stretched away to the S B At
floods, and go up the river to clear down sacred this point the landscape became one of great
whenever there is a chance. When the logs 10 THB and varied magnificence bein'? broken into
reach the tidal water they are caught and i" me moby of + numberless diversified bays and° dells, winding
put into “ pens,” which are enclosures in PATRICK BOL T RKE valleys, and craggy ranges. We disturbed
some eddy or still water, formed of stakes HE WAS killed by sundry black swans ffi OU r progress. Mr.
interlaced with brash wood, and a log chained t T ™ E BAEK Milligan having been put on shore, brought some
across the entrance as i o-ate When a planters mast- shrubs and stones fro m Louisa—a memorial for
across tne entrance as a g ate - a head off maquarrib the fair lady after whom the island had been
vessel comes for a load, from 10 to 18 logs harbour February v 1872 named. During the stoppage consequent upon
are fastened together into a raft, and towed aged 21 years this debarkation, th e s „n broke forth, gilding
down below the bar along-side tbe vessel at gf" with liquid glory a most conspicuous ridgy
the usual anchorage. The settlement has ' as-you-abe-now-so-oncb-was-i ravine that inters ec t e d the towering grassy
extended in this direction since my last visit, as-i-am-now-so-you-will-be mountains of the north shore. Immediately '
and there are now several dwellings close to preparb-for-ueath-and-follow above Louisa Isle the hills separated into a
the anchorage. ° + ME broken spreading valley, Bracondale forming the
As regards distribution of ground, there is Tsle above painted in white letters on a black and agrassy, elevated, flat-topped mount,
an understood code of honour among them g'°™ d i n _ Erected lately by Capt Reynolds > and 'anoThl^bran^of Spring very^ossb
not to interfere with each other within a t>ly ? upon accurate investigation, these branches
certain distance, so well observed that I may be found to be but limbs of an extensive
heard no complaint of any one having taken ' sea-arm. A channel of some two miles brings
an undue advantage. A creek or flood- dt memory the tourist to a third and much larger lake, most
enchantingly studded with various low, brushy
islands. This lake flings its ramified, glittering
channel is usually the centre line of a pro- OF
.... i. n v A B
perty, and is followed up on both banks. Any GEORGE, islands This lake flings its ramified, glittering
~ _ A t i M . A native of mangea died limbs deep into the bosom of the mountain
new comer wishing to £0 higher up the . A . .. . , ~ , m, . . ..
, . ° , vx i a 1 a 0N region wherein it is embedded. Ihe picture it
same creek must go ahead at least a quarter
board the barqub terroe April presents is one of indescribable magnificence,
of a mile. . 4 1853 aged 20 years. varying in character every thirty or forty yards.
Longley’s diary for the years 1863, 1r64,l r 64, Here a smooth, grassy hill thrusts its velvet
1865, and 1866 will give a fair sample of a jjj limbs into the wave. There an endless succession
pi.ner’s employment. He had three others as ' of wild, irregular cliffs, split into figures of the
partners; and I find that his time was sacred most extraordinary magnitude and extravagant
occupied on an average of these four vears a s £ orm > P lerc ® * e sk J their uncouth points.
„ 1 - ° F mLiiViUK.x SnmA nto hn nwpn n Iro onorantvip. nnnnh-hnw «
r, 1 nn 1 ql “ 7 MEMORY Some are hollowed like gigantic punch-bowls,
o ows. ays e' yar up le mer 0 f fit for the revels of the Cyclops; others assume
felling timber and dealing down ; dais MATTHEW HENDRY the aspect of Nature’s primitive fortifications,
at work at home, catching logs, squaring or killed on board the being ranged in long and imposing lines, tier’
sawing them, rafting and loading vessels, re- maid of brxn over tier of deeply-scarped battlement and fosse
pairing boats, vessels,huts,pens, etc., garden- fell from the masthead —the naked crags presenting a variety of tints,
ing, and building vessels ;55 clays hunting, THB 29 BjST JAKUARY 1863 white, pink, and slate being the prevailing hues
fishing, and getting mutton-birds ; 55 days A6ED 32 YEARS that glanced and flickered in the varying sun-
visiting Hobart Town, including voyage and The above two inscriptions cut into the wood. bgM- Hill soars over hill—crag surmounts
t t n I*3l. The boards are lying on the ground cra £ —whilst peak and mountain-cone tower to
detentions ; and 20 days unemployed, Ling Jmg _ 8 heaven their proud pinnacles, shown in bold
Sundays, holidays, or bad weather. They „ relief or veiled by the fleecy canopy that, ever
built two vessels during these years, one of lv - and anon, strives to envelop their aspiring
which was lost in Eecherche Bay on its way sacred fronts. Nature is untarnished, primeval
to town to be sold. In the season ending T 0 majesty reigns here supreme, whilst man looks
June, 1864, they got pine logs to the extent on 1° wonder and adore. Would that the
UIIC, J.U vfE, fillv V piUL tU tUC CAICIJ U p- , XXXT rirr i ... _ ill t -
of 58,336 feet, the quantities varying each JOHN CHA painters art were mine ! Would that I could
, . , x , ~ _ WHO DTRD mTO wprp it. nnr. a tA<nKlfi r>rvnir nr r.m« TT9.nsnnn-
, ’ • ,’. , \ i 1 ° , who died give were it hut a feeble copy of this transcen-
week owing to track or creek clearing board brh* “ro dant picture ; the subject could not fail to have
other causes. During the week ending sth 13 January ] inspired my pencit, it would have taught me to
March they got 4,509 feet ; that ending 7th aged 39 yea pourtray the glorious landscape in all its racy
May 7,203 feet; that ending 21st June 2,284 This was erected to John Chard of the brie characters of heaven-horn grandeur. This
feet. In another week they got as much as “Roscoe,” date not ascertained. It is much panoramic enchantment lies about eight or nine
9,440 feet. The size of the trees recorded mutilated, and has been chopped with an axe. mdes above Bathurst Harbour, the expanse of
its waters terminating two or three miles further
north, whilst the river, or what is said to he the
river, flows from the B.N.E. for what distance
has yet to be determined ; ten or twelve
long summer days might he most deliciously
spent in the investigation of this little known
locality. It is much to be regretted that the
land, seemingly, is of such small avail, either
agrestially or pastorally, because, with a mode-
rate share of fair soil, the favourable position
and immense navigable facilities of Port Davey
must otherwise render it a settlement of para-
mount value. A century may (is sure to) achieve
what the present age cannot well accomplish.
also vaiies much. Logs 10 or 11 feet in
We debarked upon a smooth, pebbly beach,
partaking of a comfortable refection of ham,
and bread and cheese, the task of deglutition
being rendered easily practicable with the aid of
some choice brown stout and superlative sherry.
At 4 we plied the homeward oar, regaining the
Eliza at 6, after having encountered a slight
shower during our homeward progress. Mr.
Bagot and Captain Harburg had preceded ns
with five swans. Strange ! when the shooting
a few of these birds would have afforded a most
acceptable food to the famished pilgrims, we
could, by no possibility, steal within reach ;
now that they were valueless, we had them to
kick about. Having inspected everything that
the advanced season of the year and the
threatening aspect of the weather rendered con-
veniently practicable, the Eliza, at 7h. 42min.
p.m., weighed anchor and dropped out of
Bathurst Harbour with a light air from the N. W.
At 8 we passed between Gunn and Kathleen
Islands, opened the Great Caroline (a name
given by whalers) pyramidal rock, and, with a
flowing sheet, stood to sea.
NATIONAL LIBRARY
OF AUSTRALIA
