

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
NEW SOUTH WALES
The
Farmers'
Handbook
(Third Edition)
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.—1918.
Compiled by P. G. GILDER,


A “Caterpillar” Tractor.
Subduing the Western Plains.
EXTENDING THE WHEAT BELT OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Frontispiece.


DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE
FARMERS’ HANDBOOK
[THIRD EDITION.]
COMPILED BY
P. G. GILDER,
Editor, Agricultural Gazette.
Price : Paper Boards, ss.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1918.
t 17299—a
Issued by direction of the Minister of Agriculture,
The Hon. W. C. GRAHAME, M.L.A.


Editors of Agricultural and Country Papers are especially
invited to reproduce any of the articles contained in the
Farmers’ Handbook, in whole or in. part, provided that
the usual acknowledgment is made.


Introduction to the Third Edition.
The fact that the Second Edition of the Farmers’ Handbook was
exhausted within eighteen months of issue is gratifying evidence
that the information it contained and its method of presentation
proved valuable to the farming community, as well as to the
student of agricultural science. It is particularly pleasing to me,
as Minister of Agriculture, that the Handbook should have been
received with such marked approval by the agricultural press of
Australia, who have classed it as comparing more than favourably
with similar productions in any other country.
It is of interest to note that copies of the Second Edition have
been circulated in Great Britain, the United States of America,
Canada, India, New Zealand, and in every State of the Common-
wealth ; in fact, some restrictions had to be placed upon its sale
outside the State in order to reserve as many copies as possible for
residents of New South Wales,,
Few marked changes have been found necessary in the present
Edition, the chief alteration being in the section dealing with
maize, a crop which has recently received increased attention from
our field officers.
Such a volume as the present would have been impossible
without the complete co-operation of the staff of the Department,
and they may fairly be congratulated on the result.
Increased efficiency in food production is one of the most urgent
necessities at this time of world conflict, and it is with the
confidence that the Handbook will materially assist in this direction
that this further Edition is issued.
W. C. GRAHAME,
Minister of Agriculture.
Department of Agriculture,
Sydney, 9th September, 1918.


Introduction to the Second Edition.
The first edition of the Handbook, compiled by Mr. W. H. Clarke,,
and piloted through the press by his successor, Mr. J. E. O’Grady,
rapidly proved its value as a work of reference in connection with
agriculture, not only as practised in New South Wales, but to a
material extent throughout the Commonwealth. In addition to
being extensively used by practical farmers, it served a useful
purpose as a convenient text-book in Agricultural Colleges and
High Schools in many parts of Australia.
In less than five years the edition was exhausted, and when the
question of a reprint was considered, at first sight it appeared that
only a mere modernisation of the previous work was necessary.
But a closer examination proved that agricultural practice had
progressed materially even within such a comparatively short
period. Methods had been modified, older varieties of crops had
given place to more recent introductions, and above all, the
pushing back of the “Wheat Line” had led to the opening up-
of new spheres of profitable production under conditions differing
substantially from those of the older established districts.
The recent phenomenal yield of 67,000,000 bushels disclosed to
the world at large the wonderful fertility of the wheat areas of the
State, but it forms no criterion of the capacity of the vast spaces;
yet untouched by the plough, which increased railway facilities,
modern methods of soil treatment, and the use of carefully-chosen
varieties, will enable to be successfully cultivated.
And while there has been such a striking object lesson in
connection with our main cereal, there is no reason to doubt that,
given corresponding attention, other crops will expand in similar
proportions, both within the Coastal areas and on the Tablelands.
In the light of the most recent experience, therefore, much of
the Handbook has been re-written by officers of the Department,
who have all co-operated heartily in an endeavour to bring within
the covers of one volume the sum total of the departmental
recommendations on crop production. Extensive use has been
made of various articles which have appeared in the Agricultural
Gazette , and in many cases the advice of the officers has been
supplemented and reinforced by the experience of successful farmers,
who have contributed, by papers and discussion, to the meetings
of the Agricultural Bureau of New South Wales.
The compilation of a Handbook of such a character has involved
a considerable amount of work in collecting the necessary data,
condensing numerous articles, and setting out the facts in their
present form; and in addition to the help afforded by various
officers of the Department, whose articles are acknowledged by
footnotes appended to their contributions and in an author index,
invaluable assistance in all stages of the work has been received
from Mr. W. H. Brown, Assistant Editor of Publications.
P. G. GILDER,
Sydney, ist June, 1916.
Editor, Agricultural Gazette*


CONTENTS.
PAGE.
SECTION I.
Farm Lands op New South Wales 1
Climate, Soils, Timber, Native Grasses, Cost of Clearing and
Fencing, Water Supply and Roads in Various Land Board
Districts; Soils of New South. Wales; Injurious Substances
in the Soil,
SECTION 11.
The Chemistry op the Soil 61
Manures and Manuring; Formulae for Preparing Fertilisers; List
of Fertilisers in New South Wales, 1918.
SECTION 111.
The Farm Holding ... 138
Clearing; Fences and Fencing; Conservation and Distribution of
Water; Soil Drainage ; Farm Buildings; Painting; Trees for /
Shade and Shelter.
SECTION IV.
Wheat Culture 241
Cultivation Methods; Varieties; Sowing the Wheat; Cost as a
Factor in Production; Sheep on the Wheat Farm; Share
Farming; Harvesting for Grain; Harvesting for Hay and
Chaff; Description of Varieties Recommended; Fungus
Diseases; Insect Pests.
SECTION V.
Dereals Other than Wheat 391
Oats; Barley; Rye ; Maize ; Sorghum; Millet.
SECTION VI.
Root Crops 477 ■
The Potato; Turnips and Swedes; Mangels; Sugar Beet; Sweet
Potato; Jerusalem Artichoke.
SECTION VII.
Leguminous Crops 536
Lucerne; Cowpeas; Soy Beans; Peanut; Field Peas; Vetches
and Tares; Autumn-sown Legumes combined with Cereals;
Clovers.
SECTION VIII.
Miscellaneous Crops 578
Broom Millet; Rape; Kale; Sugar-cane; Indian Cane; Elephant
Grass; Linseed.


PAGE.
SECTION IX.
Vegetable Crops 616
Cauliflowers and Cabbages; Onion; Garlic; Beans and Peas;
Tomato; Pumpkins; Squashes; Marrows; Grammas;
Melons; Cucumbers; Asparagus; Rhubarb; Carrots;
Parsnips; Beet.
SECTION X.
Introduced and Native Grasses 686
Specific Grasses; Overstocking; Making Bush Hay.
SECTION XI.
Some Native Fodder Plants 717
Saltbushes; Some Native Australian Fodder Plants.
SECTION XII.
Silos and Silage 737
Stack Silage; Pit Silos; Hillside Silos; Overground Silos.
SECTION XIII.
The Feeding of Farm Stock 759
Analyses of Fodders.
SECTION XIV.
Seeds and Seed Testing for Farmers 773
SECTION XV.
Farmers’ Weeds 793
SECTION XVI.
The Handy Man on the Farm 796
Harness; Harness Fitting and Repairing; Blacksmithing for
Farmers; Carpentry; Use and Care of Rope.
SECTION XVII.
Book-keeping for Farmers 851
SECTION XVIII.
Farmers’ Calendar 867
Seed Table for Farm Crops.
Subject Index 895
Author Inde' 900


THE FARMERS' HANDBOOK.
SECTION I.
Farm Lands of New South Wales.*
Armidale Land Board District.
Includes Armidale, Uralla, Walcha, Hillgrove, Guyra, Bundarra, Tiugha, Inverell,
Glen Tones, Tenterfield.
Thk country in this district is, in general, hilly to mountainous, with table-
lands and valleys, the New England Range and its spurs running right
through the centre. Basalt, granite, and trap are the prevailing rocks.
Much of the soil is inferior, and suitable only for grazing, with rich patches
of alluvial and basaltic soils. The richest soil is generally found in the
valleys.
West of Glen limes, and near Tooloon and Koreelah, there are extensive
areas of cultivable land. About Tenterfield the country is granite, and
suited to wheat and English fruits. To the east of Glen Lines the country
is mountainous, with ridges and fairly level areas suitable for agriculture,
especially about Ben Lomond, Glencoe, Stonehenge, Glen Tunes, and Red
Range.
In the Inverell and Armidale districts the country is undulating to hilly,
with soil varying from black to light red loams of volcanic or igin.
Generally speaking, to the east of the range the soil is of the black or
chocolate type, derived from basalt; whilst a more sandy type of soil, derived
from granite, is found on the west.
The climate is superb, and very healthy both for human beings and stock
The New England district is a favourite summer health resor t. The mean
annual temperature for the district is about 01 deg. Fahr. The mean
summer temperature is about 71 deg. Fahr. The summer temperature in
Armidale is 90 deg. Fahr.
The winters are cold, and snow is common on the hills. The mean winter
temperature for the district is given as 46 deg. Fahr.
The rainfall is good, and the whole district is well watered.
The average rainfall is 33 to 35 inches, about one-third of which falls
between December and February.
The district is mainly pastoral, and it is considered the best wool-growing
district in the State. A little dairying h carried on, but this industry can
be said to be only in its infancy.
* F. B. Guthrie, compiled from notes supplied by officers of the Lands and Stock
Departments in the different districts. Prices of fencing, ring-barking, &c., hare been
revised by the District Surveyors to May, 1914.
t 17299—A


The principal crops are potatoes and fruit, such as apples, cherries, Ac.
Potatoes are pretty extensively grown in some districts, such as Guyra and
the counties of Sandon, Hardinge, and Gough.
Timber is plentiful on the eastern slopes of the range and on the table-
lands, especially about Tooloon, the McPherson Ranges, and east of Glen
Innes. The western slopes are more sparsely timbered. Of the softwoods,
pine, cedar, rosewood, silky oak, and coachwood are the most common ; with
blackbutt, tallow, woollybutt, grey and red gum, and stringybark among
the hard woods.
in the Inverell district, box, apple, ironbark, and white box are the
principal timber trees ; in the Tingha district, stringybark, red and white
gum, and pine; and in the Rundarra and Ashford districts ironbark, gum,
box, and apple are the common timbers.
The native grasses are good, but, in general, rather coarse. The herbage
is greatly improved after ringbarking. The best English and other imported
grasses do well.
With the exception of box, all the New England timbers are very hard to
burn, and the cost of clearing is thereby much increased. Ringing costs
about Is. per acre. To prepare ringbarked land for the plough costs from
£3 to £5 or £G per acre. When not ringbarked, the timber, being mostly hard-
wood, is usually grubbed, felled, and cut up.
The supply of fencing material is good, on the whole; scarce in parts.
The best woods for posts are ironbark, stringybark, oak, blackbutt, and red
gum. White ant is fairly prevalent in the district. Posts should not be too
slight, should have as little sapwood as possible, and the bark should be
removed from nm-st timbers to prevent the sapwood rotting. Charring
the bottoms of posts and the use of coal tar are means also used for the
prevention of white ant.
The cost of cattle-proof fencing, four plain or three barbed wire, is from
£24 to £3O per mile. For 6or 7-wire sheep fence, £35 to £4O. Rabbit-
proof fence costs about £BO per mile. The cost of 14-wire dingo-proof fence
is given at £lOO per mile.
The cost of well-sinking runs from 12s. 6d. to £1 per foot ; but there are
not a great number of wells in the district, except for household purposes, as
the country is fairly well watered.
Excavating for tanks costs from Is, to Is. Gd. per cubic yard.
The roads are for the most part hilly, with easy gradients as a ru’e. In
ordinary seasons they are hard. The cost of transport is from Is. to 2s. 6d.
per cwt. for 10 miles.
The district is well watered, and is suiwible for dairying. With regard
to pests, dingoes and wallabies are fairly common. Prickly-pear is bad in
certain districts, such as about Tenterfielcl, Tooloon, and the head of the
Clarence River. Blackberry is found in patches all over the district.
The seasons are regular, and, as the records quoted show, without violent
inequalities. Inverell provides a good centre for marketing produce in
the west. The northern railway line runs through the centre of the district;
and this main line will, doubtless, eventually be connected with the coast.
No'rts.—The prices quoted for the Armidale Land Board District are those for 1910.
A considerable increase has since taken place.


Dubbo Land Board District.
Includes Dubbo, Wellington, Gilgandra, Narromiue, Warren, Nyngan, Nevertire,
Tottenham, Canbelego, Coonamble.
Xyngan and Warren District ?. —The country is for the most part level;
about one-fifth consists of gravelly ridges to gently undulating country, the
remainder being rich black and red soil country. West of the Bogan the
country is heavily timbered ; east of the Bogan it is mostly plain country,
with heavily timbered areas. The soil is black, red, and chocolate heavy
soil with sandy patches. The heavy soil is extremely fertile, and is generally
prolific in herbage in autumn and winter, and is in good seasons also heavily
grassed, but it may be looked upon in summer as a semi-arid area.
The climate is dry, very hot in summer and mild in winter, with occasional
frosts.
The rainfall is aoout 20 inches annually, of which about a third falls,
during January, February, and March.
The average temperature is about 80 degrees Fain 1 , in summer and
51 degrees in winter.
The district is within the artesian area and water can always be obtained
by boring, the average depths being 2,000 to 2,500 feet. Sub-artesian water
is also obtainable in parts.
Wheat-growing is the only class of farming carried on to any extent, the
district being essentially a pastoral one.
The principal timbers are box, pine, gum, belar, myall, yarran, supplejack,
and rosewood.
The grasses are all of good fattening qualities, and this is one of the best
stock districts in the State, though in parts not heavy carrying. West of
the Bogan the chief grasses are mulga grass, corkscrew, spear grass, kanga-
roo, blue, and star grass. East of the Bogan, Mitchell grass, blue grass,
star, couch, and umbrella grass predominate.
Clearing costs about 255, per acre, varying with the nature and density of
the timber. Most of the timbers are easily killed except gum and box.
Timber for fencing is plentiful in the Nyngan district, limited about
Warren. The timber best adapted for posts arc yarran, box, gum, and pine,
with pine and yarran for rails, but rails are not largely used.
"\\ lute ants attack the hardwoods where they are sappy, the best ant-
resistor apparently being the pine. There is very little charring done now.
Post and rail fences are hardly ever used. The cost of a four-rail fence
would be prohibitive for. ordinary use. Cattle-proof fences are also very
rare ; they would cost from £2B to £32 per mile, according to their con-
struction. For sheep-proof fences, £3O to £36 ; and for rabbit fences, £65
to £BO per mile.
The cost of well-sinking runs from 12s. 6d. per foot for the first 50 feet, up
to 17s. 6d. to 255. per foot for greater depths.
Excavation for tanks is about 9d. per cubic yard in good seasons when
feed is plentiful.
Transport is for the most part over level country on black or red soils, which
are very soft in wet weather. About one-fifth is of a hilly nature, with hard
gravelly soil. Generally speaking the country is a pastoral one, though
agriculture is progressing rapidly. In good seasons plenty of hay is grown.
The soil is suitable for any class of farming, provided it receives enough
moisture.


Ihe Dubho District. —The country in the Dubbo district, which includes the
southern and eastern portion of the Land Board District, varies in character.
To the north of Dubbo, towards Yevertiro and Gilgandra, it is generally flat,
whilst to the south, towards Wellington, it is hilly in character, and towards
Tomingley very hilly.
The soils vary from sandy loams to rich red and chocolate loams and
black soil plains, the latter with clay subsoils. On the higher levels the soil
is red and of a more loamy nature, and sandy to gravelly on the ridges.
The climate is Dot and dry, especially in the western part of the district.
In the eastern portion the climate is milder, with abetter rainfall. It is very
hot in the summer ; the winters are mild and bracing. The mean summer
temperature for this district is about 76 deg. Fahr., with a winter average of
49 degrees.
The rainfall at Dubbo is 224 inches annually.
The principal crop is wheat, which is grown extrii-ively about Narromine
and Wellington, and in the southern parts of the district. Lucerne is also
grown, and does splendidly on the river flats.
The principal timbers are box, pine, buddha, wilga, rnallee, iroubark,
yarran, gum, myall, coolab.ih, b ;lar, bull oak, currawong, red lux, ironwood,
a little currajong (fodder tree), whitewood (fodder tree), needlewo >d, etc.
The grasses are of good fattening quality, and include Mitchell, umbrella
grass, corkscrew, crowfoot, and barley grass.
For clearing dead timber the cost is from 7s. 6d. to £1 per acre ; green
timber costs from £1 10s. to £3. The average cost may be set down as about
255. per acre. Yankee grubbing is not extensively practised. The cost
would be from Bs. to 10s. per acre.
Fencing material is abundant, and in most parts good. For posts, box,
pine, ironbark, yarran, and buddha are chiefly used. Pine posts withstand
white ant best, but yarran and buddha arc exceptionally lasting. Charring
butts is resorted to in some cases to protect posts from white ant and rot,
but it is not a general practice.
Post and rail fences are hardly ever used. Their cost would he prohibitive
for general use. Cattle-proof fences cost from £2B to £32 per mile for
4-wire fences, but these fences are little used. The cost of 6-wire sheep
fences most generally in use is from £3O to £36 per mile. Rabbit-proof
fencing costs from £65 to £BO per mile. For well-sinking the price is
about 12s. 6d. per foot for the first 50 feet, the cost increasing with the
depth up to 17s. 6d. to 255. per foot.
The cost of excavating for tanks, which are now chiefly’ done with scoops,
is from lOd. to Is. per cubic yard; however, if feed is plentiful in the
locality’, this may’ be a little reduced.
The transport is level in the western part and hilly’ in the eastern parts of
the district. The roads are for the most part good and hard except in wet
weather.
The Coonamble District embraces the northern and eastern part of the
Dubbo Land Board District. Except for the Warrumbungle Mountains in the
east, the country is flat in character, with rich black and red soils, alternating
with belts of sandy soil. The climate is hot and dry, with a rainfall of from
17 to 25 indies annually. The average temperature in summer is 80 deg.
Fahr., and in winter 51 deg. Fahr. It is at present mainly’ a pastoral
district, but agriculture has considerably increased in the eastern part and
will eventually overshadow pastoral pursui’s more particularly around
Gilgandra and the eastern side of the railway between Dubbo and Gular.
Maize is grown under irrigation, but only in small areas.


The chief timbers are yarran, box, pine, belah, gum, buddha, and ironbark,
with plenty of edible scrubs such as myall, wilga, currajong, rosewood, wild
orange, whitewood, and leopard-wood.
The grasses are Mitchell, blue grass, sugar grass, star and barley grass, with
winter and spring herbage, saltbush and cotton bush.
Yankee grubbing, except in grazing areas, is on the decrease. The present
cost of ordinary clearing is about 12s. 6d. per acre in dead country. An
estimate for green country is not reliable, as so little is done, but probable
coat ranges up to £3 per acre. About three-fourths of the district is plain
country or open forest.
The supply of fencing material is ample; box, pine, buddha, yarran, iron-
bark, and gum are used for posts. White ants are said not to be troublesome
in this district.
Neither post and rail, nor ordinary wire cattle-proof fences are used. The
cost of a 2-wire (No. 8), with barbed wire on the top, would be about £3O
per mile.
For a 6-wire (No. 10) sheep-proof fence with 11 foot panels, the cost would
he from £3O to £36 per mile.
For rabbit proof fencing, 42 in. netting on sheep fence, £65 to £BO per mile.
Wells cost from 10s. to 255. per foot, according to the depth. The cost of
artesian boring is 20s. to 225. Gd. per foot. Excavating for tanks runs
from 9d. to Is. per cubic yard.
Transport is mostly over level and soft country, except in the eastern part,
which is somewhat hilly. The district includes extremely good pastoral
country, the grasses are fattening, and disease amongst stock is almost
unknown ; one of the worst troubles in connection with stock being the
prevalence of blow-flies.
Artesian water is procurable everywhere by boring at a depth of 500 feet
onwards. Bedrock is struck at from 2,500 to 2,700 feet. The flows from the
bores vary from 50,000 gallons to 1,500,000 gallons per day.
Forbes Land Board District.
Includes Forbes, Parkes, Grenfell, Barmedman, Mandamar, Wyalong, Valgogrin,
Ungane, Condobolin, Trundle. Peak Hill,
The country comprised in this district is of fairly uniform character, being
tor the most part undulating to flat. About a quarter of the district is level.
There is some hilly country about Grenfell. In the wes'ern and southern,
parts the country is for the most part flat. The soil varies—the typical soil
being a rich red loam, generally with a rather stiff subsoil ; chocolate loams
and sandy loams of a light colour are represented, and black sticky soils are
found on the river flats.
Ihe climate is fairly even over the, district; the average summer tem-
perature being about 76 deg. Fahr., with a winter average of 56 deg. Fahr,;
the western portion being somewhat hotter in summer. The district generally
may he described as rather dry, the mean annual rainfall for the western
portion being about 19 inches. In the eastern part the rainfall is somewhat
higher, being about 23 inches. It is a good, healthy climate, and not subject
to extremes of heat or cold. There is not a great deal of farming. A con-
siderable quantity of wheat is grown in the eastern and southern part of the
Land Board District, the western part being chiefly grazing country, A


fairly largo area is now under wheat, and the cultivated area is being
increaseJ yearly as land is made available. This applies to the whole
district.
The principal cereals cultivated are wheat and oats. Mixed farming is
almost universal. Lucerne and sorghum are grown on some of tho alluvial
flats, but only in limited quantity. All kinds of fruit grow well
throughout the district, and especially about Grenfell and Forbes, and
generally in the more eastern part of the district. The river country is
extremely well adapted for irrigation. The principal timbers are pine, white
box, yellow box, red gum, ironbark, currajong, myall, wilga, and yarran. In
the western part there is plenty of myall and mallee country.
The grasses in general are of a good fattening nature—corkscrew, silver
grass, blue grass, panic and umbrella being tho principal summer grasses, with
barley and other grasses in tho winter. Crowfoot, trefoil, clover, &c., are
also fairly abundant.
To clear dead timber for the plough costs from 7s. Gd. up to 255. per acre,
according to the density of the timber and its burning power.
Yankee grubbing is extensively adopted, and costs from ss. to 12s. 6d.
per acre, according to the den-ityaud tho burning power of the timber.
To clear green timber for the plough the cost varies with tho conditions
mentioned above from £2 up to £4 or £5 per acre. The universal custom
is to kill by ringharking. Tho cost of ringbaiking is from Cd. to 2s. 6d. per
acre. It is customary to grub about 9 inches below the surface and burn.
For pastoral purposes clearing may be put down at about 2s. 6d. per acre. In
the case of mallee scrub this is rolled down at a cost of about 7s. 6d. to
10s. per acre, and then burnt off.
The supply of timber suitable for fencing is still fairly good in most parts,
though it is diminishing, especially in the eastern part of the district. For
posts, ironbark, white and yellow box, pine, red gum, yarran are the best
timbers. Pine, yarran, red gum, and ironbark are said to be immune from
the attacks of white ant, which is pleat ful over the greater part of the
district. Box is the least satisfactory of the above timbers, as it is attacked
by the an f . Precautions are taken in some districts, such as the Condobolin
district, against white ant by seasoning the tinib -r, charring the ends of posts,
or sometimes coating the underground parts with tar. The best fence for all
kinds of stock is said to be one made of split posts B'' x I" or 10'' x 3", 22 inches
in the ground, with five wires and one barbed wire on top ; the height of the top
wire should be about 3 feet 7 inches from the ground. The cost for such a
fence would be about £26 per mile. For sheep the fence may be lower and
the posts wider apart, say 20 feet instead of 12 feet, with a proportional
reduction in cost.
Other estimates vary for sheep fencing from £22 up to £33 per mile.
A good deal depends upon the nature of the timber. For example, sheep-
proof fence with posts of ironbark (which is not plentiful in the Grenfell
district) 7 in. x 4 in., 20 inches under ground, 4 feet out of ground, 9-foot
panels, with six wires, would cost about £35 per mile, whilst a fence of the
same construction with 8 in. x 5 in. box posts would cost £33, and if made
with pine posts 10 in. x 5 in. only £3O per mile.
Rabbit-proof fencing costs from £SO to £6O per mile.
There are few or no wells in the district; the average cost per foot may he
stated at 10s. in soft ground and 20s. in hard ground for the first 100 feet.
This includes timber.


For excavating tanks the average cost is from 7d. to 9d. per cubic yard
This is in good seasons, when bullocks can be used. In dry seasons when
horses have to be used and fed, the cost may go up to Is. per cubic yard.
Nearly all over the district there is good holding ground for tanks, and
sinking is fairly easy.
The country being fairly level for transport, the roads are generally of easy
gradient and fairly good, except in wet seasons, when they are heavy. The
roads are improving throughout the district.
The district is, for the most part, suitable for mixed farming and grazing.
In the western part the country is not adapted to small holdings. Rabbits
are decreasing, the cost of keeping them down in the Condobolin district
being said to be about Id. per acre.
Goulburn Land Board District.
Includes the South Coast from Bateman’s Bay to Cape Howe, and comprises the south-
eastern corner of the State, stretching westward to the Snowy Mountains. It
includes Camden, Crookwell, Burrowa, Yass, Goulburn, Queanbeyan, Cooma,
Cobargo, Dalgety, Bega, Bombala, and Eden,
The Great Dividing Range runs through the centre of the district, dividing
the coastal portion from the tablelands.
In the Eden and Bega district, which comprise the south coastal portion,
and includes Bombala, to the west of the Dividing Range, the country is for
the most part mountainous to hilly and uneven and undulating. There is a
small area of alluvial flats along the rivers. The soil varies from a light loam,
sometimes gravelly, to a chocolate clayey soil, and is derived from granite,
slate, basalt, and dioritc.
The climate of this part of the district is even and moderate, averaging
about 66 deg. Fahr. in the summer, and with a winter average varying from
51 degrees on the coast to 42 degrees in the inland portion.
The average annual rainfall varies also from about 30 inches in the coastal
half to 25|- inches in the western half of the district.
In the Monaro and Cooma districts, lying to the west of the Land Board
district, the country varies from mountainous to hilly, undulating, and open
country and treeless belts, the hills being thickly timbered ; the soils are on
the whole good, and are derived from granite and basalt.
The soil in the Goulburn and central part of the district varies from a
rather sandy loam to red and dark loam. There is a good deal of red and
black loam about Crookwell and Taralga, and granite with limestone patches
about Goulburn itself. About Breadalbane is good plain country.
The north-west portion of the district, Burrowa, Yass, &c., is for the most
part undulating to level plains surrounded by mountains. The soil varies
from fertile loam to rather poor and gravelly soil on the ridges. There is
plenty of good black soil on the river flats in all parts of the district.
Generally speaking, the climate is rather severe in the winter, especially on
the elevated lands, and mild in summer. In Goulburn the highest summer
temperature is 96 degrees, the mean summer temperature being about 70 deg.
Fahr. throughout the district. The winter average for the coast districts is
about 52 degrees, whilst on the tablelands it is about 10 degrees lower.
The average rainfall on the coast is about 46 inches annually, about 27 to
28 inches on the tablelands, decreasing to about 26 inches in the north-western
plain country.


Dairying is the principal industry, and is carried on pretty extensively all
along the coast, the crops grown being wheat and oats for seed and lung sorghum,
potatoes, maize, and lucerne. There is less cultivation on the tablelands’.
Fruits do well all over the district. Mixed farming, dairying, and grazing is
carried on in the Moss Yale district. Potatoes and maize are fairly exten-
sively grown about Taralga and Crookwcll. The Gunning district is
principally a grazing one.
Maize and lucerne are extensively grown on the river flats.
Wattle is cultivated in the Eden-Bega district.
The supply of timber is good in the mountain districts, and includes box,
stringybark, mountain ash, yellow and white box, apple, oak, red gum,
peppermint, blackbutt, messmate, and ironbark. The grasses are on the
whole geod ; there is fair natural grass, and imported grasses are grown
extensively, and do wall. Kangaroo and corkscrew’ are among the chief
summer grasses, with barley grass and a little trefoil in the winter. Couch
and Parramatta grass are also plentiful. In the Braidwood district rye and
cocksfoot did w ell for some years in wet seasons, but are now dying oiit and
being replaced by the indigenous grasses. Paspalum has been grown in
the coast district in the past; it is, however, not viewed with much favour,
and its planting has practically been abandoned.
The usual custom in clearing green timber on the tablelands is to vingbark
and allow to die, then break and burn. With the coastal scrub timbers the
practice is to cut down and fire when dry.
To clear and burn off dead timber for grazing costs about 2s. Gd. to £3
per acre, according to the nature and density of timber. It might be
averaged throughout the district at 7s. per acre. Clearing for the plough
costs in the case of dead timber 10s. to £3 per acre, and in the case of green
timber £2 to £2O according to the timber.
Timber for fencing is fairly abundant over most of the district. In the
Goulburn district the supply is limited, and in the Burrowa district it is not
of the best description.
For posts the best timbers are red gum, box, mountain ash, white gum,
woollybutt and stringybark. On the coast red gum, box, and blackbutt, are
chiefly used, and on the tablelands mountain ash, messmate, and stringybark.
For rails, stringybark, mountain ash, box and blackbutt are ail used.
White ants are said not to attack sound timber, and no precautions are
used against them. Some of the settlers char the butts of the posts.
The cost of a post and 2-rail fence is from £4O to £5O per mile. Cattle-
fencing, 4 or 5 wire, costs from £3O to £4O per mile ; sheep-proof fencing,
6 or 7-wire, £35 to £45 ; and rabbit-proof fencing, £6O to £lOO per mile.
'The country is generally well watered by springs and streams, and there
are comparatively few wells or tanks. What wells there are are shallow.
The cost of well-sinking varies with the depth and nature of the country, and
appears to be about £1 per foot for 50 feet on the average. Excavating for
tanks is given at from Bd. to Is. 6d. per cubic yard.
Transport is fair on the whole. The roads are well made and kept, and
the bush roads fairly hard, except in the wet weather. The roads are for the
most part hilly, except in the Burrowa district.
There is little or no Crown land available. The district is eminently
adapted to dairying, and all fodder crops do well. Feed has to be stored for
the winter. The class of country is not rich, and on unimproved land its
carrying capacity is stated to be one sheep to 10 acres. Improved land
carries one sheep to 1 or 2 acres. The little Crown land available is not
adapted to settlers.


Grafton Land Board District.
Includes Wooigoolga, Grafton, Maclean, Lismore, Balliiia, Casino, Drake, Kyogle, Byron
Bay, Murwilluinbah.
The Clarence River carries considerable areas of good alluvial soil. The
same applies in a lesser degree to the creeks and tributaries, the remainder
of the district being undulating to steep hilly country of slate and ironstone
origin.
The soil on the alluvial flats is an easily-worked fertile soil, eminently
suited to crop production. There is also plenty of good agricultural land on
the lower ridw;s of the remainder. 'There are large areas suitable for grazing.
1 n the northern part of the coast district and on the Richmond and Tweed
Rivers, the land varies from mountainous, hilly to undulating, flat, and
swampy, and the soil from sandy to volcanic loam and alluvial.
The'climate in the northern portion, including the Tweed and Richmond,
is sub-tropical and humid, with an average rainfall varying from 75 inches
annually on the coast to 36 on the upper portions of the livers.
The Clarence River portion (the southern part of the district) lias an annual
coastal rainfall of 5-1 inches to 37 inches inland.
The temperature for the whole district varies from about 75 degrees Fa! r,
in summer to 56 degrees in winter.
The summer is generally hot and humid.
In the southern portion the nights are cool and dewy, and light frosts are
not uncommon in the winter. The principal crops are maize and cane, and
potatoes on the river flats. Dairying, the production of maize, and pig and
poultry breeding are general throughout the district.
The cultivation of sub-tropical fruits is a growing industry, especially in
the Tweed' Valley.
The 'Tweed, Clarence, and Richmond River flats produce the only sugar-
cane grown in the Btato, totalling about 180,000 tons. These rivers also
account for one-half the total amount of maize produced in the State.
Then* is plenty of timber in the district, including a dense coastal scrub
and hardwood forest. The principal hardwoods are spotted gum, red gum,
flooded gum, grey gum, ironbark, box, turpentine, tallow, mahogany, stringy-
bark, messmate, and blackbutt. There is a very large quantity of hoop pine
and also of other good softwood timber.
In the forest country blady and kangaroo grass are the chief natural grasses,
with couch and foxtail on the low-lying lands. But paspalum is the mainstay
of the district. It thrives luxuriantly, especially on the Tweed and
Richmond. Clover and rye grass are also cultivated, and, on the river flats,
lucerne is a rapidly increasing fodder. Johnson grass is used in seme
localities instead of paspalum.
The cost of clearing green timber for the plough is about £4 to £6 per
acre. In the open forest country the cost is as low as 20s. per acre.
Ringed timber suckers freely in forest country. Scrub country is generally
felled and fired when dry, grass seed being sown in the ashes. This in a
great measure prevents the growth of suckers, seedlings, Vc.
Timber for fencing is plentiful and of good quality. For posts the best
timbers are bloodwood, mahogany, ironbark, grey gum, and stringybark,
for rails ironbark, grey gum, stringybark, and blackbutt. A good deal of
damage is done by white ants, but preventive measures are not much employed
in this district.
The cost of post-and-rail fence is from £65 to £75 per mile. Cattle fences
cost £45 to £55. Sheep and rabbit-proof fences are not used in this district


Well-sinking costs Gs. to 7s, per foot without timber, 15s. to 20s. with
bricks or slabs. Excavating for tanks is about Is. per cubic yard. There is
very little of either well or tank making in this district, as it is well watered
by creeks and springs.
The nature of the transport is very variable, the country being for the
most part hilly ; the roads, both hard and soft, on the whole are fairly good.
Dairying is the most profitable industry, and is making rapid development.
There are several large butter factories, notably one at Byron Bay, and there
are good facilities both by road, rail, and boat for carrying cream. There is
a butter factory in every town.
The winters are mild, and hand-feeding is very seldom necessary.-
Improved lands carry one beast to the acre.
Hay Land Board District.
Includes Hay, Carrathool, Narrandera, Baredan, Cargellico, Hillston, Gunbar, Booligal,
Moulamein, Barrata, Moira, Hcniiiquin, Conargo.
This district, embracing the south-western and southern portion of the
Central Division, is principally occupied as grazing country, Barellan,
Yanco, Narrandera, Deniliquin, Moama, and Barham being the chief
agricultural centres. What cultivation there is is principally wheat, either
for grain or for hay, for which soil and climate are admirably suited, the
only drawback being the comparatively low rainfall, 12 to 18 inches, and
the danger of droughts. Other cereals do well where they have been
tried, and excellent malting barley is obtainable. M arm climate fruits
all thrive to perfection, and good crops are always assured o! citrus fruits,
peaches, apricots, grapes, figs, and passion-fruit, provided a sufficiency of water
is assured, either naturally or by in igatien. The Yanco and Mirrool Irrigation
Areas are becoming important cultivated districts.
The country is for the most jiart fiat, with a few sand-hills. Towards
Narrandera and in the northern portion of the district, in the neighbourhood
of Hillston and Conapaira, the country is more rocky and hilly in nature.
The soil varies from black and grey stiff clays to reddish sandy loams.
In the Jerilderie district the country north of the Biilabong Creek is a
heavy reddish soil, with the exception of the boree country, not very suitable
for agriculture, whilst the better class farming land is found south of the
creek, where the soil is of a better nature.
To the north of the Murrumbidgee at Narrandera are ranges of conglomerate
rock, with level country, whilst open plain country predominates south of the
river. In the Narrandera district south of the Murrumbidgee red and grey
soil plains predominate. The country is for the most part open plain,
sparsely timbered, except in the neighbourhood of Narrandera and towards
Hillston, where it is heavily timbered. The principal timbers are pine and
box, with red gum near the rivers, oak, yarran, and myall (mallee in the
Narrandera and Hillston districts).
The climate is exceedingly healthy, with a mr an summer temperature of
about 75 deg. Fahr., and a mean winter temperature of 49 deg. Fahr. Hot dry
winds are prevalent in the summer, and the south and south-west winds in
winter are frequently very cold. The extreme temperatures recorded are
122 for summer and 28 for winter.
The grasses are of a nutritious kind, and in good years produce as good
grazing as is to be found in the Slate. Batley grass is said to be the best
winter grass. It is a peculiarity of this grass that its nutritive properties


vary in different districts. Other good herbages are spear gras«, white-top,
crowfoot (this suffers in hot weather), trefoil, clover, and saltbush.
Timber for fencing is very scarce in the Hay district. Generally
speaking, box, gum, and pine are the best timbers for posts. Tor rails
timber "is not used in this district. Pine is immune from white ant.
Clearing is generally done by rinsharking, and burning off after four or
five years.
Timber for fencing posts costs £3 to £4 per 100 in the Hay district,
whereas near Gunbar and Hillston the cost is about 30s. per 100.
The cost of clearing varies a good deal ; roughly it averages 4s. 6d. per acre
for o-razing to 10s. for the plough, running to as high as 40s. per acre in the
Karrandera district in the case of green timber. This includes ringing,
scrubbing, picking-up and burning-off.
The cost of fencing is—for sheep-proof fence, £25 to £3O per mile ; for
rabbit-proof fencing, £GO to £BO. Post and rail fences are not used.
The cost of well-sinking is about 20s. per foot up to 100 feet, including
timbering and centering. There are few wells sunk in the district, water
being chiefly obtained by boring. The cost of sinking a 4-inch bore with
tank and windmill would be about £l5O. Permanent water is generally
found at a depth of from 80 to 120 feet.
It is a sound, healthy district for sheep, there being practically no disease.
Rabbits are well in hand, and the country carries on the average about a
sheep to 24 acres.
There is good railway communication both with Sydney and Melbourne in
the eastern and central parts of the district. The Moama to Deuiliquin
Railway connects the southern portion of the district with Melbourne. The
northern part (Hillston district) is without railway communication. The
coat of transportation is about Is. per ton per mile, the roads being good
natural roads, level, hard, and dry in the dry weather, soft and often
exceedingly heavy when wet.
The Crown lands in the district are mostly leased under improvement and
scrub-clearing conditions, or reserved for specific purposes, the Murray red
gum forests being a profitable asset of this State.
Kempsey Land Board District.
Comprises CofFs Harbour, Bellingen, Dorrigo, Kambucca, Bowra, Trial Bay, Kempsey,
Port Macquarie, Camden Haven, and the Bellinger, Macleay, and Hastings
Rivera.
The country is generally hilly to mountainous, with alluvial flats on the
Hastings, Macleay, and Bellinger Rivers and their tributaries. In the
southern portion of the district the soil is for the most part of a rather poor
nature, the country consisting of gravelly ridges, with patches of shallow
dark loam with a yellow- clay subsoil.
The ridges leading to the Comboyne carry a dark loam, with quartz-gravel
in places. On the Comboyne itself there is a great deal of deep, red,
volcanic soil from 20 to 30 feet deep, and the country is fairly level to
undulating tableland, well watered, and heavily timbered, carrying a softwood
scrub.
. The Comboyne is not as high as the Donigo plateau, and the climate is
milder.


On the Hastings River there is a good deal of alluvial soil, a lot of it
consisting of rather sour tea-tree flats. The bulk of the country is hilly
in nature, with a rather shallow black to chocolate loam on the surface. The
best of the land along this river is alienated : large areas arc ringed and held
as grazing leases.
Between the Hastings and Macleay the country is hilly, with gravelly
ridges carrying a sandy loam to black loamy soil. The best of the country is
along the creek frontages, and is here also nearly all occupied.
The Macleay is an old settled district, and farms on the alluvial land are
worth from £3O to £35 per acre. There is not a great deal of Crown land
available. The soil on the ridges varies from stony country to a red or black
sandy loam with a clay subsoil. The alluvial land is sometimes of great
depth. The Upper Macleay is well watered. On the Lower Macleay salt
water is struck when sinking for wells.
North of the Macleay, the Nambueea district contains some splendid
agricultural land on the upper reaches of the Nambueea River. Settlement
is proceeding rapidly in this district, which is heavily timbered.
The soil on the river and creek frontages is a rich and deep chocolate to
datk loam. On the ridges, the soil is mostly a black loam with quartz out-
crops and a stiff subsoil. Settlement is extending in this district up to the
foot of the Dorrigo Mountains.
From the Nambueea to the Bellinger and Coffs Harbour the country is
all hilly. The Bellinger Valley is extremely rich land, and farms fetch up
to £4O per acre.
The Dorrigo country is mountainous, and very heavily timbered with soft
woods.
The soil varies from red volcanic soil to black alluvial, with sandy patches.
The country is very well watered.
To the north of Bellingen, towards Goff's Harbour, there is some splendid
land; the country is heavily timbered, the soil volcanic, chocolate to red,
with alluvial flats.
The climate over the whole district is mild, the summers not too hot, and
the winters short. On the Comboyne (1,500 feet) and Dorrigo (3,000 feet)
plateaux the climate is colder.
The mean annual temperature for the district is about 66 deg, Fahr., with
a summer average of 73 degrees to 74 degrees, and a winter average of 561-
degrees.
The mean annual rainfall is about 54 inches in the northern portion of the
district, and 59 inches in the southern part, February and March being the
wettest months.
The district is rapidly developing as a dairying country ; grasses of all
kinds do well, paspalum especially. All English fruits do well, while
potatoes and turnips are particularly good crops. Generally, the fanning
-carried on is dairying, pigs, maize, lucerne, potatoes, and grazing.
It is one of the most heavily timbered and best watered districts in the State.
Enormous forests of both soft and hard wood timbers are still to be found.
Some of the best milling timbers are found in the Dorrigo, including pine, beech,
cedar (somewhat rare), tulip, sassafras, and rosewood. Of the hardwoods, iron-
bark, blackbutt, tallow, grey, blue, and spotted gum, box, red and black oaks,
and mahogany are amongst the valuable timbers represented in the district.
Of the grasses—blady grass, blue grass, couch, and kangaroo are among
the chief natural grasses, but introduce 1 grasses are replacing them, among
the best being paspalum, rye, foxtail, prairie, clover, &c.


Fencing material is abundant, except in the flat county. For posts, the
best timbers are bloodwood, tallow-wood, and gum ; and for rails, ironbark,
blackbutt, and mahogany.
Sometimes the butts of posts are charred as a protection against white
ant.
The cost of post and rail fence is from £v2 to £74 per mile, according to
the number of rails. Four-wire cattle fencing costs £32-£4O. Sheep-proof
fencing (6-wire), from £37 to £45 per mile ; and rabbit fencing, 3-wire and
netting, £7O up to £BO per mile.
The cost of well-sinking runs from 10s. to 20s. per foot with timbering.
The best timber to use is mahogany, as it is very durable and does not
discolour the water.
The cost of excavating for tanks is from Is. 6d. to 2s. 6d. per cubic yard.
The transport is for the most part hilly, and over good hard reads.
The natural water supply is very good.
Maitland Land Board District.
Includes Maitland, Singleton, Muswellbrook, Scone, Merriwa, Wingen, Gloucester,
Camden Haven, Tarce, Stroud, Raymond Terrace, Morpeth, Cessnock, Newcastle,.
Wyong, Gosford, Wollombi.
The district embraces the coast line from Broken Bay to Camden Haven
and stretches inland westwards along the Hunter and Manning Hirers. It
includes a very considerable variety of country and all classes of soils. The
land varies from river flats to undulating and hilly country, the latter with
a general easterly slope towards the coast. The geological formation is, for
the most part, Carboniferous or Permo-Carboniferous, and includes the New-
castle coal measures. There are frequent outcrops of granite and basalt, and
occasional patches of limestone. The district is well watered by the Hunter
and Manning Hi vers and their tributaries, and the river flats of the former
are among the most fertile soils in the State. On the ridges the soil varies
considerably in character, including nearly all types, from sandy or gravelly
loam to heavy clay. Towards Wollombi the soils become poorer and more
sandy in character. The climate is mild, having a mean summer temperature
of about 74 deg. Fahr. and a winter mean of about 53 deg. Fahr. The nights
in summer are usually cool, and in winter cold and frosty. The mean
annual rainfall is 38| inches, distributed fairly evenly throughout the year.
The water supply is fair, and water is generally readily and cheaply stored.
The country is very suitable for dams or tanks.
It is practically free from rabbits. A great variety of farming is carried
on, and the district is suitable for almost every kind of cultivation. The
principal crops are lucerne, maize, sorghum, millets, grapes, oranges, peaches,
passion-fruit, and all kinds of vegetables. Wheat is grown principally in
County Brisbane, in the western part of the district. Dairying is carried on
extensively in all parts of the district, and there are several large butter
factories in operation.
This is one of the finest wine-growing districts of the State ; and the Hunter
River wines have a deservedly high popularity. The principal vineyards are
in the Pokolbin Range, County Northumberland, in which about 2,000 acres
of the 5,000 odd acres of wine grapes of the whole State are situated.
On the Hunter River flats is grown about one-third of the total lucerne-
produced in the State.


la the country towards Wollombi little but grazing is carried on. The
whole of the district is good fattening country.
The Hunter River flats are extremely fertile, and being subject to floods,
their fertility is constantly renewed by the rich deposits left by the inundations.
A great variety of timber is met with, including some of the best hardwood
timbers of the State. Among the trees reported are ironbark, tallow-wood,
spotted gum, cedar (?), rosewood, red and blue gum, bloodwood, turpentine,
pine, box, mahogany, blaekbutt, stringybark, apple, oak, itc.
The cost of clearing varies very considerably, and no very accurate data
are available. Ringbarking alone costs from 10s. per acre ; ringbarking,
falling, and scrubbing for pastoral occupation, from 10s. to £l. The usual
practice is to fell and burn off stumps when sufficiently decayed. Grubbing
is not much practised in this district.
To clear the land for the plough costs, according to the nature of the
timber, from £5 to £l5 per acre. In heavily-timbered country it may go as
high as £3O per acre. When heavy, the value of the timber will often
repay the cost of clearing. Fencing material is abundant. For posts, the
woods most in favour are ironbark, bloodwood, box, turpentine, and grey
and red gums. For rails, stringybark, ironbark, blackwood, tallow-wood, and
flooded gum. White ant is not prevalent in the district. Turpentine timber
is practically immune from its attacks.
The cost of a post and 2-rail fence—64o posts to the mile—is from £45
to £7O per mile.
Cattle fence—4-wire (No. 8), with 640 posts to the mile—from £2B to
£5O per mile.
Sheep-proof fence—7-wire (No. 8), with 528 posts to the mile with
droppers—cost from £32 to £5O per mile.
Rabbit-proof fence 6-wire (No. 8) with netting, 440 posts to the mile,
and droppers—costs £75 to £lOO per mile. Rabbits are not plentiful.
The cost of excavating dams is from Is. to 2s, per yard, the lower price
being for deeper dams. For wells, including timbering, the cost is about £1
per foot, the price varying according to the depth.
It is not easy to speak of the nature of transport as the country varies so
very much. In the Maitland, Dungog, and Paterson districts the roads are
generally good, often soft and swampy oft' the main tracks, and rough, but
hard, at the heads of rivers. Towards the coast they are good and level.
On the whole, the roads are fairly hard and good. Most of the available
land in the district is alienated.
Moree Land Board District.
Includes Moree, Warialda, Bingara, Narrabri, Pilliga, Wee Waa, Corinda, Walgett.
Very little farming is done in this district, which is at present almost
entirely devoted to sheep-breeding. The railway communication is the line
from Narrabri to Burren Junction, with branches, thence to Walgett and
Collarendebri; and the main line from Sydney via Narrabri, through to
Moree with branches, thence to Inverell and Mungindi.
The rainfall varies in different parts of the district, the western portion
being the driest with an average annual rainfall of about 20 inches, whilst in
the eastern (Warialda) district it is about 29 inches. Most of the rain falls
during the summer months, January to March.


The temperature is fairly constant over the district, the mean for the year
being about 63 deg. Fahr., with a mean temperature in summer of 80 degrees,
and in winter of about 52 deg. Fahr.
From these figures it will be seen that the climate is hot in summer and
mild in winter. Generally speaking it is hot and dry, but healthy both for
human beings and stock. In the more elevated regions about Warialda and
Bingara the nights are almost always cool.
The Warialda district includes flat country and rolling downs to hilly.
The hilly country lies chiefly in the eastern portion of the district, and is
principally basalt. In the centre are undulating downs merging into black
soil plains in the west of the district. In the plain country are numerous
sandy ridges where the soil is not so good, but for the most part the soil on
the plains is first-class, and carries heavy belts of belar and brigalow.
A considerable amount of wheat is grown about Warialda, and from 16 to
20 bushel crops are obtainable. Very little other farming is done, except in
the vicinity of the railway, as the '••aut of easy communication prevents
cultivation, except for home use. A dttle maize and lucerne is grown along
the rivers.
The Bingara district (county Murchison) is more hilly, and even mountainous
in character, and the general contour of the country is hilly to undulating,
with level to undulating areas along the Gwydir, Horton, and other water-
courses. The soil is principally red to chocolate, with black soil on the plains.
On the hills it is more or less stony in character. Sheep and cattle fatten on
the flats, but the country is used more for breeding and wool-growing than
for fattening. What farming there is is mostly mixed, sheep, cattle, wheat
and a little maize.
In the Narrabri district the spurs of the Ifanclewar Canges render the
eastern portion hilly to mountainous, the rest of the district being mostly
level plains in the western portion and level to undulating in the centre.
The plain country north of the hTamoi River and in the western part of the
district is black soil. In the Pilliga scrub country red soil predominates, a
good deal of which is sandy in character with patches of grey or black soil.
On the foothills in the eastern part good loamy soil is found. East of Woe
Waa some mixed farming is carried on, sheep, wheat, dairying, fruit, and
vines, the black-soil plains being almost exclusively devoted to sheep.
In the Moree and Walgett districts (west and north of the Land Board
District) there is some hilly to undulating country south of Moree, the
remainder being plain country with heavy black soil in the north and west,
and red and chocolate in the south. On the hills the land is more stony.
Good wheat and hay is grown in this district in small quantities, especially
in the eastern portion, also citrus and summer fruit, but the country is
practically given over to sheep farming. The living area for closer pastoral
settlement is calculated at 3,000 to 5,000 acres.
In the Warialda district, box, ironbark, and pine are the principal timbers
with apple, myall, wilga, and thick belts of belar and brigalow.
In the ISTarrabri district the hilly country to the cast and the Pilliga
scrub carry box, pine, ironbark, belar, bloodwood, and rosewood, with
coolibah, box, and belar on the plains.
Box, ironbark, with coolibah, belar, brigalow, pine, wilga, and rosewood,
are the principal timbers in the Moree and Walgett districts. Most of the
timber in the district is stunted, only a small percentage being good for
commercial purposes.


The grass in the black-soil country is good and fattening, generally poor in
the timbered country until ringbarked, when it is good. The principal
grasses are blue, Mitchell, kangaroo, star, coolah, and wire, besides which
there are many nutritious and fattening herbages during the winter months.
With regard to the cost of clearing, the following information is supplied.
In the Warialda district the cost for dead timber is 10s. to 20s. per acre ;
for green timber, £2 10s. to £i. Yankee grubbing is sometimes practised
for green timber at a cost of £1 10s, per acre.
Ringbarking only can bo done for Is. per acre in the case of box and
ironbark, rising to Is. per acre for belar and brigalow.
Firing can be done cheaply and easily, and without danger. All the
timbers burn easily except bloodwood.
Fencing material is plentiful, except in the open plains, and from fair to
good in quality.
Ironbark, box, belar, coolabah, and pine arc the best timbers for posts.
White ants are not troublesome in this district if split posts are used.
Round posts with hollow centres or small hollow's are readily attacked. The
holes through which the wires of fences pass through the posts, are frequently
attacked, and the excrement deposited by the white ant, when damp, tends
to rust the wires.
Post and rail fences are not used, and cattle-proof fences are not common.
The cost for a three-wire cattle-fence would be from £24 to £26 per mile.
Sheep-proof fence (six-wire) costs about £36 to £4O, and rabbit-proof fencing,
42-inch netting with three wares in netting and one barhed wire, from £BO
to £lOO per mile, the cost varying according to distance of cartage, and the
facility of obtaining suitable timber.
Well-sinking, including timbering, varies in cost from 10s. to 20s. per foot
according to the depth. The cost of excavating for tanks runs from lOd. to
Is. 3d. per cubic yard. Excavating for drains costs from £lO to £3O a mile
if ploughs and delvers are used.
The cost of transport by team in the Bingara district is Is. per ton per
mile for long distances.
The roads in the Moree and Walgett districts, and generally in the flat
country, are fairly hard and good when dry, but bad in wet weather, and
sometimes impassable. In the eastern part the roads are better, and
in the ridges often hard and stony'. The main roads in the hilly country are
metalled.
There is very little land available for settlement in this district except of
inferior quality. The extension of the railway would encourage the increase
of cultivation, as there are extensive areas of rich country in all parts of the
district suitable for cereals ; and wheat, corn, oats, and lucerne, all give good
results when cultivated.
There is a great deal of land infested by the prickly pear.
The price of land in the Warialda district is from £2 to £3 per acre on a
freehold basis for conditional purchase. Land for settlement lease is from
10s. to 35s- per acre, carrying rentals of from IJd. to sd. an acre.
For agricultural land in the Bingara district £4 and upwards per acre is
paid on a freehold basis, and for mixed lands £2 10s. to £3 10s. The aver-
age carrying capacity of the country is 1 sheep to 2 acres in the Moree
district, and 1 sheep to 2|- acres in the Walgett district.
In the Narrabri district the neighbourhood of Narrabri itself is the most
■suitable for the man with limited capital, both because of the proximity to
market and because water can generally be obtained in shallow w T ells.


EXPLANATION.
1. North Coast
2. Hunter and Manning
3. Metropolitan
4. South Coast
5. Northern Table-land
6. Central Table-1 and
7. Southern Table-land
8. North Western Slope
9. Central Western Slope
10. South Western Slope
11. North Western Plain
12 Central Western Plain
13. Riverina
14. Western Division


In the western part of the district water is conserved in tanks or obtained
from artesian boros. There is little surface water except along- the Namoi,
the frontage of which is alienated. The black soil should grow good wheat.
The herbage makes excellent silage.
Orange Land Board District.
Includes Orange, Bathurst, Molong, Wellington, Mudgee, Cassilis, Eylstone, Sofala,
Wallorawang, Mount Victoria, Katoomba, liyclal, Oberon, Burraga, Cowra, Kooro-
watha, Canowindra, Cargo, Manildra, Portland, Candos, Turnkey, Tuena, Carcoar,
Roekley, Blackheath, Medlow, Wentworth Falls.
The district is well watered by the Macquarie River and its tributaries,
and is fairly well served with railways. The main western line passes
through the centre of the district, and the Blayney-Hardeii line through'the
south-western portion, wdiile the Molong-Forbes line connects the western
part with the main line. An extension from Cowra to Canowindra is now-
completed, which will open up further agricultural land in tin- south-western
corner, also from Gulgong to Dubho.
Bathurst lies in the centre of an undulating plain, and there is a good
deal of level country south and west of the Canoblas Range from Molong
to the south-west limit of the district.
The remainder is from undulating to hilly and mountainous. Near the
extreme east lies the great dividing range, stretching northwards through
counties Bligh and Phillip. The south-eastern corner is also mountainous,
and in the western portion are the Canoblas Ranges and the hills about
Blayney.
The climate may be classed as temperate over the whole district, being
mild in summer and cold in winter, when snow is not unusual, especially- on
the Great Dividing Range, the highest point of which in this district is about
1,000 feet.
The average summer temperature is about 70 degrees Fahr., with a winter
average of about 41 degrees Fahr., the average for the whole year being
between 50 degrees and 58 degrees Fahr. The annual rainfall is about 3Fl-
inches, w-hich is very evenly distributed over the twelve months.
The country in the neighbourhood of Orange and Millthorpe is undulating
to hilly and rough, the formation being largely granitic and basaltic. The soils
in this neighbourhood are, on the w-hole, fairly rich red and chocolate loams, of
a rather heavy type, with black soil in the valleys. Mixed farming is carried
on, principally cattle, sheep, pigs, wheat, fruit (chiefly apples, cherries, grapes,
&c.), potatoes, and dairying. Marble quarries exist at Borenore.
East from Orange and towards Lewis Ponds and Ophir the land becomes
more stony and shingly on the hills, with black soil in the valleys. The
principal farming here is sheep and potatoes.
Tow-ards Wellington the country is more broken with ridges and valleys,
especially about the Macquarie and its tributaries. A good deal of w-heat
cultivation is carried on here. The soil is very variable, changing from
good rich basalt soils to poor sandy soils. Slate and dioritic marble are to be
found near Mullion.
Round Molong the country becomes more open, and varies from undulating
to fairly level country. Works are being established for limestone. To the
south and south-west of Molong the country varies from flat to hilly, with


rich, red, volcanic soil on the flats, and black soil in the valleys. On the
high hills the land is generally poor, stony, and scrubby. There is plenty
of very fertile soil in this part of the district, especially round Manildra,
Eugowra, and Canowindru. Promising shows of phosphate apatite are
Doing explored on Gambcola, near Molong.
In the south-western corner of the Land Board District the country ranges
from flat and undulating to hilly and mountainous, granite and basalt being
the principal soil forming rocks. In the lower portions the soils are fairly
rich to rich red and chocolate loams, with black soil in the valleys. The
principal crops here are sheep, wheat, maize, and oats. Lucerne does well,
and is cultivated on the flats along the Lachlan. Fruits, barley, vines, rye,
potatoes, and pumpkins are also cultivated in this district, and all do well.
Round Carcoar and along the Blayney line the country is hilly to moun-
tainous, chiefly slate formation, with ironstone and volcanic outcrops. On
the hills the soil is poor and stony, but the lower country carries considerable
areas of rich red or chocolate loam. Good black marble exists at Rockley.
Farming in this district is principally confined to sheep, wheat, fruit, and
potatoes. There is a good deal of first-class wheat-land about Lyndhurst and
Mandurama. About Forest Reef a considerable area of potatoes is grown.
About Bathurst the country varies from slaty ridges with granite to
undulating to flat and sometimes swampy. The soil varies from light, sandy
loam to stiff clay, with occasional pipeclay. The chief crops are potatoes,
wheat, oats, cauliflowers, and tobacco, with maize and lucerne on the river
flats. There are plenty of good orchards in this district, which is especially
suited to cool climate fruits, such as apples, pears, cherries, etc. Gooseberries,
cunant«, and similar fiuits also do well. The climate is too cold for grapes.
In the north-eastern portion of the district, including Mudgee and
Ryistone, there is a great deal of rough country on the ranges, with fertile
valleys merging into undulating and flat country. East of the Dividing
Range the country rock is sandstone; to the west, slate and basalt pre-
dominate. In county Bligh (in the northern part) basalt is the principal
soil-forming rock on the high land, the valley's having rich flats. There is also
a good deal of sandstone in this district. Round Mudgee itself the country
is hilly, with good fertile valleys. A little wine is made from grapes grown
about Mudgee. For the most part sheep are grazed in this district, with
some cattle and dairy-farming. On the flats, lucerne, maize, and wheat are
cultivated, and in the cooler parts oats, potatoes, and apples. Large cement
works exist at Portland, and others are being opened up at Candos.
Between this district and Bathurst there is a great deal of rough,
mountainous country, unsuitable for cultivation. There is little arable land
in this district, which includes Hill End and Sofala, where mining operations
are carried on.
The eastern portion of the Orange Land Board District includes the Blue
Mountains and its spurs. The country is principally sandstone, high, rough
to mountainous. The soil is poor and sandy', generally stony. Some fruit
is cultivated, but grazing is the principal occupation
In the south-east corner, including Burraga, Tuena, and Bigga, the land
is only fit for cultivation in patches, the greater portion being steep,
broken, and mountainous country, which is given over exclusively to sheep
grazing.


Timber is fairly plentiful over the most of the district. White, red, and
yellow box are represented throughout, and are generally indicative of the
better-class country. On the Dividing Range the typical Blue Mountain
timbers are found, viz. : —stringybark, peppermint, messmate, black ash,
mountain ash, blackbutt, apple, and white gum.
Over the rest of the district, in addition to red, white, and yellow box, the
most common trees are stringybark, apple, peppermint, ironbark, woolly butt,
red and white gum, with pine in the Mudgee, Cowra, and Mol on g districts.
The grasses are generally good on ringbarked coun'ry, and include
kangaroo, barley, and crowfoot. The herbage is generally stunted on the
hills but good in the lowlands, and very good in the improved country’.
The cost of clearing varies a good deal, according to the district. For
pastoral occupation, ringing, suckering, and scrubbing cost from 3s. to ss.
per acre. The cost is rather higher in the eastern and hilly districts, running
from about ss. per aero for white box up to Bs. p'-r acre for other timbers.
For cultivation, clearing dead timber runs from 15s. up to 30s. per acre,
for green timber from £2 to £3 ; generally dearer in the colder country, going
as high as £5 per acre.
Except in cleared country fencing material is plentiful. The best timbers
for posts are ironbark, red box, red gum, and stringybatk. White ants are
not troublesome. Post and rail fences are hardly used in the district. The
cost of post and split-rail fencing would be from £5O to £7O per mile.
The cost of a five-wire cattle-fence is about £23 to £25 per mile; for a six-
wire sheep-proof fence, £3O, and for a seven-wire fence, £35 per mile.
Rabbit-proof fencing costs £7O to £BO per mile. In the south-western
portion the price is given at £6O to £7O.
The cost of well-sinking varies from 3s per foot for the first 50 feet in
soft ground to 10s. or 12s, in hard ground. This price does not include
slabbing ; slab wells run from 20s. per foot upwards.
Excavating for tanks costs from 9d. to Is. 3d. per cubic yard. Neither
wells nor tanks are much used in this district as the country is generally well
watered.
The cost of transport is also very variable, the roads being in places very
steep. East of the Dividing Range the roads are sandy, but in nearly’ all the
country west of the range the roads are good and hard, with the exception
of the northern portion (County Bligh), where the roads are impassable in wet
weather unless metalled.
The cost of transport of wool and merchandise is stated to be 30s. per ton
in the Mudgee district (where the country is hilly).
There is not much available Crown land in the plain districts, and the
price of good land is very high, running up to £8 to £l5 per acre for the
best land. Land suitable for mixed farming fetches £4 to £7 per acre.
Lower priced land is poor and carries a sheep on from 2 to 12 acres.
Generally speaking, the following are the crops principally grown in the
different districts, or for which those districts are particularly suitable :
Orange: Apples and pears, cherries, and other cold country fruits, and
potatoes.
Potatoes are extensively cultivated about Millthorpe.
Carcoar; Sheep, wheat, fruit, and potatoes.
Cowra: Fruit, sheep, wheat, oats, and vines; lucerne, on the river-flats.
This district is well watered by the Lachlan and permanent creeks.
Molong : Mixed farming, sheep, wheat, oats, fruit, and vines ; lucerne on flats.
There is plenty of first-class wheat land around Eugowra and Canowindra.


Sydney (Metropolitan) Land Board District.
Includes the coast from Broken Bay to Bateman’s Bay, with the townships and districts
of Windsor, Richmond, Penrith, Parramatta, Picton, Wollongong, Kiama, Nowra,
Milton, and Ulladulla.
This district includes a considerable stretch of the coast south of Broken
Bay, and the country to the east of the Main Dividing Range. The
formation is for the most part derived from the Hawkesbury sandstone and
Wianamatta shale formations, with granite and basic outcrops. The soil
embraces almost every type represented in the State, from sandy soils to
heavy clays derived from slate and basalt, with alluvial Hats upon the rivers.
The climate is temperate and the rainfall good. The latter may be given as
30 inches annually on the average. Being the oldest settled district in the
State, the land is all taken up. Any Crown land still available is unsuitable
for agriculture.
The farming carried on is chiefly dairying, fruit-culture (especially citrus
fruits in the Parramatta and Metropolitan districts), poultry, market-
gardening, and the ordinary cereal fodder plants and roots.
There is a fair amount of timber in the district, and representatives of
most of the best Australian hardwoods are still to be found. Clearing and
grubbing may be put down at £1 to =£l6 per acre, the cost varying with the
locality and the timber. For grazing, ringbarking, felling, and cleaning up
the cost would be from 12s. 6d. to 30s. per acre.
Timber for fencing is still fairly abundant in the coastal districts, except
about lllawarra.
For posts ; Red and grey gum, ironbark, box, turpentine, mahogany,
bloodwood, peppermint, and redwood are all used.
For rails the best timbers are blackbutt, grey gum, stringybark, and
red gum.
Turpentine is rarely attacked by white ant, which is prevalent in the
district.
Post and rail fences, two-rail, 610 posts to the mile, can be erected for from
£5O to £75 per mile.
Four-wire (No. 8) cattle fence, 610 posts to the mile, costs £-13 to £6O ;
and seven-wire sheep-proof fence, No. 8 wire, 528 posts to the mile, with
droppers, will cost £5O to £7O per mile.
For rabbit-proof fencing, six-wire, with 12-inch netting, 110 posts to the
mile, and droppers, the cost would be from £75 to £9O per mile.
Well-sinking in alluvial costs from 10s. to 20s. per foot, and excavating for
tanks from Is. 6d. to 3s. per cubic yard.
The prices are necessarily approximate, as the conditions of settlement and
trade vary in this district very much, as will be realised by contrasting
Central Cumberland with such places as Putty, Hawkesbury T River, Burra-
gorang, and the lower South Coast.
The transport varies considerably from level to hilly and mountainous,
with roads both hard and soft.
The district, both on account of its nature and its proximity to market, is
better adapted to mixed farming, such as dairying, fruit-growing, poultry-
raising, bee-keeping, market-gardening,pig-keeping, &c., rather than toonecrop.


Tamworth Land Board District.
Includes Tamworth, Manilla, Barraha, Nundle, Werris Creek, Quirindi, Bindella,
Tambar S]rriags, Coonabarabran, Barradine, Ctunnedab, and Boggabri.
The district may be conveniently divided into three divisions for the
purpose of description ; The eastern portion, east and west of a line through
Barraha, Manilla, Tamworth, Murrurundi ; the western division, with
Coonabarabran as the centre; and the central or Gunnedah division.
The climate of this district is generally temperate, fairly warm in summer,
with occasional frosts in winter'. The coldest parts of the district are the
ranges to the west of Coonabarabran, with an altitude of 4,000 feet.
The mean annual temperature varies between 57 degrees and 64 degrees
Fahr., according to the locality. "With the same reservation, the mean summer
temperature is from 68 degrees to 78 degrees Fahr., and the winter from 46
degrees to 50 degrees Fahr. The average annual rainfall is about 27 inches,
being fairly evenly distributed. July, August, and September are the
driest months.
The country round Tamworth, and in the eastern division, is undulating
to steep, being composed chiefly of slate, conglomerate, granite, and sandstone.
In the centre of this district, and towards the west and south of Tamworth,
the country may he described as undulating to flat, with slate, basalt, and
sandstone.
The soil varies over the area from chocolate and reddish soil on the hills
to black soil on the plains, and light sandy loam in the scrubs.
Some limestone occurs in the neighbourhood of Tamworth.
In the western portion of the district, with Coonabarabran as the centre,
the country varies from rough and mountainous in the centre (the Warram-
bungle Ranges are from 3,000 to 4,000 feet high), with a reddish sandy loam
on the ridges, interspersed with a good many patches of raw sand, to the
black-soil plains on east and west.
The country lying between the above divisions, and in the centre of the
Land Bear'd District from Boggabri on the north, and stretching southward
through Gunnedah and Bundella, is for the most part black soil plain country.
This portion is bounded on the north-east by the Kandewar Range, in the
neighbourhood of which the prevalent soil is of a reddish or chocolate
coloured sandy loam.
All classes of farming are carried on. Wheat is the principal crop in the
neighbourhood of Tamworth. Manilla, Quirindi, Gunnedah, and the eastern
portion of the district. Lucerne is grown extensively in county Parry.
In this district (the south-east portion of the Land Board district), maize
and barley are also extensively cultivated. The barley is particularly good
for malting purposes. Tobacco is extensively cultivated near Tamworth and
Manilla.
Wheat is also extensively grown in the Gunnedah district.
Round Tamworth, Quirindi, and Manilla there is some dairying, and
butter factories have been established at Gunnedah, Tamworth, and Quirindi,
which promise to become important dairying districts.
In the western portion of the district mixed farming is carried on over
the greater part of the area. The black soil plains are chiefly devoted to
wool and fattening, the natural grasses being good fattening grasses. Wheat
and maize are cultivated, but only to a limited extent. Lucerne is grown in
small areas, and fruit is successful wherever it has been tried.


These crops are only grown for local requirements, as the distance from
the railway is against crop production on any extensive scale.
There are at present considerable areas under cultivation with a 25-inch
rainfall, which is the lowest in the district, the average being 27 inches.
Yields are invariably good, and absolute failure of crops is unknown. The
only points at present accessible by railway are Gilgandra, Gulargambone
and Merrygoen.
Generally speaking, water is obtainable by sinking in the Tamwcrth
district, at depths of from 20 to 150 feet. In the Gimnedah district it is
stated to be found at an average depth of 80 feet. The cost of well-sinking
is about 10s. to £1 per foot. Boring plants are coming into use in the
Coonabarabran district at a cost of from 7s, Cd. to 10s. per foot. The cost of
excavating tanks runs from Bd, per cubic yard for large tanks to Is. for
smaller ones. The cost is somewhat higher in the hilly country than on the
plains.
There is plenty of timber in the district, especially on the ridges, and a
great variety of timber is represented. In the eastern portion box, apple,
red gum, stringybark, peppermint, yellow jacket, and a little pine and iron-
bark are the principal timbers.
In the Coonabarabran district, box, pine, gum, apple, ironbark, blood-
wood, yellow' jacket and peppermint, with ironbark on the ridges are
obtainable.
The black soil plains about Gunnedah originally carried nival!, which is
now dead ; the balance of the flat country is principally pine, box, and scrub,
such as belah, etc., with ironbark and gum on the sandy country.
Clearing costs from 10s. to 15s. per acre in old dead box country ; and from
20s. to 255. in recently dead timber. In green country clearing costs from
£2 to £5 per acre, according to the timber. Eingbarking costs from Is.
to ss. -per acre. In nearly all cases the country is ringberked some time
before clearing. In the Gunnedah and Quirindi districts traction engines
have been tried and found to be a cheap and effective means of pulling
down both dry and green timber.
The supply of fencing material is generally fair. In the eastern part of
the district it is becoming somewhat scarce. There are hardly any post and
rail fences except in paddocks about dwellings. Ironbark, bloodwood, and box
are the best for pests, and are not attacked by white ant in this district.
Belah may be used for rails, hut is no good for posts.
Cattle and sheep proof fences (six-wire) cost about £36 to £42 per mile ;
rabbit-proof fencing from £65 to £B5. Rabbits are prevalent throughout
the central and western portions of the district.
Transport is fairly good over the whole district. The main roads are good,
and transportation is easy, except in the mountainous country and in wet
weather on the black soil plains, which are impassable when wet. The
gradients are not steep, and the roads are for the most part fairly hard.
Wagga Land Board District.
This district includes the Riverina, and is bounded on the south by the Murray. It
includes Young, Temora, Cootainundra, Junee, Gundagai, Tumnt, Tumberumba,
Albury, Corowa, Berrigan, Findley, Jerilderie, Uraua, and Wagga.
Wagga Land District. —This district includes a variety of country,
from the mountainous country on the Great Dividing Range in the eastern
part to the plrin country in the west, watered by the Murray River and
creeks such as the Billabong and Yanco,


About Wagga itself, and in the portion to the north and north-east,
including Junee, Temora, and Young, the country is fairly uniform, being for
the most part gently undulating, with ranges, hills, and stony ridges, but no
mountains. About 80 per cent, of this country is level to undulating, and
can be profitably cultivated. The remainder is fair grazing country.
The soil over the greater part is a rod clayey loam, wdth a deep clay
subsoil. In the western portion there is a good deal of black still' “ puggy ”
soil.
Wheat-growing is very successful in the district, and constitutes the
principal crop. Sorghum, rape, lucerne, and fruit are also successfully
cultivated.
The climate is hot and dry in the summer, with cold and bracing winters.
Frosts are frequent. The average summer temperature is about 72 deg.
Fahr., the winter average being about 47 degrees. The average annual rainfall
is about 2G inches, and is very evenly distributed throughout the year.
The chief timbers are white and yellow box with white pine, ironbark,
stringybark, and kurrajong. On the flats, red gum and apple are the princi-
pal timbers. The hills are mostly lightly timbered with stringybark, iron-
bark, stunted gum, red box, sheoak, and black pine.
The grasses are good. The principal native growths are corkscrew, umbrella
grass, and geranium. Barley grass and trefoil are also plentiful. Dandelion is
spreading.
The co,-t of clearing for agricultural purnoses varies considerably ; from
lbs. an acre for timber which has been dead for five years, down to 10s., or
even less in the case of timber dead for twenty years. For grazing,
the cost is less than half the above.
In the case of green timber, clearing for the plough will cost 30s. per
acre. The usual procedure is to ringbark and sucker till dead, and
then burn out the dead timber. Box burns most easily of any of the timbers,
and burns itself right out if a hole is dug round the trunk and a fire lighted.
Yankee grubbing is also practised occasionally.
Timber for fencing is fairly plentiful in places, but is being rapidly
denuded and is becoming scarce in the agricultural districts.
For posts, white pine, red gum, box, and ironbark are the best timbers.
White pine is the only wood that is immune from the attacks of the white
ant, which is prevalent in the district. Ho special precautions are taken
against it.
Post and rail fences are not used in this district. The cost of a four-wire
cattle fence (two wires barbed) is about £4O per mile, of a six-wire sheep-
proof fence about £3l, and of a five-wire rabbit-proof fence, with 42-inch
netting, about £6B to £72 per mile.
The cost of well-sinking is about 12s. to 15s. per foot up to 50 feet. For
deeper wells the cost is greater. For the Wagga Stock District the cost is
given at 20s. Tanks up to 2,000 cubic yards capacity cost from Bd. to 9d. per
cubic yard ; for very large tanks the cost may be as low as 7d.
With the exception of the south-east part of the Wagga Stock District,
where some hilly country is met with, the transport is good and easy, the
soil being firm and fairly hard, except on the flat®, where the roads are wet
and sticky in wintei.


The whole of the country is good for fruit-growing and general agriculture,
the soil being strong and rich. The country is healthy for stock of all kinds.
The Tirana District is for the most part level country, with undulating
plains, and from light boree to box and pine country within the wheat belt.
About one-third of the area is good agricultural land, and the district is
well watered by creeks, such as the Billabong and others. The soil is for
the most part a heavy loam, and in parts a stiff clay of a rich nature,
which is good for agriculture, and grows fattening grasses.
The climate is good and temperate, though subject to dry spells, with an
average rainfall of about 18| inches, December to March being the driest
months. The average summer temperature is 75 degrees Balm,, and in
winter -18 degrees.
Wheat is successfully grown in the eastern and southern parts. A good
deal of cultivation is carried on about Lockhart. The western part of the
district is for the most part grazing country.
Box and pine are general over the whole district, with red gum along the
creeks.
The western part of the district is mostly plain country, with timber along
the creeks. The grasses are fairly fattening, and the country carries 1
sheep to 2 acres.
To clear dead timber for cultivation costs from 10s. to 15s. per acre;
and for grazing about 4s. per acre. These prices apply to box and pine.
The supply of timber for fencing is limited ; box and pine are used for
posts. The fencing is generally light in character, with fewer posts than is
usual in other parts of the district. Bor six-wire catile and sheep proof fence,
with posts 16 to 18 feet apart, and wooden or patent droppers, the cost is
about £2l per- mile.
Rabbit fences, with 12-foot panels, four-wire tom; barbed), and -12-inch
.netting, £65 to £6B per mile.
Well sinking, with timber, costs about 10s. per foot, and tanks about 8d
per cubic yard. 2s. Gd. per chain is paid for tank drains.
Generally speaking, the eastern part of the district is the richest and most
suitable for agriculture. The extension of the railway from Lockhart has
promoted agricultural settlement. In the western portion, with its much
lower rainfall, irrigation from the natural watercourses will be needed to
render agriculture remunerative.
Coroira Land District. —One quarter of this district is hilly, the rest
undulating. There are no creeks, but it is watered by the Murray. The soil
is a rich loam for the most part, in part heavy loam. On the low sand
hills there is sandy loam. It is mostly all good agricultural land.
The climate is warm in the western portion, being about the same as the
Urana district. Cold in winter. Rainfall about 20 inches.
Sheep farming and wheat growing are the principal agricultural operations.
A good deal of wine is made, and some of the principal vineyards in the
State are situated here. Orchards are also plentiful, and fruit does well. It
is a good agricultural district, especially suited for mixed farming. Lucerne
is grown for a considerable distance along the Murray frontage. The
principal timbers are grey and yellow box, gum, and pine, with red gum on
the Murray flats. The grasses are good ; trefoil is especially good. Barley
grass is plentiful but not much thought of in this district.


The cost of clearing dead timber for grazing is about 4s. per acre. For
the plough dead box costs about 17s. 6d. to 205., and dead pine about 20s.
per acre. With green timber no return can be expected for throe years,
and it would thus cost about 30s. per acre to bring it under cultivation. The
supply of fencing timber is only fair. For posts, grey box, red gum, and
pine are all good.
Cattle and sheep fence (six-wire), costs £32 to £35 per mile. Rabbit-proof
fencing, four-wire (one barbed) with 42-inch netting, costs £6B to £72 per
mile.
Well-sinking costs 10s. to 15s. per foot with limber. Tanks, Bd, to 9d.,
per cubic yard for excavating. Drains, 2s. 6d. per chain upwards.
For transport most of the district is level and firm, with good bottom in
wet weather.
It is now only watered by tanks. It is a good wheat district, but subject
to dry spells.
Alhury Land District. —About a quarter of this district is high land
and hilly, becoming mountainous in the eastern portion. It is fairly watered
by the Murray and by billabongs and other creeks. The balance is undu-
lating with fairly rich grazing and agricultural land. The sol! varies a
good deal, being derived from granite, slate, and basalt. There are also rich
alluvial flats along the rivers and creeks. The climate is temperate, very
healthy, and the rainfall is regular and assured, the aveiage being 22-24
inches. On the western side the rainfall is less certain, but absolute failure
of crops from drought is unknown.
This is an old settled district, wheat, and all cereals except maize are
grown successfully ; fruit, vines, and mixed farming are carried on, as well
as grazing.
There is a great variety of timber of good quality, the principal being box,
messmate, stringybark, peppermint, gum, and pine, with red gum on the
Murray.
Clearing for agricultural purposes costs about 15s. to 17s. 6d. per acre in
dead pine or box country.
For grazing, about 4s. to ss. for the above timbers, and from 7s. 6d. up to
10s. for other timbers, or in denser country.
In green timber clearing costs about 40s. to 455. per acre in ordinary
country, and up to £3 ss. in stringybark country.
The usual practice is to ringbark so as to kill slowly, keeping the suckers
down.
Fencing timber is still plentiful, but becoming limited around agricultural
centres.
For posts, red gum, yellow box, red box, and stringybark, are the best-
timbers.
White ants are very bad, but no precautions appear to be taken against them.
Cattle and sheep-proof fences (six-wire), with 9-foot panels, cost £34 per
mile ; rabbit-proof fencing from £6B to £72.
Well-sinking costs 15s. per foot timbered; tanks 9d. per cubic yard;
drains 3s. 6d. to ss. per chain.


The transport is generally good. It is a good district for mixed farming,
orchards, wine, grapes, and poultry; all do well. It is very healthy for stock,
and the market facilities are good.
Tumberumba Land District. —Half of this district is mountainous, the
other half hilly, with good rich river flats on the Murray. The soil varies
from very poor to rich, with patches of alluvial and a fair extent volcanic.
The climate is good. There is usually snow on the mountains in winter.
The mean annual temperature varies from 72 degrees in summer to 46
degrees in winter. Rainfall about 35 inches. Taking the mean average of
the whole district it is probably higher. Roughly it would range from 30
inches to 50 inches.
Dairying is in its infancy, but making good progress. The chief occupation
is sheep and cattle grazing, but the area is suitable for fruit, a] pics, roots,
cereals, pigs, and mixed farming.
The chief timbers are messmate, stringybark and gum, with mountain ash
on the hills. The timber is suitable for building and fencing. The flats carry
fattening grasses. Those on the hills are inferior.
Cost of clearing for grazing, ss. to 10s. per acre; cost of clearing green
timber for cultivation varies considerably, being from £2 to £lO per acre. The
timber takes some years to kill by ringing. The suckering is very strong,
often producing a dense scrub of suckers and seedlings. The ringing has,
therefore, to be done so that the timber is killed slowly, and then the existing
suckers and seedlings destroyed every year.
Timber for fencing is good. For posts stringy gum is mostly used away
from the Murray, and red gum on the Murray.
The cost of cattle fencing (six-wire and one barb) is about £4O per mile
(without clearing the line); of sheep-proof (six-wire, No. 8) about £36.
Rabbit fencing with 42-inch netting costs about £75 per mile.
Well-sinking costs 15s. p n r foot with timber.
Tank excavation about 9d. per cubic yard.
The country is hilly and mountainous, and the transport consequently hard,
though the roads are for the most pare fairly good. The absence of a railway
also adds to the difficulties of transport.
The district is well suited for mixed farming, and for intense culture.
Deciduous fruits and English grasses do well.
It is a favourite health resort.
Tumut and Grwndaqai Districts. —These include the country on the western
slopes of the Dividing Range, and comprise high mountainous country, steep
slopes, and narrow rich flats. There is good gently-undulating country under
the edge of the Dividing Range. The soils on the tableland are generally
rich red volcanic loams, with rocky outcrops and patches of limestone. On
the slopes the soil is generally poor and shallow. In the undulating country
the soil is generally a good friable to sandy loam, with rich black alluvial on
the river flats. On the mountains, the summers are cool, the winters cold.
The rainfall is fairly good and certain, and would roughly range from
24 inches to 50 inches. 35 inches is a fair rough average and is rather less
than that of Tumberumba district.
The principal crops on the flat country are maize and tobacco. There is a
good deal of mixed farming carried out throughout the district. Wheat, oats,
potatoes, and fruit all do well. There are a number of orchards about Batlow
(2,500 feet), on rich red volcanic soil. Dairying is making good progress
in the district. Sheep and cattle are grazed.


The timber on the mountains is generally tall, straight, and plentiful —
the principal trees being white and ribbon gum, messmate, stringybark, with
mountain ash, red gum, white and yellow box, apple, ironbaik, sheoak, &c.
Kangaroo, barley, and other native grasses do well all over the district.
Couch is plentiful along the river flats.
In the mountains the cost of clearing dead timber for the plough varies
considerably, £2 to £B, or even £lO per acre ; on the flats, from £2 to £3 ;
and on the undulating country, 20s. to 255. per acre ; clearing green timber
costs from £5 to £l5 as a general average, though there are parts such as,
Bago, &c., where it would cost more. For grazing, the average cost for dead
timber is 10s. to 15s.
Timber for fencing is generally plentiful throughout the district.
For posts, in the hilly country, messmate, stringybark, and gum are used.
The messmate and gum are not good in the ground.
On the undulating country and flats the chief timbers for posts are white
box, red gum and yellow box—all stand well. No precautions are employed
against the white ant.
Cattle and sheep fence (six-wire, one barbed) costs about £4O per mile ;
for rabbit-proof fencing (five-wire and 42-inch netting), £7O. Well sinking-
costs 12s. 6d. per foot ; tanks, 9d. per cubic yard. Tanks are not
greatly used, as the -water supply is good throughout the district. It is
fairly safe country, eminently adapted for mixed farming, and very healthy
for stock. The roads being generally hilly, transport is hard. The roads are
generally hard and fair, and many of them are metalled.
Western Division.
Including the country to the west of an irregular line through from Jlungindi through
Walgett, Coolabah, Euabalong, Booligal, Balranald, and extending to the Queensland,
South Australian, and Victorian borders.
The country is nearly all flat, chiefly open plains, with red sandy soil, or
black-soil plains along the -watercourses. There are the Barrier Ranges and
some undulating country in the western portion, and some low ranges of hills
to the east of Wilcannia; also north and west of this place. There are stony
ridges in the north of the district. The district is lightly timbered with
rather small trees. On the open plain country the red soil is very often
wind-swept, and the surface soil carried away by the strong westerly winds.
The only soil really suitable for agriculture would appear to be the greyish-
black alluvial flats, where yarran, pine, and box flourish. Yarran indicates a
soil of good depth, but cultivation without irrigation is not generally
practicable.
The climate is very hot and exceedingly dry. The mean summer tempera-
ture in the Bourke district is 80 degrees to 83 degrees, sometimes going as
high as 120 degrees. The winters are mild and occasionally cold, with an
average temperature of 52 degrees to 54 degrees Fahr.
The annual average rainfall varies from inches in the eastern portion
to as low as 10 in the western part. At Bourke and the eastern district
quite one-third of the 18£ inches falls during January, February, and March


It is essentially a pastoral district, and there is no cultivation except under
irrigation. A little wheat is grown (chiefly for hay), and vegetables are
grown by irrigation from the rivers. Round Nymagee wheat has been
grown for years, and lucerne in a very small way is being grown near Cobar.
But, on the whole, there is no prospect of cultivation becoming general for
many years, and until some scheme of irrigation is adopted which will enable
the country to be irrigated more cheaply than is at present possible.
The principal timbers are box, gum, pine, mulga, gidgea, wilga, yarran,
coolibah, kurrajong, leopard-wood, and white-wood.
Red gum and box are the chief timbers on the liver flats.
The grasses are wire grass, spear grass, barley grass, corkscrew, umbrella
grass, Mitchell, cockspur, kangaroo, blue grass, and mulga grass.
Many of the scrubs are edible.
There is no clearing to speak of in the district, consequently it is difficult
to obtain reliable information on the subject. Ringbarking costs from 9d.
to 2s. 6d. per acre, the cost varying according to the nature of the timber.
In the malice country in the southern part of the district, the initial
cost of killing the timber for grazing is said to be about 10s. per acre.
Timber for fencing is fairly plentiful and sufficient in the eastern part of the
Division, generally scanty elsewhere.
Mulga and gidgea are considered to be the best timber for posts. Belar,
box, piim, and beefwood are also good.
Post and rail fences are not used in the division, neither are cattle-proof
fences to any extent.
A six-wire fence would cost £25 per mile, and more if remote from rail
or riser.
Rabbit-proof fencing costs £65 to £75 per mile.
The cost of well-sinking averages 20s. up to 40s. per foot. For the first
50 feet, if no blasting is required, the cost is 15s. In Wilcannia, £1 per foot
is paid for the first 100 feet, 255. for the next 100, and so on.
Artesian bores cost 15s. per foot upwards according to depth.
Tank excavation costs Bd. to Is. 2d. per cubic yard. If through rock,
much more.
Transport is, on the whole, easy, the country being flat and the roads good
in dry weather. In some parts of this country, however, the roads are
heavy, being either deep sand or sandy hills. The heavy river flats are fairly
good in dry weather, but impassable when wet. Camels are used west of
the Darling for transport, as well as horses and bullocks.
Water is scarce all over the district, and the water from the bores is saline
or alkaline in character, and not suitable for irrigation by flooding.


Rainfall
AND
Temperature Table.
Particulars furnished by Mr. H.
A. Hunt,
Commonwealth Meteorologist.
■o +*
x: j-
%
<U c
O u
t, 9
Average Monthly Rainfall.
Extreme
temperatures.
Frosts.
District.
T3 >
’3 (3
?Z 4>
< s
5 S
£ S
c
CJ
rt
t
s?
a>
c
tc
a
.
>
0
d
Max.
Min.
Earliest
recorded.
Latest
recorded.
<
'•
<
3
in
O
K
Q
Albury
534
27-97
46
1-46
1-68
2-07
2-26
2-53
3-51
2-71
2-83
2-57
2-81
1-95
1-59
117-3
19-9
5 April ..
27 October.
Armidale
3265
32-32
47
3-62
3-45
2-98
2-01
1-77
2-67
1-98
2 02
2-23
2-75
3-33
3‘56
105-2
U-2
5 February
21 December.
Bannedman
788
18-58
23
1-53
1-35
1-54
1-66
1-35
2-06
1-56
1-49
1-70
3 -76
1-25
1-33
114-3
15‘5
27 April ..
26 September.
Bathurst
2155
23-39
51
2-49
2-20
2-02
1-74
1-76
1-94
1 -59
1 -60
1\S8
2-10
2-12
1-89
312-9
13-0
4 „
13 November.
Bega
50
32-00
29
2-89
3-12
3-26
2-53
‘>•75
3-54
2-04
2-60
1-98
2 -62
1-99
2-68
115-6
16-6
15 „
12 October.
Berrigan
390
15-32
15
•98
•95
1-39
111
1-10
2-09
1-27
1-71
1-41
1-22
•86
1-19
Not reported
Not reported.
Berry
24
56-54
22
6-30
5-32
7-01
6-04
4-60
6-71
5-33
4-13
3-52
3-42
3-60
4-64
109-8
27-2
30 April ..
1 November.
Blayney
2844
29-63
24
3 02
1-85
2*33
2-12
2-01
3-21
2-67
3-93
2-64
2-65
1-83
2-37
1 February
27 December.
Bodalla
40
36-12
34
3-42
4-13
4-07
2-87
2-73
3-20
0-25
2-56
2-82
2-85
2-60
2-02
114-1
18-6
18 April ..
18 October.
Bombala
3000
22-74
25
2-40
1-71
1-97
1 49
1-37
2-68
1-76
1-64
1-02
1-96
1-77
2-37
6 January
24 December.
Bourke
350
15-04
38
1-97
1-83
1-56
1-33
1-04
1-08
•87
•94
•92
1-07
1-27
1-16
127-0
25-0
23 May ..
2 September.
Bowral
2210
36-66
25
3-52
3-0C
4-41
2-91
2-73
3-90
3-55
2-96
2-06
2-33
2-43
2-SO
105-0
20-0
17 March ..
18 October.
Braidwood
3157
26-91
33
2-69
2-64
2-16
2-29
2-12
2-56
1-81
2-16
1-95
2-32
2-08
2-13
104-9
14-3
12 February
4 November.
Brewarrina
392
16-6(1
36
2-29
ISO
1-85
1-31
107
1 -57
•95
1-04
1-38
1-10
1-19
•95
122-3
24-8
38
S August.
Bundarra ..
2000
29-82
24
3-58
2-44
3-09
2-08
1-05
2-18
1 "55
2-17
2-30
2-62
2-72
3-44
101-0
17*5
10
2 November.
Carcoar
2363
29-87
28
2-74
1-78
2-03
2-17
1-99
3-87
2-60
2-80
2-74
2-75
2-27
2-13
104-9
15-4
2 January
10
Casino
77
44-18
36
5-34
6-34
6-08
4-08
2-03
2-38
2-53
2-26
2-12
2-79
3-36
3-97
116-4
21-0
24 May ..
21 September,
Cassilis
1500
23-86
38
2-46
2-62
2-28
1-39
1-76
1 96
1 -52
1-87
1-85
1-76
2-02
2-38
313-7
15-8
10 March ..
30 November.
Collarenebri
477
18-91
25
2-09
2-32
2-06
1-10
1-43
1 -45
1-06
1-29
1-19
1-31
177
1 84
121-0
19-0
8 June ..
18 August.
Condobolin..
653
17-47
29
1-83
1-37
1 -56
1-53
1-48
1-50
1-24
1-61
1-28
1-52
1-11
1-44
122-2
20-0
39 May ..
9 September.
Coolamon ..
823
19-56
22
1-42
1-35
1-73
1-71
1 -63
2-45
1-89
1-59
1-60
1-86
1-24
1-09
118-5
25 -0
25 April ..
2 October.
Cooma
2662
19-07
45
2-01
2-19
1-77
1-38
1-23
1-49
1-18
•95
1-60
1-81
1-88
1-58
il-2-0
S-5
6 January
24 December.
Coonamblo ..
589
19-57
32
1-81
2-24
2-07
1-77
1-55
1-45
1'IG
1-44
1-49
1-52
1-50
1 57
3179
21-9
- April ..
21 August.
Cootamundra
1082
23-02
25
2-38
1-36
1-73
2-02
1-65
2-63
1-99
2-10
1-82
2-17
1-44
1-73
112-0
19-9
25 February
24 October.
Oorowa
503
20-72
27
1-35
1-24
1-70
1-61.
1-83
2-61
1-S6
2-03
3-79
1-87
1-41
1-41
1140
21-0
4 April ..
30 September.
Cowra
978
24-68
24
2-88
1-66
1 ‘95
2-07
] -74
2 51
1-77
1-99
2-08
2-15
1-52
2-36
116-3
21-6
28 April ..
11 November.
Crookwell ..
910
31-79
26
2-S7
1-83
2-26
2-20
2-12
4-22
2-99
3-22
3 03
2-78
1-95
2-32
100-8
12-1
36 January
15 December.
Deniliquin ..
268
16 24
50
•98
1-06
1-46
1-56
1-GI
1-75
1-25
1-44
1-59
1-57
1-14
•S3
12M
18-0
23 March ..
28 September.
Dubbo
867
22-30
38
1-97
1-92
1-83
1-92
1-94
2-00
1-55
1-86
1-92
1 -58
1-82
1-99
115-4
16-9
14 ,,
Not reported
13 October.
Eden..
107
34-36
38
3-14
3-26
3”20
2-93
3-47
3-60
2-39
2-27
2-30
2-85
2-42
2-52
106 0
29-3
Not reported.
Forbes
783
20-88
34
1-65
1-72
2-03
1-78
1-76
1-76
1-48
1-74
2-20
1-89
1-34
1-54
1184
24-0
6 May
3 October.


CD .
C *J
-3
cj 3
S 8
Average Monthly Rainfall.
Extreme
temperatures.
I
[
[
Frosts.
District.
a> <D
'©
—
I
,
77 sj
-* c3
■< 3
d
4
ri
c?
5
to
3
©
©
1 §>
Max.
j Min.
Earliest
recorded.
Latest
recorded.
<
*=
<
1 c
i
Gcrmanton..
On 7
27-30
24
1-S4
1-40
V07
2-13
2-28
381
2-88
2-60
2‘29
2-34
1-99
1-83
'
10S-0
20-0
1 April . .
29 October.
Gilgandra ..
942
24-93
24
2-51
1-81
2-31
2*54
2 03
2-05
1-96
2-02
1-03
1-78
1-89
2-40
118-1
20-0
10 ,,
4
Glen Junes ..
3520
32-51
28
4-31
3-14
2-95
1-87
1-82
2-40
1-77
2-03
2*20
3-09
3-30
3-57
107-3
14-4
— March ..
Goulburn
2074
24-13
40
2*60
2-47
2-01
1-04
1"75
2-05
1 *59
1-82
2-01
2-12
202
1-99
111*0
13 0
21 ,,
25 October.
Grafton
29
38-50
40
5-02
4-95
494
3-57
2-59
2 42
217
178
1-91
2-54
2-98
3-03
lis-o
20-9
23 April ..
Grenfell
1238
24-01
24
2-10
1-90
2 03
2-01
!•=»
2-75
2-13
217
2-21
-207
1-40
1'90
100-0
27-0
24 ,,
Gunnedah ..
870
24 -OS
32
2-28
2 54
2-79
1-70
1-80
1-71
1-49
2-10
1-80
2-04
2-09
2-58
120-0
10-7
25 Mav ..
Gulgong-
1470
20-20
29
251
2*21
2-40
2-12
1 -89
2-41
1-09
2-04
2-03,
2-20
2-11
2-53
109-0
20 -9
20 April ..
14 ,,
Hay ..
307
14-21
29
*82
•93
110
1-30
1*40
1-75
1-13
1-48
1-27
1-17
•82
•98
117-3
2L1
9 Mar ..
*>•>
Inverell
1912
30-21
35
3'57
2-89
3-12
2*10
1*86
2 -30
1-93
2*07
2-17
2-59
2-49
3-12
110-6
13-4
J 1 March ..
Jerildorie ..
308
15-43
2L
•94
•85
1*22
1*41
1-51
1 "8S
1-20
1-70
1-10
1-34
1-22
1-01
23 Mar ..
Jerry s Plains
150
24 -00
24
2-08
•2 -53
2"70
1*01
1-29
1-92
1-89
1-49
1-03
1*68
2-09
2-49
121-7
24-0
21 „ ..
.Tunee
988
20-36
27
1*49
1-22
1-73
1*62
1-65
2-40
1-71
1-84
1 -so
1-98
1-45
1-38
111-9
23 0
12 April ..
21
Keinpsey
30
44-85
28
4-44
5-56
5-40
3-72
3-30
3 "44
3-01
332
2-38
2-72
3-34
4-10
119-9
23-9
C
o
o
Kiama
41
50-74
24
4.64
4*84
0 18
4-72
414
5-24
4-35
3-S5
3-08
2-78
3 04
3-88
25 June ..
19 July
25 December.
Kiandra
4040
63-92
37
4-08
3-10
4 04
4-58
5-27
8-08
6-25
5-94
0-07
0-76
4-89
3-60
91-0
-4-0
0 January
Kurrajong Heights
1870
49-55
44
5-44
0-38
0-42
4-29
4-19
3 30
2-78
2-65
2*79
2-90
3-99
4-42
Lisinore
37
54-25
25
o-o I
7-01
7-73
4-53
4*59
3-25
3-90
2'95
2-79
2-58
3-03
4-62
116-2
23-0
8 Mar ..
Maitland
19
33-78
42
3-23
3-04
3-94
2-72
2-45
*2-52
2-67
2-42
2-00
2-27
2'42
2-84
115 0
24-0
10 ,,
Manilla
1287
20-19
20
2-83
2-51.
2-77
217
1-71
1-87
Ht42
1-569
1-91
2-11
2'71
2-62
24 April ..
Molong
1730
28-90
25
2-74
1-89
2-01
2 33
2"33
2-85
2-07
2T.7
2-40
2-34
2-00
‘>•77
111-7
18-0
1 „
..
Moree
080
23-79
31
2'08
3-21
2-00
1-42
1-72
1-81
1 '31
1-52
1-67
1-91
1-95
1-93
117'3
18-0
30 Mav ..
5 September.
6 ,
Moruya Heads
50
35*02
34
3-17
3-49
4 03
3*20
2-74
327
2-38
2-39
2-78
2-S7
2-28
2-36
114-8
22-3
20 June ..
Moss Vale
2208
38-51
38
3-42
3-04
3-73
3-30
3-60
3-82
3-57
2'73
2-35
3-11
2-71
2-47
1000
18-9
19 January
18 ,,
Mudgee
1530
20-02
39
2-2.1
2-33
1*96
2-01
2 10
2-50
1-80
2*08
2-30
2-31
2-01
2*41
114-4
15-0
22 March ..
Murrumburrah
1271
23-89
25
2-34
1-34
2 07
2-21
1-64
2*69
2-09
2-20
2-04
1-96
1-50
1-Sl
114-9
19-0
25 February
Murrurundi
1548
31-09
38
2'0/
3-04
2-58
2-19
2-12
3-03
2'2G
2-71
2-46
2 71
2-70
3-22
107-3
19-0
5 „
Murwillumbah
19
67-00
17
9-98
9-02
9-59
4*50
6-29
3-88
3-34
3-30
3 10
4-3S
4-22
5-04
13 August.
Muswellbrook
477
23-30
30
2-18
2 *52
2-10
1-03
1-61
2*00
1-08
1 75
1-63
1-77
2-02
2-35
117 6
19-0
21 April ..
Narandera ..
570
17-26
25
1-30
1-12
1-47
1-49
H7
2-02
1-51
1-05
1-38
1-72
1-17
•90
114-5
21-0
Harrabri
097
20-25
40
2-80
3 08
270
1-77
2 10
215
170
1-79
1-78
1 -85
2-32
2-15
119 9
18-4
24 ,,
Narromine
780
18-83
17
1-95
1-54
1-91
1-90
1*34
1-64
1-47
1 93
1-22
1-30
1-41
1-22
....
24 „
"
20 September.
Rainfall and Temperature Table — continued.


Diagram showing the Average Annual Rainfall for New South Wales
for the Years 1871 to 1912 inclusive.


District.
Altitude above
sea level (ft.).
Average
Annual Rainfall.
I
.Number of
years’ records.
Average Monthly R
linfall
ti)
3
<
_
o
5$
d
S
Extreme
temperatures.
Frosts.
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
April.
c3
?!
i
June.
1
%
CO
O j
Max.
Min.
Earliest
recorded.
Latest
recorded.
Nynffan
570
17-63
28
2-04
2'28
1-89
1-61
1*43
1-10
1-08
1-51
101
•97
1-23
1-48
— April ..
21 August.
Orange
2840
36-27
40
2-78
2-75
2-70
2-87
3-15
4 -30
3-04
3-39
3-22
3 19
2 - 7 7
•2-55
10 Januaiy
16 December.
Parkes
1035
21-00
10
2-28
1-40
2-30
1-70
1-87
2-05
1-77
1-78
1-96
1-72
1‘2G
1-51
114-9
20-0
28 April ..
2 October.
Parramatta..
50
35-04
51
3-28
3-95
3-73
8-74
2-85
3-24
3-15
2-48
2*23
2-20
2-33
2-09
3 Mav
30 September.
Penrith
80
20-05
13
1-70
2-48
2-34
2-80
1-90
1-90
3-30
2-08
1-39
1 -50
1-89
2-40
Pieton
552
29-08
30
3-21
2-02
3-35
2-70
1-94
2-40
2-10
1-90
1-79
2 - 22
1-91
2 "07
114-0
10-7
15 April ..
18 October.
Pilliga
773
20-52
27
2 34
2-40
1-80
1-44
1-89
1-03
1 *83
1-61
1-36
1-48
1-47
1-77
11.0-9
23-0
11 Mav ..
_
24 September.
Port Macquarie
40
02-09
39
.r87
7-55
0-31
o-oo
5-78
4-77
4-37
3-85
4-15
3-25
4-14
0-05
105-4
24 8
12 June ..
1 August.
Queanbeyan
1901
22-47
39
2-30
1-83
1*00
1-00
1-70
1-90
1 31
1 -58
1-77
2" 25
2-10
1-96
109 4
15-8
18 January
25 December.
Quirimli
1270
27-62
27
2-08
204
2-00
1-80
2-00
2-28
1-55
2-10
2-06
2-18
2-43
3-18
113-0
17-0
10 Februarv
10 October.
Richmond H. A. College..
70
30-18
28
3-42
2-05
8'78
2"5;>
2-72
2-01
2-33
1-89
2-10
2-20
2’83
2-89
113-5
18-8
15 April ..
1 November.
Scone
680
23-44
35
2-50
2-75
2*17
1-51
1 -50
1-02
1-59
1-8S
1-70
1-80
1-85
2-48
114-4
19-0
22 April ..
24 October.
Singleton
137
20 18
20
2-58
3"24
3-38
2-81
1-74
2-20
2*18
2-04
2-05
2-18
2"47
2-75
113-9
22'0
5 Mav ..
15 September.
Tamworth ..
1270
27-32
34
2-00
2-00
2-17
1 -99
1-Stt
2-20
1-71
2-12
2-15
2 31
2-70
2-79
120-5
20-0
24 April ..
18 October.
Taree
30
44-30
27
4"0u
6" 50
4-80
4-00
2-84
3-20
3-40
3-15
2-12
2-44
3 -15
4-07
100-9
27-0
24 ,,
20 September.
Temora
058
10-28
30
1-02
1-05
1-48
1-50
1-40
2-17
1-57
1-73
1-60
1-97
1-57
1-50
Not reported
Not reported.
Tentertield
2831
33-13
30
4-55
3-21
3-33
1-88
1-70
2-18
2-28
1-S8
2-40
2-57
3-37
3-74
107 -i
0-9
10 April ..
0 November.
TunnU
000
3P53
24
2 "-I :>
1-44
2-47
2-40
2'43
4-35
2 -00
2-09
2-88
2'90
2-05
2-12
Nut reported
Not reported.
Uralla
3337
33-10
25
8-83
3-IU
3-00
2-08
1-78
8-02
108
2-30
2-48
2-71
3-28
3-59
102-0
15-6
10 January
5 December.
Ijrana
400
17"I2
80
•05
1-29
1 54
141
1-70
2-20
1-30
1-50
1-40
1 -59
1-1!)
•99
117-0
18-4
2 Mav ..
0 October.
Wagga .. 5
(100
21-88
37
1-48
1-40
1-79
1-78
1-05
2-78
1-83
1-99
1 83
2-15
1 "02
1-2S
119-0
18-4
8
29 September.
Walchii
3387
80-51
24
3-24
2 -80
2-02
1-08
1-71
2-03
1-70
1-97
2-34
2-59
8 - 12
3-43
104-1
100
14 February
3 December.
Walgett
437
18-97
31
2-11
2-41
1-70
1-47
1-04
1-44
T08
1-42
1-20
1 -85
1-00
1-40
122-2
28-2
29 April ..
20 September.
Warialda
1224
28-07
32
3-15
3-y.i
3-00
1-70
1-85
2-08
V59
1-87
2-14
9“’,5
2-30
2-73
117-7
io-o
— Mav
11 October.
Warren
045
17-80
24
1-81
VS2
1-00
1-78
1-34
1-35
113
1-05
1-07
1-12
1 30
1-50
Not reported
..
Not reported.
Wellington ..
990
22-98
28
1-00
1-72
1-78
1-88
1-84
1-98
1-01
2-11
1 -78
1*05
1 -99
2-38
111-6
i r> -6
25 April ..
1 November.
Wentworth..
144
11-40
30
•85
•03
•77
•88
1-21
1-25
•so
1-07
1-04
*97
•95
•95
119 0
21-0
8 May ..
9 September.
Werris Creek
1240
25-81
21
2-58
2-44
2-04
1 -90
1-04
1-90
1-00
2-59
1-68
1-02
2-20
2-45
107-5
300
18 ,,
28
Windsor
51
30-88
47
2-83
3-:,i
3-40
2-72
2-82
3-00
2 -22
1-77
1-91
1 -90
2-38
2-20
Wollongong
50
43-05
30
4-04
4-94
4-14
4-92
3-80
4-50
3-20
2-77
2*77
2'77
2-00
2-90
113-4
31-9
25 June
19 July.
Wvalong
831
ISM 7
28
1 -50
1-07
1-42
1 50
W7
1-90
1-49
1-71
1 -55
1-82
1-37
1 -25
25 February
21 October
Yass ..
1020
22-04
20
2-24
1-24
1-01
1-80
i " 'i 5
2-08
1-80
2-14
1-98
2-21
1-71
1-09
108*5
21-0
2 March ..
1 November.
Young
1418
25 -47
30
1-94
1-71
1-90
2-08
2-10
3 03
2"25
2-28
2 34
2-84
1-09
1-81
113-9
20-3
20 April ..
27 December.
Rainfall and Temperature Table — continued.


Table showing 4verage Composition
of Soils
from Different Localities in
New South "Wales
Loculi'! y of Soils.
Capacity
for
■water.
Volatile
matter.
Nitrogen.
Lime,
Potash.
Phosphoric
Acid.
1. Count}’of Cumberland
....
7-4
o-u
0-12
o-io
0-12
2. County of Camden ..
11-2
0-23
o-u
010
0-17
3. County of Northumberland
45-3
S'0
0-19
0-12
0 10
o-io
4. Richmond River
52-C
10-0
030
0 ■ 2 L
0-08
0-3
5. Black Soil Plains
GPO
7A
0 09
0*07
0 34
0-18
6. Semi-arid Districts ..
40-0
5-7
0 08
0-44
0-33
0-21
7. Hunter River,.
400
C‘6
0T2
0 20
0-10
0-10
8. South Coast (Eden District)
41-0
7-3
o-u
0-23
0-04
0-07
9. Myall Creek (Closer Settlement Area).
62-0
10-2
0-14
0 62
0-18
0-22
10. Dorrigo (Closer Settlement Area)..
55’o
18-0
0‘25
0-04
0-12
0-14
11. Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area
40-0
6A
0-04
0 GO
0-45
0-15
12. Pilliga Scrub
34'4
4-0
0-07
0-25
0-09
0 07
13. Peel River Estate
52-5
8 9
0-13
0-77
0-26
013
•THE SOILS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.*
The following notes on the characteristics of the soils typical of different
districts of the State must be regarded as of a provisional nature. They are
based on examination of a large number of soils from the different districts,
in some cases forwarded by farmers, and in others collected by ourselves. The
soils chosen have in all eases been virgin soils, with the exception-of those
carrying certain crops, such as lucerne, tobacco, &e., and those which exhibit
any peculiar divergence from the type soil have been rejected, so that those
on which the following notes are bas d may be regarded as typical ones. The
work is now being carried on systematically, and one of our officers, Dr.
Jensen, was for some years engaged in a systematic collection and ex-
amination of soils representative both of different rock formation and also
those typically suited to various crops, such as wheat, lucerne, <fcc. In the
meanwhile the following notes will provide a fairly good idea of the general
nature of many of the typical soils, their peculiarities and possibilities.
The table here given gives the average amount of plant food and some of
the chief characteristics of some typical New South Wales soils.
* F. B. Guthrie, Chemist to the Department of Agriculture, New South Wales.


Taulk showing Average (’(imposition of Soils—
rontin had.
Locality of Boils.
i Capaeit.
J for
water.
j Volatile
| matter.
I
Nitrogen.
Lime
Potash.
Phosphoric
Acid.
14. Riverina
35 '°
4-0
0*10
0-23
0-23
; U - 14
15 Typical wheat land (Riverina)
(Loams to clayey loams.)
37-0
4T>
0-07
() 25
0*28
' Ul3
,
•
I
l(i Tvpical lucerne land (Hunter River and
'South Coast).
(Heavy loams to elavey loams.)
4b - 0
mu
0-21
'
1
0*56
0-10
0 - 24
17. Tvpical vineyard soils (Alhury and Huntei
* River).
(Light sandy loams.)
33 •3
-
0-15
0 - 07
0'O7
0 - 13
18 Typical tobacco soils (Tumut)
(Light loams.)
4S"3
ST.
U-.5
!
0-37
n-15
0'24
19. Tvpical Citrus soils (Count} - Cumber-
' land).
(Friable loam.)
451
11*45
019
0*46
018
0-27
20. Tvpical granite soils
(Loams.)
37-7
5-3 |
0*10
0*19
U-14
0-1L
21. Typical basalt soils
48-0
8 0 j
0*17
0 - 56
0*08
Oil
Analysis of Sandstone from Pyrmont—Representative of the Hawkesbury Sandstone
Moisture at 100° C. ...
•45
Potash
•28
Combined water
1-40
Soda ...
•45
Silica ..
... 87-60
Phosphoric acid
... trace
Alumina
... 8-53
Sulphuric acid
•ii
Ferric oxide ...
■03
Chloride of sodium ...
... trace
Ferrous oxide
•10
Soluble silica...
■40
Manganous oxide
nil.
Lime ...
•60
100-24
Magnesia
•29
1 17299—B
COUNTY CUMBERLAND,
The rocks which form the county of Cumberland belong to what is known
as the Ilawkesbury Series, and may be roughly divided into two portions,
the first including those obtained from the area lying between Sydney and
Penrith, east and west, and the Kurrajong ami Picton, north and south,
which rest upon, and are for the most part derived from Wianamatta shale;
the second division, including those from the rest of the county of Cumberland,
derived principally from the Hawkesbury sandstone. Both the formations
from which the Cumberland soils are derived are remarkably poor in
constituents suitable for plant-food ; it is consequently not to be expected that
the derived soils should he rich in fertilising ingredients. Of the ingredients
of which the Hawkesbury sandstone is composed, felspar is the only one
whose disintegration provides any lime or potash, and we should expect to
find very little phosphates, these salts being quite unrepresented in the
original rock.
The following analysis of Hawkesbury sandstone was made by Mr, H. P.
White, Assistant Analyst and Assayer, Department of Mines, and represents
the average composition of this rock : —


Analysis of Clay from Cook’s River—
-Representative of Wianamatta Shale.
Moisture at 100° C.... ... 1*47
Lime ...
... absent
Combined water ... ... 7"29
Magnesia
•18
Silica 7098
Alkalies
1-71
Alumina ... ... ... 18'12
Organic matter
trace
Ferric oxide ... .. ... ‘25
Manganous oxide ... ... trace
100-00
Average percentage of fertilising ingredients in
Cumberland soils.
Lime.
Potash.
Ph osphorie
Acid.
Nitrogen.
Average of virgin soils from Wianamatta shale ...
•136
•133
•096
‘140
Average of virgin soil from Hawkesbury sandstone
•106
•066
•137
■133
Average of all virgin soils from Cumberland
121
•099
•116
•136
White elay iu a very fine state of division is distributed through the sand-
stone.
The following analysis of a plastic, dark-coloured clay from Cook’s Kiver,
is due to Mr. Mingaye, Analyst and Assayer, Department of Mines, and
may, perhaps, be taken as fairly representative of the clays of the Wiana-
matta shale formation: —•
The most striking differences in the two divisions of soils are the much,
larger proportions of lime and potash, notably potash, in the shale soils and
the larger amount of phosphoric acid in the sandstone soils. The slight
difference in the nitrogen contents is not in reality due to the nature of the
rock, this constituent varying with the amount of organic mattter and humus
present in the soil, which averages 7-62 in the shale soils, and 7-22 in the
sandstone ones.
Physical Characteristics.
The soils examined vary from almost pure sand to stiff clays, and these are
fairly equally derived from both divisions of the county. They are, for the
most part, deficient in humus, and their capacity for water is low, the soils
from the sandstone formation being somewhat better off in this respect than
the shale soils. The possession of this property is important in enabling the
crop to resist the effects of a drought, and it depends chiefly upon the texture
of the soil and its content of humus. It is greatest in soils rich in humus,
marls (calcareous soils) coming next, clays, loams, and sandy soils being
lowest.
With these exceptions, which are due to deficiency in lime and humus,
the physical nature of our soils does not present any feature of particular
note.
Defects due to want of Lime.
As has been pointed out above, want of lime is the most serious defect in
these soils, and in quite seven cases out of ten of the soils examined, the
advisability of liming is strongly insisted upon.
The most apparent result of deficiency in lime is the tendency to sourness.
If not actually sour, practically all the soils in this county have a strong
tendency to become so after a short time. This may be due in some cases


to deficient drainage, but it is also evident in well-drained soils, and in dry
weather, and does not appear to be much improved by cultivation as it is
usually practised.
General Treatment.
Speaking generally, the defects to he remedied in these soils are sourness,
lack of humus, and poverty of plant-food. The remedies for these defects are
the following: —
Cultivation. —Deep and frequent cultivation is one of the most important
means of ensuring good texture and of sweetening the soil. Its object is
to disturb the surface soil, partly to ensure aeration, partly to enable it to
absorb rain, and partly to bring it into such a condition that it will draw up
water and keep it in circulation. A well-cultivated soil is in a better con-
dition to withstand drought than one where the surface has been allowed to
become hard and compact.
Drainage. —The question of drainage is one that must be decided in each
instance by the individual conditions. So much has been written on this
subject, and the matter has been so well and practically treated of, that I
shall not attempt to do more than insist upon its importance in maintaining
the texture of the soil. In the case of orchards the best results are practically
out of the question unless the land is suitably drained, unless it happens that
the natural drainage is sufficient.
Liming is the most important operation on the soils of County Cumber-
land. They are naturally, as has been several times insisted upon, remark-
ably deficient in lime, and exhibit all the defects due to this deficiency. Of
these, sourness is the most apparent, and perhaps the most disastrous.
Now, also, that our farmers have awakened to the importance of using
artificial fertilisers, it is important that this fact should not be lost
sight of, since a good deal of disappointment has resulted in using fertilisers
which are themselves acid, such as superphosphates or mixed fertilisers
containing superphosphates, on soil which is itself often quite strongly acid
(sour). A previous treatment with lime, or mixing lime with such a fer-
tiliser (provided it contains no ammonium salts), is essential if the manure
is to exert its full benefit. Tor such sour soils the best phosphatic fetiliser
is probably Thomas Slag, a manure which only requires to be more cheaply
obtainable to be largely used.
Green Manuring. —The importance of green manuring and the principles
underlying its beneficial action are more fully discussed on page 71.
Too little attention is paid to it in this State, where the soils are on the
whole poor in humus, and where farmyard manure is so difficult to obtain.
For reasons which will be discussed subsequently, green manuring, besides
providing humus and thus improving the texture of the soil and rendering
it more suited to withstand drought, possesses the additional advantage, if
leguminous crops are employed, of enriching the soil in nitrogenous matter,
an essential fertiliser, and the most expensive to obtain.
It is, then, by more thorough methods of cultivation, by effective draining,
by liming and green manuring, that the fertility of our Cumberland soils
may be increased.


By fertility is understood not the actual richness in plant-food, but that
condition of the soil which enables the plant-food present to be utilised to the
best advantage, and in which any manures added may be most effective.
Of course it may not be necessary to carry out all the operations above
mentioned. In some soils nothing may be required to bring them into good
condition but deep cultivation, in others a dressing of lime may be sufficient;
there are others whose only defect is want of humus; but the principal
defects in our Cumberland soils, in addition to their poverty of plant-food,
are want of lime, tendency to sourness, and deficiency in humus, and where
all these defects occur in the same soil it may be necessary to have recourse
to all the above plans for ameliorating it.
The above remarks apply only to the treatment of the soil preparatory to
manuring. The question of the proper manure to apply, and the quantities,
depends upon the crop it is required to grow and not upon the soil. But in
order to obtain the full benefit from the use of fertilisers it is necessary first
that the land should be in good condition.
COUNTY CAMDEN.
The soils of County Camden are for the most part derived from the
Hawkesbury sandstone, which forms the country rock over most of the
county. To the north of Pictou, Wianamntta shale is the prevailing forma-
tion, and more or less extensive outcrops of volcanic rocks, chiefly basic,
occur in different parts.
Thus the soils about Bowral and Mittagong, Exeter, Wingello, and a few
other places are frequently of volcanic origin.
In the south-east portion of the county and more or less along the coast
are the Bulli coal measures. Only a few soils, however, have been received
for examination which can be regarded as having been derived from Permo-
Carboniferous rocks, and these will not be included in the summary.
By far the largest number of the soils examined have been derived from
Hawkesbury sandstone, and the following table gives the average chemical
composition of such a soil calculated from a large number of soils examined
from different parts of County Camden,, excluding those derived from vol-
canic areas or from the coal measures:—
Average Composition of Virgin Soils from County Camden.
Nature of soil ... Light sandy loam to clay loam.
Reaction of soil ... .. .. Neutral to strongly acid. (42 per cent, of the soils
examined were strongly acid.)
Capacity for water ... = 49'73 per cent.
Organic matter ... ... = 11'23 ~
Lime ... ... ... = 'll3 ~
Potash ... ... ... = 'lO2 ~
Phosphoric acid ... = 'l7l ~
Nitrogen... ... ... = '231 „
As might have been expected, the soils are very similar to those of County
Cumberland derived from the Hawkesbury sandstone, the Camden soils
being as a rule better supplied with humus than the Cumberland ones, and
possess consequently more nitrogen and a higher capacity for retaining
water. In lime, potash, and phosphates they are also slightly but consistently
higher, and, generally speaking, are more fertile soils.


General Treatment.
With regard to the treatment which will bring the laud into the best
■condition and increase its natural fertility, much the same remarks apply as
in the case of the Cumberland soils. The first essential is the addition of
lime, in which this type of soil is deficient, and the addition of which, besides
supplying this ingredient, counteracts the acidity of sour soils, renders
certain mineral food-stuff soluble, improves the texture of the soils, and
promotes nitrification.
Proper cultivation and drainage are, of course, essential to the mainten-
ance of a fertile soil. Croon manuring, in order to supply humus and nitro-
genous matter, is also important. The soil-humus is one of the most
important ingredients in the soil, not on account of the plant-food it
contains, but on account of the way it modifies the texture of the soil, and
particularly for the resistance it offers to the evaporation of moisture from
the surface —a property of incalculable value in a climate like our own,
subject to protracted dry spells. In countries where a more intensive system
of farming is carried on this organic material is supplied by moans of the
straw or litter in the farmyard manure, 10 to 15 tons of manure being an
.average dressing.
RICHMOND RIVER SOILS.
The virgin soils from this neighbourhood possess certain rather striking
features in common, and a sufficient number have been examined to render it
possible to strike an average wdiich shall fairly represent a soil typical of
the area, which has become one of the principal dairying centres of the
State.
The soils under discussion have been taken, for the most part, from the
area on the northern side of the river, and are of volcanic origin, mostly
overlying basalt, and derived therefrom.
From the analyses of a considerable number of virgin soils from this
locality we are able to give the following as the composition of an average
soil. They are remarkably uniform in their chemical composition, and
vary r but little from the average here given:—■
Composition - of an average Soil of Volcanic Origin from Richmond River.
Capacity - for water ... ... ... ... ... = 52 percent.
Organic matter (humus) ... ... = 16 ~
Lime ... ... ... = o'2l ~
Potash... ... .. ... ... . ... = o’oß ~
Phosphoric acid ... ... ... o'3o ~
Nitrogen ... ... ... ... = o'3o ~
Reaction —Neutral to acid.
The soils vary from light sandy loams to heavy loams, the heavy soils pre-
dominating. They are in nearly all cases well supplied with vegetable
matter (humus).
Associated with this high humus-content (often over 20 per cent.) are a
high percentage of nitrogen and a high capacity for absorbing and retaining
water. This latter property is in the highest degree indicative of fertility,
soils of this nature being open, readily worked, and favourable to the
•development of nitrification. The soils examined from this neighbourhood
are all exceedingly active, and produce nitrates abundantly. They are also


better able to resist dry spells than soils deficient in humus and with a
low capacity for retaining water, as the surface evaporation is reduced to a
minimum.
With regard to the mineral fertilising constituents, the soils under con-
sideration are uniformly well supplied with phosphates, but poor in lime
and potash; and it is in the direction of supplying these ingredients that
particular attention must be paid when manuring. The absence of lime,
combined with the high proportion of vegetable matter, tends to the
production of acidity in these soils; and of the samples examined a large
proportion are sour in character.
General Treatment.
Where the subsoil is of an impervious nature, and the natural drainage
inadequate, this defect can only be overcome by a proper system of drainage.
In many instances thorough cultivation and exposure of the upturned soil
to air will probably effect a great improvement. But in all eases the soil
should be limed.
Freshly-slaked lime should be added at the rate of about i ton to | ton
per acre; the treatment to be repeated every second or third year.
After the soil is thoroughly sweetened by this treatment it will be in a
condition to make the most of any manuring applied.
The manuring need not be very heavy, but the deficiency in potash in
these soils must be specially kept in view.
Probably a good dressing of wood-ashes, if these are readily and cheaply
available (about 20 to 30 bushels to the acre), would supply the require-
ments for pasture lands for some years.
Where it is intended to get the best results that the land is capable of
returning, a somewhat heavier and more complete manuring is required. A
mixture of the following composition (after liming) will probably give the
best results for grass lands :• —
1 cwt. sulphate of ammonia
li cwt. superphosphate,
i cwt. sulphate of potash
per acre applied as a top-dressing.
Speaking generally, they are typically fertile soils, in good mechanical
condition, and should provide good pasture, for which purpose they are
eminently suitable. There should be no difficulty in raising good crops of
every kind suited to the district.
SOILS OF THE BLACK-SOIL PLAINS.
An extensive and typical area of black-soil plain country is that occurring
in the north-western portion of the State, in the country -watered by the
Barwon and its tributaries, the Gwydir, Namoi, and Castlereagh, and lying,
roughly within a circle bounded by Coonamble, Inverell, Moree, Collaren-
dabri, and Walgett.
These soils are probably of alluvial origin and include some of the richest
grazing land in the State. A glance at the tabulated analyses will show
that they possess certain well-defined characteristics in common which
distinguish them from the soils met with in any other part of New South
Wales.


Locality.
Colour.
Nature of Soil.
Reaction.
Capacity for Water.
Mechanical Anal}
sis.
'o
3-70
Chemical Analysis.
Roots.
o
GO
Coarse Gravel.
Fine Grave.
ifi
Clay.
Volatile Matter.
S
ic
o
£
•no
Soluble in II
chloric At
% : |
Lj £
i
•329 j -295
y dro-
id.
o
£
■178
1. Coonamble ..
Black
Clay
Slightly acid ..
77
none
none
none
8-80
15*00
70-20
2. Wee Waa
Black
Heavy loam
Neutral
50*0
”
0-33
3-93
40-91
48*83
!
j 3-08
873
•132
*488
■403
■187
3. Narrabri
Dark
Loam
Neutral
48
”
-
none
0-80
45-30
53-90
0-83
0-34
*098
'725
•192
•237
4. Inverell
Black
Heavy loam
Neutral
02'0
0-08
-
0-33
1-08
32-06
65"85
7-51
10-33
•in
*400
•152
*428
5. Myall Creek..
Black
Clay ..
Slightly acid ..
72
none
-
none
1-46
17-00
80-94
10*50
10-71
*120
•823
•158
•389
6. Moree
Black
Very stiff clay
Alkaline
89-5
”
roo
1-24
0-50
11-00
80*14
1 4-17
5-85
*074
*769
•489
•080
7. Moree
Black
Clay
Slightly alkaline
63-0
”
none
0-66
7-66
13-33
78-35
9-70
6-10
*003
•640
*387
•074
8. Moree (cultivated)
Black
Clay ..
Slightly alkaline
59
••
-
0*93
9-40
18-00
71-07
8*13
5-29
*035
•760
■350
•091
8. Collarendabri
Black
Heavy loam
Alkaline
53"6
■■
0*25
0-83
35-60
03-32
5-09
0*17
■050
rooo
•550
•040
Average
Black
Heavy loam to clay
Slightly acid to alka-
64
0-3
4'4
25*5
69 '8
0-70
7*4
■089
■600
*337
•179
line.
■


None of them differ in any important particular from the average soil
obtained by calculation. Those examined are all either virgin or grazing
country.
They are stiff clayey soils, of low capillary power, and highly retentive of
water, becoming very sticky when wet, and very hard and cracked when dry.
They are not, as a rule, rich in vegetable matter, though their black colour is
an indication of the presence of humus. Whether this black colour is due to
a peculiar condition of the humus present or to the condition of the iron-salts
is a matter for further examination. The nitrogen content is invariably low,
but they are very rich in mineral plant-food, particularly lime and potash,
and are extremely fertile soils. Even a superficial observation of the nature
of the native timbers and the luxuriance of the herbage after rain affords
sufficiently convincing proof of their fertility.
They are also deep soils, often of considerable depth, so that they are not
likely to be readily exhausted.
From their mechanical constitution they are to be classed as wheat lands.
From an agricultural point of view, their principal drawback is the initial
difficulty of getting them into good tilth, as, owing to their extreme stickiness
when wet, and to their caking hard when dry, tillage operations are always
difficult, and, except at the most favourable time—when they are in the right
condition as to moisture—ploughing is practically impossible. Once broken
up, the surface becomes friable on exposure to air, and their future cultiva-
tion presents no difficulties. They are very commonly slightly alkaline in
nature, but not sufficiently so to cause any trouble. They are not alkaline
soils in the sense of the alkali plains of the Western States of America,
which have presented so serious an obstacle to cultivation.
In discussing the question of the use of bore water on these soils, however,
this fact must not be lost sight of, as the use of this water for any length of
time will, undoubtedly, tend to exaggerate the defects already noticed,
namely, their alkalinity, their deficiency in humus, and the sticky nature of
the soil when wet, and its tendency to harden and crack when dry. Indeed,
the peculiarities are just what one would expect if the soil had been subjected
for a length of time to the action of alkaline bore-water.
Geological Notes on the Black-soil Plains.
With regard to the origin and general geological features of black-soil
plains, the following notes by Dr. Jensen are appended:—
“ Black soils may be divided broadly into four classes, namely—
“ (a) Peaty Black Soils.
“ (b) Basaltic Black Soils.
“ (c) Alluvial Black Soils.
“ ( d ) Black Limestone Soils.
“ These classes are not sharply differentiated, but intermediate varieties
occur.
“ (a) The Peaty Black Soil occurs in swamps, and owes it dark colour
essentially to the presence of organic matter. If such a soil occurs in a
sandstone area it may consist almost wholly of quartz sand (silica), and


carbonaceous material. On ignition it will, in such a case, become light
grey or white in colour. If the soil occurs in any formation abounding in
iron-bearing minerals it will, of course, take a red colour on burning.
“ (b) Basaltic Black Soils occur on basaltic plains and tablelands, and
often cover very extensive areas, as on the Darling Downs of Queensland,
and on the Liverpool Plains of Hew South Wales. The presence of an
abundance of lime-bearing minerals in the parent rock has, probably, much
to do with the formation of the black colour, since the lime is readily
liberated on the weathering of the rock, and its presence in the soil as
carbonate would favour nitrification and accelerate plant growth, and the
humus formed by decaying vegetation partly tends to blacken the soil in
itself, and partly acts so as to reduce iron oxide to the black ferroso-ferrio
condition (magnetite), and also so as to form black organic salts with iron.
Generally basaltic soils tend to posssess a brownish colour on hillsides, and
a black colour on flats and in valleys, where vegetation is more luxuriant.
“ ( c ) Alluvial Black Soils, comprising those here tabulated and discussed,
known in the west as river country, are generally formed of sediments carried
hundreds of miles by rivers from various geological formations. Their
black colour is probably due to the same cause as in the case of basaltic soils.
They differ from the latter in being more loamy in character, and more
pervious to water.
“ West of the Warrumbungle Mountains, at Tundebrine, Tooraweenah,
Tenandra, &c., and west of the Nandewar Mountains, near Narrabri, at
Maule’s Creek, Spring Creek, Bobbiwaa Creek, &c., occur miniature black-
soil plains, whose black soils belong to a type intermediate between ( h ) and
(c), although in general appearance and in flora they are very like the typical
alluvials (river country) of the Namoi and Oastlereagh. These soils are
composed mainly of volcanic detritus, which has not formed by the decom-
position of volcanic rock m situ , but which has been carried there by streams
from the adjoining volcanic mountains.
“ ( d ) Limestone formations are also not unfrequently covered with black
soil, the colour of which may be due to the causes already mentioned.
“In addition to the four classes mentioned, the soils on diorite and
gabbro formations are also frequently black loams. They are like the basalt
soils —brownish on the hills, becoming black on plains and in valleys, and
differ only from basaltic soils in being less clayey.”
SOILS FROM THE SEMI ARID REGION.
In the table on page 32 is given the general characteristics of an average
soil (No. 6) from this area, which includes a large portion of the present and
the potential wheat-growing area of the State. In the following table the
nature of these soils is set forth in mor ' detail.


Composition of some Typical Soils from the Semi-arid Parts of New South Wales.
u
C
■-1 *"*
Mechanical
Analysis.
a
Soluble in
Hydrochloric Acid.
Locality.
Nature of Soil.
Reaction.
Capaeit
Wat
Root
Fibres.
Stones.
u >
rt d
O *•
QC5
Fine
Gravel.
Sand.
ei
O
5
’o
S
Volatile
Matter.
be
o
£
Lime.
Potash.
ts
Collarendahri ..
Loam, red-brown
Alkaline ..
42*6
none
none
none
1-50
57-13
41-37
4-38
6-23
■07
1-15
■57
19
Heavy black loam ..
„
53-6
,,
0*25
0-83
35-60
63-32
5-69
6-17
■05
1-00
•55
•04
Menindie (Darling)
Light sandy loam, red
,,
24*0
0-04
none
7-29
80-54
12-13
0-28
3-44
•04
■23
•29
■28
Moree District ..
Sandy loam ..
Slight alkaline ..
46*0
0-08
,,
4-33
7-66
68-54
19-39
4-46
5-31
•07
1-08
■17
•22
Tenandra Bore (average of four soils)
Vary from alka-
line to acid.
0-84
5-71
•05
•37
•20
17
Wantagoong (Nicholson), Lachlan River..
Light sandy loam
Acid
■28-6
none
none
none
13-45
73-70
12-85
1-93
3-63
•06
■08
■23
17
Mungindi (Queensland Border)
Chocolate, loam
Neutral ..
46-0
0-04
0-66
0-79
0-83
53-87
43-81
3-56
5 07
•no
■27
19
12
Carinda Bore ..
Light sandy loam
Acid
30-0
0-08
none
one
8-33
74-33
17-24
0-61
3 80
■09
■08
■32
19
..
Black loam
,,
37-3
008
,,
3 66
375
62-12
30 39
1-46
6-63
■10
■07
■29
•30
»
Red loam
Slight alkaline ..
44*0
004
,,
0’20
0-41
66-54
32-81
2-39
7-56
12
•41
■64
•21
Coolabah
Light sandj loam
Neutral ..
33-0
0-08
,,
116
9-29
77-25
12-22
2-05
3 56
•01
13
•23
•22
Alluvial Flats, Bogan River, Coolabah ..
Light loam
Alkaline ..
47'0
none
1-08
2-50
67-49
28 93
6-31
6-59
•05
■85
•54
‘33
Parish Elsinore, County Cunningham,
near Condobolin
,, colour varies ..
Acid
40*0
016
-
0-25
4-00
6612
29-47
2-32
6-39
•09
•25
•27
•24
,» ,, ,,
Loam, colour varies..
,,
45 6
0*25
,,
041
2-91
60*91
35-42
317
8-07
•15
•21
■27
•24
Pera B^re
Light sandy loam, red
Very slight alka-
line.
28-3
012
”
012
0-91
79 04
19-81
3-21
3-94
•03
13
•36
•25
Eugowra, Ashburnham (near Parkes
,, loam, red
Acid
37-3
0-04
„
0-87
1291
61-33
24-85
2-98
5-77
•07
■22
•26
17
Mingelo (near Parkes)
,, gravelly loam, red ..
Very slight alka-
line.
44*3
none
1-66
14*41
6-25
56-20
21-48
1-79
8-70
■15
■70
■37
■43
» ,,
,, loam, red
Slight acid
30-0
i,
3-33
1-75
4-58
69-79
20-55
0-60
4-61
13
14
11
10
Brewarrina
Red loam
,, alkaline ..
50-5
”
none
none
2-33
56-97
40 70
7-65
6-40
■07
1-02
•40
*15


Humus.
In the first place is to be remarked the deficient amount of humus matter.
The absence of moisture is equally noticeable, but although the comparative
figures given probably represent very nearly the proportionate amounts as
compared with other soils, the individual figures are not altogether trust-
worthy, since the amount found in the soil on arrival in the laboratory is by
no means always an indication of its condition in situ. The soils were,
however, invariably dry, and the average probably very nearly represents the
average contents of the soils if determined on the spot. The humus deficiency
is, however, a definite one, and has to be seriously taken into account in any
scheme for the improvement of these soils. It is due, of course, to the
absence of moisture and the burning action of the sun. Moisture is neces-
sary for the decay of vegetable matter. This defect will be remedied by
irrigation; firstly, by deposition of the silt which is carried in suspension by
even the clearest river water, and which contains a certain amount of organic
matter; and, secondly, by supplying the necessary moisture to enable the
decay of vegetable matter to proceed.
Capacity for Water.
The next point of importance is the capacity of these soils for water, that
is to say, their water-retaining power. These figures represent the percentage
amount of water which the soil is capable of holding. This property depends
partly upon the amount of humus present, which has a very high capacity
for holding water, and partly upon the mechanical condition of the soil, the
relative proportions of coarse and fine sand and clay. It is noticeable that
the light sandy loams (those soils in which the amount of clay does not
exceed 12 or 15 per cent.), have a very low retentive power for water. The
average of these soils is, however, about the same as it is for similiar light
sandy loams in other parts of the State. This is true, also, of the soils in
which the clay content is higher—in the loams and heavy loams. With the
increase in decayed vegetable matter, which will be one of the results of
irrigation, this retentive power for water will be considerably improved. This
is exemplified in the case of the soils from the Richmond River and other
places, where the increased humus content has increased the water-holding
capacity of the soil enormously, although the proportions of sand and clay
are, on the average, the same as in our Western soils. This characteristic
of the soil to absorb and to retain moisture is one of the very greatest
importance in determining their fertility; and although the average of the
soils examined from the semi-arid regions is lower in this regard than the
average of soils from other parts of the State, it must be borne in mind that
these soils are for the most part sandy soils, and only fairly comparable
with similar sandy soils from other parts.
The average water-holding capacity of the loams and heavy loams will be
found to be quite as high as that of the same class of soils from other places.
It is, I think, a matter of congratulation that we are able to assure ourselves
that in this important particular the soils in our drier districts are in no
way inferior to those of more favoured regions.
Mineral Plant-food.
A second very striking peculiarity in these soils is the large amount of
mineral plant-food present. It will be seen, on comparing them with the
County of Cumberland soils, for example, that they contain about three
times the amount of lime and potash, and twice as much phosphoric acid.


Comparison of Soils from Humid and Arid Regions of the United States.
(From F H. King, “ The Soil.’')
Soils from humid regions
Soils from arid regions ...
Humus. Nitrogen.
3-04 T3
0-75 -10
.
Lime.
*11
1-36
Pntasli Phosphoric
Pousli. 1 Acid
■22 j ’ll
•73 j ' -12
This is, of course, largely to be attributed to the absence of water, which, in
more humid regions, carries away a considerable proportion of saline matter
into the subsoil. To show that these peculiarities are not abnormal, and
that they correspond with what has been observed elsewhere, I quote some
figures given by the late E. 11. King, Professor of Agricultural Physics at
the University of Wisconsin, in his book on “ The Soil,” contrasting the
chemical nature of arid and humid soils. The figures are taken from
analyses of Hilgard:—
Ih these figures it will be seen that the difference between the amounts of
mineral plant-food are even more strongly marked than is the case with the
figures dealing with our own soils. The explanation given by Professor King
is the same as I have suggested, namely, “ that sufficient water falls for the
decomposition of the rock and the formation of alkalies and of zeolitic
mineral” (zeolites are soluble in hydrochloric acid), “but not enough to
remove these when formed, as is the case in humid regions.” The fact that
these soils are richer in mineral plant-food is one of considerable importance
in relation to their fertility, though it must be remembered that richness in
plant-food is only one of the elements of fertility, and that this property
alone is not sufficient to render a soil fertile.
Humus in American Soils.
A much more striking difference between our soils and those of similar
soils in the States, as examined by Hilgard, is the relatively large amount of
organic matter as compared with the “humus” shown in Hilgard’s analyses.
It must be explained that the organic or volatile matter in our analyses is
not strictly humus only, but includes unchanged vegetable matter, small
root-fibres, and so forth, which are sometimes present in these soils in con-
siderable quantities. It also includes water of combination and carbonic
acid. The true humus—that is, the decayed vegetable matter —is certainly
much smaller in amount, and the very striking peculiarity has been pointed
out by Hilgard that the humus in arid regions is very much richer in
nitrogen than is the case with the humus in moist regions. So much is this
the case that the nitrogen in the humus in arid regions rises as high as 15
per cent., or about three times the amount present in the humus of humid
regions, which is about 5 per cent.
Powdery condition of the soil when dry.
A third striking characteristic of these soils, and one not shown in the
tables, is their peculiar powdery condition when dry. Everybody who has been
in the districts referred to is aware that the surface soil over large areas is
often carried away by the wind in the form of a fine dust, which is deposited
against outstanding obstacles, or, if unobstructed, is carried enormous dis-
tances, to be ultimately deposited when the wind subsides, or carried down ih
the form of mud by a shower of rain This phenomenon is noticeable in all


arid regions, and Hilgard attributes it to the larger content of lime which
these soils contain, ft is well known that the addition of lime to clay
renders the clay pulverulent and incoherent on drying. There are, however,
reasons which make it difficult to accept this as a complete explanation of the
cause of the incoherent nature of our soils. In the first place the quantity of
lime, though larger than in the case of the soils from the more humid parts
of the State, is not by any means excessive, and it is only exceptionally that
they contain as much as is found in the average of the soils examined by
Hilgard. In connection with this matter, Mr. Cohen* has made some experi-
ments in our laboratory in regard to the behaviour on drying of clay soils
mixed with different quantities of lime. He finds that a clay soil containing
■53 per cent, lime (an amount above the average in our soils) when moistened
and subsequently dried, became quite hard —as hard as clay which contained
no lime —and that the addition of 1-5 per cent., making 2 per cent., in all
(an amount which is above the average of the soils quoted by Hilgard), had
very little effect indeed upon the texture of the soil when dried. It required
the addition of at least 3 per cent, (about 15 tons per acre 1 foot deep) to
reduce the soil when dry to the crumbly condition characteristic of the soils
of this region. It would seem, therefore, that some other causes, probably
the absence of humus, operates in addition to bring about this state of things.
This is a subject that will repay further investigation.
Nitrification in soils from arid regions.
The nitrifying power of the soil is one of the most, if not the most,
important index of its fertility, since not only does a vigorous nitrifying
power ensure to the plant sufficient nitrates, which are essential to its proper
development, but the conditions which promote nitrification, namely, aera-
tion, moisture, and warmth, are exactly those which make for fertility. In
this connection the opinion of Hr. Helms,f who gave this subject his special
attention, is as follows:--
Hitrifying organisms appear to be present in the soils examined from all
parts of the State, with the exception of swamp-soils on which water has
lain for some period, and of extremely sandy soils. Sourness of the soil is
detrimental to their growth, and, what is of special interest to our purpose,
dryness of the soil affects the vitality of these organisms very strongly. In
dry soils, such as are met with in the region we are discussing, their vitality
is considerably affected, and their development, when placed under favour-
able conditions, is very slow. When they have once started to develop, however,
their further growth proceeds fairly rapidly. It would appear that dry
conditions, though they do not actually destroy the nitrifying organisms
reduce them to a dormant condition.
The beneficial effects of irrigation were strongly marked in some samples
from rice-fields near Bangkok, These were received in small, hermetically-
sealed tins, and were quite moist on arrival. The nitrifying organism was
present in large quantity, and its development was extraordinarily rapid.
Excessive heat has, of course, also a detrimental effect upon these organisms,
and both excessive heat and want of moisture are conditions which prevail in
the class of soil under discussion. Hence these soils are characterised by the
slowness with which the nitrifying process takes place; but although the
vitality of these organisms is impaired; or their condition modified, to the
extent that their development is exceedingly slow, in no case are they absent,
and when once they commence to develop, the development continues at a
* Chemist's Branch, Department of Agriculture, Xew South Wales,
t Late of the Chemist’s Branch, Department of Agriculture, New South Wales.


normally rapid rate. The conditions which favour their development within
the soil, namely, aeration, moisture, and equable temperature, are conditions
which will result from properly conducted irrigation. Similarly, the nitrogen-
assimilating organisms which occur in the root-nodules of certain plants
depend, of course, upon the vigorous growth of these plants, and, without
irrigation, it appears hopeless to attempt to grow leguminous plants in these
districts.
Prevention of Loss of Water from Soil.
Even in the absence of irrigation a great deal can be done to ameliorate
the conditions of farming in the dry districts. There are large areas in the
State where it is out of the question to establish irrigation works—at all
events, for many years to come. It then becomes a question of conserving
within the soil the moisture present in the soil, and to counteract the con-
tinual loss of water which evaporates from the leaves of the plants and from
the surface. The planting of belts of trees to break the force of the winds is
a very important operation in this connection, since evaporation from both
leaves and soil is greatly accelerated by the passage of hot wind over the land.
Mulching of the surface soil, liming, thorough tillage, and a proper system
of drainage are all operations which result in the production of a fine spongy
texture in the soil, increasing its water-holding capacity and reducing the
amount of surface evaporation.
The Value of Irrigation.
There is no room for doubt that the soils of our arid districts arc admirably
adapted for cultivation by means of irrigation; abundance of water, properly
applied, being the only thing necessary to render them extraordinarily fertile.
Irrigation fertilises.
Irrigation is of value also on account of its direct fertilising effect, since
all water contains more or less saline matter in solution, which is retained
by the soil, and acts as plant-food.
Saline Waters.
There are, however, certain waters which contain substances which in
quantity are injurious to plant-life, and such waters must be employed with
caution. The most commonly occurring of these substances, as far as we are
concerned, are common salt and carbonate of soda. These salts have an
injurious effect both upon the plant and upon the soil
We have found by direct experiments in pots that the growth of wheat is
affected by quantities as low as -05 per cent, to -15 per cent, of common salt,
whilst -2 per cent, prevented germination*
Carbonate of soda (alkali) affects the growth of the plant when present
to the extent of -1 per cent.; -3 per cent, prevents germination and growth.
Our own observations on soils which had become charged with alkali from
continuous flooding without efficient drainage or correctives, show that such
soils are very rich in mineral plant-food, notably in potash, but deficient in
humus and in nitrogenous matter. Their capacity for water is reduced. The
soils become hard —so hard that some of the samples had to be taken by means
of a crowbar. The tendency of continued irrigation with alkaline water is
to destroy the organic matter, the soil becoming cemented together so as
to render tillage operations difficult, and finally impossible.
*F. B. Gut’irie and R. Helms—Jouru. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, XXXVI, p. 191.


A knowledge of the behaviour of these salts is of importance in view of the
fact that a large proportion of the water from New South Wales artesian
bores is charged with one or other of them.
The continued use of such water, if allowed to lie on the land, would in
course of time prove detrimental, and soils have been examined where the
land has been thus flooded without drainage, or any attempt to correct the
alkali present, which have shown as much as -9 per cent, alkali, and exhibit
all the peculiarities described by American writers as characterising their
alkali deserts.
Speaking generally, if this kind of water has to be used, it should,' be
employed with judgment, and care should be taken in the selection of such
crops as are most capable of resisting the action of these salts. This,
combined with a system of drainage wherever practicable, good tillage, and
the use in some cases of substances known to correct the alkali, such as
gypsum on the soil or in the water, will probably enable such water to be
utilised with advantage on these soils.
Lucerne Soils.
The soils from which the average given in the table on page 33 has been
calculated are from the Hunter River district (Maitland and Branxton),
from the South Coast (Shoalhaven River Mats, near Nowra, Milton, and
Tilba Tilba), and from Bathurst.
They are all good lucerne country on which this crop is successfully culti-
vated, and may be taken as being representative of the best lucerne land in
the State. They are friable clay soils, some containing as much as 80 to 90
per cent, clay, the lowest having 60 per cent. At the same time lucerne can
be profitably cultivated on lighter soils, and if irrigation is practised, a
much lighter soil is preferable. They are fairly rich in mineral plant-food,
particularly in lime, an ingredient which is of the first importance in
lucerne-growing. It will be noticed that although the percentage of organic
matter (humus) is not particularly high (it is low compared with the soils
from Dorrigo and Richmond River) the nitrogen content is good. This is
largely due to the faculty possessed by lucerne, in common with other legu-
minous crops, of obtaining its nitrogen directly from the air, and thus
actually enriching the soil in this ingredient.
The growth of lucerne depends loss upon the physical and chemical nature
of the soil than upon the presence of moisture and room for the development
of the root system. The root system of a good, well-established lucerne plant
is enormous, and has been traced to a depth of over 30 feet.
The most satisfactory position is. therefore, along watercourses, or on the
banks of rivers and creeks, where the roots can extend freely downwards to
the water.
In such situations fairly heavy rich soils give the best results, provided
they are friable and contain a sufficiency of lime. Under irrigation, as has
been said, it will do well in much lighter, even sandy soils.
Wheat Soils.
The soils taken as typical of wheat land (page 33) are from the Riverina
district. There is no striking peculiarity about their chemical composition,
and they are very similar to other soil samples taken from the Riverina.
They are generally fairly heavy loams to clay loams. Wheat does best on a
fairly stiff soil, and the ideal soil for wheat is a fairly strong clayey soil, not
too loose in texture. The soils arc not particularly rich in plant-food, and
wheat will grow well on land that is much poorer than is the case with most


Capacity
for water
Volatile
matter,
Nitrogen.
Lime.
j Potash
Phosphoric
Acid.
Typical tobacco soil from Fiji ...
54' 2
7-0
0 18
1-34
0 27
0-30
Tumut tobacco soils
48'3
8'5
0-15
0-37
0 15
0'24
other crops. It follows also that wheat does not require heavy manuring.
The usual practice of applying a small quantity of superphosphate with the
seed is a sufficient manuring for the first few' years. After that a small pro-
portion of potash salts and of nitrogen fertiliser may be added with advan-
tage, but heavy manuring does not pay, particularly in the serai-arid or dry
districts into w'hich wheat-cultivation is now being extended. The extensive
use of soluble nitrogenous fertilisers, such as nitrate or sulphate of ammonia,
is unnecessary under our conditions, for reasons which are discussed more
fully under the heading “ Superphosphates for Manuring Wheat ” in another
part of this publication. (Page 83, et seq.)
Tobacco Soils,
Tobacco is generally regarded as a very exhausting crop, requiring rich
land and heavy manuring. The crop itself, as a matter of fact, makes very
little more demand upon the land than root crops, such as mangels or
turnips, but, from the fact that it occupies the ground for only a short time,
it is necessary that it should be provided with plenty of readily-soluble plant
food.
A light friable loam, well supplied with lime, and of good water-holding
capacity, is the best kind of soil for tobacco. The soils averaged in the table
on page 33 are from the Tumut neighbourhood, and are soils w'hich give good
results with tobacco. They compare favourably with tobacco-soils from
Fiji, the average of a number of which is given below for the sake of
comparison.
Though not as rich as the Fiji soils, it will be seen that with the exception
of lime and potash they approach very close to these, and they are of similar
mechanical nature and texture, being light friable loam, with a fairly high
water-holding capacity.
Vineyard Soils.
The soils taken for the calculation of the typical soil (page 33) for the
production of wine are from the principal wine-producing districts of the
State —Albury and Hunter River districts. They indicate fairly the charac-
teristics of the kind of soil most suitable for the production of the lighter
kinds of wine, and are light loams to light sandy loams, fairly deep and well
drained, and easily worked. Heavier soils are more productive of the fuller-
bodied type of wine, and are said to be liable to impart a heavy and “ earthy ”
flavour to the wine.
Calcareous soils —soils rich in lime —are particularly regarded in Europe
as productive of the best class of wine, and in this respect soils from Hunter
River and Albury are exceptional, being deficient in that ingredient, and its
application either in the form of freshly slaked or powdered lime or of
gypsum will improve the vintage in these districts.
Citrus Soils.
The soils from which the average is calculated (page 33) were collected and
examined by Dr. Jensen from a number of good orchards in County Cumber-
land, between Hornsby and Baulkham Hills. These may be taken as


fairly representing the kind of soil suited to citrus fruits. Their present
■condition is the result of manuring and cultivation extending over many
years, and a comparison with the average soil from County Cumberland
quoted in the same table shows how profound have been the changes
brought about by cultivation. In addition to the increase in plant food
shown in the table there are other changes affecting the mechanical nature
of the soils which are not there shown. The capillary power has been,
reduced in the case of the sandstone soils and increased in the case of the
shale soils to about the same figure in each case. In the same way the
water-holding power of the sandstone soils has been increased, and that of
the shale soils reduced to the figures given in the table.
The original sandstone soils contain, generally speaking, a comparatively
small amount of clay, whilst the soils from the shale formation are more
clayey in nature. Under cultivation the clay percentage in the sandstone
soils has been increased and that of the shale soils reduced to about 72 per
cent, on the average. The soils are no longer the poor, rather hungry soils
characteristic of these formations, but approach more nearly the composi-
tion of a good basalt soil.
FLOOD DEPOSITS.
The silt deposited by floods has a considerable fertilising value, and the
■extraordinary fertility of many river flats which are subject to periodic
floodings is, undoubtedly, largely due to this cause.
An attempt has been made to determine the nature and extent of this
deposit in the case of floods on the Hunter and Hawkesbury Rivers in
1904*
In the following tables are given the composition of these flood %aters
and the amounts of suspended matter (silt), and the chemical composition
-of the silts: —
Analyses of Flood Waters.
Analysis of Hunter River Water.
Parts per 1,000. Grains per gallon.
Total residue .. .. = 2'463 or 172'4
Volatile on ignition ... = 0 308 ~ 21 '6
Fixed residue ... ... = 2155 ~ 150'8
Matter in suspension ... = 2182 ~ 152'7
Analysis of Hav'keshnvy River Watir.
Parts per 1,000 Grains per gallon.
Total residue ... ... = 145 or 1015
Volatile on ignition ... = 'O3 ~ 210
Fixed residue ... ... = 115 ~ 805
Matter in suspension ... ll6 ~ 812
Both waters are slightly acid in reaction.
Analysis of Si f f from Hunter River Wafer.
Per cent.
Insoluble in hydrochloric acid ... ... ... ... ... “ 79*25
Soluble in hydrochloric acid
Oxide of iron and alumina (FeoOj and
Lime (Cat)) ... ... .. ... ... 1 *55
Potash (KoO) .. ... ... ... ... ... = 009
Phosphoric acid (P 206) 0 6 ) ... ... ... . . ... = 018
Volatile matter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... = 9*61
Nitrogen ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 'OB4
Weight per acre, one foot in depth = 3,403,125 lb.
* David and Guthrie —Journ. Roy. Boc. N. S. Wales, Vol. XXXVIII., p, 191.


Analysts of Silt from Jiau-ktsbury liictr Waist.
Per cent.
Insoluble in hydrochloric acid ... ... ... = 89 96
Soluble in hydrochloric acid—
Oxide of iron and alumina (Fe 2 O s and A1 2 0 S ) = 4'77
Lime (GaO) ... = 049
Potash (K 2 O) = 0-12
Phosphoric acid (PjOj) = 008
Volatile matter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... = 468
Nitrogen == o'los
Weight per acre, one foot in depth = 3,307,332 lb.
Assuming an average based on local observations of 2 inches of deposit,
after the subsidence of a flood, the silt left by the Hunter Elver in flood
would amount to 567,186 lb. in weight per acre, and would supply the land
with a top dressing of fertilising constituents to the following amount per
acre:—
Lime 8,791 lb.
Potash 510 ~
Phosphoric acid ... ... ... 1,020 ~
Nitrogen 476 ~
—a manuring which contains sufficient of the necessary plant-food to supply
the requirements of most crops for nearly ten years.
On the assumption that the same volume of water was flowing for the
same length of time at the same rate in both cases, the amount of deposit
left by the flood will be proportional to the amount of suspended matter.
Taking 2 inches to be the depth of deposit left by the Hunter Eiver, then
the Hawkesbury Eiver would deposit under similar conditions as to time,.
volume and rate of flow silt. The weight of this deposit in the case
of the Hawkesbury flood would be 27,561 lb. per acre, or about one-twentieth,
the weight of that left by the Hunter Eiver flood.
This would provide the land with a top dressing per acre of the following-
fertilising constituents: —
Lime 135 Ib.
Potash ... ... .. ... ... 33 ~
Phosphoric acid ... ... ... ... ... 22 ~
Nitrogen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 ~
All the above estimations as to the amount of fertilising material de-
posited are based on the assumption that the depth of the deposit in the
case of the Hunter Eiver flood averaged 2 inches. This appears a very
high average, but there are unfortunately no hydrographical data available
by means of which this can be checked. It would be a matter of consider-
able national importance if further data concerning the rate of flow, volume
of water, height of flood, and amount of silt deposited, &c., could be obtained
during the period of such floods as those now discussed. This is a matter
which might well engage the attention of engineers.
The fact must, of course, not be lost sight of that although such floods
are distinctly beneficial in increasing the fertility of land over which they
flow, their immediate action is more frequently detrimental than otherwise.
Instances have even occurred in which farms have been practically ruined
by heavy deposits of sand brought down by flood currents of more than usual
strength and volume. In any case floods are uncertain in their coming, and,
besides the risk of their destroying growing crops, they render the land unfit
for the plough for several weeks, so that a whole season may be lost.


Depth and
Locality.
Colour.
Reaction.
j
Water ,
Capacity. '
j
Capillary
Power.
4)
Clav =
‘ ijo
% C
£
0
p-C-
O -O
S
be ,4
!
55
6
Remarks.
No. 1 Near silo—
0" to 6" ..
from decomposition of granite in situ.
1 Per cent.
light vellow strongly 25 good
23'8 -160
■111
•072
•140
3-66
6" to 12" ..
reddish
acid.
acid.
1 :
excellent ! 51 - 0 *218
•452
•069
•112
5-S3
> Red colour due
12" to 18" ..
faintly
44 h
,,
61-8 -349
•559
063
■112
8-55
S to ferric oxide.
13" to 21" ..
yellowish
acid.
45 1
44-8 '333
'435
•104
•098
7-72
Contains lumps
24" to 30" ..
light
yellowish
42 :
46-8 -446
•582
•122
■070
6-84
> of decomposed
’ granite.
30" to 30" ..
vellow
,,
30
,,
347 -369
•008
•063
•042
6-07
Very lumpy with
No. 2. Near or-
chard gate—
0" to 6" ..
granite detritus redistributed b\
light brown [ strongly 42 i
water.
good
59-2 -249
■184
•094
•154
5-34
decomposed
granite.
6" to 12" ..
grey
acid.
very
26 !
54-2 .184
•103
012
0
1-
p
1-92
12" to 18" ..
dark grey
faintly
acid.
neutral
42 j
fair
70-1 -307
■371
•052
■070
5-95
18" to 24" ..
24" to 30" ..
> brownish
very
weakly
53 1
poor
85-0 ! *420
.425
■064
•084
6'09
30" to 36" .,
)
alkaline.
NOTES ON THE WEATHERING OF SOILS.
As a general rule, it is not easy to trace any close relationship between
the soil and the rock from which it has been derived. This is especially the
case when the soil has been exposed to atmospheric influences for a long
period, when vegetation has taken a good hold, and when the land has been
under cultivation. The changes brought about by all these processes ren-
dering the mineral matter in the original rock more soluble, and the further
action of plant-growth, rain, drainage, &c., remove the more soluble salts
from the soil to such an extent as to materially alter the original proportion
of the ingredients.
The same thing happens when the soil is transported from its original
position, either by rain or wind, or when the original soil is overlaid by
transported soil from other rock formation or by flood deposits.
If the weathering or other agents of destruction have been sufficiently
active, and have acted for a sufficient length of time, the resulting soil from
a pure limestone rock becomes indistinguishable from that derived from
sandstone.
Where, however, the rock has weathered in situ fairly rapidly, where
vegetation has not taken hold and the rainfall is not excessive, it is possible
to trace the effects of weathering in the different layers of soil.
This has been shown by Dr. Jensen in the case of samples of granite soil
taken from a spot overlying the country rock, where the weathering process
could be traced through the different soil-layers right down to the unchanged
rock.
The result is given in the accompanying table.
Table showing alterations in composition at different depths of a granite
soil formed in situ (Bathurst Experiment Farm).
This table is instructive as showing that the subsoil in granite areas is
invariably richer in mineral plant-food, especially potash, than the surface
soil. The phosphoric acid gets slightly and the nitrogen considerably less
at a depth, but the lime and potash are much higher. It follows from this


that when a granite surface soil gets depleted in potash a good supply can
be introduced by deeper ploughing. In sandstone country this is not true
to nearly the same extent —a fact which makes a poor granite soil an
infinitely better asset than a poor sandstone soil.
INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES IN THE SOIL *
Bare Patches.
It frequently happens that large or small areas of land are found to be-
unproductive or of poor quality, although from their origin, and the nature
of the surrounding country, one would expect them to possess a high
degree of fertility. Of such nature are the bare patches often met with in
otherwise fertile areas.
Such bare patches may occur in areas of a few feet in diameter, or may
be of very considerable extent. The causes of this infertility are various,
and it is by no means easy in all cases to determine to what their unpro-
ductiveness is due.
The following are some of the instances most commonly met with.
Shallowness of Surface Soil.
It may happen that the rock from which the soil is derived has weathered
unequally in different parts, and that undecomposed rock is found quite
close to the surface, thus forming a very shallow surface soil on which
nothing but the most shallow-rooted crops will grow, and resting on a hard
stratum through which water will not penetrate. Crops or trees growing
on such soil may do fairly well until the roots reach the impervious layer,
when they begin to wilt.
The same result is produced when a hardpan or layer of impervious
material is formed below the surface. This hardpan may be formed mechani-
cally by the plough, either by ploughing stiff clay when it is wet, or by
ploughing repeatedly at the same depth. It may also be formed naturally
by the cementing together of the particles of sand and gravel of the subsoil
by humates and silicates, particularly humates and silicates of iron and
lime, and is especially likely to occur in ironstone country. The remedy is
to break up the hard layer by deeper ploughing, and to apply slaked lime.
Scalded Plains.
Where conditions are such that a shallow and dry surface soil, or a soil
deficient in vegetable matter, is exposed to the action of wind, large areas
are frequently denuded. In such cases the top soil is carried away and a
hard surface exposed, destitute of vegetable matter, and which is useless for
the production of crops, or even of grass, until it has been thoroughly worked
and brought under cultivation for some time. These patches form the well-
known scalded or scoured plains of greater or less extent occurring in the
arid and semi-arid districts, and particularly in thinly-timbered country.
* F. B. Guthrie.


The same thing happens in such parts as have been heavily trampled by
stock on stock routes and camping-places. Such lands require only to be
well ploughed and exposed to the influence of rain and sun to render them
again productive.
Sourness.
This is one of the most common causes of infertility in soils. It is
brought about either by the absolute exclusion of air, as in water-logged
soils or soils in which the surface has been impacted; or it may also be the
result of an excessive amount of organic matter, as in peaty soils, in both
cases the result is the formation of organic acids (humic acids, &c.), which,,
in the absence or deficiency of basic substances, such as lime, to neutralise
them, act as plant poisons. They not only affect the growth of the plant,
but have a solvent action upon the soil constituents, which are liable to be
dissolved out and pass into the subsoil. Soils which are red or chocolate in
colour from the presence of oxide or iron, if allowed to become sour, are very
frequently bleached in colour. They also exercise a reducing action upon
the higher oxides, such as ferric oxide, reducing it to the state of ferrous
oxide. It is commonly stated that this latter substance is itself a plant
poison, but since this compound would not be present in soils in good tilth,
but would be converted into the higher (ferric) oxide, it is probable that
the ill effects noted when ferrous oxide is present are in reality due to sour-
ness, and that the presence of ferrous oxide is only one of the results of this
condition.
The remedies for sourness are thorough cultivation and turning of the
soil and exposing it to the air. In cases where it is the result of accumu-
lation of water (in swampy soils) it will be necessary to have recourse to
drainage. The addition of lime to neutralise the acids formed is in all
cases beneficial; and by a proper system of drainage, together with thorough
cultivation and the addition of lime, it should be possible to reclaim the
most sour land. A sour condition of land is usually quite readily recog-
nisable by the experienced farmer from its appearance, the peculiar odour
when moist, &c.
As this condition is due to acidity, sour soils have always a strong acid
reaction towards litmus; but as this reaction is influenced by other factors,
it is not a reliable indication except in experienced hands. It must also be
remembered that cultivated soils nearly always possess an acid reaction.
Protoxide of Iron and Pyrites.
The presence of these compounds in the soil is generally an accompani-
ment of a sour condition of the soil, and is due to the same cause—want of
aeration. It is doubtful whether they are themselves active plant poisons,
but their presence is always associated with an infertile condition.
The presence of ferrous oxide is indicated by a bluish or greenish colour-
ation in the clay. This colour changes to red or reddish brown when the
soil is aerated.
Pyrites and marcasite (sulphide of iron) are commonly occurring minerals,
and their presence unchanged is also a sign of deficient aeration.
It is also stated that ferrous sulphate, the substance into which the sul-
phide is at first converted on oxidation, is itself a plant poison if present in
excessive quantities, so that such soils will require very thorough aeration in
order to convert the ferrous sulphate into the fully oxidised ferric compound.


At the same time it must be remembered that ferrous sulphate is recom-
mended by many writers as a manure. A very effective fertiliser was pre-
pared locally by mixing boiling-down soup with ferrous sulphate. It is
probable that the injurious effects noticed when the compounds under dis-
cussion are present are due less to the substances themselves than to the
conditions under which they are produced.
The treatment of soil in which these substances are present is the same as
in the case of our soils —cultivation, liming, and draining.
Alkalinity.
The reverse condition to that of sourness, and one equally injurious to
plant life, is the presence of alkali in the soil. As far as New South Wales
is concerned this alkalinity is due to the presence of carbonate of soda, and
A “Bare Patch” in the Mature Wheat at the Coolabah Experiment Farm.
is almost exclusively associated with the use of bore water; naturally
■occurring alkali soils such as are found in other parts of the world are
practically non-existent.
The continued use of bore water, especially when used to flood the land,
and on dry land which is level and has no adequate natural or artificial sys-
tem of drainage, results in the accumulation on the surface soil, as the water
evaporates, of a white incrustation of carbonate of soda. This substance
(alkali) acts injuriously in several ways. It corrodes the stem or crown of
the plant or tree with which it comes in contact at the surface; it dissolves
■out the humus or vegetable matter of the soil, and it combines with the clay,


forming a substance which is extremely slimy and sticky when wet, and
which dries to a hard mass which it is almost impossible to break up with
any agricultural implement. On drying, the surface contracts and opens out
in cracks, thus damaging the roots of the crops.
If it is necessary to use this class of water for irrigation, the following
precautions must be taken :
The land must be efficiently drained if there is no natural run-off for the
water; the water must be run on in channels and cross-furrows, so that it
penetrates the soil laterally; it must be used in moderation, and not allowed
to lie on the surface; the surface soil should be continually cultivated with
the harrow, and, if possible, kept well mulched with vegetable matter.
Of the substances recommended to neutralise the effect of alkali, gypsum
(sulphate of lime), in the form of powder, was first suggested by Professor
Hilgard for the alkali lands in the United States, and has been found suc-
cessful. Its use has not been adopted locally to any extent, but there can be
no doubt that it would be effective. It can be applied either directly to the
land itself, or placed in the channels or flumes so that the water has to pass
over it.
The use of nitric acid has also been suggested; but, unfortunately, the
results of the experiments so far carried out locally have not been very
definite. The application of an acid naturally suggests itself as the most
The “bare patch” terminates abruptly at the boundary of the plot to which superphosphate has been applied.
obvious means of neutralising an alkaline substance, and nitric acid has the
additional advantage that it converts the injurious carbonate of soda into a
valuable fertiliser —nitrate of soda. Recent experiments reported by the
Queensland Department of Agriculture indicate that it can be applied with
benefit to the bore water in proportions which will depend upon the amount
of alkali in the water.
Common Salt (Sodium chloride).
Except in the case of bore water, where its presence no doubt increases
the injury done by the alkali, but where its power for evil is insignificant in
comparison with that of carbonate of soda, common salt is hardly ever met


with in our soils, other than those close to the sea or salt-water creeks, and
liable to flooding. Crops vary considerably in regard to their power of
tolerating the presence of common salt. Some plants, such as beetroot and
asparagus, benefit from its presence; it is also said to be a good manure for
mangels and cabbages; and such plants as saltbushes, &e., contain consider-
able quantities in their tissues. Most farm crops will stand as much as from
01 to 02 per cent, salt in the soil, but if the amount exceeds this quantity,
crops are likely to be affected.
The action of salt is injurious in several ways. It affects the production
of nitrates and the process of nitrification, and also affects the texture of the
soil. The addition of salt, in the first instance, flocculates the clay particles,
and makes the soil temporarily more friable; but it has a very damaging
after-effect, due probably to its combining chemically, with exchange of base,
with the silicates, particularly silicate of lime, and forming colloidal sili-
cates, thus rendering the clay slimy.
Manganese.
Although salts of manganese, in small quantities, are found to be beneficial
(indeed some, chemists go so far as to say necessary) to the growth of crops,
they are undoubtedly injurious in larger quantities. Several instances have
come under our notice in which small, bare patches occur in a field otherwise
fertile; and examinations of these patches and of the surrounding good soil
have shown them to be similar in all respects, except that the bare patches
contain manganese, whereas the good soil either contains none, or propor-
tionately much smaller quantities.*
The action of manganese is peculiar, and extremely interesting. It would
appear that certain compounds of manganese are more toxic than others, and
that the higher oxides of the metal are more toxic than the lower, so that
the process of aeration, usually of benefit in increasing the soil’s fertility, has
in this case a distinctly prejudicial action. The result is that it may happen
that a soil may yield good results for a year or two, and suddenly develop
toxic properties, due to the conversion of the more innocuous forms of man-
ganese into higher oxides of greater toxicity. Another point of some interest
is that, when the quantity of manganese present is small in amount, it
frequently happens that crops suffer during the winter months, and provided
the quantity of manganese present is not excessive, recover themselves with
the advent of the warm weather, and when their growth is more vigorous.
Soils containing excessive quantities of manganese are generally dark in
colour, and frequently it is possible to distinguish small particles of man-
ganiferous compounds, black in colour, and very soft.
Generally speaking, manganese poisoning may be suspected when the
affected patches are darker in colour than the normal soil, when the bad
effects do not appear until the land has been under crop for a year or two,
and when the crop suffers in the winter and recovers itself during the
summer. It not infrequently happens that these bare patches change their
position from year to year; that is to say, an area which was bare one
season will resume its normal condition in the next, while other patches in
the same paddock will become infertile. Such a condition of affairs will
lead one to suspect the presence of manganese.
* See article on this subject in the Agricultural Gazette for March, IhlO.


With regard to remedies, it has been found that the addition of super-
phosphate has a decidedly beneficial influence on such soils, probably due to
the formation of manganese phosphate—a compound of lower toxic action
than the oxide. The data so far obtainable are insufficient to justify this
being put forward as an infallible remedy, but it has been found to bo
successful where it has been tried, and is worth further trial.
Magnesia.
Although lime is one of the most important elements of soil fertility,
magnesia, which is a very similar compound, and which is frequently found
associated with lime, is by no means desirable in any considerable quantity.
Although limestone rocks almost invariably produce the most fertile soils,
those formed from dolomite (magnesian limestone), which is carbonate of
magnesia, are of poor quality, and even the presence of any quantity of
magnesia in the limestone renders the soil a poor one.
The general result of experimental work in the field and in pots tends to
show that when the magnesia in a soil exceeds the lime the soil is an
unproductive one. Loew, who has particularly studied this matter, finds
that a certain ratio must be preserved between the lime and the magnesia in
the soil. This ratio appears to vary with different crops; some crops do best
when the amounts of these compounds are equal, whilst others require about
two or three parts of lime to one of magnesia.
The remedy most likely to be effective in the ease of soils whose infertility
is due to excess of magnesia is the addition of lime, in order to restore the
balance, and such soils come under the heading of those which are deficient
in lime, although actually the amount of lime salts present might be suffi-
cient provided magnesia was absent.
Toxic Substances Secreted by the Plant.
It is well known that when certain crops are grown continuously on the
same ground -without fallowing or rotation, the land becomes unsuited to
that particular crop. The cause usually assigned to this phenomenon,
namely, that the continued growth of the crop in question removes certain
elements of plant-food necessary to that crop, requires some modification
in view of recent investigations.
The United States Bureau of Soils has advanced the suggestion that the
plant during its growth secretes toxic material which is injurious to the
succeeding similar crop, though not to crops of a different nature, and a
good deal of work has been done in trying to isolate and identify these toxic
substances. A corollary of this theory is that the beneficial action of
fertilisers is due less to their actual value as plant-food than to the fact that
they neutralise or otherwise alter these poisonous substances.
Another theory is that these plant toxins are formed not by the direct
secretion of the growing plant, but by the action of bacteria upon the
residues left in the soil by the crop. Such a theory would afford an explana-
tion of such phenomena as clover sickness, &c., where it is found that bad
results follow the continuous growth of the same crop on the same land,
although the soil itself may show no appreciable loss of plant-food.


It must, however, be stated that these theories have not yet advanced
much beyond the speculative stage; and that, although a considerable
amount of work has been done, and several definite organic substances have
been isolated, the toxicity of these substances in the field has not yet been
established conclusively.
Whatever may be the real cause of the trouble, whether it is due to soil
exhaustion or to the production of toxins, either by the growing plant or by
bacterial action on crop residues, or to a combination of these causes, the
remedy indicated will in every case be the same, namely, crop rotation or
fallowing.
Excessive Concentration of the Soil water.
Damage may also be done to the growing plant by otherwise harmless or
•even beneficial ingredients, when the solution in which they are presented to
the plant is too concentrated. During dry spells, for example, the soil
moisture will contain a relatively larger amount of soluble saline matter
than under normal conditions; and it may quite easily happen that a soil
on drying out during a dry spell may lose moisture to such an extent that
the remaining water may contain an excessive quantity of salts in solu-
tion. If the quantity of matter dissolved in the moisture in the soil is in
excess of that present in the cell of the plant-roots, the result is that the
water will pass out of the cell into the stronger solution outside, with the
result that the contents of the cell will shrink and the plant itself wilt.
The ill effects of want of water during a protracted dry spell are thus
accentuated by the danger of an over-concentration of mineral matter in
the remaining soil moisture. A rich soil, therefore, one well supplied with
soluble plant-food, would be expected to show the ill effects of drought even
more than a. poor one.
This would also account for the fact that heavy manuring with artificial
fertilisers is generally found to be rather harmful than beneficial in dry
seasons, and that under such conditions light dressings are superior to
heavy ones.
Calcium Chloride.
This substance is stated by some authorities to be harmful to the growth
of crops, though I am not aware of any exact experiments being recorded
which prove its toxicity in the field. We know that chlorides of other metals
are frequently injurious. The case of sodium chloride (common salt) has
already been dealt with, and potassium chloride is found to be much inferior
to potassium sulphate as a fertiliser for certain crops (such as potatoes and
tobacco) ; and it is quite likely that calcium chloride is an undesirable
form in which to apply salts of lime.
In certain bare patches from Coolabah Farm examined by Mr. Cohen, and
reported upon by him in the February, 1910, number of the Agricultural
Gazette, he found not only a condition of considerable concentration of
plant-food in the soil moisture, which we have already seen is injurious,
but only a small proportion of lime and an absence of carbonic acid; and
from the fact that the soil from the bad patches was deliquescent, and con-
tained a larger proportion both of lime and chlorine than the good soil,
Mr. Cohen suggests the presence of calcium chloride.
In such cases, also, the addition of lime is the remedy which suggests
itself, so that the crop can be supplied with lime in another form than that
of calcium chloride. Here, again, it must be borne in mind that the
toxicity of calcium chloride has not been proved by exact experiment.


Alum.
A substance which is frequently accused of causing infertility in soils is
alum. Alum is a double sulphate of alumina and potash, and it is not
quite obvious why it should have such a bad name. In water cultures of
spirogyra it has been recently found by M. ITuri (Hied. Gentr. 1909, 38, p.
670) that proportions of aluminum salts as low as -003 per cent, deprive the
cells of starch. As a matter of fact, of all the soils examined here in which
alum is stated to have been the cause of the trouble, none have contained
alum; and the infertility has been due either to sourness (in the majority
of cases) or to the presence of common salt.
Samples of incrustation or efflorescence occurring on such soils, and stated
to be alum, turn out on examination to be salt or alkali, and the trouble is
in all cases due to inefficient drainage, and disappears when the land is.
properly drained.
Absence of Elements essential to Fertility.
In addition to the presence of the actively injurious substances enumer-
ated above, soil infertility may be caused by the absence or deficiency of
certain essential soil ingredients.
Want of lime, for instance, as we have seen, may induce sourness and a
disturbance in the ratio between lime and magnesia. Its absence also affects
the growth of many crops for which it is an essential plant-food, particu-
larly leguminous crops, lucerne, clovers, &c.
Deficiency in humus is a common cause of infertility. A soil deficient
or wanting in humus is less able to withstand droughty condition, lacks
cohesion, and is easily blown or washed away, and is unfavourable to the
growth of micro-organisms. The subject is more fully dealt with on
page 70.
Absence of bacteria, particularly of the nitrifying organisms, is prejudicial
to the satisfactory production of crops. The cause is generally one or other
of those discussed above, either want of aeration, lack of lime or vegetable
matter, sourness, bad tillage or drainage, &c., and when such soils are
restored to good condition the development to the nitrifying organisms will
proceed normally.
Want of plant-food is, of course, a common cause of infertility, especially
in the case of land which has been exhausted by repeated croppings without
manuring or rotation. Proper manuring, having due consideration to the
requirements both of the soil and of the crop, is the remedy, provided that
the land is in good condition; but the important fact must not be lost sight
of that the mere addition of plant-food is not sufficient unless the soil is in
such mechanical condition that it can make good use of the manure applied.
Manuring alone is not likely to be of any benefit on land that is badly
drained, sour, or in bad tilth.
Presence of Organisms which destroy the Nitrogen-forming Bacteria.
In connection with one of the causes of sterility noted above, namely, the
absence or deficiency of bacteria, the results of an investigation of the
greatest interest and importance has recently been published by Messrs.
Russell and Hutchinson from the Eothamsted Laboratory. These investi-
gators find that probably in all soils the development of these bacteria is
kept in check by the presence in soil of certain larger unicellular organisms
(Protozoa) which feed on the bacteria concerned in the formation of soluble
nitrogen compounds.


If the soil is partially sterilized by heating for a short time to the tem-
perature of boiling-water, or by subjecting it to the action of vapours such
as chloroform, bisulphide of carbon, toluene, &c., such vapours being sub-
sequently removed by spreading the soil out in a thin layer and allowing
the vapour to evaporate, the effect is to destroy the protozoa and probably
most of the bacteria as well, but not the spores of the ammonia-producing
bacteria. These spores subsequently develop, and in the absence of the
hostile protozoa, their development proceeds with increased activity, the
result being a considerable increase in the soluble nitrogenous plant-food
and a more vigorous crop growth.
These experiments have so far been carried out in the laboratory. If
means are discovered of partially sterilizing the soil in the field a most
valuable method of increasing the fertility of the soil will be placed at the
disposal of the farmer.


SECTION II.
The Chemistry of the Soil.*
Introductory.
The essential difference between the now methods of farming and the old is
that the old rule-of-thumb methods are being superseded by those which are
based on a study of the conditions under which crops grow, and of the
relationship of the growing plant to soil and air and water. These new
methods have become necessary because of the changed conditions under
which farming is carried on. The number of people who have to be supplied
with food is continually and rapidly increasing, competition is getting
keener, the available land of good quality is diminishing, and poorer land or
land in a less favourable climate has to be opened up, and the need has arisen
■of utilising to the utmost the resources of the soil. This is only possible by
the application of principles which science has discovered. This does not
mean that the farmer must necessarily bo a scientific man, but it is becom-
ing every day more and more necessary that he should understand something
■of the principles on which farming depends.
Agriculture is an art, and it is an art that was practised centuries before
the sciences were born with which it has become associated in modern times.
Man raised corn and made bread and wine thousands of years before he
knew anything of the constituents of grain and grape, or the nature of fer-
mentation, and a man can to-day be a thoroughly successful farmer without
knowing anything about botany or pathology, or entomology or chemistry.
Xevertheless, the farmer of to-day, working under modern conditions,
cannot afford to neglect the teachings of science as far as they affect his own
art, and that farmer will be the successful one who is able to understand
what science has to tell him, and to utilise the weapons which she puts into
his hands. And agriculture is indebted to science not only for the knowledge
of useful facts and principles, but in a still higher degree for the scientific
method of work, the spirit of inquiry, the patient, accurate, and systematic
attention to the minutest details. Without this, the farmer becomes a mere
sowing and reaping machine, incapable of progress, and at the mercy of
adverse seasons and crop diseases.
The following notes are written with the object of affording some infor-
mation (avoiding technicalities as far as possible) of the nature and func-
tions of this all-important material —the soil—which, though it is no more
than a fine dust-film on the surface of the globe, and is infinitely small com-
pared with the mass of the earth, is nevertheless the substance on whose
support all the teeming life of the earth depends.
The point of view from which our study of the soil will proceed will be
that of the conditions which make for soil fertility. Ty a fertile soil is
meant one that is most favourable for producing crops, and if we know the
factors on which this depends we shall be able to maintain the fertility of a
good soil, to restore it to impoverished soils, and to increase it in barren ones.
* F. B, Guthrie.


Classification of Soils.
The classification which will be adopted in the following pages is that based
upon the mechanical condition of the soils and depending upon the propor-
tion of particles of different size. For all practical purposes one based on
the proportion of sand and clay is sufficiently close, and the following table
gives the standard which is adopted:—
of Soil.
Clay. Sand. Gravel, &c.
Per cent. Per cent.
Clay 75 ... 90 10 ... 25
Heavy loam ... ... 60 ... 75 ... ... ... 25 ... 40
Loam ... 30 ... 60 40 .. 70
Light loam ... ... 20 ... 30 ... .. ... 70 ... 80
Light sandy loam ... 10 ... 20 ... ... .. SO ... 90
Sand 0 ... 10 ... 90 ... 100
Gravelly soils contain over 20 per cent, gravel.
Calcareous soils „ „ 5 per cent. lime.
Peaty soils „ „ 20 per cent, humus.
There are, however, other methods of classification which can be usefully
adopted under different circumstances. For instance, the farmer will dis-
tinguish between light and heavy soils, plain, timber, and swamp soils, or
according to the nature of the vegetation, as pine country, box country, &c.,.
or according to the different crops for which they are particularly suitable,,
as wheat land, lucerne land, grass land, &c. Another method of classification
frequently adopted is one depending upon their manner of formation into
sedentary aiid transported soils, and as these terms are commonly met with
in text-books, it will be useful to define them a little more accurately.
Sedentary soils are those which overlie the rocks from which they are
formed, and transported soils are those which have been carried away by the
action of wind or rain, or streams, or by glacial action, from their original
positions.
Transported soils are divided into colluvial soils, such as are found on
hillsides or in undulating country, which have been moved from their
original position, by the agency of wind or rain, and alluvial soils which
have been carried away by streams and rivers and deposited often far from
their original position by the action of running water.
Sedentary soils are usually met with on upland plateaux and are generally
shallow, their depth depending upon the length erf time during which denud-
ation has taken place and the amount of transportation which they have
undergone. They merge gradually and imperceptibly into the rock from
which they are derived, and a knowledge of the nature of the underlying
rock is of value in determining the character of the soil.
Colluvial soils — Drift soils. —In the ease of these soils the surface has
been removed from its original position, and has become mixed with soils
derived from other rocks, often of quite different character.
Their transportation may have been brought about by a variety of causes,,
such as the action in remote times of glaciers, or by the action of rain or of
wind or running water.
Examples of drift soils blown about by the action of the wind are to be
found in the western plains, where the movements of the soil during con-
tinued wind-storms have resulted in the transportation of the surface soils to
new positions, where they are often piled up to the depth of several feet.


Alluvial toils are found in the beds of old watercourses or on either side
of the banks of flowing streams, where they are deposited by the rise and
fall of the river, and especially during floods. The Hunter Valley, in New
South Wales, where the river is not only subject to periodic floods, but is
continually changing its course, affords an excellent example of a large area
of country covered by such alluvial soils.
Alluvial soils are also met with in the plain country, where no rivers are
to be seen, and occupy the beds of dried-up watercourses, along which they
were originally deposited.
Such alluvial soils are generally of great fertility, largely due to the fact
that the soil particles are exceedingly fine. Those formed by the deposition
of silt in successive floods upon the river banks are often of great depth, and
much of the best lucerne land of the State is found in such localities.
Formation of Soils.
Soils are produced in the first instance by the weathering of rocks. By
weathering is meant the continued action of wind, water, and changes of
temperature upon the rock, and the term includes the mechanical and
chemical changes brought about by these agencies, as well as by the action
of vegetable and animal life.
The disintegration of rocks to soil is an exceedingly slow process. It has
been calculated that the disintegration of limestone rock (one of the most
readily-weathered rocks) to the depth of one metre would take over 70,000
years. Syenite would take ten times as long to disintegrate to the same
depth.
Weathering of Rock.
Action of Air —(a) Mechanical. —Air acts mechanically by the actual
pressure exerted by the wind upon exposed surfaces, and by the bombard-
ment of rock surfaces by wind-borne material such as fragments of rock and
pebbles. Its action is also of importance in the removal by wind of the dis-
integrated rock, leaving fresh surfaces exposed to the other disintegrating
agencies. It is also one of the principal factors in the formation of the
drift-soils mentioned above.
(6) Chemical. —The chemical disintegration of rock, due to the action of
the constituents of the atmosphere, is for the most part brought about by the
carbonic acid and oxygen. The action of carbonic acid is amongst the most
powerful of the agencies at work in the disintegration of rock, and since its
action is practically confined to the solution of the gas in water, either in
rain or in spring or in river water, it will be better discussed later under the
heading of Water (page 64).
The action of oxygen is practically confined to the further oxidation of
lower oxides of such metals as iron and manganese. A large number of
minerals contain ferrous oxide, to which they owe their dark colour. This
oxide really absorbs oxygen, being converted into ferric oxide (rust), the
■change being accompanied by an increase in bulk which assists in shattering
the rock in which these minerals occur.
Changes of Temperature.
The mechanical effects of alternate heat and cold are potent factors in the
-disintegration of rocks, which, with few exceptions (such as limestone,
•quartzite, &e.), are made up of a mixture of different minerals. These


minerals expand and contract unequally when subject to variations in tem-
perature, and their alternate contraction and expansion is an important
factor in the slow breaking down of rocks.
The daily alteration of temperature between night and day is capable of
effecting the disintegration of the hardest rocks. This disintegration is
accelerated by the fact that into the minute crevices so formed, water, dust,
plant-roots, &c., are carried, themselves acting as further disintegrating:
agents.
On mountain ranges and over extensive plains, where frosts occur, and the
air is clear and dry, the action is yet more marked. The surface soil in the
deserts of Central Asia and other parts of the world, including the interior
of our own continent, has been formed in this way, aided, of course, by the
other weathering agencies.
Water.
The effect of water, and especially of water containing carbonic acid in
solution, as is the case with rain-water and most spring and river water,-has
most far-reaching influence in the disintegration of rocks and their conver-
sion into soil.
(a) Mechanical Action of Water. —Water acts mechanically in several
ways. The actual bombardment of exposed surfaces of rock by rain results
in its slow attrition. Running water traversing rock surfaces exerts a very
considerable erosive action apart from its solvent action. The action is
further hastened by the removal to lower levels of the particles thus torn
away and the exposure of fresh surfaces of rock to the weather.
Running water also plays an important part in the transport of soils from
one part to another, from higher to lower levels, and in the formation of
alluvial soils by the deposition of mud and fine silt during flood. Such
alluvial soils occur along the banks of all our rivers for some distance from
the river banks, and in the case of rivers which wind tortuously through
level country and are subject to frequent floodings the extent of the alluvial
deposit is very considerable. When such a river, as is the case with the
Hunter, frequently changes its course, the extent of the alluvial deposit
becomes still greater.
The alternate freezing and melting of water plays an important part in
mechanical rock disintegration. Even the most compact rocks are not
entirely impervious to water, and contain a small amount of moisture,,
known to quarrymen as “ quarry water.” Water in freezing expands about
one-tenth of its bulk, so that in situations exposed to alternate frosts and
thaws, the amount of disintegration brought about by this means is very
considerable, particularly when the alterations are rapid, say, warm days
followed by frosty nights. During periods of prolonged frost this action
does not proceed.
Connected with the action of moving water, we must also take into account
the action of glaciers, wdiich, though it takes no present part in the formation
of soils on the Australian continent, has undoubtedly been an active agent
in the past in the disintegration of mountain ranges and the transport of the
debris to form soils in the valleys.
(h) Chemical Action of Water. —The chemical action of water, and
especially of the dissolved substances, is undoubtedly the most extensive
agent in the denudation of rocks.
Water acts on the soil constituents in two ways —
(a) By combining chemically with the ingredients to form hydrates;;
and (6) by its solvent action.


(0) A large proportion of the minerals which form rocks are hydrated
silicates, containing a certain proportion of combined water. The hydration
of these minerals is accompanied by considerable increase in bulk, which
assists in the disintegration of the rock-mass, and also produces a substance
which is more readily attacked than the original silicate. A good example
of the expansion of rock on hydration is met with in the well-known opera-
tion of taking a cast in plaster of Paris, which is burnt gypsum, a substance
which frequently occurs in rock-masses. When plaster of Paris is moistened
with water it absorbs the water and becomes a hydrate, and in so doing
expands so that if a mould is made round a coin or medal and filled with
moistened plaster, this will expand in drying out and setting, and force itself
into the irregularities of the surface, forming a reproduction of the original
medal.
(1) It is, however, the solvent action of water which plays the most
important part in the breaking up of rocks. Even pure water exercises a
slight solvent action on the minerals of which rocks are composed. If a
little finely-powdered felspar be shaken up with water, the water will show'
an alkaline reaction, and turn red litmus paper blue —showing that some-
thing has been dissolved from the water. The same thing happens with
powdered glass. Absolutely pure water is, however, not met with in nature.
Natural water contains appreciable quantities of dissolved materials, some of
which, such as carbonic acid, ammonia, nitric acid, exert a very considerable
solvent action upon rock particles.
Carbonic acid is present in all natural waters to a greater or less extent.
Even in rain-water the quantity, though small and very variable, is appreci-
able, and amounts to as much as 1 per cent. The solvent action of waters
holding carbonic acid in solution is very considerable. Some rocks, such as
limestone, are completely soluble in such a solvent. On this account waters
flowing over limestone rocks are invariably hard owing to their containing
carbonate of lime in solution.
Ordinary spring and river waters do not, indeed, contain very much car-
bonic acid, but some springs contain a very considerable quantity of the gas
dissolved under pressure, and the effervescence of many mineral waters is
due to the escape of this gas when the pressure is released on reaching the
surface.
Other rocks and minerals are not so readily dissolved as is carbonate of
lime, but all are very much more soluble in water containing this gas than
in pure water. Felspar, for example, is very readily attacked, the carbonic
acid removing the potash (or other base) and leaving a residue consisting
of pure clay. Even silica is attacked by it, and the minerals composed of
hydrated silica —such as flint, jasper, and even quartz—are sensibly attacked
by it. Quartzite is the only rock that may be regarded as practically
unattacked by carbonic acid.
T-he ammonia contained in rain-water has also a very powerful solvent
action upon silicates. Finely-powdered glass is quite readily soluble in
ammonia; and the windows of stables, where organic matter is undergoing
decay and ammonia is evolved, are frequently frosted by the action of this
latter substance.
Nitric acid in the air also aids in the solvent action of rain-water.
The dissolved saline matter in rain-water also helps in the disintegration
of rocks, both by its chemical action and by its mechanical. In the neigh-
bourhood of the sea especially the air contains particles of salt which are
dissolved by the rain and carried into the minute abrasions and »revices
117299—0


formed in the rock by the mechanical action of wind and rain. As the water
evaporates the salt crystallises out, expanding in the process, and thus aiding
the work of disintegration.
The Action of Vegetation.
As soon as a very small quantity of disintegrated soil is produced, it
becomes at once the medium for the germination of small seeds wind-blown
or dropped by birds. As these seeds germinate and grow they assist in the
disintegration of the rock below, mechanically by forcing their roots into its
mass, and chemically by the solvent action possessed by their roots. Even
on the solid rock vegetation can gain a foothold. The first forms of vegetation
are the lichens which cover the surface of the rock in moist and sheltered
places. These plants secrete oxalic acid —a much stronger acid than car-
bonic acid—which attacks the lime in the rock. Crystals of oxalate of lime
are frequently found in lichens. By their growth they exclude light and air,
and help to keep the rock moist, thus favouring its farther denudation.
When a certain amount of soil has been produced by the growth and decay
•of these lichens other forms of vegetation can obtain a foothold —mosses,
terns, stone-crops, and saxifrages, followed by other shallow-rooted plants.
By the decay of these and the continued disintegration of the rock, the soil
gradually' increases in depth until higher plants and trees are able to find
•support and nourishment.
Bacteria.
Bacteria and micro-organisms generally play a highly important part, not
only in the transformation of organic material within the soil (which will be
discussed more fully under the heading “ The Plant’s Supply of Nitrogen,”
page 75, et seq.), but also in the formation of soil from the disintegration of
rocks. The bare surfaces of rocks contain large quantities of organisms
which, with the aid of the oxygen, ammonia, watery vapour, and carbonic
acid of the air, are capable of decomposing the rock and of forming nitrates
and accumulating carbon.
Factors which determine Fertility.
The fertility of a soil depends only partly on its contents of plant-food
(potash, lime, phosphoric acid, and nitrogen), and partly on the power the
soil possesses of making use of these compounds. We have to take into
account the other characteristics which conduce to fertility, especially- the
power possessed by the soil of changing the condition of the plant-food.
The soil is not an inert mass of material, out of which the plant picks
whatever material is present for its nourishment, and, having exhausted that,
dies. When we talk of changes that take place in the soil, we must realise
that the changes are constantly going on, that the material of which the soil
is composed is continually changing, that the growth and decay of plants,
the movements of underground animals and of minute organisms, the fall of
rain, the evaporation of moisture, alternations of temperature, of night and
day, of summer and winter, even alterations of atmospheric pressure, the
passing of clouds, and countless other phenomena of which we take no heed,
or whose action we do not y-et fully understand, all these agencies produce
an incessant series of changes within the soil. When we add to these the
changes produced by human agencies—by cultivation, by ploughing, liming,
manuring, &e., &c.—it will be seen at once that a mere statement of the


amount of fertilising material in the soil, even if we could say how much
was actually available for any particular crop, is not all that is wanted if
we are to judge of the soil’s fertility.
The fertility of a soil depends, then, in the first place, upon the presence
of a sufficiency of plant-food, and, secondly, upon certain physical charac-
teristics, possessed more or less by all soils, which effect the splitting up of
the mineral ingredients and nitrogenous matter in such a way as to render
them available to plants, as well as regulating the supply of water, warmth,
&c.
Of these physical characteristics the most important are —■
The texture or porosity of the soil—On this characteristic depends a large
number of the properties conducive to fertility.
'Ey the porosity of the soil is meant the fineness and the number of its
■pores. We must distinguish between this and permeability to water; a
coarse sand, for example, is permeable to water, but possesses properties
exactly opposed to those of a porous soil. Humus soils axe especially porous.
On the fineness of texture depend the following characteristics: —
The capillary power, by which is understood the power of imbibing water.
This property maintains a continual circulation of water within the soil, and
consequent aeration. It is, moreover, largely through the agency of this
circulating water, which is charged with carbonic acid and different salts,
that the mineral and, in a less degree, the organic matter of the soil is
rendered available for plant-food, and presented in solution to the plant.
The capillary power of a soil depends very largely upon the fineness of its
texture. The nearer the texture approaches that of a sponge the greater will
be its capillarity.
Humus has a very high capillary power, which is not possessed to any
extent by either coarse sand or clay.
The capacity of the soil for water is also of special interest, and depends
partly upon its porosity and partly on its content of organic matter. Peaty
and humus soils, other things being equal, have the highest capacity for
water, followed in order by marls, clays, loams, and sand.
The hygroscopic power —that is, the poever of attracting water vapour —is-
of practical importance, in that it prevents undue evaporation, and prevents
the soil from becoming parched up. It also serves as a guide to the absorp-
tive power for other gases. This property, like capillarity, is due entirely to
the fineness of texture, and the order is the same —humus, clay, loam, marl,.
sand, and coarse sand.
The absorptive power of the soil for salts is another factor of very great
importance in determining the fertility of a soil. This power which soils
possess of removing saline matter from solution, and retaining it within
their pores, is due partly to the chemical nature of the soil, resulting in a
chemical interchange of basic, constituents, and partly to its mechanical
structure, the fineness of its texture, substances such as humus and clay
possessing the power in a remarkable degree.
Nitrification.
We now come to the most important property possessed by soils as affecting
their fertility, and, at the same time, the most obscure, namely, their power
of nitrification. This property depends upon a number of points on some
of which our information is not very clear.


From what we know of the process of nitrification, we can lay down with
tolerable certainty the following conditions as being favourable to the
process: —•
We must have free access of air and moisture, a certain degree of warmth,
the presence of nitrogenous organic matter prone to oxidation (represented
by humus). The presence of reducible mineral matter, such as sesquioxide
of iron or metallic sulphates, is also favourable. A sufficiency of basic sub-
stances to combine with the nitric acid appears to be advantageous to
nitrification.
Putting on one side the bacteriological aspect of the phenomena involved,
we shall find that the formation of nitrates within the soil is due primarily
to oxidation, and that within certain limits the power of oxidation which
the soil possesses is also the measure of its nitrifying power.
Wo are, therefore, justified in assuming that a soil will be most favourable
to the development of the nitric ferment which combines the following
characteristics: —
Ist.. A proportion of humus.
2nd. Warmth.
3rd. Provision for free access of air and of moisture (these depend upon
its porosity, and are determined by its capillary power).
4th. Good drainage, to prevent stagnant water accumulating.
sth. A certain proportion of basic substances.
These conditions arc more fully discussed on page 16, but it will be seen
that, beyond the presence of certain mineral and organic matter, the con-
ditions favourable to nitrification are those whose presence otherwise indi-
cates fertility—namely, fineness of texture and absence of excessive water.
If the capillary power of the soil is low, it indicates an unfavourable con-
dition for nitrification.
It has been stated that the presence of nitrates in the soil assists in ren-
dering soluble the potash in such insoluble combinations as felspar, which is
an additional mode by which the nitric organism promotes fertility.
Provided then, that the condition of the soil, as indicated by the physical
properties above enumerated, is favourable to the metabolism of plant-food,
its fertility will depend upon the amount of that plant-food, and it is imma-
terial whether that food be now in a soluble state or not. If the mineral
and nitrogenous matters are present in sufficient quantity, and the soil pos-
sesses high absorptive capacity', high capillary power —in short, is of good
texture, and possesses the conditions conducive to nitrification —it may be
fairly expected to prove a fertile soil; and, in cases where one or more of the
conditions conducive to fertility are absent, we may look to improved
methods of cultivation to attain that fertility'.
The above considerations lead us to attach special importance to two
factors in particular besides the chemical nature of the soil. One factor is
the texture of the soil, its porosity', and the second is the amount of humus
>or decaying organic matter it contains.
It may bo worth while to study these two points a little more in detail.
Texture of Soil.
We have seen chat the texture is of first importance in determining the
fertility of the soil. We will now discuss some of the conditions which
affect the texture and some of the means to be adopted to promote the
desired porosity of texture.


Relation of Texture to Moisture.
The ideal condition of the soil as regards moisture is obtained when the
soil contains about half the amount of water which it is capable of holding.
For example, a fairly heavy clay soil will have on the average a capacity
for water of about 40 per cent. —that is to say, 100 lb. of such soil
will contain, when fully saturated with moisture, about 40 lb. of water. It
is generally agreed that the amount of moisture most favourable to plant
growth is something under half this amount, namely, about 18 per cent. If
a much larger proportion of water exists than this, the interstices of the soil
are filled with water instead of air, consequently there is a deficiency of
oxygen, which we have seen is one of the prime agents in promoting chemical
action within the soil. The soil becomes what is called water-logged, and
the chemical action which we have recognised as essential to fertility is at
a standstill. The roots of the plants, moreover, are immersed in water.
The condition of things in a soil containing the proper amount of water,
and in good tilth, is pretty much as follows: —The minute grains of which
the soil is composed do not form a compact mass, but the intervening spaces
are so small that they act as capillary tubes, of the same nature as the pores
of a sponge or the little tubes of an ordinary wick, and their effect upon the
water present is exactly the same as the bundles of hollow tubes in the wick
—that is to say, they draw the w y ater up by the attraction of the sides of the
tubes. Each grain of the soil will be then surrounded by a thin film of
■water, which in its turn encloses and surrounds small bubbles of air. (In
the case of a waterlogged soil, these bubbles are driven out, and there is
little or no air in the soil.) In and out amongst the grains of soil the plant
pushes its roots and its root-hairs in search of food and moisture. If the
above rough description is at all clear it is obvious that the water in the soil
is continuous —that is to say, a sufficiently minute organism could pass
through the entire soil in the water, without ever having to touch a particle
of soil, or pass through a bubble of air. The result of this is that, supposing
a particle of water to be removed at any point, either by evaporation at the
surface or by absorption by means of the root-hairs, its place is at once
taken by adjacent water, and the whole of the water in the soil is at once
set in motion until equilibrium is again restored. It follows from this that
a crop with well-developed roots is itself an important factor in retaining
moisture within the soil, for, as the water is absorbed by the root-hairs at
any point and circulates through the plant, its place is taken by adjacent
particles of water, so that a steady flow of water is set up towards that
point.
The evil effects of too much moisture, which cannot get away, have been
already mentioned. In addition, it is to bo noted that this is one of the
most common causes of sourness in the soil. Sourness —that is, the forma-
tion of certain acids within the soil —is directly due to the absence of air
and oxygon, and can be remedied by the free admission of air, as by turning
over and exposing to the atmosphere.
To prevent this accumulation of water, the remedy is to drain. In many
cases where it is due to the presence of a stiff clay subsoil, through which the
water cannot penetrate, subsoiling is resorted to; but it is also possible to
have too little water in the soil, with the result that the crops wither and die,
and this takes place when the evaporation equals or exceeds the absorption
by the roots. Plants absorb water only through their roots and root-hairs.


Evaporation.
The soil-water evaporates in two ways. The water absorbed by the root
diffuses throughout the cell-system of steins and leaves, and evaporates
through the breathing-pores of the leaf. Water is also lost by evaporation
from the surface of the soil.
Both kinds of evaporation are increased by high temperature, dryness of
the atmosphere, or a high wind —that is to say, evaporation is most rapid in
hot, dry weather and a windy day; it is slowest in cool, moist -weather and
calm air.
The advantage of shelter in the shape of trees is, therefore, quite obvious
as a means of cooling and moistening the air and breaking its force, and
thus preventing too rapid evaporation. It is, unfortunately, largely ignored
in New South Wales, where most of the trees are religiously “ cleared,” and
the crops protect themselves against drought as best they can.
I do not know of any other method for checking the evaporation from the
leaves winch has been successful, though one or two have been suggested.
With regard to the evaporation from the surface-soil, the case is different.
Evaporation from the surface can be checked by mulching. A covering of
leaves or farmyard manure, or any other form of mulch, protects the surface-
soil from the heat and the dry winds which cause rapid evaporation, and
prevent the too great loss of moisture; or the same result can be obtained
by hoeing or stirring the surface-soil, winch has the effect of breaking or
widening the capillary tubes at the surface, and by this moans preventing
the upward motion of the water, for a time at least, and until the water has
found out the new channels. Hoeing, therefore, which is generally practised
for the removal of weeds, has another equally beneficial action, and it should
be done, even where there are no weeds.
The above remarks show how important a matter is the texture of a soil in
its relation to moisture, the ideal soil being one of a fine tilth, from which
excessive moisture drains readily away, in which there is free movement of
air and water, and in which too rapid evaporation is checked.
Humus.
Closely connected with the soil’s texture and its consequent relation to
moisture is its content of humus. Humus is the black or brownish matter
in the soil produced by the slow decay of organic matter, whether of animal
or vegetable,origin. It is not a definite chemical compound, but a mixture
of a number of different compounds, the nature of which varies, both with
the original matter and with the ago of the product.
Over that considerable portion of the State’s arable land on which the
rainfall is limited or uneven, the need of retaining within the soil whatever
moisture is received as rain is one of paramount importance in the treat-
ment of the land. The maintenance of the soil’s fertility in these areas
becomes largely a question of conserving this sometimes scanty supply, and
soil treatment having for its object suitable means of maintaining the most
favourable conditions as to moisture will claim the most serious considera-
tion of the farmer.
As the land taken into cultivation gradually extends so as to include more
and more of the area within the belt of reduced rainfall and approaching to
serai-arid conditions, this question of the conservation of soil moisture
becomes of increasing importance.


It far exceeds in importance the question of manuring, and it is safe to
say that unless the conditions as to moisture arc satisfactory, the application
of manures is not likely to be of any benefit, and the money expended on
their use is practically thrown away.
Apart from the question of cultivation and drainage, the maintenance of
the best conditions as to water within the soil depends to a very large
extent upon the presence of humus. Humus, which is derived from the
gradual decay of animal or vegetable matter within the soil, is one of the
most important of the soil’s constituents, and any great variation in its
amount affects profoundly the value of the soil for agricultural purposes.
Functions of Humus.
The presence of humus in the soil increases the fertility in the following
ways: —
In the first place it absorbs and retains moisture in the soil, and prevents
surface evaporation. A surface soil, fairly rich in humus, exercises much
the same influence on the underlying soil as does a mulch of dead leaves or
other vegetable matter. During dry spells, and under the influence of hot
winds usually prevalent under such conditions, the loss of moisture from the
soil by surface evaporation is enormous, and in soils destitute of humus this
loss is so rapid as to result in the drying up of the soil and the wilting of the
crops. The final result of such conditions is the formation of scalded spots
and the complete removal of the fine surface soil in the form of dust.
The humus in the soil is the ingredient which is most subject to alteration
and destruction, and under dry conditions it is more or less rapidly
destroyed. As soon as it has lost its moisture and become dry it is rapidly
burnt out by the combined action of sun and air. So that it is exactly in
those circumstances where its presence is most essential that it is most liable
to destruction, and the necessity for renewing it most urgent.
The presence of humus in the soil tends to improve its texture,
lightening and loosening it, and preventing compaction of the surface, so
that it is of special value in the amelioration of stiff soils.
It is the principal source of nitrogen in the soil, and by its decay under
the influence of soil organisms, ammonium salts and nitrates are produced,
which are the forms in which this important element is assimilated by the
plant. It is of interest to remember that the humus of arid or semi-arid
regions is richer in nitrogen than that of the moister districts. This is a
point of great importance with reference to the potential fertility of these
soils. In point of fact, from a variety of causes acting together, the soils of
the dry climates are richer in plant-food of all kinds than are the soils in
regions of greater rainfall, consequently nothing but the absence of water
prevents these from being extremely reproductive. There is, therefore, no
problem which exceeds in importance that of retaining in the soil the little
moisture that it receives, and any operation that succeeds in arresting even
partially the unavoidable loss of that moisture deserves the highest con-
sideration.
Methods of supplying Humus.
There are three ways of supplying humus to soils in need of this constitu-
ent, namely, by the application of generous additions of farmyard manure
(in cases where this is available), by the application of compost manure, and
by green-manuring, or the ploughing under of a quickly-growing green crop
(leguminous for choice).


(a). —Farmyard Manure.
Except in some dairies or such farms on which the animals are stall-fed
the material known as farmyard manure is nothing more than the solid
excrements of animals, and does not contain either the urine or the vegetable
matter used as bedding which is the characteristic of farmyard manure
made and used in Europe and colder countries.
Owing to the absence of vegetable matter such manure has very little
value in the formation of humus, and it is probably most economically used
in the compost heap.
(&). —The Compcst Heap.
The compost heap is a most valuable adjunct to the farm, and it is a very
groat pity that it is not more frequently to be found.
A heap or pit can be made very economically, and is of special value in
that it utilises all sorts of vegetable and animal refuse, which would other-
wise be wasted, and converts it into a valuable manure, rich in organic
matter, and eminently suited for soils low in humus or subject to droughty
conditions.
The principle of the compost heap is the fermentation of easily-decom-
posed vegetable matter in the presence of earth and lime. It is not only sub-
stances like peat and straw, which form the usual basis of compost heaps,
that arc thus decomposable, but almost every kind of organic substance, both
of vegetable and animal origin, can be thus composted. Dead leaves, bush
scrapings, sawdust, weeds, tops and stalks of vegetables, as well as bone and
animal refuse, can be treated in this manner. In the case of animal refuse,
the operation is much slower, and substances like bones should be first
crushed. It is also important to bo sure that animal refuse so treated is not
derived from a diseased source.
The best way of making and maintaining the compost heap will depend
largely upon local surroundings.
As a general method of procedure the following will be found satisfac-
tory : —Make a heap with alternate layers of earth, refuse, and lime. Under
the term refuse is included all the refuse material of animal or vegetable
material mentioned above. Cover the whole with a layer of earth. When a
sufficient quantity of refuse is again collected, place it on top of the heap
and cover with a layer of lime, and lastly of earth, until the heap is 3 or 4-
feet high. The heap should be kept moist, and for this purpose all refuse
water from the house, slops, urine, &c., should be added. The heap may be
conveniently watered by making a hole into the interior and pouring the
liquid in. The outer covering of earth has the object of absorbing any
ammonia which is evolved in the process of fermentation and by the action
of the lime.
When the heap has been prepared it must be left to itself to ferment for
some time. Probably a few months will be sufficient unless very refractory
substances, such as bone, &c., are present. In a few months’ time it should
be well forked over and another layer of lime, and finally of earth, should be
added. In the course of another month or two it should be ready for use,
and you will have provided yourself at a very slight cost with an excellent
manure, rich in humus, and will have utilised for the purpose a great amount
of refuse material which would otherwise have been lost or burnt. When
refuse material is burnt, the ashes, though still possessing manurial value
on account of the lime and potash and phosphates they contain, are of


incomparably less value than the original substance out of which they are
derived, owing to the absence of humus material and nitrogen, both of
which have been lost in the process of burning.
Instead of a heap the compost may be conveniently prepared in a pit. In
either case the bottom should be cemented, or so drained that the liquid
escaping from the mass can be collected and returned to the compost.
It will be found advantageous to prepare a second heap while the first
one is ripening and being used. It will also be found that if it is desired
to use more concentrated fertilisers, such as superphosphate, potash, and
ammonium salts, these can be mixed with advantage with the compost
manure before being applied to the land. Used in this way they will be in
less danger of leaching away, and will bo of greater benefit than if applied
directly to the land.
(c). —Green Manuring.
Amongst the most effective methods of supplying humus to the soil and
increasing its fertility is the practice of green-manuring—that is, the plough-
ing under of a green crop. The beneficial action of this operation is a twofold
one: it enriches the soil, in the first place, by supplying it with a consider-
able proportion of readily-availablo plant-food; and in the second place, by
adding humus, and thus improving the soil’s texture and its power of absorb-
ing and retaining moisture. When such a crop is buried, the surface soil
becomes enriched by the nourishing materials which the crop, during the
period of its growth, has drawn from the air and from the lower portions of
the subsoil, and this material is now placed within the reach of the succeed-
ing crop.
During the growth of the plant the soil has, in addition, been stirred up
and disintegrated by the development of the roots. When ploughed under,
provided that sufficient moisture and warmth are present, the buried mass
decomposes with more or less rapidity, and the succeeding crop gets the
benefit of the fertilising ingredients contained in the decaying mass of vege-
tation in a readily-available form. The resulting humus is of the greatest
value, not only as a source of plant-food, but in improving the soil’s texture,
in prei’enting too rapid evaporation, and in enabling the soil to absorb and
retain water, thus rendering it less liable to suffer during dry spells.
A further important result is the formation of carbonic acid by the decom-
position of the buried crop. Carbonic acid is given off abundantly in the
fermentation of the mass and assists in the disintegration, of the soil and in
rendering available the plant-food contained in it.
Green-manuring is effective both in sandy and in heavy clay soils, and,
indeed., on all soils deficient in humus. On sandy soils the effect of green-
manuring is to consolidate the soil, the humus formed binding the particles
together. On clay soils, the effect of the addition of humus and the produc-
tion of carbonic acid is to loosen and aerate them. When conditions as to
warmth and moisture are favourable, and the crop decomposes fairly rapidly,
the production of soluble plant-food proceeds with considerable rapidity.
This is especially the case in respect of nitrogen, which is the principal
manorial ingredient. Nitrification (that is, the conversion of the nitrogen-
ous material of the plant into soluble nitrates) takes place quite rapidly. In
sandy soils, green manure nitrifies more rapidly than manures like dried
blood, bone-dust, &c., and only less slowly than ammonium sulphate; while
in stiff clay soils the green crop nitrifies very much more rapidly than either
sulphate of ammonia or animal manures.


With regard to the kind of crop to be used for the purpose of green-
manuring, a good deal of latitude is permissible. Any crop that is rapid
and luxuriant in growth, and that can be readily turned under, is suitable
for the purpose, and the selection will bo guided by considerations such as
the time of year at which it is to be grown, its suitability to soil and district,
&c. Amongst the most effective class of crops for the purpose are legumin-
ous plants, such as clover, cowpcas, lupins, &c., since these are specially
valuable on account of their power of obtaining their nitrogen from the air.
They are, therefore, especially suitable for soils poor in nitrogen, and are of
high value in enriching the soil with this ingredient. There are, however,
many other crops which are suitable for the purpose, and frequently used,
such as mustard, buckwheat, &c. These are all rapid growers, and can be
grown as catch-crops—that is to say, after the main crop has been harvested
and before the succeeding one is sown. The practice of growing a crop of
tares or vetches after the wheat crop has been harvested is very common in
Europe, and can be followed successfully here in districts where the autumn
rainfall is sufficient. Such a catch crop occupies the ground only at a time
when it would be otherwise unoccupied, and, during its growth, is collecting
plant-food from air and soil, which is utilised for manuring the succeeding
crop.
The practice of green-manuring is of special value in orchard work, where
the green crop can be grown and ploughed under between the rows.
It must be borne in mind, in all cases, that green-manuring depends for
its success upon conditions favourable to the decomposition of the buried
green crop, namely, sufficient warmth and moisture. A crop ploughed under
in the late autumn or winter will nitrify only slightly, and the same applies
to ploughing under a crop in a dry season. If the land is quite dry the crop
will remain buried without decomposition for a considerable period, raid its
benefit is lost.
Proportion of Nitrogen supplied to Soil by Green Manuring.
With regard to the actual amount of material supplied to the land by
ploughing under a green crop, some experiments were carried out at the
suggestion of Mr. W. J. Allen, the Emit Expert of the Department.
The produce of one square yard of crops of vetches, at Waggn, Bathurst,
and Hawkesbury College, was harvested carefully, tops and roots, and for-
warded for analysis. In the case of the Wagga sample, the roots were
obtained by washing away the soil, and Mr. McKcown calculates that ho
succeeded in obtaining 95 per cent, of the total weight of roots in the soil.
The produce of tops from one square yard was 4 lb. 14% oz., or 10 tons
12 cwt. per acre; and of roots, 1 lb. 9 oz. per square yard, or 3 tons 7 cwt.
per acre. Analysis showed that the tops contained 87 per cent, water (13
per cent, dry matter) and -506 per cent, nitrogen; the roots contained 83 per
cent, water (17 per cent, dry matter) and -213 per cent, nitrogen.
When, therefore, this crop is ploughed under, it will add to each acre of
the soil, in the shape of dry matter, 1 ton 7 cwt. tops, and 11% cwt. roots,
including 120 lb. nitrogen from the tops and 1G lb. nitrogen from the roots;
a total of 136 lb. nitrogen per acre. Assuming that conditions are favourable
for nitrification, this will bo equivalent to a dressing of nearly 7 cwt. sul-
phate of ammonia per acre, or over 11 cwt. dried blood—an enormous
dressing.
The soil in which this crop was grown was a light loam with about 25 per
cent. clay. The clay is of a tenacious character, and has a tendency to cake
hard on drying. The soil is low in humus, containing only about 4 per


cent, of this ingredient. It is fairly rich in potash and satisfactorily sup-
plied with lime, but rather low in nitrogen and phosphates. It is, conse-
quently, just the type of soil in which green-manuring should be effective, as
the effect of ploughing under the crop will be to break it up and render it
more friable, and to supply the deficiencies in humus and nitrogen. Its effi-
cacy is, of course, dependent upon conditions as to rainfall being favourable
to its decomposition in the soil. The climate of Wagga is not very favourable
to the growth of these crops.
At Bathurst, and at the Hawkcsbury College, where conditions are more
favourable, the benefits of green-manuring are even more striking. Mr.
Allen obtained similar samples of tops and roots, representing the produce of
one square yard from crops grown at these places, and they gave the follow-
ing figures:—
At Bathurst, the tops weighed 17 lb. and the roots 2 lb. 5 oz. per square
yard, or 30 tons 14 cwt. tops and 5 tons of roots per acre, giving a total of
dry matter to be ploughed under of 4 tons 15 cwt. from the tops and 16 cwt.
from the roots. Assuming' the same nitrogen content in tops and roots as
was found in the Wagga plants, this would give when ploughed under 411 lb.
nitrogen per acre from the tops and 22 lb. nitrogen from the roots.
At Hawkesbury the produce was 21 tons 12 cwt. tops and 4 tons 14 cwt.
roots per acre. When ploughed under, this would yield 2 tons 16 cwt. dry
matter from the tops and 16 cwt. dry matter from the roots. With -5 per
cent, nitrogen in the tops and -2 per cent, in the roots, the soil will be en-
riched in nitrogen by 242 lb. per acre from the tops and 22 lb. from the
roots.
The Plant’s Supply of Nitrogen.
The question of the plant’s supply of nitrogen is one of the most interest-
ing of the problems presented to the agriculturist; it is also one of the most
obscure and least understood. A largo proportion of the dry matter of all
plants consists of nitrogenous material, and this portion of its structure is
of fundamental importance to the plant. Further, it is upon the nitrogenous
matter of plants that animals depend for their proteid material —blood,
flesh, &c. —since animals can only utilise for this purpose nitrogenous
material already elaborated in the tissues of plants or other animals.
The ultimate source of all this nitrogenous matter is the free nitrogen in
the atmosphere. It is the study of the different methods by which this
element is brought (naturally or artificially) into combinations in which
it can be utilised by the plant that will form the subject of the present
discussion.
The plant may absorb its nitrogen in two -ways, either by means of its
leaves from the free nitrogen or from the ammonia or the nitric acid in the
air, or by means of its roots.
With regard to the first of these, the absorption of nitrogen by means of
the leaf, the question cannot be said to be definitely settled at the present
time; the consensus of opinion, however, is that if such absorption takes
place, it does so to a very limited extent, and is insufficient to constitute part
of the economic functions of the plant.
By means of its roots, however, the plant absorbs nitrogen, in the form
of either nitrates, nitrites, or ammonium salts dissolved in the w r ater of
the soil. . ;


It appears probable that the nitrogenous material taken up by the plant
from the soil by means of its roots enters the plant in the form of nitrates.
In the case of leguminous plants, as we shall see later on, the free nitrogen
contained in the air imprisoned in the soil can be made use of under certain
conditions by the roots of these plants.
Formation o! Nitrates in the Soil.
It has long been known that the addition to a sterile soil of a quantity of
a more fertile one rendered the sterile one fertile; and the operation of top-
dressing poor soils in this manner was a common one amongst the nations
of antiquity.
When the subject was approached in the light of more recent advance in
scientific knowledge, it was shown that this increase in fertility was accom-
panied by an increase in the quantity of nitrates in the soil. How it was
that the addition of so small a proportion of a soil containing nitrates could
bring about the large increase of nitrates observed was a problem which
remained unsolved until the discovery by Pasteur of organisms capable of
inducing fermentation and of producing certain chemical substances as by-
products, paved the way for a rational explanation of the process. Pasteur
himself surmised that this gain in nitrates was due to bacterial activity.
(a). — From Nitrogenous Organic Matter.
In 1877, it was shown by Schloessing and Muntz that the formation of
nitrates (nitrification) only took place within certain temperatures, and that
it could be entirely stopped by antiseptics—such as chloroform vapour—
showing that nitrification was brought about by the action of organisms.
We know now that quite a number of different organisms take part in
the conversion of organic nitrogenous material into nitrates. In the first
stage of the process, the nitrogenous matter in vegetable or animal refuse
is converted by putrefaction into humus, carbonic acid being evolved and
the nitrogen converted into simpler forms such as amides ( asparagin , urea )
and ammonium carbonate; the familiar odour of stables and dung-heaps
being due to the ammonia evolved. Quite a number of bacteria and moulds
possess this power of converting albuminoid matter into ammonium salts.
In ordinary manure heaps moulds produce this decomposition; in arable
soils it is brought about by the action of bacteria (particularly by Bacillus
mycoides, which is widely distributed in the surface-soils, air, and water).
The further nitrification of ammonium salts is the work of yet other bacteria.
Warington first showed that there were two distinct stages in the conver-
sion of ammonium salts into nitrates, and that nitrites were formed as an
intermediate oxidation. Consequently, there must bo two distinct organisms
involved.
In 1890 these were isolated by Winogradsky, who found two distinct
organisms capable of converting ammonium salts into nitrites —namely,
xJitrosomonas europea, occurring in soils of the Old World, and a nitro-
eoccus, which he found in American and Australian soils.
The further conversion of nitrites into nitrates is the work of another
Organism, of the genus nitro-bacter.
Frapps has identified a fourth organism, which it is stated converts nitro-
genous organic matter directly into nitrites and nitrates. The process takes


place, more or less vigorously, in all soils not absolutely destitute of organic
matter, but there are certain conditions "which are more particularly favour-
able to the process. They are —
1. The presence of organic matter prone to oxidation, represented by
humus.
2. The presence of suitable food for the growth and development of the
organisms, such as lime, potash, sulphates, and phosphates, and free
carbonic acid.
3. Suitable temperature. The optimum temperature being about 35° to
36° 0. Nitrification is stopped at temperatures over 50° to 55° C.,
or at 0° 0.
4. The presence of a base to combine with the free nitrous and nitric
acid formed. Carbonate of lime is the most suitable. The presence
of free acid prevents nitrification, so does excessive amount of
alkali (carbonate of soda).
5. Moisture.
6. Absence of too strong light.
7. Presence of sufficiency of oxygen (the process is essentially one of
oxidation).
8. Good drainage.
(b). —From the Nitrogen of the Air.
We have, so far, discussed the question of the plants’ supply of nitrate'3
(which are the principal source of the plants’ nitrogen), and we have seen
that these are derived from the decomposition of animal and vegetable nitro-
genous matter within the soil. How is this material, in its turn, derived
from the free nitrogen of the air, for that must be its ultimate source?
Atmospheric nitrogen is converted into organic material in nature in
several ways.
Quite a number of free-living organisms have been isolated during recent
years which have the power of fixing the free nitrogen of the air, and thereby
enriching the soil in nitrogenous material and nitrates.
The Azotohacter chromacoccum (for example) of Baeyerink is capable of
fixing atmospheric nitrogen in a medium in which nitrogenous matter is
absent, the fixation being due to the presence of lime, and is much more
active in soils rich in lime.
These free-living organisms do best in soils containing organic matter, but
poor in nitrogen. Hall thinks that, as in the case of the nitrifying organisms,
the fixation depends upon the oxidation of carbohydrates, which supplies the
energy.
Henry has recently found that decaying leaves of forest trees, such as oak
or beech, possess the power of fixing free atmospheric nitrogen in consider-
able quantities. The fallen foliage on the surface of the ground in an oak-
forest accumulates 13 kilogrammes of nitrogen per hectare annually (11(4
lb. per acre). In the case of beech leaves, 22 kilogrammes is annually accu-
mulated per hectare (19(4 lb. per acre).
(c). — By the Boot-nodules of Leguminous Plants.
An extremely interesting instance of the absorption of free nitrogen by
a certain class of plants was first observed by Hellriegel and Willfarth.
The roots of leguminous plants when vigorously growing develop small
nodules or excrescences, which contain bacteria capable of fixing the free
nitrogen in the interstitial atmosphere of the soil, and of handing it over to
the plant in a form in which it can be readily assimilated. The process is


either symbiotic or parasitic, and is quite distinct from the fixation of nitro-
gen by the free-growing organisms, and explains the enormous gain in
nitrogen found to result by the growing of a crop of clover or peas. The
growth of such a crop, even if not turned under, enriches the soil in nitrogen
by the production of these nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
Pure Cultures of Nodule Organisms for Use.
Many attempts have been made to prepare cultures of these organisms,
for use in directly inoculating either the seed or the soil. The best-known
of these was a preparation originally prepared by Professor Nobbe, and
known as “ Nitragin,” which has been in use for many years, and which con-
sisted of gelatine cultures of these organisms. Its use was not attended by
universal success, and many attempts have been made to prepare by other
methods cultures of these organisms which shall possess greater vitality and
be of more universal practical application. The best known of these in
recent years have been prepared by Professor Hiltner, in Germany, by Dr.
Moore, of the United States Department of Agriculture, and by Professor
Bottomley, of London.
Eeports of exact experiments conducted with these cultures in England,
Canada, and South Africa, show that it is premature to claim for them
anything like certainty in ordinary farm practice. Our own experiments
with Dr. Moore’s cultures, both in pots and in the field, have likewise yielded
■disappointing results, and the fact is forced upon us that the reports of the
remarkable results alleged by the American magazines to have resulted from
their use have been much exaggerated. It is always quite possible that some
method of preparing these cultures will be devised by which the vitality of
these organisms may be retained and their use made of practical value for
farm-work.
Artificial Fixation of Atmospheric Nitrogen.
The free nitrogen of the air can then be utilised in the manner above noted
by plants for their growth, principally by means of free-living organisms
within the soil and by the bacteria in the root-nodules of leguminous plants.
A point of the very greatest importance to us is, can we produce artificially
this nitrogen absorption ? Can we convert atmospheric nitrogen into a form
in which it can be utilised by the plant? The importance of this point is
enormous, for nitrogen is one of the essential constituents of the food of
plants, and owing to the soluble nature of the nitrates produced by the soil,
it is continually being washed out by rain into the subsoil beyond the reach
of the plant-roots. Consequently, it is necessary to constantly replenish it,
and this is done by manuring.
Manures such as blood, bone-dust, stable manure, nitrate of soda, and
sulphate of ammonia, owe their value to the nitrogen they contain, and
enormous quantities of the more concentrated manures, such as nitrate of
soda and sulphate of ammonia, are used for this purpose. Nitrate of soda is
at present exported from a narrow strip of land east of the Andes. The
present export is about f,500,000 tons per annum, equal to £16,000,000. It is
expected that the deposits will be exhausted in 1950. It is not only the most
important, but the most expensive of the fertilising ingredients, costing
about 9Jd. per lb., potash costing about 2|d.,* and phosphoric acid about lid.
to 2Jd., according to its solubility. If a cheap method of fixing the nitrogen
in the limitless expanse of air could be devised, it would bring about the
most important results in the increase of the yield of farm crops. Many
* Pre war price. At present practically unobtainable.


attempts have been made to do this, but so far they have not resulted in the
production of an economic manure. .Nitrogen is one of the most difficult
elements to fores into combination; it combines directly with only a few
elements.
The text-books tell us that nitrogen is the most inert of elements. It
would, however, be fairer to say that it is characterised by a highly aristo-
cratic exclusiveness. So strongly marked is this characteristic, that even
when it has been coaxed into certain combinations (such as nitro-glycerine,
picric acid, nitrogen chloride, &c.), it sets itself free on the slightest provo-
cation, and with explosive violence. On account of this aloofness, it has not
as yet been possible to devise means whereby atmospheric nitrogen can be
made to combine readily and cheaply in such a form as to be available for
plant-food when applied to the soil. Eccentiy, however, experiments have
been carried out in one or two directions which contain considerable promise
of success, and the future developments of these processes will be watched
with extreme interest.
Calcium Cyanamide.
"When air from which the oxygen lias been removed, and which is practi-
cally pure nitrogen, is passed over calcium carbide at a white heat, it com-
bines, forming a compound known as calcium cyanamide (Kalkstickstoff),
CaCN,, in the form of a fine black powder. This is readily converted by
water into ammonia, and the crude cyanamide has been found to possess
manorial value, due, no doubt, to the production of ammonia. The results
of trials with it at Eothamsted and several of the German experiment
stations show that while it has a distinct mammal value, there is nothing to
show that it has a higher manorial value than sulphate of ammonia, with
which it -cannot compete in price, at least at present. There are certain
disadvantages connected with its use; for instance, it must not be used as a
top-dressing, as loss of ammonia results; nor must it be mixed with super-
phosphate, as the mixture becomes hot. It is most efficient when sown about ten
days before the seed, as when sown with the seed it has a markedly injurious
effect upon the germinating power. It is most effective when mixed with
peat, or applied to peaty soils, the peat no doubt acting as an absorbent for
the ammonia. It may be said that its future success depends upon whether
it can be produced at a cost which will enable it to compete with ammonium
sulphate or nitrate of soda.
Production of Nitrogen by Electricity.
Another more recent, and apparently more promising, method of utilising
atmospheric nitrogen, has been rendered possible by later developments in
electricity. When air is sparked, the nitrogen and oxygen combine to form
nitric oxide, which in the presence of water becomes nitric acid. This
happens always in the neighbourhood of electrical machines, and the light-
ning flashes during thunderstorms also produce the same result, so that the
air during thunderstorms always contains small quantities of nitric acid.
Many attempts have been made to utilise this action on the manufacturing
scale. Amongst the earliest of these which had any measure of practical
success was Bradley and Lovejoy’s, which was in operation at Niagara Falls
until 1904. The latest and most successful of these processes is that patented
by Birkland and Eyde in 1903 (see Journal of Society of Chemical Investi-
gation, 1905). This is being carried out at Savelgfors, in Norway, where
works have been erected utilising 30,000 horse-power and producing large
quantities of calcium nitrate for use as a manure. The several features of


the process are the following:—Air is led into .a specially-constructed electric
furnace, where it is heated to a very high temperature by an electric arc,
spread out into a fan-shape under the influence of powerful electro-magnets.
The oxides of nitrogen formed are passed into towers, where they are dis-
solved in water and concentrated. The whole of the gases are not, how-
ever, absorbed by the water, as it is so diluted with the air which passes over
with it that at least half escapes absorption. This is passed into a tower
charged with milk of lime, where it is converted into nitrite and nitrate of
calcium. By further treatment with nitric acid, a calcium nitrate, contain-
ing about 13-2 per cent, nitrogen, is formed (pure Ca (jST0 3 ) 2 = 17 per cent,
nitrogen). It is placed in the market, either in this form (either fused or
in crystals), or, preferably, by converting it (Messel’s process) into a basic
fait by calcining it with lime, this product being non-hygroscopic, whereas
calcium nitrate absorbs water from the air and becomes moist. This is a point
of considerable importance in determining its value as a manure.
Calcium nitrate appears to bo just as effective as sodium nitrate contain-
ing the same amount of nitrogen. The determining factor is, of course, the
cheapening of the unit-cost of the current, by the provision, for example,
of water supply adequate to produce the requisite power at a cheap rate,
MANURES AND MANURING.*
In order to understand properly the action of the different substances used
as manures, if will be necessary to study in some detail the food-requirements
■of the different crops and the manner in which these are satisfied.
The Chemical Composition of the Plant.
Tins subject will be dealt with as broadly and generally as possible, so
as to avoid technical language, and to bring into prominence only those
essential points which will enable us to understand the connection between
the chemical requirements of the plants and the part played by the soil and
bv manures for their provision.
We shall not go far wrong if we assume that all plants are built up of the
same elements combined together in different proportions. The.-o elements
are carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus, silicon, chlorine,
■and about half-a-dozen metals in combination. It is in the relative propor-
tion of these elements and their compounds to which the great differences in
the chemical composition of the various plants are duo.
Different combinations of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen give us the large
class of bodies known as carbohydrates, including such dissimilar substances
as starch, sugar, the woody structure, cellulose, gum, &o. Hydrogen and
oxygen combined give us water ; nitrogen, united with the above elements
and sulphur, forms the nitrogenous constituents of the plant, such as the
gluten in wheat. Little is known regarding the manner of formation of
these substances in the living plant. Still less is known of tire metals—their
•disposition in the plant, and the changes they undergo. We are able to
detect their presence in the ash, in combination with oxygen, phosphorus,
sulphur, and chlorine.
Not only do the quantities of the different elements vary in different
plants, but in the same plant some elements are present in quantities out of
all proportion to the others. Over one-half of the bulk of most growing
* F. B. Guthrie.


plants consists of water. In watery fruit, such as. the melon or cucumber,
the percentage of water is as high as 90 to 90. Of the remaining portion of
the plant the compounds of the metals rarely exceed 2 per coat., and are
more often about 1 per cent. This you may readily prove by burning a
weighed quantity of any green crop until a white ash, or nearly so, is left.
The ash from every pound of such crop will not weigh more than 100 grains.
The point of importance for us to keep in mind is that each of these
plant-constituents is as necessary for the well-being, even for the existence,
of the plant as any other, whether that constituent bo present in large or
small quantities. The substances found in the ash, though present in minute
proportions, arc as indispensable to the well-being of the plant as the elements
found in large quantities. Nut only that, but if any single one of the ash-
constitucnts is insufficiently supplied—if the potash is deficient or the iron—
the plant likewise suffers, although the amount of such element does not in
many cases amount to more than a fraction of 1 per cent.
The volatile portion of the plant—that is, the water, carbohydrates, nitro-
genous matter—is for the most part abundantly supplied to it, by air and
rain (with the exception of nitrogen in some plants)—that is to say, about 98
per cent, of the food of the entire plant is derived from air and water. From
the soil it extracts the remaining 2 per cent., consisting for the most
part of iron, lime, magnesia, potash, and soda, combined with sulphuric,
hydrochloric, and phosphoric acids, together with the nitrogen at already
stated. These substances it is the function of the soil to supply, and where
the soil, by reason of its nature, or from having been exhausted, is unable to
meet the demand, eve have to assist it by means of manure.
The tbject, then, of manuring is to assist the soil in present! g to the
plant a portion of the food necessary for its growth ; and though the food-
stuff thus supplied is extremely minute in comparison with what the plant
derives from other sources, it is nevertheless of the greatest importance, and
its absence or insufficiency will affect the health of the plant quite as much
as will the absence of air or of sunlight or of water.
Ingredients to be supplemented by Manure.
Of these ash ingredients, the greater portion is found in all soils in quantities
more than sufficient for the requirements of any number of crops; thus, iron,
magnesium, sodium, manganese, chlorine, sulphuric acid, silica, are present
in nearly all soils in greater quantities than the plant requires, so that there is
little danger of the soil becoming exhausted as far as they arc concerned.
The ingredients, therefore, that we have to supplement by means of manure
arc reduced to three or four, viz., lime, potash, phosphoric acid, and nitrogen.
Lime is probably present in most soils in quantities sufficient for the pur-
poses of plant-food, and it is seldom neefssary to supply it with that object.
Its principal functions when apjjlied to land are, firstly, a mechanical one, in
modifying the physical character of the soil ; and, secondly, a chemical cne
in rendering available certain insoluble plant-foods. (Sec pages 90 to 92.)
Lime acts, however, also directly as a plant-food, and the different classes
of artificial manures fall under one or other of the above headings, according
as they supply lime, potash, phosphoric acid, or nitrogen.
The food thus supplied by the soil is taken up in solution by a peculiar
process by means of the roots. It is, therefore, necessary that such food
should be in a soluble form to bo of any use to the plant, which is unable
to utilise insoluble material. By soluble we mean soluble in water or in
the weak acids present in the soil or secreted by the plant-roots.


Insoluble and Soluble Plant-food.
This is what is meant by the constituents being “ available for plant-
food,” and when the terms “latent” or “dormant” and “active” are
employed, they simply mean insoluble or soluble in the water imbibed by the
root. Those manures which are known as quick-acting manures are such as
contain their potash, phosphoric acid, and nitrogen in a soluble form at once
available for the plant ; those which are slow-acting contain these substances
in a more or less insoluble condition.
In these latter cases a gradual decomposition takes place in the soil, due
to the action of chemical agencies within the soil and assisted bv the action
of the roots of the plant, by which the insoluble compounds are converted
into soluble ones, and so become gradually available, the beneficial action
extending over a long period of time.
A good example of these two conditions is found in the state of the
phosphoric acid in bone-meal and in superphosphate respectively. Bone-
meal consists of bones ground to a powder, and the compound of phosphoric
acid and lime which it contains is insoluble in water to any appreciable
extent. In course of time the agencies at work in the soil render it soluble.
Superphosphate is a compound manufactured by treating bones or mineral
phosphates with strong oil of vitriol, by which treatment a different compound
of phosphoric acid and lime is produce!. This being readily soluble is at
once made use of by the plant.
Crop Requirements.
From the preceding considerations, which I have endeavoured to make as
clear and as general as possible without going into precise details, we shall
have realised that a definite relationship exists between the requirements of
the plant and the nature of the food with which we have to supply it. All
plants do not take up the constituents presented by the soil in the same
proportion, and are consequently benefited differently by different manures.
Whilst all crops will benefit from the application of a complete manure
containing all the elements of plant-food, there is in each case a special ingre-
dient or ingredients which the crop more particularly requires. Some require
potash, others nitrogen, whilst others do not thrive unless there is abundance
of phosphoric acid.
What these special requirements are, and the nature of the different
manures by means of which they are satisfied, we are now in a position to
inquire into.
We know that in the selection of the proper manure for use in any special
case we have, in the first place, to consider the requirements of the crop in
question, and, secondly, how far the soil can supply those requirements.
In connection with the rational application of artificial manures, we have
therefore the following points to consider :
1. What are the chemical requirements of the different crops?
2. How far does the soil supply these requirements ?
3. In what direction is it to be assisted by manure ?
I do not propose to touch upon the question of tillage or of general farming
operations, except in so far as they may produce chemical changes in the soil
constituents. The action of the different manures will be regarded entirely
from a chemical point of view as plant-food.


In the first place, with regard to the requirements of the different cultivated
crops, a very superficial observation is enough to show us that the food
required by different plants must vary considerably. Plants vary enormously
in character, and every plant requires one or more special sorts of food, and
exercises a power of selection in regard to such food. Some crops cannot
make use of the soil-ingredients to the same extent as others do.
Some crops also occupy the ground for a longer period than others ; those
that come rapidly to maturity will require a larger store of food which is
immediately available. Again, their requirements vary in many fames at
different stages of their growth. What these special requirements are wa
will proceed to examine more in detail for each class of crop.
Cereals.
Wheat. —The quantities of the different fertilising ingredients removed
from the soil by the wheat crop are as follows :
A wheat crop of 30 bushels grain to the acre weighs about 5,000 lb., or
something over 2 tons of grain and straw, and removes from the soil during the
period of its growth 48 lb. nitrogen, 21 lb. phosphoric acid, and 29 lb. potash.
The wheat crop depends practically entirely upon the soil for its nitrogen,
so that for the whole of the above quantities of food the wheat is dependent
upon the supplies existing in the soil. Now, 48 lb. nitrogen is equivalent
roughly to about -003 per cent., as indicated by analysis in a soil of average
weight (1 inches deep. This quantity is very much less than the average
percentage of nitrogen in our soils, which is quite T per cent. In the same
way 21 lb. phospihoric acid represents about ’OOl per cent, phosphoric acid in
a soil of average weight and depth. This quantity is present ten times
over, even in poor soils, as is also ‘OO2 per cent, potash, the quantity
represented by 29 lb. potash, required by the 30 bushel crop. If, then, it were
possible to convert the plant-food in the soil into an available form at the
times that the plant could make use of them, the necessity for manuring of any
sort would be done away with and the poorest soil would contain abundance
of plant-food for a succession of several crops. But wheat does not appear
to be cajmble of utilising the soil-ingredients to their full extent, consequently
the application of soluble manures is particularly beneficial to it and the
other cereals.
The Use of Superphosphate in Manuring Wheat.
In the great majority of cases the manuring of wheat lands resolves itself
into the application of a small quantity of superphosphate, either applied
broadcast on the land or drilled in with the seed when sown. In this respect
the practice is opposed to that which prevails in the older, wheat-growing
countries of the European Continent and in England and America, where the
application of nitrate of soda is almost universal. With us the application
of nitrate of soda (or of ammonium salts) by itself is found to be of little or
no benefit, whereas in most cases the addition of a small proportion of super-
phosphate in the early stages of the plant’s growth insures an increased
harvest. The soundness of this view has been confirmed by exact experiments
carried out in all the Australian States, including our own. The reason of
this want of response to nitrogen in the wheat crop is, I think, to be found in
the different conditions as to rainfall under which the crop is grown, and the
effect thereby produced in the natural formation of nitrates within the soil.


In Europe the grain sown in autumn remains dormant after germination
for four to five months during the late autumn and winter, its period of active
growth being practically confined to the months of April, May, and June,
and being particularly active in May and June. It is during this dormant
period that the greatest fall of rain takes place. The ground is covered
•with snow during the winter months, so that during the thaws, when
the frost breaks up in February and March, the soil is subjected to a very
heavy leaching. This applies more particularly to 'Northern Europe and
America, where there is little thawing during the actual winter, and the
whole of the accumulated snow melts in a comparatively short time, flooding
the land, and leaching out the nitrates which have been produced during the
previous summer and autumn. The leaching process is continued by the
spring rains—which are usually fairly heavy—of March and April, so that
when the plant enters upon the period of its most active growth in May, the
soil's store of nitrates is removed beyond the reach of the roots, and the
addition of readily available nitrogenous manures such as nitrate of soda or
sulphate of ammonia is essential for a satisfactory harvest.
The Rothamsted experiments show that nitrification is most active during
summer and autumn, the formation of nitrates increasing from July to
October. "When wheat was grown at Rothamsted after fallow the increased
yield was found to be almost wholly due to the retention in the soil of the
nitrates thus formed in the summer, and depended upon whether the fallow
was succeeded by a wet or comparatively dry autumn. Should a wet autumn
and early winter succet d, the nitrates are washed so far down into the subsoil
as to be out of the reach of the crop, which then shows a very small return
for the previous summer fallow.
The Rothamsted experiments also show that there is little or no nitrifica-
tion going on during the three months preceding harvest—that is during the
period of the plant’s most active growth. The period of active nitrification
begins about midsummer, and continues with increased activity during late
summer and after the grain is harvested. The nitrates thus formed are
to a greater or less degree washed down into the subsoil during the rains of
autumn and the thaws and rains of late winter and early spring. Hence
the great importance of the use of nitrogenous manures in these countries.
The Rothamsted experiments show, further, that practically the whole of
the nitrogen supplied as ammonium salts is nitrified during the season of
growth of the wheat, and whatever is not removed by the plant gets washed
down as nitrate into the subsoil.
With us the condition of things is very different. During our mild winter
the wheat plant, once well started, is making steady and continuous growth
the whole time, from April or May, when the seed is sown, till December.
The months succeeding harvest are usually comparatively dry and warm,
and favourable to nitrification. The seed is thus sown, and the plant
germinates in land in which nitrates are abundantly present; and as there
is practically no dormant period the plant gets the full benefit of this, at least
during the eaily stages of its growth, until it is well established. The
greater portion of the rain falls (at least in the principal wheat-growing
districts) during the winter months—June, July, and August—when it is of
the greatest benefit. If these months are dry, a failure in the harvest is
almost certain, unless rain falls in September or October. Nitrogenous
manuring alone is, therefore, of little benefit under our conditions. What
the wheat crop appears to need is an application of fertiliser to enable it to


No. of
Plot.
Nature of Manuring.
Yield per acre (bushels).
1900.
1901.
1903.
1904.
i
No manure
>5
17|
20*
n
3
Superphosphate only ... ...!
m
22|
33
141
8 ■
Sulphate of ammonia, super-j
phosphate, sulphate of potash;
i
10
20J
32i
loi
make a vigorous growth at the outset, and to develop the root-system, which
latter property is possessed in a high degree by superphosphate, and this
is supplied by the application of readily available phosphatic fertiliser.
The principle adopted by most of our farmers of ap[dying with the seed a
small quantity of superphosphate is therefore a perfectly sound one, and on
new land, or fairly rich land, the use of a complete manure is unnecessary 7.
On account of the undoubted benefits attending the use of small quantities
of superphosphate for the first few seasons, the notion is not uncommon that,
a small annual dose of superphosphate drilled in with the seed is all the
manuring which the wheat plant requires.
This is, however, not the case, and superphosphate alone is not a complete
manure for wheat or any other crop. The initial advantages as to increased
yield are not maintained in succeeding seasons.
This is well showm in the following table, wdiich gives the yields obtained
in successive seasons from some of the experimental plots at Wagga under-
supervision of Mr. Helms :
The harvest of 1 902 is not included, as it was a failure, owing to drought,
and the plots were not weighed.
In the first year (1900) the increased yield over the unmanured plots due
to the use of superphosphate alone was 74 per cent., as against only 30 per
cent, increase when a complete manure was used.
This initial advantage was, however, not maintained, and diminished each
year, until in 1904 the advantage was on the side of the plots with the complete
manure, which yielded 40 per cent, more than the unmanured, against a
.30 per cent, increase in the case of the plots which received superphosphate
only.
Wheat thrives best in soils of moderate stiffness, and the ideal soil for
wheat is a fairly strong soil not too loose in texture.
A leguminous crop, such as clover, is an excellent forerunner of the
wheat crop ; and a very common and satisfactory' rotation, where wdieat is
grown, is the. three-course one of wheat, roots, clover. The clover crop
immediately preceding the wheat stores up nitrogen for the latter. The
clover crop may' be either eaten off or ploughed under. Por fuller details
concerning this operation of ploughing-in green crops or green manuring, see
page 73.
Wheat occupies the ground for a very much longer period than other
cereals, such as oats and barley 7 , and removes rather a larger proportion of
soil-constituents. It is, therefore, a somewhat exhausting crop.
The best manure for wheat on new laud or on land that has not been
over cropped is a dressing of about 4 cwt. superphosphate p>er acre. On land
that was very poor originally, or that has been over-cropped, a complete
manure is to be recommended such as are given on pages 115 and 116. On
new land a dressing of superphcsphatc (about 4 to 1 cw't. per acre) will
probably give the most economical results for the first few' years.


Nitrogenous manure should not be applied at a late stage of the plant’s
growth.
Do not use the nitrogenous manures in quantities larger than those
recommended in the formulae as too much nitrogen is injurious, causing a
tendency in the plants to become too green and to “ lay.”
Of the other cereals—
Maize prefers light porous sandy loams, and does not do so well upon stiff
clay soils. With regard to manuring the same remarks apply as in the case
of wheat, but it is a grosser feeder than wheat and requires rather heavier
manuring.
Bye accommodates itself to lighter and drier soils—in fact, the poorest soil
is usually considered good enough for rve.
Barley requires a light fertile soil, warm and friable, and grows most
strongly and produces the largest crops on land well tilled and heavily
manured. If, however, the grain is grown for malting purposes, the applica-
tion of excessive quantities of nitrogenous manures is to be avoided, as the
grain produced by such treatment contains a large proportion of nitrogenous
matter, which is said to injure the keeping qualities of the beer, the starch
in the grain being likewise diminished.
Oats thrive best in a damp climate and moist soil, with a moderate summer
temperature. They contain considerably more potash in the straw than the
other cereals.
Tire manuring recommended in the case of wheat applies more or less to
all the cereals.
Grass.
A crop of tons of meadow hay per acre contains on the average 49 lb.
nitrogen, 51 lb. potash, and 12J lb. phosphoric acid.
The question of the appropriate manuring of grass-lands is complicated by
the questions as to whether it is intended for permanent pasture or to be cut
for hay, and whether grass or clover is to predominate. It may bo stated
generally that the proportion of clover is increased by the application of
manures containing potash and phosphoric acid, and diminished by the
application of nitrogenous manures.
Too heavy manuring of any bind, especially nitrogenous, tends to the
growth of coarse grass. Manures containing lime, such as plaster, also
promote the growth of clovers.
For grass the best results have been obtained oy the application of mineral
manures (superphosphate and potash salts) together with sulphate of
ammonia. . Heavy grass-crops were obtained to the almost total exclusion
of clover. To promote the growth of clovers, omit the ammonium salts
from the above mixture, and manure with mineral fertilisers alone.
Stable manure and compost is an excellent manure for grass lands,
especially when mixed with sulphate of ammonia.
Root-crops.
These exhibit a greater variety in their food requirements than the cereals,
and differ more amongst themselves. In all cases the crops contain a larger
proportion of nitrogen than the cereals, but they appear to possess to a far
greater degree than these the power of assimilating the nitrogen as it exists
in the soil ; consequently the application of nitrogenous manure alone is, as a
ru’e, without much benefit, the exception being the mangel crop, for which


purely nitrogenous manures are distinctly beneficial.. They all produce far
more bulky crops than the cereals, and remove proportionately larger
quantities of the soil ingredients. They, therefore, require liberal manuring,
and are especially benefited by the application of potash.
Potatoes. —A crop of 6 tons of potatoes weighs about 18,000 lb. of tubers
and haulm, and removes from the soil G 7 lb. nitrogen, 80 lb. potash, and
24 lb. phosphoric acid. As in the case of the cereals, these quantities are
abundantly present in the poorest land, and it is only a question of the
power of the crop to assimilate them. Potatoes do well in most soils—
best in loose, mellow soils. Virgin soil appears particularly well adapted to
their growth. This may he partly due to the manuring of potash the soil
receives from the clearing and burning away of the timber. The subsoil
should be poious, the tubers being liable to rot in land with stiff subsoil, or in
very retentive soils. The soil should not be too stiff, otherwise there is not
room for the roots to develop. They are surface feeders, and, as might bo
expected from the preponderance of potash in their composition, the applica-
tion of potash manures is especially beneficial. The addition of potash salts
alone is, however, not usually of much benefit, and they are generally applied
together with superphosphate. Before sowing, the best treatment for average
land is the following : —About 2 cwt. superphosphate, mixed with 1 ewt.
sulphate of potash, and 1 cwt. of sulphate of ammonia per aero, or one of the
formuhe given on pages 121 and 125.
Turnips. —A crop of 17 tons roots per acre contains 49,000 lb. of root and
leaf, and removes from the soil 112 lb. nitrogen, 149 lb. potash, and 33 lb.
phosphoric acid, in round numbers. They thrive best on light loams, loose
and open. The land for the turnip crop requires more thorough tillage and
previous preparation than for most other crops; but this question is outside (he
scope of the present discussion. They are a crop that requires hea\ y manuring,
and a liberal dressing of farmyard manure is favourable to their successful
cultivation. Though the quantity of potash is larger than in the potato crop,
potash manures have not the same marked benefit. Their weak point appears
to be their inability to make use of the phosphoric acid in the state in which
it exists in the soil; hence the manuis s from which they derive especial
benefit are those containing phosphoric acid, such as superphosphate or bone-
dust ; 2 cwt. to 3 cwt. superphosphate per acre is the average proportion.
Mangels. —A mangel crop of 22 tons weighs 67,000 lb. roots and leaves,
and removes 147 Ib. nitrogen, 300 lb. potash, and 53 lb. phosphoric acid.
Mangels are deep feeders, and require a deep and well-tilled sod. They
foim an exception to most root crops in that they arc capable of utilising the
phosphoric acid and potash present in the soil, and the manures that specially
benefit them are those containing nitrogen. On a rich land, or one already
well-manured with farmyard manure, the application of a soluble nitrogenous
manure alone is of marked benefit, though, as a rule, it is added together
with superphosphate.
Beetroot is also a crop that requires nitrogenous manures in conjunction
with bone dust or superphosphate.
Leguminous Crops.
Crops such as the pea, bean, lupin, lucerne, clover, vetch, etc., stand mid-
way between the cereals and root-crops in regard to the amount of fertilising
materials they contain. A few figures will show the composition of beans
and of red clover.


Beans. —A crop of 30 bushels grain consists of 2,000 lb. grain and 2,200 lb.
straw, and contains 99 lb. nitrogen, 67 lb. potash, and 29 lb. phosphoric
acid.
A Red Clover crop of 2 tons contains 102 lb. nitrogen, 83|- lb, potash, and
25 lb. phosphoric acid.
In addition to the above, leguminous crops contain a large proportion of
lime, amounting in the clover crop to 90 lb. None of the cereals contain
more than 10 lb. lime in the entire crop. Potatoes contain about 27 ;
mangels, 43 : and turnips 70 ; so that it will be seen that the proportion of
lime in the leguminous crop is considerable.
They thrive best on calcareous soils, and derive special benefit from the
addition of lime as a manure.
But the most striking peculiarity about this class of plants lies in the fact
that they are practically independent of the soil for their supply of nitrogen.
It has long been a vexed question, and is still undecided, whether plants are
able to utilise the nitrogen of the air by morns of their leaves. There is no
satisfactory evidence hitherto of this fixation of nitrogen by the leaves of
growing plants, and it is quite certain that the amount thus obtained is
inconsiderable, and not sufficient to enable them to thrive independently of
the soil-nitrogen.
The case of leguminous plants is, however, quite different, and m:iv again
be referred to. It appears from experiments of Hellriegel and Willfarth, and
later, of Lawes and Gilbert, on peas, lupins, vetches, and lucerne, that there
exist in the root-nodules or small excrescences which are found on the roots of
these plants, certain minute organisms, which are capable of assimilating free
nitrogen and of rendering it in an available form to the plant. These
organisms act therefore, as carriers of nitrogen between the air and the plant,
and the root-nodules become a store-house from which the leguminous crop
derives its nitrogenous food. The air from which the nitrogen is thus with-
drawn is the air in the interstices of the soil, and as this is continually
renewed, especially in the case of a porous soil, from the outside air, the supply
of nitrogen is practically an inexhaustible one. The form and appearance of
those nodules vary somewhat in the different plants, being generally large or
small swellings on the root or root-fibres, sometimes single and sometime!
agglomerated. Though leguminous plants exhibit this peculiarity in a special
degree, there is reason to believe that other plants are able to fix nitrogen
from the air in a similar manner, though in a much smaller degree.
On account of this property possessed by leguminous plants, such plants
derive little or no benefit from the application of nitrogenous manures—in
fact, it has been observed that the formation of root-tubercles is reduced, or
even stopped entirely by the addition of much nitrate.
The manures that particular!}’ benefit leguminous crops are such as contain
potash. Taking further into account the proportion of lime necessary, the
following would be found a useful average formula : —A dressing of lime in
the autumn —say, 4 ton per acre—followed by a top-dressing to the crop of
cwt. superphosphate and 1 cwt. sulphate of potash per acre.
Fruit-trees.
The proper manuring for these, together with the general treatment of
the orchard, will be found carefully considered a few pages further on in this
Handbook (page 118, et seq.), where are given formula! for preparing
fertilisers for the differerit varieties.


All fruits contain considerable proportions of potash and phosphoric acid
and of nitrogenous matter ; moreover, the assimilation of nitrogen promotes
the formation of sugar in the fruit, so that it may be said generally that a
good general manuring containing lime, potash, phosphoric acid, and nitrogen
is essential for the production of fruit in highest excellence, in addition to
the mechanical treatment of the soil by effective draining.
Composition and. Action of Manures.
We have now to consider the composition and the specific action of the
several substances used as manures ; and for this purpose it will be con-
venient to classify them according as lime, phosphoric acid, nitrogen, or
potash is their dominant constituent.
MANURES CONTAINING LIME.
Tire manures which depend for their action upon the presence of lime are
(V/) burnt-lime, (b) carbonate of lime, and (c) gypsum.
(a) — Burnt-lime , quicklime, or stone-lime.
When liming is recommended for a soil, it is always either bumt-lime>
(powdered or freshly slaked), that is intended or else carbonate of lime. The
following remarks apply to burnt-lime or quicklime. Many substances used
as manures contain lime, but in these cases the lime is in combination with
other substances, and has not the same action on the soil as burnt-lime. For
example, bone-dust and superphosphate both contain considerable proportions;
of lime in combination with phosphoric acid as phosphate of lime. Neither
of these substances, however, has any effect in lightening clay soils, or in
sweetening sour ones. In the same way gypsum (sulphate of lime) is a
substance rich in lime, and a valuable addition to the land in certain cases,
but its action is not that of burnt-lime, and it is not to bo used when
liming is recommended. Wood-ashes also contain carbonate of lime and
have a considerable value as fertilisers. Thomas’ phosphate contains free-
lime, and there is no doubt that it has a considerable effect in altering the
texture of heavy clay-soils, but none of these substances are to bo substituted
for burnt-lime.
There are few soils which will not derive benefit from the application of lime,
even when this substance is present in fair proportion. A. D. Hall, the late
Director of the RothamsteJ Station, states that English experience shows that
soils containing loss than 1 per cent, carbonate of lime require liming. This
represents about ),- per cent, lime, and there are not a great number of soils
in New South Wales which contain as much as this, whereas the bulk of our
soils contain considerably less. Liming is beneficial on a great variety of
soils, and is to be regarded rather as a means of improving the land than as
a direct plant-food. The soils on which it is particularly beneficial are the
following :
1. Soils deficient in lime.
2. Sour soils, on which it acts as a sweetening agent, neutralising the
soil-acidity. On land which is newly opened up, or land which is
being reclaimed from swamps, the addition of lime is an essential.
3. On stiff clay soils. The action of lime on this class of soils is to
lighten them and render them more friable and amenable to tillage
operations.


4. On sandy soils, lime acts in an opposite manner, as will bo shortly
explained, consolidating them and increasing the cohesive and
capillary power of the soil.
5. On land which is destined for leguminous crops, or such crops as are
specially benefited by the presence of lime, such as sugar-cane,
maize, &c. Where a green crop is sown to be ploughed under
(green-manuring) the previous application of lime to the soil is of
the greatest benefit in promoting the growth of the green crop.
Nature of Lime.
Burnt-lime, stone-lime, or quicklime is obtained by burning limestone
(carbonate of lime) in kilns of special construction. In the process of burning
or calcining, carbonic acid and water are driven off, and the burnt product is
pure lime (calcium oxide) of greater or less purity according to the purity of
the original stone. Other substances, having the same composition as lime-
stone, also yield lime on being burnt, such as chalk, marble, shells, &c. If
the lime has been properly burnt it forms a very hard, stony substance, nearly
white, which slakes, or combines with water, with great avidity, crumbling
to a fine white powder, and evolving sufficient heat to convert a part of the
water into steam. In slaking, it combines with the water, slaked lime being a
hydra'c of lime. As its function in the soil is principally mechanical, a test of
its goodness lies in the readiness and completeness with which it slakes. Both
under-burnt and over-burnt lime slake badly, though from different causes.
Action of-Lime on Different Soil?.
The action of lime in the first place is a mechanical one, in altering the
texture of the soil, and with it those properties which depend upon its
texture, such as its absorptive power for water, its amenability to tillage
operations, itc. The action of lime upon a clay soil may be illustrated by
the following experiment ;— lf a small quantity of a heavy clay be mixed
with water in any suitable vessel, it will form a muddy liquid. If a little
lime he added to this, and the mixture well shaken, it will be noticed that
the solid matters sink to the bottom in a loose powder, and in a short .space
of time, if the water is poured off and the soil dried, it can be readily
broken up by the fingers If no lime had been previously added, the clay,
on drying, would form a hard mass, difficult to break up. This action, which
is due to the power that the lime has of coagulating the fine particles of the
clay, is identical with what takes place on the larger scale when lime is added
to the field.
The presence of lime also prevents the shrinkage which wet clay soils
undergo on drying, and which causes the cracks and fissures seen on the
parched clay soil. The admixture of lime with a clay, therefore, prevents the
formation of a sticky mass when wet, and a cracked, parched appearance
when dry.
Limed land is drier and warmer, more friable, and consequently more
readily cultivated. Land which has been limed is ready for the plough
sooner than unlimed land.
On light, sandy soils the action of lime is also strikingly beneficial in
binding the particles of sand together, and increasing the cohesive and
capillary power of the soil. Its action is, in fact, exactly that of lime on


sand in the mixing of mortars, only on a much modified scale, since for
making mortar the proportions are one part of lime to three or four parts of
sand, whereas the addition of a ton of lime per acre represents one part of
lime to nearly 20.000 parts of sand. The action of the lime is the same in
both cases—on drying it absorbs carbonic acid from the air, forming carbonate
of lime, which cements the particles of sand together; forming, in the
proportions used in making mortar, a hard compact mass, and, in the case of
the soil, increasing its cohesiveness and its power of retaining water.
Lime, therefore, lessens the cohesiveness of clay soils, and increases that of
sandy soils—two properties which are apparently opposed to one another—in
fact, there are few soils the mechanical texture of which is not improved by
liming.
The action of slaked lime is exactly the same as that of stone or quicklime,
but not so pronounced, and it is generally prefer able to use the lime powdered
and unslaked, or only slightly and freshly slaked.
Chemical Action of Lime.
Apart from the above mechanical property of lime in improving the texture
of the soil, it has also a chemical action, and though this is not thoroughly
understood, it may be classed undr r the following headings
Firstly, it neutralises the acids sometimes present in soils. Sour soils,
in particular, contain free acids present in such quantities as to be
injurious to plant life, and such soils are “sweetened” by the
application of lime—that is to say, the free humic and similar acids
are neutralised.
Secondly, it attacks the inert organic matters in the soil and promotes
fermentation—one of the most active agents in the production of
available plant-food. It is, of course, possible to have too much of
a good thing, and an excessive dressing of lime would tend to burn
up the vegetable matter of the soil, and do as much harm as good ;
but in the moderate dressings recommended, it will be found
beneficial even on land which has recently been green-manured. It
must not be forgotten, however, that the action due to caustic lime
soon ceases, for it is very rapidly converted into carbonate of lime
within the soil, which has no such action on organic matter.
Thirdly, it attacks the insoluble mineral constituents of the soil to some
extent. Phosphoric acid also enters into combination with lime,
and is in this form more readily utilised by the plant than in its
insoluble combinations with iron and alumina, with "which it is
associated in the soil. Owing to the tendency of lime to bum up a
portion of the organic matter, its benefit is more marked on soils
rich in organic matter.
Fourthly, carbonate of lime (into which we have seen the lime is soon
converted in the soil) is beneficial, if not necessary, to the process
of nitrification, the peculiar ferment action by which the inert soil-
nitrogen is converted into nitrates.
Fifthly, whilst it promotes certain ferment action, such as the above, it
hinders the active growth of many fungoid diseases like rust and
smut, and is said to be often a cure for such diseases.


Lime may be applied in two ways —either as ground lime or freshly slaked.
As ground burnt-lime, it is applied at the rate of 5 to 6 cwt. per acre in a
manure-distributor and lightly scattered over the surface. If freshly-slaked
lime is used it is applied in somewhat larger quantities up to | ton per acre,
or even more in the case of very stiff clays. The heavy dressings once
employed are found to be less beneficial than smaller applications more
frequently applied.
Liming with freshly-slaked lime is best carried out as follows;—The quick-
lime (stone-lime) is broken up into smaller lumps and placed in heaps about
the field covered with moist loam. It is left exposed to the air and moisture
until it begins to crumble to powder. As soon as this happens the heaps are
scattered with a shovel as evenly as possible over the surface of the field, and
harrowed or ploughed in very lightly. Liming is most effectively done in the
autumn or winter, but whenever it is done the land should be left alone for
two or three weeks after the application, and no seed sown nor any manures
(especially such as contain nitrogen or superphosphate) used during that
period.
Other Lime Compounds.
(b) —Carbonate of Lime.
Carbonate of Lime is used in several forms—such as chalk, ground lime-
stone or shells, and ‘'mild” or “ agricultural” lime, which latter is old burnt
lime which has been exposed to the air and become converted into carbonate
by absorption of carbonic acid. Its addition to the soil promotes nitrification,
sweetens sour soils, and prevents clay soils from paddling, though it is less
powerful in the latter respect than burnt-lime. It is milder in its action and,
as a rule, burnt-lime is to be preferred for lightening stiff soils, though for
sweetening sour soils or for supplying lime to soils deficient in that ingredient,
it is equally effective. It should he applied in quantities of not less than
1 ton per acre.
(c) — Gypsum.
Gypsum or plaster (sulphate of lime) may also be sometimes used to advan-
tage. Its action is principally that of a direct plant-food on soils poor in
lime; hence it is most useful for such crops as clover, and other leguminous
urops on soils poor in lime. It is best applied moist, or in wet weather, at
the rate of 2to 3 cwt. per acre. Gypsum is also often used as a “ fixer ”
that is to say, when added to dung or urine or decaying animal and vegetable
matter, it decomposes the carbonate of ammonia which is being continually
evolved from such substances, and converts it into sulphate of ammonia, in
which form ammonia does not escape into the air. If a heap of dung
from which the odour of ammonia is perceptible, he covered with a few
shovelfuls of moist gypsum, the smell will be found to have disappeared —
in other words, the ammonia is “ fixed,” and its loss prevented.
Gypsum is also of great value in lands which are charged with alkali, or
irrigated by alkaline water. For this purpose it is either sown on the land
in proportions depending on the amount of alkali in the soil, or it may be
introduced in boxes in the irrigation sluices, or added to the tanks if the
water is stored.
MANURES CONTAINING PHOSPHORIC ACID.
Phosphoric acid is applied to the soil almost exclusively in the form of
phosphate of lime, and its sources are bones, rock-phosphates, and guanos.


Bones and Bone-products.
Bones vary very slightly in composition from whatever source they are
drawn, or from whatever part of the animal they are taken, though as a rule
the thigh-bones and the bones that have to bear the greatest mechanical
strain are the richest in phosphate of lime. Bones are composed chemically
of water, ossein or collagen, fat, and mineral salts. The last-named, which
are left behind as ash when the bones are burnt, consist principially of phos-
phate of lime. Bone-ash contains about 83 per cent, of this substance,
together with about 10 per cent, carbonate of lime, and in much smaller
quantities magnesium compounds, and fluoride and chloride of calcium.
The ossein of the bones is the substance which is converted into gelatine
by boiling with water, and is an albuminoid containing about 1C per cent,
nitrogen. Bones are, therefore, a nitrogenous, as well as a phosphatic,
manure. An average sample, reduced to powder as bone-meal, contains about
45 per cent, phosphate of lime, and a trifle under 4 per cent, nitrogen.
Bones are used in a variety of ways. They may be used whole or broken,
or reduced to powder (as bone-meal, bone dust, or ground bones), they may
be boiled or steamed, fermented, calcined (bone-ash), charred (bone-black),
or converted into superphosphate.
We shall now see how these different methods of treatment affect their
composition and action.
Bone-meal.
When simply broken or crushed their chemical composition is, of course,
unaltered, and the principal advantage derived from their finer mechanical
condition is the greater rapidity of their action. Whole bones resist decom-
position within the soil for a considerable length of time, and it is very
doubtful if their use is in any sense economical; in fact, as the object of
artificial manuring is to feed the crop rather than the soil, it is doubtful
whether slow-acting manures are in any case economical. The case of lime,
which we have just considered, stands on a different footing. Lime is seldom
applied as a direct plant-food. Its action is practically confined to the soil.
The substances we have now to consider are valuable only when they are
available as plant-food. They produce little or no permanent benefit to the
soil, and if their decomposition is slow the plant receives its nourishment in
small driblets, inadequate to its needs.
Bones are, therefore, most efficacious when crushed, and, within certain
limits, the finer the powder the better the product as a manure. An addi-
tional advantage of fineness of division lies in the ease and evenness with
which it can be distributed on the land or mixed with other manures.
Bone-meal is decomposed in the earth, the nitrogen in the ossein being
converted by putrefaction into ammonia, and the phosphate of lime rendered
soluble by the action of carbonic acid and the vegetable acids. It is particu-
larly suited to turnips and root crops generally, grass, tobacco, fruit-trees,
and in fact is a manure of almost universal application. It is applied at the
rate of from 3 to 5 cwt. per acre, and if mixed with a manure containing
potash, forms a complete manure, and an excellent substitute for stable
manure. It is more particularly adapted to light soils, and is sometimes
disappointing on heavy clays, the probable reason for which is that in stiff
clay soils it is more or less protected from putrefaction (which we have seen
is the cause of its efficacy) by the absence of air and moisture.


Bone-
meal.
Boiled
bones.
Steamed
bone-
meal.
Fcr- 1
memed :
bjnes.
Bone-
ash.
Fresh
bone
charcoal.
Spent
charcoal.
Water ...
10-43
10-61
11-57
12-02
1-86
2-0
matter, includ-
ing 10% carbon in the
case ot charcoal
32-30
21-05
19-01
28-71
13-5
18 0
Calcium phosphate
48-40
00-19
60 02
49-28
80-34
7d 0
74-0
Calcium carbonate, alka*
lies, &c.
7-20
5-81
8o4
8-92
11-20
70
5 5
Insoluble
1 07
1-84
0-86
1-07
0-51
1-0
1-5
100-
100-
100'
100-
100-
•Containing nitrogen
3 71
1 76
reo
3-47
0-7
0-7
Boiled or steamed hones or hone-meal. —When bones or bone-meal are
boiled, and more effectually when they are subjected to steam, the ossein of
the bone is gelatinised, and more or less removed, whilst the fat is also
removed, the resulting compound being, therefore, poorer in nitrogfn, but
richer in phosphoric acid. The treatment renders them more friable, and
they are easily reduced to fine powder. The removal of the fatty matter
also renders them more easily decomposed in the soil, as fresh bones are more
or less protected from external action by the presence of the fat. Not
only is the proportion of phosphoric acid increased, but the rapidity of
action of the product, and its consequent effectiveness as a manure, is
increased, at the expense, of course, of the nitrogen, which may be reduced
1 or 2 per cent., as is shown in the table at the foot of this page.
Bone-ash. —The residue left after the calcination of bones consists, as we
have seen, mainly of phosphate of lime, and contains no nitrogen. It is not
largely used as a manure. It is dissolved in the soil by carbonic acid, and
convoyed thus directly to the plant.
Bone-black is the product of charring bones. The broken bones are sub-
jected to strong heat in closed iron cylinders, whereby they are converted
into bone-charcoal, on exactly the same principle that wood is converted
into wood-charcoal. The volatile matter of the bones is driven off in the
form of gas, water, oil, and tar, and the carbon \ resent is for the most part
left mix'd as charcoal with the mineral matter of the bones. This product
is largely used by sugar-refiners for removing the colouring matter from raw
syrups. After it has been used for this purpose a certain number of times
it becomes unserviceable, and can be obtained at a cheap rate for manurial
purposes. It may be applied directly to the soil as a phosphoric manure or
better converted into superphosphate by treatment with acid.
Bone-black by itself is a purely phosphatic manure, containing only a very
small proportion of nitrogen. The charcoal present has no fertilising value,
and bone-black is slightly poorer in phosphate of lime than bone-ash. Bone-
black is worthy of consideration as a manure on account of the low price at
which it can be obtained.
The following table shows the alteration in composition which bones
undergo when subjected to the above methods of treatment. The analyses
are not analyses of the same sample but represent fairly the average com-
position of the several products. The analyses of hone-black were kindly
supplied by Mr. Walton, of the Sugar Company, and represent their “ char ”
before and after it had been used for the purpose of refining :


Utilising Waste Bones on the Farm.
The following are amongst the best methods of utilising waste bones on
the farm, and converting them into manure when it is not feasible to grind
them ;
1. Fermented Bones. —Bones may be decomposed and rendered more active
by mixing them with about one-fourth of their weight of loam, and keeping
the heap moist with stable-liquor or urine. The heap should be protected from
rain. By this process also there is a loss of nitrogen, but the phosphate is
rendered more readily available and proportionately increased. This is a
method that deserves to be made use of where bones are plentiful, and there
is no means of reducing them to powder. Thirty to forty bushels per acre is
the proportion recommended for grass lands.
2. Another method of fermenting bones, which I have taken from the late
Mr. J. L. Thompson’s notes in the Agricultural Gazette, is the following :
Bones may bo softened by mixing in heaps with quicklime and loam. A
layer 6 inches deep of bones, then a layer 3 inches deep of lime, and then a
layer about 4 inches deep of loam, and so on, repeating until the heap is
made of convenient height, when it is to be covered up with a thick layer of
earth. Holes are then bored into the heap from the top, and water
poured in to slake the lime. The mass will become hot, and remain so for
two or three months, after which the bones will be found very friable, and
the whole heap may be mixed together, and is ready for applying to the
ground
3. By conversion into superphosphate (see page 97).
Other Sources of Phosphoric Acid.
Mineral phosphates arc little used iu the raw' state as a manure ; but as
they form the basis of the bulk of the superphosphate and mixed manures
on the market, a short account of them will not bo out of place here.
The mineral known as apatite is a crystalline form of phosphate of lime,
and phosphorite a non-crystalline form. These occur as rcck-massos or in
nodules embedded in rocks of sedimentary origin in many parts of the world,
notably Canada, South Carolina, Florida, England, Spain, ami Norway. The
Canadian phosphate is a crystalline rock, the English coprolites are for the
most part spherical nodules found in the green-sand and chalk.
Bock phosphates are found in considerable quantities in the islands in the
Pacific, whence they are imported to the mainland and used in the
manufacture of superphosphate.
Ground phosphate is the name usually given to the above compounds when
finely ground. They are not much used in this condition, but if so employed
it is essential that th-y should he as finely ground as possible. They are
non-nitrogenous.
Guano, in its original signification, is the name applied (o the dried dung
of fish-eating sea birds, and is obtained principally from the rocky islands in
the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. Guanos are either nitrogenous or contain
little or no nitrogen, the amount of this ingredient decreasing with the age
of the deposit. Guano w'as at one time very extensively used as a manure,
but it is being largely superseded by cheaper and more concentrated forma of
phosphoric acid and nitrogen. Nevertheless, it should not he overlooked, in
view of the quantity of it existing in the islands of the Pacific Ocean off our
■own coasts.


The term is used locally to include a much more extensive class of sub-
stance. The dung of bats, flying-foxes, and marsupials goes under this name.
A large number of artificial fertilisers are also sold as guanos.
The nitrogen exists often in the three forms of organic nitrogen, ammonium
salts, and nitrates, the last form being the most soluble form in which
nitrogen can be applied to the soil. They are excellent manures for cereals,
especially as a top-dressing in the spring.
They likewise contain an appreciable percentage, 2 to 3 per cent., of potash.
The bulk, however, of the mineral phosphates and of phosphatic guanos
is converted by treatment with sulphuric acid into superphosphate.
Superphosphate. —When hones, bone-ash, or any of the substances
mentioned in the previous paragraphs are acted upon by oil of vitriol
(sulphuric acid), the phosphate of lime which they contain, and which exists
in the form of tri-calcium phosphate, is converted into a different lime
compound, known as mono-calcium phosphate, or superphosphate., This
substance differs from the original phosphate in being readily soluble in
water. We have already seen that the availability of a manure as plant-food
depends largely upon its ready solubility; consequently a phosphate of lime
soluble in water is the most available form of this substance. Plants, how-
ever, are not dependent for their food-supply only upon such compounds as
are solub'e in water, hut arc able, by means of the acid juices secreted in the
roots and root-hairs, to avail themselves of a class of compounds soluble
in vegetable acids. It is, indeed, very improbable that superphosphate
remains in the soil for any length of time in that condition, for it is readily
decomposed, both hv carbonate of lime and by the iron and alumina salts
present in the soil. Carbonate of lime converts it into a third compound of
lime and phosphoric acid, known as hi-calcium phosphate. This substance
is insoluble in water, but being in a very finely-divided state is readily
dissolved by the plant-acids. Iron and alumina attack the superphosphate
even more rapidly, converting it into phosphates of iron and alumina, to
which the same remarks apply.
This point is of further importance in reference to the composition of the
superphosphates sold as manures, for they abo usually contain a considerable
quantity of the bi-phosphate in question.
In the valuation of fertilisers the term “citrate-soluble phosphate ! is just
this bi-calcium phosphate, which is formed to a greater or less extent in
superphosphate by the inter-action of the superphosphate and unchanged tri-
calcium phosphate. In a superphosphate, therefore, as usually purchased,
there will bo not only the water-soluble superphosphate, but also a certain
quantity of the reverted phosphate, which is insoluble in water, but is,
nevertheless, available for plant-food, and of only slightly lower fertilising
value than the water-soluble phosphate.
Superphosphate is essentially the manure for wheat, cereals and root-crops,
and in all cases where a rapid return is wanted. For autumn manuring and
for the manuring of permanent pasture, bone-dust is equally effective;
and the conditions under which it will he advisable to use the one or the
other form of phosphate will vary with circumstances.
Superphosphate is more specially beneficial on soils of medium nature,
and such as contain lime. Indeed, in sandy soils poor in lime it has been
found to be of very little benefit. It must not be forgotten that it is an
acid manure, and in the absence of lime to neutralise it, may even prove
injurious.


Superphosphate from
Superphosphate from.
Mineral Phosphate.
Bone-meal.
Water
16-00
10 00
•Volatile and combustible matter
9-50
33-00
Phosphate of lime (soluble in water)
28-00
31-50
Insoluble phosphate of lime
600
200
Sand and insoluble matter ...
5 00
3-00
•Containing nitrogen
3 00
Kqual to ammonia
3 60
It is applied usually at the rate of | to 3 cwt. per acre, the amount varying
with the nature of the soil and with the quantities of the other manures
used in conjunction with it. It is of especial value in the case of wheat
and root-crops, and it forms the basis of the “ general ” manures, special
manures, mixed fertilisers, ifcc., on the market, such manures being usually
prepared from superphosphate by mixing it with sulphate of ammonia or
nitrate of soda and potash salts.
Superphosphate obtained from mineral phosphate contains no nitrogen ;
that obtained from bones usually contains 2 or 3 per cent., a portion of the
nitrogen having been lost in the process of manufacture.
The following table will serve to convey an idea of the result of the action
of sulphuric acid upon mineral phosphates and upon bone-meal respectively:—
The tendency to revert is greater in those superphosphates which contain
iron and alumina, and in such manures a portion of the soluble phosphoric
acid often reverts to the citrate-soluble condition on keeping for a length of
time.
Dissolved bones is the name applied to superphosphate prepared trom-
bones.
Dissolved guano is superphosphate obtained from guano.
Fish guano is not a guano, but fish offal.
Thomas’ phosphate, or Basic slag, must also be mentioned amongst phos-
phatic fertilisers. It is a waste product of the manufacture of steel by the
Thomas-Gilchrist, or Basic process, and contains, in the form of a phosphate
of lime, the phosphorus existing in the original impure pig-iron. In Germany
and England enormous quantities of it are consumed. In those countries
it can be obtained at a very small cost, and has proved itself a very
valuable and cheap form of phosphoric acid, its price in England being
less than £2 per ton, but its great weight and the consequent coat of
transport has, no doubt, hitherto prevented its economical use in this
country. There is no doubt, however, that it is an exceedingly valuable
manure, giving results little if at all inferior to superphosphate. On stiff or
sour soils it is of special value on account of the lime it contains.
Manufacture of Superphosphate on a Small Scale.
The following directions for making this invaluable fertiliser on a small
scale may prove useful on farms where bones accumulate, and the question
arises how to deal with them most economically.
It will be found most satisfactory in the first instance to burn the bones,
and convert them into what is known as bone-ash, since fresh bones or bone-
meal produce, on treatment with acid, a slimy mass, which is exceedingly
difficult to dry.
t 17293 -D


To prepare the superphosphate from bone-ash, it is necessary to provide a
receptacle for mixing the ingredients which is not attacked by sulphuric
acid. A wooden trough lined with lead (a sheet of lead hammered to fit the
trdugh) is about the best: but a wooden trough, pitched inside, will answer
the purpose, or a hole in the ground lined with cement. In this receptacle
the ingredients are mixed in the following proportions; —For every 40 lb.
of bone-ash add 1 gallon of water and 15 lb. strong sulphuric acid
(commercial oil of vitriol). Pour the whole of the water into the empty
tank, then add gradually, stirring constantly with a wooden pole, the
sulphuric acid. The acid combines very violently with the water, and unless
it be added as directed above, an explosion may result. Now add gradually,
a little at a time, the bone-ash, stirring constantly with a stout pole or hoe.
The above proportions should yield a mass possessing the consistency of a
stiff dough. If it is not stiff enough, some more bone-ash may be added.
Leave it to itself for a few hours, when it will dry to a friable mass, easily
broken, and in a fine state of division. Protect from rain whilst.drying.
The manure is now ready for use. The acid does not actually dissolve the
bone-ash, and the resulting superphosphate is very similar in appearance to the
original bone-ash. Although burning the bones destroys the organic matter
and diminishes the proportion of nitrogen, this loss is more than compensated
for by the ease with which the product can be dried and handled. If fresh
bones or bone-meal be used, the fat which they contain prevents the
complete action of the acid, and the resulting product is so slimy as to
be unmanageable in many cases, and much difficulty will be experienced in
getting it to run through the drill.
If. it is preferred to use fresh bones or meal, the following proportions are
said to be the best: —
Dilute every gallon of acid with 1 gallon of water as directed above—
that is, add the acid to the water, stirring all the time. Never, on any
account, add water to the strong acid. Pour this diluted acid upon 20 lb. of
the bone-meal in the trough, taking care to pour slowly, stirring all the
while. The sticky mass must now be mixed with loam, wood-ashes, peat, or
gypsum, in order to dry it.
Instead of burning the bones, the oil may be removed by steaming them,
but this is rather a troublesome process, though a smaller proportion of
nitrogen is lost by this means. Simple boiling with water is better than
nothing, but in no case is the product so satisfactory as that prepared from
burnt bones.
Instead of using acid, bones may be rendered soluble by allowing them
to ferment (see page 95). The following is also a good plan :
Dig a trench, and fill it with alternate layers of wood-ashes and bones,
beginning and ending with wood-ashes. Moisten each layer of ashes when
laid, and keep the whole moist by watering from time to time. In a few
months the heap may be turned over.
Bones can also be dissolved by placing them in a pit, and drenching with a
hot solution of lye—l lb. of potash lye to every 4 lb. of bones. Cover with
earth, and stir occasionally for two or three weeks, when the mixture may
be turned out to dry.
It will be seen that treatment with acid is the most rapid, and the
product is more satisfactory, but a little caution is required in mixing the
ingredients.


MANURES CONTAINING NITROGEN.
Nitrogenous manures fall under three heads, according as the nitrogen
they contain is combined with organic matter or exists in the form of
ammonium compounds, or of nitrates. In the two latter forms it is soluble
in water, and immediately available as plant-food. Most of the quick-acting
concentrated fertilisers contain one or other of these compounds, usually
sulphate of ammonia or nitrate of soda. What is known as organic
nitrogen is contained in animal products, refuse, and excreta, such as blood,
bones, hair, meat, guano, farmyard manure, ic.
The nitrogen in these latter products is not in a state in which it can bo
immediately utilised by the plant, but requites first to undergo fermentation
within the soil, resulting in the first instance in the formation of ammonium
compounds before it is available as plant-food. Although the nitrogen
in these different substances is usually classified for the sake of convenience
under the one heading of “ organic ” nitrogen, it occurs therein in a variety
of combinations, some of which are more susceptible to fermentation than
others, and consequently more rapid in their action. The smell of ammonia'
is soon noticeable from such products as urine and farmyard manure, which
contain a large proportion of their nitrogen in the form of urea, whereas hair,
wool, &0., resist decomposition for a considerable length of time.
The following list shows the order of solubility of the most commonly
occurring of these products, the most soluble standing at the head :
Fresh urine. Fine bone-meal. Coarse bone-meal.
Dried blood. Oil-cake. Horn-meal.
Dried and pounded flesh. Fish scrap. Dung.
Guano. Dried offal. Hair and wool.
This list is of course only intended to show the relative solubility of the
nitrogen in the different substances named. It is not meant to apply rigidly
in all cases, nor is it possible to draw any such rigid comparison, for the
solubility will vary according to the fineness of division of the material, to
some extent also with the nature of the soil, and with the substances with
which the manures in question are mixed. The list will serve its purpose
if it makes clear the fact that some of these nitrogenous products are
more soluble than others, just as we have seen that some forms of phosphoric
acid are more soluble than others, and that the percentage of nitrogen alone
is not always a sufficient indication of the value of such manure, unless the
source of the nitrogen is also known.
Those products containing their nitrogen in the most inert form, such as
hides, horn, hair, &c., are generally utilised by the manure-makers by treat-
ment with sulphuric acid as in the manufacture of superphosphate. Their
rapidity of decomposition is greatly increased by this means, just as mineral
phosphates are rendered soluble by treatment with acid. They may also be
mixed with lime, under which treatment they swell, become soft, and
decompose far more readily. They may also be usefully added to the
compost heap.
The most important and most commonly used of these products are :
Dried blood and dried flesh. —These substances are produced in consider-
able quantity in slaughter-houses and boiling-down works, and are dried by
means of steam. They are almost identical in chemical composition, and
contain on the average 11 to 13 per cent, nitrogen. They are specially
beneficial on grass lands (about 30 bushels per acre), for cereals, turnips,


and in fact all crops that require nitrogenous manures. They are less
soluble than such manures as sulphate of ammonia and nitrate of soda, and
are more applicable as an autumn manuring than as a top-dressing. With
superphosphate and kainit they form a complete manure, suitable for fruit-
trees, vines, potatoes, tobacco, and such crops.
Sulphate of ammonia is a manure of very great value, and being a waste
product in the purification of coal-gas, it can be produced more cheaply than
other soluble forms of nitrogen. It is obtained by treating the ammoniacal
liquor of the gasworks with lime, which drives off the ammonia. The
ammonia is absorbed by sulphuric acid and forms sulphate of ammonia.
The ammoniacal liquor is a mixture of different ammonium compounds
produced in the purification of coal-gas. Sulphate of ammonia is a white
crystalline powder when pure. It is the most concentrated form of nitrogen
we possess, containing about 20 per cent, of this element in combination.
It is readily soluble and immediately available, and specially valuable as a
top-dressing to the young crop.
For gardening purposes it may be dissolved in water (about | oz. to 1 oz.
to the gallon), and will be found effective for most pot plants and flowers. It
is more particularly adapted for clay soils. It is stated to be ineffective on
strong calcareous soils—that is, soils which contain over 8 or 9 per cent, of
carbonate of lime ; but as the cultivated soils of the State average something
under 1 per cent., there is not much to be feared on this score. Sulphate
of ammonia, or manures containing sulphate of ammonia, should not be
mixed with lime, nor applied to land which has been recently limed.
A still more effective form of available nitrogen exists in—
Nitrate of soda, the principal source of which is the nitre-beds of Chili
and Peru. Enormous quantities are exported to England and the European
continent, and it is largely used both in the imported and locally-made
fertilisers.
It contains about 16 per cent, nitrogen, as against 20 per cent, in
the case of sulphate of ammonia, and the unit value for the nitrogen is
higher than in the case of sulphate of ammonia. Its local use is consequently
limited.
Of other forms of nitrogen may be mentioned—
Soot, which contains from 1 to 2 per cent, of nitrogen, principally in the
form of ammonium compounds. It is fairly quick in its action, and at the
rate of about 33 bushels per acre will be found useful for grass and
■vegetables.
Calcium cyanamide or Nitrolim is a product obtained by passing nitrogen
over calcium carbide at a high temperature. It is lower in nitrogen than
sulphate of ammonia, and does not appear to possess any higher manurial
value, and it cannot at present compete with the latter locally in cost. It is
consequently not on the local market to any extent.
Calcium nitrate is the manurial product obtained by the electric process
for the manufacture of nitric acid from the atmosphere. It contains about
13 per cent, of nitrogen, and appears to have the same manurial value as
nitrate of soda that contains the same amount of nitrogen. Like cyanamide
it is not on the local market at present. Like this, also, its future success
depends upon its production at a rate enabling it to compete with sulphate
of anmonia.


Humus and Green-manuring.
Amongst the most effective means of adding nitrogen to the soil is the
application of vegetable matter in the form of farmyard or compost manures
(page 72), and the ploughing under of a green crop or green-manuring.
We have seen in the case of many leguminous crops (page 87) that they
are not only independent of the soil for their supply of nitrogen, but that
their growth actually enriches the soil in this ingredient. The land on
which such a crop has been grown contains a larger proportion of nitrogen
than before. This property is turned into account in rotating crops, and
also suggests a means of supplying nitrogen to the soil without the addition
of nitrogenous manures. If a leguminous crop is grown, and is ploughed into
the land just before it reaches maturity, a manure is thereby added to the
land containing 100 lb. or more of nitrogen to the acre—that is to say, the,
land receives a manuring of nitrogen equivalent to that produced by the*
addition of over 4 cwt. sulphate of ammonia or of 8 cwt. of dried blood per
acre. Of course, with such treatment, the land is occupied for a certain
length of time (dependent upon the rapidity of growth of the crop), and the
crop so grown may, in some cases, be utilised to better advantage.
The crops suitable for green manuring are, therefore, those that mature
most rapidly, occupy the ground for the shortest time, and are otherwise of
no great value. Perhaps such crops as lupins, cowpeas, vetches, or clover
generally meet these requirements, but the choice will depend upon the
surroundings of the individual. The crop may be fed as pasture to cattle, in
which case a small proportion of fertilising matter is lost, which is nearly
compensated for by the use of the crop as fodder. The value of green-
manuring to the physical nature of the soil is mentioned on page 73.
Inoculation of the Soil for Leguminous Crops.
Attempts have been made in the preparation of pure cultures of the
organisms occurring in the roots of leguminous plants for the purpose of
inoculating the soil with these organisms.
Several preparations have been made under different names, and by
different investigators, the idea being that the introduction of the organisms
into the soil would favour the growth of the particular crop on the roots of
which they had been growing, just as soil from a clover-field is known to
favour the growth of clover in other land if used as a top-dressing. So far
the results obtained have not been entirely satisfactory ; and although
numerous carefully-conducted experiments have been carried out with
these preparations, their use has not spread to any extent as a practical
application. Further reference to this subject was made on page 78,
MANURES CONTAINING POTASH,
With the exception of wood-ashes, we are dependent upon the German
potash deposits for our supplies of this invaluable manure, and at the time
of publication of this Handbook it is unobtainable. Potash occurs in these
deposits in combination with other substances in different minerals, of which
the commonest is kainit.


Phosphoric Acid.
P'ltasli
Spotted-gum
•10
•GO
Red-gum ...
•3S
4 17
Kloodwood
Tv 2d
Box
...( *67
1 -G5
Blackbutt ...
,J -04
•2-0-2
Ironbark ...
•S2
]
Red-apple ...
Grape-vine
•47
-i I'fi
6 00
,‘>'76
She-oak
8‘8.)
•2 1 19
Grass-tree ...
. 8-07
5'.‘SO
Kaii)lt is a mixture of the sulphates of potash anil lime, roovtiv'r wit 1 ;
chlorifles of magnesium and sodium, it is of value principally on account
of its potash, of which there is about 12 per cent. For leguminous crops,
root-crops, fruit, vines, <Sre., it is a valuable manure. It is usually mixed
with other manures, especially phosphatic manures, about 2 cwt. mixed
with 3 cwt. superphosphate, and 1 or I £ cwt. sulphate of ammonia per
acre being about the best proportion for potatoes.
Sulphate of potash is also obtained from the same source as the above,
and is a very concentrated form of potash, of which it contains over 50 per
cent. As it contains no chlorine, it is preferable to kairrit for such crops as
tobacco. It is more economical than kainit on account of its concentrated
nature, 1 cwt. of it containing as much potash as 4 cwt. of kainit.
Potassium chloride or Muriate is a potash salt containing a somewhat
higher percentage of potash than the sulphate. The chloride is not, how-
ever, quite so universally applicable as the sulphate, as some crops do not
do well when manured with chlorides.
Wood-ashes.
The value of wood-ashes as a fertilising materia! is not as widely known
as it deserves to be. In newly-cleared country this valuable substance is
produced in largo quantities, and it will be found to more than repay the
trouble of returning to the land. It is a matter of common observation that
after a bush fire the vegetation is particularly strong and luxuriant, and the
effect is due largely to the lime, potash, and phosphoric acid thus returned to
the soil. The household wood-fires also furnish a small but continual supply
of ashes which should be all kept and made use of. They may be utilised,
either by themselves or mixed with other manures, or added to the compost
heap—a valuable adjunct to the economy of the farm. (See page 72.)
The ash of the different woods contains the mineral portion of the wood from
which it has been obtained. Of these ingredients the substances possessing
fertilising value are lime, potash, and phosphoric acid. Their potash and
phosphoric acid are, moreover, in an exceedingly soluble condition, and are
in such a state as to be readily assimilated by most plants. The value of the
ash of the different, varieties of European trees lias been long well known
and their constitution established by numerous exact analyse*. The
composition of the ash of our own trees has not as yet been studied
systematically, but from the following analyses made in the Department
it will bo seen that they are likely to be quite as valuable :


The process of burning converts the potash salts into carbonate of potash
for the most part. The lime is present in the form of oxide and carbonate,
and the phosphoric acid partly as calcium phosphate, and partly as alkaline
phosphates. Now, carbonate of potash and alkaline phosphates are particu
larly soluble forms of potash and phosphoric acid respectively , the beneficial
action of lime, both in the form of oxide (quicklime) and of carbonate
(chalk), is well known. It will, therefore, readily be seen what a valuable
manurial substance we have got here. In addition to their direct action as
plant-food, wood-ashes act beneficially in improving the quality of stiff clay-
lands, and equally so in binding light sandy soils : in fact, they benefit the
soil mechanically exactly in the same way that lime does. With the
exception of nitrogen, which, of course, has been burnt off, they contain all
the ingredients of a complete manure, and in a particularly serviceable form.
It might, therefore, be expected that the addition of a nitrogenous substance
would make a complete manure of them ; but such addition must be made
with great caution, as the presence of free lime and alkalies in the wood
ashes is liable to decompose the nitrogen in such a mixture, driving it off
in the form of ammonia, the smell of which will be apparent when sulphate
of ammonia and wood-ashes are mixed together.
The ash of young wood is especially rich in potash, and, generally speaking,
the ash of young and small wood, as young boughs, twigs, &c,, is more
valuable than that obtained from the trunk or heart of an old tree.
The following are the best means of utilising wood-ashes ;
(a) They may be used alone as a top-dressing to grass and pasture, and
for leguminous plants ; but they are of benefit to nearly all crops,
potatoes and roots, fruit and vines being specially benefited. They
are applied at the rate of from 25 to 30 bushels per acre,
(b) A mixture of wood-ashes and bone-meal in the proportion of 6 cwt.
bone-meal to 25 bushels ashes is said to be an excellent substitute
for farmyard manure. Such a mixture should be made as required—
not kept mixed.
(c) They may be used instead of loam or earth for mixing with super-
phosphate and other chemical fertilisers when these are applied to
the land. Ammonium salts must not, however, be mixed with
wood-ashes.
(d) One of the best ways to utilise wood-ashes is in the compost heap.
The best material with which to compost it is undoubtedly peat, but other
decayed or decaying vegetable matter is nearly as good, such as straw, dead
leaves, and refuse of this sort generally. Such substances are fermented in
contact with wood-ashes, and their nitrogen rendered available. On farms
where the compost heap is an institution, it should not be forgotten that the
addition of wood-ashes forms the best method of utilising tiiis product and
improves the value of the compost heap. Where such a system of utilisation
of waste matter is not practised, the following method of composting ashes
will be found useful : —Make a heap of alternate layers of peat or peaty loam,
or vegetable refuse, and wood-ashes, or make a hole and fill it with these
substances in alternate layers, moisten the heap with urine or slop-water, and
allow to ferment for a few months, when it may be turned over. The
addition of stable-manure, dung, and in fact all refuse-matter of the farm,
will benefit such a heap, which may be thus made the means of utilising a
great deal of valuable fertilising material which would otherwise be thrown
awav.


The above remarks apply to unleached ashes, such as are obtained from
the burning of timber.
Leached ashes contain practically little but lime and carbonate of lime, as
the potash and phosphoric acid are for the most part leached out. Their use
and action arc similar to those described under the heading of carbonate of
lime. They may be sometimes economically used instead of this substance,
but in no case will the farmer derive any benefit from leaching his own ashes.
As the above analyses will show, it is chiefly for the sake of their potash that
wood-ashes are used, and they may be regarded as potash manures. They
are not nearly so concentrated a form of this substance as potash salts, and
if substituted for kainit in any of the formulae recommended on page 115 el set}.,
it is well to remember that 1 cwt. sulphate of potash contains about the
same quantity of potash as 12 or 13 cwt. wood-ashes.
Sea-weed as a Manure.
Sea-weed is not at a first glance a very promising fertilising material. It
has, when fresh, a fertilising value somewhat lower than that of farmyard
manure, and its large content of water prevents its carriage in a fresh state
to any distance with economy. Even at the distance of a few miles from
the coast the cost and labour of transport places it out of court as a fertiliser.
Its use is, therefore, limited to farms situated immediately upon an accessible
coast ; but in such cases there is no doubt that it might he applied with
advantage more frequently than at present.
In the coastal districts of Great Britain (especially of Scotland and Ireland),
France, Norway, and the United States, sea-weed is largely used as manure.
The general custom is to fork it straight into the land like dung, and this is
the best method for such sea-weeds as decompose rapidly, and can be easily
distributed, such as the different varieties of kelp and ribbon-weed. These
may be strewn over the land or ploughed lightly in, and rapidly decompose
and disappear. For the tougher kinds, such as cel-grass, it is usually
recommended to compost with lime. This is done by building a stack of
alternate layers of sea-weed and lime, the layers of sea weed being about
6 inches deep, and covered with lime. The whole stack may be conveniently
covered with gypsum to prevent loss of ammonia. The heap is left for two
or three months, and then turned over at intervals until well rotted. It is
doubtful whether composting is economical in the case of the more readily
decomposed varieties above mentioned.
Though a poor manure, it is fairly rich in nitrogen and potash, its weak
point being its phosphoric acid. For this reason a previous dressing of the
soil with superphosphate or bone-dust is stated to be beneficial. Its use
must be avoided on certain crops, such as beet-root and tobacco, which are
injuriously affected by chlorides, which are present in sea-weed in considerable
quantities in the form of common salt. For the same reason, plants such as
asparagus, and small fruit, such as raspberries, which require much saline
matter, arc benefited by its use. Potatoes arc said to contain less starch
when manured with sea-weed, and to acquire in consequence a somewhat
soapy taste ; at the same time, in many parts of the coast of Ireland, sea-
weed is almost the only manure used by the peasant for his potato crop.
It must be carefully spread, especially if used as a top-dressing for
meadows, as it is otherwise liable to destroy the grass when used in largo
quantities.


Water.
Nitrogen.
Potash.
Phosphoric
Acid.
Ribbon-weed, Kelp, Tangle ( Laminaria sacrharina)
87-99
•17
•16
•05
Broad-ribbon weed, Broad-leaved Kelp, Devil’s
apron Tangle [Laminaria digitata)
87-50
•23
■31
•06
Dulse, Dilisk {Rhodymenia pahnata)
86-25
■37
1-07
•09
Round-stalked rock-weed, Ascophylhnn {Fucus)
nodosum ...
77-26
21
■64
•os
Flat-stalked rock-weed {Fucus vesicuhsus)
76’55
•38
■65
•12
Irish or Carragheen Moss {Chondms crispy- s)
76-03
•57
1-02
•13
Kebgrass, grass-wrack ( Zostera marina) ...
81-19
•35
•3
■07
Storer, in his work on « Agriculture,” points out that it is entirely free
from seeds of weeds, spores of fungi, and eggs of insects ; consequently it is a
comparatively easy matter to keep the land clean where it is used.
The ash of sea-weed contains a considerable quantity of fertilising
materials, potash, and phosphoric acid, and in some cases it may be found
economical to utilise sea-weed in this form. The nitrogenous matter is, of
course, thereby lost. The ash is richer in fertilising substances than wood-
ashes— the potash varies in the different varieties from 4to as high as 20
per cent.
Except for the larger amount of water contained in it, sea-weed compares
favourably with farmyard manure.
The average composition of cow-manure is roughly : -
Water ... 77'0 per cent.
Nitrogen ... ... ... ... "5 ~
Potash... .. ... ... ... "6 ~
Phosphoric acid ... ... ... "15 ~
The following table shows the composition of the most abundant species of
sea-weeds, determined by Messrs. Wheeler and Hartwell, of the Rhode Island
Experiment Station, who have also collected a largo amount of valuable
information as to the use of these plants :
A Few Simple Hints for Detecting Adulteration in
Artificial Manures.
It must be premised that it is of no use attempting the roughest analysis
of a manure without a fairly accurate balance. The substances likely to be
added as adulterants, or whose presence in quantity lowers the value of the
manure, are not foreign matters, but those like sand which already exist in
most manures ; therefore, all attempts to decide the value of a fertiliser must
depend upon an estimation of the quantities of the ingredients present, and
these cannot be estimated without a balance which must be capable of
weighing at least half a grain.
In the absence of a balance, however, the following rough tests may be
found useful in giving an approximate idea of the purity of a few of the
simple fertilisers
Bone-dust. —A good sample of bone-dust, however fine, shows the bony
structure in some of the larger pieces. It should be as dry as possible, and


in a fairly fine state of division. It should have the characteristic smell,
though there is no need that the smell should be offensive. It does not
follow that bone-meal is necessarily good because the smell is disgusting.
Take about 100 grains in a small iron spoon or ladle ; heat it strongly in
a brisk fire. The heat should be applied cautiously at first to avoid loss by
spurting, after which it may be applied as strongly as possible. Any moisture
present, all the organic matter and carbonic acid are driven off by this
means, and the “ash” left behind contains phosphate and oxide of lime, and
magnesia, with a small quantity of alkalies. The ash should be quite white
if the bone-dust is pure, although it may require .some patience and a pretty
hot fire to get it white. This ash is now' allowed to cool, and emptied into a
glass beaker or a basin which will stand heat. If such a vessel is not at hand,
a small enamelled saucepan may be pressed into the service. Pour on to the
ash in this vessel about half a pint of water and a few ounces of hydrochloric-
acid, and boil well for about five minutes. The substance should dissolve
completely in the acid, or leave only a very small residue. If there is - any
considerable residue left undissolved, the presumption is that sand has been
mixed either purposely or accidentally. Allow- this acid liquid to cool ; pour
it off from the sand into a tumbler or glass jar. A rough indication of the
quantity of phosphate of lime present may be gained as follows : —Add dilute
solution of ammonia until the liquid smells of ammonia. This will form a
dense white precipitate of phosphate of lime, and a little practice will enable
you to judge from the bulk of the precipitate after it has stood for two hours
of the relative proportion of this ingredient in the manure. If the same
quantity (100 grains) be taken in each case, you will know what quantity to
expect from a good sample. If no precipitate, or only a slight one is formed,
the manure may be discarded. I know- of no method by which even an
approximation of the nitrogen can he made without apparatus. As sand is
the most likely adulterant, it will generally be sufficient to test for it as
above. This method will detect sand in bone-dust, dried blood, offal, and
such products.
Sulphate of ammonia should be a whitish crystalline powder, fairly dry
and friable. It should dissolve completely in water without leaving any
residue, and on placing some in the iron spoon used in the test for bone-dust,
and heating it strongly in the fire, it should completely volatilise, leaving no
residue, A fair idea of its purity may be inferred from the quantity of the
residue thus left. A perfectly pure sample should volatilise completely, leaving
the spoon perfectly clean. If a little of the pow-der be mixed with slaked
lime, and heated in the spoon, a strong smell of ammonia will be given off.
If there is none, the substance is not sulphate of ammonia at all, nor any
ammonium compound.
Dissolve a little of the salt in water, and add a few drops of ferric chloride,
which can be prepared by dissolving a little iron rust, scraped off a rusty
iron implement, in hydrochloric acid. If a deep blood-red colour is produced
by this reagent, the manure should not be used, as it contains a compound
which is injurious to plants, namely, ammonium sulphocyanide, The solution
of sulphate of ammonia should not alter the colour of blue litmus paper : if
it turns red, the salt contains free acid and should not be used'
Kainit should be a crystalline powder, resembling common salt, more or
less white, often of a reddish or darkish tinge, generally damp to the touch.
It should dissolve almost entirely in water, and should be completely soluble
in water to which a little hydrochloric acid has been added. The potash
cannot be estimated by any simple method with any degree of accuracy.


The above tests require no other reagent than a little hydrochloric acid
and ammonia, and though they are not, in any sense of the word, accurate
analyses, still they may prove useful when there is any doubt about the
purity of any of the substances in question.
With the help of a balance which will indicate half a grain, such as any
druggist possesses, the following scheme will enable a fairly close estimation
of bone-dust to be made :
The following articles and chemicals will be required ; A balance (turning
to j grain), pure hydrochloric acid, pure ammonia, a packet of cut filter
papers, glass beaker, pestle and mortar, a sieve of eighty meshes to the linear
inch, a porcelain basin, a glass funnel, some strips of litmus paper. These can
all he obtained at the local druggists.
It is very important to obtain an average sample of the bone-dust. To do
this, if the sample is contained in one hag, empty it out upon a clean board
or lloor, and mix it well with the shovel. If in two or more bags, take a'
sample from the middle of each bag, and mix them as above. From the
mixture take about a spadeful and grind it thoroughly in the mortar until
the whole of it has passed through the sieve. The sifted sample is again
mixed and is ready for analysis.
A piece of glazed writing-paper is placed on one of the pans of the balance,
and exactly counterpoised by placing a similar piece of paper in the other
pan. Weigh out exactly 200 grains of the finely-powdered manure upon the
paper, introduce it without loss into the iron spoon, heat very gently at first
and then gradually more strongly until the ash is white. Care must be taken
not to lose any by spurting. Allow to cool; empty back again upon the paper
without loss of substance. The weight should not now much exceed 80 grains.
This is now emptied again into the porcelain basin, about half a pint of
water added, and about 3 ounces of strong hydrochloric acid. Boil well for
about five minutes, add a little more water, and filter.
Filtering is done as follows : —Fold one of the round papers in half ,
now fold again in half at right-angles to the first fold £]. On opening this
out it will be found to fit exactly into the funnel. The funnel with the filter-
paper is now supported over a beaker. The liquid in the dish is poured
through the filter, rinsing it out with water so as to get all the sand on the
paper. The paper with the sand is now placed in the oven until quite dry,
and weighed. If a second filter-paper be placed in the other scale the weight
required will represent the weight of sand. This should not be more than
3 or 4 grains in a pure bone-dust. This number divided by two will give the
percentage of sand and insoluble matter in the bone-dust.
The filtered liquid is now neutralised with ammonia—that is to say,
ammonia is added till the solution turns red litmus paper blue. Allow the
precipitate which is formed to settle and filter again in the same way as the
sand ; dry and weigh as before. The weight of this precipitate divided by
two gives the percentage of phosphate of lime in the bone-dust. This
should not be less than 40 per cent. —that is, the precipitate should weigh
at least 80 grains. The above scheme dges not pretend to scientific accuracy,
but it will give a fair approximation to the actual composition.
As the efficiency of a bone-dust depends much upon the fineness of division,
it is as well to grade it roughly by passing it through a sieve with twenty-
four meshes to the linear inch. Three-quarters of the weight of the manure
{75 per cent.) should pass through the sieve.


It must be thoroughly understood that the above tests are only intended
as a rough guide as to the purity of a manure. If the quantity of impurity
is found to be excessive a sample should be forwarded to a qualified analyst
or to the Department for report.
General Remarks on Artificial Manures
Manure the crop, not the land.
Never purchase a manure without a guarantee of its composition as
determined by analysis.
In the case of complete fertilisers, it must not be forgotten that you have
to pay for getting them mixed; consequently it is often a question whether it
would not be cheaper to buy the simple manures and mix them voursolf. On
the other hand the mixing (especially in the case of large quantities) can be
much more thoroughly done by the manufacturer.
The simple manures are bone-dust and superphosphates, containing nitrogen
and phosphoric acid (superphosphates from mineral phosphates contain no
nitrogen) ; dried blood, sulphate of ammonia, and nitrate of soda, containing
principally nitrogen ; sulphate of potash, and wood-ashes, containing potash ;
and lime, gypsum, &c., containing lime.
It will be found more convenient to mix them with about three times their
weight of dry loam, and distribute evenly. The advantages of such a course
are obvious. Lime should not be added to ammonium sulphate, or dried
blood, or bone-dust, as it drives off ammonia. It is safer not to add lime to
any nitrogenous manure ; hence, when the land has been limed, it is better
not to manure it for two or three weeks.
COMPARATIVE VALUE OF FARMYARD MANURE AND
ARTIFICIAL MANURES.
The following comparison of the relative manurial value of farmyard
manure and a typical complete artificial fertiliser on the market may he
found useful.
One ton of farmyard manure contains, roughly, the following quantities of
fertilising ingredients :
Nitrogen ... ... ~ ... ... ... ... 8 lb.
Potash ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 lb.
Phosphoric acid ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 lb.
In 3 cwt. of the artificial fertiliser there are of—
Nitrogen ... ... ... ... .... ... 9 lb.
Potash ... .. ... fi lb.
Phosphoric acid ... ... ... ... ... ... 42 lb.
That is to say, 3 cwt. of the fertiliser contains about the same quantities of
nitrogen and of potash, and seven times the quantity of phosphoric acid,
as 1 ton of farmyard manure.
The cost of 3 cwt. of this particular fertiliser at pre-war prices is about
19s. 6d.
The manurial ingredients in the artificial products are in a very soluble
form, and their effect is more rapid. On the other hand, they contain no
vegetable matter like the litter in farmyard manure.


REGULATIONS RELATING TO ANALYSES OF SOILS,
FERTILISERS, &c.
Analyses of soils, fertilisers, fodders, plants, wheat, flour, water for
irrigation or for watering stock, farm produce generally, insecticides
preservatives, etc., &c., are made by the Chemist gratis for bona-fide farmers
and settlers, resident in Neiv South Wales, only. No analyses will be
undertaken for commercial purposes. These should ho made by chemists
outside the Department.
Instructions for Forwarding Samples for Analysis.
All samples should be addressed to the Under Secretary and Director.
Department of Agriculture, and be accompanied by a letter giving instruc-
tions and name and address of sender. The sample should bear either outside
or inside the package the name and address of the sender for identification. It
more than one sample is sent in a parcel, they should be numbered or lettered,
so as to correspond with the numbers, etc., in the letter of advice.
Soils. —Owing to the length of time required to carry out a satisfactory
analysis of a soil, and the fact that there are a large number of samples
always waiting their turn, some delay is unavoidable in furnishing the result.
If the results are required before carrying out any particular operation,
farmers are advised to send in the samples about three weeks beforehand.
Forms of application for analyses of soils, together with instructions as to
how the samples should be taken, can be obtained from the Department.
Manures. —ln forwarding samples of manure for analysis, great care
should be taken to ensure that the sample sent represents a fair average of
the bulk. In the case of a dispute between vendor and purchaser, the
sample should be taken in the presence of someone representing the seller, or
in his absence, in the presence of a police officer. Three samples should be
taken and sealed separately, one to be sent to the Department for analysis,
the second handed over to the seller’s representative or the police officer, and
the third kept with seals intact for future reference. A sample from Jto •§ lb.,
or even less, is sufficient for analysis, provided it has been properly sampled.
Plants should be cut close to the ground, the cut ends enveloped in sacking,
and sent away immediately after packing. A box knocked together of loose
boards, with interstices between the boards, is the best, as if packed in a
tight box they are certain to sweat on a long journey. When sending plants
or other perishable articles, such as milk, etc., for examination, a letter
advising their despatch should be sent a few days previously, addressed to
‘'The Chemist, Department of Agriculture, Sydney,” so that the analysis
may be undertaken immediately upon arrival. The samples should be sent
direct to the Chemical Laboratory, 136 George-street.
Waters for irrigating purposes and for stock should be collected in perfectly
clean glass bottles. One ordinary quart-bottle will usually be sufficient,
except when a complete analysis is required, when two quarts should bo sent.
Each bottle must be corked with a perfectly clean, well-fitting cork, and
sealed. The bottles must, of course, be securely packed against breakage.
Wheat. —For examining the milling qualities of wheat, a sample of not
less than 2 lb. weight is required. It should be stated whether the sample
has been previously cleaned or not, and to what extent it has been cleaned.
The name of the grain, if known, should also be supplied, as well as any
information available as to the district, class of soil, yield per acre, etc. The
Department does not undertake to name wheats from the grain.
Flour. —A sample of not less than 1 lb. is required for analysis.


Formulae for Preparing Fertilisers.*
Introductory.
Tin- formula} here suggested may he taken as fulfilling the requirements
of the different crops on average soil, and are intended to seme as a basis
which may be modified to suit individual instances.
The proper manuring of farm-crops has been greatly neglected in New
South W alt's until within the last few years ; and even now it is not unusual
to hear doubts expressed as to the ettieaev of manures, and occasionally some
one propounds tie 1 flieorv that their use tends to exhaust the foil. Ordinary
soil, under cultivation, becomes impoverished by the continual and periodical
removal of the crops grown upon it without any attempt at returning to the
soil the ingredients which have been removed by the crop. To restore
these ingredien's is the function of manures ; and if the phenomena
attending the growth of crops and the movements within the soil were more
under our control, the question of the application of manure in the proper
form and quantity would become capable of accurate solution.
Although proper manuring is an essential to successful farming, it is not
the only essential, nor is it the most important one. No amount of manuring
will produce good crops on land that is undrained, sour, or in had tilth. It
is understood that the following suggestions as to manuring are to follow
proper treatment of the soil, thorough cultivation, subsoiling and draining if
necessary, liming, or green manuring. They presuppose a soil in good tilth,
well limed, and well supplied with humus.
The ingredients have been made, in each case, up to 10 cwt., as a
convenient basis for calculation if larger or smaller amounts aio required.
The calculated cost is based on the current prices in Sydney, and does not
include freight nor mixing. The prices are necessarily not exact, as substances
like bone-dust, refuse, ic., vary considerably, both in composition and price,
but will be found to be fairly close. (See, however, special introductory
note.) This way of presenting the formula* will, it is thought, facilitate
matters for the farmer who wishes to mix the ingredients himself. At the
same time, this course is not one to be generally recommended, unless the
farmer has plenty of time and patience, and is alive to the importance of
very thorough and careful weighing and mixing of the ingredients.
In most cases it is more satisfactory to purchase the manures ready mixed.
Any firm of manure agents will prepare the formulae, and they have facilities
for making the mixtures more efficiently than the ordinary fanner. The
small extra cost involved in the mixing (from 6s. to 7s. above that given in
the formulae) will he more than repaid by the greater uniformity of the
fertilisers. If only small quantities are, required, the mixing can be con-
veniently done by the user himself.
Local Fertilisers.
The formula; have been prepared specially with the view of utilising to the
best advantage the manures most readily and cheaply obtainable in the (State.
These consist, on the one hand, of carcase manures, such as boiling-down
refuse and similar products, bone-meal, dried blood, desiccated soup, <fec.;
and, on the other hand, of fertilisers having as their basis substances such as
mineral phosphates or the bone-char of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company,
&c., rendered more or less soluble by treatment with sulphuric acid.
♦ F. B. Guthrie.


imported fertilisers of this latter class arc usually prepare'! tram mineral
phosphates treated with acid.
The complete fertilisers are prepared from these phosphatic materials by
mixing them with sulphate of ammonia or nitrate of soda and potash-salts.
The sulphate of ammonia which supplies the nitrogen in the locally-
manufactured manures of this class is itself manufactured locally.
There is practically little to choose, as far as efficiency is concerned,
between sulphate of ammonia and nitrate of soda, and their choice will
depend upon the cost. At the present time, the local price of nitrate of soda
is about £23 per ton, whilst the price of sulphate of ammonia is about £2O
per ton.
Since nitrate of soda contains about 1G per cent, nitrogen, and sulphate of
ammonia over 20 per cent., the cost, locally, of nitrogen in the form of
sulphate of ammonia is about 10i<l. per lb. as against 15 ’,d. per lb, in the case
■ if nitrate of soda.
The potash-salts, both in the locally-prepared and the imported fertilisers,
are obtained from the great saline deposits at Stassfurth, in .Saxony, which
supply the world with kainit, sulphate and chloride of potash, &e.
Here, again, the availability of the different forms of potash is much the
same, and it becomes a question of cost. Potash in the form of sulphate is
both the most economical form and the one most universally applicable, and
it has been used exclusively in the formuhe.
In the form of chloride it is found not to be so beneficial to all crops,
potatoes and tobacco particularly being crops which are not greatly’ benefited
by the application of chlorides. Kainit, being a form of potash which contains
chlorides, should be avoided in these instances.
Potash-salts may’ be beneficially’ applied in the form of wood-ashes
(unleached). The potash in wood-ashes is in the form of carbonate for the
most part, and is equally available for plant-food as the sulphate or chloride.
If wood-ashes are substituted for sulphate of potash in any of the formulae
here given, it must be remembered that they contain free lime, and must
consequently not be mixed with fertilisers containing ammonium salts ; also
the ashes from our local trees contain, in the average, not more than 3 or 4
per cent, potash, and it will require 13 to 14 cwt. wood-ashes to provide the
same amount of potash as is contained in 1 cwt. sulphate of potash.
Comparison of these Formulae with those at present on the Market.
These formuhe are so devised as to provide the fertilising ingredients in the
quantities per acre which recent experiment has shown to be most suitable
to the different crops, having regard also to the proper proportion of soluble and
slowly-available plant-focd and of organic and ammoniacal nitrogen. They are
calculated to average land, and may be modified to suit land particularly rich
or particularly’ poor in any individual ingredient. In cases where farmyard
manure is used, the fertilisers here recommended may be added, in smaller
quantities,provided the manuring with farmyard manure has been fairly liberal.
Comparing these formuhe generally with the composition of the mixed
fertilisers at present on the market, it will be found that the difference lies
chiefly in the larger proportion of potash they contain and the smaller
proportion of phosphates.
During recent years a very’ large number of careful experiments have been
conducted, more especially in the United States and Germany’, and our-views
as to the proper manuring for different crops have undergone considerable


modification. The formulae given in the following pages are more in accordance
with our present knowledge of the subject, and will be found to represent the
now generally-accepted views as to the proper proportions and quantities of
the fertilising ingredients.
Since first these formula} were presented to the public, they have under
gone considerable alteration, suggested by local experience, especially from
experimental work carried out on the different departmental farms, and from
farmers’ experiments carried out under departmental supervision.
The manuring here recommended lias, however, formed the basis of the
treatment recommended in individual cases by the Department for several
years past, and has always given successful results locally.
Substitution of one ingredient for another.
Attention has been given to supplying the requirements of the crops, not
only as to the quantities of the fertilising ingredient, but also as to their
condition. It is found that some crops require their plant-food in as readily-
available and concentrated a form as possible ; whereas with others better
results are obtained by supplying them with plant-food which becomes slowly
available. In the matter of nitrogenous manuring, some crops derive more
benefit from manuring with organic nitrogen, such as bones, blood, ifcc., whilst
others give better results when supplied with nitrogen in the form of
ammonium salts or nitrates. Some discretion must, therefore, be used in
substituting one ingredient for another ; and speaking generally, only
manures of the same kind should be substituted for each other.
In a formula providing nitrogen, for example, in the form of dried blood,
if it is desired to substitute another form of nitrogenous manure, one should
be selected containing its nitrogen in the same condition, such as bone-dust,
or a similar product. It is not generally advisable to replace it by sulphate
of ammonia or nitrate of soda.
It must also bo remembered that the substitution of one ingredient for
another in any formula affects the proportion of the other ingredients, and
the whole formula will have to be recalculated. Thus, suppose in No. 2
formula it is desired to use kainit instead of sulphate of potash : kainit only
contains about 124 per cent, of potash, so that 466 lb. kainit will be required
to replace the 112 lb. sulphate of potash ; but the total will be no longer
1,120 lb., but 1,474 lb., and this mixture will have to be applied at the rate
of 2 cwt. per acre to give the proper proportions of plant-food.
In recalculating such a mixture, the point to he kept in view is not so
much the percentage composition of the mixture, as the total amount of
fertilising ingredients provided per acre.
Fertilisers containing similar ingredients, and which are interchangeable
in the formulas, are grouped together, and their price and average composi-
tion added -
A.—NITROGENOUS MANURES.
1. Animal Products containing Organic Nitrogen and Insoluble
Phosphoric Acid.
Hone-dust. —A good sample of genuine bone-dust should contain from
34 to 4 per cent, nitrogen, and about 20 per cent, phosphoric acid.
Where bone-dust has been used in the formulae, a product of about
this composition has been assumed. Bone-dust varies, however, very
considerably, as all sorts of meat-refuse are sold locally under this name,
some of which contains very little bone. Its cost is about £9 per ton.


Boiling-down refuse. —Bone and blood manures, etc., contain on the average
about o to 7 per cent, nitrogen, and 11 to 18 per cent, phosphoric acid.
This is the composition assumed in the formula). In the local trade,
however, a great deal of boiling-down refuse is sold mixed with bone
dust, and it is not easy to draw' a very sharp line. The cost is usually
about £9 to £lO per ton.
The following contain organic nitrogen only :— ■
Dried blood contains 10 to 13 per cent, nitrogen, and costs about £l5
per ton.
Desiccated soup, and similar products occasionally put upon the market, are
prepared from the boiling-down products, and contain about the same
proportion of nitrogen as dried blood. The price is about the same.
Offal manures. —Dried offal, sometimes with wool and droppings, average
about 7 per cent, nitrogen, and are sold at about £lO per ton.
The nitrogen in the above products is all derived from the same source,
and is more or less slowly available as plant-food. These products may all be
substituted one for the other, as far as their nitrogen is concerned. Due
regard, of course, must be paid to the different amounts of nitrogen they
contain.
Cyanamide or nitrolim is a nitrogenous manure, containing 18 per cent,
nitrogen. It is prepared by passing air over calcium carbide at a high
temperature. It is not made use of in the formula) here given, as only small
quantities are imported. None is made locally.
Nitrate of lime is the product obtained from atmospheric air when air is
sparked. It contains about 13 per cent, nitrogen. The same remarks apply
as in the case of cyanamide. Both these substances are coming into use in
Europe as substitutes for sulphate of ammonia and nitrate of soda, but their
cost locally is prohibitive.
2. Salts of Ammonia and Nitrates containing Nitrogen in a very
SOLUBLE AND QUICK-ACTING FORM.
Sulphate of ammonia contains a little over 20 per cent, nitrogen, and costs
about £2O per ton.
Nitrate of soda contains about 16 per cent, nitrogen, and is sold locally at
about £23 per ton.
Nitrate of potash contains 131, per cent, nitrogen, and, in addition, 4IJ per
cent, potash. I have not made use of it in any of the formulae, as 1
have no experience of its use as a fertiliser. If used, it may be
substituted for sulphate of potash and sulphate of ammonia.
B,—PHOSPHATIC MANURES.
1, Phosphates derived from Bone and Mineral Phosphates not
TREATED WITH ACID.
The phosphoric acid in both these classes of fertiliser is in the same form—
tribasic phosphoric acid. They may be substituted one for the other, but
not with the next class (2) of phosphates.
Bone-meal and bone-dust in all forms—green, dried, steamed, &c.—except
treated with acid (dissolved). Their composition and price are already
given under nitrogenous fertilisers.


Mineral phosphates. —These are imported and used chiefly for the manufacture
of superphosphate. They are also to he obtained finely ground a-
manures.
2, Superphosphates prepared by treating the above Substances
Bone-dust, Bone-char, Mineral Phosphates, Phosphatic Guanos.
Ac. —with Acid.
The phosphoric acid is in a soluble and readily-available form.
The “ superphosphateused in compiling the formula* is assumed to
oontain about 17 per cent, water-soluble phosphoric acid, and to cost about
£5 per ton.
3. Basic Slag—Thomas Phosphate.
If this is used instead of superphosphate it is best used alone as in Formula
No. 4, where fuller instructions are given as to its use.
C.—POTASH MANURES*
These manures all contain their potash in a very soluble and readily-
available form, and all fall into the same class, and may be substituted for
each other, with proper regard to the amount of potash they contain.
Sulphate of potash, is the most universally applicable ; it contains about
52 per cent, potash, and before the war cost £l4 10s. per ton.
Kainit contains about 12£ to 13 per cent, potash, and before the war cost
£4 15s. per ton. It contains, in addition, chlorides, as well as
magnesium salts, &c.
Potassium chloride (muriate of potash) contains 57 to 60 per cent, potash,
but is very little used in this State.
Nitrate of potash. —See “Nitrogenous manures.”
Wood-ashes. —The potash in unleached w r ood-ashes is in the form of hydrate
and carbonate. If it is proposed to substitute wood-ashes for the
sulphate of potash in the formulae, a preliminary analysis must be
obtained, as the potash-content varies very considerably in different
samples. (See analyses of ash of native trees, page 102.)
• In the succeeding formnhe sulphate of potash has been used as a source of potash.
At the time of publication this salt, and, indeed, any concentrated potash salt, is un-
obtainable, consequently it will not be possible to make up the mixtures as directed.
The available material containing potash, such as wood-ashes, sea-weed, &0., vary so
much in their potash content, that it is not possible to give formulas in which the sulphate
of potash is replaced by other ingredients. It is therefore recommended that the potash
be added separately. Jlake up the formulae, as far as the nitrogen and phosphoric acid
are concerned, as recommended, and apply the potash in the form of wood-ashes two or
three weeks previously. This is necessary because the lime present in wood-ashes would
destroy the ammonia in the mixture. The composition of wood-ashes varies with the
kind of wood, but it may be said that, roughly speaking, 13 or 14 cwt. wood-ashes will
contain about the same amount of potash as 1 cw't. sulphate of potash. If other material
be used to supply potash, it would be advisable to have the substance analysed ; indeed,
it would be advisable to do this in the case of wood-ashes. The prices given are, of
course, affected by the shortage of potash, since, where this substance is obtainable, the
cost will be very considerably greater than is here given, and no unit value can be
assigned to it. It is thought better, however, to retain the prices, as they serve as a
basis ot comparison, and in the case of the other manures are correct. If the potash is
replaced by wood-ashes, the cost of this will vary in different localities and on different
farms.


Quantity per
half ton.
Cost,
•
£
S-
Cl.
Superphosphate
7 cwt.
1
9
9
Sulphate of ammonia
.. 2 cwt.
1
12
C
Sulphate of potash ...
.. 1 cwt.
0
14
6
10 cwt.
£3
16
3
Apply on average soil at the rate of 1 \ cwt.
per acre.
A Few General Hints.
When purchasing a manure, always insist on a guarantee of its <•< >)n|F> isitioii
a- determined bv analysis.
Artificial manures .should be mixed with about three times their weight of
dry loam, and distributed evenly.
Never add lime to a, manure containing sulphate of ammonia or blood and
bone manures, as in those cases loss of nitrogen results ; and w hen lime has
been applied to the land, do not use manures until about three weeks
afterwards.
The accompanying fertiliser diagram, which represents in a graphic manner
the points to be taken into consideration in the mixing of different manures,
is reproduced in the hope that it will be found useful to fanners w ho make up
rheir own mixtures.
Substances connected by thick line must not be mixed together.
Substances connected by double line must only be mixed immediately before use.
Substances connected by single thin line may be mixed together at any time.
Fertilisers for Wheat.
No. I,
(On new land, or for the first few years.)
From J cwt. to | cwt. superphosphate per acre.
For very dry districts 40 lb. superphosphate per acre.
This manure costs 4s. 3d. per cwt.
2s T o. 2.
(For worn-out soils, or such as have been manured with superphosphate
only for four or five years.) Also for green fodder.
* It should be understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only.


Quantity per
*
half ton.
Blood and bone manure (containing 5'5 per cent.
£
s.
a.
nitrogen and about 13 percent, phosphoric acid)
6 cwt.
1
19
0
Superphosphate
3 cwt.
0
12
9
Sulphate of potash ...
J cwt.
0
14
G
10 cwt.
£3
6
3
This mixture will contain—-
Nitrogen ... 4 percent.
Phosphoric acid ... -- 12 percent, (all water-soluble).
Potash... ... ... -■ of per cent.
This, applied at the rate of 1| cwt. per acre, will give—
-6| lb. nitrogen 1
20 lb. phosphoric acid > per acre,
8j lb. potash )
and will cost 11s. Gd. per acre at Sydney prices, not allowing for railway
freight.
No. 3.
An alternative to No. 2, using blood and bone as a source of nitrogen
instead of sulphate of ammonia, for soils deficient in organic (vegetable)
matter.
This mixture contains—-
Nitrogen ... ... —■ 3'3 per cent.
Phosphoric acid ... ~ 13 percent (5 per cent, being water-soluble).
Potash... ... ... = 5J percent.
Apply at the rate of 1| cwt. per acre. This will give—
-5J lb. nitrogen 1
22 lb. phosphoric acid ? per acre,
8J lb. potash )
at a cost of 10s. per acre.
If a leguminous crop is grown alternately with wheat, the quantity of
sulphate of ammonia in Formula No. 2 and of blood and bone in Formula
No. 3 may be considerably reduced.
No. 4.
Using Thomas Phosphate.
This is a form of phosphatic fertiliser which should be particularly well
adapted to the class of soil most common in New South Wales, though it
has not yet had a fair trial. Its merits have been long recognised in Europe,
where its cost is about £2 per ton for the highest quality.
Thomas phosphate is not found to be so satisfactory on limestone soils as
superphosphates, but in peaty soils, or on soils poor in lime and on sour soils,
it is of especial benefit. It requires some care in mixing with other
fertilisers, as the lime it contains liberates ammonia from sulphate of ammonia ;
it must, therefore, on no account be mixed with this manure. There is less
risk (but still some) of loss of nitrogen when mixed with hone and blood
manures. With potash salts, especially if finely ground, it has a tendency
to dry to a hard cake.
The best and most effective method of applying it is to sow by itself,
broadcast, either before sowing or with the seed—say, at the rate of about
1 cwt. to the acre. This will give a dressing to the soil of about 18 lb.
phosphoric acid to the acre.
* It should be understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only.


Quantity per
half ton.
£ s. (h
Sulphate of ammonia
3 cwt.
2 8 0
Superphosphate
6 cwt.
1 5 R
Sulphate of potash , ,
1 cwt.
0 14 0
10 cwt.
£4 8 0
Quantity per
half ton.
Cost.
£ s.
d.
Dried blood ...
3 cwt.
1 11
6
Bone-dust
... ... ... 2 cwt.
0 13
0
Superphosphate
... 4 cwt.
0 17
0
Sulphate of potash ...
... ... 1 cwt.
0 14
6
10 cwt.
£3 16
0
Quantity per
half ton.
cost.
£ s.
*
d.
Superphosphate ...
6 owt.
i
5
6
Sulphate of ammonia
... 3 cwt.
2
8
0
Sulphate of potash ...
... 1 cwt.
0
14
6
10 cwt.
£4
8
0
For Maize.
No. 5.
2 cwt. superphosphate per acre, supplying 31 lb. water soluble phosphoric
acid to the acre, at a cost of Bs. 6d. per acre.
No, G.
This mixture contains—
Nitrogen ... ... -- ti percent.
Phosphoric acid ... = 10 percent, (all water-soluble).
Potash... ... ... Hi per cent.
Apply at the rate of 14 cwt. per acre. This will give
10 lb. nitrogen 1
17 lb. phosphoric acid Vper acre,
8J lb. potash J
at a cost of 13s. 2d. per acre.
No. 7.
(On land poor in vegetable matter.)
This mixture contains—
Nitrogen ... ... = 4J per cent.
Phosphoric acid ... = 10 percent. (7 per cent, being water-soluble).
Potash... = 5| per cent.
Applied at the rate of IJcwt. per acre, this will give—
-7J lb. nitrogen 1
17 lb. phosphoric acid 1 per acre,
8J lb. potash J
at a cost of 11s. sd. per acre.
For Oats.
No. 8.
(For grain.)
J cwt. to | cwt. superphosphate per acre.
No. 9.
(For green fodder.)
* It should be understood that these arc pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only.


No. 10.
Quantity per
half ton.
Cost.
•
£
3.
d.
Bone-dust
5 cwt.
1
12
6
Superphosphate...
... m cwt.
0
10
9
Sulphate of potash
cwt.
1
10
3
]0 cwt.
£3
19
6
This will provide a manure containing
Nitrogen fi percent
Phosphoric acid )o percent, tali water soluble!
Potash o] per cent.
Applied at the rate of lb cwt. per acre, tins will give—
-10 hi. nitrogen "i
17 lb. phosphoric acid [• per acre,
SJ lb, potash )
at a cost of ! 3s, 2d. per acre.
Fertilisers for Fruit-trees.
The manuring of fruit-trees has recently undergone considerable modifica
lion, it having been found that the plant-food whose application is most
beneficial is potash, and that it pays best to considerably increase the
amount of this ingredient, the phosphoric acid and nitrogen being of less
importance. It is better, in most cases, to limit the amount of nitrogen
applied, and to apply this ingredient in quantity only if the tree requires
it, and then in the form of a top-dressing before the flowers are out, and
not at a later stage.
All manures for fruit-trees should be well worked into the soil.
For Apples and Fears.
This mixture contains
Nitrogen ... ... 2 per cent.
Phosphoric acid ... per cent. (4J per cent, being water-soluble).
Potash ... ... = 13 per cent.
Apply at the rate of 1 lb. per tree for young trees ; at higher rate if the
trees are older.
Four lb. per tree will cost about Id. per tree, or £1 13s. 4il. per acre if 100
trees are planted to the acre.
The above amount of nitrogen should bo sufficient.
If the trees show want of nitrogen, if the leaves are not of a healthy green,
sulphate of ammonia should be applied at the rate of about £ lb, per tree, as
a top-dressing, mixed with dry loam. The extra cost of the manure will be
6s. per acre, or Jd. per tree.
For Stone Fruit.
Peaches, plums, apricots, etc., require rather more liberal manuring than
the previous class of fruit. They show more readily want of nitrogen, and
this ingredient should be applied in a more soluble form than in Formula
No. 10. It is also important that it should be applied early in the season.
This is the reason why slow-acting nitrogenous manures do not yield such good
results, the nitrogen becoming available at a late stage of the crop, and the
leaf-growth being increased at the expense of the fruit.
* It should be understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only.


No. 11,
quantity per
half ton
Sulphate of ammonia
2 cwt.
1
12
0
Superphosphate ...
6 owt.
i
6
Sulphate of potash
... 2 owt,
1
9
U
10 owl.
£4
6
6
For
Citrus Fruit.
No. 12.
Quantity per
half ton.
£
Cost.
*
d.
Bone-dust (containing per cent, nitrogen
and 20 per cent, phosphoric acid)
5 cwt.
1
12
0
Superphosphate...
2 cwt.
0
s
6
Sulphate of potash
3 cwt.
• >
3
(j
10 cwt.
£4
4
6
This mixture contains —
Nitrogen... ... - 4 percent.
Phosphoric acid... 10| per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash ~ ... lU'4 per cent.
This should be applied at the rate of about 4 lb. to the tree, at a cost of a
little under 4d. per tree. For older trees use a larger amount of fertiliser,
Some long-continued and interesting experiments on the manuring of peach-
trees were carried out by the New' Jersey Experiment Station. A fertiliser
of the above composition was applied at the rate of 6 lb, 'to the tree for a
period of ten years. The results were compared with those obtained on
Humanured land and on land which had received a dressing of 20 tons of
farmyard manure to the acre.
The average yield during the ten years was three times that of the
unmanured land, and very nearly equal to the yield obtained by the enormous
dressing of 20 tons per acre of farmyard manure.
The results obtained in an unfavourable season were even more striking.
The yield in a bad year, 1899, which was only 11 baskets of fruit per acre
from the unmanured plot, was 152 A baskets from that treated with the
chemical manure, and 162 - from the 20 tons of farmyard manure. The
farmyard manure contained eight times the quantity of nitrogen, four times
as much phosphoric acid, and more than twice as much potash as the chemical
fertiliser.
This contains—
Nitrogen... ... -; 2 per cent.
Phosphoric acid,,. -13 J per cent, (34 per cent, water-soluble).
Potash ... ... = lo| per cent.
Apply at rate of 41b. per young tree, at a cost of about 3Ad. per tree, or
XI Bs. per acre of 100 trees.
The following have also been found to be suitable mixtures for citrus
fruits:—
No. 12 a.—For trees in full hearing up to twelve gears old—
-4 to 6 lb. superphosphate )
Ito llb. sulphate of ammonia 1 per tree.
Ito lb. sulphate of potash J
No, 126, —F0r very large, old trees—
-6 to 8 lb. superphosphate "i
to 2 lb. dried blood J-per tree.
to 2 lb. sulphate of potash J
• li should be understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only,


For Grape-vines.
No, 13,
On So,
•h containinj sufficient Lime,
(Quantity per
half ton.
Cost.*
£ s. d.
Sulphate of ammonia .
3i cwt.
2 16 0
Superphosphate
4 cwt.
0 17 0
Sulphate of potash
... cwt.
1 16 H
10 cwt.
£5 9 3
No. U.
On Soils poor in
Lime.
Quantity per
half ton.
Cost.
«
£
s.
d.
Sulphate of ammonia
... 3 cwt.
2
8
0
Sulphate of potash
., 2 cwt.
i
9
0
Superphosphate ...
... 2 cwt.
0
8
G
Gypsum ... ...
3 cwt.
0
6
0
10 cwt.
£4
11
6
This will contain —•
Nitrogen ... ... ■■= 7 percent.
Phosphoric acid ... = 7 per cent, (all watei-soluble).
Potash ... ... = 13 per cent.
This should bo applied at the rate of 4 cwt. to the acre, and will cost about
£2 4s. per acre.
This will provide—•
31 lb. nitrogen )
31 lb. phosphoric acid > per acre.
58 lb. potash j
The grape-vine is a more exhausting crop than the fruit-trees mentioned
above, and requires a larger proportion of manure.
It is particularly exhaustive of nitrogen, potash, and lime, the phosphoric
acid being of minor importance. There is not the danger of supplying
excessive nitrogen, as is the case with some of the other fruits, and the
nitrogenous manuring should be pretty heavy.
The above formula is for soil well supplied with lime or well limed.
Liming is essential ; but, if the soil is deficient in this ingredient, it should be
supplied with the manure. Sulphate of lime (gypsum) is usually recom-
mended for this purpose, and the following formula gives the necessary
alterations ;
This will provide a manure containing—
Nitrogen ... ... = G percent.
Phosphoric acid ... = 3| per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash ... ... = 10| per cent.
Lime ... = 9 percent.
and applied at the rate of 5 cwt. per acre, will give the vines a dressing of—
-34 lb, nitrogen \
19 lb. phosphoric acid f
58 lb. potash ( per acre ’
48 lb. lime )
at a cost of £2 6s. per acre.
* It should be understood that these are pre-war prices, bu they are retained for comparison only.


(Quantity per
half ton.
Cost.
*
Sulphate of ammonia ...
5i cwt.
£ s.
4 8
<1
0
Superphosphate
... ... 3 cwt.
0 12
>J
Sulphate of potash
li cwt.
1 1
9
10 cwt.
£6 2
(i
Sulphate of ammonia ..
Superphosphate...
Sulphate of potash
For Cherries.
No. 16.
(Quantity per
half ton.
. ... ... ... 2 cwt.
cwt.
... cwt.
£
1
1
1
Cost.
s.
12
3
16
tl.
0
6
3
10 cwt.
£4
11
9
For Strawberries.
No. 17.
Quantity per
half ton.
Ccsi
*
£
s.
(1
.Sulphate of ammonia ,
n cwt.
1
4
0
•Superphosphate...
7 cwt.
1
9
!l
Sulphate of potash
H cwt.
1
1
9
10 cwt.
£3
Id
G
For Passion-vines.
No. 15,
From a number of experiments carried out with the manuring of passion
vines in the Glenorie (Cumberland) district, the following mixture was found
to be the most satisfactory : —■
This mixture contains —
Nitrogen :■ 11 percent.
Phosphoric acid ... = 5 per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash = 7'B per cent.
This is applied at the rate of 4 lb, to each vine. Each vino will thus
recei ve —
7 oz. nitrogen.
‘A\ oz. phosphoric acid (all water-soluble).
5 oz. potash.
at a cost of under s|d. per vine.
This mixture contains—
Nitrogen = 4 per cent.
Phosphoric acid ... = 9 3 per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash =l3 per cent.
Apply at the rate of 4 lb. per tree for young trees, at a cost of Id, per
tree. For older trees up to double the quantity should be used.
The above mixture contains—
Nitrogen ... ... = 3 percent.
Phosphoric acid ... = 12 per cent, (all water-soluble).
Sulphate of potash... = 7'B per cent.
* It should be understood that these arc pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison on ! v.


No. 18.
Quantity per
half ton.
Cost.
£ s.
d.
Bone-dust
... 1 cwt.
0 6
6
Superphosphate...
6 cwt.
1 5
6
Sulphate of potash
... 3 cwt.
2 3
6
10 cwt.
£3 15
6
No. 19.
Quantity per
half ton.
Cost,
£ s.
(1.
Dried blood
... 11 cwt.
0 15
9
Superphosphate
... ... ...
cwt.
1 3
6
Sulphate of potash
3 cwt.
2 3
6
10 cwt.
£4 2
9
Applied at the rale of 3 cwt. per acre this will give- -
10 lb. nitrogen i
40 lb. phosphoric acid per acre,
26J !b, potash \
at a cost of £1 2s. Bd. per acre.
Fertilisers for Clovers and Leguminous Crops.
The power possessed by this class of crop of obtaining their nitrogen from
the air renders the application of nitrogenous fertilisers of less importance
than in the case of the other crops. The growth of the root-nodules peculiai
to leguminous plants depends largely upon the amount of mineral fertilising
ingredients available, and the manuring necessary for this class of crop is
one that supplies abundance of lime, potash, and phosphoric acid.
Liming at the rate of i ton to | ton to the acre is an essential to obtaining
a successful crop unless the land is rich in lime.
The above mixture contains—
Nitrogen = J per cent.
Phosphoric acid ... 12 percent. (10 per cent, being water-soluble).
Potash ... ... = 15'6 per cent.
Applied at the rate of 2 cwt. per acre, this will give the crop—
-1 lb. nitrogen )
27 lb. phosphoric acid Vper acre,
35 lb. potash j
at a cost of 15s. per acre.
The above dressing on land previously limed should give a full crop.
Liming alone will be found of very considerable benefit.
The above fertiliser is for fairly good laud, well supplied with vegetable
matter. In soils poor in humus, a somewhat larger dressing of nitrogen is
necessary, in order to give the young crops a start, and supply them with the
nitrogen necessary for their growth before they are able to obtain it from
the air.
For such soils the following formula will be found good :
For Leguminous Crops on Soils deficient in Vegetable Matter.
* It should be understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only.


For Peanuts.
No. 20.
Quantity per
half ton.
Cost.*
£ s. cL
Sulphate of ammonia
,. 1 cwt.
0 16 0
Superphosphate ...
.. 7 cwt.
1 9 9
■Sulphate of potash
., 2 cwt.
1 9 0
10 cwt,
£3 14 9
This mixture contains -
Nitrogen 2 per cent.
Phosphoric acid 9 per cent, (all water-soluble;.
Potash ... 16 per cent.
and, applied at the rate of 2 cwt. per acre, will provide the crop with
4 lb, nitrogen t
20 lb. phosphoric acid > per acre,
35 lb. potash )
at a cost of 16s. 6d. per sere.
This mixture will contain—
" Nitrogen =» 2 per cent.
Phosphoric acid... = 12 per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash ... 10J per cent.
Apply at the rate of 3to 5 cwt. per acre. At the rate of 3 cwt. per acre
the land will receive—
-6J lb. nitrogen i
40 lb. phosphoric acid 1 per acre,
35 lb. potash '
at a cost of £1 2s. 6(1. per acre.
The cost per acre for manuring leguminous crops according to the above
formula' is somewhat greater than for manuring wheat and cereals. It
is to be remembered, however, that such crops actually enrich the soil in
nitrogen, and act as a nitrogenous manure even when they are cropped
so that, if a legume is grown alternately with wheat, the quantities of
nitrogenous material required for manuring the wheat in Formulae Nos. 2
and 3 may be considerably reduced.
If such a green crop be ploughed under—say, a moderate crop of 10 tons
per acre —it is equivalent to a dressing of sulphate of ammonia of 6 cwt. lu
the acre, which would cost about £6, or of 10 cwt. dried blood (costing
about £7 10s.). This is, of course, in addition to the phosphoric acid anil
potash which is returned to the soil when the crop is turned under.
* It should foe understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only.


For Pasture-grass.
No. 21.
Quantity per
half ton
C‘03«. *
€ s,
Sulphate of ammonia ..
... 4 ewt.
3 4 0
Superphosphate...
4£ cwt.
0 19 3
Sulphate of potash
H owt.
1 1 9
For Potatoes.
No. 22.
Quantity per
half ton.
Cost
£ 3.
*
d,
Sulphate of ammonia ...
... 2 cwt.
1 12
0
Superphosphate.,.
... 6i cwt.
1 7
9
Sulphate of potash
... li cwt.
1 1
9
10 cwt.
£4 1
3
Quantity per
half ton,
Cost.*
£ s. d.
Superphosphate ...
... 8 cwt.
1 14 0
Sulphate of potash
... 2 cwt.
1 9 0
10 cwt.
£3 3 0
10 cwt. £5 5 0
This mixture contains—
Nitrogen,. 8 percent.
Phosphoric acid... 7'6 per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash ... ... = 7'B per cent.
Applied at the rate of 2 cwt. per acre. This will give per acre—
-18 lb. nitrogen "1
17 lb. phosphoric acid >per acre,
17 lb. potash J
at a cost of 21s. per acre.
This mixture contains—
Nitrogen ... ... = 4 percent.
Phosphoric acid = 11 percent, (all water-soluble).
Potash = 7'B per cent.
Applied at the rate of 4 cwt. per acre, this will give a dressing of—
-18 lb. nitrogen 1
49 lb. phosphoric acid / per acre,
35 lb. potash )
at a cost of £1 12s, 6d. per acre.
No. 23,
Ihe following mixture, which contains no nitrogen, has also given excellent
results, especially in the South Coast district, ■where it has generally proved
superior to the nitrogenous fertiliser.
* 't should be understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only.


For Mangels.
Iso. 24.
Quantity per
half ton.
Coat.
*
£
3.
d.
Sulphate of ammonia ...
3 cwt.
2
8
0
Superphosphate
6 cwt.
1
5
0
Sulphate of potash
... 1 cwt.
0
14
6
10 cwt.
£4
7
9
For Turnips,
Swedes, &c.
No.
25.
Quantity per
half ton.
Cost.
£ s.
<1.
Sulphate of ammonia
cwt.
1 4
0
Superphosphate
7 a cwt.
I 12
0
Sulphate of potash
... 1 cwt.
0 14
6
10 cwt.
£3 10
6
The mixture contains—■
Phosphoric acid... ■-= 13$ percent, (all water-soluble)
Potash ... ... 10$ percent.
Applied at the rate of 4 cwt, per acre, this will give—
-61 lb. phosphoric acid t
46$ lb. potash / P er acre ’
at a cost of £1 ss. 3d, per acre.
This mixture contains—
Nitrogen ... = 6 0 per cent.
Phosphoric acid = 10'0 per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash ... ... = per cent.
Applied at the rate of 3 cwt. per acre this will give—
20| lb. nitrogen )
34 lb. phosphoric acid > per acre,
17J lb. potash )
at a cost of £1 6s, 6d. per acre.
This mixture contains—
Nitrogen ... = 3 per cent.
Phosphoric acid = 12J per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash ... ... = per cent.
Applied at the rate of 3 cwt. per acre this will give—■
10 lb. nitrogen S
44 lb. phosphoric acid > per acre,
17i lb. potash )
at a cost of £1 Is. 2d. per acre.
• It should be understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only.


For Tomatoes.
No. 28,
Vuantit v p>-,'
haif ion.
' ' ' f
£ =.
U
''ulphatt* of ammorr.a
. 3 cwl.
2 .S
0
Superphosphate
, 4J cat.
0 19
3
Sulphate of pefa*h
owt.
1 Ifi
O
10 cwl.
£5 .3
6
For Pumpkins, Melons,
&c.
Xo. 27.
Quantity per
*■
half ton.
v wot.
£ s
<1.
Dried blood
cwt.
2 7
3
Superphosphate
4 cwt.
0 18
0
Sulphate of potash
li cwt.
1 1
9
10 cwt.
£4 7
0
This mixture contains—
Nitrogen... ... = 6 percent.
Phosphoric acid ... - 7j per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash 13 percent.
Applied at the rate of 3 cwt. per acre this will give—
-201 lb. nitrogen ■)
25J lb. phosphoric acid >per acre,
14 lb. potash J
at a cost of £1 11s. per acre.
Contains-
Nitrogen ... ... - .VS per cent.
Phosphoric acid . , -7 per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash - 7'B per cent.
Applied at the rate of 4 cwt. per acre, this will give—
-25 lb. nitrogen v
30i lb. phosphoric acid > per acre,
35 lb. potash 3
at a cost of £1 14s. 9d. per acre.
For Cabbages, Cauliflowers, &c.
No. 28.
These plants make heavy demands upon the plant-food in the soil, and
require very liberal manuring. The increased production obtained by
manuring is, however, of considerably greater money value than the cost
of manuring here recommended, which may at first sight appear rather high.
* It should be understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison onV


A.
per
half ton
Cost.*
£ 3, d.
Bone-dust
Howl.
l> 18 6
Sulphate of potash
1 owl
u 14 6
10 cwt,
£3 13 0
]>ried blood
For Onions.
No. 29.
Quantity per
half ton.
si cwt.
Cost. •
£ s. d.
1 16 9
Bone-dust
cwt.
0 16 3
Superphosphate
... ... ... ...
cwt.
0 6 6
Sulphate of potash
2J cwt.
1 16 3
Applv the above at the rate of 3 cwt. per acre when sowing or planting
out.
This will give a dressing of -•
11 lb. nitrogen i
GOJ lb. phosphoric acid > per acre.
174 lb. potash )
The nitrogen and phosphoric acid in the above are in slowly-available
forms, and should be supplemented by a top-dressing, just before the heads
begin to form, of
B.
4 cwt. sulphate of ammonia")
j cwt. superphosphate > per acre.
I cwt. sulphate of potash )
This dressing will cost 18s. 6d. per acre, and there will have been given
a iota! dressing of—
-22 lb. nitrogen )
74 lb. phosphoric acid > per acre,
47 lb. potash 3
at a total cost of £2 Cs. Gd. per acre.
10 cwt. £4 15 9
This fertiliser contains—
-5J per cent, nitrogen.
~h per cent, phosphoric acid (3 per cent, being water-soluble).
13 per cent, potash.
It should be applied before planting, or when planting, at the rate of 5 cwt.
per aero.
The crop will thus receive—
30| lb. nitrogen t
42 lb. phosphoric acid [-per acre,
73 lb. potash J
at, a cost of £2 Bs. per acre.
* It should be understood that these are pre-war prices, but they are retained for comparison only.


For Tobacco.
Xo. 30.
Quantity poi
Cost.
*
1 alf ton.
£ .
d.
Sulphate of ammonia
4 cwt.
3 4
0
Superphosphate
3J cwt.
0 15
0
Sulphate of potash ...
cwt.
1 10
3
10 cwt.
£5 15
3
For Cotton.
No. 31.
Quantity per
half ton.
£
Ccst
s.
*
(1.
Sulphate of ammonia
1J cwt.
1
4
0
Superphosphate
7i cwt.
1
12
0
Sulphate cf potash
1 cwt.
0
14
6
10 cwt.
£3
10
0
After the crops have well started, a top-dressing of about i, cwt. sulphate
of ammonia per acre, mixed with dry loam, should be given. It is advisable
not to give the whole dressing at once, but in small quantities and at
intervals.
This additional top dressing will cost Bs. per acre, bringing the total cost of
the manuring to £2 16s. per acre, and providing the crop with—
4IJ lb. nitrogen (11 lb. in form of soluble top dressing).
42 lb. phosphoric acid.
73 lb, potash.
This mixture contains—
Nitrogen... ... = 8 per cent.
Phosphoric acid... = 6 per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash ... ... = 13 per cent.
Applied at the rate of 6 cwt. per acre, this will give—
-53J lb. nitrogen \
40 lb. phosphoric acid > per acre,
S7i lb. potash !
at a cost of <£3 9s. per acre.
This mixture contains
Nitrogen... ... -- 3 per cent.
Phosphoric acid... = 13 per cent, (all water-soluble).
Potash = 5“2 per cent.
Apply at the rate of from 3J to 5 cwt. per acre.
At the rate of 34 cwt. this will give—
- 11:)’ lb. nitrogen \
411) lb. phosphoric .acid > per acre,
2()i lb. potash )
at a cost of £1 4s. Bd.
* It should he uuderetool lhat these aie pre-war prices, but limy ;.re retained for comparison o 1


LIST OF FERTILISERS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
1918 List.
The accompanying list of manures obtainable in Kew South Wales,
together with their composition, as guaranteed by the vendors, is the result
of the revision of previous lists.
The list is published in the interests of the farmers, and it is hoped that it
may serve as a guide to those requiring an} r particular class of manure.
It must be clearly understood that the figures given are not those obtained
by analysis of the sample by the Department. They represent the guarantees
given by the vendors in accordance with the provisions of the Fertilisers
Act.
Where possible, samples have been taken from bulk by one of the officers
of the Department, and only those manures are inserted in the list which have
been found on analysis to be up to the guarantee.
On account of the war, potash manures are unprocurable, and the market
value of other manures may alter. An attempt has, however, been made
to assign a “ unit value ” to the other fertilising ingredients, viz., nitrogen
and phosphoric acid, as has been done in pre-war years.
A word is necessary in explanation of the column giving the “manurial
value” of the manures. These figures are calculated from the composition of
the manures as represented by analysis, a definite unit-value being assigned
to each of the fertilising ingredients (except potash). The units on which
are computed the values given here, are as follows :
Unit-Values of fertilising ingredients in different manures for 1918.
Per unit,
s. d,
Nitrogen in nitrates ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29 4
~ in ammonium salts ... ... ... .., ... ... ... 20 1
~ in blood, bones, offal, &c. —fine ... ... ... ... ... 21 10
Phosphoric acid in hones, offal, &c.—fine ... ... ... ... ... 4 5
Phosphoric acid (water soluble) in superphosphates ... ... ... 6 1
Price per lb. of fertilising ingredients in different manures for 1918.
Pencf* per lb.
Nitrogen in nitrates ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 15*7
~ in ammonium salts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10*8
~ in blood, bones, offal, &c. —fine ... ... ... ... ... 11*7
Phosphoric acid in bones, offal, &c.—fine ... ... ... ... ... 2*4
Phosphoric acid (water soluble) in superphosphates ... ... ... 3‘3
To determine the value of any manure the percentage of each ingredient is
multiplied by the unit-value assigned above to that ingredient, the result
being the value per ton of that substance in the manure. For example, a
bone-dust contains 4 per cent, nitrogen and 20 per cent, phosphoric acid: —
4 x 21s. lOd. = £4 7s. 4d. = value of the nitrogen per ton.
20 x 4s. sd. = £4 Bs. 4d. = ~ phosphoric acid per ton.
£8 15s. Bd. = value of manure per ton.
f 17299-E


It must be clearly understood that the value thus assigned, depending solely
upon the chemical composition of the manure, does not represent in all cases
the actual money value of the manure, which depends upon a variety of
causes other than the composition, and is affected by local conditions
neither does it represent the costs incurred by the manufacturer in the
preparation, such as cost of mixing, bagging, labelling, <fec. It is simply
intended as a standard by which different products may be compared. At
the same time, it has been attempted to make the standard indicate as nearly
as possible the fair retail price of the manure, and the fact that in the majority
of cases the price asked and the value assigned are fairly close shows that the
valuation is a reasonable one.
These figures have been checked in all cases V>y analyses made on samples-
collected by an officer of the Department. It by no means follows, however,
that the particular product analysed and here published will be in stock for
any length of time.
Some agents guarantee tw T o figures —for instance, “from 16 to 18 per cent,
phosphoric acid.” In these cases the low-er one has been published in the
list, as it will certainly be the one the vendors will rely upon in cases of
dispute.
Now that the Fertiliser Adulteration Act is in force, the purchaser has
only himself to blame if he pays for an inferior article. Every vendor is
obliged to furnish a guarantee with ever}- delivery of fertiliser, setting forth
its actual composition as determined by analysis.
If the purchaser has any reason to suspect the genuineness of the guarantee,
all he has to do is to notify the vendor of his intention to take samples for
analysis, in sufficient time to enable the vendor or some person appointed by
him to be present. The samples must be taken before the consignment is
finally in the purchaser’s possession ; for example, if the fertiliser is sent by
rail, the sample should be taken at the railway station or siding. Three
samples must be taken, one being given to the vendor or his representative,
the second kept by the purchaser and submitted to an analyst, and the third
forwarded to the Department of Agriculture for future reference, in case of
divergence in the analyses of the other two. All three samples must be
sealed up.
In the case of bone-dust, blood and bone manures, &c., the valuation has
been made irrespective of the fineness of division, and is based on the amounts
of fertilising ingredients only ; but it must be borne in mind that finely
ground bone-dust acts more rapidly than coarse, and that unground fragments
of bone only become available as fertilisers very slowdy.
A word may be added in explanation of the term “ w-ater-soluble phosphoric
acid.” When bones or mineral phosphates are acted on by sulphuric acid, a
portion of the tricalcic phosphate is converted into another lime compound,
known as monocalcic phosphate or superphosphate. This compound is
soluble in water, and it is to its presence that the rapid action of the
phosphate is due. This is the “water-soluble ” acid of the table. In many
superphosphates, however, a considerable portion of this compound has
undergone change. This change may be due to the salts of iron and alumina
present, or to the length of time it has been kept, and it results in the
formation of a third lime compound—bicalcic phosphate. This is known
as “ reverted ” or “ retrograde ” phosphoric acid, and is insoluble in water,
but soluble in ammonium citrate.


In the fourth table are a number of waste products which may in many
oases be economically utilised.
When purchasing a manure, always insist on a guarantee of its composition
as determined by the analysis.
Never add lime to a manure containing sulphate of ammonia or blood and
bone manures, as in these eases loss of nitrogen results : and when lime has
been applied to the land, do not use such manures until about three weeks
afterwards.
The accompanying fertiliser diagram, which represents in a graphic manner
the points to be taken into consideration in the mixing of different manures,
is reproduced in the hope that it will be found useful to farmers who make up
their own mixtures.
Substances connected by thick line must not be mixed together.
Substances connected by double line must only be mixed immediately before use.
Substances connected by single thin line may be mixed together at any time.


T.- -Simple, Fertilisers.
Guaranteed Composition.
Manurial
Value.
Manure.
Where obtainable.
Nitrogen.
Equal
to
Ammonia.
Lime. Potash.
Phos-
phoric
Acid.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent, per cent.
per cent.
£ s. d.
Sulphate of ammonia ..
Geo. Shirley, Ltd., 7 Bent-street
20 0
24-29
20 1 8
Gypsum ...
Farmers’ Fertilisers Corporation, Ltd.,
31 Hunter-street.
9fi% ......
Cryst.
CaSOj ,
Sulphate of ammonia ...
>> )> 5 >
20'4
24-77
20 9 8
Nitrate of soda ...
) 5 j y j >
15-9
i9-;u
23 6 5
“ Triphosfatc ” ..
N.S. W. Phosphate Co., Ltd., 18 Hunter-street
11-45
Sulphate of ammonia ...
Baton, Burns, & Co., 75 York-street
20-4
24-77
20 9 8
Nitrate of soda ...
>? >» • • •
15-5
18-82
22 14 8
Sulphate of ammonia ...
Australian Gaslight Co., Kent-street ...
2042
24-82
i
20 10 1


II. — Bone and Blood Manures.
Guaranteed Composition.
Manure.
Where obtainable.
Nitrogen,
Equal
to
Phosphoric
Acid.
Equal to
Tricalcic
Manurial
Value.
Ammonia.
Phosphate.
Bone-dust
Geo. Shirley, Ltd., 7 Bent-street ...
per cent.
3*7
per cent.
4*5
per cent.
21-0
per cent.
45*85
£
s
s.
18
d.
7
Blood and bone
K. S. Lamb & Co., 82 Jamieson-street
50
6-07
17-0
37*11
9
4
8
Blood and bone ...
5-35
6o
14*66
32 0
1)
s
1
7
10
No. 1 General purpose bone-dust..
Wooster Fertilisers, Ltd., O’Riordan-street,
37
4-5
21-98
48-0
17
Alexandria.
No. 2—Pure steamed bone-dust
3 01
4'75
24-50
53*50
9
18
-r
No. 8—Bone and blood manure
4'34
6 00
13-74
30*00
8
s
n
No. 5—Raw or green bone-dust
Kitchen & Sons, Ltd., 365 Kent-street ...
4-01
4-86
24*41
63*3
<)
1 5
4
Bone and blood manure
5'5
6-68
17 0
37*11
()
1 5
2
Special bone and blood manure
ii ii i) ...
M. Gearin, Old Botany road, Mascot
M. O’Riordan and Sons, O’Kiordan- street,
6-0
7"29
13-0
28 *38
9
8
I
10
Excelsior bone-dust ...
3-7
4-5
21-98
48*0
8
s
17
Bone-dust
3-29
40
21-98
48-0
8
ii
Alexandria.
Pure fertiliser...
N.S.W. State Abattoirs, Homebush Bay...
6'68
8-11
1287
28*10
10
o
8
Sandown fertiliser
J. Cooke & Co. Propy., Ltd., Sandown Works,
6-85
8-32
10-44
22*82
9
15
8
Parramatta.
Bone and blood, No. 1
Farmers’Fertilisers Corp., Ltd., 31 Hunter-st. ...
6-25
7'59
14-50
31-65
10
0
6
,, ,, No. 2
»> »» ,»
B. Richards and Sons, Ltd., Riverstone ...
6 25
7-59
16-00
34-93
10
2
.»
Blood
13-70
16 60
14
19
Bone-dust
>5 ii ,, ......
317
3-85
26-78
58*51
9
0
Bone-dust, B.D.l
Raton, Burns, & Co., 75 York-street
3-7
4-5
2212
48-29
8
S
6
„ B.D.2
? > if if ...
3-7
4-5
22-12
48-29
8
8
6
,, B.D.3
5> J > if ...
3-3
4-0
20-70
45-19
8
3
6
>. B.D.4
)) >i ff
3-3
4-0
18-4
40*17
7
18
4
Bone and blood, B.B. 1
>> ii if
6-6
7-89
12-0
26-20
9
14
11
,, ,, B.B. 2
>5 >> fi ......
5'5
6-68
170
3711
9
15
o
Bone phosphate
29-77
64-99
Dried blood ... ... ... ...i
13-0
1579
14
3
10


III. —Superphosphates, Mixed Fertilisers, and Imported Manures.
Guaranteed Composition.
Manure.
Where obtainable.
Nitrogen.
Water
soluble
Phosphoric
Acid.
Total
Phosphoric
Acid.
Potash.
Manurial
Value.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
£ s. d.
Superphosphate ...
Geo. Shirley, Ltd., 7 Bent-st ...
17’0
5 3 r.
Basie superphosphate
Manure No. 8
0-7
19-0
,
4-0
130
7 19 5
,, No. 10
2 0
130
5 19 :i
No. 0 Phosphatic manure
Wooster Fertilisers, Ltd., O’Riordan-st., Alexandria
2-87
8-5
19-1
r> 14 10
No. 1 .Superphosphate ...
Farmers’ Fertilisers Corp., Ltd., 31 Hunter-st.
Gibbs, Bright, & Co., Ltd., 37 Pitt-st.
17-0
Sulphide superphosphate
Nitro superphosphate
No. 1 Bone and superphosphate
170
5 9 5
(> 4 5
1-6
15-0
7 7 > > ... ...
1-5
8-5
19-0
(i 10 10
No. 2 „
7 7 7 7 • • •
0-8
130
19'0
6 3 1
Potato manure
Orchard manure ...
Maize and fodder crop manure ...
Root crop manure
Leguminous manure
Special orchard manure ..
7 7 7 7 .. . . . •
»i > i
7 7 7 7 • • • • • •
7 7 77 • • • • • •
1-
2-
3 0
3 25
14T>
130
11-0
7'5
1 o "5
160
14-5
140
10-0
18-0
3-
4-
10
30
2-4
77 »7 ••• •••
2-3
1‘2 '0
12-8
7-25
5 3 5
Superphosphate ...
Baton, Burns, & Co., 75 York-st
17-0


IV. — WASTE-PfionrcTS, Ashes, &c., not on the Market.
Manure.
Original Source.
Water.
Volatile
and Com-
bustible.
Nitrogen.
Ammonia.
Insoluble.
Lime,
Phosphoric
Acid.
Potash.
Deposit from wool-scouring ( *
Liverpool Wool-scouring Works
per cent. .
per cent.
per cent.
•64
per cent.
•78
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent
•73 ‘
1-03
1-34
•16
tanks. 3
Deposit from breakers
Sediment from wool-scouring
works.
Scutch
„ from limed pelts ..
Decomposed hair and lime
Tan-yard refuse
Tan refuse
Fleshings from tannery
Salt (sweepings from tannery) ..
Wool-waste ..
Peat
1-37
1-66
•14
Yass ..
34
IP
17
57
1*81
•59
3-95
3-20
*71
3*58
50-08
8-24
■85
•97
4-56
■88
1-60
•30
andria.
Hugh Wright, Auburn ..
Fellmongery
Tanneries, St. Mary’s
P-70
(i-43
7-10
•PI
7:!-43
57-OS
33'S3
50-90
1-80
6-86
2-34
2 -63
44*43
3-18
8-83
3-73
3-18
5'3S
3-01
1*23
21-43
16-03
5-98
9-36
36-27
36-96
18-58
■89
■ ■ ■ ■ ‘
•56
1-14
•30
•is
•04
3-0-1
•70
*38
8-15
9-89
II. Tager, Moss Vale
S. Cook, Pyrmont ..
73-93
tP"5I
38-30
16*68
34 -03
1*97
•35
3- 39
•42
•01
26-03
10-39
(ash).
3 - 75
■37
•06
•01
Burnt peat
Filter-press muck
Megass
Megass ash ..
84-45
•35
Cane-mills, Broadwater ..
Clarence River cane
16*39
33-86
20*07
67*33
•63
■°7
■78
34*86
8*61
87-69
13-20
•30
3-07
5-98
•01
•44
•05
Richmond River cane
•31
Bloodwood ash
Ironbark ash..
Blackbutt ash
Red-gum ash
Spotted-gum ash
Boxwood ash
Grass-tree ash
Vine-cuttings ash
Red-apple ash
She-oak ash
Hardwood ash
Ash of wild melon
Wood ashes
8-47
'37
5-35
•82
7-27
04
•38
4‘17
•io
'70
i i
1*78
33-48
34-94
3-07
5-30
•IP
60-64
11-34
1 -85
54-52
•47
8-57
13-35
“PIP
•;‘)0
1*35
62-38
13-50
Stock Branch
4 -85
‘30
.
..
31-43
41 -37
2-80
11 12
50-78
Ash of kerosene shale
Eucalyptus leaves ash
Hartley Vale
1*40
37-93
■70
•85
67-59
•28
•14
Camphor laurel ash
Coachwood and sassafras wood
ash.
16-16
3 00
13-53


Volatile
Phosphoric
Acid.
'
Manure.
Original Source.
Water.
and Com-
bustible.
Nitrogen.
Ammonia.
Insoluble.
Lime.
Potash.
Coals (ash) ..
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
■64
•29
•16
•25
-09
Clinker from locomotive boiler ..
Residue from furnace
R. E. Bragg, Marrickville
1-55
35-63
'54
•61
52-40
•64
•43
Sea-weed ash
9-27
6-29
9-39
6-52
•49
1-27
•47
•91
•19
•59
17-55
•43
56-28
Manly
13-98
34-30
• 0\>
Mr. Harvey, Department
3-25
19-46
61-63
1-00
•09
31-41
118
•60
•14
80-00
•16
•41
Sea-weed
41-03
42-49
•14
Sea-weed, dried
18-58
65-97
1-64
1-99
15-44
344
•14
(ash).
16-58
1-88
Residue from calcium carbide ..
41-36
1-08
36*19
Limestone rock
Queanbeyan
1-10
4-70
(
1 -22
)
Hvdrate
Agricultural lime ..
Portland Cement Co.
18-43
23-80 J
13-80
1
Carbonate
43-97
1
Gvpsum
Marulan
DaSOi —92-641
4-47
Cave deposit, shells, &o. ..
Cowan, Hawkesbury River
2-11
•82
1-00
35-40
1 -59
•88
,, ,,
Macleay River
23*06
16-01
2-43
2-95
26-77
13-88
7 40
Deposit (coral, shell, &c.) ..
Pacific Islands
2-13
13-53
•72
•87
44-00
3 '53
•39
Shells
•10
:ue deposit ..
83-75
•31
Liverpool
1
1-29
1 -82
,, from sanitary furnace
63-f)3
1-61
•38
C-30
44 -33
•74
•89
18-60
■78
•28
Night-soil
Wagga Wagga
6-70
*03
•04
82-19
•44
•69
,,
,,
9-14
•28
•34
78-92
1-18
•18
•54
•50
•61
•64
9-65
•62
•91
Night-soil preparation, No. 1 ..
8
22
3-73
4-63
50-22
13-32
,, „ No. 2 ..
7-20
1-83
2-22
29-02
8-05
4-10
•15
,, „ No. 3 ..
25-95
1-64
1-99
60-17
1-39
1-61
•70
,, preparation, “ Pinhoe ”
•92
9-54
•21
•25
57-58
14-71
1-26
•50
manure.
Night-soil preparation
F. Artlett, Parramatta ..
7-33
30*06
2-10
2'55
46-38
2-09
1-92
•61
Mr. Halstead, O’Brien’s patent ..
10-11
42-59
4*97
6-03
•94
30-12
•39
1-54
12-36
•54
65 -
77-95
•63
29-52
56-15
2-55
3-10
14'33
(ash).
IV. —Waste-Products, Ashes, &c., not on the Market — continued.


_ — —
— —-
—
—
Manure.
Original Source.
Water. 1
Volatile
and Com-
Nitrogen.
Ammonia.
1
Insol able.
Lime.
Phosphoric
Acid.
Potash.
i
bustible.
per cent..
. per cent.
per cent.
pel* cent.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
per ctnt.
Street sweeping
Svdnev Municipal Council
61-63
19- 57
•35
•43
15-45
■16
'42
-28
Farmyard manure ..
67-06
22-09
•40
•49
896
Stable manure
Fowl manure
Bathurst
39‘26
•41
•50
'27
•67
16-48
1-47
1-78
70-16
2-10
1-94
I’M
15-23
•86
1-04
79-96
■64
T>9
■:«
Sheep manure
Bathurst
Liverpool Wool-scouring Works
7-73
0-71
1-06
] *30
•69
1-17
50*91
1 -79
2-17
32-26
2-80
•91
•92
Sheep dag
Refuse manure
3-04
3 -69
Abattoirs
12-00
74 Til
4-14
5-03
6-56
1 -80
" 195
Flying-fox manure ..
1-09
35-34
3- 34
4-05
50-19
1-02
‘36
Fish fertiliser
Shark fertiliser
Fish manure
Rabbit hair, long ..
14-47
9-02
10-37
12-59
4-52
68*04
10-59
12-85
3-86
7-27
59*26
6-10
740
5-39
9-82
8-2S
Anderson, Oxford-street ..
88*64
14 -03
17’04
3-63
(.-isll).
,, short ..
9-72
S7-76
14-00
17-00
2-82
(ash).
,, ,,
1
Bat-guano
14-11
10-86
17*69
19-65
1 '55
1 -88
28-77
13-72
11-42
2-24
51-95
1 -75
8-55
•15
13-70
34-35
4-76
5-78
3-30
22 "28
13'04
! (race.
Bat deposit ..
Cave Flat, Cooradigbee ..
5-43
12-98
•50
•61
57'64
6-60
12-J2
Guano deposit
Tamworth .. ..
38-40
0-17
7-19
12-85
9'24
t
8-42
20-97
3-10
3*7(5
31-89
1 "8/
14 \55
9-35
29-91
44-32
3-66
' 15-81
7-33
1 '65
12-98
,, ,,
,,
8-17
4-29
1 0 * 17
1
Deposit from cave ..
L. R. Mercv, Ashford
3-63
10-82
1L2S
! -60
Bone breccia
Muck from waterworks reservoir
Qucanheyan
Maitland
f)-7l
•59
; 9-48
4 2-SO
8-11
4-84
17-55
•74
■90
63-42
■J -56
•31
1 -oo
Muck raked from waterhole
63 "66
29-86
■81
•98
3-80
•90
•10
■Of,
Sawdust
33-32
62-33
•82
1-00
1-70
-05
Decayed wood, bark and leaves,
bloodwood.
•74
•89
40 -68
1-30
■
I
Decayed wood, bark and leaves,
pepper-tree.
79-92
■8
1-OS
17-77
1-50
1 -49
Coco-nut oil cake ..
Castor cake ..
Pea cake
Bean cake
8-24
3-29
3-99
5-22
74-08
4 ’30
1
1-83
■so
Ja\ a ..
Xorth China
1C 02
14-32
7-24
8-79
1-46
j 1-17
80-32
6-77
1-33
1-99
Rice husks ..
42-74
42-15
1-07
1-30
1 13-77
•02
•03
i -04
Field pea, whole plant
Tares, whole plant ..
Marsh mallow, whole plant
Horse bean, leaves and stalks ..
8S-58
9-97
■55
'67
■15
•12
j -49
83*97
79-00
14-96
•73
•88
i
•11
! -SI
17-86
•S5
1-03
1
•14
i -69
82-87
15-90
•90
1-09
[. ■ '
•05
•11
! -54
IV. —Waste-Products, Ashes, <&c., not on the Market — continued.


SECTION III.
The Farm Holding.
CLEARING.
The methods by which land is cleared in New South Wales vary widely
according to the nature of the timber and the purpose to -which the land is
to be applied.
Where cultivation is the object in view, the work must be done with some
degree of thoroughness, the trees being either grubbed out to a depth -of
9to 12 inches, or burnt off to lor 2 inches below the surface. The former
method permits of the use of the set-plough, but the latter limits the farmer
to the stump-jump implement.
Where dairying is intended, the practice in heavily timbered coastal dis-
tricts is to cut the brushwood and undergrowth, to ringbark all big trees,
and, after waiting for some months, to apply a fire-stick to the dry material
where it lies.
In western districts, where wool and mutton-growing are alone thought
of, it is usual to sweeten the soil and improve the pastures by cutting down
all small timber, ringbarking more or less cf the larger trees, “ suckering ”
as required for a few years, and permitting nature to do the rest.
Clearing for Cultivation.
To deal fully with these various methods is unnecessary for the purposes of
this Handbook. The primary clearing on many properties is done by con-
tract, and the farmer, even if previously ignorant of this class of work,
usually acquires sufficient knowledge while the contractor is on his land to
enable him to proceed at his own convenience with the extension of his
cleared area. A general indication of the principles underlying the different
methods may, however, be of use.
A warning should be interpolated here that, if it is decided to clear by
contract land which is to be put under cultivation, it is necessary to see that
the contractor is bound down pretty strictly as to the depth to which the
roots are to be run, to state whether the timber is to be burnt on the ground
or not, and to stipulate that when the land is being broken up the contractor
shall follow the plough to run any roots exposed.
Before proceeding to the consideration of the various methods of clearing,
it should be stated that there are many farmers in different parts of New
South Wales who do not like the practice of clearing land of green timber
and applying it to cultivated crops at once. They state that the results are
better if the timber is “ rung ” and allowed to die before it is removed. They


have found it takes the soil two years to sweeten after green timber is
cleared, whereas the sweetening period is much shorter if the other method
is adopted.
Hand Grubbing.
Fortunately clearing need not now be the very heavy, tiresome work that
it was a generation ago, science having come to the assistance of the farmer
with winches, jacks, hauling gear of different kinds, and explosives, and by
the use of two or more of these agents in conjunction it is possible now to clear
in a few days areas that at one time would have taken almost as many weeks.
For convenience, the principles of hand-grubbing may be stated first, and the
application of the various mechanical devices and of explosives afterwards.
The grubbing of timber, especially green timber, in preparing land for the
plough, is one of the most laborious tasks with which the new settler hag to
contend. If the weather has been dry for some time previous to the
beginning of operations the ground is exceedingly hard, and the task doubly
difficult, as more labour is necessary in removing the earth from around the
tree (that the roots may be cut to allow the tree to fall), and also the earth
requires to be dug to a greater depth, as the lower roots, owing to the dryness
of the soil, will not draw out so easily when the tree begins to overbalance,
as they would if the ground were soft. The same applies also to the running
of those roots which are near enough to the surface to interfere with the
ploughing, and which if not taken out at first may cause many breakages to
the plough and harness, and injuries to the man and horses by the share or
coulter suddenly coming in contact with a hidden root.
The advice that clearing should be done when the soil is moist has to be
offered with some reservation, however. It almost invariably happens that
that is the time when the farmer is least able to give attention to the
extension of his cleared area, for the reason that he is then usually fully
occupied ploughing or cultivating elsewhere on the farm. What clearing is
done has often, therefore, to be carried out during dry spells, when the
ground is too hard to cultivate, and so hard as to make clearing very hard
work indeed.
One of the commonest errors of beginners is to think that if they are
getting the trees down quickly they are getting along famously, but the
experienced hand knows that if the tree falls, breaking off and leaving the
tap root unmoved, the hardest part of the work is yet to be done; for when
the tree has fallen, there is no leverage to assist in drawing the tap or
main roots.
Another error is to try to save labour by removing as little earth as
possible from around the tree or stump, but it is invariably found that before
the job is finished the barrow-loads of earth have run into cartloads ere
the mattock and axe can be swung freely and the taproot reached. Until
that is achieved, and the root is severed, the end is not in sight. The soil
should be opened well back from the trunk, a mattock and long-handled
shovel being the most suitable implements. As will be found a few pages
further on, one of the great utilities of explosives in clearing is to loosen
the earth at the base of the tree, to enable a cavity to be cleared out and
the taproot uncovered.


The root system having been opened up, the first thing to do is to cut
through, or partially through (with as wide a cut as possible), the roots on
the side towards which the tree leans (see Fig. 1). If there is a taproot, a
cut should be made into it as far as possible on this side. Explosives are very
useful at this stage, inasmuch as an auger hole can be bored in the taproot
and gelignite employed to sever it.
Meanwhile the roots on the other side being intact will hold the tree, thus
enabling the workman to operate in security. All the cutting possible
having been completed on the side to which the tree leans, the roots on the
other side are followed a bit further out, and severed one by one. There is
Fig. 1.—Showing how large-headed trees can be canted with lever.
nothing gained by cutting these latter roots close in to the tree. On the
contrary, the further they can be followed the better, especially if tackle
is used, or if the tree has a decided lean or there happens to be a favourable
wind. As shown in the illustration, a long sapling, used as a lever, can
sometimes be employed with advantage to cant the tree.
The manual labour involved in clearing land thoroughly by hand is very
heavy, and for the man who is dependent on immediate returns most costly
in the long run. Indeed, it would pay a man better to defer building a
cottage, and to camp in a tent for six months or a year, so as to have the
money for pushing forward with the clearing. Some of the clearing can be
done by degrees as opportunity occurs, but it will always be most profitable
to get at least half of it done so as to catch the autumn or spring season for
sowing a crop which can be growing while the rest of the work is in progress.
Winch Grubbers and Jacks.
The laborious work of clearing has been greatly reduced in recent years
by the adaptation of the principles of the lever and the capstan in such
machines as the jack, “forest devil,” and winch grubber, and these can now
be had for a comparatively small outlay, and so adapted to the purpose that
they are capable of doing all that is claimed of them, providing they are
properly handled.


With the aid of a tree-pulling winch, and- by severing with an axe
or by means of explosives the larger main roots 4 or 5 feet from the trunk,
both green and dead trees of 5 and 6 feet diameter can be pulled down in a
very short time. Away from the coast, in districts where the timber is of
normal size, several acres can be brought down in the course of a day. The
Fig. 2. —A winch grubber of modern type.
method of attaching the gear is shown in Fig. 2. One end of a steel rope
is passed through a pulley-block as high up the trunk as convenient, while
the other is hitched to the machine and an anchor-tree. If the main roots
have been severed well back from the trunk, the tree can be made to “ run ”
its own roots as it falls.
An implement that is almost indispensable where clearing is going on is
the jack. For running roots, prising out trees or stumps, moving logs,
boulders or floating rocks, or drawing old fence posts, &c., it is well suited,
doing the work with little exertion on the part of the man, and in a
surprisingly short time. The use of this implement is illustrated in the
accompanying figures.
Fig. 3.
Fig. 4.


Fig. 5.
Fig. 6.
Fig. 7.
Yet another machine, in which the lever is again the chief agency, is
that known as the “ forest devil.” It consists of the ironshod end of a
wooden lever pivoted between a pair of parallel iron plates, and an arrange-
ment of bolts or steel clutches provided to grip two chains, one attached to the
tree pulled and the other to the anchor-tree. If the distance is at all
considerable, steel bars are often used for portion of the way instead of
chains. A man grips the free end of the lever and walks backwards and
forwards in a semicircle, whilst a lad rearranges the clutches or bolts at the
end of each trip so as to reverse the direction of pull. The slack portions of
the chains fall to the ground as they are drawn in. As the lever may be of
any desired length, the power which may be obtained is practically limited
only by the strength of the tackle. In South Gippsland, Victoria, appliances
of this nature have been largely used in clearing the heavy forests of that
region, particularly for drawing stumps after a burn.
In connection with machines of all these kinds, it must be borne in mind
that no machinery will continue to work well without oiling, and the cost of
a tinful of oil is but a fraction of that of a broken part, quite apart from the
vexatious delays that breakages entail.
Block and Tackle.
In certain districts it is economical to hire a team of bullocks or steady
horses, and to use hauling gear on a more powerful scale. The method,
though extensively used in the past, is being superseded in many parts of
the State by the machines for manual power just described, but it still has
its utility, and there are those who prefer it, though generally employing
winch grubbers or explosives in conjunction with it.


The team having been obtained, the selector himself, with what assistance
he can arrange for, can perform the necessary shovel, mattock, and axe work
in opening up the ground about the trees and stumps. Under fair weather
conditions great headway can be made in getting the trees down, and the
heavy logs hauled off the clearing, while the tops can be at once disposed of
by burning on the spot. The advantage of this system is that the owner of
the area can see for himself exactly how the stumps and roots are removed,
and this will repay him tenfold when the area comes to be worked.
There are several methods of hauling down timber, but the description of
two here will suffice to indicate the principles.
For one used in clearing the site of Cowra Experiment Farm, the plant
consisted of: —
200 feet of 2-in. circumference wire rope.
150 feet of 2J-in. circumference wire rope.
Two pieces, 20 feet long, of 3-in. circumference wire rope.
Three pulley-blocks, size of sheaves 8 inches x 2 inches, viz., one treble,
one double, and one single sheave.
Fig. 8. —Tree-hauling gear, as used in clearing at Cowra Experiment Farm.
Mr. Geo. Marks, late Inspector of Agriculture, .North Coast District (now
Manager, Grafton Experiment Farm), thus describes the use of this
tackle:—•
One of tire short pieces of 3-inch rope, with the single-sheave block hooked on,
is placed round the barrel of the tree that is to be pulled down, a ladder being
brought into requisition to fasten the rope as high as possible. The 200-feet rope is
reefed in pulleys of double and treble sheave blocks. The double block is hooked
on to the other short piece of rope, which Is then fastened round the butt of a
neighbouring stump or tree, on the side on which it is intended to pull the tree.
The end of the 150-feet rope is hooked on to the treble block, passed through the
single block attached to the tree, and after the slack is taken up, is anchored
by winding it round the butt of the stump or tree, where the other block is
anchored, or if the stump or tree is small and not likely to stand the strain, to
another tree in the line of pull. A pair of strong steady horses is hooked on to
the end of the 200-feet rope, and everything is then ready for the pull. The
slack is taken out of the ropes, and, by means of a strong steady pull, the tree
will come down.


The side from which the tree will be pulled will depend upon the shape aud
lean of the tree, the slope of the land, the direction of winds, if any, and the
nearness or otherwise of anchor-trees.
When the ground is soft and in good order, as is the case after or during rains,
green trees up to 2 feet in diameter may be pulled down, taking almost every
root with them, without easing: and dry trees of any size with sound barrels
may be pulled down. It the ground is dry and hard, or the trees are extra
large, it will be found necessary to case them by removing the soil around the
butt of the tree to a depth of a. couple of feet, and perhaps cut some ut the
larger roots. It will thus be seen how important it Is to take advantage of
any wet weather, thus effecting a great saving of labour. Five men and a pair
of steady horses could pull down about b acres of ordinary box timber in a day.
Fig. 9. —Manual tree-hauling gear.
In the case of stumps, or trees with hollow or defective barrels, they should be
jjrubbed round well before commencing to pull, as there is often not the same
leverage obtainable, and should the tree break off level with the ground, the
butts and roots would have to be taken out in the ordinary way, thus necessi-
tating a great deal of extra labour.
All blind stumps and roots that may have been cut in easing the trees are then
taken out to a depth of 18 inches from the surface —a depth that will not inter-
fere with future ploughing, and, if necessary, subsoiling of the area. These
should be taken out thoroughly.
The tackle illustrated in Fig. 9 has been found very useful where the
trees are of a moderate size. It does not help so far as opening out about the
main roots and cutting them through are concerned, but it saves worrying


around the taproot. A log is usually placed at the font of a tree that is
being felled, as shown in Fig. 2. The effect is to " draw ” the roots 1 on the
near side of the tree. The logs shown in Fig. 9 are placed for the
tree to fall on, so that in sawing the trunk time may not be lost by the saw
cuts biting the saw as the ends of the unsupported parts of the trunk press
in against each other.' This can also be prevented by using wedges gently
tapped into the cut as soon as it is deep enough to carry a wedge. The wire
rope is about 25 yards long, and an ordinary double purchase tackle is used.
In hauling, the operatives stand well away from the line of fall, and as the
ropes slack off when the tree begins to fall the blocks are jerked aside. The
rough ladder shown is made of a couple of hloodwood saplings, which are tough
and soon become very light when stripped of the bark. The gear is fixed
ready before the tree is opened up.
The mistake is often made when pulling down trees by machinery, when
the ground is hard, of not easing the trees sufficiently to allow of the
drawing of the roots, and consequently when the strain of the machinery is
brought to hear on the tree, it, being too firmly held in the ground (especially
if the barrel or trunk be hollow),- breaks off level with or close to the surface,
and then more labour is necessary to get the stump out than was at first
required if it had been gone about in the proper manner.
Hauling machinery, such as wire rope in pulley-blocks, is of great-
assistance in grubbing when used with judgment, but if care be not exercised
the greater part of the work remains to be done after the trees are pulled
down. The running of roots to the depth that it is intended to plough is very
necessary in the clearing of land, and much expense in the way of repairs
will be saved by doing it thoroughly at first.
At times the burning of big trunks that have been brought down is almost
as difficult a problem as was the standing tree itself. Explosives are proving:
valuable in shattering such trees and enabling the farmer to burn them.
Before filling in the holes that have been made by the removal of large
stumps, a careful examination should be made, and all roots that will inter-
fere with the ploughing removed.
Clearing with Explosives.
Although these machines and devices all lighten the heavy part of clearing
and save much time, they* in no way prepare the stumps and trunks for the
final operation—the burning off —which, in itself, often entails a great deal
of effort. It is in this connection that explosives are specially valuable. A
considerable change has taken place in the method of using explosives for
clearing since first they were tried in Hew South Wales, and it is well for the
beginner to realise that whereas once the object was to “ blow them up ”
whether stumps, logs, or big trees —to-day it is to split and shatter them so
that a fire can be lit below and the timber burned where it is. This involves
placing charges of the explosive in such a way that the soil below and around
the butt of a standing tree or stump shall be loosened, so that the root system
can be opened out without a great deal of labour, and a fire lit in the cavity.
Trees and stumps treated in this way burn readily unless they are quite
green, in which case they dry out rapidly and are soon ready for the fire.
Timber that has fallen, or has been brought down by the winch grubber,
can be treated with explosives to advantage where it lies, for charges of
two or three plugs can be placed in auger holes, bored a few feet apart in the


-case of big trees, and either tired simultaneously with electric detonator
fuses and a battery, or, if a battery' is not available, with Xo. 6 detonators
and safety fuse. In the latter case each charge must be placed and fired
separately, and the distance apart determined by the extent of the splitting
from the previous shot. If, for instance, a shot splits a log’ a distance of 10
feet, the next shot must be placed 10 feet beyond the end of the split. It is
.surprising how well timber that usually burns badly can be dealt with after
it has been torn and shattered by explosives.
The following paragraphs detail more fully the use of explosives in this
connection: —
There are several kinds of explosives on the market that are suitable for
use in connection with clearing, and of these gelignite has several advan-
tages. It is cheap, easily handled, convenient in size, and comparatively
safe, for the reason that the State Explosives Department very carefully
tests all gelignite before allowing it to be landed. If the slightest sign of
exudation is found, the shipment is taken outside Sydney Heads and dropped
overboard.
One important fact should be borne in mind ; should gelignite become
frozen (which very rarely happens in tills State), it is not advisable to handle
it. The condition can easily be detected, for gelignite is normally soft and
pliable to the touch, but when frozen it is quite bard.
It should be thawed carefully, and the best and simplest way to do this,
without going to the expense of a “ warming pan,” is to place the gelignite
in an empty billy, put the lid on, and stand the billy in a bucket of hot
water for about twenty minutes. On examination the gelignite will lie
found to have thawed and regained its normal condition. Under no circum-
stances should it be placed near a fire or in an oven ; both are dangerous.
There are plenty of men who consider there is an element of danger in the
use of explosives. There is just the same risk in the use of a gun. If the
same care be taken in using explosives as in handling a gun, under average
conditions there is practically no danger.
Until recently farmers were averse to applying explosives to land clearing,
subsoiling, &c., but the prejudice and nervous feeling in regard to handling
explosives is becoming a thing of the past; and in practically every district
in the State men arc using them when necessary, just as freely as they do
the plough.
The cost entailed in clearing is always considerable, and this bears still
more hardly on the now settler, who has nothing “ coming in.” It is often the
cost that prevents a man from clearing and cultivating much of his holding.
Where timber is easily burnt, the matter presents little difficulty. Box,
brigalow, belar, and some other timbers burn right out, and explosives are
not necessary, and in such areas clearing is a small item ; but where we
find red gum, white gum, flooded gum, mahogany, peppermint, messmate,
and other timbers hard to burn, it is a question of what it is going to cost.
In many instances a man buys a property after the timber has been sold,
and he is left with a legacy of stumps to dispose of. This is a case where
explosives may be used to advantage both as regards time and cost. At
many demonstrations carried out by the Department, estimates have been
given by practical farmers of the cost of grubbing out stumps, and in every
case they have exceeded that of removal by explosives. The saving in time


Fig. 10.—Showing position of charges for shattering and burning heavy timber.
Fig. 11.—Position of charges for treating hollow trees and stumps.
Note that the charges are placed under sound wood and not under the hollow centre
Fig. 12.—Position of charges for treating sound stumps with taproot.
This system enables the taproot to be cut clear of the ploughing depth.
EXPLOSIVES IN AGRICULTURE.


is substantial, for where it would take a man a full dav to grub a stump,
gelignite lias done it in half an hour, which means that one man can
do about sixteen stumps a day without working particularly hard.
* A further advantage over grubbing is that when a stump is grubbed
it has to be disposed of, and probably it is difficult to burn, and is in one
piece. With explosives, the stump can be shattered, and then handled
with ease.
The same remarks apply to trees, for there again explosives have the
advantage as regards cost, time, and work. Of course, this does not mean
small trees, which can be pulled down : what is meant is heavy timber,
from 3 feet in diameter upwards. If the tree is grubbed out it still has to
be disposed of, and if not burnt this means a lot of sawing, whereas with
explosives, when the tree is down, by putting in a plug here and there along
the trunk, the whole tree is easily shattered, a very handy thing when it
fails to burn easily.
When using explosives for land clearing an eve must bo kept on the cost.
It is worse than foolish to indulge in spectacular displays in the shape of
blowing a tree to pieces as it stands. That sort of thing costs money, and
there is no necessity to blow parts of stumps fifty or a hundred yards away.
After a little experience one will be able to gauge how much explosive is
required.
With regard to very heavy timber, it is not advisable' to blow it out. It
is too costly, and a far cheaper method is to shatter and burn. Nearly ail
timbers will burn well if shattered properly. In Fig. 10 it will be seen
that a charge is placed in the trunk as well as under the tree. The result of
the explosion will be a cavity under the tree, where a fire may be started,
and a trunk split in many places. By this method the fire can be made to
save outlay in explosives.
Green timber may also be treated this way, and frequently timbers that
are hard to burn will burn better half dead.
Piped, or hollow stumps and logs often present considerable difficulty.
Experience has shown, however, that by placing the charge in the hollow
and then filling in with earth, and ramming it firm the most troublesome
stumps can be burst up, and with no great expenditure of explosive. In the
case of a hollow log that is lying on the ground, one end should he filled in
and rammed tight first, and the charge pushed in from the other end and also
rammed tight. One farmer’ has declared that this hint alone saved him £2O.
In all operations of land clearing, whether it be stumps or trees, either for
blowing right out or for shattering and burning, it is better to use a
battery, cable, and electric detonators. Small stumps and trees can be got
rid of by using the tape fuse insti-ad of the battery, and even where there
is a taproot or the timber is at all heavy, it is frequently possible to get
satisfactory results at comparatively little extra cost.
A most important fact to remember is that resistance is everything to the
explosive ; quite a number of men forget this fact. For instance, it is a
waste of explosive to place a charge directly under a tree that has a “ pipe ”
through it. It stands to reason that, as the explosive makes for the line of
least resistance, the charge, instead of doing its work, escapes up the pipe
and is entirely lost. Therefore every plug used must have plenty of
resistance.
To blow out hollow stumps or trees, omit the charge directly under the
tree, but place the charges as shown in Fig. 11. There the resistance is
utilised, with the desired effect.


Fig. 13. —The necessary outfit for land clearing by explosives with an electric battery.
(a) Tamping rod.
(b) Punch bar. (Preferably with a sharper point than that shown.)
(c) Wood auger (Matheson).
(d) Earth auger (short).
(e) Wood auger (Bull-nose).
(f) Earth auger (long).
(h) Handles for augers.
(i) Rack-bar exploder (Magneto).
(j) Q 1 exploder.
(k) Galvanometer for testing electric detonators, cable, and charge
when ready for firing.
(l) Crimpers.
(m) Q exploder.
(n) Firing cable.


Should tli3 stump be sound and have no taproot, the main charge should be
placed directly under the stump ; if there is a taproot, insert a good charge on
both sides of it and a smaller one into it. The result will be that the two side
charges do the lifting, and the charge in the taproot cuts it off. '(See Fig. 12.)
Where large lateral roots exist, which dip away from the surface, it is wise
not to depend on the “ lifting ” charges, as mentioned above, to do all the
work. These roots are very powerful, as generally in such cases there is
no taproot. Endeavours should be made to strike these roots with the
auger below the ploughing level, and insert a small charge. The result will
be that these roots will be cut at this point, and not only will the main
charges be greatly aided, but a lot of “ pruning” will be saved. (Note the
treatment given to the lateral roots in Fig. 12.) Sometimes difficulty is
experienced in placing charges in taproots that have not been uncovered,
and good work can then be done by placing a smaller charge on each side
of the taproot ; the effect of the explosion is. then to cub that root as
effectively as if the charge had been placed in the middle of the wood.'
When one commences land clearing with explosives, it will be found that
the first stump or two costs somewhat more than it should. This is due to
the fact that a beginner generally makes the charges too big, but the fault
is soon corrected as the work progresses.
The depth at which the charges should be placed will vary with the
character of the subsoil and the rooting system. Generally speaking, the
main charges should be from 2 feet 6 inches to 3 feet 6 inches. If the
charges are too shallow, failure will follow ; and if too deep, too much cavity
will result. Experience will guide one as to the required depth, but if there
is a hard clay subsoil, or an equivalent, for the shot to “kick off” from, the
holes need not be so deep ; whereas if the soil is sandy and deep, the charges
have to be deeper to secure the resistance.
Avoid boring down alongside a root, such as a “ hip ” or lateral root.
Go into it or under it, otherwise the power is lost.
It may be found that the land is full of small stones, and the auger is
useless. In such a case, punch the holes down with a bar somewhat like
(b) in Fig. 13, but experience has shown that this bar is much too blunt.
The end should be drawn out to a sharp point, tapering for 3 inches from
the bulb. A bar sharpened in this way can be used in place of the auger,
even in the hardest ground, and will enable the work to be done much
quicker than with the auger. Should it stick in hard soil, a little water
poured into the hole will soon release it.
Keep a small three-cornered file bandy, to touch up the augers occasion-
ally. The whole outfit is shown in Fig. 13. . The augers, with the exception
of the bull-nosed auger, are of the ordinary Matheson type, with the points
cut off of those required for earth work. The total cost of the necessary
tools, battery, &c., at pre-war prices, is about £6 10s. It will be noticed that
throe batteries are shown in the plate. This is merely to show the varieties,
which are known as Q, Ql, and Rack-bar exploders. The prices are
£2 7s. 6d., £3 10s,, and £7 10s., respectively. For ordinary clearing, the
smallest battery will be found strong enough, as it will fire about eight
shots. Where it is the intention to treat se\ eral stumps at once, the large
battery will be necessary.


The following is a summary of the most important points, the observance
of -which may save a lot of trouble :
(1.) When at work keep children and dogs away: they both want watching,
and it is impossible to do two things at once.
(2.) Keep the gelignite in a shady spot while working.
(3.) When making the “pinner,” take only one electric detonator out of
the bundle at a time.
(4.) Test both the firing cable and detonators with the galvanometer
before using.
(5.) In the event of getting a short circuit, after previously testing the
cable and detonators and finding them satisfactory, look to the wires. The
fault may lie there, either by the exposed ends being on the ground (they
should, after being twisted, be hung up), or a wire of one of the primers
Fig. 14. —Cutting the required length of fuse.
may have been damaged in tamping, or they may not have been twisted
together properly. If nothing wrong can be found, go back to the end
of the cable, and put the two wires of the cable on to the galvanometer.-
If the hand on the dial still remains quiet, the best plan is to go back to the
stump and "drop” one charge. That is to say, if there are four holes
connect the wires as if there were only three, and test again. The faulty
place may possibly be found at once. If not, disconnect again, and treat as
if only two holes, and so on. This sort of thing very seldom occurs, but
when it does it is very annoying.
(6.) Always put the cable out towards the sun, so that when you fire your
back is to the sun, thus enabling you to keep an eye on flying timber.


(7.) Disconnect the battery as soon at the shot is tired. The battery is a
magneto, not a drv cell.
Better results an* obtained when the subsoil is in a bard drv state, as
the resistance is greater, and the ground for some distance round is benefited.
Poor results are obtained if operations are carried on when the ground is
soft, as the ground is only “ pugged,” a result detrimental to its physical
condition.
Splitting Boulders. —Frequently there are floating boulders in cultiva-
tion paddocks which are too large to lift and put on a cart. These are
ploughed round year after year. If they are not too big they can be got rid
of by means of gelignite. To do this take one plug of gelignite, attach a
No. ti cap and about 3 feet of tape fuse, place, the charge on top of the
boulder, and cover the charge with a “ poultice ”of moist clay 1 . Make a
nick in the end of the fuse and insert a small shaving of gelignite, touch
Fig. 15. —Inserting the fuse in the detonator.
this with a match and get well away. The boulder will be split in three or
four pieces and can then be thrown on a dray and dumped out of the
paddock. Gelignite strikes in every direction, and not upwards only as is
usually thought.
Post Holes. —Every man on the land knows what it is to put up a line of
fencing at a time when the ground is hard. Under such conditions the use
of half a plug of gelignite for each post hole, and one plug for each strainer,
gate and corner post hole, will be found of great advantage. Use No. 6
caps and tape fuse. It will be found that the work is done quicker and far
cheaper.
Storage of Explosives on the Farm.*
Regulations as to the handling of explosives have been issued under the
Explosives Act, 1905, and persons acting contrary to these render themselves
liable to heavy penalties.
Any person is entitled to keep explosives, such as gelignite, cheddite, &c.,
together with detonators, up to a total weight of 25 lb. For any quantity in
excess of this amount, a magazine is necessary. According to the Act,
* H. Rogers, Assistant Inspector of Agriculture.


premises used m tins way are divided into three sections, according to the
amount of explosive it is required to have on hand at any one time. For
clearing and subsoiling a person does not, as a rule, require more than
100 lb. of explosive and detonators on hand, so that a license taken out
Fig. 16. —Crimping the cap on the fuse.
under Division “C ” should meet requirements. This license expires on
the 30th September of each year, and is renewable; the cost is 10s. per
annum.
Information concerning licenses under Divisions “ A ” and “ B ” for the
storage of more than 100 lb. of explosive, can be obtained from the Explo-
sives Department.
Fig. 17. —Punching a hole in the plug of gelignite, showing the correct position of the hands and gelignite
when making the hole with crimpers.


The magazine must be of wood, iron, or other suitable material, and of
sufficient size to hold the necessary amount of explosive (viz., about 100 lb.),
fitted wdtb a substantial brass-hinged door and padlock, and kept locked. It
should be situated away from all inflammable material; in a paddock aw 7 ay
from all buildings is the best place for it. The interior of the magazine
should be lined so as to cover all exposed iron or rough, gritty portions.
The outside must be marked “ Explosives ” in a conspicuous place.
Detonators must be kept in a box put together with brass screws, and have
a brass-hinged door fitted with a brass padlock. This box must be kept in a
building away from risk of fire, and must be marked “Explosives—
Detonators."'
Under no circumstances may detonators be stored with other explosives.
Fig. 18.—Inserting the capped fuse in the gelignite.
The local police are authorised to act as inspectors under the regulations,
and may be applied to for any particular information required.
It is necessary for an inspector to certify that the premises comply with
the requirements of the Act and the regulations in force thereunder before
a license can be issued.
While a magazine can be put together in a short time by any practical
man, many people do not desire to have one on the farm. Under such cir-
cumstances arrangements could be made with one of the selling agencies to
forward such quantities of explosive each week as would keep the total
quantity below 25 lb. at any one time. This method involves much more
expense in freight charges, and while some persons prefer to adopt it, it is
not to be recommended, as the license fee is so low 7 , and the cost of installing
a “ C ” Division magazine is trifling w 7 hen safety and convenience are con-
cerned.


Killing Green Timber with Arsenic/
la this country, where large areas of land are available for occupation, and
are heavily timbered, it is of primary importance to remove the timber, either
wholly or in part, in order to increase the productivity of the land, and the
quickest methods are usually the best.
Ordinary ringbarking is effective if done at the right time for that par-
ticular district, for it must be conceded that seasons vary considerably from
year to year, making the operation an adjustable one. But ordinary ring-
barking has one disadvantage—it is slow, often taking twelve to eighteen
months before the trees can be burnt off.
Of late years, the action of arsenic has been introduced with marked
success in hastening the killing by the ringbarking process, and trees that
ordinarily would take months to kill by the old method, are now killed in a
few weeks, and frequently in a few days, by the application of arsenic.
Arsenic—the ordinary white arsenious oxide of commerce—is not soluble
in water to any great extent, so that soda, either the ordinary washing soda
or caustic soda, has to be used to dissolve it. When large amounts of the
solution are required, washing soda will be the cheaper, but for small
quantities of solution, caustic soda will possibly be found the handiest.
When preparing the solution, whether caustic soda or washing soda is used,
first dissolve the soda in a convenient amount of water, using heat, if desir-
able, to assist and hasten it ; then slowly add the arsenic, previously made
into a thin paste (as the housewife treats her cornflour), stirring all the time ;
place on a strong fire, and after it has come to the boil, allow it to remain
boiling for at least half an hour ; stir from time to time, and be careful to
stand on the side away from the fumes, as being poisonous they are apt to
cause sickness. When the arsenic is thoroughly dissolved, the solution may
be made up to the required bulk by adding the remainder of the water, either
hot or cold.
A useful strrngth for quick and effective work in all kinds of timber is as
follows:—Arsenic, 1 lb. ; washing S' da, I lb., or caustic soda, 4 lb. ;
water, 4 gallons whiting, 5 lb. The addition of this whiting is merely
that it may serve as an indicator on trtes treated, as it turns white on
•slightly drying, making it quite certain what trees have been operated on.
An empty kerosene tin makes a useful measure for dissolving in, as it holds
4 gallons.
The time to carry out the work of poisoning is when the tree is dormant
that is, when the sap movement is at its minimum and the sap right down in
the roots and lower portions of the trunk. This occurs in the winter months,
from, say, March to July, according to the district, and must necessarily vary
between these limits in a State like New Sou h Wales, which embraces such
a wide variation of climate. On parts of the North Coast ringbarking has been
• C. W. Burrows, Field Assistant.


carried out to the best advantage as late as June and early July in certain
vears, whereas in the more central parts of the State late February and
March have found the sap movements at their lowest.
The main object in catching the sap to season is to prevent suckering.
Trees can be killed by arsenic or ringbarking at practically any time of the
year, but to prevent this suckering it is highly important to operate when
the sap is down, or just completing its downward course.
Having decided on the season and dissolved the poison, we are ready to
“ frill ” the trees. By “ frilling ”is meant a succession of downward axe cuts
completely round the tree, each cut well overlapping the adjoining ones, so
as to leave no unsevered section of bark up which the sap can Howe There
is no doubt that “frilling” alone would kill timber if allowed time, but the
poison does it in a fraction of the time ; in fact, trees have been killed in a
few days. These cuts must be through the bark and well into the wood
proper, and as close down to the ground level as is convenient to cut’them
consistent with the shape of the tree, say, from 6 to 10 inches up.
For trees of 4 feet diameter, about a quart of solution is poured into this
frilling, right round the tree, using an old teapot or kettle, as the spout makes
pouring easy, and less is wasted by spilling needlessly round about. Smaller
trees naturally need less solution. Saplings may be cut off low down, and with
a swab-stick the solution may be dabbed on to kill and prevent suckering.
It is very important that this frilling and the applying of the poison be
consistently and thoroughly carried out, and not in any way scamped or
slummed if good results are to be looked for.
There need be no fear about stock being poisoned by eating the fallen or
dead leaves from poisoned trees ; for when it is considered the comparatively
small quantity of solution used, the likelihood of the leaves absorbing any free
arsenic is very remote. Nor is there much danger from stock grazing on areas
frilled and poisoned, though it would be desirable to keep all stock off for three
or four weeks, when all possible chance of danger would have disappeared.
No estimate of cost can be given, as this will necessarily depend upon so
many factors which vary with each particular area.
Although arsenite of soda is obtainable as such from drug merchants, its
use in that form cannot be recommended for the poisoning of green timber,
as it is most irregular in its arsenic content.
Owing to the war, prices for arsenic, caustic soda, and washing soda are at
present high and are constantly altering, so that it would be of little use to
farmers to quote them here. It is therefore advised that when a considerable
area is to be treated, one or other of the wholesale chemists should be written
to and quotations obtained.
The cost of the work will differ considerably in different districts. It is
worthy of mention, however, that a report of the Manager of the new
Condobolin Demonstration Farm records that poisoning was adopted there
with success and economy. The work was done by day labour at a total


cost of Is. sd. per acre. This must be considered very low, as the country
was fairly heavily timbered, and the wages paid were from Is. to Is. 4Jd. per
hour. Said the Manager: ‘‘The timber has all died, and mostly within
forty-eight hours from the time of ringing." The liquid was distributed by
means of IJ-gallon watering-cans with spouts made specially long, and having
exit holes of about the size of a Xo. 8 wire.
Destroying Stumps with Acids.
An impression has persisted among farmers for many years that tough
stumps can be got rid of, or at least rotted so that they will burn freely, by
treating them with some strong acid, such as sulphuric or nitric acid, and
waiting a few weeks. In order to test the matter properly, a series of
experiments was designed by Mr. F. B. Guthrie, Chemist, in 1913, and deep
auger holes were bored in selected stumps of tough timbers, some green and
some dry. Quantities of the chemicals named, separately and together in
varying proportions, were poured into different stumps. The results were
noted regularly for six months, at the end of which time an examination
showed that in the case of both green and dry stumps the acid had had no
appreciable effect. The average cost per stump worked out at Is. 9d., which
included labour at the rate of 7s. per day; it is an open question whether men
could be found -who would use two such dangerous acids at that figure.
Saltpetre has also been said to be useful in preparing dead timber for
burning off, but numerous private experiments go to disprove the theory.
Clearing Coastal Lands for Pasture.
In outlining on page 138 the purposes and methods of clearing,
reference was made to those adopted in coastal districts, where the object is
to enable grasses such as paspalum to be sown as early as possible, and cattle
to be depastured thereon. To secure a good “burn” is then the concern of
the settler, and usually it is obtained by felling the brushwood, ringbarking
the larger timber, and firing some months later. The accompanying short
articles indicate the methods more fully, but several of those described in the
foregoing pages, especially explosives, are of use in either bringing the
larger trees down or disposing of old stumps.
Clearing Brush Lands.
The late Mr. John McKenzie, of Gloucester, in detailing his experience
with considerable tracts of country, stated four or five years ago: —
Commence operations during the mouth of March, when the risk of running
tires has passed. First with brush-hooks carefully cut all the vines and under-
growth ; then, if all softwood, fell everything. If there is hardwood through it.
those up to 10 Inches should be felled also, and the larger hardwoods riugbarked
deeply, cutting right through the sapwood. In felling care should be taken to
get the trees to fall as nearly as possible in the one direction. This gives a more
even distribution of the fallen stuff and ensures a more rapid and effective
burning. When the brush has been felled it should be left untouched for at least
eighteen months. After that period it may be fired, but very great care should
be taken in selecting the day to light it. Our greatest success in burning has
not been on the hottest days or days when the wind has been strong, but on a


day on which the atmosphere was dry and a light breeze blowing. It should be
lighted as quickly as possible all along the side from which the wind is blowing,
and on the low land lirst if the wind is favourable. If the brush so dealt with is
softwood, after the tire nothing will be left but a few charred stumps, and the
land is ready for sowing as soon as the ashes have cooled.
When brush has been felled during the cold weather no growth is likely to
show through it till the spring, but with rains and warm weather up come many
shrubs, weeds, and vines of endless variety, the seeds of which appear to be
.stored in the brushes waiting for sunlight to germinate. The result is a rank
.growth, increasing as time goes on, and in parts hiding the felled timber.
Several varieties of softwood brush throw out suckers, which by the second year
will have grown to a height of 10 or 12 feet. To the inexperienced this gives
an idea that there may be a difficulty in firing; as a matter of fact it rather aids
■the fire. The green growth is not amongst the decaying rubbish, but above it,
and seems to hasten its decay. It acts as a protection against rain; I have
frequently noticed after heavy showers that rubbish so covered is perfectly dry.
With the hot winds of summer soft weeds and vines, which would resist much
hot weather if close to the ground, quickly shrivel when dependent on spindly
stems which have found their way through the rubbish by a long winding course,
and burn readily with the dry material. If the Are is a success very few stumps
sucker; weeds of various kinds come up, but most of these are edible. Parra-
matta grass we find the most troublesome weed, but it only lasts two or three
years. If grass seed is sown immediately after the fire it will continue to grow
even amongst the Parramatta grass. Blade thistles may be expected to come up
in abundance, but they are an advantage. If the burn has not been a clean one,
or Parramatta grass is very thick, the thistles make a second and a clean burn
a very simple matter. When the thistles begin to wither and the down is
abundant one match thrown down on a hot day will start a running fire which
will cover the whole area in a very short time.
The cost of felling brush country here is 17s. Od. to 20s. per acre, and this is
really the whole cost of clearing if a suitable day is picked for burning. One
Intelligent man can fire thousands of acres in the day. The actual cost of
clearing the average forest country on the coast districts is difficult to get at
because it is done gradually; first ringbarked, then suckered and grubbed. This
may require to be done annually for some years. Finally, say five years after
being ringbarked, it may be burned off at a cost of 14s. to 20s. per acre. For
grazing purposes only, many people do not burn the dead timber off forest
•country, and quite overlook the fact that brush country may be dealt with for
grazing purposes in the same way. Brush timber requires to be more deeply
ringbarked than forest trees, and some varieties take longer to die than forest
trees; but after a brush is ringed and the undergrowth cut, stock find their way
Into it, and that they get abundance of food is proved by their condition.
Felling and Burning Scrub Lands.*
The burning of felled scrub is a very important operation. A good fire
cleans up all but the large stumps and logs; a bad fire means endless and
constant hard work afterwards. Usually the scrub is felled early the previous
autumn. The undergrowth and young trees of 2to 3 inches diameter are first
cut down with a brush-hook. This is very important, for the “running” of
the fire is materially influenced by the thoroughness with which this work is
performed. Then comes the felling of the trees. Those of small diameters
are felled in the usual way, but the larger hardwoods have to be “ rung.”
In districts where the larger timber is not so hard, but have abnormally
■developed butts, it is necessary to use the “ spring-board.”
By means of this contrivance the tree is cut some distance from the
ground, usually 8 to 12 feet, occasionally as high as 20 feet. A great deal
•of labour is thereby saved, as in addition to the smaller diameter, the wood is
* G. Marks, late Inspector of Agriculture, mw Manager, Grafton Experiment Farm.


straighter and freer in the grain, which renders the cutting much easier..
The spring-board is made of some light, tough wood, is about 4 feet 6 inches
Jong, and 6to 8 inches wide. At one end an iron shoe with turned-up edge
is securely bolted. This is necessary to “ bite ” into the recess cut in the side
of the tree, and prevent slipping. At this end the board is about 2 inches
thick, but it tapers to about li inches at the other end. Eed cedar is prized
amongst expert axemen for the purpose. It is tough and light, and with the
Using the spring-board to fell a Carrabean tree on the Dorrigo.
A belt of typical scrub forms the background.


imprints of nails from the boots, aifords sure foothold for the men whilst at
Showing how the spring-board
is secured to the tree. The
leverage on the outer end
causes the edge of the shoe
to “bite,” so that it cannot
slip.
work. Where hardwood timber has to be,
employed, the “ board ” may be reduced to
1 inch in thickness as it is essential that the
springboard be light as well as tough. It
has to be lifted and placed in position, or
lowered, with one band, the other being
engaged in holding on to the tree; and
should the tree crack unexpectedly and
commence to fall, the descent has to be made
very quickly.
Another form of platform is sometimes
used in the form of a trestle, but the one
described is more serviceable and universally
used by expert axemen, and it may bo
adapted to anv tree and at any height.
Drive-trees.
When possible, a “ drive ” tree should be used. A number of trees are
cut half-way through, or a little more, and left standing. Then the drive
tree, which is usually a large one, is felled so as to strike its partially-cut
neighbour and snap it off. This one in turn strikes others, and if favoured
with a suitable wind, trees covering from one to several acres in extent may
be brought down at once. Occasionally trees “ miss,” and have to be gone
over again.
Scrub-felling is dangerous work, and should never be undertaken by a man
alone. A quick eye and keen ear are indispensable, and even with the best
judgment, a tree may snap unexpectedly, or rebound off another. The tools
must have keen edges, and be kept in good order by occasional use of the
grindstones, and more frequent application of the small carborundum stone.
Burning.
The length of time required for drying before burning is governed by
several factors, viz., elevation, season, size and thickness of timber, whether
isolated or surrounded by other brush, the area felled in one block, and the
date of felling. Some settlers prefer to allow the scrub to lie for eighteen
months before firing, which means that the burn takes place the second
summer after felling. The more general practice is, however, to fire during
favourable weather the first summer after felling, the drying period thus
ranging from seven to about ten months, which is ample for all the leaves,
light branches and smaller trees to become sufficiently dry for burning. An
additional twelve months means that the larger timber is dry and will bum
more readily, but the leaves and light twigs and branches have been destroyed
by the weather, and there is an additional undergrowth of suckers from the
stumps and other green vegetation, which rather retards the free advance
of a good fire. The leaves and small branches favour a good sweeping fire,
that cleans up all the small timber, and the heat so obtained kills the


Buokering growth of the green stumps, thereby ending this trouble for all
time. With favourable, hot, dry weather, a large proportion of the larger
trees will also be burnt.
The selection of a suitable day is very important. A hot, dry day with a
breeze should be chosen. Westerly winds are drier than the sea breezes. If
the scrub is felled early and is dry, such a favourable day may be obtained in
October, November, December or January. After December, monsooual
rains usually set in, and the humidity of the atmosphere is not conducive to
the best results. Usually December is the best month. If neighbours are
“A good burn.” Portion of a block of 120 acres burned only a few weeks before.
also clearing, it will be found of great mutual benefit if they can all agree
to fell and fire their respective areas as one block. In any case, it is
advisable to give the necessary notice to neighbours, and not to light the
scrub if a particular wind is likely to carry the flames beyond control and
burn out a neighbour’s homestead and grass.
Before the date of firing is decided upon, preparations should be made
to ensure the fire starting quickly, by arranging a continuous line of readily
combustible material, such as dead leaves, bushes, light twigs or other
rubbish, all round the edges. If there is danger of the fire getting beyond
control, its spread can be largely prevented by clearing a strip several yards
wide all round. This is best performed with a garden rake or forked stick,
the refuse being heaped along the hue of scrub.
A breeze is essential to a good fire. It acts as a forced draught, and much
timber is consumed which on a perfectly calm day might be barely charred.
When it is decided to fire, plenty of help should be available to ensure that
1 17299—F


the fire shall start, as it were, all at once. Dry bushes, torches saturated with
kerosene, or even a plentiful supply of matches, are used to start the fire
in numerous places on the running front, so that the wind may drive it
forward as one unbroken sheet of flame. This is performed by lighting the
edge of the scrub every few yards, and running on ahead to escape the
heat. If it is desired to confine the fire strictly to the area felled, it should
also be set alight beforehand on the leeward side, so that it will burn slowly
against the wind and meet the windward flame some considerable distance
from the edge. With a fair breeze, the fire travels very rapidly, and it is
only a matter of a couple of hours before a whole block of 100 acres is burnt
out.
Should the area to be fired be in close proximity to farm buildings, it is
advisable to provide beforehand suitable fire-beaters and a few vessels of
water. It frequently happens that the wind changes after the fire has been
A paddock of cocksfoot, rye grass, and white clover; twelve months after the scrub was fired and nine
months from the time of planting seed.
burning some time, and any precautions made along these lines need never
be considered too much trouble. After the fire has burnt itself out, any
timber which may not have been burnt, and which can be easily handled,
should, in the course of a few days, be heaped up against large logs and set
fire to. The land surface will thus be cleaned up and the sowing of grass
seeds later facilitated. As most of the scrub timbers consist of softwood,
logs that are not burnt can be left alone. In the course of a year or so they
will readily rot, and a fire-stick applied on a hot, dry day will speedily
get rid of them with a smouldering fire. In this connection it is advisable
to exercise extreme care, for the weather that suits this operation also favours
fire running through the somewhat dry grass of adjacent pastures.


Ringbarking in the West.*
Any person interested in land settlement cannot but observe the large areas
in blocks of 10,000 to 50,000 acres now being made available for lease in the
Western Division of the State.
Stock returns show that the carrying capacity of western country is very
much lower than it was a few years ago, and if success is to be obtained
improved methods of management must be adopted. Some settlers are
making provision for water by tank sinking, and many are improving by
ringbarking.
The varying results observed here from ringbarking has led the writer
to inquire into the causes of the differences. In some cases it is due to
letting large contracts at the one time, the work extending over the greater
portion of the year. Where large areas of ringbarking have been under
observation, by far the most satisfactory results have been obtained where
the work has been done in the summer. Indeed, in two cases the most
unusual circumstance of yarren suckering was observed through ringing
being done in a wet winter, and the country is not as good now as it was
before the expenditure was incurred.
With a view to ascertaining the views of others, the Pastures Protection
Board rolls were obtained from the secretaries of the Cobar, Wilcannia,
Bourke, and Hillston districts, and circulars were sent to station managers.
Forty-six replies were received. Several stated that they had had no
experience, whilst others were very indefinite. However, the writer is
indebted to several gentlemen for lengthy replies, containing the results of
their experiences, extending over many years.
The first question asked was: What time of the year do you consider the
best for ringbarking?
A very general reply was when the sap is up. A practical guide to know
when the sap is flowing freely is when the bark strips easily, or when the
leaves are of a brighter green than ordinarily. It is a well-known fact that
trees are dormant in winter, and that the sap is then down. Theoretically,
then, it would not be advisable to ringbark in winter, when the sap is down.
Why? Because the tree’s food supply is cut off above the ring, and the
stored starch goes to the dormant buds, and they develop into suckers.
The time of year when the sap is flowing freely will depend on the locality,
weather, and species of tree.
Nearly all trees are killed after the first ringing, excepting box and gum
(also known as Coolabah), which always sucker more or less, depending on
the season when the operation is carried out and the method of ringing
adopted.
In handling replies to the above question a vote was given to each month
where the pastoralist had specifically mentioned it. Appended is the
result:—
Jan. Feb. Mar. April May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.
599642222228
From this table it will be seen that the warm summer months are mostly
favoured. The above are the results of observation by practical men.
* C. J. Woollett, Stock Inspector, late at Cobar, now at Tamworth.


Timber.
Chip out or Scarf, i
Frill.
Box and G urn
14
i
All others...
2
8
The next question was; When do you find the most vigorous suckering,
after winter or summer ringing? This question was partly covered by the
first. Ten persons were of opinion that suckering was freer after winter
than summer ringing, and three votes were recorded vice versa. Two had the
proviso, “ if followed by heavy rains,” when referring to summer ringing.
To the third question, w'hat kind of ringing do you prefer, several replies
w r ere received, and these may be summarised thus:—
The disparity between the totals is because some correspondents only referred
to box and gum.
It is an almost unanimous opinion that chip ringing is the only satisfactory
method for old box and gum, and scarf for trees from 10 to 18 inches in
diameter. Frill ringing for these varieties has been abandoned.
Mr. McKellar, of Merri Merigal, who has 300,000 acres of ringbarked
country under his charge, and an experience extending over twenty-five years,
described chip ringing thus:—“ The chip ringing I refer to is made by two
down chops, the first being the same as in frill ringing, and the second
about 2 inches above and allowing the axe-head to fall outwards, which
breaks the chip out. My experience here is that you must damage the outer
surface of sapwood the whole way round, or you will have trouble with the
bark joining across the space.”
Mr. Officer, Kergunyah, Cobar, stated: —“For full-grown timber I prefer
the chip out, but for trees under 9 inches in diameter, a strip of bark 8 inches
wide. Timber under 4 inches in diameter Ido not ring, as the suckering is
too vigorous, and if cut any depth a g-reat many blow down and grow
stronger. These I trim to 1 feet of all limbs, and so improve the country by
allowing the sun to penetrate and sweeten the grass.” Mr. Officer has 40,000
acres of ringbarked country, done over a period of years, and is one of the
most successful men in the district.
Another very general and successful method is to take a strip of bark 9 to
12 inches right round the trunk, removing every vestige of bark about
3 feet from the ground. By this method, the tree naturally dies more slowly
than when the cut is made into the sapwood, but there is the very great
advantage that suckering is slighter.
In connection with dealing with suckers, Mr. Madden, The Rookery,
Cobar, wrote : —“ In ringbarking suckers, which are too big to split off with
the axe, it is always an advantage to ring the suckers in preference to the
stump underneath them. When the stump is ‘ rung,’ the sprouts will come
out of the ground from the roots, and are very hard to get rid of.”
Frill ringing for trees other than box and gum is recommended, and is the
practice all over this district, where contracts for over 200,000 acres on
different stations have recently been let.


Station.
Total Area.
■ Area Ringbarke 1.
Sheep actually carried
for last five years.
Carrying' Capacity
acres.
; acres.
1
1 sheep to-.—
i
240,000
18,000
11,560
12 acres
2
164,500
0,093
24
3
40,960
40,960
5,235
7-8 ,,
4
93,000
10,000
5,730
16 ,,
5
255,585
90,000
29,8,39
8-5 ,,
6
71,000
40,000
8,879
8’4 ,,
“ I feel sure the best method to adopt for belah and pine is frill ringing,
j.n,' not to take off a strip of bark but to wrench the axe slightly when it
enters the tree. This is a cheaper method than chip ringing and is quite as
effective. Be above timbers, we find feed grows through it four months after
treating, though the trees may not die within a year to eighteen months.
Odd ones will die almost immediately.”—Mr. Parker, Mena Murtie, Wil-
•cannia.
“In ringbarking pine, yarren, &c., such trees as do not sucker, the
better plan is the quicker one, such as what is known as frill ringing. Just
one chop with the axe round the tree, meeting the cuts in the wood, and then
giving the axe a wrench, so as to make sure you miss none between the
cuts.” —Mr. Madden, The Rookery.
Several correspondents referred to the necessity of leaving the timber in
the vicinity of tanks for shade and breakwinds.
Results from Ringbarking.
In order to give some concrete example of the benefits derived from ring-
barking, the writer obtained the stock returns supplied to the Cobar Pastures!
Protection Board for the last five years, and ascertained the actual carrying
capacities of several properties in the district, all more or less contiguous.
The total areas embrace over 860,000 acres, and, as far as appearances go,
are much the same as regards quality of soil. The country is red, and tho
principal timbers are box, gum (Eucalyptus iniertexta, sometimes called
•Coolabah), ironwood, pine, yarren, mulga, &c.
As a basis of calculation one head of large stock has been assumed to be
equal to six sheep, and each property has carried upwards of 60 head of
cattle.
The places are managed by men of long experience in the West, therefore
the reader may be assured that the properties have been wisely stocked.
These figures may be stated in a somewhat different way. Assuming
the properties to be of equal carrying capacity under similar conditions, and
taking one sheep to 24 acres as the standard for virgin land (as based on the
capacity of property No. 2, none of which is ringbarked), the value of the


/ingbarked country ranges from one sheep to 4 acres to one to 7’8 acres, or
an average of 1 to 5 over the whole area. In other words, ringbarking has
more than quadrupled the carrying capacity of the land. This will be seen
from the following summary;—
Station No.
Total
Area in
Acres.
Area Ring-
barked.
Sheep
Actually
Carried
hast Five
Years.
Carning
Capacity one
j Sheep to
No. of
Sheep on
Timing
Country, at
one Sheep
to 24 acres.
No. of
Sheep on
Rung
Country.
Carrying
Capacity of
Rung
Country,
one Sheep to
3
40,960
40,960
5,235
acres
7*8 or
*13
5,235
acres.
7-8
i
240,000
18,000
11,560
12 ,,
■08
9,166
2,394
7*5
4
93,000
10,000 J
5,730
16 „
■06
3,460
2,270
4-4
5
255,585
90,000
29,839
| 8 '5 ,,
■11
6,900
22,939
’4*0
6
71,000
40,000
8,379
8-4 ,,
•12
1,290
7,089
5-6
Totals and
Average..
700,545
198,960
60,743
11-5 or
■09
20,816
39,927
5 approx.
2
164,500
6,693
24 „
■04
As to the question of cost, it has been ascertained from managers who
have had the work done, and from contractors constantly carrying out the
operations, that to “ chip out ” costs lOd. to Is. per acre, and to “ frill and
scarf ” 9d. per acre.
From the experiences referred to, it is obviously desirable to limit, as far
as possible, all ringbarking operations to the hotter part of the year, or from
December to April. The improved carrying capacity of the country resulting
from judicious ringbarking much more than compensates for the expense.
FENCES AND FENCING.*
The methods of fencing differ widely in different parts of the State, and
a complete statement of the subject from the point of view of the New
South Wales farmer would involve the treatment of the subject in relation
to the district, the nature of the fencing required, and the material available
locally or most easily obtainable. It is obvious that such a work would
occupy much more space than can be afforded in this Handbook, and wbat
has been attempted in the following pages is simply to give the specifications
* Note. —The prices quoted in this section are on the basis of those current
when the various articles were written, some time ago. In consequence of the
sharp advances in many lines (some the direct result of the war), and the
obvious difficulty of arriving at a basis that, in such a work as the present,
would be permanently useful to farmers, it has been deemed unnecessary to
attempt to revise the quotations. The quantities are mentioned in each case, and
it will be easy to make calculations on the quotations current at the time and in
the district where they are required.
The cost of the chief classes of fencing in various parts of the State are
also mentioned in Section I of this Handbook, “ Farm Lands of New South
Wales.”


for certain complete fences erected by the Department some years ago,
together with comments upon them after they had had a thorough trial, and
to describe one or two other less expensive fences that have proved suitable
for special purposes and districts.
Fences at Cowra Experiment Farm.
The decreasing supply, and consequently the increasing cost, of timber for
fencing is gradually forcing landholders to consider how little can be used
in the construction of an efficient fence. Metal, i.e., fencing wire, has almost
entirely replaced the rails which at one time were considered necessary to
make a fence stock-proof. We, however, still find that timber is the cheapest
material for fence posts, though the supply available is becoming scarcer
each year, and it is possible that in the future it may be necessary to use
posts made of iron or concrete. In either case, it is important that we
should have information which will enable us to determine how few posts
can be used in the construction of an efficient and durable stock-proof fence.
An essential feature of a rail fence is a comparatively short panel, but
now that wire is, in the majority of cases, taking the place of the rail, it is
questionable whether as many posts are now necessary as was the case when
Fig. 1.—A wire-netted boundary or subdivision fence; two posts and six droppers per chain.
Cost, £63 18s. 3d. per mile.
rails were used. That all are not agreed on this point is patent to the most
casual observer in a district where wire fences are common. Scattered
throughout the country can be seen fences apparently equally efficient, some
of which have as many as 880 posts per mile, whilst others are constructed
with as few as 80 per mile. In the latter class, cheaper droppers have been
substituted for posts.
_ The erection of subdivision fences at Cowra Experiment Farm was con-
sidered an opportune time to obtain information on the points referred to,
and to enable those interested to determine —
1. Whether a fence constructed with posts and droppers is as efficient
and durable as one constructed entirely with posts.


2. The minimum number of posts required in the construction of an
efficient and durable netting fence when droppers are used; and
3. The character of the dropper required for best results.
Different patterns of fencing were therefore included in the fence which
surrounds the cultivation area. Each portion under trial is YJ chains long,
one strain. The experiment with the fences is divided into two sections,
particulars of which are as follows: —
In section I, which deals with the number of posts necessary for
efficiency—
Pattern A has the posts 8 ft. 3 in. apart (640 per mile).
~ B ~ 16 ft. 6 in. „ (320 ~ ), 1 dropper between the posts,
~ C ~ 22 ft. 0 in. „ (240 „ }, 2
~ D ~ 33 ft, 0 in. „ (160 „ ), 3
In section 11, which aims at determining the most suitable dropper to
use, the posts are 33 feet apart, with three droppers between the posts, as
in Fig. 1.
Pattern D has wooden droppers, i.e., rigid droppers.
~ E has plain (“ Anchor ”) No. 68. VV.G. wire droppers.
~ F has crimped (“Cyclone”) No. 6 B.W.G. wire droppers.
The different fences were erected by contract according to the following
specification, which was designed to meet the requirements of a general
purpose fence, i.e., one that would be sufficient to control the movements of
horses, cattle, sheep, and rabbits.
Specification for Wire Fence, Netted.
All fencing is to be on and in proper line. The posts when erected are to
be straight, uniform and upright. The split posts are to be in line
along the tops, and are not to follow the lesser irregularities of the
ground.
Timber. —White and yellow box may be used in the construction of the
fence.
All timber is to be taken from large trees. It is to be thoroughly
sound, free from splinters and other defects, barked and straight. All
measurements specified are to be taken to mean at the smallest
dimensions.
Posts. —All posts are to be sawn square on top, and when erected are to
have the earth placed properly around them and well rammed.
The distance between posts will be 8 feet 3 inches, 16 feet 6 inches,
22 feet, 33 feet, as required.
All posts are to be bored properly with f-inch auger holes, as required
for the proper placing and spacing of the wires.
Split posts are to be 6 feet 3 inches long, and to have mean dimensions
which range between 7 inches wide by 5 inches thick, and 8 inchee
wide by 4 inches thick. Centres are to be backed out to within 24
inches of the large end. No face is to be less than 4 inches, and one
edge is to be rough-dressed.


Split posts are to be placed in the ground to a depth of 21 inches.
Eound posts— Corner posts are to be 8 feet long, not less than 12
inches in diameter, and are to be placed 3 ft. 6 in. in the ground.
Straining posts are to be 7 ft. 6 in. long, not less than 10 inches in
diameter, and are to be placed 3 feet in the ground. Straining posts
are to be erected at distances of about 7-J chains throughout the fence.
Gate posts are to be 8 ft. 9 in. long, to be placed 4 feet in the
ground in a direct line with the fence. They are to be not less than
15 inches in diameter.
The tops of gate-posts in each gateway are to be level.
On sloping ground the post on the high side of the gateway is to be
4 ft. 9 in. out of the ground.
Permanent struts are to be placed at all angles and corners of fences
.and at every second straining-post. They are to be firmly mortised
into the posts 22 inches from the top, and are to be firmly butted
against the adjoining post or against a short post placed in the ground
Fig.2.—An Improperly-stayed corner-post. Note the stones piled against the post In a vain
endeavour to keep it in the ground.
to a depth of 2 feet, and situated at least 10 feet away from the bottom
of the post which they are supporting. Struts are to be not less than
3 inches in diameter.*
* Note. A quite common defect in the construction of a fence is that of placing the
strut too near the top of the post, and consequently at too great an angle with the line
of fence ; the result is that when the wires are strained the post is pulled out cf the
ground. In order to prevent this happening, various plans are tried, the least effectual
of which is that of weighting the post as shown in the illustration (Fig. 2). Placed as
the strut is in the illustration it is practically doing no good, as can be seen.
Another and more effectual method adopted by some is to place two long struts, one
on each side of the wires. This is unnecessarily cumbersome and costly, when the same
result can be obtained by placing the end of the single strut lower down on the post, but
not lower than half-way. The longer the strut the better it will do the work it is
intended to do.


Gateways. —Four gateways are to be placed where directed. Gateways are
to be 15 ft. 6 in. from gate-post to gate-post; the fence posts nearest
gateway are to be similar to corner posts.
Between the gate-posts a sill, 10 inches in diameter, and flattened to
6 inches at the small end, is to be firmly bedded. The flat face is to be
level, and on a level with the ground on the high side of the gateway.
Droppers. —Between the posts, one, two, or three droppers, as required, are
to be placed equidistant from the posts and from each other.
The wooden droppers, 2 in. x 1 in. hardwood, are to be secured to the
plain wires with staples, which pass over the wire through a hole in the
dropper, and are then clinched on the opposite side of the dropper;
they are to be tied to the barbed wire with No. 12 galvanized tying
wire, which is to pass through a hole in the batten about li inches from
the top of it.
The metal droppers are to be secured to the wires with the loops and
clamps specially designed for the purpose.
Wires. —The fence is to contain five wires, including one galvanized barbed
wire No. 12 8.W.G., firmly secured to the top of the posts with No. 12
galvanized tying wire, which is to pass through a hole in the post about
2 inches from the top.
The other wires are to be four No. 8 steel galvanized wires, with the
following spacings from the ground:—l2 inches, 24 inches, 36 inches,
and 43 inches, and the barbed wire 51 inches.
All wires are to be thoroughly strained and secured in position.
Netting. —A selected brand of netting, 17 gauge, 42 inches wide x 1J inches
mesh, is to be erected, so as to have the straight selvedge at the
top. The netting is to be properly strained in an approved manner. A
portion of the netting is to be placed, without bending, underground
(in a suitable trench, previously dug the required depth, i.e., 6 inches),
so that the netting can be securely fastened to, and in line with, the
third wire from the ground.
The netting is to be secured to the top and bottom wires with gal-
vanized netting clips. To the top wire with 24 clips, and to the bottom
wire with 16 clips to the chain.
All w’ork to be finished in a workmanlike manner, and to the satis-
faction of the officer in charge of the w T ork.
Though the fences erected at Cowra have proved very satisfactory, it would
be an advantage to reverse the positions of the barbed wire and the
fourth plain wire, so as to have the plain wire on top and the barbed wire
in the position now occupied by the plain one. The object of the barbed
wire is to deter horses and cattle from feeding over or through the fence,
and thus injuring it. It has been noticed that cattle endeavour to feed
through the fence just over the top of the netting. If the barbed wire is
placed in the position indicated, it would still prevent stock feeding over
the fence, and would more effectually prevent cattle feeding through the
fence.


The cost of erecting the different patterns of fence will be seen
from the
following
statement, in
which,
for
the
purpose
of
easy
comparison, the
expenditure for each pattern
is
given
at
a
rate
per
mile
which
has
been
computed from the actual costs
•= =
O
0
a
CO
32
Cl
0
O
0
CO
a
a a
CO
•fjunoiuv
s
xd
3
20
O
X
i-O
Ld
0.
CO
xd a
X
g
a
CO
a
0
O
0
01
-
CO
0
0
03 xd
X
a
*5
d
<y
d
Ph
f
o
••f"
z
0
'S’
bo
0
X
O
O
1.0
Id
3
0
a
0
X
32
—
0
0
0
CO
•d 1
a a
X
W
’^unocay
*«
s
3
20
0
CD
32
0
2
01
CO
xd 0
c
CO
32
O')
0
a
0-1
CO
a
a
01 xd
3
O
q
0)
d
Pm
1)
0
35
p
bij
a
X
O
0
xd
0
1
a
a
s
Cl.
r»
O
%
3 °
°
O
0
X
0
co
0
O
O
a
a
a 0
a
5S‘
U
d
•■lanouiy
O
z
CO
01
X
10
v>
bfl
&
c
«rta
CO
32
0
O
0
Ld
CO
0
a
01 xd
a
a
O
T?
3
*
a
Ou
o
Oh
:
tf
o
s
0
•^r
0
X
0
0
Id
xd
0
a
a
s
rf
03
3 °
o
0
°
X
JO
CO
0
0
0
CO
a
a
a a
S
o
O
d
•■4UUOLUV
X «
z
z
z
a
Ol
32
X
id
z
Ol
X
a
0 a
03
d
id
=
« 3
CO
32
a
-
O
0
id
-
Id
O
a
a
°r
o
o
33
1
00
■.Ciauunfr
&
V
0
bi
0
0
0
O
a
0
“
a
S
*•
-
Ol
31
•'C
0
rs°
a
O
0
X
CO
a
0
0
0
a
a
X
a a
rH
Xf-
62
q
CO
•juuomv
rf
xd
3
20
■M
50
0.
Id
Id
c.
-
a
a a
a
d
Ed
=
O
CO
0
0
O
CO
-
I-
0
CO
03 id
0
c-
3
+£
%
<
ei
■.urjuTJn^)
f
o
-H2
If
0
b<3
0
0
0
Xd
0
a
d
a
y.
03
CO
to"
u
P.
~6 ~
a
O
0
X
0
0
0
CO
a
Tf<
a 0
a
s
t-H
os
<
uj v
d
>$•
CO
CO
ud
s
03
X
CO
xd O
Tj.
-
co
02
0
-
0
xd
O
a
01
r-H Xd
a
r-
a* -
J,
io
•A’^pU'Bn?)
o
,_
2?
br
03
0
O
CO
xd
a
-xf
a
3-
a
0
Cl.
■s
-3"
i_ 43
d a
O
*
3
O
d
d
O
O
bfl S
s
7S O
O
2
s £*a
"2
S
d
d
S3
£
coa
'3 x
Q.-S
a
s
.O
•£>
d
~02
,c<
» rH
Si
bO
a;
i
!£
■q
be
.S
d
72
3
~v
be
_c
0
2S
4»
£
bo
.s
E-
3
_S
a.
d
<73
9}
a.
a
0
5
0
be
d
5q
CO
a
a
72
*
i,
c
c
d
S
S-i
0
a
0
a
bp
0
0
i-
a
0
a
bo
c
0
02
33 £p_
d be
11 Stf
§ B
os a
"d
O
From the above figures it will be seen, under the conditions which prevail
here, that the substitution of droppers in lieu of posts reduces considerably
the first cost of the fence; but this does not determine the relative values of
the different patterns, for in addition to cost, efficiency and durability have
to be considered. Each style of fence has, since its erection, proved equally
efficient to restrain the stock it was meant to restrain, and this during
summers when feed was scarce on the side where the stock were and
plentiful on the other side.


It may or may not be that the cost of maintaining the cheaper kinds in a
state of efficiency will exceed that for the maintenance of the more expensive
types in an equal state of efficiency. This point can only be determined by
Fig. 3. — A corner-post properly strutted. A wire-netted boundary or subdivision fence; eight posts
per chain. Cost, £79 4s. 6d.
time. In order to do this, arrangements have been made to keep an
account of the expenditure found necessary for the upkeep of each pattern
of fence erected under the above contract.
Arranged in their relative order of initial cost, commencing with the
cheapest pattern, the fences are as follow: —
Per mile.
£ s. cL
Pattern F.—Posts, 33 ft. 0 in. apart, with 3 crimped wire droppers between
posts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63 18 3
Pattern E.—Posts, 33 ft. 0 in. apart, with 3 plain wire droppers between
posts 65 1 3
Pattern D.—Posts, 33 ft. 0 in. apart, with 3 wooden droppers between posts 66 15 0
Pattern C.—Posts, 22 ft. 0 in. apart, with 2 w r ooden droppers between posts 69 12 11
Pattern B.—Posts, 16 ft. 6 in. apart, w'ith 1 wooden dropper between posts 70 16 1
Pattern A.—Posts, 8 ft. 3 in. apart, no droppers between posts ... ... 79 4 6
Barbed Wire.
It will be noticed that barbed wire has been used in the construction of
the fences. This has been done with regret, but there can be no doubt that
under certain conditions it prolongs the life of a fence by deterring stock
from rubbing against it and unduly straining the plain wires. Everyone
regrets having to use barbed wire on account of the risks which always
attend its use; but until large stock can be controlled in some other way its
use will certainly be continued.
Stock soon get to understand how dangerous it is, and when in a quiet
condition, are rarely injured by it; but once excited by panic or play, they
forget its dangers, and often suffer in consequence. For some purposes,
t.g., to prolong the life of an old fence, it is invaluable, and despite its
dangerous character, it is likely to stay with us. It may be that some style
of woven fence will enable us to do without it; but for such a fence to be
a success, it will require to have sufficient elasticity to recover from occasional
very severe and unusual strains, and also sufficient to respond to our varying
conditions of heat and cold, and so require no straining after its erection.


Rail Fences.
Whilst for boundaries and general subdivision work the rail fence has
been superseded by the wire fence, yet for some purposes, such as yards,
approaches to gates, bridges, &c., it, or the stub or sapling fence, is still
required. Such fences are more easily seen than wire fences, and their
appearance indicates that they are a more effective barrier than even the
dreaded and dangerous barbed wire. Some details regarding them, their
cost and construction, are therefore likely to be of interest.
Fig. 4. —Three-rail fence; eight panels per chain. Cost, 7s. 9d. per rod.
Three-rail fence (Tig. 4). —The erection of this type of fence is gradually
becoming more and more rare, it is quite unusual now for a new one to be
erected. The two-rail fence, with one or two wires underneath the bottom
rail, and between the rails, is effectually taking its place, except in very
exceptional cases.
The two-rail fence (Tig. 5) is largely used as indicated in the illustration —
that is, for enclosing tanks, also for the yards about the homestead, stable
or dairy, and for other similar purposes.
Fig. 5.—A two-rail fence with two wires. Cost, without wire, 6s. per rod.


The single-rail fence (Fig. 6), with three, four, or five wires beneath the
rail, is very suitable, and is popular in some districts for enclosing town
and suburban allotments. With the increasing scarcity of timber, it is now
being used in many situations and for purposes for which, formerly, only a
two or three-rail fence tvould have been considered suitable.
With or without wires, it is a suitable fence on hill-side roads, to act as
a barrier at dangerous places, to prevent travellers leaving the road.
Fig. 6.—Top-rail and wire fence; eight posts per chain.
The construction of the three kinds of rail fence is very similar. The
following specification, which is suitable for many localities, will serve as a
basis for those who contemplate erecting fences of this description:—
Specification for Rail Fences.
All fencing is to be on and in the proper line. The posts when erected are
to be straight, uniform, upright, and in line along the tops; they are
not to follow the lesser irregularities of the ground.
Timber. —White and yellow box or other approved timber may be used in
the construction of the fence.
All timber is to be taken from large trees. It is to be thoroughly
sound, free from splinters and other defects, barked arid straight. All
measurements specified to mean at the smallest dimensions.
Posts. —All posts are to be sawn square on the top, and when erected are to
have the earth placed properly around them and well rammed. The
distance between posts is to be 8 ft. 3 in. from centre to centre.
Split posts are to be 6 feet 6 inches long, and to be 9 inches wide and
3i inches thick. They are to be placed 24 inches in the ground, and
are to be mortised as per gauge herewith with holes 6 in. x 3 in.
Round posts for corners and ends are to be 7 feet long, and not less
than 12 inches in diameter; they are to be placed 2 ft. 6 in. in the
ground, and are to be mortised as per gauge herewith. The mortises
are to be 6 inches long, 3 inches wide, and 6 inches deep.


Gauge for Mortising. — The posts will be mortised as follows, the measure-
ments being taken from top of post to top of mortise : —
Three-rail Two-rail Single-rail
fence. fence. fence.
1st mortise .. 6 in. 6 in. 6 in.
2nd „ . . 21 in. 28 in.
3rd „ . . 36 in.
Rail fences are usually erected at so much per rod (16J feet), which com-
prises two panels. The approximate cost per rod of the fences is : —
Material,
Three-rail fence.
Two-rail fence.
Single-rail fence.
s. d.
s. d.
s. d.
Posts
2 @ 6d. = 1 0
2 @ 6<1. = 1 0
2 @ 6d. = 1 0
Rails
6 @ 9(1. = 46
4 (ai 9d. = 3 0
2 ® 9d. = 1 6
5 6
4 0
2 6
Labour
2 3
2 0
1 9
T otal
7 9
6 0
4 3
Rails. —The rails are to be 9 feet long, 8 inches, wide, and 3 inches thick.
The tenons on ends of rails are to be 6 inches long, adzed carefully to
fit into the mortises; they are to be shouldered and finished so as to
fill the mortise and to butt up to the posts.
The homestead fence (Fig. 7) is a neat ornamental type of fence which
appears very suitable for enclosing the garden or front portion of the farm-
house. The fence illustrated is built of sawn timber, but where this is
Fig. 7.—A homestead fence. The wires do not run through, but are tied on the outside edge of the posts.
Cost per panel (9 feet), 9s.


Tho pre-war cost per panel (9 feet) of this fence is
approximately, 9 3
made up as follows:—
Material —
s.
d.
Posts—6 in. x 4 in., sawn ironhark
2
9
Rails—4 in. x 4 in , sawn hardwood ...
e s
0
Hoop-iron—No. 10 gcauge. 2 ft. x 2 in,, 2 lb....
... 0
3
Bolls—Two 7 in. x f in. ...
... 0
3
Netting—A grade, 17 gauge, 42 in. x If in. mesh ..
... 1
0
Plain galvanized wire )
Clips [■
... 0
3
Tying Wire )
Labour —
Erecting
... 1
0
9
0
difficult to procure, and where straight saplings are plentiful, a very similar
fence can be built with round posts and straight saplings for rails. A fence
of this description, when painted white, adds considerably to the attractive-
ness of the home.
The particulars of the construction of the fence illustrated are as follows: —
The posts are hardwood (ironbark), 5 ft. 6 in. long, 6 inches wide and
4 inches thick, placed 2 feet in the ground and set 9 feet apart. The rails
are hardwood, 4 in. x 4 in., laid edge upwards in notches cut in the tops
of the ordinary posts and mortised into the end and corner posts.
The rails are secured to the ordinary posts with hoop-iron Xo. 10 gauge
straps, 2 feet long by 2 inches wide, bolted to the posts with two 7 in. x \ in.
bolts.
Six i*elies beneath the rail, rabbit-proof netting is attached by clips to
three plain galvanized wires, which are secured to the outside edge of the
posts by tying wire, which passes through a hole 2 inches from the edge of the
post. With this plan of fixing the plain wires, the netting can be strained
as tight and as flat as a board, and when secured presents, as may be seen
from the illustration, a neat, even, flat surface.
Comments on above Fences.
Reporting during June, 1913, on the present condition of the fences
erected at Cowra Experiment Farm several years previously, the Manager,
Mr. M. H. Reynolds, remarked that in section I the fence consisting of
posts only was the most efficient of all (but the most costly), and efficiency
decreased as the number of posts per mile decreased. The fences in which
the posts were 33 feet apart proved too weak for big stock, especially when
the strain imposed by wind and weather was taken into account. The
fences with throe or more posts to the chain proved satisfactory.
As to the tests with the droppers, the most efficient was the wooden
dropper, but it was also the most costly. The next best was the crimped
(“Cyclone”) dropper, and the least efficient was the straight wire dropper.
Since the date when the test was commenced, the “ Kingloc ” dropper—
galvanized and plain iron—has been introduced, and where the fence is
well erected this class of dropper is satisfactory, its great advantage being
the pos*i.bility of straining up at any time.


Another fence lately erected on this farm, and so far satisfactory for
internal divisions, is constructed as follows: —Posts, three to the chain, 22
inches in the ground and 4 feet 2 inches out; bored on the edge for five
•wires, which are attached to the side of the posts by tie wires that pass
through the holes in the post. To the three bottom wires is attached 2 feet
45 inches netting, 4-inch mesh, gauge 15 or stouter. One wire is attached
to the posts along the ground, one about the middle of the netting, and one
at the top. Two galvanized barbed wires are spaced between the top of the
netting and the top of the post, and two to three Kingloc droppers are used
between posts. A steel fencing wire, No. 8 gauge, is preferable for the top
of the netting, and No. 10 wire for the middle of the netting. Waite’s
special steel wire is used on this farm. The object of using the steel wire
is to avoid loosening once the wire is strained up; and though there is
difficulty in manipulating it, it is very satisfactory once it is up. The
netting is attached to the wire by No. 14 tie wire, and the wire to the posts
by No. 12 tie wire.
A Cheap Sheep and Cattle Proof Fence.*
A topic which is always of interest and importance to the man on the land
is that which relates to the construction of cheap and effectively stock-proof
boundary and subdivisional fencing,
Post-and-rail structures are almost a thing of the past; they have had to
give way in late years to the more modern and cheaper method of using
wire. But even in the construction of wire fences a diversity of opinion
Fig. 8.—A chain panel of cheap fence.
appears to exist, for while some fences may he encountered with posts
6 feet apart, in others, again, the panels vary from 12 feet to 33 feet, or more,
with a height of from 4 to 5 feet, containing anything from four to seven
wires.
It has no doubt been frequently noticed that the closer the posts arc
situated in a wire fence, the easier it is for sheep or cattle to get through.
This is because the wires in short panels do not give with or yield to
pressure when applied by an animal, thus permitting it to squeeze through
in some way or other.
At the beginning, I may say that to erect posts at shorter distances than
33 feet apart is not only not strengthening the panels, but is also so much
waste of money incurred in putting up needless posts, sinking holes, boring,
<fec.; in fact the kind of fence advocated here has posts not less than 1 chain
apart, is 3 feet 4 inches high, and has five plain wires and one barbed wire.
* H. Ross, Chief Inspector.


The total cost per mile, then, would be :—
£
s.
(1.
Eighty posts, at £2 10s. per 100 ...
2
0
0
Sinking holes and erecting
... 0
15
0
Boring holes in posts
... 0
6
0
16 cwt. No. 8 fencing wire, 12s. per cwt.
... 9
12
0
5 cwt. barbed wire, at 18s- per cwt.
... 4
10
0
Pulling wires through and straining
... 0
15
0
240 droppers, at 86s. per 100
... 4
6
6
Fixing droppers ...
... 0
6
0
Total
... £22
10
6*
In estimating the cost of erection, whether it be either sheds, outbuildings,
or fences, due consideration must be given to locality, supply of timber, rail
freight, availability of labour, &c.; but in the subjoined estimates I think it
will be admitted that, if anything, I have rather over than under estimated
the cost of material and labour for 1 mile of fencing.
As stated previously, posts are to be erected 1 chain apart, 3 feet 4 inches
above ground, and from 20 to 22 inches in the ground.
If posts can be procured on the farmer’s own place, the cost of splitting
will be £} 10s. per 100; if they have to be procured from any distance
£2 10s. per 100, delivered on the proposed line of fencing, will be found to
be a reasonable estimate.
Digging eighty post-holes and placing posts in position, 15s.
Boring holes in posts for five plain wires and one hole near the edge on
top of post for fastening barbed wire, 6s. The first hole should be 6 inches,,
the second 11 inches, the third 16 inches, the fourth 21 inches, and the fifth
28 inches from the ground. The barbed wire will be placed on top of the
posts, leaving a space of 12 inches between the last plain wire and the
barbed wire, which should not be fixed on with staples, but with a piece of
wire inserted through the top hole bored near the edge, and made fast by
twisting.
No. 8 fencing-wire should be used, the cost of which is about 12s. per cwt.
There are nearly 25 chains in 1 cwt., so the total quantity required would be
16 cwt., which at 12s. per cwt., would cost T 9 12s. per mile.
Barbed wire will run from 16 to 17 chains per cwt., and cost from 16s. to
18s. per cwt., or £4 10s. per mile.
Pulling wires through and straining, 15s.
Three droppers are required for each panel, or a total of 240.
While the old-time iron dropper had little to recommend it, there have
lately been put on the market several makes whose stoutness, durability, and
facility to strain wires without detaching the droppers have proved them to
be more economical than wooden ones. Droppers may be obtained,according
to quality, with any gauge or length required, from 15s. per 100 upwards,
but a good serviceable article, suited for all stock (sheep, cattle, and horses),
will cost about 365. per 100, equal to £4 6s. 6d. per mile. Fixing droppers
will cost 6s.
It will be noticed that allowance has been made for all labour to be done
at contract prices. If the farmer employs weekly labour, and the work be
done at the slack time of the year, the above cost will be considerably
diminished.
* With regard to prices, see footnote on page 160.


Improved droppers, which are referred to in another part of this section,
are quoted at 325, per 100, free on rail at Sydney. The rail freight per 100
droppers for, say, 350 miles, is about 65., so that the cost of landing on the
fence-line would be slightly more than indicated ; but the cost of affixing
improved droppers, without ties, would be very much less.
Now, this class of fence can be erected at fully £lO per mile cheaper than
fences whose posts are, say, from 9 to 14 feet apart. It is, however, not only
on account of its cheapness that it ought to commend itself to the farmer’s
notice, but also on account of its durability and sheep and cattle-proof
qualities. It will be found that it is next to an impossibility for a sheep to
get through it. Lincoln rams have purposely been driven against such a
fence, only to find that the “spring ” of the wide panels will send them flying
back.
While its height is sufficient to prevent cattle and horses reaching over the
barbed wdre to eat the standing crop, the opening between the last plain
wire and the barbed ware is insufficient to allow them to get their heads
through that way.
The risk of damage by fire is reduced to a minimum, and owing to the
growing scarcity of timber suitable for posts, the reduced number required is
a point worthy of serious consideration.
Fences of this description have been erected in several wheat-growing
centres, and have given more satisfaction than the class of fence in use
hitherto.
Hints on Fencing for Settlers.*
In putting up a wire fence only—supposing the timber is already laid on
the ground —the first thing to do is to dig the post holes, and there are, even
in connection with such an apparently simple operation as that, a few things
worth remembering.
The holes should be from 22 inches to 24 inches in depth, and there is no
necessity to make them too big, which involves unnecessary labour both in
■digging, filling, and ramming ; besides, the post wall not have such a firm
grip in the ground. They should be a little more than large enough to
receive the posts comfortably, and leave room for the rammer to work to
bottom of the hole. Dig the full depth straight away ;if a little too deep it
is easy to put in some loose earth to make post the required height. Sight
the posts- from the centre, and fill in and ram the bottom—say, the first
€ inches—thoroughly well. The bottom, and near it, is the place where
ramming is nr st required ; as the top is approached less ramming will do.
Place earth that remains neatly around the post to allow for subsidence.
The tools required for post-hole sinking are a medium-size iron bar with
rammer heal and chisel point, and a long-handled shovel, t This latter tool
should have a round nose and be bent inwards at the sides, so as to form a
kind of scoop. Small post-holes cannot be dug with wide shovels.
Sink post-holes, if possible, when the ground is in good condition—not
too wet and not too dry. Ground saturated with moisture is not benefited
by ramming, and will set better without.
* R. H. Gennys, Manager, Glen Innes Experiment Farm.
fin some parts of the State quick and effective work is done by the use of one of the
many patterns of post-hole auger.


The dimensions of split posts should be somewhere about the following :
8 in. x 4 in., with a face of not less than 4 in., and 6 ft. 6 in. in length.
Posts may be from 7 feet to 12 feet apart from centre to centre but, where
battens or droppers are used, may be further apart still. Put all large and
sound ends into the ground; place the posts into position so as to be
quite firm, after the manner just described.
Fig. 9.—Forked Wire-strainer, Wire-key, and Plug.
The following gauge for spacing and boring a 7-wire sheep-proof boundary
fence has been found to be thoroughly reliable, and after a two years’ test
no stock have got out, with the exception of one beast that jumped over.
Height from surface of ground to top of post, 4 ft. 6 in.
No. 7 wire 3 inches from top of the post.
6 „ 12 ~ No. 7 wire.
5 ~ 9 ~ fi „
4 „ 7 ~ 5 ~
3„6 4 „
2 „ 54 „ 3 „
1 ~ 5i „ 2 ~
Surface of ground 6 inches from No, 1 wire.
When boring, use a |-inch auger, if No. 8 wire is to be used, and also
battens ; this will allow wire to run freely. If no battens are used, an |-inch
auger will be large enough. Bore straight and right through, so as to push
out anything that may impede easy threading of the wire.


An easy and simple way of running or threading wire through split posts
is to place the coil on a reel made on the capstan principle ; this allows
the wire to run off freely, and prevents it getting entangled, &c. The
wire is then pulled through the holes
from one strainer post to the next,
and strained up tight. It can, how-
ever, be fastened anywhere between
the posts with a patent strainer.
This can also be made to work at
a post, which is an improvement.
Another way is to bore right through
the strainer posts and pull up either
with rollers or forks.
Strainer Posts are the mainstay
of a wire fence, and should be of
the best timber procurable, with
a diameter of not less than 12
inches. Those used at angles
should be mortised to receive stays
or struts. The strainers should be
let into the ground at least 3 feet
6 inches, and be very thoroughly
rammed. All posts should have
the bark taken off before being
put into the ground.
Stays or struts should be used
at all corners, two for every angle,
to be placed inside, clear of the
split-posts, not less than 13 feet
long, and 6 inches in diameter at
small end, with a good strong
stake driven into the ground
about 15 inches deep at the end ;
the large end should be away from
the strainer. One stay may be
used, which divides the angle
equally and projects into the pad-
dock, but at corners this is specially
awkward and somewhat dangerous
for large stock.
Where timber is plentiful, four
stays may he used at a strainer
post with advantage, two on each
side of the wire, on opposite sides
of the strainer, and mortised into
it, close together, not more than a
few inches apart, and secured as
befoi e mentioned. Do not have
stays too short; they should be at
Fig. 10.— Reel for carrying and unwinding wire.
least 13 feet long, and do not use a post in the fence instead of a stake for a
support.
Strainer posts should not be more than 4 chains apart.


Drawn Iron Fencing Wire.
Posts to the mile.
Wire irauge.
Weight of 1 mile.
Length of 1 cwt. i
(Fractions neglected).
cwt.
qrs. Ib,
yards.
ft.
in.
4,
6
i
14
276
8
3
640
5.
5
i
t
332
9
0
587
6.
4
i
19
397
10
0
528
7.
3
2
20
479
11
0
480
8.
3
0
8
573
12
0
440
9.
■2
2
10
680
13
0
409
10.
2
0
'l
819
14
0
377
11.
1
o
18
1,050
15
0
352
12.
1
1
2
1,393
16
6 i
(1 rod)
320
A Useful Barbed-wire Winder.
The accompanying' sketch of a barbed-wire winder (Fig. 11) has been sup-
plied by Mr. A. B. Paddison, Perthville. Most farmers have, at some time or
other, to face the necessity of detaching barbed-wire from an old fence, and
storing it for future use. Under ordinary conditions, the result is a cumber-
some, loosely wound mass of wire, difficult to handle, and still more difficult
to put to profitable use later.
Mr. Paddison uses a piece of J-inch piping, about 6 feet long, and costing
about Is. This makes a first-class light windlass by heating and bending to
the shape shown in the illustration. It is operated by two men, and the man
operating the crank carries only about a third of the weight, and has the
ether hand free to turn the crank.
By means of such a device wire can be wound almost as tightly as the
factory turns it out, and as fast as the men can walk.
Fig. 11.
A. Piece of J-inch water-piping, 6 feet long before bonding, and about 4 feet long
after the crank is made.
B. Empty barbed-wire reel slipped on to pipe.
C. Strong cord fastening reel to the crank in pipe to prevent the reel turning.
D. Barbed-wire to be wound up, fastened to reel with small staple.
When the reel is filled, cut the cord, take off and slip on another empty reel.


Gates and Gateways.
iNo fence is complete without an entrance, and therefore -without a gate,
for slip-rails at the best are only makeshifts, and are a source of loss both of
time and temper. It is surprising that slip-rails are as common as they are,
for excellent and serviceable light gates can now be purchased very cheaply,
and even where the lack of eash is an obstacle to this being done, a handy
man can, with the aid of an auger and a tomahawk, build and hang a strong
useful bush gate, with no other outlay than the expenditure of a few hours’
labour, and certainly in less time than is required for continual putting
down and up of the slip-rails.
There are some who prefer something a little neater than the bush gate,
but who wish the outlay to be as small as possible; for such, the batten-gate
is admirably suited. The cost of the material required is not great, the gate
Fig. 12. — Gateway and round untrimmed posts. Cost of gates, per pair, 16s. 2d.
is easily and quickly constructed, and if by accident it is injured, it is
easily repaired. A gate of this kind is described by Mr. Gennys, Manager of
Glen Innes Experiment Farm, on page 185.
It is the more common practice to make these gates of hardwood; but an
objection to hardwood is its heaviness —for a heavy gate is generally the
principal cause of its own inefficiency and final destruction. For this reason
the gates at Cowra Farm (which are similar to those illustrated in Figs.
12 and 13) have been made of Oregon pine, which is light. It may be
thought that Oregon pine is not strong enough for the purpose; but that
supposition is not borne out by actual results, for on, at least, one dairy-
farm in the State, Oregon batten gates have been in daily use for nine or
ten years, and are still in excellent condition. They have never been broken
or out of order during the whole time. It will be admitted that this material
is strong enough for ordinary conditions of service, and that if it be broken
it will be by some unusual act of violence, which, in most cases, would
have been sufficient to have broken one constructed of hardwood.
The pair of gates illustrated in Fig. 12 are 16 feet wfide. In most situa-
tions on farms it is advisable to have openings of this width, as the
transference of implements like the reaper and binder from one paddock to


the other is greatly facilitated. It will be noticed that the bottom batten is
put down to within an inch of the sill. This is in readiness to carry the
netting when the paddock is made rabbit-proof. The tops of the uprights
are rounded off; this gives the gate a neat appearance, and is less dangerous
than having the ends pointed, as is sometimes done.
Fig. 13.—A gateway with squared and trimmed posts. Cost of gates, per pair, 16s. 2d.
For openings up to 12 feet wide, a single gate, if made of light wood, may
be made to do. The cost will be less, and a single gate is certainly more
convenient than a double one.
The pair of gates, as illustrated, can be made ready for hanging in half a
day. The materials used were —
s. d.
160 feet run. = 40 super, feet, 3 in. x 1 in. Oregon dressed all round, at 235.
per 100 feet super, .. ... ... ... ... ... 9 2
Bolts, 3J in. x f in., 3 in. x f in., in. x § in. ; washers, nails ... ... 1 0
Two pairs hook-and-eye hinges, 2 ft. x 2 in. x ft in.; 18 lb. at 4d. per 1b..,. 6 0
16 2*
The gates cannot be said to be finished until they have been painted, and
the soundness of painting as an investment cannot be gainsaid. It will be
better, and a saving of time, if the timber, after being cut up for the gates, is
given a couple of coats before being put together. The gate, after it is com-
pleted and hung, can be given a final coat. The first, or priming coat, should
be very thin, in fact may be nearly all raw linseed oil. The second and last
coats will, of course, be a little thicker, and in order to dry hard, and with a
* See footnote on page 166 with regard to prices.


A Cheap Farm Gate
The material required for, and the cost of a
pair of gates,
as shown in
the illustration on this page, are approximately
112 running feet = 28 super, feet of 3 in. x 1
as follows: —
s.
in. battens, at
d.
13s. per 100 feet super.
3
8
3 lb. 3J in. x | in. bolts and washers, at 4d.
... 1
0
2 pairs hook-and-eye hinges, at 2s. 6d.
5
0
1 iron bolt and 1 gate fastener ...
0
7
Labour —making and hanging ..
7
6
Total cost
17
9t
little gloss, should contain a small quantity of turpentine and boiled oil.
With regard to colours, tastes differ, but judging by results, white, in this
climate, seems to give the most satisfaction, and a first-class quality of
white paint is a mixture of white lead and oil. Painting the ironwork
(hinges) black will make a slight contrast, and will rather add to the
appearance of the gateway.
Gate-posts.
The gate-posts should be quite separate and distinct from posts used in the-
construction of the fence. A better effect is obtained without additional
trouble if they are slightly higher than the uprights in the gate, and also
higher than the fence-posts adjoining the gateway. The main entrance to the
farm, and also the gateways around the dwelling, may be still further
improved if a little additional trouble be taken to square the gate-posts and
round off the tops. The amount of improvement effected by this may be'
judged from a comparison of the illustrations (Figs. 12 and 13). The four
posts in the gateways shown were practically identical as they left the bush.
The cost of trimming is about 3s. 6d. to'4s. per post.
These gates are made without any mortising, being entirely bolted
together. The nuts can be given a turn if the timber shrinks, and thus the
gate kept rigid. A coat of paint, wood-preserving oil, or tar thinned with
Fig. 14.—Farm Gate for a 12-foot opening.
kerosene, will preserve the wood and improve the appearance. In the
illustration the shaded parts represent double battens, while the unshaded
parts are single battens, the double battens being placed one on either side of
the single rails and bolted through.
* R. H. Gennys, Manager, Glen Innes Experiment Farm.
tWith regard to prices, see footnote on page IBG.


A sleeper should be let into the ground between the posts, and a stop-
block let into this for the gates to close against. The posts should be let
into the ground at least 4 feet deep.
Gates are better hung on posts in no way connected with the fence. If a
strainer-post is used as a gate-post, the weight of the gate pulls the fence
out of shape, while in cold weather the wires may draw the strainer back, and
thus throw the gate out of plumb.
Squaring a Gate-post.*
For a gate-post, a bushman likes to have a perfectly sound log. He is not
always able to secure this, and often has to be content with one containing a
small hollow or “ pipe,” which may be plugged up when the squaring is
completed.
Fig. 15.—The log barked ready for squaring.
A log with a straight free-running grain is the more easily worked, but one
with a curly grain is the more durable.
A suitable tree having been chosen and felled, and the necessary logs
having been cut off, the first operation consists in removing the bark : the
sooner this and the subsequent operations are done after falling, the easier
they will be.
The tools necessary for squaring a log are —an American axe, a squaring or
road axe, a level with a plumbing bulb, a rule or measure, a pencil, a line,
or string, and some chalk or other material for coating the string so that it
will make a mark on the log.
Tor the sake of stability, as large a butt as is possible is left on the gate-
post ; only that portion, therefore, which is to stand above the ground is
squared. The length of this portion is measured off, and the log fixed so
that it will remain steady while the ends are being marked, at the same time
this placed in such a position that the most may be made of the timber it
contains. The ease and readiness with which this is done depends entirely
upon the skill and judgment —largely the result of practice and experience
of the axeman.
The squares or rectangles are now marked on the ends with the aid of the
level and rule. The first line (a vertical one) is obtained by drawing a pencil
along the face of the level when it is held “ plumb ” and as close to the edge
* J. Win. Chapman, Cowra Experiment Farm.


as it is deemed advisable to go. The line at right angles to this is obtained
by drawing a line along the top of the same instrument when it is held level.
The other lines, necessary to complete the rectangle, are then obtained with-
out difficulty by measurements. Another way of marking the first line on
both ends is with the aid of a plumb-line. The other lines are then marked
off it with the aid of a blacksmith’s or other square and a measure.
Fig. 16.—Marking the ends.
It is very necessary that some method he adopted to prevent a '■'■wind” or twist
in the squared log. Marking the first line on each end with the plumb-line
or level is an easy and satisfactory way of preventing this ; but, in the
absence of either a plumb-line or a level, the “wind” may be prevented by
marking the first line on each end with the aid of two laths, or light battens,
used in the following manner. A lath, or batten, is tacked to one end of
the log in either a vertical, or a horizontal position, the other lath is then
held on the opposite end of the log, so that the edges of both laths “ line,”
or correspond with each other, when sighted across. The longer the laths
the more accurate is the work likely to be.
The ends having been marked, it is necessary to connect these marks with
lines which will show the axeman how deep to chop. These lines are marked
or “ struck” in a similar manner to that adopted by a carpenter for marking
a chalk line on a board. A carpenter’s line, a piece of fishing-line, or failing
these, a piece of string or sewing-twine is used. Instead of coating the string
with dry chalk as the carpenter does, it is found better, for the work in hand,
to use a black or a white liquid. Black is to be preferred as ic makes a
better mark than white on the green log. A suitable liquid is made by
mixing charcoal, soot, or burnt straw with water. To make a white mark,
lime wash or whiting and water is used.
A knot is tied in one end of the string, which is then wound crossways
on the thumb and little finger of the left hand ; it is then placed in the
black or white mixture until saturated, when it is taken out, the knotted
end is taken hold of, and the wound-up portion thrown out with a smart
jerk ;it should fall out quite clear and free from tangles. The knotted


end is now placed in an axe-nick previously made on the end of the log
and in a line with one of the vertical marks on one end of the log ; the other
end of the line is taken and held at the point where a continuation of the
corresponding vertical line on the other end would meet the uppermost
surface of the log. With one hand the line is pulled tight and held firmly
at this place, whilst it is seized towards the middle with the other hand
Fig. 17. —“Striking.”
Fig. 18.—Chopping to the line.


Fig. 19. —Splitting to the line.
Fig. 20.—Squaring the edges.


and stretched upwards, held for an instant, and then released. It strikes
the log with a smart smack and leaves a straight but somewhat bespattered
mark connecting the uppermost end of the two vertical lines on opposite
ends of the log. Another line is now “struck” on the other edge of the
log. The log is then rolled over and corresponding lines “struck” on both
edges of the other side of the log.
Fig. 21. —Striking after the first two edges have been squared.
Cuts, or kerfs, at intervals of 9 to 12 inches, are now chopped with a.
common axe, almost to the lines “struck.” The intervening blocks are
then split off with the same axe, after which the edges are finally trimmed
with the squaiing axe.
Fig, 22.—Finished.


The partially-squared log is now rolled over until the remaining marks on
the ends are in a vertical position ; lines connecting these marks are “ struck ”
and the edges squared as the others were squared. The top is then rounded
off with axe and adze. This completes the squaring, the post is finished, and
is ready for setting in the ground.
Concrete Fencing-posts.
With the prospect of timber for fencing-posts becoming scarcer each year,
and because of some prominence being then given to cement concrete, it was
decided early in 1908 to make an experiment at Cowra Experiment Farm
with a short line of fencing with concrete posts, so as to determine if there
were any special difficulties to be met with in this type of post, and to
obtain some definite idea under local conditions as to its cost and efficiency.
The length of line erected is 2| chains, and included in the line are gate-
posts, straining-posts, struts, stays, and ordinary posts.
The location of the fence is such as to ensure that the posts are subjected
to a fair trial. It is the boundary line between a lane and the paddock
in which the stables and other farm buildings are situated. The gateway is
the entrance to this paddock, and is in constant daily use. On one
occasion a dray collided with one of the gate-posts, but it suffered no ap-
preciable damage. Fig. 23 is an illustration of this kind of fence ; its
neat appearance commends it.
The posts were made of the following mixture: cement, 1 ; sand, 21;
gravel, 5. In the case of the ordinary fencing-posts and struts, the gravel
was small, being about - inch. In the larger and bulkier posts the gravel
Fig. 23.—Concrete Fencing Posts at Cowra Experiment Farm.
was of a much larger size, some pieces being the size of an egg. The dimen-
sions of the ordinary posts are 6 ft. 3 in. long by 3| x 3 in. at the top, and
x 5 in. at the bottom. Each post is reinforced with four pieces of No. 6
crimped wire, placed 1 in. from each corner. The crimped wire was used
because it was on hand, and was considered to be stronger than the plain,
but from what has since been learned it is believed that the ordinary No. 6
plain wire, bent at the ends, would be quite strong enough for reinforcement.


The wires are fixed to the posts, as shown in Fig. 24, by tying wire which
passes through holes in the post, and 2 inches from its face. These
holes are made when the post is moulded, by putting j-inch iron
rods through the sides and across the mould the required distance apart, i.e.,
the distance necessary for the spacing of the wires. When the concrete sets,
the rods are withdrawn, leaving holes in the post. Two of the rods are in
the form of bolts, which on b-ing screwed up hold the mould together, and
stiffen it, so that the mould will remain firm when the material is tamped.
Where only plain wires are used on a fence, they can, if desired, be run
through the holes in the post, but because of the ease with which a broken
wooden or concrete post can be replaced, and because a much neater and
better job can be made when affixing netting, it is believed that the proper
method of affixing wires is by means of the tie-wires to the face of the post.
The posts were moulded singly in collapsible moulds. The sides of the
moulds were of 1J inch dressed Cypress pine, and were kept apart by blocks
2 inches thick at each end. The top block had two small three-cornered
fillets tacked to it, in order to give a bevel finish to the top of the post. The
Fig. 24.—Concrete Fencing Posts at Cowra
Experiment Farm.
moulds were held together by
three bolts, the top and
middle bolts being placed so
that the holes, which were left
when they were withdrawn,
were at the required distance
apart to correspond with the
spacing required by two of
the wires in the fence.
When making the post the
mould, after being cleaned
and greased, was placed on a
board, so that the back of
the post would be underneath,
and sufficient material in a
soft state to cover the bottom
about 1 inch deep was placed
therein. Two of the reinforc-
ing wires were then placed
on the concrete, at about 1
inch from each side, and ex-
tending from within 2 inches
of one end to the same distance
from the other end. The
mould was then half filled,
and the rods to make the
holes for the fencing wires,
passed through the sides.
Material was then placed in
the mould to within 1 inch of
the top, when the remaining
two reinforcing wires were
put in a similar position to the first two, and the mould filled. After being
filled the material was worked to the sides by passing a trowel or spade
between the material and side of frame or mould. When this had been


done the material was thoroughly tamped with a small rammer. This
operation brought the fine material to the top, which, on being smoothed off
with a trowel or float, gave a smooth surface to the face of the post.
After the concrete had been allowed to set for two or three hours, the
bolts were unscrewed and the mould taken apart, cleaned, and greased
for another post. The newly-made post was kept in the shade to season for
about a fortnight, being watered daily for the first week so as to retard the
progress of setting.
Information gained after the posts were made, produced the impression
that the material could be used much drier, and though this would require
more tamping, it would admit of the moulds being removed sooner from the
posts without injury to them. It is also believed that the posts could be
moulded on the ground, or on a bed of sand, instead of on boards.
The actual details of making the posts will vary according to the facilities
available on different farms. If desired the moulds can be made in sets,
and several posts made at a time. Under certain circumstances this plan
will perhaps be found the most suitable, but for continuous work it is
believed that making a single post in a collapsible mould will be found the
better plan. If a single collapsible mould be used, it can be removed much
sooner, and with less risk of injury to the post, than if a compound mould
be used.
t 17299—G


The gate, straining posts, and struts were made in a similar way to the
ordinary posts, in moulds of the proper size. In each case stronger re-
inforcing rods of |~inch round iron were used. It is believed that the |-inch
reinforcing rods in the struts or stays could be replaced with -[--inch rods
without unduly weakening them.
The holes for the hooks of the hinges were made in the gate-posts by
placing the hooks or gudgeons to be used in their relative position in the
moulds. The tops of the gate-posts were rounded by placing a block of wood
the required shape at the head of the mould.
The straining-posts are 7 feet 9 inches long, with a cross section of
8 inches x 6 inches. At 1 foot 10 inches from the top, a slight rectangular
recess is moulded obliquely in the centre of one of the narrower sides for the
reception of the end of the stay or strut. The straining-posts are placed
3 feet 6 inches in the ground.
The stays or struts are 9 feet long, with a cross section of 4 inches x 3
inches.
The appearance of the posts is improved if, after completion, they are given
a coat of thin cement wash, made by mixing cement thinly with water.
The cost of fencing-posts made of concrete will depend upon the local cost
of the material used. It is estimated that where suitable gravel and sand is
easily obtainable concrete fencing-posts can be made for about Is. each
(labour and material). Fencing-posts of the dimensions given require about
18 lb. of cement, which at Cowra Farm cost about Bd. With sufficient
moulds available, it is believed that a man could make about 100 posts per
day.
The experience gained with the short line of fence referred to suggests
very distinctly that concrete is a suitable material for fencing-posts in this
climate. Concrete posts do not require specially skilled labour to make ;
they are neat, efficient, and durable, being unaffected by white ants or rot,
and probably also by bush fires. Their first cost, however (about Is.) makes
their use uneconomical in districts where wooden posts are still easily
obtainable. Concrete gate-posts are a decided advantage over wooden ones.
Unsightly cracks do not appear in them, nor do they require painting
regularly to keep them neat and in good order.
Comments.
In response to a request for a few comments on the concrete posts in use
at Cowra Experiment Farm, Mr. M, H. Reynolds, Manager, wrote :
“ With two exceptions all the concrete posts erected five years ago are still
in good condition. The two referred to were only broken in each case after
a second accident at the opposite direction to the first. I think any weak-
ness is attributable to the smooth, water-worn quartz used in the concrete.
“The tapering re-inforced concrete posts in the line of fence are still
apparently in good order, and where timber is scarce or dear, they should
make satisfactory substitutes.”
The Practical Use of Timbers.*
Although the following notes refer more particularly to western timbers,
the principles enunciated apply nevertheless equally to timbers from other
districts.
* C. ,T. Woollett, Stock Inspector, late at Cobar, now at Tamworth.


All trees that provide us with timber are outward growing trees —that is
to say, they increase in girth by developing successive layers round the
trunk next to the bark. Each year generally adds one of the layers or rings,
and consequently they are called “ annual rings.” In addition to the
annual rings, trees have medullary rays, which are thin and generally broken
lines, radiating from the centre, or pith, to the bark, and vice versa. These
rays are not very apparent in some trees, but in dry Cypress pine they are
easily seen. Cabinetmakers call these rays the “ silver grain.”
The trunks and branches of trees consist of two kinds of wood—the hard,
dead heartwood, or duramen, and the soft sapwood, or alburnum. The latter
is much lighter in colour than the former. The bark consists of an outer
and inner layer.
Heartwood is much stronger and more durable than sapwood, and the
outer portion of the heartwood is stronger than that near the centre, or pith,
more particularly if the wood is “pipy,” because then it has been subjected
to decay and is very brittle.
Old wood is stronger, though lighter, than young wood. The strength of
timber is influenced by the quality of soil on which it grows. Evenness of
grain in the annual rings denotes strong wood.
By strength of wood we mean the resistance it offers to force acting at
right angles to its grain. This is called “ transverse strength.”
It must be patent to all that where the strongest parts of timber are
preserved the structure built would have a much longer life than where the
weaker tissues are made to stand the strain.
For stockyards, stables, huts, and the like, Cypress pine (Callitris sp.)
timber is generally used in this district, because it is practically the only
timber of any size, and is much more easily split and worked than the
eucalypts and acacias.
Cypress pine is very fissile, but will stand very little transverse strain;
and therefore, when using it, knowing of its weakness, workers should aim
at conserving the strength in every possible way. Anyone familiar with pine
used in stockyards knows that the rails most frequently break at or near
the middle and at the tenon, which fits the mortise of the post. When pine
saplings are used as rails the posts should be close together to lessen the
strain when stock bump against the
rails. Little or nothing but the
bark should be removed from young
pine in making a tenon, because the
young wood is much weaker than
that from mature trees, and by re-
moving the harder heartwood of an
already weak timber the strength
and durability are very materially
lessened.
In Fig. 25 the stockyards are
made of split pine. To the casual
observer they appear to be very sub-
Fig. 25.
stantial and as strong as that timber will allow, Both the posts and
rails are from mature and fairly sound trees. They are on a station


Fig. 26.
belonging to a gentleman as keen,
observant, and well informed on
matters pertaining to agronomy as
any person with whom the writer
comes in contact. Yet, until the
matter was discussed with him.
although he was well aware of the
characteristics of the timber, he had
not given any thought to the re-
duction of the strength of these
timbers when he allowed his men
to cut them as they had done in
making these yards.
In Fig. 26 the photo, is taken
much closer to the posts and rails
than Fig. 25, and from inside the
yard.
The readerwdll observe that about
half the rail has been cut away and
a very small tenon left to fit the
mortise of a very substantial post.
A chain is no stronger than its weakest link, and so here the strength of this
fence depends on the strength of the tenon. Furthermore, even the tenon
has been weakened by adzing wood from the convex outer hardwood, instead
of from the inner wood towards the vicinity of the pith. Obviously, to make
the yards as strong as possible with this class of timber, much larger mortises
should have been made in the posts, and there should have been no adzing
from the rails.
Eucalypts are also used for building yards where strength is required, the
best of which in this part are Coolabah (Eucalyptus intertextei) and bimbil
box (E. populifolia). The timber of these trees is very hard, with short
interlocked grain, and is most difficult to split. It is capable of standing a
heavy transverse strain if fairly thick and not too long. Excellent bullock-
yokes and w’aggon-poles are made from bimbil box.
Fig. 27 is a picture of yards made
of hardwood, which at first sight
appear very substantial, but while
they are strong enough to hold
sheep, goats, or quiet milch cows,
they frequentlyfail to stem the rush
of frightened cattle. The rails are
of sawn timber of a short, curly
grained hardwood and about 1|
inches thick. They are much too
narrow in comparison with their
length. Being so narrow and long,
they bend to only a moderate pres-
sure upon their middles. To guard
Fig. 27.
against the rails being forced out —which frequently happens—the mortises
should be at least 2 inches deep; but. instead, they are only half that depth
in the post.


Fig. 28 shows how two rails gave
way when a mob of cattle became
frightened. These are compara-
tively now yards. Split timber is
much stronger than sawn timber,
and therefore for such purposes as
stockyards the split hardwood is
better than sawn, because the grain
is not broken so often. Here
strength has been sacrificed for
neatness.
Fig. 29.
Fig. 28.
Fig.29is an example of using rails
out of all proportion to the strength
of the posts; the former have also
been weakened by cutting away
such, a large amount for the tenon.
Attention to some of the points
enumerated above relating to the
construction of stockyards, may
avoid the annoying occurrences of
wild stock breaking away at, say,
branding-time, through a weak rail
being broken by the animals in their
caperings round the yard, to say
nothing of loss through broken
limbs when they essay to jump out
of a yard through an opening left
by a broken rail.
How to Lay Timbers for Flooring.
Slabs of pine and old railway sleepers are frequently used as flooring for
stables and cow-bails on farms and stations. At times they arc not used to
the best advantage, and consequently are heavy with the smell of urine, no
matter how the attendant may try to keep the place clean.
Fig. 30 represents logs showing
the rings plainly.
If the logs were placed as in
Fig. 30a, urine would find its way
through the space of the rings when
the logs were seasoned, and there
set up decomposition, decay, and
an objectionable odour. Obviously
they should be set as in Fig. 30&,
Fig. 30.
As milk absorbs odours very readily it is necessary that cow-bails should
be as free from bad smells as possible. The same thing applies to the
decking of bridges and culverts. If placed as in Fig. 30a. rain would find
its way into the rings, and, when evaporated by the sun, would cause
warping and, consequently, weakening of the timber for traffic.


CONSERVATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF WATER.*
Many areas of land taken up for grazing and cultivation have no natural
permanent water supply; therefore the matter of providing a sufficiency of
this most necessary element should be a first consideration with the settler.
Tanks and Dams,
It is somewhat difficult to arrive at the quantity required for sheep and for
cattle, say, over a period of twelve months. Every person must be his own
judge as to whether the weather conditions of his climate warrant him in
providing for a shorter period, or whether in the driest parts it will not be
wiser even to provide for a longer period, but there are a few points that
are worthy of consideration in determining the size of a dam.
Sheep, more especially when there is plenty of green feed with a moderate
temperature, require very little water; indeed, they have been known to go
Excavated tank.
months without any and do well. When, however, feed is dry and dusty
they drink a great deal. "When there is a drought and the weather is very
hot they almost live on water, and they also carry out a lot of water in their
wool. Taking these things into consideration, and also the evaporation from
the surface, I consider that li gallons per day for each sheep should be
provided. This makes the requirements of each sheep for one year 456|
gallons. Each cubic yard of water contains 168| gallons, which works out
at about 2f cubic yards per sheep. As it is always safer to provide a little
more, I would advise that 3 cubic yards of water be provided for each sheep
intended to be watered at the tank, or tanks; for 100 sheep, therefore, provide
300 cubic yards of water; for cattle and horses, from 24 to 30 cubic yards
should be provided for each beast for one year.
* K. H. Gennys, Manager. Glen Innes Experiment Farm.


Having considered the quantity of water in cubic yards that will be
required for the maximum number of stock intended to be kept, providing for
the driest seasons (and of water there should always be more than enough),
the next thing to do is to select the most convenient position or positions on
the estate for watering stock.
Tanks or dams may be placed so as to water more than one paddock if
required. If the paddocks are large, however, it is better to place the
excavations as near the centre as possible, in order that stock may not have to
travel too far to water and will not tread down the grass so much going
to and fro. There must be a catchment area that will catch enough water
to fill the excavation in good heavy' rains; a large area with a gentle grade
is preferable to too steep a catchment, as the latter carries too much soil
and rubbish down during heavy rains. See that the area is kept clean and
does not contain pigsties, sheep yards, &c.; also, shade-trees should not be
left in the catchment, but rather below it, so that the excreta from stock
camping under them may T not be washed into the tank and pollute the water.
The next is a very important point—good clay must be chosen so that the
water will not leak away. It is worth all the trouble to sink a few trial holes
to the depth required, and see what the clay is like all the way down, and
that no rocks are in the area that it is proposed to excavate, as getting rid of
even a few feet of these is an expensive process, and rock bottoms, as a rule,
do not hold water well. The first foot or so of top soil may not hold well at
first, but this is not of much consequence, as a little stocking w'ill soon tread
it down. Any man used to mining can go 12 or even 15 feet in good sinking
in a day; the shaft need only be big enough for him to work in, and the
earth can be thrown up until near the bottom.
In all cases it is advisable that a small silt tank should be made, into
which all drains shotdd flow, only the overflow from it being allowed to go
into the main excavation. These silt tanks can be cleaned out easily when
required; and they need not bo made too deep, say 5 to 6 feet. The drain
leading from the silt tank to the main tank should be stone-pitched and the
work continued right down the slope to the bottom to prevent the earth being
cut away; sometimes hollow logs are used to shoot the water clear of the
batters. Iron fluming is altogether too dear and quite unnecessary. In
making an artificial water supply', the depth is what should be aimed at; the
surface should be of as small an area as possible, consistent with facility for
watering stock and preserving the slopes. Very steep slopes are soon trodden
down, mud and clay falls in, and the shape of the excavation is spoiled.
This applies to tanks that are not fenced in and that stock are allowed
access to all round. Sheep only' should be watered at these, and the slopes
should not be less than 3 to 1. If made with bullocks, ploughs, and earth-
scoops, they' can be taken out at this grade all round, but 3 to 1 is too steep
for cattle and horses to water at.
All excavations intended to be used for large stock should be fenced in
and access given at one side only', which is generally' termed the roadway.
This should have a grade of from 4 to 1 to 5 to 1, and should be corduroyed
or stone-pitched—the latter is more lasting and safer in every way. This
can be done by' making an excavation 7 or 8 inches deep and filling in with
large stones placed on edge, and all interstices tightly wedged with spawl?
or small stones to an even surface and then blinded with gravel a few inchtfH


thick. The other slopes may then be graded to 2to 3, in order to make the
average depth as great as possible, and expose a small surface to the rays
of the sun. Evaporation and consequent loss of water is very great in the
summer, and is an important factor to be reckoned with.
Move all earth taken out at least 1 chain from the nearest edge of the
excavation, in order that it may not be trodden or washed back.
In making a dam, the earth should be placed neatly and the top made
sufficiently wide to allow 7 a cart to move safely along; the higher the dam
can be taken, providing a good base is secured, the better, as the surface of
the water is then protected against winds, which make little waves, and
thereby increase evaporation. In dam-making, the matter of providing a
sufficient get-away, or by-wash, is very important, and the greatest possible
flow of water should be provided for, as otherwise the work of many months
A Suggested Method of Water Conservation.
Showing a tank A, the water shed of which, WWW, is fenced off and kept free of stock. The water
is siphoned off into the trough B, located in the stock paddock.
may disappear in a few minutes, and a valuable supply of water be lost.
Of course, the by-wash must be on the lower side, and should not be too much
confined, but allowed a wide sweep. The end of the embankment near the
by-wash should be stone-pitched to prevent the earth being cut away and
gullies being formed, which, ere long, will give much trouble. An old water-
course well grassed over can often be used with much advantage. Where
sufficient water will not flow naturally into the excavation, drains should
be made, and, as before mentioned, should all flow' into the silt tank; these
drains should have a fall of not more than 6 inches to the chain, 4 inches
being generally sufficient to allow the water to run freely; if a greater fall
is allowed the drains will cut away and much rubbish will wash down into the
tank. An ordinary drain—that is, one that does not receive other drains,
but only carries the water collected in its own courser-might be made an
average depth of 1 foot, the bottom to be about 1 foot wide with slopes
1 to 1. A main drain—one that receives two or more laterals—of course.


ft.
ft.
sq. ft.
Top ... 60
X 60
- 4,800 tup area
Bottom ... 20
X 20
= 400 bottom area
40
X 50 X 4
= 8,000 middle area X 4
13,200
1 3,200 - 6
= 2,200
2,200 X 10 (depth) =
22,000 cubic feet
22,000-27 =
814-81 area
of tank in cubic yanK
should be made much wider. Width and not depth is the important feature
in drains. The junction of the sides with the bottom should not form an
angle, but should be rounded off.
When a dam or tank gets dry, the silt should he cleaned out at once, as the
opportunity may not occur again for a considerable time; this maintains the
depth and also keeps pure the next volume of water that flows in. Couch
grass may be sown with advantage on dam heads —it binds loose material
wonderfully and keeps it from frittering away. Before taking out any earth
and constructing the embankment, it is advisable to plough the surface on
which the latter is to rest about a foot deep, and, if this is of a very porous
nature, remove it and fill in with better material. As soon as the excavation
is complete, fence down the edges of the roadway and right across the bottom
before any water gets in.
There is, however, an advantage to be gained in excavating tanks not quite
in the lowest portion of a depression, but a little above it, so that the tank
may be securely enclosed, and the water drawn off automatically into a
trough by means of a siphon with a floating ball, as shown in the illustration
on the opposite page. This prevents pollution of the water by stock and is
also more economical in every respect.
Rule for Measuring Tanks.
Add together the top area and the bottom area, together with four times
the middle area. Divide result by 6, and multiply by the depth. If the
measurements are in feet divide by 27, and the result will then be the size of
the excavation in cubic yards. Thus: —
If it is desired to find the size before sinking, the length and breadth of
what the bottom will be on completion can be obtained thus: —This tank has
the top measurements 60 feet by 80 feet long; depth, 10 feet; slopes on
three sides 2 to 1, and on one side (the roadway) 4 to 1; in the breadth, 2 to 1
for 10 feet=2o feet; this on either side=4o feet. This subtracted from
60 feet leaves 20 feet in breadth at bottom. In the length on one side, 2 to 1
slopes x 10=20 feet; and on the remaining side, which is 4 to 1 by 10
feet deep,=4o feet. For both sides 60 feet to be taken off from 80 feet in
length of top. leaving 20 feet, thus 20 feet x 20 feet will be measurements of
bottom.


Tank-sinking in Western New South Wales.*
Careful observation of the methods of different men engaged on tank-
sinking reveals a great disparity both in the way in which the work is
done and in the expense. Some contractors do very well, whilst others admit
that, when working under similar conditions, they, perhaps, have just cleared
expenses. Employees when working together in the same tank show marked
differences in the ease with which they do their work. The horses or
bullocks are worked by some men in such a way that they hold their
condition, work without much apparent effort, and at the end of the day
show little evidence of fatigue; whereas others “knock themselves up,” as
Fig. 1.—Type of small scoop generally used.
well as their charges, and do not get through as much work. Apparently
an important adjustment of tackling has been, in the writer’s opinion, respon-
sible for the greater ease with which some men work than others.
Adjustment of Scoop.
The reader will observe that at the bottom of the scoop illustrated on page
203 are two rods of iron. These are termed the cradles. After being used
for some time, they wear very thin. At this time they should be removed,
and fresh cradles riveted on. Very frequently the writer has observed the
cradles missing altogether. With a moment’s reflection it must be admitted
that this is unwise. Where the scoop is drawn with the whole of the bottom
in contact with the ground, the friction is very much greater than when
gliding along on the rockers or cradles. The energy lost through the extra
load on the draught animals has to be replaced in the form of feed if the
animals are to hold their condition.
In the illustration the handles of the scoop arc, as usual, straight. On one
occasion a man using a quarter-yard scoop, who worked leisurely and yet
removed more earth than his mate who “ bustled,” was asked how he did it.
He pointed to the handle of his scoop, which was bent upwards; that of the
other scoop was straight. lie argued that he did not have to bend his back
bo much or use so much strength when filling and turning the full scoop
*O. J. Woollett. Stock Inspector, late of Cobar, now tit Tamworth, who wag
indebted to Mr. T. M. Cuniinins. District Works Officer. Dubbo. for much of the
information contained in this article, obtained, as it was. by watching Ids work.


over as the other man. As this performance would bo repeated very many
times in a day, it is not hard to conceive the force of his argument. A very
significant fact, too, is that he always got 10s. a week more than his mates
for this particular work. It must not be understood, however, that the above
Fig. 2. —Back of scoop showing cradles.
was the only recommendation about him, for he used his brains as well a*
his muscles, and thought about every step in his work. He also followed
the plan indicated in the following paragraph.
When scoops are new they are always bevelled upwards at the mouth, as
in Fig. 3a.
When scooping, the ground is always previously
ploughed or picked, unless very soft. By having
the mouth bevelled as in Fig. 3a, the draught is
always heavier when full than when it is as in
Fig. 3b. In the first case it takes more power on
the handle to raise the month of the filled scoop to
the surface, and then it “ bites,” and has a tendency
to work downwards. It requires not a little effort
Fig. 3
to keep the mouth up. When bevelled as in Fig. 3b, much less pressure on


the handle sends it up, and then it glides over the top of the loose earth
without any trouble, and the handle is not touched again until it is necessary
to empty the scoop.
When used for some time, the mouth of the scoop gets very thin, and it
buckles into all sorts of shapes. In such a condition unsatisfactory work is
done. To prevent the buckling, a piece of j-lnch x .'-inch steel is riveted
across the mouth, and bevelled as in Fig. 37a
Removing the Earth.
Care should be taken with the ploughing, as the scooping is done with
greater facility when the ground is ploughed at a uniform depth. The scoop-
does not then bob up and down, damaging the temper of the seooper and
giving him an occasional dig in the ribs.
The earth on which the embankment is to be built should first be ploughed,,
so that the soil placed on top will incorporate with it. If this is not done,
there is a risk that, should the water overflow the excavation, it will percolate
between the hard undisturbed soil and the soil of the bank. With this
“ weeping ” there is danger of a break-away in the embankment.
Lack of judgment on the part of tank-sinkers is often shown in the
method of depositing the dirt removed from the excavation. The first lot
scooped is generally placed near the margin of the excavation; so long as this
continues the horses or bullocks have to climb over the formed bank, dragging
the filled scoop behind them to the point where it is emptied at the back.
It must be very obvious that, considering the workmen and the strength of
the animals, the operations should bo reversed. The first earth removed
should be placed farthest back, and the embankment built from behind.
To increase the storage capacity of the tank the embankment should be
built well forward.
Drains.
Wide, shallow drains are much to be preferred to narrow, deep ones. A
drain 4 feet wide and 9 inches deep is much better than one 2 feet wide and
18 inches or 2 feet deep. With the wide, shallow drains the flow of water
is slower, and there is very little scouring. The silt removed from the
drains, of course, becomes deposited in the silt tank, and. when that becomes
full, in the main tank. This is a very important matter. For the same
reason, the drains should have a slight fall. Where scouring is likely to
take place in drains, the following method is very successful in preventing
it: —A trench about a foot wide and fS inches deep, and extending a couple
of feet each side of the drain, is dug across it. This is tilled with stones of
2or 3 inch gauge. The efficacy of this apron is seen along the roads in this
district. It could also be used on farm and station roads where there are
washaways. The time taken in making the apron is very short as compared
with that lost in travelling round deviations.
Where drains curve they should be widened; the sharper the curve the
more the width should be increased. By tills means there i< less likelihood
of the water overflowing. As a double safeguard, an embankment might be
placed ou the lower side.


Sometimes drains meet before reaching the tank. In addition to widening
the main drain at the confluence, they should be made to meet at an acute
angle, otherwise there will be considerable silting up, until ultimately the
water will find its way over the bank and be lost.
Measuring Drains.
Where the total length of drains runs to several miles, it is a very tedious
proceeding to measure them for payment of the contractor. A chain-tape is
generally used, but there is great risk of error. The following method of
measuring up road-work is very simple, yet accurate, and it could be applied
similarly in measuring drains, lines of fencing, &c., where it is possible to
drive in a straight line: —A piece of white paper is tied round a spoke of the
wheel of the buggy. The vehicle is then advanced until the wheel makes a
complete revolution. A mark having been made on the ground before start-
ing, the circumference of the wheel is easily measured. With two persons in
the vehicle, the counting is easily done whilst the driver steers a straight
course. The second man counts the revolutions, and when up to ten calls
aloud " ten.” The driver says “ one.” When another ten is reached, the
second man calls “ ten ” again, and the driver says “ two,” and so on.
To take an example:—Suppose the driver counts 43 and the other man has
6 —there are 430 revolutions. If the wheel is 14 feet 8 inches in circum-
ference, then the total distance is 0,3943 feet, or nearly 97 (drains.
The Hydraulic Ram on the Farm.*
The water supply, particularly on a dairy farm, is a very important matter,
not only for the animal economy, but also as an aid in keeping the dairy
premises clean and flushing drainage channels. Although the North Coast
usually' enjoys a splendid rainfall, ranging from 60 to 100 inches per annum,
there are times of the year when the water supplies attached to the home-
stead run short, and the necessary amounts have to be procured from neigh-
bouring creeks or springs. When the daily requirements have to be thus
obtained, a great deal of time and labour is involved.
In most of the hilly localities at the heads of the coastal rivers, and par-
ticularly in the volcanic Comboyne, Dorrigo, and Big Scrub districts, where
almost every valley has its creek or spring, and where there is usually
a sufficient fall in the ground, much time and labour might he saved by the
introduction of a simple but effective “ water raiser ” —the hydraulic ram.
By its use not only' could ample provision be made for the homestead supplies,
hut troughs could also be provided in neighbouring paddocks for stock nse,
thereby ensuring a pure supply, and helping very largely in keeping the
sources pure. When stock have access to streams whose flow is very limited,
there is always danger of pollution, and in too many instances the only water
available to the cattle is in these polluted watercourses or lagoons. It
is unnecessary' to refer to this subject more than to emphasise the necessity
(d providing all classes of farm stock with the purest of drinking waters if
they' are to be kept in a healthy' condition.
Tiie hydraulic ram is a machine capable of raising water by Itself to
almost any height and distance. The only thing necessary is a fall or head
♦ Oem-ge Mark-*, late Inspector of Agriculture. now Manager, Grafton
Experiment Farm.


of water. When properly adjusted, .U requires uo aUeiiuon <_>r oilmg, and
will work automatically day and night as long as there is an ample supply
to feed it.
The accompanying sketch will
serve to illustrate the working-
principles of the ram. Water
from the reservoir enters the in-
let pipe, A. Attached to this
pipe is a dome-shaped cylinder
containing air, with a valve open-
ing inwards at 11. At the ex-
treme end of the inlet pipe is
The Hydraulic Ram.
another valve, opening inwards, at C. The discharge pipe is shown at F.
The valve at C is weighted so that it will open when the water in the
inlet pipe at B is at rest. To adjust this, the vertical height of the water
from the reservoir has to be taken into consideration. As the water enters
it commences to flow out through the valve which is open at C. The force
of this flow is sufficient to carry the valve up against its seat, and the
momentum caused through this flowing column of w T ater being suddenly
checked is sufficient to open the valve at D, through which a quantity enters
until the pressure is relieved, when the valve C opens again, and valve D
closes. Water again flows through the outlet valve C, until it is again
closed and more water ascends through I). This action goes on repeatedly.
The air in the dome-shaped cylinder is compressed, as shown at E, and this
compression forces the water through the outlet pipe, F. The valves work
automatically, being regulated by the flow and pressure of the water, and
will continue to work without attention as long as the water supply is main-
tained in the reservoir and the machine is in good order.
By this machine a portion of the water that flows into the ram is forced
through the delivery pipe, and cun be raised to a considerable height—the
height depending upon the head, and length and size of inlet and delivery
pipes. The surface of the water in the reservoir should be kept constant,
so that the pressure against the valve C shall be uniform. Any undue
differences in the height of this supply will materially affect the working of
this valve, and impair the efficiency of the ram.
The quantity of water a ram will deliver varies under different conditions,
but it may be taken as a general rule that one-seventh part of the water
which enters the ram can be raised and discharged four times as high as the
fall applied. Thus a fall of 10 feet would raise one gallon out of every seven
entering the ram 40 feet high, or half a gallon 80 feet high.
The inlet or drive pipe, A, leading from the supply in the reservoir, should
be from 50 to 200 feet in length, according to the work required. It should
also bo three-fourths as long as the height the water has to be raised. For
example, to force water to a vertical height of 100 feet, the drive pipe should
be 75 feet in length.
The delivery pipe, F, may bo almost any length horizontally, but should
not be more than five to ten times higher than the fall applied to the ram.
When there is a fall of, say, 10 feet, the vertical height of delivery pips


should be from 50 to 100 feet higher than the rain. The fall should, there-
fore, be from five to ten times less than the height to which the water has to
be raised. If, for example, it is necessary to raise the water 100 feet high,
the fall or head applied to the ram should bo from 10 to 20 feet.
A ram will work successfully where the source or reservoir is only 3 feet
above its own level, but the greater the height, or head, the more powerfully
will the ram operate, and its ability to force water to a greater distance and
elevation will correspondingly increase. Where, however, the requisite
quantity of water is forthcoming from a ram under a certain head, it is not
wise to increase this, for by so doing an extra strain is put upon the
ram, those parts doing the work are unduly overtaxed, and the durability
of the machine is thereby considerably lessened.
The weight of the volume of water in the inlet pipe is an important
auxiliary in forcing water into the air-chamber and through the delivery
pipes. When heavy lifts are required, the length of the inlet pipe may bn
advantageously increased, or where this is not practicable the pipe may be
bent in a coil of 6 or 7 feet diameter.
The relative height of the spring or supply above the ram, and the height
to which it is required to have it raised, determine the relative proportions
of the water raised and that wasted. The quantity raised also varies accord-
ing to the height it is conveyed, and the distance the water has to be
conducted. The consequent length of pipe will exert some influence on the
quantity delivered at the point of discharge, as the greater the length of
piping through which the water has to be forced, the more friction there is
to overcome. When it is necessary to use elbows or make bends in the pipes,
it is always advisable to have them as large as possible, so as not to interfere
unduly with the free flow 7 of the water. Any acute bend should be carefully
avoided.
The size of the delivery pipe should always be much smaller than the inlet
or feed pipe. For instance, a ram having a 2-inch diameter inlet pipe would
require an inch delivery pipe; a 4-inch pipe w r ould require a 2-ineh delivery;
and so on.
In fixing a ram, it is always essentia] that it be set perfectly level, and
firmly secured to solid wood, or preferably bolted to a concrete foundation.
There is a constant concussion and strain upon the ram, and unless it is
securely and properly set, it will speedily get out of position and render
unsatisfactory service. In too many instances the ram is secured to a
temporary support and held in position chiefly by the pipe connections,
which in course of time invariably w 7 ork out of position. In districts where
frosts are prevalent, the ram and pipes should be carefully protected from
frosts. The ram and source of supply should also be fenced off, so that there
will be neither pollution by stock nor interference with the connections.
At the end of the inlet pipe a strainer should be fitted, so as to prevent
access of any rubbish or leaves that would interfere with the working of the
ram. A suitable race is also required for the free get-away of the waste
water from the ram.
The two accompanying sketches illustrate how water is obtained and
supplied to the ram on a Forth Coast farm, and also how it is reticulated
to serve the requirements of the owner.


The Hydraulic Ram. General arrangement.
Sketch showing location of ram and pipes, Mr. C. S. Bell's farm, Tweed River.


The Hydraulic Ram.
Arrangement of Water Suppy at Mr. C. S. Bell’s farm, Tweed River.


SOIL DRAINAGE.*
Most farmers have at some time or other found that badly-drained soils
grow but indifferent crops. They are, as a matter of fact, not worth
cultivating. The resulting crop is usually such a poor one that it does not
pay to plough, cultivate, and sow this class of land unless it has been properly
drained, notwithstanding that these undrained soils contain an abundance of
moisture and a sufficiency of plant-food, though mostly in an unavailable
form.
Advantages of Draining.
Drainage has an intimate relation to soil moisture. It is quite a false
idea to hold that drainage dries a soil out; its effect is quite the contrary.
It is only the superfluous moisture, which would otherwise remain stagnant
in the soil, and prevent the free circulation of air, that is removed by
drainage.
A well-drained soil, whether so artificially or naturally, acts as a reservoir
for the storage of moisture. Such soils are porous and well aerated, and they
are capable of holding more water in a capillary form than undrained soils.
Another advantage which drained soils possess over undrained soils is,
that plants grown on drained land are encouraged to root deeply, and are,
consequently, better able to withstand adverse conditions. In undrained
soils, the root system is shallow, thus limiting the feeding area of the plant.
Furthermore, such soils are cold in the spring and the growth is backward.
But, perhaps, the most important aspect of the drainage question is that
relating to soil fertility. The soil contains millions of tiny forms of bacterial
life, necessary to make certain essential plant-foods available. This bacterial
life cannot exist and perform its functions except under certain conditions of
warmth and air. In an undrained soil these conditions are not present,
consequently badly-drained soils may be said to be “ dead,” whereas a sweet
and more porous soil is teeming with these minute micro-organisms, which
play such an important part in the production of plants.
Surface drainage does not, as a rule, act as effectively as under-drainage.
By employing under-drainage, the water, sinking through the soil by
gravitation, carries with it a large mass of useful materials in the shape
of plant-food, which, for the most part, remains when the surplus water is
removed by drainage, to be afterwards made use of by the plants. Such,
however, is not the case with surface drainage where the surplus water,
flowing near the surface, carries away with it particles of materials which
might become plant-food, but arc thus lost.
Cheap and Effective Drains.
On many farms one finds patches of from 5 to 20 or more acres of
undrained and sour land, which the farmer does not think worth cultivating,
and which, in fact, if cultivated, would hardly give any return. Still these
patches can easily be reclaimed, sweetened, and, by an inexpensive system
of drainage, be made a source of profit and an asset to the farm.
* 11. Hess, Chief Inspector of Agriculture.


Often farmers eauuot afford a system of drainage with pipe- or lilea, and
frequently the value of the land does not warrant such an expenditure; but
cheap and thoroughly effective drains may be constructed in the following
manner: —•
After the natural fall of the land to be drained has been ascertained, a
trench 1 foot wide and 2 feet 6 inches deep is dug. Into this trench, to a
depth of from 9 to 12 inches, saplings of any length, from I to 0 inches in
diameter, are thrown. On top of this is placed brushwood to a depth of about
5 inches, and then the excavated earth is scooped back level with the surface
of the land, as shown in the sketch.
A cheap drain.
The water to be drained off will be found to percolate freely through the
spaces between the saplings. The brushwood (bracken fern or similar
undergrowth) prevents the earth from falling into the space filled with
timber. As the earth is scooped back to a depth of 12 inches, the drain does
not interfere with the ploughing, &c., whereas if it had been left open it
would hamper the working of the land. Besides this, the aides of open
drains are constantly breaking loose, thus interfering with and blocking the
watercourse.
The writer has at various times constructed drains of this description,
at a minimum expenditure, and they have invariably proved effective and
durable.
FARM BUILDINGS.
Of the buildings that must bo regarded as a part of every well equipped
farm, the residence is the first to be thought of, and eventually it is also the
most important, affecting, as it does, the comfort and convenience of every
one. The building erected in the first instance on many holdings in Aus-
tralia is of a very temporary character, and often it is so inconveniently
designed as to be of little use in the more commodious and permanent


structure that follows it within a tew years. Sometimes the original building:
has to be abandoned as a place ol residence, and a new site chosen; more
often one detached structure js erected after another until the home is
simply a cluster of small buildings that have little appearance and that
increase the labours of the housewife.
Design for a Farmer’s Cottage Residence.*
Some time ago a correspondent of the Department commented on the
absence of a good ground plan that would enable a farmer to build a few
rooms first, and to add others as required, until a really attractive cottage-
had been obtained on a complete design.
In offering the accompanying plans fora farm homo residence, one that can
be erected as it were by instalments, the fact that it is necessary to make
the job look finished at the completion of each section has been kept in
view. The roof can be gabled and finished with a simple barge-board,
which will give a finished appearance. Another and a very important point-
nowadays, the cost of construction, has also been carefully considered.
A large house, such as this would be when complete, must cost a
fair sum to erect, the average cost per room usually being from =£l2o lo £l4O,
according to locality and finish, and including verandahs, laundry, bath and
store rooms, which are considered as being provided in all plans.
The rooms here shown are of fair average dimensions, but without
alteration of the design they can be enlarged—for instance, the dining
and sitting rooms could be made wider from front to back, and so could
the back hall if desired.
Material.
Provision is made for the use of light material, but the building would
still be strong and durable. Of course, any heavier materials may be used,
such as bricks, stone, or concrete, but it has to be remembered that the build-
ing may be erected in a district miles from rail or wharf, where the cost of
cartage would be a considerable item. Then, again, with such material fewer
tradesmen may be employed at the work ; in fact, a good carpenter could do
the bulk of it. For the foundations, wood blocks may be used, but, as the
chimneys and fireplaces have to be of brickwork, the house would lie more
comfortable in winter, and the job would look better, if a close foundation wall
were provided on the outside, with brick piers under the internal walls.
The walls are shown to be of wood frame, covered externally to a height
of 3 feet 6 inches with weatherboards, and the remainder wirh fibro-ceruent
sheets.
Internally the covering would be of fibro-cement 4 feet high, and wood
veneer sheeting above, with ceilings of the same material, and the whole
finished as panelled work, with fillets covering the joints of the sheets. This
materia] is strong when fixed, and can ho finished in either paint or varnish,
and makes a good class of work at a reasonably low cost.
* A. Brooks, Works Overseer.


NORTH EAST ELEVATION


For such rooms as the bath mom, larder, kitchen, laundry, and store-room
fibro-cemont sheeting would be fixed internally the full height of walls.
The roof may also be covered with slates of this material, which are now
extensively used, and are proving satisfactory,but the galvanizeddron roof is
the most lasting, and, therefore, in back-country districts, where repair work
requires to be avoided as much as possible, the iron roof is recommended.
By coating it with one of the roof-coating paints, and providing good
ventilation and boarding under the battens, it is a cool roof. Of course, a
good pitch must be given to the roof,
Ventilation of the rooms can be provided for by inserting gratings on the
outer face of the walls at the floor level, and about 6 inches under the ceilings,
also on the inner face in each room at about 4 inches under the ceilings.
Larger openings must be made in the foundation walls, having strong wire-
netting on frames, affording not only provision for ventilation, but (as a
further precaution against the white ant) also for the admission of light.
The foundations under the whole building should be lime-washed, and the
ground surface left properly cleaned up. A door opening should be provided
at the most convenient position for gaining admission under the building to
inspect when desired.
Progress of the Building.
The first part to be erected might be that indicated on the plan by open lines,
viz.: —The sitting-room (which may be used as a best bedroom), the dining-
room, kitchen, larder, No. 1 bedroom, and back verandah, which provides
space 13 feet x 10 feet 6 inches for sleeping out purposes, and the verandah
continued round the back. The probable (pre-war) cost of this section would
be about £650, This afterwards covers in the laundry, porch, and store-room,
which would be the second portion to be erected, as indicated by blocked-in
lines, and finally' the extra bedrooms, permanent bath-room, and enclosed
court-yard, as shown by hatched lines, which would complete the residence.
The probable cost of this work before the war would be. £1,050 to £1,350,
according to the materials used and the locality, the lower figure being the
probable cost for the work being done with the lighter materials specified,
and near the railway at about 250 miles from Sydney.
For the first section of the house, three 1,000 gallon tanks would probably
be sufficient, but, as soon as possible, there should be provided an underground
tank, with either a hand or a windmill pump to raise the water to an elevated
tank to supply all requirements.
The whole drainage should be conducted into a small septic tank set about
2 chains from the house, and delivering the effluent into the vegetable garden
or other cultivation. These tanks can now be had in various sizes from the
State Monier Concrete Works read}' to set in position and connect to the
drain pipes.
The Roof Plan.
A plan of the roof, showing the lines of construction, as when the building
would be completed, is also supplied. If a section only of the building is
required, the roof should be hipped at the point to be continued, so that the
materials can be used again in the extension.






It should be not"d that the plan -how.- the rafter- at 18-inch centre- us
for a tile covering, but if corrugated iron is to be used, one half of this
number would be sufficient, i.e., at G-feet centres.
AN ATTRACTIVE RURAL HOME.
In the Agricultural Gazette for May, 1912, illustrations were given of a
house at Manilla, of which it was said - the home has more the appearance of
a suburban villa than of a farmer’s residence as the latter term is too
commonly understood.”
At that time Mr. Packham, who has a wheat farm of GOO acres at Cherry
Hill, Garra, was contemplating the building of a new residence; he con-
sidered that of several that had appeared in the Gazette that of Mr.
McDonald, at Manilla, most closely conformed to his notions of comfort and
attractiveness.
He, however, decided upon certain minor modifications, and a fair idea of
the result may be gathered from the illustrations here given.
Mr. James Packham’s Residence at Garra.
The materials used were cement concrete blocks made on the site, as suit-
able sand for this purpose was available about a mile distant. The dimen-
sions of these blocks wore 24 in. x S in. x 8 in., and the cost was about a
quarter less than that of bricks, although these could be obtained about T
miles away at Molong.
The internal partitions are of smooth concrete blocks G inches thick,
plastered on the inside.
Hr. Packham has evidently built with a view to permanence, and his
experience of the house so far fully complies with all his anticipation*.


PLAN OF NEW HOMESTEAD
OT GARRA for M r LAMES PACKHANM


FARM BUILDINGS AT GLEN INNES EXPERIMENT FARM.
The Department of Agriculture in 1910 completed a set of buildings at
Glen limes Experiment Farm, designed by Mr. Adam Brooks, Works
Overseer of the Department. The plans were drawn with a view to meeting
the requirements of a Government Experiment Farm of 1,050 acres, devoted
to mixed farming and experiment work, on the New England highlands,
and at which a number of students arc instructed in the principles of agri-
culture. It cannot be expected that these will form type plans exactly
suitable for farmers in all parts of the State, but it is felt that many land-
holders will benefit by way of suggestion by the publication, of complete plans
and specifications of some of the farm buildings, which may be varied to suit
the individual locality, the lines of farming being followed, and the materials
available. The approximate cost to the Department is given in each case; but
in other localities the prices of materials will be found to vary considerably,
and there are many portions of the State where such buildings could have
been erected much more cheaply. For instance, there is no hardwood timber
in the vicinity of Glen Innes, the native timbers being chiefly white gum and
peppermint. The hardwood used in these buildings had to be carted 36
miles to the farm. Again, the coarse basalt metal which had to he used for
making the concrete necessitated a large proportion of sand, in order that the
cement should bind. The proportions actually used were 1 yard metal,
i yard sand, and 3 bags of cement, to make a cubic yard of concrete. Sand
had to be brought from the Mann River, 16 miles away, and cost 13s. a
cubic yard. The price will, of course, prevent concrete from being largely
used in the Glen Innes district, but in other localities the cost of materials
wmuld be very much more reasonable. The sharp rises that have taken place
in connection with both labour and material since 1910 have also to bo
allowed for in all parts of the State, of course.
The buildings of "which the pflans and specifications are given are the
stables, barn, coach-house, and shearing shed, all under one roof; the imple-
ment shed and foreman’s storeroom combined; and the hayshed. All the
buildings are on concrete foundations, and have cement floors, with the
exception of the stalls in the stable, which are partly of wood blocks laid
on cement.
The Stables Block.
Two special features of the stables block are the facilities afforded for
feeding the horses, and the fact that the barn may be readily converted into
a shearing shed. The latter is only a temporary arrangement at the Experi-
ment Farm, but the design as it stands is suitable for a small mixed farm,
where it is desired to save the expense of a shearing shed. Of course, a little
extra trouble would be involved in clearing the barn at shearing time.
Chute doors for the sheep and shearing machine fittings are provided in
the barn, and yards are constructed outside the buildings in the ordinary way.
The beam carrying the shearing machine shafting was fixed directly on
to the framework of the outer wall; but on account of the vibration caused,
it "was found necessary to securely fix, at the driving end, a 6 inch x 5 inch
hardwood diagonal stay, from the height of the beam to a sill piece on the
ground, the two being securely bolted together. This has proved quite
satisfactory.


A chuff silo and grain bins are provided in the angle of the building and
under the same roof. This enables the feed to be distributed both ways
along the feeding passages into the mangers, it is not necessary to go in
among the horses to fill the mangers.
The floor of the chaff silo is raised 2 feet above the passage flour. A truck
is run underneath the floor of the silo at the door through which the chaff
is emptied and distributed from the truck into the mangers.
The grain bins are constructed inside the silo, and filled from the grain
elevators on the barn floor. The bins distribute their contents into three
separate hoppers, from which the grain is taken to the mangers.
In warmer climates, where it may not be necessary' to completely house the
stock, the wall at the heel-posts need not be erected, posts to carry the roof
being sufficient. This will considerably reduce the cost of the building.
Specification for Stables Block.
Approximate cost (in 1910), £660.
Footings. —To be about 18 inches deep by 9 inches thick, standing 6 inches
above floor level, with ji-inch bolts bedded in, as shown on detail, and where
marked with dots on ground plan. The crank head of bolts to bo lengthways
in wall.
Sills. —Set 9 in. x 0 in. sills To all gates and doorways; at sliding
doors to stand g inch below floors; all others flush, and tilted » inch out-
wards. All door studs to butt down on to sills, and the ends of bottom
plates housed | inch into back of door studs, (See detail of doors.)
Framing. —Corner studs to be tenoned through top halving of bottom
plates and lower halving- of top plates; all others through both plates, 1 inch
thick tenons. All window and door trimmers tenoned through and housed
inch into studs. Diagonal braces, wherever practicable, to be sunk flush
into outer face of studs, and squared off' and hutted at ends as shown.
1 Vails. —Walls of chaff silo to have 3 in. x 1 in, cut in between studs
at 35 inch centres, flush on inside face of studs, to provide nailing for edges
of plain iron. Head of coach-house doors to be ti in. x 3 in. on edge set
flush on outer face. Cover the outside of studs with weatherboards, finishing
at angles against 3 in. x If in. batten fillets, and 1) inch jamb linings to
all doors and windows. Cover inside of walls of chaff silo with plain iron,
fixed to studs and 3 in. x f in. battens with clout nails,
Windows. —Shutters on barn wall to be ledged and pivot-hung on wrought-
iron pivots I e & _c made of j-ineli round iron flattened out to screw' to
shutters, round ends working in the jambs. Sills to be of 5 in, x 2 in.
J [ stuff, sloping, with flat piece planted on inside acting as a stop
/d for shutter. Stable windows to he as shown, with glass over
transom and fixed louvres; sills of 7 in, x 3 in. stuff.
Doors. — Loose-box doors to he ledged and hinged in two halves, upper and
Lover, as shown. The joint to be bevelled, so that the upper half, when
fastened on the outside, secures the lower half.
Coach-house doors to be framed, ledged. braced, and sheeted, rebated and
headed on meeting styles, secured with monkey-tailed bolt into top rail inside
and hasp and pun out-ide. Set into ground where marked on plan, 5 in. x


5 in. stumps rounded on tops and with hooks to secure doors when open.
Sliding doors to be framed and sheeted. Doors to be hung with top rollers
running on 1-inch iron bar, and against similar bar at bottom, flush with
floor ami lixed to inside edge of sills. fSee detail.) Bottom ’ *
guide iron to he sunk into top of sill at dosing side of doors, hoot-strap
on bottom end of styles, | in. x i in. iron, to run against bottom bar on
sills.
Fastenings. —Secure ledge-doors with chain pin and staple; sliding doors
with 0-inch pad bolt fixed on the jambs.
Transoms. —Transoms over .stable doors to ho as shown in detail; 3 in.
x 1 in. battens on outer face fixed upright at 1| inches apart. Rail to take
iron bar for top rollers to be made to suit and fixed on inside of transom and
across studs.
Chute Doors. —To bo under shutters, made of three T. ami G, boards lodged
and hung with T hinges and secured inside with tower bolts (no jamb linings).
Stalls. —To be constructed as shown on section, with S inch x S inch,
chamfered on corners J inch each way and pointed on top. leaving J inch
blunted. The bottom rail 6 in. x 4 in. on edge, set on floor, grooved and
chamfered on top edge to receive 11-inch T. and G. boards; 4 in. x 3 in.
rail on top of the boards, mortised on top at about 4 inch centres to receive
11-inch square balusters, fixed into groove of upper rail. 4 in. x 3 in. flat,
rounded on top.
Floors of Stalls. —Floors of stalls to be wood-block paving, laid in hot
tar and pitch, and sloping back 2 inches to cement gutter at outside face
of heel-posts, Mangers to he galvanized iron, shaped as shown, with flanged
edges, secured to under side of rails. Top of manger rails to be 3 feet
3 inches over floor of stall. Mangers of stalls towards barn to be supported
on struts from front rail to bottom plate, as shown on section; on the others
the inner rail is to run through the 11-inch boarded divisions. Dividing bars
in loose boxes to lie supported at head posts with hook and eye, and hung
from collar tie with rope. Studs at a■ i " 7~ p
end stalls to be weatherboard, 7 feet ' U 1
high.
Roof. —To be pitched and hipped as shown, except over stalls against the
barn, which form a lean-to to the barn roof. Rafters at 3 feet centres, over
alternate studs; collar ties to each pair, and 4 tie beams where indicated over
barn. Cover spaces between feet of rafters on chaff silo roof only with wire
netting. Set in roof lights, as indicated on plan, trimming battens as
required. Battens for flat roof to be 3 in. x 11- in., others 3 in, x 1 in,, fixed
at about 32-inch centres.
Chaff Silo. —Walls framed and covered externally as already specified,
and internally with plain galvanized iron. Floor to be raised 2 feet above
stable floor, constructed with 5 in. x 2 in., notched J inch into studs to take
ends of joists, and 6 in. x 3 in. centre bearer, supported at centre on
concrete pier. Trim opening 3 feet 2 inches wide under door in passage to
take feed tank, 3 feet wide, under joists. Bottom of tank to be 12 inches
under floor level, set on eon Crete. Door to be fitted with small sliding
shutter on face, sufficiently large to allow shovelling through, at floor level.
Beave opening under ridge-board iu wall, over grain bins, to admit head of
chaff, elevator, as will be directed.




Corn Bins. —To bo constructed as .diown .h, n.-ciioa detail, divided into
three compartments. Opening at top ol front to he (i ±’<;et h inches long,
with shutter opening inwards to head of elevator. Opening at bottom full
length to allow grain to fall into feed-boxes. Cover of these may be in one
or three lengths.
Note. —Ceiling over passage-way to be covered with galvanized roofing
iron, 2d gauge, S-feet sheets, fixed to plate- us shown at each end, and
.secured on joints with 2-inch roofing bolts.
Galvanized Iron Wort'. —Cover roofs, allowing double lap at sides, and
G inches at ends, fitting close to ridge- and hip-, and fixing with plenty or
screws and washers.
Where stable roof butts against silo walls, beat out fiat and turn edge ot
iron np at least 4 inches against studs and under weatherboards, fixing to a
batten sunk flush on the rake of roof. Fix guttering with one bracket to
each rafter; joints soldered both sides, and riveted on bottom with two rivets
each joint. All outlets to down-pipes to be domed over with .Cinch wore
netting. Down-pipes to be as will be arranged for tank-.
Flash round finial with plain iron tacked to flnial, sunk flush and painted.
Fix ridging to battens parallel with hips, boxing in open ends of rolls, and
turn flanges under eaves of iron.
Painter. —Paint the whole of the weatherboards with red oxide and
Venetian red mixed; the jamb linings and foot of rafters cream colour; the
doors, gates, shutters, &c., olive green. Doors only to he painted inside.
Cement Floors. —The whole of the floors, except the raised floor of silo,
to be laid with 4 inches thick concrete, laid in convenient separate sections,
and finished with 4 inch thick top-dressing. Joints of sections to be arrised
•off, forming V-joints between blocks. Concrete under wood-blocking of stall
floors to be without top dressing, and kept low enough to take 1 inch of
sand under blocks. Floors of stalls to be laid with 4 inches long 6 in. x 3 in.
hardwood blocks, ends up, on sand bed, dipped in hot tar, and laid close
together.
Harness Fittings. —Fit np saddle and other harness racks as will be directed,
to be fixed on studs of outer walls and head-posts.
Manure Pit. —Construct walls and floor of manure pit where shown, of
either dj-inch brickwork in cement rendered on inside, or of 6-inch thick
concrete, external corner bevelled off as shown.
Drains. —Open gutters on floor of stable as indicated, leading into traps
and to 4-inch earthenware pipes to manure pit. Gutters and drains indicated
on ground plan.
Specification for Implement Shed and Store-room.
Approximate cost (in 1010), £l2O.
Foundation. —To be of concrete TJ- inches thick, flush on inside of framing.
Posts. —To bo charred on bottom ends to 3 inches over the ground. Two
to be plated and strutted as shown.
Tops to be scarfed to receive 6 in, x 4 in. top plate, and bolted with
I-inch bolts. Struts under plate to be toed into post and plate.
Door-sill. —Sill to store-room door to be 9 in. x 4 in. hardwood.


training. To be similar to other building, 5 in. \ 3 in. bottom plates,
5 in. x i ; in. top plates, 5 in. x 5 in. corner studs, windows trimmed
with 8 in. x 2 in. sills pitched as shown, and 5 in, x 2 in. heads.
Door studs 5 in. x 5 in., shaped t« take ledge door in two halves,
hung on hinges. Over transom to he filled in with 3 in. x 1 in. spaced
1 inch apart. Diagonal braces 3 in. x 1 in. sunk flush.
Roof. —Constructed with 5 in, x 2 in. rafters and collar ties, 3 only;
C in. x 2J in. tie-beams; S in. x 1-J in. ridge, and 8 in. x 1J in. hips.
The length of rafter to suit two 7 feet sheets of iron with 6 inch lap at
centre.
Iron. —To he fixed with double lap at side, and 34 inches into gutters.
Gutters. —To be fixed to brackets, one on each rafter, falling to down-pipes
on back wall.
Floor. —Store-room only to be concrete, top dressed, about 4 inches thick,
laid with slight fall to door, finishing ]- inch below sill.
Windows. —Two in store-room to be double hung in ordinary box frames;
the others to he as shown on detail of stable louvre window's.
Specification of Hayshed.
Approximate cost (in 1910), £llO.
Posts. —To be spaced at 12 feet 6 inch centres, sunk about 5 feet into
the ground, and charred from the bottom to 0 inches over the ground level.
The four comer posts to be cross-footed and strutted; the centre posts footed
and strutted across thg building only.
Posts and struts to be toed into sole pieces.
Heads of posts to be scarfed to receive 0 in. x 24 in. rafters, and
notched to receive foot of G in. x 2J in. hardwood struts, the latter to stand
in the centre of the pjost and to be scarfed If- inch on to side of rafter.
Xote.— The lug on the head of the posts should be 2 inches more than
half the thickness of post, which allows for | inch to be taken out of the
rafters.
Rafters. —To be halved together at top, notched I inch deep at post
heads and | in. x 2 in. for 5-inch purlins. Short rafters to take gutter
brackets.
Braces. —G in. x 1J in. scarfed 4 inch deep at centre crossing and at each
rafter, including the foot at post heads.
Bolts. —4-inch bolt, nut, and washer to all crossings.
Purlins. —3 in. x 2 in. and 5 in. x 2 in., as shown, supported with cleats
spiked on to rafters.
Braces. —3 in. x 2 in, diagonal braces, on flat, halved and sunk flush into
top edge of purlins and butted at post heads and top purlin.
Closed End. —Till in one end only, with 4 in. x 24 in. cross rails, sunk
flush into face of centre post and the ends into centre of outer posts, and
covered over with S-feet vertical iron, including gable close up to roof iron.
Dressing. —Take good arrises oil all sawn timbers.
Eaves Gutter. — To be fixed to deliver w-ater into down-pipe at enclosed
gable end.






ASH C3NCRETE.
Portland cement concrete is an artificial compound, generally made by
mixing cement, stone, sand, and water together in such proportions as will
form a solid conglomerate.
To make the strongest and heaviest concrete, the stone must be hard,
rough, and somewhat porous, affording a rough surface to which the cement
mortar will readily adhere.
Technically the stone is called the aggregate, and the mortar made from
the sand, cement, and water is known as the matrix.
For many classes of work, such as small farm buildings, cottages, floors,
surface drains, &c., heavy concrete is not necessary, and for such purposes
there arc other materials that provide a suitable aggregate. Amongst these
is the ash, generally a waste product obtainable from coke ovens, foundries,
gasworks, and railway loco, sheds. This is generally found to be of a
mixture that requires only the addition of the cement and water to make
good concrete. Generally speaking, however, it is found desirable to add a
proportion of sand, as it is always safer to have a little too much than too
little matrix in the mixture. All materials used in the manufacture of
concrete must be clean, and free from any vegetable matter.
Sand that is of a loamy nature, although good for mortar, is not suitable
for concrete; for which purpose it should be sharp and gritty. The quality
of the cement is assured, and may be procured with the certificate of the
Government tester attached. The local manufacture is equal in quality to
the best imported cements, and for convenience is put up in bags containing
about 128 lb. It would, however, be much more convenient if it were put up
in bags containing exactly 1 cubic foot, as all concrete is mixed by measure.
Until it is to be used the cement must be kept perfectly dry; as it is very
sensitive to even slight moisture, it should be laid on planks or boards
raised a few inches from the ground, so that the air can pass freely under it.
Often it will be found that a bag of cement out of the stack will have
become apparently solid, from pressure only. This does not injure it in
the least, as it is quite easily knocked into powder again; but if the
hardening is due to moisture it is quite useless —not even fit to be broken
up and used with the aggregate.
When water is added to cement it becomes pasty, and will remain so for
about twenty minutes (if not exposed to the sun); after this time it begins
to harden or set. To disturb it after this has taken place weakens the
mixture, and to do so after it has set destroys it altogether. It should not,
during the first five or six days after setting, be exposed to the hot sun or
wind, hut if possible be shaded and wetted at least twice daily. If this he
done the concrete will be thoroughly hard all through; while if not, it will
become chalky, easily damaged, and appear to have insufficient cement in
the mixture.
Mixing Platform and Gauge Boxes.
Having selected the proper materials, the next step is to provide the
plant and tools for mixing, and these should be just as carefully attended to.
* A. Brooks. Works Overseer, Department of Agriculture.
t 37299—H


For instance, it is of little use to have clean sand and water if the concrete
is to be mixed up on the bare ground, whore it is certain that the earth will
be picked up with the shovels and mixed with the concrete.
It is absolutely necessary to have a clean wooden floor or platform lor
mixing on, and this may be of boards from If inches thick and about 9 inches
wide, laid solid on a thin bed of sand, and close at the joints. If the boards
are a little open they should be filled up with a poor quality of mortar before
the mixing is started. On one side and end of the platform a board, say
6 inches wide, should be sot up on edge to prevent the materials spreading
off the boards.
A handy size for ordinary work would bo 10 or 12 feet long by 8 foot
wide, and it should bo laid level on the surface, and as handy to the work
as possible. To ensure the correct proportions of materials in each batch
gauge boxes should bo made of the size to hold the quantities specified for
each mixing. These boxes should have sides and ends only so that they can
be lifted, and allow the contents to fall out on to the platform.
A good water supply is absolutely essential, and where it cannot he laid
to a point near the mixing board by means of pipes from a storage tank,
It should be in an open-top tank sunk into the ground, so that the water can
be dipped out with buckets.
Miscellaneous Tools.
In addition to the mixing board and the measuring boxes, the following
tools are required for hand mixing;—
Two Xo. 3 square-mouth shovels.
One deep-bodied wheelbarrow.
One garden rake.
Two 2-gallon water buckets.
One 4-gallon watering-can.
Light rammers for packing the concrete.
Where the water is laid on, a length of rubber hose is useful.
Method of Mixing.
The ashes should first be measured on the board, and the heap spread
out to about 3or 4 inches thick. Then the sand and cement should be mixed
together separately, and afterwards spread over the whole area of the ashes.
The whole should then be turned over in shovelfuls, and as the shovel is
turned it should bo dragged towards the feet of the mixer, which causes the
materials to be more properly mixed. It may bo mentioned that concrete
cannot be too well mixed. Usually the materials are turned over twice
while dry and twice while being wetted. The watering is best done by means
of the watering-can, although this requires an extra hand on the board, and
to do the mixing properly three hands are required. There are a number
of different machines in use for mixing concrete, but it does not pay to use
them unless the job is a large one.
When mixed the concrete should be loaded into the wheelbarrow, taken to
the work, and carefully placed in the moulds, or wherever it is to be used,
and lightly tamped in.


Fig. 1.—Plan showing position of stumps, posts, and boxing ready for concrete.
ASH CONCRETE FOR USE ON THE FARM.


Ash concrete should not be made too wet, but just enough to make it pack
solidly together, by using the rammers lightly, when it will be noted that the
water will come to the surface. A fair idea of the correct consistency may
be had if a handful is pressed and retains its ball-like shape when the
pressure is released.
Forms or Moulds for Concrete.
Concrete is a plastic material, and before it hardens takes the shape of
anything against which it is placed, so that the making of the forms or
moulds is a most important item in the success of the job.
Almost any material that will support its weight will serve as a form.
For instance, in trenches made for foundations it will be found that the
earth sides are sufficient to hold the concrete up to the ground line.
When an extremely smooth finish is desired galvanized iron is used, and
these are more easily cleaned and last longer than wooden moulds. But
timber is more often used, and where we require scantling sizes for the
frame-work of roofs and ceilings, and boards for the floors, these can be
used to build the forms with, and afterwards used for their special purpose.
In this way there is no extra cost for material for the forms.
They should be correctly planned and carefully made, and with good
joints, otherwise difficulties will be met with when they have to be taken down.
For ordinary work, such as the walls of cottages, dairies, stables, &c., there
is no necessity for any heavy framing, but simply studs at each corner and
angle of the walls, so placed as to form guides for the ends of the boards
to slide between. On the lower ends of these studs a short piece is attached,
forming a break, equal to the projecting distance of the footing course
beyond the walls.
Where the building is only a small one, such as a separating room for a
dairy, this may be omitted, and the studs put straight into the ground, in
which case when the frame is removed holes the size of the studs will be in
the foundation, which can afterwards be filled up; but for larger buildings
the foundations should not bo so cut into.
Details of Construction.
The accompanying plans (Figs. 1,2, and 3) show the arrangement of the
framing and the details of the construction suitable for the erection of
farm buildings or cottages.
It may be here stated that where the boards are being shifted as the work
proceeds the surfaces must be cleaned of any cement that may adhere to
them, and the same applies to all tools used in the work. Nothing is better
for this than an old dandy brush from the stable.
Fig. 4 shows the framing around a double fireplace in a cottage being
erected, the openings having semi-archcs over each, the boarding in the fore-
ground being that for the hearth walls.
Fig. 5 shows a building which is a portion only of a cottage, being the
back rooms, with the bathroom on the verandah, the intention being to add
the remainder at a future date. The method of staying the studding and
tying the framework together at the tops is clearly depicted, and the various
lengths of the timbers show that they are those intended for other parts of
the building when the walls arc completed.


Fig. 3.—Showing A, exterior elevation at angle, and B section.


Fig. 6 shows a small dairy finished, giving a fair idea of the neat and
solid appearance of these ash concrete buildings when completed. The
plastering is ruled out to represent stone blocks of 2 feet x 1 foot outside,
but the inside is plain. The floor
and the cream-can vat are of the
same material, the sides of the latter
being only 3 inches thick, but
having a little extra cement in the
mixture to make it hold water
securely.
Fur foundations and other parts
where greater strength is desired, to
each five measures of ashes mix one
of sharp sand and one of cement;
for the first 3 feet of height in the
walls over the floor-line use six
parts of ashes, and for the re-
mainder use seven parts of ashes,
with the same quantities of sand
and cement all through.
The Foundations.
The width of the trenches should
be 5 inches wider than the thick-
ness of the walls to be erected, and
where the ground is solid, affording
a good foundation, the depth need
not be more than 6 inches, in which
it is recommended that from 2 to 3
inches thick of sand be placed
under the concrete. if, however,
the ground is of an unreliable
nature and it is necessary to go
Fig. 4.—Framing over a double fireplace in cottage.
deeper to get a solid bottom a thickness of 6 inches of sand should be put
in. This should be evenly spread and wetted before the concrete is placed.
To strengthen the foundation, at a distance of 3 inches from the bottom
of the concrete place under the outer walls three rows and under inner
walls two rows of |-inch round iron rods well lapped and hooked at joinings,,
and turned at angles.
Walls, Frames, and Finishing.
The walls at the set-off for footings at the level of window-sills and at
the heads of openings should have a continuous row of wire-netting binding.,
secured to frames where they cross.
All door and window-frames should be secured with wire or hoop-iron ties,
the ends being turned into the concrete. Ventilators for underfloors and
ceilings are made of |-inch timber boxes, having wire-netting and gauze
tacked on.
Where holes require to be provided for pipes, bolts, &c., in stone concrete
buildings, it is necessary to make provision for these as the walls are erected,
otherwise some hard cutting has to be done, but in ash concrete the cutting
is an easy job, and a hole can be bored with a brace and drill.


Plugging for nailing is also unnecessary, as the concrete holds nails well,
.and picture rails, architraves, skirtings. &e., can be nailed directly on to it.
Fine nails should, however, be used.
Fig. 5. —Portion of a cottage in course of erection.
lor plain buildings, and especially if protected by a verandah, a good
face can be put on with a mere skimming of cement mortar, rubbed on with
s piece of bagging held tightly over a piece of board, similar to a plasterer’s
floating trowel. Lor better-class work a thicker coat is desirable, but not
more than g inch thick anywhere.
Fig. 6. —A small dairy built of ash concrete. Note the neat and solid appearance.
Lime plastering may be applied to the inside where desired and finished
with a coloured putty coat, as is usual in brick buildings. It is, however,
desirable to use a little cement in the first coat of the plaster, which makes it
withstand nails and knocks, without damage to the face of the walls.


The Cost.
The cost of materials varies considerably according to the locality, the
distance they have to be conveyed, and so on. The ashes are usually obtain-
able at 2s. per ton, and if they are reasonably dry there should be about
45 cubic feet in each ton. Sand may be anything from 3s. to 15s. per cubic
yard, and cement ss. to Bs. 6d. per bag, if a full truck-load is taken. The
cost of the materials would have to be worked out when it was ascertained
how many cubic yards of concrete have to be used. Usually there are
about 50 cubic yards in a cottage having four rooms and kitchen.
The cost of labour, including the making of the forms, the digging of the
foundation trenches,and cleaning down cm completion may be stated at 13s.per
cubic yard, where the walls are not less than 4 inches nor more than C inches
thick. When the walls are thicker the cost per cubic yard will be less, and
if thinner, more than 13s. Plastering costs for bagging as described about
Sd. per superficial yard, and if 3 inch thick Is. Cd. for labour and materials.
From the above figures it can be ascertained what the finished walls will
cost.
The cost of similar work done on the Department’s experiment farms
has been at least 2s. per square yard less than weatherboard buildings
would cost, aud the work has been quite satisfactory in other ways.
Remarks.
The uses to which this concrete may be put on the farm are almost
unlimited, once the farmer or his handy man has mastered the making of
forms and the mixing and placing of the material.
Feed and water troughs (cither fixed or portable), slabs for paving, fence
and gate posts, steps for doorways, pipes for drains, and blocks for buildings
may be made on wet days when other work cannot be done. The thing is to
have the materials on hand ready for the wet days.
For most of the above items the concrete must be strengthened or
reinforced, for which purpose old fencing wire or wire-netting may be used,
placed near to the outer surfaces.
All finishing coating—that is, the plastering—should be put on while the
concrete is green, but if it should be dry on the surface, wetting before
plastering will assist the suction. The mixture for this finishing coat should
usually be three parts sand to one of cement.
Concrete Floors.*
The materials required for making concrete floors are old bricks, blue
metal, or sandstone broken to IJ-inch or 2-inch gauge, clean, sharp sand,
Portland cement, and clean water; a gauge-box (Fig. T), made of boards, 12
inches deep, measuring 4 ft. 6 in. x 3 ft. inside, is also required. This
is laid on a prepared platform of planks bedded flat and close together.
Set the box on the platform, fill it with the stone, and again nearly half-
full of sand; mix these together, then add one and a half bags or half a
cask of cement, and mix all together dry, by turning over with shovels
twice ; then turn a third time, and while this is being done one man should
sprinkle the water over from a watering-can; this heap should again be
* A. Brooks, Works Overseer, Department of Agriculture.


turned over, when any dry stuff should be wet as before, ware must be
taken not to use too much water, as the concrete must not be sloppy; and
after it is laid it should be lightly rammed with a fiat rammer, say 12 in,
x 10 in. on the face.
A Cheaper Concrete for Cow-bail or Pig-sty Floors.
Spread and ram down to the required levels the dry stone or other
aggregate to be used, which need not in this case be broken to any
particular gauge. Mix a batch of stone lime mortar, using three parts
sand to one of unslaked lime. This may be made up by opening out the
centre of the heap of sand and placing the unslaked fresh lime in the
Fig. 7.
centre; then sprinkle enough water on to reduce the lime to a powder,
add enough water to make it like milk, and gradually mix in the sand;
knock the lot into a heap, cover with a little dry sand, and let it stand
for a week. Mix up this into a grout or liquid mortar, and pour it over
the dry stones until all the spaces are filled in, and next day render or
plaster the top off with a coat of cement mortar J inch thick, ruled straight
and trowelled hard.
Rendering.
This is the term given to the finished coat applied to walls or floors,
and is usually done with cement mortar made of two parts clean sand
to one part Portland cement, worked together through a fine sieve before


being wetted for use. Care should be taken not to wet up any more than
can be used within a half hour, as some cements set quickly fan indication,
they are not the best).
Mixing and Laying Concrete Floors.
A few hints as to how to mix and lay cement concrete, especially for
such as pig-sty floors, may prove useful, and are given here in the hope that
they may prove so.
Laying concrete floors requires two distinct operations—first, laying and
ramming (lightly) the concrete in position, and then rendering or top-
dressing with cement-mertar made of clean sand two parts to one part
Portland cement, evenly laid and trowelled hard to a smooth finish. Concrete
that is to be so top-dressed must never be allowed to dry before the render-
ing is put on, otherwise it will not adhere together, and no floor should
be laid in large areas, but in small, easily worked slabs, otherwise the floor
is sure to crack in various directions This is more likely with floors of
less than 6 inches thick.
To lay a concrete floor, say 12 ft. x 10 ft. and 4 inches thick, to be
top-dressed (rendered) to a smooth finish, determine the height to the
finished surface, and drive in
pegs at the four corners; with a
straight-edge or levelling rule,
laid on the top of these pegs,
measure down and cut out the
soil to a hard, even surface, using
the spade or square-mouthed
shove] only, 4 inches below the
straight-edge in every direction.
This will make room for a slab
of concrete 4 inches thick all
over. Then divide the area into,
say, twelve squares of 3 ft. 4 in.
x 3 ft., as in the accompanying
diagram, numbered 1 to 12, and
using boards 4 inches wide, with the upper edges straight, lay one from A to B
and another from C to I), and drive pegs in the centre space behind them,
as at e, e, e; then using short boards 3 ft. 4 in. long, place them three on
each side, as at F. F, F. and fix them in position with pegs as before. Koto-
that these pegs are not to be in the spaces to be filled with concrete ; it is
sometimes necessary to have them so, but they must be removed, and the
holes filled in with cement mortar as soon as possible.
Having the concrete mixed, fill in slabs Nos. 1, 3, 9, and 11, keeping
the surface lightly rammed down 4 inch below the edges of the boards, to.
allow for the top-dressing. These should be allowed to set for. say, twenty-
four hours, when the top may be finished off, trowelling hard with a steel
trowel for a smooth face, or with a wood float or trowel if required for ,i
rough face. Cut off the corners half V shape; then take up the short boards
and place a strip of strong brown paper against the edges of the finished
slabs; fill in Nos. 2, 4, 10, and 12, allow to set, and finish as before, then
Nos, 5 and 7, then C and 8, and the floor is laid in twelve separate blocks that


will, if the stuff has been properly mixed and a liberal amount of elbow-
grease used, never crack nr wear out. The quantities of material required
for this floor would be —
1 J cubic yards stone, broken to If-inch gauge.
if cubic yard clean sand.
6 bags or two casks Portland cement.
PAINTING.*
The object of painting is to preserve- the more perishable parts of a strue-
■turn from the effects of the weather; and, properly speaking, all woodwork to
be painted should be thoroughly seasoned, otherwise the paint, by confining
the sap and moisture, only hastens decay. Xew work usually receives three
-coats, the first or priming coat and two more, and each coat should incline
towards the required finished shade or tint of colour.
The selection of colours is a matter that requires some experience if the
blending is to be agreeable with the surroundings. Generally, the wish of
the owner of the house is consulted; but after a little argument it is usual
to find that the painter’s suggestions are taken and acted upon.
Tor outside work on weatherboard cottages, it is now very fashionable to
paint the walls in red, terracotta, or green, with the windows and other parts
picked out in either white or buff. Doors may be in dark greens or in browns.
It must always bo borne in mind that when two different colours are
placed side by side they must be of very different shade, one being light
and the other dark. Stone colours are much used, one reason being
because they are more easily mixed by an amateur than greens, greys, or
buffs. The durability of the various colours, or rather the materials used to
produce them, varies less than is generally supposed. All colours fade
somewhat, and the darker colours, such as olive or sage green, show the
■effect of fading more plainly than most others. These will stand better if
put on over a coat of red —that is, white lead coloured with Venetian or
Indian red, and yellow ochre. Yellows bleach out by exposure, and browns
take on an ashy appearance.
Staining and varnishing is often done to the walls of wooden buildings
externally instead of painting, and, beside looking well, is cheaper. The stain
may be boiled linseed oil, oil of creosote, or linseed oil mixed with limber,
Vandyke brown, sienna, or other staining pigments, and a coat of varnish put
on to finish with. This may be done on either hardwood or pine boards.
All work, whether inside or outside, should lie carefully prepared if a
■good job is desired. The whole should lie carefully cleaned down, all
knots of a resinous nature treated with a coat of knotting varnish or glue
size, and the first coat carefully applied. When this has dried, all cracks,
nail holes, &c., must be properly stopped with putty, and rubbed off smoothly.
The putty must not be put in until the first coat has been applied, otherwise
the wood will absorb the oil out of the putty and it will fall out. Before the
second coat is applied the first must be thoroughly hardened and dry, ami
the same applies to the last coat.
* A. Brooks. Works Overseer. Itopnrhueut of Agriculture.


Proportions of Lead, Oil, &e., to use.
The following should make sufficient paint to cover about 100 square yards
of new work :—
Red Lead. | White Lead. Raw Oil
Turps.
Driers.
lb, lb. pints.
pint.
lb.
lirstcoat ... ... ...i 1 15 6
Second coat ... ... 15 4
i
Third coat ... ... ...1 13 2J
1
In preparing old work for painting, it is necessary first to see that all
repairs to windows, doors, mouldings, &c., are done by the carpenter, and
then to clean down as before mentioned, raking out all loose putty; and
where the surface is bad or blistered, it will be necessary to rub oif with
pumice stone and water. Use a lump of pumice with a flat face on it, and
rub off the old paint down to a smooth surface. All putty in the sashes
should be looked to, and if necessary, cut out and renewed. All ironwork,
such as verandah roofs, gutters, down-pipes, and tanks, should be scraped
off clean, and these should be painted in one coat only, to a finish.
Materials used.
Briefly, the materials of which ordinary paint is composed are white lead,
linseed oil, driers, turps, and various other ingredients to obtain the required
colours. The latter are called “ Stainers.”
The oil soaks into and fills the pores of the wood, forming a resinous
surface which keeps out the air. The driers quicken the drying process of
the oil, and the white lead gives a body to the paint, combining with the oil.
Turps (or turpentine) is used merely to save oil and make the paint spread
or work more freely. It soon evaporates, and takes no part in protecting the
wood. Red lead is generally used with the first or priming coat, as it dries
well and sets hard.
For flatted work mix the lead with turps only.
For outside w 7 ork II pints of raw and II of boiled linseed oil may be used
for the last coat, instead of 21 pints of raw oil.
Colouring Pigments generally used for common colours.
Stone colour : Burnt Turkey umber, raw Turkey umber, yellow ochre.
Drabs : Burnt umber and yellow 7 ochre.
Buffs ; Yellow ochre and Venetian red.
Greys : Lamp black, Indian red, ultramarine blue, vermillion.
Brown : Burnt sienna, Prussian blue, yellow ochre.
Greens-. Brunswick greens, dark and light; with blue and chrome yellow.
Mixing.
The white lead is ground to a paste in oil, ready to mix with more oil, &c.,
as stated, to prepare it for use. The colouring matter is mixed in a similar
way and added to the white lead and oil until the required tint is obtained.
The whole is then strained, either through a piece of canvas (usually a piece
of chaff bag tied over the mouth of an oil drum), or a fine-mesh wire strainer.


the paint being worked through with an old brush. If found to be too thick
for immediate use, a little oil and turps may be added. The strainer when
finished with should be placed under water, to keep it soft and fit for future
use. If mixed paint has to be laid aside for a few days, it should be covered
with a little water to prevent a skin forming on the surface.
Brushes.
The most useful sizes are B'o brush for ordinary work, with Nos. 3 and
C sash tools and flat fitches for small work, such as edges around window
sashes and frames, or picking out colours on mouldings. The larger brushes
should, when first taken into use, be loosely bound with string about half
way down the bristles, the ends of the string being secured with tacks, one
on each side. New brushes should also be set a few hours in clean water or
raw oil before taking into use. At no time when out of use should they be
exposed to the air, but set into clean water, say, 2 inches deep, sufficient to
keep the ends of the bristles soft. To clean a dark colour out of a brush so
that it can he used in a lighter colour, work it briskly in a little raw oil, which
can afterwards be used in other paints. To clean a brush that has been
neglected, soak it in hot turps, kerosene, or strong solution of washing-soda.
Application.
See that the surface to be painted is cleaned down —that is, all dust
brushed off and anything that requires rubbing down is attended to, as
previously recommended, either with pumice-stone or glass-paper.
Start at the topi and work downwards, so that if any paint falls off the
brush it will not injure the finished work. Apply quickly and evenly,
leaving no brush marks, and finish with the grain of the wood. If the
paint seems to run, it is either too thin or the surface is not clean —probably
greasy, if you are painting old work. This should be given a coat of hot
lime-wash, and allowed to dry before paint is applied. Always allow one
coat to be thoroughly hard and set dry before applying the next.
If doing outside work, select fine weather when neither dust nor flies are
about, as nothing makes the painter more annoyed than to have a dust-
storm rise when he is applying the finishing coat.
It is a general idea that the first coat should have only a small proportion
of white lead in it. It should really be just the opposite, and have rather more
than the next coat, because white lead clings to the wood with far more
tenacity than any other of the ingredients in paint. The best lead will keep
its hold long after the oil with which it has been mixed has disappeared,
forming the “ chalky ” surface so familiar on old buildings, fences, or gates.
A Useful Lime Wash.
The following mixture may be used on rough timber, brickwork, or
corrugated iron, and will reduce the temperature of houses when applied to
the roof, equally as well as the best refrigerating paint sold:—
10 lb. of fresh unslaked stone lime; 1 lb. glue; 1 lb. powdered alum.
Slake the lime with hot water, keeping it well covered over during slaking.
Dissolve the glue, also the alum, in boiling water, and add to the already
slaked lime, taking care not to make too thin. Strain the whole as for
paint, and cover over for two days or more, when it is ready for use.


Apply with an ordinary two-knot whitewash brush, giving the work two
coats, the first to be thoroughly set before the next is applied : ansi if on
roofs or tanks, apply in cool weather. Colouring matter (ochres.) may be
added if necessary. A little bine improves at all times.
TREES FOR SHADE AND SHELTER.*
One thing that strikes the observer about the homes of many of our farmers
and settlers is the absence of shelter or shade trees. Everyone will readily
admit that the country homestead where judicious tree-planting or preserva-
tion of natural trees has been practised, has a more attractive appearance
than the bare, sun-burnt, wind-swept spot unfortunately so commonly met
with. Nor has the necessity of conserving or planting shade and shelter trees
in the subdivision paddocks yet received the attention that it deserves.
That shade and shelter is appreciated by man and boast is beyond dispute.
Apart from naturally timberless country, the bare appearance of the home-
stead and of the open, wind-swept paddocks is due to various causes. Want
of foresight in the original clearing operations, and lack of knowledge of what
kind of trees will grow and provide the desired shade and shelter, are probably
the chief causes. Nothing discourages a man so much as, after undertaking
all the trouble of planting, to get no results, and to find out later that the
species planted were quite unsnited to the district only adds disgust.
The stock-owner should recognise the value of shade and shelter. A
little rough hill on the property, covered with stunted gum-trees, is worth
more to the farmer as it stands for shelter purposes than the small amount of
grass it Will grow should he decide to have it rung. To the settlers in
naturally clear country, judicious planting is a necessity. Some of our native
trees lend themselves for shelter purposes admirably, while some species from
other parts of the world adapt themselves to the same purpose.
To those who desire to improve their property by the addition of shade
and shelter trees, my purpose is to supply a few hints on planting methods
generally and care of young trees, and to give the names of a few good trees
for the purpose.
Preparatory Work.
Before planting, the ground should be well worked to a depth of 12 to 13
inches. Whore this can be done by ploughing and subsoiling the initial cost
for shelter breaks is reduced. The area proposed to be planted should be
broken up early in the autumn months, leaving the surface rough. When
ready to plant, the harrows should be run over it. If the ploughing has been
done early in the season, the ground should now be in good tilth and in
proper working condition.
Open out holes sufficiently large to give room to spread the roots of the
young trees evenly. In opening out the holes, put the surface soil on one
side. When refilling the hole, the surface soil should be again put on top.
Nothing is gained by bringing up the subsoil to the surface round the young
plant. Loosen the subsoil as much as possible, but leave it underneath the
surface.
*A. A. Gollaii. Superintendent- of I'lanliug. Forestry Commission.


Planting Operations.
From 8 to 10 feet is a fair distance apart to plant trees for shelter belts.
Some kinds may be planted much wider. However, the distance apart is not
of such vital importance in shelter belts; the object is to get a breakwind
as quickly as possible. Close planting forms a denser shelter than more open
planting, but if the trees are to develop, thinning out must be done in the
future. Thin early, before the bottom branches die off.
I would advise planting several rows to form breakwinds.
Assuming that the area to be planted is now ready, and the young trees
are at hand, carefully spread the roots evenly in the hole. Fill in with
surface soil, and tramp the ground firmly round. If water is available, leavo
a slight depression round the tree; put a spadeful of soil round the collar or
neck of the plant; then fill up the hollow with water. After the water has
thoroughly soaked in, fill up the depression with dry soil, leaving it as
loose as possible. It acts as a mulch and retards evaporation. A tree so
treated will have a certain amount of moisture near the roots for a consider-
able time afterwards. It is a good plan to dip open-rooted plants— i.e.,
plants received from the nursery with no soil attached—in a stiff clay puddle
before planting. Young trees taken from pots should have the ball of earth
attached loosened at the bottom, and some of the roots spread out.
Pack the soil thoroughly up to plants taken from pots when planting.
Young trees are often lost through neglecting this necessary packing of the
soil to the plant. I have found young trees which were struggling to get a
hold of the soil begin to grow after just trampling the soil firmly round them.
Inexperienced planters are liable to fall into this error often from a mistaken
fear of causing injury.
Best Time to Plant.
The mouths of June, July, and August are the usual months of
the year for planting, but no hard-and-fast rule can be laid down. For trees
that shed their leaves during the winter, the months mentioned are the only
ones. Evergreen sorts, usually sent out by nurserymen in pots, can be planted
either much earlier or later.
I would advise getting the planting done as early as possible. The young
trees thus get the benefit of the winter rains, and stand a much better
chance of becoming established before the heat of summer is due. In districts
subject to severe frosts, planting' operations may extend up to early in
October. One advantage, however, of early planting is that should a tree
fail, the failure may be noticed in time to replant again with a fair chance of
success.
Care of Young Trees.
The young trees must be protected from stock, either by a system of
tree-guards or, if planted in shelter belts, by running a line of fence round
them. This protection should be afforded till the trees are sufficiently grown
to be out of the reach of large animals. Rabbit-infested country will require
closer protection by wire-netting the plantations. Any attention given, such
as keeping the surface loose and free from weeds, will repay the trouble
taken; it will servo a double purpose, assisting the growth of the trees and
reducing the risk of injury by fire.


Suitable Kinds of Trees.
It must be distinctly understood that the following' ii-t of tree.' dot" not,
pretend to rover all the kinds that may be grown for this purpose. 1 have
kept the list down to what may bo fairly called "certainties." To simplify
matters, I have divided the State into three areas, viz., Inland, Tablelands,
and Coast.
Inland Districts.
i'or inland planting the undermentioned kinds have a wide range;—
Sugar Gum (Eucalyptus corynocalyx).
White Cedar ( Melia composita).
Aleppo Pine (Finns halepensis).
Pepper Tree ( Schin as molle).
Kurrajong ( Sterculia diver si j olia).
Sycamore, or Plane Tree (Platanm orientalis).
Carob Bean (C eratonia siliqua).
Mulga (Acacia aneura).
Guteh (Acacia catechu).
Myall, or Ironwood ( Acacia stenophylla).
Cypress Pino or Mallee Pine (CalUiris verrucosa).
White Pine (CalUiris robusta).
False Acacia (Bobinia pseudo-acacia).
Honey Locust Tree ( Cleditschiotriacandhos).
Queensland Silky Oak ( Orevillea robusta).
Tagasaste, or Tree Lucerne ( Cytisus proliferus).
The last-named plant makes a good rough hedge. It is also a stand-by as
a fodder plant in drought-time, and will grow on very poor land.
Tableland Districts.
Remarkable Pino (Finns insiynis).
Canary Island Pine (Finns canariensis).
Stone Pine ( Finns pinea).
Cypress Trees (Cu press us sp.).
Japanese Cryptomcria ( Cryptorneria japonica).
Black, or Green Wattle (Acacia deevrrens).
Cootamundra Wattle ( Acacia haileyana).
Poplar Trees (Populus sp.).
Sycamore, or Plane Tree (Platanus orientalis).
Elm Tree ( Ulrnus sp.).
Willow Trees (near water) (Salix sp.).
All the above are fairly quick growers, Finns canariensis and Cryptorneria
japonica being the slowest. The last four lose their leaves in winter, and
are more useful as shade trees.
Coastal Districts.
For the coastal districts the above-named will also be found satisfactory,
but substitute Finns pinaster, or Cluster Pine, for P. canariensis and
P. pinea, and omit Cryptorneria japonica altogether. Trisiania conferta, or
Brush Box, should be added.


SECTION IV.
Wheat Culture.*
IIAUDf.Y any feature of agriculture in New South Wale-, ■- nwre interesting
or more surprising than the development of wheat-growing that has taken
place in the past twenty-five years. In 1891 the area devoted to this cereal
was only one-third of a million acres; to-day it is more than ten times that.
In 1891 wheat occupied loss than 40 per cent, at all our cultivated lauds;
to-day it represents over 81-8 per cent.
Upon the factors that have influenced this rapid development it is
impossible to dwell here, but two or three may be briefly indicated.
In the first place, wheat is a staple article of food with all white peoples,
.and the number of consumers is being steadily increased, not alone in
obedience to natural law, but by other races becoming eaters of bread. An
assured market thus awaits the grower, and for the most part at a payable
price.
The comparative ease with which wheat can be grown has also influenced
the rapid extension of our wheat areas. To be sure, the day when the seed
was sown on land pirepared in a rough and casual manner is passing, but
farmers know that —however much better they might do with improved agri-
cultural methods —crops of 10 to 12 bushels are reasonably assured under
average conditions at no greater outlay than is necessary for a single
ploughing, a couple of strokes of the harrows, and perhaps 56 lb. super-
phosphate. A crop so cheaply produced and so assured of a fair market can
hardly fail to occupy increasing areas.
While the inducement and the opportunity have thus been presented, two
•other factors of much significance have also operated; first, the production
of improved varieties, and, second, the evolution (for such it has largely
been) of better cultural methods. Tor the first of these the late Mr. William
Farrer was notably responsible. By the crossing of numbers of varieties, he
and his successors in this work produced wdieats of such yielding capacity
under dry conditions as Federation, Bobs, Firbank, Florence, and others,
thereby enabling large areas hitherto considered outside the wheat belt to
be brought under cultivation. The second of the two factors, improved farm
methods, has done hardly less for this industry in New South Wales than
the first, and it may be anticipated that the practice by wFich two years’
rainfall can be made to serve for the growth of one crop will enable still
further extension of our wheat-growing areas into dry districts. It is hoped
that the following pages will be found to so present these important aspects
of wheat production as to induce growers to employ only the best varieties
and the best methods.
* Compiled by H. Rosa, Chief Inspector.


The Wheat Districts of New South Wales.
The districts of Xew South Wales in which wheat is grown may, for
convenience and for purposes of easy identification, be classified briefly as-
follows; —
1. Coastal (embracing those districts bordering on the coast, and which
are specially subject to rust).
2. Xorthem Tableland (of which Glen limes is representative).
■l. Central Tableland (of which Bathurst is representative).
4. South-western Slopes and Riverina (of which Wagga is represen-
tative).
o. Central-western Slopes (of which Xarrominc, Dnbbo, (lilgandra,.
Wellington, Cowra, Grenfell, Forbes, and Parkes are representa-
tive).
Progressive Methods in the Wagga District.
Xorth-western Slopes (of which Tamwurth and Gunncdah are vciirc-
sentative). .
7, Western Plains (of which Xyngan is representative).
The soils in these districts vary considerably from both mechanical and
chemical points of view; it would be quite impossible hero to make any
attempt at classification, and it is sufficient to state that they are usually of
either basaltic or granitic origin, the granite formation prevailing.
Grey and yellow box, pine, apple-tree, kurrajong, belar and she-oak are the
timbers most commonly met with in those western districts where grain
production is largest, and it is these which land-seekers usually look for in
selecting their prospective homes. Yet timber alone does not determine the'
suitability 7 or otherwise of land for wheat-growing, and many other aspects,
such as subsoil, rainfall, &e., have to be taken into consideration. Reference
to these will be made further on.
The purposes for which wheat is grown differ a good deal in different parts
of the State. The moist, humid conditions on the coast preclude the-
production of grain, except in small areas and in favoured localities, and of


the area there devoted to thin cereal over halt is cut tor hay. and quite
10 per cent, for green feed, while on the I'ahlehmd.s nearly half the total
area is also lined lor hay. On the Western Slopes and Jliverina the vast
bulk oi the wheat sown is reserved tor gram, the proportion of hay rarely
reaching one-fifth in an average season. In the far western districts, repre-
sented by Xyngan Demonstration Farm, hay is again the chief considera-
tion. 1" or these different districts and purposes, as will bo apparent in the
following pages, different varieties are specially adapted, and farmers should
be careful to make their selections accordingly. In view of the prepon-
derating importance- of the grain crop, it is tilting that its production should
receive the greater consideration, although the adaptation of the same
general principles to other districts, and for purposes of hay and green feed,
will he found easy, and, indeed, essential to the ’nest re-uh-.
Clearing Land for Wheat-growing.
Two methods are employed in clearing whent land for the plough : Firm,
■grubbing out the trees and roots to a depth of 9 or 12 inches; and second,
burning off the timber and stumps just lor 2 inches below the surface. The
latter method is generally referred to as "Yankee grubbing.” On land
cleared by the former process a set-plougdi is used; in the latter ease a stump-
jump plough is necessary.
The cost of Yankee grubbing depends entirely on the length of time the
timber has been ringbarked. Thus, a paddock in which the timber has been
rung’, say, for seven or eight years will cost far less to clear than a paddock
in which the timber has only been rung for three or four years.
The usual procedure is to stack small wood and limbs against the ring-
barked trees, and then to set fire to the paddock. March is considered the
best time for burning off.
Lund can be cleared in this way, ready for the stump-jump plough, at
from 7s. Od. to 14s. per acre, according to the length of time the timber has
been rung. The cost of clearing land for tho set-plough—that is, grubbing
.stumps and roots to a depth of 9 to 13 inches —will be just double.
Yankee grubbing is the method employed by many wheat-growers. The
man wdio is just making a start frequently cannot afford the extra cost of
.grubbing thoroughly, and as he is anxious to get as much crop in as possible
during the first year, he cannot afford the time to thoroughly rid the paddock
■of all stumps and roots.
The general opinion held by wheat-growers is that the yields from a
Yankee-grubbed and from a thoroughly grubbed paddock, other condition-
being equal, are about the same. It may bo mentioned that some of the
heaviest yields in the farmers’ experiments have been obtained from Yankee-
grubbed land.
The cost of ploughing with a stump-jumper does not exceed that of
ploughing with a set-plough. The former is certainly' a little heavier, but
this can hardly- be taken into consideration. As to the respective merits of
the work performed by the two kinds of ploughs, there is not much to choose;
but for obvious reasons only a stump-jump plough is used on Yankee-grubbed
land.


In wheat-growing centres, such as Lockhart, Henty, Temora, Wyalong,
Ganmain, and Coolamon —in fact throughout Eiverina —Yankee grubbing is
acknowledged by practical wheat-growers to be the cheapest and most prac-
tical method of clearing land, for the reasons that —
1. Yankee grubbing costs only one-half the amount of clearing land
thoroughly.
2. Yankee grubbing saves time, thus enabling the man just making a
start to put in a larger area of crop.
3. Yankee-grubbed land will return as good a yield as land cleared by
any other method.
The foregoing refers to country carrying grey box, yellow box, stringy-
bark, pine, bull-oak, and apple-tree. It in no way refers to tree or whipstick
mallee, in which country the method of clearing is entirely different, though
the stump-jump plough is invariably used.
If, on the other hand, a paddock is not immediately required for culti-
vation, and sufficient labour is available to thoroughly clear it, that is, to-
take out the stumps to a depth of 9 to 12 inches, this method has much to
commend it, as it leaves the paddock clear of all stumps for all time, and
any kind of plough can be employed in future operations. The methods by
which land is cleared for cultivation are more fully dealt with in another
portion of this Handbook under the section heading “ The Farm Holding,”
page 138.
The success or otherwise of wheat-growing is far less influenced by the
various methods adopted for clearing the land than by such other important
factors as the method of cultivation adopted, the varieties sown, the fer-
tilisers used, the harvesting machinery employed, and the general manage-
ment of the farm. To the consideration of these we now proceed.
CULTIVATION METHODS.
The determining factor in the cultivation of wheat in New South Wales
is the rainfall; not so much the annual rainfall as the amount which falls
during the growing period of the crop.
To produce a crop of lo bushels per acre, 4| inches of water are required
to pass through the crop”; for every additional 5 bushels, 1J inches are
required, so that 6 inches of rain must actually pass through a crop in order
to produce 20 bushels. This by no means signifies that only 0 inches of rain
must fall during the growing period, because out of an actual fall of 6 inches
during six months, 3 inches or more may be lost through evaporation or
other causes.
The exact amount of rain that is actually needed during the growing
period of the crop in order to allow 6 inches to pass through the tissues of the
plant is hard to estimate, for much depends upon whether the rain has been
distributed over few or many days, the condition of the soil, the temperature,
the amount and velocity of prevailing winds, and many other factors; it is
sufficient to say that the rainfall during the growing season in most of our
wheat districts is not sufficiently large to allow 6 inches, or even 4J inches,
of moisture to pass through the crop during the growing period.
* The late Prof. King, Wisconsin.


The first impression produced by such a statement is, perhaps, surprise
that wheat-growing should have become such an extensive industry as it has.
In consequence, however, of the low cost of production in Australia, and of
the undoubted fertility of the soil in large areas of the wheat belt, it is
possible to raise crops averaging 10 to 12 bushels per acre that certainly do
leave a respectable margin of profit. Economical methods, such as those
referred to, are necessarily adopted by new settlers, and are usually profitable
on new land for the first three or four years; they may even be adopted—and
certainly are over large areas —on much older wheat-land than that, and the
persistence of the system is evidence that the growers are able to show
Federation Wheat on the Farmers’ Experiment Plots, Mudgee.
Manured with 84 lb. superphosphate per acre. Yield per acre =34 bushels.
satisfactory profits. In such case the land is ploughed as early in the autumn
as the conditions will allow, and harrowed or cultivated once or twice before
sowing. Crops grown under such conditions are dependent entirely on the
rain that falls immediately before sowing and during growth, and are conse-
quently readily affected by an unfavourable season. The fact that there has
existed, side by side with this system, another and better one has probably
influenced the extension of the past few years, even though ordinary farm
methods have not been affected to the extent that might have been expected.
The system advocated by the Department and adopted now to a certain
extent throughout the drier districts of the State is known as “Dry Farm-
ing.” The term is somewhat of a misnomer, but it is intended to imply the
use of good farming methods in dry districts for the production of crops
without irrigation.


Dry Farming in Australia.
So much hag been written ami said about "dry farming'" in America, that
many are apt to conclude that only in that country hag dry farming been
practised. They are apt to overlook the fact that dry farming (as the term
was understood until quite recently) has been carried on in Australia.
For years past dry-farming methods have been practised in South Australia,
Victoria, and Xow South Wales.
South Australia is famous in the Commonwealth for the amount of grain
produced in districts of scanty rainfall. The successful settlers in the Malice
districts of Victoria, with an annual rainfall of 12 to 1C inches, give striking
examples of dry forming in that State; and in the Mother State the appear-
ances of tlie farms in numerous localities and the flourishing condition of
many inland towns furnish undoubted evidence of the success which has
attended dry farming in those districts.
Dry farming has been practised as far west as Hiilstou, Balranald and
Cal Lai, but it is only just to state that these are the successes of careful
men; the groat need at the present time is for the general adoption of the
better and more profitable methods.
Possibilities of Dry Farming in New South Wales.
Wheat-growing is uncertain in some districts, because no attempt is made
to conserve the water that falls prior to planting. Modern methods require,
and enable this to be done, and when they become general, failure in our
present wheat districts will be almost unknown. The industry will then be
less speculative; it will be placed on a sounder and more prosperous basis
than ever; the average yield will be largely increased; the wheat belt will be
widened, and a large proportion of that immense area between the limits
of the 14 and 10-ineh rainfall will he brought under cultivation.
The imams by which this can he achieved will occupy our attention in the
succeeding pages.
Fallowing.
The practice of fallowing consists of ploughing the land a year previous
to sowing tlie crop and allowing it to rest during the interval. Much con-
troversy exists among farmers as to whether the mouldboard or the disc plough,
is the better implement for the purpose. Xo hard-and-fast rule can be laid
down, and the farmer must be guided to a large extent by the class of soil
lie has to handle and the condition it is in when making a choice between
the two implements.
Tlie mouldboard plough may lie said to do better work in laud that is not
likely to break up too fine, and is certainly superior to the disc on land
covered heavily with weeds or other rubbish.
On tlie other hand, tlie disc plough on fairly clean land has many advan-
tages, chief of which is that from 400 to 500 acres can be ploughed with the
one set of discs without renewing them. However, a groat deal less depends
upon whether the land has been ploughed with a disc or mouldboard plough
than upon the choice of tlie right time and the thoroughness with which the
work is done.


Depth to Plough.
In years past the practice was to plough as deep as possible, even to 7
inches, but with more experience to guide us. it is found that very seldom
is more than 5 inches necessary, and the best results are usually obtained
from a depth ranging from 4to 5 inches. Farmers should be careful not to
plough too many years at the same depth, however, as such a procedure is
very liable to result in a hardpan forming. If the ploughing has been
5 inches on, say, two occasions, it will be found best to plough the third time
to 4i inches, the fourth time to 4 inches, and then to come back to 5 inches
at the fifth ploughing.
When to Plough.
As the essence of fallowing is the storage in the soil of moisture precipi-
tated before the seed is sown, so that it may supplement that which falls
during the growth of the plant, the time of the year at which the plough
should bo put in must be governed largely by the incidence of the rainfall.
In southern portions of the wheat belt the greater part of the year's rain
falls in the winter, and operations must be directed at carrying the rainfall
of one winter through the following summer in order that it may bo available
in the soil in the autumn.
In western districts the ratio of the -winter rain to the year’s total is rather
smaller than in the Riverina, and ploughing may start a little later, and
sufficient of the spring and summer rains still be stored.
In northern districts, where only sound methods are necessary to an
extension of the area under cultivation, the rainfall is much more definitely
a summer one, and ploughing immediately after harvest will usually con-
serve much of the rain that falls in January, February, and March, and that
otherwise evaporates before seeding time arrives. Farmers in the north-
west can therefore meet their conditions by ploughing half the following jmaFs
wheat area in the spring, and the other half immediately after harvest. This
system would enable a man with, say, 800 acres of wheat land to sow 200
acres every year, half of which would receive a full fallow as, preparation,
and the other half a short, or summer fallow.
As a safe generalisation it may be stated that on the South-western Slopes
and Riverina the farmer -who fallows should plough in July and August, in
western districts in August and September, and in the North-west he should
{dough as much as possible in August and September, and the whole of the
balance immediately after harvest.
Treatment of Ploughed Land.
The ploughed land should lie in the comb for six or seven weeks after
ploughing, and then be broken down with heavy harrows. This method is
usually preferable to breaking the comb down immediately after ploughing,
because the winter rains in the former ease are more likely to be absorbed,
air, wind and sunshine are better able to penetrate and sweeten the soil, and
the particles of the soil are not likely to run together and form a hard crust
as easily as they would if the land w-ere harrowed immediately after
ploughing.


As the principal object of fallowing is the storage of moisture, to the end
that two years' rainfall may be used to produce one crop, it will bo easily
recognised that the subsequent working of the fallow has a very important
place in tins method of cultivation.
Working the Fallow.
It may be said that only a small percentage of the fallowed land in the
Btate is worked as it should be. It is true that the wise practice of
ploughing in the winter or spring preceding sowing is becoming more
general, but it is seldom that the soil is given the attention during the
summer that it should have, and the wonder is that a lot of fallowed land
yields as well as it docs. Weeds arc allowed to spring up and are not
checked; the surface is allowed to become crusted and is not disturbed, and
in this way the value of much of the work that has been done is seriously
A Modern Mouldboard Plough.
discounted. The objection urged by many farmers is that summer culti-
vation involves work at the hottest season of the year, and at a time when
the horses are fully entitled to a spell, but the evidence in favour of the
method is so strong, and the advantages so great that no wheat-farmer can
afford to neglect it without first having counted the cost.
Professor Watt a year or two ago made the remark that even though the
area of land fallowed might not have increased very much in the preceding
two or three years, a very definite change had taken place in the attitude
towards fallowing. Farmers have always known that it increases the yield,
but the difference is that to-day they recognise that it saves moisture.
That in itself is a very important achievement, especially in a country
where every drop of stored moisture has an influence on the eventual results,
but surface cultivation to prevent evaporation has the closest possible
association with the earlier working—the prevention of crusty and weedy
surfaces is absolutely essential if fallowing is to be truly and thoroughly
effective.


View of Fallowed Plot in Albury District.
View of a non-fallowed Plot in Albury District, showing poor growth.
Fallowed and non-fallowed Land Compared.


It is well enough known that, while the top twelve or eighteen inches of
the soil are the most important to plant life, beneath that is stored water
which is conducted by line capillary tubes to the surface, where it is lost by
evaporation. If these minute tubes become established they will continue
to carry off the moisture as long as there is any below, and the only way to
prevent that taking place is to disturb the surface and break the capillary
tubes, thus locking the moisture in.
Neglected Surfaces and Their Losses.
A few figures will prove that this is the case. The late Professor King, of
Wisconsin (U.S.A.), said that ho reduced the mean daily loss from *OTI of
an inch to ’O3l of an inch, by freshening the mulch, taking off one inch
and placing it back loosely and lightly—a saving of 30 per cent, of the
average daily evaporation.
In California, Hilgard and Loughridge made instructive comparisons.
They found that while in uncultivated land there was 4'3 per cent, of
moisture in the first foot of soil, in cultivated land there was 6'4 per cent.,
and continuing their experiments at every foot to 6 feet below the surface,
they showed that the advantage was the same almost the whole way down.
In other words, while the uncultivated land had equal to 86 tons of moisture
per acre at the first foot, 88 tons at the second, 100 tons at the fourth, and 90
tons at the sixth, in the cultivated area there was equal to 128 tons at the
first foot, 116 tons at the second, 130 tons at the fourth, and 120 tons at the
sixth —an advantage, where cultivation was carried out, of 30 to 40 per
cent, more moisture the whole way down to 6 feet.
American and English experiments are not the only ones which we have
to rely on in urging this work upon our wheat-growers. Experiments at
Geelong, Victoria, showed that just before sowing time a worked fallow
contained equal to 492 tons of moisture per acre in the top 18 inches of soil,
while a neglected fallow could only show 281 tons.
The wmrk was continued on a more extensive scale the following summer
at Longerenong Experiment Farm, the moisture-content of a worked and a
neglected fallow being carefully ascertained at different depths every month.
Certain land was ploughed and cultivated in September, one portion receiving
no further cultivation, and the other being worked in the same way and time
as other fallow land in the vicinity. On the Ist November there was already
a difference in the moisture-content, and by April the difference was marked,
the neglected fallow having in the first 4 feet 27T6 per cent, of moisture,
while the cultivated fallow had 32'7l per cent. As February and March
wore months of good rainfall, the difference in the top 4 feet was not as
groat as it would have been in a dry summer, but further tests showed that
the rains referred to had gone a good deal deeper than 4 feet on the culti-
vated portion, and remained there to nurture the succeeding crop.
It is because of facts like these that the Department continues to urge
farmers to work their fallow land in the summer.
The effect of neglecting the fallow, as the above results clearly show, is to
allow the moisture which has been caught to escape again into the air. The
only way to prevent that is to maintain a loose surface, and thus put a lid
on the reservoir.


There is another reason. A neglected fallow means a dirty fallow, in which
weeds add their part to the loss of moisture and plant-food, and spread their
-eeds to the detriment of the next crop.
When to Work the Fallow.
As the object of working the fallow is to produce a loose mulch on tht
surface, in order to prevent the evaporation of the soil-moisture, it can be
easily understood that the fallow should be worked in such a "way as not
only to produce, but to preserve this loose mulch.
Provided the soil has been ploughed when in good condition, it can with
advantage be left in the rough state as broken by the plough, there being no
necessity for immediate further treatment. But if the ground has been
A Modern Disc Plough.
ploughed when wet enough for the furrow to show a large polished surface, it
will be desirable, in most cases, to harrow it as soon as it is dry enough to
crumble perfectly; otherwise it is likely to become so hard and lumpy that
the labour necessary to make a good seed-bed will be largely increased.
The object of working the fallow early in the season is to keep a mulch
on the surface, so as to conserve the moisture in the soil beneath. Mulches
act by breaking the connection between the surface soil and that beneath it.
The more thoroughly this connection between the two sections is broken the
more effective will the mulch be.
The plough, by cutting off a layer of surface soil and returning it loosely
and more or less inverted, completely breaks the connection between the two
sections, and in consequence makes a more effective mulch than any other
implement. Recently-ploughed land is. therefore, covered with the most
effective mulch possible. This is especially the case if a sod or the residue of
a green crop has been turned under. Until this mulch has been destroyed
by rain and other natural causes, nothing will be gained by wmrking the land
and breaking down the rough surface. Indeed, to do this will be rather a
disadvantage; for it will have a tendency to re-establish the connection


between the surface soil and that beneath, thus strengthening' the capillarity
and increasing the flow of water upward to the surface, where it can be
lost by evaporation.
Even if the ploughed surface has become somewhat settled, and therefore
less effective as a mulch, little will be gained by working it in the early
spring. At this season, when the days are cool and often cloudy, and the
amount of evaporation, even from damp soil, is not great, it would require
almost continual stirring of the soil to maintain an effective mulch; for,
owing to the conditions prevailing, the connection between the surface soil
and that beneath would be re-established almost as fast as broken. Later,
after dry-weather conditions sot in, the amount of working the fallowed land
will require will depend upon the climate and the condition of the soil.
If the moisture is to bo saved the soil must be kept mulched. The late
Professor King found, as the result of experiment, that in seven weeks
the loss of moisture from unmulchod ground was equivalent to 170 points of
rain more than from mulched land. But if this moisture is to be conserved,
the soil must be stirred as soon as the effectiveness of the mulch is destroyed
by rain; mulches are only effective wdien loose and dry.
Even a light shower is sufficient, under some conditions, to render a mulch
non-effective; and when this is the case the soil is often drier twenty-four
hours after the shower than if no rain had fallen. This is due to the
increased capillarity of the particles, caused by the wetting and consequent
compacting- of the soil, resulting in loss of subsoil moisture by evaporation.
This is illustrated by the results of another experiment conducted by Professor
King, who found that 25 points of rain in twenty-four hours was sufficient
to cause an increased flow of water (equal to 70 points of rain) from the
subsoil to the surface, where it could be lost by evaporation.
Implements for Working the Fallow.
Ko hard-and-fast rule can be laid down as to the implement to use for
working the fallowed land. The farmer will be guided by the condition of the
soil, and will use the implement likely to achieve the result in the cheapest
way, mindful that the object of working in the early stages of fallowing is
to conserve the moisture rather than to prepare a seed-bed. Ko effort should
at this time be made to reduce the surface to a fine tilth, for coarse mulches
remain effective longer than fine ones.
Before the ground gets very firm, and if free from weeds, the tine harrow
can be used cheaply and with advantage. If the ground is “ set ” a cultivator
should be used, and if weedy the disc cultivator or skim plough.
The one-way disc cultivator has proved itself well adapted for economically
working fallowed land. The skim plough is also a suitable and effective
implement for the purpose.
Some farmers favour the one-way disc cultivator, others the spring-tooth
cultivator or the ordinary tine harrow, but much depends on the class and
condition of the land.
If the fallow is dirty with weeds, it is useless to try to get them out with
the spring-tooth cultivator or the tine harrow. In this case the farmer must
resort to the one-way disc cultivator, which literally chops the weeds out of


the ground, at the same time leaving the surface in a fine tilth. It is this
fine tilth itself which many farmers do not like, and rightly so. From
experience they know that the finer the surface, the easier it sets again after
the first shower of rain, a further early working being thus necessitated to
prevent the rise of moisture to the surface.
The Disc Plough on a large area at Narromine
If the soil be of a kind that pulverises too finely with the one-way disc,
resort must be had to another implement. The spring-tooth cultivator, in
such a case, offers the very advantages that are required, because it allows


Table showing the relative effectiveness of two mulches, 1 and 3 inches thick.
Moisture content per cent.
First foot. Second foot. Third foot.
Cultivated 3 inches deep ... 2314 23*30 21*94
Cultivated 1 inch deep... ... 22'70 21*08 19*65
Fourth foot
22-46
19-58
Difference .., ... *44
2-22 2-29
2-88
the finer particles to sift through, leaving the surface in a fairly cloddy, or
lumpy condition, but it should only be used on a clean fallow where there
are no weeds.
Tine harrows may be used in the loose soils which are frequently found
in districts where the soil is of volcanic origin. The physical condition of
such soils wull often permit even light harrowing to produce the essential
mulch.
It will be seen that no hard-and-fast rule can be laid down as to which
implement should be used in working the fallow. The farmer must follow
ins own judgment, being guided by the physical condition of the soil.
Depth of the Mulch.
For practical purposes, a mulch of 2J to 3 inches thick is deemed to bo the
most economical. Thinner mulches are not effective enough, and thicker
ones, though more effective, are not sufficiently so to justify the extra cast.
The relative effectiveness of a 1-inch and 3-inch mulch is shown in the
following table, taken from “ Physics of the Soil ”: —
These differences at the end of the growing season represent IC7'4 tons,
equivalent to T 47 inches more water per acre in favour of the deeper mulch.
Though a mulch should be re-formed as soon as possible after its effective-
ness has been destroyed by rain, nothing will be gained by working the soil
before the surface has a crust on it. If worked before this stage is reached,
the implement teeth instead of stirring the soil cut through it like a knife,
and leave it in such a fine condition as to assist rather than retard evapora-
tion.
The Seed-bed.
As the result of the working which the land has received whilst being
fallowed, its condition at the time for the reception of the seed should be
ideal, especially if the final cultivation, just before seed-time, has been with
the skim plough or one-way disc cultivator, to ensure that any young weed
growth likely to interfere with the welfare of the wheat has been effectually
destroyed. As the result of such treatment the seed-bed wall be clean, in
good tilth, with the soil immediately below the surface in that compact
condition which induces constant capillarity and admits of the free upward
flow of the soil-water from the subsoil, thus providing conditions favourable
for ready germination and vigorous growth.
Deep re-ploughing just before seeding is not recommended; it is likely to
prove injurious by making the seed-bed too open and dry for the require-
ments of the wheat plant, and also by bringing deep-lying and dormant
weed seeds to the surface where they will have the same opportunities as the
wheat to grow a7id compete with it for existence.


A set of harrows for stirring the surface of fallowed land.
Spring-tooth cultivator.
The one-way disc-cultivator used for cultivating the fallow in recent years.


I'ost of Whoat-yroKing on yon-faUoired Land; esUinntcil
ilicld.
12 hnxlul
£
s.
d.
Ploughing once. Gs. per acre .
0
G
0
Harrowing once, t(d. per acre
0
0
0
Drilling, Is. Gd. per acre
0
1
G
Seed. 45 lb. at os. per bushel
0
3
0
Superphosphate. A cwt. at 5s.
0
o
G
Pickling seed. 3d. per acre
0
0
3
Harvesting witli harvester
0
3
0
Kent
0
G
0
Bags, 4 at Od.
0
2
0
Cartage, at 23d. per bushel..
0
2
3
£1
8
0*
t'ost of Whcai-grotriiifj on Falloirul JauuI; estimated yield, 2
1 bushels
£
S.
d.
Ploughing once. Os. per acre
. . 0
0
0
Harrowing 3 times, 9d. per acre . .
. . 0
2
.:>
Disc-cultivating once, 2s. Cd. per acre . .
. . 0
2
0
Spring-tooth cultivating once
. . 0
i
0
Drilling. ]s. (id. per acre
. . 0
i
0
Seed, 45 lb. at 5s. per bushel
. . 0
3
9
Superphosphate, 4 cwt. at os.
.. (I
2
c
Pickling seed, 3d. per acre . .
. . 0
0
3
Harvesting, 3s. per acre
. . 0
3
0
Kent. 2 years at Os. per acre
. . 0
12
0
Bags. 7 at Od. each ..
. . 0
3
G
Cartage, at 2id. per bushel
.. 0
4
0
£2
3
0*
Compacting the Seed-bed.
Under a system which provides for the working of fallowed land, the use
of the roller to break clods or compact the soil will be unnecessary. During
the period of fallowing, any clods that may have originally been present
after ploughing will have become weathered down into good tilth.
Xor will there be any need for the use of a special implement like the
sub-surface packer to compact the sub-surface soil and so bring the subsoil
moisture to just below the mulch, where it will be available for the germina-
tion of seeds. This will have been accomplished incidentally, as the result
of working the fallowed laud, the sub-surface soil of which will have become
compact as the result of natural settlement, aided by the tramping of the
grazing stock, and by the teams and implements passing over the land.
During the period between early ploughing and seed-time the soil is more
thoroughly compacted by the forces of nature than could possibly be done
by any implement devised by man.
Does Fallowing Pay ?
The all-important issue respecting fallowing is raised in this question, and
a comparison of the cost of working fallowed with non-fallowed land, together
with the average returns in each case, is distinctly interesting. The
following figures are based on the average yield of the State during the
five years 1930 to 1914, inclusive, and the average yield from the Farmers'
Experiment Plots (135 tests) in the same seasons.
Allowing an average yield of 12 bushels per acre for non-fallowed land!
(an estimate really in excess of the actual), the gross proceeds at 3s. 3d.
per bushel would be £1 19s. per acre. If the cost of production, with rent,,
averages £1 Ss. per acre, as shown above, the actual profit is 11s. per acre.
On the other hand, if the land be fallowed the cost will work out thus: —
* These estimates were framed under pre-war conditions, and in view of the
uncertainty of the whole situation, it has been deemed advisable to leave them
unaltered for this edition.


The return in this ease, on the average of the Farmers' Experiment Plots
(135 tests), would be 21 bushels 43 lb., which, at 3s. 3d. per bushel, represents
£3 10s. 7d., showing a profit at the rate of 13s. 9d. per acre per annum.
In addition, in the former case there is always a possibility of almost total
failure to be reckoned with, -while in the second case there is always a
reasonable certainty of success.
It is evident that, apart from any other advantages gained by fallowing,
such as the maintenance of fertility, the checking of wild oats, &c., a rigid
system of fallowing should commend itself on a simple commercial basis to
every wheat-farmer in the southern or western portion of the State.
Discing Stubble Land before Ploughing.*
While the main object of fallowing is to store moisture in the soil, it will
be seen that the system described above makes no attempt at conservation-
between the time of harvest and the time of early fallowing in June or July.
After harvest the soil, owing to its hard crusted surface, is in a very favour-
able condition to part with its moisture, and the great evaporating agencies
—heat, dryness, and winds —are actively at work. But if the surface of the
soil can be loosened, and a soil mulch formed, this evaporation can be
checked, and any surplus moisture left in the lower soil after the removal
of the preceding crop may be saved, arid the soil at the same time prepared
to receive the autumn rains, instead of allowing them to run off the hard
surface or become rapidly absorbed by the hot, dry air.
Since water is the limiting factor in dry districts, the greater the quantity
of moisture stored in the soil, other conditions being equal, the larger the
returns. Therefore, the farmer who can start the year’s " soil moisture
account " with a ” balance brought forward ” and increased “ deposits ” in
the early part of the year, should make additional profits which will much
more than recompense him for the extra labour and time expended, and in a
dry season this additional moisture conserved may make all the difference
between crop success and failure.
The soil at harvest time is usually not in a suitable condition for plough-
ing, owing to its hard, dry state, nor is it advisable to plough at this time,
as the work can be performed more economically and quickly with a disc-
cultivator. The land may then be ploughed at the usual time during winter
or early spring. The disc-cultivator will cut into the hard surface soil,
creating a loose, dry mulch, which will arrest further evaporation and enable
the autumn rains to penetrate the subsoil.
This early discing before ploughing does more than aid the conservation
of moisture. It has much else to recommend it to farmers in the more
favoured wheat districts, especially where it is the intention to sow wheat
again the following season :
(1.) It chops up the stubble so that it can be more readily ploughed under,
thus adding valuable organic matter to the soil, and returning to the soil
the plant-food it has removed in its growth. It is necessary, however, that
stubble should be ploughed under early, in order to allow of its thorough
• H C. Stealing, Inspector of Agriculture.
t 17299—1


decomposition before seeding operation,- begin, as dry straw decay.- -lowly,
and unless thoroughly decomposed it leaves the soil too open, causing a
tendency for the soil to dry out readily'.
(2.) It puts the soil into a condition conducive to the germination and
growth of all weed seeds that are at or near the surface, which growth will
be destroyed by the subsequent ploughing.
(3.) The soil is in a suitable condition for ploughing at any time. In the
event of a dry spell, the operation of ploughing is rendered more easy, and
the soil breaks up in much better condition.
(4.) It cultivates and pulverises that portion of the soil which, when the
land is ploughed, will be deposited at the bottom of the furrow. One of the
principles for conserving moisture is that the sub-surface soil should be
finely pulverised and firmly compacted, thus increasing its water-holding
capacity. It also increases its capillary attraction and places it in the best
possible physical condition for the germination of the seed and the develop-
ment of plant roots. The root-hairs of plants feed on the outside of the
small particles of soil. Therefore, if the sub-surface soil is cloddy, the
plant-food is “locked up” in lumps, and the feeding area of the plant is
reduced. Thus, pulverising the soil may be the equivalent of fertilising it.
If for this reason alone, the early discing of the soil before ploughing is a
practice that it would be well for the farmer to adopt.
Manuring the Wheat Crop.
Like most other plants, wheat requires the presence in the soil of a number
of elements which it assimilates as plant-food, and without any one of which
the crop must be a failure in a greater or less degree. Most of these
elements are present in the soil in sufficient quantities, but the supply of
the three most essential —phosphorus, nitrogen, and potash—is often too
small for the plant’s needs; more often still one or all is present in abun-
dance, but not in a form in which the plant can make use of it. Hence it
is that in many countries in which wheat is extensively grown it is necessary
to use fertilisers that will supply all three.
Fortunately, in Australia the supply of nitrogen and potash in the soil
appears to be equal to requirements, and it is only necessary to add phos-
phorus, which, luckily for the farmer, is the cheapest of the three. The
addition is made in the form of superphosphate, because it dissolves readily
in the soil moisture, and the phosphorus becomes available for the plant in
a very short space of time.
Farmers in the southern portions of our wheat belt have already learned
the value of the superphosphate, and its use there may be said to be almost
universal. Little surprise need be entertained that this is so, for the advan-
tages are conspicuous.
In the western portion of the State the use of superphosphate is not yet so
general as in southern parts, but experiment and demonstration plots have
done much in late years to make the practice more general. The all-


Rymer Wheat at Gulgong.
Manured with 56 lb. of superphosphate. Yield per acre=18 bushels 8 1b.
Rymer Wheat at Gulgong.
Unmanured. Yield per acre = 11 bushels 36 lb.
Farmers’ Experiment Plots.


important question is, does it pay, and to that the results of the Farmers’
Experiment Plots during the past few years in southern and western
districts furnish an answer that leaves no room for doubt.
The need for phosphatic manure in the western and southern portions of
the State is more apparent than in the northern and north-western portions.
In fact, it appears from the results of continuous experiments, that the
Wheat for Green Fodder.
Hug’uenot wheat, manured, grown on Farmers' Experiment Plots on the North Coast.
Yield, 9 tons 8 cwt. per acre.
further south the greater the need for phosphoric acid for wheat-growing.
This may be accounted for in two ways—firstly, soils in the northern and
north-western districts are naturally better supplied with phosphoric acid
than those in the southern wheat-growing area; and, secondly, the southern
districts have been cropped for wheat for many years past, whereas the
western and north-western districts have only been opened up for wheat-
growing during comparatively recent years.


Table showing average yields with and without superphosphate on
Farmers’
Experiment dot
s:—
Southern District.
Western
district.
North-west District.
Manured with
Manured with >
Manured with ■
5(5 lb. Super.
( nmanured.
56 lb. Super.
I'nmanured.
56 lb. Super.
L'mnai
ured.
per acre.
per acre.
per acre. i
bus. lb.
bus. lb.
bus. lb.
bus. lb.
bus. lb.
bus.
lb.
1911...
. 22 7
15 31
17 22
14 5
21 10
21
24
1912...
. 25 +0
20 32
20 45
16 49
31 24
27
28
1913...
. 19 43
15 43
18 34
15 46
20 14 i
20
14
Average .
, 22 30
17 15
IS 53
15 33
• 24 16
23
9
As each load of wheat leaves the farm a quantity of phosphoric acid leaves
simultaneously, and as this process goes on it is reasonable to suppose that in
districts where wheat cultivation has been practised for a number of years
the amount of available phosphoric acid is smaller than in districts where
wheat-growing has been carried on for only a few years.
Wheat for Green Fodder.
Huguenot wheat, unmanured, grown on Farmers’ Experiment Plots on the North Coast.
Yield, 8 tons per acre.


This being so, it is to be expected that the application of phosphatic
manures should meet with a more generous response in southern and western
than in north-western and northern soils. In this respect the results of the
manurial trials bear out this contention. In the north-west it appears that
superphosphate is not so much needed as in the west and the south, where
the average difference bettveen manured and unmanured plots is not less
than 5 bushels per acre. It is these extra 5 bushels per acre which mean to
the wheat-farmer the difference between success and failure.
Quantity of Superphosphate per acre.
Generally speaking, it may be said that 56 lb. per acre is about the correct
quantity of manure to use; on new land 40 lb. will be found to be sufficient,
and on land that has been cropped for a number of years the quantity can
with advantage be increased to 70 or 75 lb. per acre.
Useful as manure is, it must be borne in mind that in order to obtain the
maximum benefits from it, the employment of good cultivation methods is
essential. Manuring and good cultivation go hand in hand —one is useless
without the other —and the farmer will find that it is better in many cases
to till the fertility into the soil than to buy it in bagfuls. In other words,
the plough, harrow and cultivator play quite as important parts in the
fertility of the soil as artificial manure.
Liming Wheat Land.
Little has been done in Hew South Wales in the way of liming wheat land,
but it is not hard to believe that large areas would be benefited by its use from
time to time. It is not suggested that every farmer in the wheat districts of the
Lime Distributor at work.
South-western Slopes and Eiverina should lime his wheat land at once, for it
is probable that some paddocks are sufficiently supplied, at any rate for some
few years to come, but efforts should be made to find out whether its use
is likely to be beneficial or not. This could be done by treating small areas
with 6 to 10 cwt. per acre, and carefully noting the results in comparison
with adjoining areas similarly worked with the exception of the lime.


One such experiment of an interesting kind was conducted in 1913 under
the supervision of the Department by Mr. I’. L. C. Eidgway, at Rockview,"
Old Junee. An area of 22 acres that had been cropped for sixteen to twenty
years, or perhaps longer, had already been limed when it was placed at the
disposal of the Department for experimental purposes. The experiment is
being extended over other years, and will be watched with interest. In
1913 an average of 8J bushels was gained by the application of 588 lb. of
lime per acre at a cost of 9s. aid., including the purchase of the lime, freight,,
cost of spreading, &e.
At first sight it might appear that very little was gained by the outlay.
The 3i bushels gained in 1913 at 3s. 3d. only amounts to 11s. 4Jd., which
most farmers would consider insufficient when the risk of failure is taken
into account. It must be remembered, however, that an application of lime
is a very different thing 1 to a dressing of. say, superphosphate; the lime
usually shows a beneficial effect for several years, whereas the fertiliser i s_
practically only of benefit for one year.
In the following year, 1914, the results at Old Junee were disappointing, the
limed plots generally yielding poorer crops than unlimed plots of the same
variety similarly manured, but this was almost certainly due to the excessively
dry season.
More recent experiments at other centres have also given rather variable
results, though on the whole suggesting that farmers should conduct trials
for themselves.
Rotation on the Wheat Farm.
Many of the problems that confront the wheat-grower may be solved by
rotation of crops.
All farm crops require very much the same plant foods, but different crops
require them in different proportions. Hence, the production of the same
crop from the same land year after year tends to use up the supply of one or,
perhaps, two kinds of plant food faster than they are made available by the
ordinary processes that are going on in the soil, with the result that in a few
years the yields become consistently disappointing. The introduction, from
time to time, of a crop that uses different elements of plant food, or uses them
in different proportions, allows the renewal of the supply of that particular
element upon which the previous crop has made the heaviest demand, and
enables the farmer to return to his main crop with the assurance of greater
profit.
The Value of Rotation.
A change of crops, indeed, may sometimes actually result in an increase in
the supply of plant food in the soil. An illustration is afforded by the prac-
tice in parts of the tablelands of the State, where oats for hay and potatoes
are rotated. The cultivation required by the potatoes is quite different from
that required by the oats, and the effect of the different treatments is cer-
tainly to hasten the break-up of the chemical compounds in the soil, and thus
to render certain elements available that, though present previously, could
not be used by the plants. Another illustration may be quoted—that of
lucerne and wheat. Farmers know that no wheat-land yields grain like that
on which lucerne has been grown, and the reason is that the deep-rooting


habit of the lucerne has led to plant food being brought from the subsoil and
made available for the surface-feeding wheat when the lucerne has been broken
up and the roots have decayed.
Rotation has an important relation, also, to some of the active enemies of
crops—notably weeds, insects, and fungi. It is now widely recognised by
farmers that the occurrence of black oats is closely associated with continuous
cropping for wheat, and that some change is imperative if a dirty paddock is
to be cleaned up. Better illustration of this can hardly be furnished than by
the result of the “continuous wheat experiment'’ at Cowra Experiment
Farm. Certain land on that farm was clean'd in 1906 and divided into
three main parts —one of these being devoted to wheat every year, another to
wheat alternated with fallow, and the third to wheat alternated with a fodder
crop. That experiment was initiated to prove that wheat cannot be grown
continuously without a serious loss in the eventual yields. And that was
exactly what happened. Seed of the cleanest and best quality was used ;
cultivation methods were adopted that should have tended to check and
destroy any oats that might have been on the land (an old common); but it
was to no purpose. Black oats and Saucy Jack were to be seen by 1910, and
by 1912 they had so taken possession that the manager reported that “but
little wheat is now taken from the area, and the weeds have become a menace
to the cleared adjoining areas.” It is a most significant fact that on the
sections where wheat was grown alternately with fallow and with fodder crops,
the oats were a negligible factor. A valuable experiment (rotation plots as
well) had thus to be interrupted and then re-started on a new area, simply
because the “ wheat-every-year ” portion had become infested with black
oats. The Department set out to prove that continuous wheat is not profit-
able compared with some rotation, however limited, and the black oats
furnished the evidence in quick time. We know of no better proof of the
value of the change of crops than that abandoned experiment area at Cowra.
The influence of rotation on insect pests is, perhaps, less conspicuous in the
case of wheat than of almost any other crop, though even there it has its
value. As to fungus diseases, especially “Take-all,” there is no room for
doubt : indeed, it will be found that a change to oats is quite essential
where a paddock contains badly infected patches.
Limitations of the Position.
The importance of rotation being thus indicated, the question presents
itself, “What crops can be used in connection with wheat under New South
Wales conditions ? ”
It has to be confessed at once that there is no crop that wholly serves the
purpose. Wheat is grown on such a large scale and under such extensive
cultural conditions in this State that there is no other crop that offers such
a certain market at remunerative prices, or that can be grown in such large
areas. Barley and oats have not the sure market awaiting them in large
quantities, even if they could be relied upon to yield as well in all parts of
the State where wheat is profitable : and the same objection applies with even
greater force to potatoes, turnips, and the other root crops which in nearly
all other agricultural countries are considered most desirable as changes from
grain.
Rape in combination with either barley or oats, or by itself, is a valuable
soil renovator, and as a fodder crop is really indispensable to the wheat and
sheep farmer ; but to recommend it as a rotation crop on a large scale under


our conditions would Ito to presuppose that the funner would have at certain
times of the year a far larger number of sheep than can he carried on any
average wheat farm. A farmer with 1,000 acres, for instance—soo acres of
wdiich is annually under wheat —would never think of sowing the balance,
500 acres, with rape and barley, for the simple reason that to feed-off such
an area he would require at least 5,000 sheep.
It is essential, as we Lac e said, that any change recommended in rotation
with wheat should be a profitable one; in other words, it should Ire such a.s
will not only improve the condition of the soil, but also improve the condition
of the hanking account.
Fallow as a Rotation.
The rotation this Department would advise in respect of large portions of
the wheat belt is simply wheat, alternated with fallow, with such occasional
variations as the circumstances requin' or permit. The period of fallow not
only enables the farmer to increase the store of moisture, but it also allows
the soil to recuperate, and additional plant food to be made available, and it
gle es an opportunity for cultivating the surface for the destruction of weeds
and certain fungus and insect pests. The value of fallow in connection with
wheat lias been discussed again and again in the Agricultural Gazette and in
other publications of the Department, but in this recommendation of fallow
as an alternative to wheat in a rotation, it is not out of place to refer again
to the experiment at Cowra, In tire six years of that experiment the “ wheat-
every-year ’ section averaged 16’8 bushels per aero, the “ wheat-aftsr-bare-
fallow” section averaged 2DB bushels, and the “ wheat-and-fodder-crop ”
section, 26’4 bushels. For the purpose of that comparison we have included
in each group both manured and unmauured plots, and various treatments of
the straw, but this experiment yielded many interesting results that might be
stated in various ways. We will present one : Taking only those plots
that were not manured, and where the grain was stripped and the straw
ploughed in, we find that an acre cropped for wheat every year would
(according to these results) have given 81 bushels in the six years, while an
acre fallowed every alternate year, and cropped in 1907, 1909, and 1911
would have given 82-2 bushels. The total yield of grain from three harvests
on the wheat-and-baro-fallow ” section was thus slightly greater than that
of six years on the “ wheat-every-year ” section—surely a very striking result.
Moreover, the yield on the “ wheat-every-year ” section was decreasing so
rapidly in the last year or two that the results would soon have been quite
overwhelmingly in favour of fallow. In ordinary farm practice probably
four crops would be taken off in six years, the fallow being limited to two
years ; even that would have been sufficient to prevent either the rapid
decline in yield that analysis of the figures discloses, or the premature termi-
nation of the experiment already referred to. Obviously, too, the cost of
producing the 8l bushels in six crops would be appreciably greater than that
attached to the 82-2 bushels in three crops.
Various Suitable Crops.
ariations should certainly be made from time to time, however, for a
simple rotation of wheat and fallow indefinitely is likely eventually to
exhaust the humus content of the soil. The store of this important soil
constituent may ho maintained in two ways, both associated with the


depasturing of 'heepi on the farm, viz. : ,• I ) liie vinwth of fodder crops like
rape, and (.1*) the leaving of tbe paddocks out in grass at intervals. The value
of rape as a soil renovator and for fodder purposes is already well known to
every farmer, and on every farm of 1,000 acres we should find annually
about 40 to 50 acres under it. Farmers have long since proved, too, the
excellent feeding value of the natural herbage, especially of the trefods, that
springs up on large areas of oar cultivated lands when “left out.” .Such
herbage deserves to be esteemed almost as much for its fertilising properties
when ploughed under with the excrement of the animals that have been
depastured on it, as for its value as feed.
In the way of ordinary crops, the resources of a fanner who desires to
change the crop on an area that is beginning to go oil’ art' greater than might
be supposed. More oats could certainly be grown with profit in this State,
and the same may bo said of barlev, and, though it must be admitted that
they do not quite fulfil the old idea of what constitutes a rotation (inasmuch
as they are “ white ” or grain crops), they might well be made to serve the
purpose of the farmer every few years.
In districts like the north-west, and in those northern portions of the
central west where they can be profitably grown, maize and sorghum also
offer the farmer opportunities under this heading. How even such a short
and apparently inadequate rotation as wheat and maize might influence
profits may be illustrated by reference to the results of an experiment that
has been carried out at Morth Dakota, U.S.A. During fifteen years a certain
area that was continuously under wheat produced during that time a total
of 206 bushels, while another plot that throughout the trial had been under
maize for one year and then wheat for three years, produced in all 233
bushels of wheat, and a third, where the maize was manured and followed by
wheat for three years, produced 262 bushels of wheat. The changes in the
method of cultivation and in the demands of the crop on the soil were
obviously beneficial there, for, notwithstanding that where maize was grown
the wheat account suffered by the loss of one crop in four, the total yield
during the fifteen years was appreciably greater than where the w'hoie
fifteen crops were wheat. The net monetary return from the “ wheat-and-
maize” (unmanured) section, was nearly 50 per cent, greater than that from
the “ wheat-every-year ” section.
It should be taken for granted that where root crops can be grown to
advantage they should be resorted to occasionally, and their value should
not be overlooked. There remains one other crop that might be mentioned
—lucerne. It certainly cannot be grown on an extensive scale in most
wheat districts ; but its value on any farm, either for the accumulation of
a reserve of high-class fodder, or for the purposes of grazing, and its
effect on the fertility of the soil, are so great that it should have a place on
every farm.
What has been said with regard to rotation should be regarded by farmers
as suggestive of their resources in the way of change. Certain it is that
continuous wheat-growing is disastrous in the long run, and it is for the
careful agriculturist to realise that the demands made upon his soil by wheat
are to a great extent minimised by fallowing. What other rotation is
suitable to his district on the lines indicated in the foregoing, he alone can
decide.


Biaek Oats.
Black oats ace certainly very common in our wheat areas, but their
suppression is largely a matter of cultivation, and is not by any means so
difficult as would appear. Weeds we shall probably always have in out-
fields, as long as our fine wheat lands retain their fertility, and the biaek
oat will probably always find its place ; but a consideration of its character-
istics will show the proper methods of keeping it within bounds and utilising
the undoubtedly good forage which it provides when it cannot be entirely
suppressed. The principle is to induce the oat seeds to germinate, and
then destroy the plants before they seed.
But having resolved upon the necessary steps to be taken in the campaign
against the pest, we find that their practical application is not such a simple
matter. It means work, and in cases where the pest is bad it may mean
the sacrifice of at least one crop on land under continuous cultivation.
When we recollect, however, that the lost crop would have been a dirty one,
that the ground is greatly improved by the spiel!, and that perhaps a valuable
supply of winter feed is obtained for stock, we cannot consider the price of
redemption too high. Moreover, the steps recommended by the Departmental
officers will bo found less costly, and spread over a shorter period, than the
efforts which many have put forth in their vigorous attacks upon the
intrude)-.
If any farmer should doubt the ultimate result of his labour in following
these recommendations, let him go to the nearest Experiment Farm and,
growing in the midst of infested districts, he will see good clean crops upon
land from which the terror of the black oat has long since disappeared.
The Control of the “Black Oat” Pest.*
The loss in yield caused by the presence of “ black ” or “ wild oats ” amongst
the wheat crops is yearly increasing. In the north-western and western
districts the greatest problem the farmer has to face is how to deal with them.
They arc troublesome because the seed lies in the ground without germinating
until the wheat is sown, when the favourable temperature and condition of
the soil make it sprout and grow with the wheat. In some of the older
paddocks the oats come up so thickly that is impossible to obtain a profitable
crop.
During the recent years many acres have been left unsown in the
north-west because of this, while in nearly every paddock the yield has been
materially reduced. Leaving out altogether any loss which accrues through
the land having to be thrown out of cultivation, it is not too much to say
that the wheat yield in this part of the State is reduced at least 30 per cent
by wild oats. Some paddocks, although sown, are not stripped owing to
the oats outpacing the wheat ; whilst in other paddocks only the best patches
are picked out for harvesting. The reduction in the yield has become so
serious on some farms that the sale of these properties is hindered, although
the soil in other respects is excellent.
The prevalence of wild oats may be attributed to two causes —the almost
universal use of the combined harvester, and the constant cropping of the
land. The combined harvester is almost diabolically devised as a disseminator
of the seed of the wild oat, and a paddock which is comparatively clean
* A, H. E. McDonald, Manager, Trangio Experiment Farm.


will, in three or four years, he almost unfit to sow with wheat when this
means of harvesting is employed, A\ hen to this is added constant cropping,
until the land becomes too dirty to
produce wheat, it can be realised how
difficult it is to control the pest.
An additional source of infection is
the rise of “ oaty ” feed for working
horses. The hairy coating of the seed
enables it to survive the digestive
operations of the horse and the ox,
and the pest can thus be spread to
land hitherto clean.
Attempts of various kinds have been
made to eradicate the oats, but they
are only partially successful. Perhaps
the most general practice is to leave
the land out for a year, and utilise it
for grazing. Usually the land is not
worked, however, and the method is
practically unsuccessful, as only a few
of the seeds germinate. One fair crop
of wheat may be obtained in the fol-
lowing year, but after that the land
has to be rested again.
Another method is to leave the land
out for a year in the same way, but
to plough it either late in the winter
or early in the spring or summer. This
gives better results, but it does not
completely clean the land.
Other farmers do not leave their
land out, but plough early, in some
cases as soon as the harvest is over,
and work the land with the harrows
or cultiv ator to induce the oats to ger-
minate. A quick-growing, early matur-
ing variety such as Comeback, Florence,
or Bunyip is then sown. This method
is perhaps the most successful, but it
does not altogether remove the evil, for
the simple reason that many of the black
oat seeds lie dormant and only start
into life after the wheat has been sown.
How, then, is the black oat to be
controlled ? If the seed which is lying
in the ground can be made to ger-
minate, then its eradication becomes a
simple matter, as it is only necessary
to kill the young plant. How is
Black Oat (Avena fatua).
germination to be brought about ? The wild oat seed is accused of lying
dormant in the ground for years. Some men quote instances of paddocks
which have been thrown out of cultivation and so closely grazed that no black
oat seeds have been allowed to mature, but which have produced oats as


thickly as ever, five, seven, ami even ten years later, when ploughed up.
Even allowing for seed which may have been produced unobserved, it is
certain that the seed does, under certain conditions, retain its vitality for
Jong periods when buried.
Close observation and study lead to the opinion that the persistence of
the black oat is not due to any peculiarity which causes some seeds to remain
dormant for one or more years, but is chiefly due to the fact that the seed
germinates slowly and requires favourable temperatures. It is evident from
the observations of Mr. Damell-Smith that the short velvety hairs on the
seed form a protective covering, preventing moisture coming in contact with
the germ, and so retarding germination. It is probable that this protective
covering is effective only for a time, and that when the soil immediately
surrounding the seed is kept moist long enough, germination does take place.
If young wild oat plants are examined it will be found that in nearly every
case the seed has sprouted in the earth about 3 or I inches below the surface ;
and it is here the land remains moist for the longest period. The surface
soon dries out, and becomes unfavourable to germination.
Experiments have proved that when the soil is kept moist only 24 per
cent, of the seed germinates after three weeks in February, when the tempera-
ture of the soil is comparatively high. Observation in the field indicates
that comparatively low temperatures encourage germination, and that the
oats come up most thickly in May, J une, and July. This has led practical
farmers to sow wheat early, so that it will get a start on the oats.
Experience shows that few of the seeds will germinate if the land is not
worked. It may be laid out for a year, but when it is broken up the black
oats will come almost if not as thickly as ever. This, of course, shows that
the cultivated soil provides the conditions which are favourable to germination.
If the seed be examined it will be noticed that the hairs are arranged in
such a way that it always moves forward when touched. The tough awn or
tail attached to the seed assists in the progressive movement, as with changes
in amount of moisture, &c., it alternately twists and straightens, and each time
forces the seed in a forward direction. The seed, therefore, works through
the soil, and is further distributed by cultivators, harrows, ploughs, &c.,
until it is ultimately mixed with the soil to at least the depth to which
cultivation is carried.
The clods on the surface harbour many a black oat seed. It is probable
that in a dirty paddock there is more than sufficient in these to re-seed
it. Strenuous efforts may be made with the ploughs, harrows, and cultivators
to encourage germination ; but all the time the clods are harbouring the seed.
The smallest of them is big enough to hold a grain. They never become
moist, and thus the seed is well protected.
We can now see from this reasoning that to free a paddock from black
oats—
(1) The right time must be selected;
(2) The land must be well worked ;
(3) The clods must be all broken ;
(4) The soil must be kept moist from the surface downwards as long as
possible.
To bring about germination, in fact, a little more care, rather than less,
must be used than is the case with other seed : the contrary is usually the
case—hence many failures.


The time to commence the work of cleaning a paddock coincides with that
of preparation for wheat. It should be so arranged that the land will be in
good order about May, when the actual work of fitting the land for the
germination of the seed should commence. Since, however, the preparation
for wheat generally monopolises attention at this time, the working of
land to destroy oats is delayed. If it be taken in hand as soon as the
sowing is over, it can, provided the season is propitious, be accomplished
before the season is too far advanced.
Immediately sowing is finished, the dirty land should be well ploughed and
thoroughly harrowed—the harrowing is most important, as it helps to make
the soil fine, and leaves it in such a condition that it retains the moisture.
Ploughing alone is not sufficient ; the land is left loose and soon dries out.
The farmer must remember that he is dealing with seed, although he lias
done no sowing, and the same attention must he given as when wheat is sown.
Ho one over dreams of merely ploughing his wheat in and leaving it at that,
and there is no earthly reason why it should bo sufficient to do so when it is
required to make oats grow. The harrow must he used to make the ground
fine and firm about the seed. If the ground is dry when it is ploughed, it is
practically useless to harrow ; the work should be done when the soil is moist.
The paddock ought to be ploughed in readiness, and harrowed immediately
after rain.
When black oats are being dealt with, harrowing, however, is not suffi-
cient ; the roller must he used also. It was pointed out above that the soil must
be kept moist from the surface downwards to promote germination. Tills is
one of the essential conditions, and its maintenance depends chiefly upon the
use of the roller. If the land is harrowed and left rough, a loose, dry layer
of earth soon forms at the surface. The layer may be 2 or 3 inches deep.
The large number of seeds lying in it do not germinate, as moisture
is not in contact with them long enough. Observations will always show
that the young oat plants found amongst the wheat crops have come from
seed buried deeply'—the soil there is firm and moist.
Further, seed of any kind will al way's germinate best in a fine soil. Black
oats are never found to be as troublesome in the fine sandy loams as they 7 are
in the clay 7 soils, which are often cloddy 7 . The fine particles of such soils
wrap around the seeds and hold the moisture to them closely.
Another most important point, and one which in the past has been over-
looked, is the power the clods have of protecting the seed of wild oats against
germination. Neither moisture nor air penetrates them readily 7 , and in the
absence of either, germination will not take place.
The roller breaks the clods, makes the soil fine, and leaves it firm at
the surface. Moisture rises freely to replace any lost by evaporation, and all
the seed irr the ground is under favourable conditions. None of the loose
open spaces, which do so much towards preventing germination, are left in
the ground after the roller has bum over it. Briefly, the conditions are
made as nearly ideal as possible.
Summarised, then, the land should be well ploughed, thoroughly harrowed,
and rolled at the right time, lire right time is in May, June, or July.
After the roller is used the land should not he touched with any implement.
Provided the season is at all favourable, it will be found that this working
will sprout the seed. The plants then have to he destroyed. This can he
accomplished either by feeding-off with sheep or by ploughing. When either
method is followed, care must be taken that the plants do not got an
opportunity to seed.


The oats make exteilmit fetal for sheep, and their value in this respect
repays the cost of cultivation. It is perfectly safe to feed them off while
the coo! weather lasts. Immediately warm weather begins to assert itself,
however, no time should he lost in ploughing the oats under Thev produce
seed in a remarkably short space of time, and any hesitation n,av result in a
fresh sunply hieing formed.
If the oats are kept closely eaten, it is a simple matter to destroy them
with the plough. Long, rank growth is somewhat difficult to cover,
out unless it is done the plants will go on growing and will ripen seed
This is especially likely to he the case should the land he wet, when it is
ploughed. Under such conditions mouldboard ploughs do the most satisfac-
tory work, as the sod is well turned. The best time to destroy the oats is
when the land is dry. The cutting up of the plant, when soil moisture is
scarce, kills it at once.
As it is still doubtful how deep black oat seeds lie in the ground, care
should be taken, when cropping in the subsequent year, not to till deeper
than was done when ploughing to prepare for the germination of the oats.
If a deeper ploughing is given it is possible that fresh seed will be brought
to the surface and germinated there by the favourable conditions that
have been carefully devised to help the wheat seed.
Why is the Black Oat so difficult to eradicate ?*
The trouble begins and ends with the seed. The germ is well protected
with the thick hard coat of the seed, and this coat or skin is covered with
fine silky hairs. It is the thick skin and well-protected germ which cause
the difficulty of extermination.
The grain needs a moister soil, and to he in contact with moisture for a
longer period, than does wheat and many other thin-skinned grains, before
it will germinate. The hairy nature of the seed-covering especially tends to
throw off moisture. In practice, this statement is found correct, for light
showers that quickly evaporate out of the soil have little effect in causing
germination of the oat, while other grains germinate freely.
Again, even with a fall of rain which would otherwise be sufficient to
germinate black oats, they will not germinate if the soil is loosely packed,
nor will they germinate if buried deeply in the soil.
The foundation of any system of eradicating oats from the soil—that is,
getting them to germinate (for the plants are easy to destroy) depends on—
(1) Feeding the farm stock with oat-free fodder;
(2) Sowing grain, wheat, ic., free from black oats ; and,
(3) Bringing the oat seeds already in the soil within germinating
distance of the surface.
The most universal method amongst farmers is to turn the land over to
pasture for two to five years, when wheat-growing is not profitable owing to
the prevalence of oats. The object aimed at is not attained by such a
method.
Another favoured means is growing Algerian oats, and cutting them
for hay. This method is also faulty. There is no doubt that by continuing
to grow hay-crops—wheat or oats—for a number of seasons and cutting them
before the black oat plants shed their seed, the trouble would be overcome.
* AX. H. Reynolds, Manager, Cowra Experiment Farm.


In certain localities success in reducing the black oats has been attained
by growing a winter fodder crop, such as rape, in alternate years, or once in
three gears. The value of this method is somewhat limited, because rape
is not a successful proposition in all localities where wheat is grown, and,
further, it occupies the land in certain localities at a time most suitable for
germinating oats, viz., the autumn and winter.
1 would suggest to farmers that they devote their energies in the
eradication of black oats to the period of the year during which they receive
the greatest rainfall. If this occurs in the autumn or winter, the prospects
are then best for the speedy reduction of the pest.
The best rainfall period should be devoted to systematic cultivation, and
no crop should lie sown to hinder or minimise the success of the thorough
working of the soil.
Of course, only a section of the farm could be operated on in any one
season.
The system suggested is as follows :
First.—A shallow 3-inch cultivation with plough or disc cultivator, then
harrow well.
Second.—When plant growth occurs, plough the greatest depth it is
intended to cultivate before the succeeding crop is sown. Again harrow.
Third. —When plant growth shows above the surface of the soil again,
plough or disc cultivate, but shallower than before, and harrow.
The harrow is necessary because black oats prefer a fine seed-bed.
Continue such treatment throughout the favoured rainfall period, and on
no consideration plough deeper than before. When no further germination
of oats takes place, keep the surface 3 inches of soil cultivated until the
seeding time for summer or winter crops,
VARIETIES OF WHEAT.
A few pages back we made the statement that the production of improved
varieties has been one of the important factors in the development of the
wheat-growing industry in Kew South Wales, and that is no exaggeration
of the facts. A number of excellent varieties of wheat have been the result
of the cross-breeding and selection carried out by officers of the Department,
some of them (notably Federation) adding in a very substantial degree to
the average yield of grain, others to that of hay, and yet others (like Thew)
to the quantity of green feed that coastal dairy-farmers can grow for the
early spring.
Beyond even those three conspicuous contributions to potential and real
wealth, there are others (several of them, like Marshall’s Ko. 3 and Yandilla
King, not the products of the Department, though recommended by it)
that for special seasons, special climatic conditions, or special purposes have
so far proved their worth as to be well and favourably known among wheat-
growers. Thus nearly all the names once familiar as those of consistent
yielders have disappeared from the Department’s list. It must not be
thought, however, that the merits of the older varieties have been overlooked.
The qualities of any wheat known to be in general cultivation have been
carefully considered, and no variety has been omitted until it has been
proved that it can be replaced by another of equal, if not superior, yielding
capacity, and which at the same time is better in some other respects.


The numerous errors that have occurred in consequence of the misunder-
standings of the meaning of the terms " early ” and - late ” suggest that
the preliminary to the list should be a word of explanation and of warning.
“Early” and “Late” Wheats.
Sow early-maturing varieties late in the season, and late-maturing varieties
early in the season, is a rule which usually can be followed in its entirety.
Heavy' losses are occasioned y r early through farmers sowing their wheats at
the wrong time. This is due either to the fact that farmers do not know
which varieties are early and which are late, or, as is more frequently the
case, it is due to a misapprehension of the terms “ early ” and “ late ” as
applied to varieties of wheat and other plants. To the vegetable-grower, as
well as to the stud wheat-farmer, the term “early'” has always meant a
variety that grows quickly, and produces its crop early, and similarly the
term “ late ” has always meant a variety that matures slowly, and produces
its crop late. Hence, to sow an “ early ” wheat at the beginning of the
sowing season is literally to make an attempt to produce wheat in the middle
of winter, and to sow a “ late ” wheat at the end of the sowing season is to
look for a grain crop in the height of summer. The quick-growing habit of
the first kind will bring it into head at a time when, even if other condition-
are favourable, frost is almost sure to prevent the maturing of grain, and
the slow-growing habit of the second kind will produce the ear at a time
when extreme heat will be just as disastrous.
If it is remembered that “ early wheats ” are early in maturing, and “ late
wheats ” are late in maturing, the whole problem is solved, and there is
no possibility of mistakes being made in the future.
Sow “ early ” wheats last, and “ late ” wheats first.
Varieties According to Maturity and Sowing.*
It is just as important to sow the most suitable varieties for certain
districts as it is to sow them at the right time. At the Conference of
Departmental officers held in 1917, it was decoded to make the recommenda-
tions contained in the following tables. For the guidance of growers it will
be convenient first to classify the best wheats in respect of maturity, though
slight differences in various districts may be expected:—
Very Early. —Sunset, Bunyip, Florence, Firbank.
Early. —Canberra, Comeback, Thew, Improved Steinwedel.
(These should usually be sown late.)
Mid-season. —Hard Federation, Warren, Bomen, Federation.
(These should usually be sown in mid-season.)
Late. —Marshall's Ko. 3. Yandilla King, Kymcr. Zealand, Cleveland,
Huguenot.
Very Late. —Haynes’ Blue-stem.
(These should usually be sown early.)
* Detailed descriptions of the varieties recommended in this classification will be
found beginning on page 330.


Varieties Recommended.
A.—Dual-purpose Wheats.
Recommended for- both Grain and Hay.
Variety.
Period of Sowing.
! Districts.
|
Bomen
Mid-season
... Central - western Slopes; South-
western Slopes and Riverina ;
North-western Slopes.
Cleveland ...
Early ...
Early and mid-season
... Cooler portions of South-western
Slopes and Riverina.
... Central Tableland; cooler portions
of North-western and Central-
western Slopes.
Comeback ...
Mid-season and late ...
Late
... Central-western Slopes; North-
western Slopes.
... South-western Slopes and Riverina.
Firbank
Mid-season and late ...
... Central-western Slopes.
Florence
Mid-season and late ...
... Central-western Slopes; South-
western Slopes and Riverina ;
North-western Slopes; Central
Tableland; Northern Tableland;
Black Soil Plains ; Western
Plains.
Haynes’ Blue-stem.
Very early
... Northern Tableland.
Improved Stein-
weidel.
Mid-season
... Drier portions of South-western
Slopes and Riverina; Central-
western Slopes; North-western
I Slopes; Black Soil Plains;
Western Plains.
Marshall’s No. 3 ...
Early ...
Early and mid-season
.. South-western Slopes and Riverina.
... Central Tableland ; Central-western
Slopes ; North-western Slopes.
Rymer
Early mid-season
Mid-season
... j Central-western Slopes; North-
western Slopes.
... Central Tableland.
Warren
Early ...
Early and mid-season
Mid-season
... Black Soil Plains.
... Coastal.
.. Central-western Slopes; North-
western Slopes.
Yandilla King
Early ...
Early and mid-season
... South-western Slopes and Riverina..
.. Central Tableland; North-western
Slopes ; Central-western Slopes.
B. — Wheats for Grain only.
Not recommended for Hay.
Variety.
Period of Sowing.
Districts.
Bunyip
Mid-season and late ...
South-western Slopes and Riverina ;
Central-western Slopes.
Late
North-western Slopes.
Canberra
Late ...
South-western Slopes and Riverina ;
Central-western Slopes; North-
western Slopes.
Federation ...
Mid-season
Central Tableland ; South-western
Slopes and Riverina; Central-
western Slopes ; North-western
Slopes.
Hard Federation ...
Mid-season and late ...
Central Tableland; Central-western
Slopes ; North-western Slopes.


C.—Wheats
for Hay only.
Not recoin mondial for Grain
Variety.
Period of .Srnvin^.
las, nets.
Firbank
Mid-season, and late .
... South-western Slopes and Riverina ;
North-western Slopes ; Western
Plains.
Huguenot ...
.. Early and mid-season
.. (, oas tal.
Thew
.. Mid-season and late .
... Coastal.
Zealand
Early ...
... Central Tableland; South-western
Slopes and Eiverina : Central-
western Slopes.
I).
—Wheats Suitable for Ghees' Feed and Soiling.
Variety.
Period of .Sowing.
Huguenot ...
... Early and mid-season
... Coastal.
Thew
... Early, inid-season and late
Coastal; Northern Tableland;
Month-western Slopes.
Florence ,..
... Early, mid-season and late
... Coastal.
E.— Wheats to be Grow* under Irrigation.
In experiments carried out by the Department, the following wheats have
given the best results when grown under irrigation for bay and green
fodder; —
(1) Zealand. (2) Marshall’s No. 3. (3) Florence (late sowing).
These experiments are being continued in several districts.
Classification of Wheat Varieties from a Milling Standpoint.*
The wheats recommended in the foregoing list have been classified by
Messrs. F. B. Guthrie and G. W. Norris, of the Chemist’s Branch, as
follows ;
Nev: South Wales Slrou ;j While Wheat —
Comeback.
* The milling values of the varieties recommended by the Department are referred
to on page 334.


Medium Strong-Flour Wheats —
Bomen, Bunyip, Cleveland, Canberra, Federation, Firbank, Florence,
Haynes’ Blue-stern, -Marshall's Xo. ‘5, Hymen, Sunset, Thew,
Yandilla Xing. .Zealand.
Wealc-Flour Wheats —
Improved Steinwedel. Warren.
Macaroni Wheat —
Huguenot.
SOWING THE WHEAT.
One of the essentials of a well-sown paddock of wheat is that the seed
should be thoroughly covered. Whether the land has been fallowed or has
been under stubble, a final cultivation or harrowing has to be given, atid,
unimportant as it may appear at first sight, a great deal really depends upon
the direction in which it is done. Both harrows and cultivators leave
shallow furrows and ridges in the soil, and if the hoes of the drill get into
The Drill at Work.
these furrows and run laterally along them, especially on land that is not
quite even, the seed will not be covered as it should be. If, on the other
hand, the final cultivation has been carried out at right angles to the direc-
tion in which the seed is to be sown, the hoes of the drill will cut through
the furrows and ridges, and the seed will be properly covered. This is one
of the things the Department has always insisted upon in connection with
the Farmers’ Experiment Plots, and no doubt it has had some influence on
the almost uniformly good results obtained. Let the final cultivation be
at right angles to the drilling.


Setting the Drill.
Another factor worth mention in this connection is the proper setting of
the drill according to the variety and condition of the seed. A drill set to
sow, say, 45 lb. of Federation per acre will often sow as much as 65 lb. of
small u shotty ” seed. Many farmers have made mistakes in this way,
having taken it for granted that the drill will sow large grains and small
grains at the same rate. In reality the larger grains run through the drill
distinctly slower than shotty seed, with the result that a farmer who thinks
he has put out enough seed to sow a certain paddock finds he is several bags
short. It is safe to reduce the drill to sow 30 or 35 lb. of “ shotty ” grain as
compared with 45 lb. of an average sample of Federation.
Variety is not the only factor that produces this discrepancy in seeding.
Bobs, Comeback and similar varieties will almost always tend to run faster
through the drill than Federation. Then, again, a variety will differ with
the season. The Federation harvested in 1913, for instance, was appreciably
heavier and more “ shotty ” than usual, and the drill should next year have
been set according to the sample.
The farmer will find it advisable before starting to sow, to measure out a
length of 10 chains, which if sown with one stroke of an ordinary 8 feet
3 inches drill will cover just about one-eighth of an acre. Weigh the seed
into the drill, sow the length, and then weigh the seed that is left in the
drill. It is then possible to calculate almost exactly what will be required to
sow the paddock, and to set the drill accordingly.
Cleaning out the Drill.
The cleaning out of the wheat-cups in the drill is another operation that
frequently exercises the farmer. If he rightly wishes to keep his paddocks
absolutely clean by avoiding the mixing of varieties, he is reduced to the
alternatives of running out the seed that remains in the drill on to the
headlands, or of jacking the drill up by setting a log, end on, under the
axle and standing the horses “ up.” But the former is obviously not a good
method, and the latter is most unsatisfactory in the extreme probability
that the axle will be bent. Even jacking the drill up with proper jacks is
not free from the latter objection.
The best method is to have a key made on the same principle as those
used for tightening up ordinary spring-wire mattresses. If a drill be
examined, an opening will be found in the iron plates at the ends of the seed-
box, and working just inside the hole is the end of the square iron bar that
agitates the feeders in the cups. The key should be made to fit through the
hole in the plate on to the square end of that iron bar. A few 7 turns of such
a key will soon empty the cups of any -wheat they may contain, and the
mixing of varieties is avoided without waste, and with a minimum of trouble.
Quantity of Seed to sow per acre.
The quantity of seed to be sown per acre depends largely upon the variety
that is sown, and also upon the time when it is sown. A safe rule to follow
is that good stooling varieties, such as Marshall’s No. 3, Rymer, and Yandilla
King, should be sown at a lesser rate per acre than such comparatively poor
stooling varieties as Bunyip or Firbank. If the wheat is sown early, a
smaller quantity can be used than if the seed is sown later on in the season.


April
May
JU)K‘
S'»w inc.
Marshall’s No. 3 ...
... 40-45 lb.
45-50 il).
Rymer
...: 40-45 ,,
45-50 ,,
Zealand
...; 40-45 „
45-50 ,,
Yandilla King
... 40-45 ,,
45-50 ,,
Cleveland ...
... 40-45 ,,
45-50 „
Huguenot ...
Haynes’ Blue-stem
... 40-45 „
45-50 ,,
... 40-45 ,,
45-50 ,,
Genoa
... 40-45 ,,
44-50 ,,
Warren
...! 40-45 „
45-50 .,
Bomen
... 40-45 ,,
45-50 ,,
Federation ...
...i 40-45 ,,
45-50 „
Hard Federation ...
., 1 40-45 ..
45-50 ,,
Comeback ...
55 ,,
60 ib.
Canberra
45-50 ,.
60 „
Thevv
1
50 ,,
55
Improved Steinwedel
...:
50 „
55 ,,
Sunset
...
50 ,,
55 ,,
Bunyip
55 „
60 „
Florence
50 „
55 ,,
Firbank
55 „
GO ,,
Again, the rainfall in the district largely influences the quantity of seed that
should be sown per acre. For instance, in a district where the rainfall is,
say, 22 inches, a larger amount of seed can be sowui per acre than in a
district where the rainfall is only from 17 to 18 inches per annum.
The following table may serve as a guide to wheat-growers in the principal
wheat districts of the State:—
These amounts are for crops that are sown for grain; if sown for hay,
especially with late sowings of Firbank or Comeback, the quantity may be
increased by 5 lb. per acre.
Depth of Sowing.
The depth at which wheat should be sown is often a subject of discussion
among farmers, there being those who advocate a comparatively shallow
sowing and others that favour a deep one. In general, nothing is gained
by sowing too deeply. The contention of many farmers that deep sowing
ensures deep rooting, and therefore greater drought resistance, is based on
a misconception. The roots of a grain sown 2 inches deep will penetrate just
as far into the soil as those of one sown 4 inches deep. The principal
advantage of sowing fairly deep is to make sure that the grain is well
covered and thus protected from the attacks of birds. Any greater depth
than 3 inches can only be justified if the soil is in such a condition as will
ensure immediate germination and enable the young plants to get above the
surface before the top soil has had time to set hard. Certainly to put seed
more than 3 inches below the surface is, in most instances, to court failure.
If the conditions are favourable, from 2 to 21 inches is deep enough. In
the case of a late sowing—towards the end of June—w r hen a quick germina-
tion is desired, it will be found that inches is ample, provided the drill is
in good working order and the soil in such a condition that most of the
grains will bo uniformly covered.


The condition of the toil, indeed,, is perhaps the most important reason
for farmers sowing too deep—the soil is lumpy and not in a good state of
tilth, and in order to cover the seed in places the drill has to be set to a
considerable depth. On a well-cultivated and well-prepared paddock the drill
can he set to sow ever so much shallower than on a rough, ill-prepared one.
With a well-prepared seed-bed the seed can be placed just where the farmer
desires.
Change of Seed.*
It is generally advocated that farmers should obtain a change of seed from
time to time, and experiments in many districts have shown this to be
absolutely necessary. For a farmer to purchase large quantities of seed
every two or three years means considerable expense, and of late it has
been proved that the practice is actually unwise. It has been found that if,
instead of obtaining large quantities, farmers purchased a small quantity
of the best seed obtainable, and from this grew their own seed for the
following year, they would as a rule get far better results in every way at' a
reduced expenditure.
This was brought under my notice very forcibly in connection with the
farmers' experiment plots, where it was found that when high-class seed
wheat was brought from the Experiment Farms and sown in the plots with
cheek plots of the farmers’ own seed, the Departmental wheat gave far
better results than the farmers’ own seed; but if the farmers saved the
wheat obtained from the plots in which the Government seed was used, and
sowed it in the following year alongside of plots sown with seed obtained
direct from the Government farms, the former gave the better result. I
noticed this first in connection with some plots at Parkes some years ago.
A farmer on whose land we had had experiment plots one season, kept the
wheat from a plot of Rymer (the seed for which had been supplied from one
of the farms), and sowed it the next year, together with more Eymer seed
which he had obtained direct from the Government farm. The crop from
the seed that had had the advantage of one season to acclimatise it was
better than the other, I have noticed the same occur frequently since,
proving how necessary it is that farmers should grow their own seed.
The advice of the Department is that farmers should not purchase large
quantities of seed from the Government farms; they should purchase only
sufficient to produce their own seed for the following year. This small
quantity should be sown on land which is of the best quality available and
which has been fallowed and otherwise well prepared, so that the crop may
be given every chance of success. This means that farmers should regard
wheat obtained from the Department as “ stud wheat,” and not as “ seed
wheat.”
At the present time the Department is quite unable to supply anything
like the quantity of seed applied for—in fact, in recent years fully ten
times as much seed could have been sold as was available. If farmers would
content themselves with buying from the Government farms for stud pur-
poses only, there is no doubt that we could supply practically all the wheat
that would be required for producing the crop of two years hence.
There is a very large demand for seed of Firbank —a variety used on an
extensive scale as an early hay wheat —the reason being that farmers do not
regard it as a good grain wheat except for the far western districts, and in
the majority of cases they cut it for early hay, omitting to keep any for
seed, and relying on the Government farms for next year’s supply.
* Geo. Valder, Under Secretary and Director.


In the case of wheats required tor coastal purposes, such as Thew,
Warren, and Huguenot, the position is different, as the farmer on the coast
cannot save his own seed, the conditions usually being against the maturing
of the grain, and the proper means of threshing it not being available on
the farm. Such seed wheat will, therefore, have to be grown in the inland
districts, and already a certain number of western growers have found it
profitable to grow seed for sale to coastal farmers. The Department,
recognising the circumstances in these cases, makes arrangements to grow
larger areas of these varieties: but the demand is si great that the Depart-
ment will never be able to supply the quantities reqiiiivd. especially as it
ha- to grow so many varieties lor other districts.
COST AS A FACTOR IN WHEAT PRODUCTION.
The question of the cost of producing a crop of wheat has always been of
supreme importance to the wheat grower, but perhaps never in the history
of Now South Wales has it been of greater interest than now. Discussion
has been frequent and prolonged, the result being the disclosure of greater
diversity of opinion than about almost any subject touching farm practice.
Individual variations in methods of farm management and work are so
great that, while hundreds of farmers can agree about the quantity of seed
or manure that should be used per acre, or about the preparation of the land,
few can agree as to the actual cost of production. The estimates presented
in this article have been prepared from figures furnished by the managers
of various experiment farms in the State, and by the inspectors stationed in
the wheat belt, who in their turn obtained much valuable information from
the leading growers in their respective districts. Even in figures so care-
fully collected as these, some variations have been disclosed, but they are
not sufficiently largo to seriously affect the issue, and it is possible to pre-
sent the estimates in this article as approximating the average costs for the
wheat belt of the State.
Wheat for Grain.
In the following estimate of the cost of growing wheat for grain, it is
assumed that the land is fallowed, and the items of harrowing and cultiva-
ting are therefore greater than in the case of land that is ploughed, worked,
and sown in one season.
The item rent ” will vary with the value of the land, but for convenience
the capital value is assumed to bo £6 per acre, and two years’ rent at 5 per
cent, has to be debited against the crop. It should not be understood, how-
ever, that the farmer can make nothing out of the land while it is under
stubble or after it has been ploughed for the fallow. As pointed out
a few pages further on, profitable pickings are available for sheep on
such cultivation land at different times in the year, but, as the present con-
cern is the cost of producing a crop of wheat for grain, that aspect of the
subject may be set aside, and the rent for the whole of the two years must
then be charged against the grain crop. In the case of unfallowed land, of
course, only one year’s rent would be so charged.
Cartage to the railway is another item that is hard to estimate, as very
much depends on the distance and the nature of the country, but Is. per ton
per mile may be taken as a basis, and for an average distance of 6 or 7
miles this works out at very close to 2id. per bushel.


Cost of producing an acre of wheat for grain.
Estimated
yield,
20 bushels.
£
G.
d.
Ploughing once ...
0
6
0
Harrowing, three times at 9d.
0
2
3
Disc-cultivating once
... 0
2
6
Spring-tooth cultivating once ...
0
1
9
Drilling
0
1
6
Seed. 45 lb. at os. bushel
... 0
3
9
Superphosphate, cwt. at os. percwt.
0
2
6
Pickling seed
0
0
3
Harvesting with harvester
0
3
0
Bags, seven per acre at 6s. per doz. ...
... 0
3
6
Total cost of growing and harvesting
... £1
7
0
Bent, two years at 6s. per annum ...
... 0
12
0
Cartage to rail, at 2Jd. bushel
... 0
3
9
£2
2
9*
£
s
d.
Ploughing once ...
0
6
0
Harrowing, three times at 9d
0
2
3
Disc-cultivating once
0
2
6
Spring-tooth cultivating once ...
0
i
9
Drilling
0
i
6
Seed. 45 lb. at 5s. bushel
0
3
9
Superphosphate, 4 cwt. at 5s. per curt.
0
2
6
Pickling seed
0
0
3
Cutting with binder
0
3
6
Twine
0
2
0
Stocking ...
(1
1
0
Carting, stacking, and thatching
0
6
0
Cutting for chaff. 2 tons at 10s. per ton
1
0
0
Bags, say 24 per ton, at os. 6d. per dozen
1
2
0
Total cost of growing, harvesting and chaffing
£3
16
0
Rent, two years at 6s. per annum ...
0
12
0
Cartage to rail, at 6s. per ton ...
0
12
0
Total
£4
19
n*
Wheat lor Hay and Chaff.
Whether it is more profitable in an average season to harvest for grain or
for hay is ever an interesting subject for discussion. In the main, of course,
everything depends on the market prices of the two lines, but the respective
costs of growing, harvesting, and carting are also important, and it may
therefore be of interest to consider the average outlay per acre of cutting
with the reaper and binder and subsequently chaffing.
As the preceding estimate is on the basis of a yield of 20 bushels of grain,
it is convenient to assume that the equivalent yield in hay will be 2 tons.
The estimate is again formed on the assumption that the land is fallowed,
and the rent for two years is added as before.
Taking Is. per ton per mile as the basis of the item “ cartage to rail,” the
cost for a distance of, say, 6 miles can be set down at 6s. per ton.
Cost of producing an acre of wheat for chaff. Estimated yield, 2 tons.
* These estimates were framed under pre-war conditions, and in view of the un-
certainty of the whole situation it has been deemed advisable to leave them unaltered
for this edition.


Cost of producing an acre of wheat for grain in hiew
England.
Estimated
yield, 20 bushels.
£
S.
d.
Ploughing once ...
... 0
10
3
Harrowing, twice at Is. per acre
... 0
2
0
Cultivating once
... 0
2
6
Drilling
... 0
1
8
Seed, 60 lb. per acre at 5s. bushel ...
... 0
5
0
Superphosphate, i owt. at 5s. owt. ...
... 0
2
6
Pickling seed, at 3d. per acre ...
0
0
3
Cutting with binder
... 0
0
0
Twine, 6 lb. per acre at 6d.
... 0
2
6
Stocking for grain
... 0
i
6
Carting and stacking ...
... 0
9
0
7 bags at 6s. per doz. ...
... 0
3
6
Threshing at Is. 6d. per bag ...
... 0
10
6
Total cost of growing and harvesting
... £2
16
2
Rent, one year
... 0
6
0
Cartage to rail, at 2id. per bushel ...
... 0
3
9
Total
... £3
5
11*
It will be observed that the figures throughout are on a fairly high scale.
For instance, 6s. per acre is allowed for ploughing, whereas the work can be
done by contract at 4s. 6d. to ss. Regular farm hands employed on weekly
wages would also effect a saving. Depreciation is include'! m the rates for
the different operations.
Cost of Production in New England.
The above estimates apply to districts such as the Riverina, the Slopes,
and the west and north-west, but there are districts, such as New England,
where farm operations are conducted on a different scale, principally owing
to the different methods of cultivation and harvesting, necessitated by soil
and climatic conditions.
The Manager of Glen limes Experiment Farm provides the accompanying
estimate, which may be quoted as applying to a fairly extensive area. It will
be observed that the cost of production is very much higher than in .the
foregoing groups of figures. Ploughing is valued at 10s. 3d. per acre, as
against 6s. in the regular wheat districts, the reason being that in the
Riverina three and four-furrow ploughs are employed, whereas on the Table-
land the work is done with single and double-furrow implements. The areas
are also much smaller.
It is not the practice in Mew England to fallow the land for grain, and
rent must consequently be charged for one year only. The general valuation
of £6 per acre may be accepted as a basis for calculating the rent. Nor is
there any essential difference in the cost of carting to rail.
In addition to the return from the sale of grain the value of the straw
from the 20-bushel crop has to be considered. On most farms this is worth
at least £1 per ton, and thus there would be a set-off of 12s. to 16s. against
the extra cost of cutting with the reaper and binder.
* See footnote on preceding page.


Cost of producing an acre of wheat for chaff in
New England.
Estimated
yield, 2 tons.
d.
Ploughing once ...
0
10
3
Harrowing twice
0
2
0
Cultivating once
0
2
6
Drilling
0
1
8
Seed, 75 lb. at 5s. per bushel ...
0
6
3
Superphosphate, j cwt. at 6s. cwt. ...
0
2
6
Pickling seed, at 3d. per acre ...
0
0
3
Twine
0
2
6
Cutting with binder
0
5
0
Stocking for hay...
0
2
6
Carting and stacking ...
0
9
0
Cutting for chaff, 2 tons at 10s.
1
0
0
Bags, 2 doz. per ton at 5s. 6d. per doz.
1
2
0
Total cost of growing, harvesting, and
chaffing £4
6
•5
Rent, one year
0
6
0
Cartage to rail at 6s. per ton ...
0
12
0
Total
£5
4
6*
It is evident from a perusal of the statements submitted that the cost o£
producing either a bushel of wheat or a ton of hay will vary considerably in
different parts of the State. In the principal wheat-growing areas, however,
the costs are practically uniform when all other conditions, apart from
actual climate, are approximately equal. It is only in districts where a
totally different system of preparing the land and harvesting the crop is in
vogue that any material discrepancy occurs.
With regard to chaff, it is obvious that in such a district as Glen Innes
the production of chaff must necessarily be limited to the requirements of a
more or less restricted local area, except in seasons of a general shortage.
SHEEP ON THE WHEAT FARM.
One of the most important developments of wheat-growing in New South
Wales during the past few years has been the recognition by many of the
most up-to-date farmers, that sheep are a valuable adjunct to the business.
The combination of wool and mutton raising with w'heat is not new, of
course, successful growers having long practised it; but the number of those
who recognise that maximum profits in wheat production cannot be earned
without the aid of sheep has greatly 7 increased within the last decade, and it
may now 7 be said that sheep are found to be an absolute necessity in
conjunction with wheat-growfing.
Sheep have so many uses on the farm, and are so easy to keep, that a few
moments’ consideration will indicate to any farmer how profitable they may
be. For keeping the fallow's clean, feeding off crops that are growing too
rank, making some use of stubble land between harvesting and ploughing,
or controlling and killing out w'ild oats, sheep are the easiest and most
economical agents that can be employed, their deposits the while helping to
fertilise the land and adding that to the soil which cannot be supplied arti-
ficially—viz., humus.
* See footnote on page 281


When, years ago, the subdivision of the big estates into small farms was
commenced, it was anticipated by many that the numbers of our sheep
would diminish in consequence, but the forecasts of numerous prophets have
been falsified, and it has been found that the country that formerly carried
1,000 sheep is frequently now in a position to carry the same number of
sheep, though 400 to 500 acres are cultivated for grain. Xo hard-and-fast
rule can be laid down as to the number of sheep a wheat-farmer can carry,
for much depends on the season and upon the proportion of the farm usually
under crop, but it might be stated, as a general indication, that any farmer
with 600 acres can safely stock from 300 to 400 sheep.
The Value of Fodder Crops.
It should be understood that by the word “ safely is not meant a sole
reliance on the natural pastures on the farm, or even on those together with
the feed provided by the fallows or the stubbles. Like most farm animals,
sheep pay best when a little attention is given in the way of growing fodder
for them. It is not suggested, of course, that men with large holdings of,
Yandilla King Wheat on the Farmers' Experiment Plots, Gulgong.
Yield per acre = 21 bushels 18 1b.
say, 30,000 to 40,000 acres, should endeavour to grow crops for sheep feed;
it is the farmer with an average area of 500 to 1,000 acres who will find the
practice of the greatest value to him. The nature of the crop will depend
largely on the district in which the farm is situated. Where the rainfall is
chiefly a summer one, such as in the north-west, it is advisable to grow a
certain amount of summer fodder, whereas in the southern portion of the
State (the Eiverina, South-western, and Central-western Slopes, and the
Central Tablelands), where the rainfall in the summer is light, farmers will
have to depend more upon crops which can be sown in the autumn.


lii the first-named portion—the north and north-west —crops such as
cowpeas, soy beans, sorghum, and maize, can be grown with some advantage,
but even there it is during the late autumn and early winter that fodder
crops are most required, and the summer ones must always be of less
importance.
Rape on the Wheat Farm.
The area of winter rainfall includes much the larger part of the wheat
lands of New South Wales, and as rape is specially suitable for the con-
ditions there obtaining, it is at once the most important rotation crop in
conjunction with wheat, and the most useful fodder for sheep. So useful is
rape, indeed, that no matter in what part of the State the wheat farm is
situated it can be grown, but in order to get the best results it must always
be sown toward the end of February, so that advantage may be obtained
from the early autumn rains, and that it may be ready to be fed off in May
and June —a time when, lambing being just over, the ewes are in need,of
succulent green feed to maintain the milk flow.
In mentioning rape as of value in rotation with wheat, it is not suggested
that 300 acres of rape should bo sown where 300 acres of wheat has just
been harvested. What is suggested is that every farmer who combines sheep
and wheat will find a small area of 30 to 50 acres of rape a first-class invest-
ment, for by means of it he will ensure succulent feed at the very time when
herbage is scarce and the ewes have their lambs at foot.
The cultivation of rape as a farm crop is dealt with later in this volume,
but a few references to it as a feature of the wheat and sheep farm will not
be out of place here.
Generally speaking, rape should be sown on the stubble, a ploughing of 4
or 5 inches, or a thorough good discing with the one-way disc-cultivator,
being given as soon as possible after harvest, before the land can set hard.
The ploughed land should be well worked over with the cultivator or harrow
to get a fine seed-bed, and seeding should be over by the end of February.
In the hottest districts it can be delayed a few days longer, the Manager of
Nyngan Demonstration Farm having obtained good results from early
March sowings.
The best method of sowing rape is through the grass-seed attachment to
the wheat drill, and superphosphate should be sown through the manure box
at the same time. There are many farmers, however, who have not the
grass-seed attachment —useful and economical as it is—and the method
recommended to them is to mix 4 lb. of rape seed and 60 lb. of
superphosphate together, and to sow through the manure box of the drill.
The quantity mentioned will sow an acre, and it is unwise to put more than
64 lb. of the mixture into the box at one time, as in a large quantity the
vibration is almost sure to bring most of the seed to the surface. For this
same reason it will be found that a more even sowing is obtained if the hand
is run through the mixture fairly frequently, in order to keep the seed and
the fertiliser well mixed. The seed and the manure should not be allowed
to remain mixed together for more than twenty-four hours.
It is not advisable to set the hoes or discs in too deeply, but to put them in
the first notch. With some drills even this will give a deeper sowing than
is required, which is I inch to 1 inch. Should it not be possible to set the
hoes so as to sow so lightly, it is better to take the tubes out of the hoes
altogether and let them hang alongside, allowing the seed and manure to be
broadcasted, but a light harrowing will then be necessary to cover the seed.


One of the advantages of rape is that it is inexpensive to put in, and
requires no after cultivation. At Nyugan Demonstration Farm the Manager
estimates the cost at &s. to 9s. per acre, but there both the seeding and the
fertilising are light. At Bathurst Experiment Farm it approximates 10s. 6d.
to lbs. 6d. per acre.
Dwarf Essex is the variety that has given the most satisfactory results in
New South Wales, It will be found that it will provide valuable and timely
feed for the end of May or beginning of June.
Complaints are sometimes made by farmers that rape has caused “ hoven ”
in sheep, and this certainly has occurred where ordinary precautions have
not been taken. Eape was never intended as a crop on which to turn out
mobs of “ starvers,' - ’ for they naturally eat too much, and thus become
"blown." But that is a limitation that does not apply to rape alone; any
succulent crop will produce the same condition in any starving animal —
sheep or cattle. It is also inadvisable to turn sheep on to rape that is wet
with rain or dew, if for no other reason than that the fodder is then trodden
into the wet soil and a large percentage lost, while the ground itself is
thrown out of condition.
Apart from the benefits accruing to the sheep themselves from a green-
crop, sight must not be lost of the effect upon the soil, which will last for
several years. The residues, when ploughed in, provide the humus that is
so essential to continuous fertility, and in their droppings the sheep return
to the soil some 70 per cent, of what they have consumed.
The wheat farmer who sows, say, 10 per cent, of his total cultivable area
with crops to be used as fodder for his sheep, will in a few years have had
the whole of his wheat land under a crop that helps to maintain the soil in a
state of permanent fertility that can only be obtained with a rotation, but
that can never be hoped for where wheat is grown continuously.
Feeding-off Growing Wheat*
The feeding-off of growing crops of wheat is commonly practised throughout-
the wheat belt of New South Wales. It is an operation that is entirely
dependent upon the season, and with good rains and mild temperatures in
April and May it may become an absolute necessity ; but there are many
cases where it is not carried out to best advantage as regards the ultimate
yield.
Many farmers who combine sheep-raising with wheat-growing sow their
crops very early with the specific object of making use of them during the
winter months, when the natural pastures are often insufficient for sheep and
particularly unsuitable for maintaining the supply of milk in ewes with
Jambs at foot. .Such men are content to regard any loss in the ultimate yield
of grain or hay as amply set off by the feed derived by the sheep.
Crops Sown for the Purpose.
Where a crop is being sown with the intention of feeding-off, the sowing
should be early in order that the wheat may have a long enough growing
season to recover from the effects of the feeding-off, and still yield a satis-
factory crop. The slow-maturing varieties are, therefore, the most suitable,
and have the added recommendation that they produce the largest quantity
* The late J, \V. Jshaw, Assistant Inspector of Agriculture.


of leaf. Hence varieties such as Kvmer, Ysuniilla King, and Mai shall'»
No. '■’> arc eminently suitable tor crops that are intended to provide some'
oreen fodder in the winter and a "rain crop later in the year. Large areas
of Federation are sown a little on the early side with the object of ensuring
some feed in midwinter, though Federation hardly produces as much feed os
one of the long-season varieties sown, perhaps, two or three weeks earlier.
Neither late-sown crops nor quick-growing varieties can be expected to
produce anything appreciable in the way of green feed, most of the varieties
suitable for June sowings being comparatively poor stoolers anti of scanty
vegetative habit.
Strongly Rooted Crops.
A crop may usually be said to be ready to be fed off when it is about
6 inches high. It is a common error for farmers to turn sheep on to wheat
that is not sufficiently well rooted to stand the pulling about that the sheep
will certainly give it. How frequently this happens will be realised if a
careful examination is made of a few paddocks after the sheep have been
removed, dead plants being everywhere observable if the wheat was not
strongly rooted when the stock were turned in. A good firm root-hold is an
essential to grazing the crop down.
Feed-off Rapidly.
The length of time the sheep should remain on growing wheat is also of
importance. For the sake of the crop it should be as short as possible. It
is much better to turn on, say, thirty sheep per acre for one week than, say,
ten sheep per acre for three weeks, because in the latter case the soil will bo
tramped too hard, and tracks are likely to be formed that will remain until
the grain is harvested. Tracks are most likely to appear when there is a
tank or dam in the paddock, but they are apt to become almost as distinct
even in the absence of a dam, if the sheep are allowed to remain too long on
the crop.
Heavy stocking for a few days has also the advantage that it ensures more
uniform treatment by the sheep. In a crop that is very rank in patches,
and that is in danger of developing rust or powdery mildew, there is every
likelihood that the sheep will tackle last those patches that the farmer wishes
to see eaten back first, and that tendency can only be combated by turning
in a large flock for a short time.
Objection will naturally be offered by the farmer who has sown a large
area early for the express purpose of ensuring green feed in the winter, and
with the definite object of getting a return from his sheep. To him a week
or two is quite insufficient to fatten off the lines of stores that he has
probably purchased for the purpose, and the only advice that can be offered
to such a man is that he must in some measure choose between the wheat
crop and the fat sheep—relying on his experience as to which is likely to
yield him the greater profit.
When not to Feed-off.
On some soils, particularly those of a heavy clayey nature, feeding-off has
the effect of tramping the ground so hard that the harrows seem to do little
good, even when heavily weighted. Obviously feeding-off should be avoided


a* far as possible in all such cases. Nor can the operation be advocated in
respect of paddocks where the seed-bed was not as clean as it might have
been. In such cases it often happens that the wheat keeps ahead of the
grass and weeds until it is fed-off, and would probably have done so till
harvest, but it fails to do so after it has been checked bv the sheep. The
enemies of the crop seem then to get such a hold as to interfere with its
growth and materially to reduce the ultimate yield.
.Sheep should never be turned on to the crop when it is too wet, or when
the land is in a boggy state, otherwise the soil will be trodden right out of
condition. Similarly, if rain falls while the sheep are on the crop, they
should be removed as Mion as possible.
When to Remove the Sheep.
Considerable differences of opinion exist amongst practical men as to the
latest date at which w heat should be fed-off, some holding that the operation
should be limited to the early part of the winter, and others contending that
it may safely be extended into early spring. The controlling factor is the
weather. In a favourable spring, a crop will recover and vield well notwith-
standing that feeding-off has been prolonged, but on the other hand it is
obvious that if a dry spell ensues upon feeding-down close in July or early
August there is practically no hope of a recovery. The question is therefore,
what is likely to be the nature of the spring, wet or dry ? Were it possible
to forecast the weather with any degree of certainty, this and many other
problems would be solved. Even the average incidence of the rainfall for
particular districts is of little value, but this can be said—in New South
Wales dry springs are certainly more common than wet ones, and the farmer
who would err on the side of safety will limit feeding-off' to early and
midwinter, and will make an absolute end of it by the 30th June. The only
extensive exception to this rule is the north-west, where the time may with
safety be extended to the middle of July. Speaking generally, the earlier
the sheep are off the better for the crop.
Effect of Feeding-off.
Does feeding-off affect the yield, and to what extent ? There are farmers
who turn sheep into their wheat simply because they believe they will get an
increased yield, but there is ample evidence of the most reliable kind that a
distinct decline in yield is caused, particularly in the case of hay crops. The
idea that feeding-off' promotes stooling, and thereby a strong rooting habit, is
probably well grounded, but that the crop suffers in bulk in the great
majority of cases is practically certain. Admittedly there are occasions when
wheat crops must be fed-off'. It is quite possible for a crop to become so
forward that, if the growth is not checked, it will come into ear at a
time when weather conditions will be unfavourable for hay-making, and
when it will probably be badly frosted if left for grain. Very often this
untimely “heading out’’ of a crop is the result of ignorance of the true
nature of the variety, an early or quick-maturing kind of wheat having been
sown early in the season instead of late. Buch rapid development of a field
of wheat under normal conditions is rare, however, and given right varieties,
feeding-off under the impression that it will greatly increase the yield cannot
he advocated.


Harrowing.
After feeding-off it is advisable to put a heavy set of harrows over the
field to loosen the surface. Some farmers think that heavy harrows pull
too many wheat plants out of the ground, and while it must be admitted
that a few will suffer in this way, no wheat farmer should be concerned
about that, for the advantages far outweigh the disadvantages. “ The man
that harrows should never look behind ” runs an old adage, and there is truth
in it. The harrows should always he run across the direction in which the
seed has been drilled.
SHARE FARMING.*
Share-farming was first introduced into Xew South Wales .about the
year 189G, on the landra Estate, near Grenfell, and the favourable results
which at once attended it there, and that have followed it wherever it has
been tried, have led to its general adoption. It is not confined to wheat-
growing, but has been extended to dairying and pig-raising, and other
branches of farming. It is easy to become a share-farmer, but it is harder
to remain one, for the reason that share-farming opens the way to the
farmer to procure land of his own —to farm on his own account. This step
lias been quickly and surely taken by many men in Xew South Wales, who
began with little or no capital.
The practice is not confined to any particular district, but extends all
through the best wheat-growing areas of the State. Indeed, in several
centres it is the ordinary method of leasing land, and is a most popular
one, the demand for “ areas on the shares ” continually pressing on the
supply. Wherever wheat is grown in the State, the principle either has
been or is gradually being adopted.
The intending share-farmer, therefore, need never bother himself about
his ability to get started on shares. If he knows his work, and has hia
stock and farming implements, he is certain of easily finding good openings
between the months of January and March or April. Ploughing finishes
in June.
Xo hard-and-fast rules or conditions are observed, each landowner making
Ins own terms with his tenants, but, broadly speaking, the terms as between
the landlord and the share-farmers are uniform in regard to the under-
mentioned headings, though, of course, the conditions vary in different
case,-. The landlord, as a rule, provides—
(a) The land cleared, fenced and ready for the plough.
(b) The seed-wheat and bluestone for pickling the seed.
(c) Bags and twine for his own share of the crop.
The tenant, as a rule, is called upon to provide—
(a) Machinery and horses necessary to work the land.
(b) The necessary labour.
(c) His dwelling.
( d ) Bags and twine for his own share of the crop.
(e) He must keep gates and fences in good repair.
* Adapted from “ Share-Farming in New South Wales/’ issued by the Immigration
and Tourist Bureau, Sydney, which publication contains a specimen agreement for
share-farming.
t 17299—K


llie provisions outlined above are generally embraced in share-farming
agreements, but to these must be added others which have not so
general an application. For instance, there is no set rule in regard to
the tenant’s residence. In most cases the tenant is expected to provide
his own dwelling, but not infrequently the landlord supplies the dwelling,
or at least the iron for roofing. Tenant-right is given in these improve-
ments, so that the share-farmer may sell his dwelling to his successor, or
remove it. Occasionally the tenant is required to provide the same propor-
tion of the seed as the landlord, but in most of these cases the tenant’s
share of the crop is increased to • two-thirds. Tenants are required to
plough to a specified depth, varying according to the nature of the soil
(usually 4 to 5 inches) and all roots, sticks, and broken wires unearthed by
the plough must be removed. It is usual to commence ploughing in the
month of March, but there is an increasing number of landlords who make
it a condition that the land shall be fallowed in accordance with the
methods described a few pages back; in all eases ploughing has to be
over, and the crop put in by the middle of June. It is always stipulated
that when the crop is well up and green, the tenant shall cut a strip one
chain wide round the outer portion of his field, and in the centre of this
another strip, 12 feet wide, is to be ploughed as a fire-break. In return,
the tenant is generally allowed to keep the hay taken from the 1-chain strip.
The landlord reserves to himself the right to depasture his stock on the
farm when not actually under cultivation. The tenant is allowed to graze
his working horses without payment, and is usually charged a small agist
ment fee for any others he may depasture. Sometimes an arrangement
is made whereby the tenant is empowered to rent an area for a horse pad-
dock at a charge of from 2s. 6d. to 3s. per acre per annum. Agreements
generally contain provisions to ensure good farming, as a safeguard against
the soil being impoverished. For instance, when the land is wheat-sick the
tenant will probably bo required to sow a crop of oat«. Manuring is
sometimes insisted on.
Sharing the Proceeds.
As to the division of the proceeds, the usual rule in the southern and
south-western portions of the wheat belt is for the landlord and tenant
(share-fanner) to receive equal shares. In some of the western, hut prin-
cipally in north-western districts, the owner usually' exacts only one-third
of the crop, the share-farmer receiving two-thirds.
The Cost of Equipment.
The labour-saving implements which have been designed to suit local
conditions place the farmer in Australia at the advantage of being able to
cultivate his land and harvest his crops at a cost which leaves a fair margin
of profit. Though the initial outlay' may appear great, the profits of a
single normal season go far to reduce the farmer’s indebtedness for his
machinery, and many of the firms dealing in these articles dispose of them
on easy terms, extending in the case of some of the more expensive
machines over three seasons. Owing to the wide diversity of farming con-
ditions in the State, the machinery used differs in style and size, and it is
difficult to name exactly the articles of equipment which the share-farmer
may require. The list given below, however, indicates what would constitute
a good eqniiunent and the approximate cost. From this the farmer may'


form a fairly accurate idea of the initial expenses.
The prices
1 noted are
the average price in Sydney, and to them will
freights : —
;ave to be
added rail
£
S.
d.
Three or four-furrow plough
25
0
0
Harrows
8
0
0
Spring-tooth cultivator . .
20
0
0
Drill . .
38
0
0
Rive horses, at £32 10s. each
162
10
0
Harness
15
0
0
Reaper and binder
42
0
0
Combined harvester
90
0
0
Waggon
50
0
0
Dray
20
0
0
£470
10
u* ■
In many oases it will be found there is so little work for the reaper and
binder that one may be borrowed for a day to cut the necessary tracks and
headlands. The waggon also may he dispensed with, as most likely the
owner will have teams and waggons of his own to cart his own wheat, and at
the rate of Is. per ton per mile will also cart the share-farmer’s wheat to
the nearest railway station. The cost of equipment can thus be reduced
by approximately £IOO.
Nor is it necessary that the whole of the purchase money for the plant
shall be paid at once, implement and machinery firms being willing fas
already tinted) to allow the price of the more expensive items to be spread
over two or three years.
HARVESTING WHEAT FOR GRAIN.
Tor harvesting grain crops the reaper and binder, the stripper, the com-
bined harvester, and the reaper thresher are used.
In moist districts the reaper and binder is used exclusively, for in such
districts the grain in the standing crop is rarely hard and dry enough to be
taken off with a stripper.
Over the greatest portion of our wheat area the conditions arc. however,
favourable for harvesting with either the stripper or the combined harvester.
Considerable controversy lias waged about the advantages and disadvan-
tages of harvesting with the respective implements. As cheap and rapid
means of garnering the grain, the stripper and harvester are unexcelled; but
advocates of the reaper and binder point to the fact that the straw, or at
least portion of it, is wasted, and that what is saved is of lessened value.
'1 his is unquestionably true, but the fact must not be lost sight of that,
after all, straw is a very inferior feeding material. The cost of saving it
is in .most cases greater than its actual feeding value in normal seasons, and
it is only by storing it until a very dry time, when inferior feeding materials
have an abnormal value, that the farmer is able to recoup himself for the
'* This estimate was framed under pre-war conditions, but any attempt to revise it at
the present time would be unsatisfactory, and it is deemed advisable to allow the figures
to stand unaltered.


outlay connected with the saving of it. It is claimed that the expenditure
necessary for saving the straw, if spent in other directions, would have
made more and better provision for times 0 f scarcity.
Nor must it be forgotten that it is not necessary to waste all the straw
if the crop has been stripped. If stock be turned on to the stubbles they
will put them to good account without expense.
The question as to which is the more desirable implement will never be
settled by argument. It is a question entirely of profit and loss, and the
fanner who finds the stripper more profitable, under his conditions, than
the reaper and binder will use the former. This much is certain, that
inexpensive methods of harvesting grain have played no mean part in the
development of our wheat areas, and that but for them many acres now
being profitably cultivated could never have been brought under the plough.
The modern harvester is a wonderfully efficient implement, and Aus-
tralians may be proud that such an implement was produced and developed
in their country.
It is particularly adapted for peculiar conditions which necessitate that
the individual cultivate a large area to be profitable.
The stripper and the harvester are intimately bound up with Australian
agriculture.
A. —Harvesting with Reaper and Binder.
When to use the Binder. —The crop is ready for the reaper and binder
when the straw under the ears has turned yellow. At this stage the grain
is waxy, and the crop may be cut without fear of loss. It is advisable to
use the reaper and binder on the heaviest portions of the crop, and also on
any portions that may have become laid, for it is impossible to deal satis-
factorily with such portions with the stripper. Even with the reaper and
binder, care and trouble are necessary to gather all the crop.
It is probable that, when labour and other conditions allow, the up-to-date
farmer of the future will commence his grain harvest with the reaper and
binder, and complete it with the harvester.
Preparing the Reaper and Binder.
Under the best of conditions, harvest time must necessarily be a busy one.
To minimise the urgent work inseparable from such a time, all that can be
done in the way of preparation should be performed beforehand.
Implements and Machines. —The various machines and implements
required should be overhauled and placed in thorough working order. Bolts
should be tightened, broken or worn parts repaired or replaced, and bearings
packed up so that pulleys and cogs will run in line; tarpaulins should be
examined and repaired, and if necessary given a coat of mutton or beef
tallow to increase their waterproof qualities. The leather belts should be
thoroughly dressed once or twice with castor oil, to increase their gripping
power and add to their life. If this dressing be done and the pulleys put


Harvesting Methods.
1.—Ready for the machines. 2 and 6.—The Reaper and Binder. 3 and 4.—The Harvester,
4.—Strippers and Winnower.


in line, recourse to resinous or other compounds during' harvest will probably
be unnecessary, provided the belts be cleaned regularly from dust. To put
sticky mixtures on the belts to make them grip is an unsound practice. It
affords temporary relief only, increases the draft, and is ruinous to the life
of the belt.
If the crop or portion of it is to be stacked, suitable sites for the stacks
should be selected, and if timber straddles are required, these shoidd be
obtained and carted to a convenient place, as also should any pegs that will
be required for thatching.
Drays and waggons should be seen to and the hay-frames fixed. Hay
ropes should be collected; and supplies of oil, black lead, bags, binder-twine,
sections and rivets ordered, if not on hand.
Binder-twine. —In ordering binder-twine a good guide as to the probable
quantity required is to estimate that a ball (44 lb.) will tie about 2, tons of
hay, or its equivalent of grain sheaves.
The Knotter. —The knotter of the binder should be examined, cleaned, and
brightened up; a rusty knotter is likely to cause untied sheaves to be thrown
out, and a rusty needle is likely to break the twine. The knotter is the most
ingenious and complicated part of the hinder, and the one most likely to
get out of order. Machinery experts travel periodically through the agricul-
tural districts, and it is advisable to get the agent or expert for the par-
ticular machine, when on the farm, to examine the knotter, and to have any
repairs or adjustments effected which he may suggest.
Binder Knives. —Any badly worn or gapped sections in the binder knives
should be replaced with new ones, and the smooth knives sharpened in
readiness for the hay crop.
Ledger Plates. —The ledger plates in the fingers should be attended to;
these to he in good order should not be rounded on the top edges. When
in this condition they can be greatly improved by filing the edge straight
and square, the filing to be done upwards and from the bottom of the fingers.
The Knife. —To cut the hay crop, put in the smooth knife. This, if kept
sharp, will cut a green crop better than the sickle, which should be kept for
the grain crops.
The Reel. —To ensure the beaters of the reel working parallel with the
fingers when in the crop, set them so that when at rest the end near the
outside grain divider is a little higher than the inside end; there is always a
tendency for the outside end to drop a little.
The Twine. —Place two balls of twine in the twine-box, joining the inside
end of the bottom ball to the end on the outside of the top ball, with a
reef or weaver’s knot, and cut the loose ends off short. The balls of twine'
are made to unwind from the inside, and this arrangement allows the twine
on the two balls to be used without a break. Draw out the end of the twine
from the inside of the top ball and pass it through the opening in the box,
thence to the tension spring and on to the needle, which should be threaded
in accordance with the directions issued with the particular machine being
used. If another ball be placed in the twine-box shortly after the top ball
has been used, there will be no vexatious delays nor untied sheaves, as the-


Allonby Farm - The advantages of the Sheaf-carrier.
Wagga Experiment Farm—Carting to Stack.
Harvesting at Bathurst Experiment Farm.
THE REAPER AND BINDER AT WORK.


result of the needle becoming unthreaded through lack of twine. It is to
prevent these delays that the box is made to hold two balls of twine, and as
far as possible two should always be kept in it.
The new ball is put at the bottom of the box, the one in use being put on
top and the two joined together as previously directed.
The Tension Spring. —The tension spring should be screwed down just
sufficiently to ensure that the sheaf is tied tightly, which should be done
under all conditions.
Compressor-arms. —lf the crop is a heavy one, adjust the compressor-arms
so that the sheaf will be a small one, as this facilitates rapid drying and
prevents the discoloration which would otherwise take place in the centre of
large sheaves made from a heavy, rank crop.
If the crop be a light one, open the compressor-arms so that the sheaf will
be a large one, as this saves twine.
Oiling. —See that all nuts are tight, that there is a fair tension on the
jink belts (these should not be too tight), and that all spindles or shafts
are well oiled.
When oiling, make it a rule to start oiling at one spot (preferably near
where the oil-can is carried) and to oil the different parts in a regular definite
order, going round the machine until the starting point is reached again.
A mixture of black lead and water, applied with a brush, will be found
a better lubricant than oil for link chains, sprockets, and cog wheels; this
will not collect dust like oil, and will save the excessive wear that dust
causes.-
Precautions against Loss by Fire.
Fire-breaks. —Hay-making affords a splendid opportunity to protect the
crops, when ripe, from advancing bush fires, by surrounding them with a
bare strip, which will act as a fire-break.
It is a fairly general practice in the grain-raising districts to cut for hay
a strip about half a chain wide round the standing crops. Such a practice
might be followed by all. In large paddocks the practice might, with advan-
tage, be extended to provide for the cutting of openings, half a chain wude,
so as to divide the crop into blocks of approximately 200 acres each.
This is a ready and economical way of safeguarding the dry, ripe crop
against destruction by fire. The piece of short stubble land provides a suit-
able place for checking the advance of a fire, which may have broken out in
the grass paddocks or other portions of the crop. This is especially the case
when, as at landra, a portion of or the whole strip of stubble is ploughed.
Fire-cart. —To assist in controlling or extinguishing a fire, should one
break out, a fire-cart, filled with water and equipped with buckets, beaters,
and axe, should be stationed, during harvest time, in a convenient place, with
harnessed horses for drawing it, close by. On small farms where the number
of horses is limited, the most suitable place for such a cart is considered
to be at the winnower, or if the harvester is being used, at the place where
the bags are sewn up. Stationed at such a place, it is where the men who
are to use it can obtain it readily and at once.


Carting to stack.
Effect of a gale of wind on bad slacking—note hay sheaves blown against fence.
Building the stacks at Wagga Experiment Farm.
Stack-building.


It can be brought daily to such a place by some of the horses used in the
stripper, and when required for a fire the animals necessary to draw it can
be taken from the stripper or harvester working close by. There is an
additional advantage in having it stationed at such a place, in that a small
portion of the water in the tank can be used for giving the stripper horses a
Stacks placed for economic working, the threshing machine or chaff-cutter being hauled between them.
drink during the heat of the day. But care must be taken when such a plan
is followed, that every favourable opportunity is seized to fill the tank, and
that the quantity in it never becomes unduly low.
Stocking.
The methods adopted vary with the climatic conditions. In districts
where fine-weather conditions during harvest are the rule very little trouble
is taken, and twelve or fifteen sheaves are put together in round stocks in
such a way as to withstand the winds only.
In districts where wet harvests ar common, considerable skill is required
in building stocks so as to shed rain, dry quickly, and withstand winds.
Stocking, whenever practicable, should be done in the morning when the
straw is tough, to prevent waste in handling. Bipe wheat should not he
handled during the heat of the day, as the grain is then more liable to shed.
In stocking, two sheaves should be handled at once. Each sheaf should be
grasped about a foot from the ears and stood firmly on the ground, leaning
towards each other at the top, and the short side of the sheaf towards the
centre. About three pairs should stand firmly upon their own bases. Two
additional pairs at each end should lean towards the central pairs, and a
single sheaf should be placed at each end. This would make sixteen sheaves
upon the ground. Two sheaves should be used as caps. The butts should be
placed in the centre and pressed together to interlock them, and a good
handful of straw upon each side of each capping sheaf should be bent down
from the bands to prevent the winds from blowing the cap off.
The number of sheaves in such stocks will depend upon the length of the
sheaves, as no more should be placed in the base than can be reasonably
covered by the two capping sheaves. Such stocks, if properly built, will
turn considerable rain and dry readily. As they are only two sheaves wide.


they may be blown over. To overcome this, buttresses should be started
upon either side at the centre and built as the original stock, and covered by
two capping sheaves as before described. A stock in the form of a cross is
thus made, which will withstand considerable wind.
Rectangular Stacks.
Stacking.*
For some years stacks have been built at Wagga Experiment Farm by
a method which has some very definite advantages. The tedious work of
thatching is avoided, whilst the roof is so constructed that no rain
likely to fall in that dry district can enter the stack. The only portions
exposed on the roof are the butts of the sheaves, and the loss which occurs
from this exposure is very small indeed. A few surface straws will be rotted
at the butt, but the actual loss does not amount to 1 per cent, of the roofing
sheaves.
Then again, the sides are all built butts outwards, and are so bound
that the slope is downwards and outwards. Rain beating on the sides
cannot enter the stack, as to do so it would need to run upwards. The
ground sheaves are all placed butts downwards, so that any loss occasioned
by soakage from the ground through the straddle will also be confined to the
butts.
Our stacks have suffered no damage from the wind. The corners are bound
by a system of overlapping sheaves, which has enabled the stacks to with-
stand the hardest winds which we have experienced at the Farm.
The work of building the stacks is simple. Of course, stack-building is
one of the fine arts of farming, and a novice cannot build any kind of stack
■without a good deal of practice; but it is claimed that this method is a vast
improvement in the direction of simplicity. One of our 45-ton stacks is
built and finished off in a day by two men—with others, of course, carting
the sheaves from the paddocks.
The oblong stack is preferred to the round form, as it is easier to top up.
A new hand working on a round stack will often find it bulging before he
reaches the full height, and he will have some difficulty in keeping a true
* A. F. Fuller, Farm Foreman, Wagga Experiment Farm.


circle. But we do build round stacks at Wagga, following the same
principles, and with excellent results. Those who prefer the round form,
and have had experience of the work, will find no difficulty in adapting these
notes to that form of stack.
The size of stack which we find the most convenient is 12 yards by 6
yards, built 14 feet to the eaves. The capacity is 45 to 50 tons. The stacks
which we are now breaking up have been standing through all weathers for
seventeen months, and have compacted to such an extent that the eaves are
Fig. 1. —Commencing the stack.
about 10 feet from the ground ; yet the stacks have remained quite perpendi-
cular. They have suffered no damage from wind or rain, and the loss of
butts on the outside is not worth mentioning.
After selecting a good site, level and dry, measure off the ground 12 yards
by G yards, and build a good straddle of straw, sticks, or other suitable
material which may bo handy You can start from the centre or from the
outside, but it is simpler work to start from the outside, and this is our
general practice.
Fig. 1 shows the easier method of commencing the stack. First of all,
place a layer of sheaves on the ends, A and B, butts outwards, and running
lengthways with the stack. Then lay sheaves along the sides, C and D, butts
outwards, running across the stack and overlapping the heads of the end
sheaves. These are the only sheaves which will be placed fiat on the ground.
Another method of commencing, which is not quite so simple, is shown
in Fig. 2, and provides for binding the corners of the first tier. The first
sheaf, A, is placed at an angle, pointing towards the centre of the stack.
The next sheaf overlaps the head of the first, and the third that of the
second, and so on, until the sheaves are lying straight across the stack. As


the corner B is appmoached, the butts are spread and the heads overlapped to
bind the corner. Then the sheaves are straightened again along the end,
B C, and so on around the stack.
In filling up the centre of the first tier, always place the butts on the
ground. The dotted lines in Fig. 3 show the sheaves first laid. Fill up by
Fig. 2.—Another method of commencing the Stack.
placing sheaves beads outwards, overlapping the bands of the first layer.
Continue around the stack, and then commence again in the centre, always
placing the butts on the ground, until the centre is filled.
The second, or binding tier, is laid upon the first tier of sheaves exactly
as shown in the second method of commencing the stack (Fig. 2), A start
may be made at the corner, or in the centre of the end, working to the
Fig. 3. — Filling up the centre of the first tier.


corner. The usual method is to start at the corner. Place butts outwards
to the edge (Fig. I), and bind the corners by laying the sheaves at an angle.
Lay the sheaf flat, and close the head somewhat. In finishing, just go far-
enough to catch the head of the sheaf first laid.
The centre of the second tier is filled by placing sheaves butts outwards
and well up to the bands (Fig. 5). In this portion of the work a good deal
of judgment has to be exercised. The aim is to keep the centre of the
Fig. 4. —The second, or binding tier.
stack a little, but not too much, above the edges. In a stack of this size
the centre should be kept about a foot higher than the edges. This is
obtained by placing the centre sheaves farther out or farther in as required.
To make the stack fuller in the centre you place the sheaves farther out ;
to make it more level you draw them in. As the filling proceeds, the stack
always looks as if it were going to have a hollow centre, but the next layer
fills it up. It may require a little practice to see exactly how far out to
place the sheaves, so as to get the centre the right height.
Fig. 5. —Filling up the centre of the second tier.


The following tiers are all put on the same as the second, binding with
the butts outwards, and keeping the centre high. If rain heats upon the
sid«* it would have to travel upwards to get into the stack. In the case of
a wheat stack, the water would need to travel upwards the full length of
the sheaf before it could injure the grain.
In commencing the third tier, place the corner sheaf at an angle with the
first sheaf of the second tier. Looking at Tig. 4, it will be seen that the
corner sheaf slopes towards the bottom side of the stack. When putting on
the corner sheaf of the third tier, slope it towards the right end of the stack,
making an angle with the lower one. This will make the corner secure.
A good stack-builder will always keep the sides of his stack perpendicular.
The stack has a tendency to spread as it rises. Do not draw the sheaves in,
but use a board about In Inches x 12 inches, with a handle about f! feet long
(Tig 0), and bent the edres in with this
Fig. 6.—Board for squaring off edges of stack.
The stack is built 14 feet to the eaves. A platform (of which an illustration
is given on page 307) is used for reaching the higher levels. This is made light
and strong, and can be readily moved by two men to any required position.
The second last tier is laid so that the sheaves overhang the sides about
3 inches (Tig. 7). The ends are flush with the other end sheaves. There is
no hip to the roof of our stacks —it is a straight gable. The heads of the
corner sheaves are bound in so as to support the corner of the roof. The last
tier is laid level on the edges with the second last one, binding the corners
as explained above. This forms a good eave.
Now we come to the top and roof of the stack. The construction requires
a little explanation, but it is hoped that the sketches will enable the reader
to grasp the method. The aim is to build a gable roof in such a manner
that butts only will be exposed, except at the cap, and the whole made firm
and strong.
All the top sheaves are laid lengthways on the stack, butts outwards at
the ends. You can bind in the centre by laying them either way. Start
from the edge and work along the stack. It will take about twenty sheaves
to run the length of the stack.


Commence the first row about 1 foot in from the eaves. Build all the rows
of this layer right across, and then commence the second layer a little
farther in. Judgment must he used to give the roof the correct pitch.
When about three layers have been built in this way, place the first row of
roofing or thatching sheaves in position. They are placed butts downwards
on the eaves, the heads resting over the top of the portion of roof already
Fig. 7.—Building the roof.
built. If the sheaves are long, four layers of roof may be required before
placing on the first thatching sheaves. Lay these thatching sheaves right
along the stack on both sides.
Now build three more layers of the roof. Before placing the first row in
position, press the heads of the thatching sheaves down upon the stack and
bind them in. (Bee Fig. 7.) When these three layers have been built, put
on another row of roofing or thatching sheaves, butts downwards, just
covering the bands of the first layer, and resting the heads over the stack
as before. Proceed in this way, working both sides together, until the ridge
is reached. It will be seen that only the butts of the thatching sheaves are
exposed.
Always use well-bound sheaves for covering the stack in this way, as these
Fig. 8.
Binding the second
top rows of the
roof.
are the ones which have to stand the
weather. We always ask the carter
for a good load to top the stack.
The ridge requires binding together,
and the method of doing this is shown in
Fig. 8. The second top layer will consist
of two rows of sheaves lying side by side,
as A and B. Take a handful of straws
from both sides of the band of sheaf A
and stick it into the band of sheaf B.
Repeat this right along the top. It keeps
the top from spreading. Then the ridge C, the last row of sheaves, is put
on, and the stack is capped.


The last two lows of rooting
sheaves, coming up the roof one
on each side, are placed butts
downwards like the rest, so that
the heads meet on the top over
the ridge. These are shown as
A and B in Fig. 9. On top of
these place two more sheaves, C
and D, butts upwards, to act as
a cap. Take a handful of straw
from each side of the baud of
each sheaf, roll them tightly, and
twist the two together, turn the
Fig. 9. —Capping the ridge.
twist underneath, and push it hard into the end of the stack.
Fig. 10, —Binding
the capping
sheaves.
The capping sheaves, butts upwards, are carried along
the ridge on both sides. To bind the capping sheaves along
the ridge, take a handful from sheaf B (Fig. 10), break it
back at the band, and stick it into the band of sheaf A
from the top. Continue this along the ridge on both sides ;
it pulls the sheaves together and makes the cap fast.
As a further precaution to protect the stack from the
wind, stick a peg into the second capping sheaf from the
end in a direction sloping in towards the stack. Draw a
string from this peg over the first sheaf, and tie it to a
peg stuck in the end of the stack. You may now knock
off for tea, and bo ready to start another stack in the
morning,
Before coming to Wagga Farm I used to earn my living as a thatcher ;
but I have never thatched a haystack at Wagga, and would never do it in
this dry district. There is no need for it. Our stacks have stood for three
years without thatching, with no loss worth mentioning. Stacks have been
thatched near this Farm by so-called ‘‘good thatchers” which have had far
more waste than the unthatched stacks on the Farm. In moister districts,
where thatching is necessary, I should build my stacks by this method and
then thatch them.
In stacking wheat to thresh, we proceed exactly as with hay, but we do
not need to spend so much time, as the stacks have not to stand so long.
We merely throw the sheaves together in the order explained.
Straw stacks had better be thatched. It is possible to build them without
thatching by keeping the middle well up, but it is a more difficult job than
with hay, and a novice is not advised to attempt it.
Precautions against Mice and Fire.
Many devices have come under notice from time to time to cope with
the mice pest. Building the stack upon a raised platform does not answer
the purpose; the mice will climb up the blocks upon which the platform is
built, run along underneath the platform-boards, and so enter the stack.
Enclosing the stack, as some farmers do, with fine wire-netting, will also
be found to be unsuitable, as the pest will climb up the wire-netting.


The only success!'ul method of keeping them out is to enclose the stack
with a fence of galvanized iron, either plain or corrugated, about 2 feet
high.
Let the iron into the ground to a depth of 4 inches, and place it in a
-lunting position, leaning outwards, all round the stack; take care to leave
no open space at the corners. It will ho found impossible for mice to enter
a stack thus protected.
If it should be found that mice are troublesome in the stack, poison with
arsenic dissolved in water. Place dishes of the solution all round the stack;
if it will not entirely eradicate the pest, it will, at any rate, help to keep it
in check.
Precautions should also be taken to protect the stacks against fire, or at
any rate against heavy loss by fire by insuring at an early date.
B. —Harvesting with the Stripper.*
Preparing the Machine for work.
Preliminary Adjustment. —Though the final adjustment of some parts of
the stripper cannot be done before the machine has been tried in the crop,
much can and should be done some time before the crop is ready for strip-
ping. The performance of this adjusting affords an opportunity to effect
any repairs that may be necessary, to renew worn parts, and to obtain in
advance duplicates that may be required during the busy harvest time,
when delays are not only dangerous, but likely to be costly. At the same
time, supplies of oil for the bearings, black lead for the cogs and chain belts,
and laces for the leather belts should be ordered, if not on hand.
Lubricators. —See that the lubricating cups, with their syphons, are in
order, and where possible have bottle lubricators fitted to facilitate even and
constant lubrication. For lubricating the stripper a heavy oil is necessary,
as thin oils in the extremely hot weather prevailing at harvest time run out
of the bearings almost as fast as they are put in. The result is heavy draft,
and hot boxes and spindles. Suitable oils for the purpose are very scarce,
but too much trouble cannot be taken to secure a kind that is suitable.
The Fingers and Comb. —Some machines have combs with adjustable
fingers. These should be set as close as the crop will permit (usually about
of an inch apart), but wide enough to allow the knots in the straw to be
drawn through them. If the fingers on the comb are fixed and worn, send
the comb to a blacksmith to have the fingers closed and reset.
Beaters. —The beaters should be set low and near enough to the cutting
plate to ensure the heads being cut off cleanly, and not drawn through the
fingers. At the same time they should be set far enough back to drive the
threshed heads on to the damp-weather drum or into the box without
choking or repeating.
Front Roller for Tall Crops. —lf the crops are tall attach the front roller
to the machine, and fix it so that the heads will be bent down low enough
for the fingers to catch them, without taking in superfluous straw. If set
* J. W. Chapman, late Foreman, Cowra Experiment Farm.


A fair average roofing-sheaf, taken from a stack
which bad been standing for seventeen months.
These are the most exposed sheaves on the stack.
The same sheaf after brushing off the rotted
trash, which is seen on the ground.
This is practically the only loss in the whole of
the stack.
The Platform.
Stack-building at Wagga Experiment Farm.


Stacks in the Wagga District.
The Absence of Thatching will be noticed.


too low, some of the heads will pass underneath the fingers, and be unthreshed
and wasted. The final adjustment of this roller will require to be made
after a short run in the standing crop. If such a roller cannot be fixed, a
similar result can be obtained by raising the body of the machine, by bolting
blocks of wood the requisite thickness between the axle and the frame of the
box, and by making obvious alterations to the connections between the
winding-gear and the body of the machine.
Roller for Loose Ground. —For such occasions as when the surface of the
ground is soft, and when the machine, instead of cutting off the ears and
leaving the straw standing, pulls up the straw with the ears attached, prepare
a roller the width of the comb and about 6 inches in diameter, and arrange
for this to be attached by light chains to each side of the comb.
The Stripper ready for work.
Such a roller can be made from a straight log, by driving a round pin with
a good head into each end. The pins will revolve in split links, with which
they can be attached to the chain, and which can be closed after being passed
over the head of the roller pins. The chains should be long enough to allow
the roller to go back until just under the wheels of the stripper. The
adjustment of this roller can take place only in the field, and as the result of
trial with the crop to be dealt with.
Removing Saucy Jaclcs, Sc., from Stripper Comb. —To enable the driver
to deal with the choking of the comb, with cobblers’ pegs, Saucy Jacks, and
other tall weeds, make a “ spade ” by attaching a piece of tin or galvanized
iron, about 6 inches or 7 inches long by 4 inches wide, to a handle about


5i feet long, making a sort of small flag. Such a contrivance is shown on
the front of the stripper in the illustration on page 309. With its aid a
careful driver, without leaving his seat, can remove the weeds as they become
entangled in the comb.
Emptying the Stripper. —For convenience in emptying the stripper when
full, a two-handled scraper (shown on the ground at the further side of the
stripper in the illustration on page 309) should be prepared, and will be
found very useful. This is made by boring two If inch holes in a piece of
0 inches x 1 inch hardwood about of feet long, or a little shorter than the
stripper box is wide. Koch hole is about S inches from the end, and about
li inches from the bottom of the scraper, as:—
Round sticks for handles, a little shorter than the length of the stripper
box, are inserted loosely in these holes, and are prevented from being drawn
out again by shoulders on the front, and by pins driven through the sticks
on the opposite side of the scraper.
This scraper is placed in the stripper box when it is empty, with the board
towards the front of the machine and the handles directed to the door.
When the machine is full and reaches the winnower, a man seizes hold of
each handle and the machine is emptied rapidly, as in the upper picture on
page 311.
Using the Stripper.
11/uui to Strip. —The grain, if bitten, will be found to be hard when the
crop is fit to strip, and the heads of those varieties with pendant heads will
hang down.
In a paddock which has not had the edges cut for hay with a binder
it is advisable to strip enough of the crop near the gate to admit of the
winnower being set up.
The Winnower. —The winnower should be set solidly on the ground, and
so placed that the wind blows from the fan and diagonally across the
machine and away from the man feeding it. It should be turned at an even
speed, and the tailboard set low enough to allow the chaff and cavings to
blow over, but high enough to catch the white heads and grain.
Starting the Stripper. —When starting the stripper, grip the belt and pull
it backwards, so that the cog-wheels and beaters will come into rapid action
immediately the horses start to move. Careful attention to this will mini-
mise choking, prevent breakages, and save waste of grain.
Out of Gear. —The machine should always be thrown out of gear when
not working in the crop.
Method of Stripping a Paddock. —With the stripper, turning corners
results either in missing a portion of the crop or in loss of time, as a result
of performing an evolution resembling the figure 8. For this reason strip-
ping around a paddock is not so economical of time as working in rather
narrow portions, after the fashion of ploughing a paddock in lands. When
this latter plan is adopted it is necessary to drive through the standing crop,
and to have a portion knocked down by the horses walking through it.


Emptying the Box.
Winnowing.
HANDLINE THE STRIPPED GRAIN.


A Harvester on a seven-bag (21 bushel) crop of Yandilla King at Gulgong.
FARMERS’ EXPERIMENT PLOTS.


Though this portion can be stripped on the return journey some grain is
lost, but this loss is more than compensated for by the extra amount of
stripping done, as the result of adopting such a plan.
The Middle of the Day. —More and better work can be done with the
stripper during the middle of the day than at other times, and for this
reason such arrangements should be made that the stripper will not require
to be stopped at this time.
Cracking the Grain. —The final adjustment of the beaters, pulley and
concave, can only be done after actual trial in the crop. The beaters by
being driven too fast may crack the grain; to remedy this reduce the speed
of the boaters by putting a larger pulley in the spindle. For ease in draft
the pulley in the beater-spindle should be no smaller than is necessary to
thresh the grain out of the heads. It is generally necessary to use a smaller
pulley in the morning than later in the day. When the grain is so easily
threshed and brittle that reducing the speed of the beaters fails to prevent
the cracking, the damp weather concave should bo removed, and if this is
still insufficient to prevent the cracking the drum also should be removed-
C. —The Combined Harvester.
The machine with which by far the largest part of the wheat crop of Hew
South Wales is harvested is that now everywhere known as “ the harvester.”
To Australians it is a matter of interest and of pride that this—probably
the cheapest harvesting implement in the world —was an Australian produc-
tion, the result of the necessity for some speedy and inexpensive method of
dealing with extensive areas. The machine combines the operations of the
stripper and the winnower, the grain being harvested, separated from the
chatf and bagged, all by means of the horse-power that draws the machine
through the crop. The saving in labour so effected has been one of the most
important factors in the extension of our wheat areas. Indeed it is hard
to see how the area devoted to wheat in this State could have reached even
half its present dimensions without the combined harvester.
Manufacturers have perfected the machine with much ingenuity, and at
the same time have maintained stability, so that the heaviest crops can bo
dealt with. During the harvest of 1915, when the work was so heavy that
farmers from other lands might easily have supposed the use of some
apparently simpler machine was imperative, combined harvesters were em-
ployed on probably quite 90 per cent, of our wheat fields. Crops that were
as much as 7 feet high, and that yielded up to 40 bushels and more per acre,
seemed to present no difficulties, provided the teams were heavy enough.
A machine so generally used requires nothing in the way of description
here nor of suggestions for its most effective use.
Within recent years there have been various attempts to further improve
upon it, one of the latest being the addition of a petrol engine that supplies
the power for driving the machinery, the horses having only to draw the
harvester as they would a waggon. Heedless to say this effects a substantial
saving in horse-power. The possibilities of the machine are indicated when
it is stated that in 1915 two farmers added, as an extension to the 9-foot cut,
an additional 4 feet of comb from an old harvester, fitting it with a travel-
ling screen. In this way they dealt with 13 feet of the crop at a time. The
device was an entire success, and enabled a large area to be harvested in a
very short time without any additional labour. This is not the only develop-
ment in harvesting machinery that seems likely in the near future.


D.—Harvesting with the Reaper-Thresher.*
The reaper-thresher, better known perhaps as, and most commonly termed,
the " header,’ - ' is a comparatively new harvesting machine, which prior to
tho year 1910 was practically unknown in the wheat-growing districts of
this State. In that year a number of the machines were distributed through-
out the main wheat districts, and although farmers appeared to favour the
principle on which the machine worked, the opinion seemed general that
many alterations and improvements were necessary. Kaeh year since
alterations have been made, and the machines appear to be liecoming inmv
popular from year to year,
Perhaps the first main difference between these machines and the harvester
is that the heads, instead of being stripped or combed off as with a harvester,
are cut off by means of a knife, which is worked at the rear of the comb.
This knife is worked on a similar principle to the knife on an ordinary
reaper and binder. Tho straw is drawn through the comb until the' heads,
assisted by the reel (which revolves at about the same speed as the machine
moves through the crop), comes in contact with the knife. The fact of the
heads being cut off greatly lessens the draught, as the crop cannot pul]
heavily upon the comb. Should the ground be soft, or the straw at all weak,
the wheat is not pulled up by the roots and choked in the comb. When the
crop is dirty with thistles or other weeds, there is not the choking in the
comb that takes place when the heads are stripped or combed off.
When the heads are cut they are carried by means of the reel on to the
conveyors at the rear of the comb. These conveyors are made of canvas,
and work in a very similar way to tho platform canvas on a binder. This
platform is on rollers, and carries the heads along to a feeder, where they
are evenly forced into the threshing drum. Tho drum on the reaper-thresher
is very large, and by means of pinions can be altered and made to travel
faster or slower to meet varying conditions. A second drum, or really a
cavings thresher, is placed at the rear of the machine to re-thresh any broken
heads which may have escaped the first threshing.
By means of straw walkers the straw is taken from the threshing drum
and thrown out at the side of the machine at the rear of the grain wheel.
The grain falls on to a graded pan situated beneath the walkers, where it
feeds evenly on to the riddles, and is winnowed. The grain is then carried
by means of elevators up into tho grain box, which has a capacity of five
bags.
The machine takes an 8-feet cut. and with two average teams of, say, five
horses each, in a fair crop, from 15 to 20 acres may be harvested in a day.
There is very little waste of grain as compared with some other harvesters,
and the lightness of draught, and its power to deal with a weedy crop, make
it a most valuable addition to the wheat-grower’s plant.
A number of farmers object to the width of the machine, which necessi-
tates wide gateways. By altering the grain wheel the width of the machine
may be lessened, but unless this is done it requires a space of not less than
18 feet. This difficulty can be overcome, however, by placing the machine
on a kind of sledge, and drawing it through tho gate sideways on.
* The late J. W. Shaw, Assistant Inspector of Agriculture.


A Combined Harvester in a crop of Steinwedel Wheat, grown at Coonamble Experiment Farm.
Yield = 24 bushels per acre. Rainfall during growth = 42 inlres.


E. —Harvesting for the Mill.*
As nearly all the wheat harvested finds its way cither directly or indirectly,
through the shipper, to the miller to be ground into Hour, it seemed desirable
to obtain some information from millers as to any points to which they
consider special attention should be directed in the growing and harvesting
of wheat.
With this object, I have approached several of the leading Sydney and
country millers, and from information with which they have been good
enough to supply me I have built together the following notes, which, I
think, fairly represent their views on this subject.
They are fairly unanimous in the opinion that Australian wheat occupies
a high place as a milling wheat, chiefly on account of the ease with which
it is milled and the excellence of its colour and flavour.
In the special quality of strength, which is an all-important point in
determining the market value, and towards the improvement of which so
much work is being done all over the world, the Australian product is still
somewhat inferior to certain others; but as far, at all events, as New South
Wales is concerned, there has been a steady and marked improvement of
recent years.
Improved machinery, both for sowing and harvesting, has also brought
about a great advance, not only in the nature of the bagged grain, but in
efficiency and economy in its preparation.
Relative Efficiency of Different Systems of Harvesting.
The use of the stripper is not in favour with millers, chiefly for the
reasons —firstly, that the winnowing arrangement does not properly separate
the chaff, short straw, stems, &c., a quantity of which finds its way into the
bag and spoils the sample and necessitates the use of special machinery for
cleaning it for the mill; and secondly, because of the risk of bleaching of the
grain. One miller states that before the advent of the stripper bleached
wheat was unknown in Australia.
It is generally agreed that grain that has been reaped by the reaper and
binder, and afterwards threshed, is a better sample and weighs heavier. This
is largely due to the fact that the grain can be gathered just at the right
time —that is, a little on the green side—and allowed to ripen in the stock,
whereas the stripper is used when the grain is dead-ripe.
The danger of allowing the grain to ripen in the straw is that, if the
weather is hot and dry the grain is liable to become pinched, lighter in
colour, and of lower bushel-weight; whilst, on the other hand, if rain falls
the grain becomes even more severely bleached, and very considerably
deteriorated in milling-value. There is also the danger of loss from shelling.
Another advantage of the separate thresher is that, being stationary, it
can be fitted with more appliances for cleaning and grading than either the
stripper or combined harvester, and can be run at a more uniform speed.
* F. B. Guthrie.


A front view of the Reaper-Thresher.


According to the opinion of one miller of experience, the chief dis-
advantage to tlie Australian system of harvesting is the length of time the
grain is allowed to stand after it is ripe—sometimes two or three weeks.
The remedy is to use the reaper and hinder and the thresher to harvest
before the grain is dead-ripe, and to carry out the harvesting operations as
expeditiously as possible. It may be desirable to sow seed that matures
fairly early, and something might also he done in the way of sowing more
than one variety, so as to avoid the whole crop) ripening at the same time.
The combined harvester is a very great improvement on the old stripper,
and this is probably the most efficient and economical machine at present
available, and its introduction has greatly reduced the cost and labour of
harvesting.
Some farmers object to the harvester on account of the danger of dirtying
the ground; but this risk can be avoided by the use of the “ chaff-carrier ”
a large receptacle attached to the machine, in which all the screenings are
deposited, so that weed-seeds are not scattered over the land.
Clean Crops.
Dirty grain is amongst the most common causes of inferior-quality crop.
As far as the use of dirty seed is concerned, there is no excuse for the farmer
who uses it. The general adoption of drilling, indeed, is against its use,,
since the seed must be fairly clean and even in order to pass regularly
through the drill.
The question of dirty ground is another matter, and one more difficult to
guard against, since land becomes dirty in the most mysterious manner.
The practice of growing the wheat crop season after season on the same land
is a fruitful source of dirty land, since wild oats and other foreign plants
grow up with the wheat, and resow themselves before the wheat is harvested,
so that in time, if the crop is not changed or the land fallowed —even in three
or four years —there may be as much wild oats and barley as there is wheat;
such a crop not only produces grain of inferior milling value, but is of poor
quality if cut for hay, producing chaff of second or third quality.
The farmer who allows his land to get foul not only spoils his own crop,
but that of his neighbour, as the seeds get blown by the wind into other
wheat-fields, and once firmly established are very hard to get rid of. As the
oats and barley ripen earlier than the wheat, the seeds fall or are blown
about before it is possible to reap them or remove them, except by hand.
The practice of treating seed with bluestone and lime, to minimise the
risk of damage from smut or bunt, should be universal, but something can
also be done in many districts by the use of resistant varieties.
One miller even goes so far as to suggest that legislative action is desirable
in order to make farmers keep their paddocks clean. Certainly it would not
be oppressive to insist that if a wheat-field is so dirty as to be a menace to
the neighbours, the owner should be compelled to cut the crop for ensilage
when green, or feed it down with sheep before the oats and barley had a
chance to ripen their seeds.


The Reaper-Thresher in a good crop of Cleveland Wheat.


Graded Grain.
In the same way, though it is, perhaps, too much to expect the farmer to
grade his crop, he should at least grade the grain he uses for sowing. It
has been repeatedly shown that the larger grains in the ear produce the most
vigorous and prolific plants. It is, therefore, to the farmer’s advantage to
sow only graded and clean wheat.
The question of grading the crop simply depends upon whether the buyer
wiL pay a sufficiently enhanced price for the higher quality and cleaner grain
to recompense the farmer for his labour. Most millers would, undoubtedly,
pay more for graded grain; but the buyer who buys on f.a.q. is prepared to
pay as much for slightly inferior grain, provided it is not so light in weight
or of such poor appearance as to reduce the average of his shipment below
the standard. If buying on quality were universally adopted, it would
undoubtedly have the effect of wheat being put on the market in better
condition than it is at present.
The f.a.q. standard for buying undoubtedly encourages irregular quality
and dirty condition of the wheat put on the market, since inferior wheat is
often mixed with prime wheat and the whole sold as f.a.q.
This is also an argument in favour of fixing a standard for two or three
grades.
Strong-flour Wheats.
The desirability of growing strong-flour wheats cannot be too strongly
insisted upon. Other things being equal, this is the determining factor in
the cash-value of a milling-sample; and this applies equally to wheat
shipped to the English market and to that purchased for milling locally.
Thanks to the work of the late Mr. Farrcr, there are now available varie-
ties of wheat for seed purposes, suited to the different districts, wTiicli possess
this quality in an eminent degree.
That this is a quality which can be permanently maintained locally has
been proved by the experience of the last ten or twelve years. Strong-flour
wheats yield well and maintain their strong-flour characteristics in districts
which are as climatically different as the tablelands and the western plains.
The cause of the higher value of such wheats as the Canadian wheats is not
to be sought, as some have thought, in the fact that the ground is covered
with snow for a certain time during the year, nor in the richness of the soil
in humus and its higher proportion of nitrogen, as others have suggested;
but it has been brought about by deliberate efforts at improving an intro-
duced strong-flour wheat, and making it specially suitable to the district.
This has been done for a succession of years in Canada, and No. 1 Hard has
been at the top of the tree as a milling wheat for a long time. The same
has been done in recent years in New South Wales, and the improvement in
this matter of strength has been, though slow, distinctly marked. This has
been strikingly shown in examining the wdieats competing for prizes at the
TJoyal Agricultural Society's Easter Show, in Sydney, for the past seven or
eight years. As these are picked wheats, it would not be quite fair to argue
from their excellence as to the nature of the grain in general cultivation;
but the important point to he noted is that the standard of excellence in the
prize-wheats is steadily rising, and the danger of having to award the first
prize to a sample deficient in gluten or strength is disappearing.


Nati;he of wheat
and Hour obtained from
years.
the f.a.q
sample
iii different
Han est.
| Weight per Pei
i bushel.
<•( nta.LTe of
Flour.
Strength—
.quarts per
200 !b. sack.
Dry Gluten,
(percent.)
190".-(Hi
62
70-5
45 5
102
1906-07
... U-4
710
■ni-i
9-4
1907-08
i 621
68-2
48-f)
10-6
1908-09
1 OH 1
t i
697
t
48-0
12-2
1909-10
[ 62
70 ! .
48-0
10'4
1910-11
1 62i :
70 0 i
i
45 0
10-2
1911-1-2
j i
72\S j
45 0
i 11-9
1912-13
1
70-3
46-0
J1 9
1913-14
' 64
7 0 0
45-0
11 o
1914-15
; m
70-3
47 0
12-9
1915-10
61 ;
72-6
45 0
11-4
1916-17
| 55J |
69-7
41'5
; 8-3
1917-18
! 58 j
70-7 !
43-8
j 9'1
A fairer index as to the general improvement in this respect is afforded
by a comparison of the strength and gluten-content of the f.a.q. samples for
the past few years. Ihe following table gives tin- results obtained from the
iast thirteen harvests: —
The high gluten-content of the f.a.q. sample in the year 1908-1909 occa-
sioned a good deal of comment at the time, the opinion being expressed that
it would not be maintained. That anticipation was supported by the experi-
ence of following years, but that the gluten-content of New South Wales
wheat shows a distinct improvement the table sufficiently illustrates. The
exceptionally low bushel-weights of the 1916-17 and of the 1917-18 harvests
seriously affected the milling-quality of the wheat, and figures, especially
those for 1916-17, must be regarded as quite exceptional.
Effect of Weather at Harvesting on Nature of the Grain.
A further point that must be taken into consideration, when harvesting, is
the effect of weather conditions upon the nature of the grain.
Rapid ripening of the grain takes place when air and soil are hot and dry
and the nights w 7 arm, and these conditions increase the gluten in the grain,
and, generally speaking, the flour-strength.
Provided the weather during the previous growth of the wheat has been
favourable, hot and dry conditions at the period of harvesting are beneficial.
When the opposite conditions prevail at harvest, that is to say, when air
and soil are moist and cool, the result is a plump, soft, starchy grain, yielding
t 17299 —L


a less glutinous and generally a weaker flour. When droughty conditions
have prevailed during the winter and spring and the ears are not well-filled,
rapid ripening results in a parched, shrivelled grain.
On the whole, the conditions that tend to diminish the quantity of the
grain are those that are productive of a better quality.
The nature and extent of the damage done to grain by bleaching was
tested two or three years ago, when bleached and unbleached samples of two
varieties (Federation and Jade —the latter no longer recommended by the
Department) were forwarded from Parkes. The unbleached samples were
harvested at the end of .November, and the bleached samples were from the
same crops after 7i inches of rain had fallen. Apart from colour and
appearance, the difference was very marked, and to the disadvantage of the
bleached grain, the chief dilferenee being in the bushel weight, which was
lower in the case of the bleached sample of Federation by 5 lb. per bushel
and in the case of Jade by 3| lb. There was less difference than might be
expected in the actual behaviour in the mill, but the bran from the bleached
samples was in both cases thicker and broader, and rather greater in quan-
tity, while the gluten content in the bleached grain was lower, especially in
the case of Federation.
Early Harvesting.
The question of harvesting at an earlier stage than is at present the
custom, is one that is w 7 ell worth serious consideration. Milling tests sug-
gest that the risk of unfavourable weather conditions at harvest time, and
the loss of grain, due partly to shelling and partly to handling, could be
avoided in this way without the quality of the grain suffering.
It would, of course, not be possible to use the stripper in these circum-
stances, and other questions, such as the quality of the straw and the yield
of grain, -would have to be taken into account.
At the same time, since dependence on the weather constitutes one of the
main difficulties connected -with the present system of harvesting, any
modification wdiich enables the farmer to choose the most favourable weather
conditions is worth considering.
Milling tests have been made with the object of ascertaining whether it
is not possible to harvest the grain at an earlier stage than is customary
without affecting its milling value. If the grain can be harvested in the
dough stage, or even a few days before it is dead ripe, it may mean in
many cases the saving of the crop from the bleaching effects of unsettled
weather at harvest time, as well as the avoidance of loss by shelling.
Arrangements were made with the managers and experimentalists of
some of the experiment farms to have samples of wheat out at two or three
different stages in several different seasons, and forwarded for purposes of
milling and examination. It was found that in bushel-weights there was
no regularity noticeable, the grain cut in the dough stage giving the heaviest
sample most frequently, while in several cases the grain cut when dead ripe
was very much lower in bushel weight, and had suffered from the weather.
The conclusion arrived at was that milling quality is not greatly affected by
the stage at which the grain is harvested, and that cutting without waiting
for the grain to be dead ripe is not likely to affect the quality to disadvan-
tage, but that on the contrary such a procedure will in many cases enable
the crop to escape unfavourable weather conditions at harvest, which would


have the effect of bleaching or pinching the grain. The most suitable time
appears to be when the wheat is in the hard-dough stage; but it is only
suggested that this might be done when the crop is threatened with rain,
or with sudden and intense heat, when at its final ripening stage. Cutting
at an earlier stage, when the grain is in the milk or soft dough stage, does
not seem necessary, nor, as far as the experiments showed, desirable. Another
advantage of harvesting early is that there is less danger of shelling and
of loss in handling. The stripper, of course, cannot be used under such
conditions.
HARVESTING WHEAT FOR HAY AND CHAFF.*
Many factors enter into the production of wheat for hay and chaff, and
the farmer who would earn the reputation for the well-grown and well-
made article that commands the highest price in the Sydney market must
exercise judgment in the selection of the most suitable variety for his
conditions, good husbandry in the growth of the crop, skill in the handling
of it in the field, and care and close attention to detail in cutting it.
All who contemplate the production of chaff for the Sydney market
should make it their business to ascertain exactly what are the require-
ments of buyers and to act accordingly. It is quite true that many do
this, and that in certain districts, particularly in the Riverina, the produc-
tion of high-class hay and chaff is well understood and practised, but there
are other districts where little care is bestowed on this product, and it is
regarded only as a convenient method of getting something for that which
is worth very little. When it is stated, however, that the proper prepara-
tion of chaff may increase its value in the market by almost as much as
265. per ton —sufficient to pay the cost of cutting and the bags—it will
be seen that the requirements of the market have an important relation to
profits, and are therefore worth catering for.
The preference of Sydney for green chaff is due to the inclination of dry
chaff to cause constipation and to necessitate the supply of some other
green feed as a laxative. The city carter therefore prefers to purchase a
green chaff which will save him the expense of another class of feed, and
producers will find it quite worth while to study this feature of the busi-
ness.
Suitable Varieties.
Chaff-production is rather , different to other classes of rural enterprise,
for chaff is not always the result of a crop grown intentionally for the pur-
pose. For convenience, producers may be divided into two classes: (1)
Those who grow for the purpose, and (2) those who grow for grain, but
who, owing to frosting, dry weather or other causes, have to cut the crop
for hay and subsequently convert it into chaff.
The man who is intentionally growing for hay should select varieties
which yield straw and flag of good colour and body. Varieties that pro-
duce light coloured hay, or that are inclined to be “ flaggy,” should be
avoided, and it is just as well to respect the prejudices against certain
varieties (such as Federation), even if they be a trifle unreasonable.
Varieties that have a brown head do not make the most attractive chaff,
for the brown husk shows up and buyers do not like it.
* Compiled from an article by A. H. K. McDonald, Manager, Trangie Experiment
Farm, and other sources.


Varieties that carry heavy straw should.also have a preference. Some
wheats have a very thin, ‘'shelly” straw which gives a light bodied chaff
that makes no weight in the bag. Heavier straw cuts better, and produces
more weight, and the chaff has more body.
This question of varieties does not receive anything like the amount of
attention it should, especially in districts where wheat is not largely
grown for hay. There are districts where the value of particular varieties
is fully appreciated, but there are others where it has yet to be learned,
Crop of Firbank Wheat at Ganmain. Yield 3 tons 2 cwt. of Hay per acre.
and where farmers will find it well worth while to consider the subject
more than they have done. Farmers in the Riverina, for instance, are
prepared to pay high prices for seed of Zealand and Firbank, having proved
their suitability for hay, but in the West and North-west it will pay to
study the Department’s recommendations and, where hay is desired, to
grow Firbank (which is one of the best), or one or other of the varieties
that are recommended by the Department for that purpose.
When to Cut.
The crop is at the best stage for hay a few days after it is in flower.
This condition is best, because at this stage the plant contains its maxi-
mum amount of nutritive qualities, and at the same time the nutriment
is evenly distributed throughout the whole plant. This is as it should be
for hay-making purposes, for when preserved as hay the whole of the plant
is to be eaten, and not only the ears. It is, therefore, better that
the whole of the nutriment should be evenly distributed throughout
the plant, rather than that one portion should be excessively nutritious
whilst the remainder is of little or no value as a food. Though the crop at
the flowering stage contains the maximum amount of nutritive qualities, it
has not reached the stage when it will produce the greatest weight of hay.
The dry matter in the plant increases until it is mature, and because of this
some farmers refrain from cutting the crop until it has passed the flowering
stage, in order to get a greater quantity of hay. They gain the extra
weight at the expense of the feeding-value and colour.


The position of the farmer who has to cut for hay a crop that he intended
for grain, is a different one. He cannot expect to get the quality that the
grower will who has grown for hay and cut at the right time. In matters
both of variety and of time of cutting the grain grower is at a disadvantage
—more especially when he delays cutting as long as possible in the hope
Cutting and Stooking.
that he will set a crop of grain, the straw meantime losing all the colour
that would recommend it for hay. In such circumstances the only advice
that can be offered is that the farmer should endeavour to cut at the earliest
possible moment after he is satisfied that he is not going to get a profitable
grain yield.
Cutting the Crop.
Throw the machine in gear as the horses reach the crop, and drive down
and round the edges. Cut at least two rounds before attempting to cut
the back swath or the piece knocked down by the horses.
By moans of the lever, move the knotter to or from the butter-board as
required, so that the sheaf will be tied in a position that it will be evenly
balanced. When the crop is very tall, and with machines that will allow
it to be done, the mechanism operating the packers and supporting the
butter-board should be adjusted so as to give as much room as possible on
the length of the table.
Raise or low'er the reel as the height of the crop requires. If the crop
Is leaning away from the knife, put the reel forward, so that the beaters
will be lifting the crop backwards when the knife reaches it.
In a short, thin crop the beaters should be low and well back over the
table, so as to prevent the stuff lodging on the knife or falling in front.
In a very light, thin crop it is advisable to have the beaters right down
on the fingers, so as to sweep the greenstuff on to the canvas. It is not
possible to do this with the beaters as fitted to the machine, for these are
made of wood, and therefore stiff and rigid, and in consequence they cannot
be set closer than 3 inches to the fingers, because of the ridge at the back of
the knife, which would break the beaters if struck by them when revolving.


The efficiency of the beaters for dealing with light crops can be very
greatly increased by tacking or screwing leather on to them, so that the
edge of the leather projects about 3 inches beyond the edge of the beater.
As the leather is flexible, the reel can be lowered until the edge of the leather
touches the fingers; when the reel revolves, the leather, as it strikes the
ridge at the back of the knife, will bend and pass over it without injury, and
at the same time will sweep the short straws on to the canvas.
For a very light crop the binder may be further improved by inserting a
piece of tin, or galvanized iron, under the first roller-holder, and allowing it
to project until it meets the clip on top of the fingers.
A light, thin crop can be cut better if rather on the dry side.
It may be thought that the mower will deal with a lighter crop than the
binder, but it may be taken for granted that when a crop is too light for a
binder to deal with, though in good working order, it is also too light for
a mower to deal with profitably.
Carting Hay.
When the crop is too short for the mechanism to tie it in sheaves (and it
is then so thin that if cut with a mower the rake would miss a great deal),
it may be gathered in loose bundles by loosely covering the sheaf-carrier with
hessian.
This will carry the loose straws until enough are collected, when the trip
can be released and the bundle deposited on the ground.
Laid crops can only be dealt with by cutting them in the opposite direc-
tion to which they are lying. This entails working the binder only one
way. When the crop is tangled as well as laid, considerable patience and
judgment are required to make the most of it. All that can be done is to
drive the binder with care, seizing every opportunity to drive it against the
direction of the majority of the laid plants.
Curing the Hay Crop.
After cutting at the right time, to secure the maximum food-value the-
plant is capable of producing, it is essential that it be dried, and so pre-
served with as little loss as possible of this food-value. Loss takes place


as the result of rain washing out the sugar and other soluble food ingredi-
ents, and as the result of the heat and sun drying off the essential oils and
other volatile compounds. To minimise these losses by protecting the
sheaves from the action of the sun and rain, a considerable number are
placed together in a stook.
The sheaves should be stocked without delay after they have been cut
■with the binder. The machine may be allowed to cut a couple of swaths,
and then sufficient men should be employed stocking to keep up with the
machine.
In a light crop, one man can stook the sheaves as fast as the binder can
-cut them, but in a 2-ton crop two men are not sufficient to keep pace with it.
The sheaves in long, open stocks dry more rapidly than in round ones,
but in the former, more of the crop is exposed to the bleaching action of
the sun. Long, open stocks are therefore suitable for moist districts,
whilst the practice of making large, round stocks is adapted for the dry
ones.
Stocking and Stacking.
Sheaves are allowed to remain in stocks until the hay is so dry that when
placed in the stack it will not heat or mould. This stage is determined by
drawing a handful of straws from the middle of the stook and examining
the knots or joints in the straws. If these are dry the material can be
stacked without danger.
In hot, dry districts like the West, the hay dries out sufficiently in four-
teen to twenty days in October. At Coonamble Experiment Farm in the
season 1913, most of the hay was ready after standing for a fortnight in
stook. It requires watching, however, as the stage at which it is carted in
will influence the quality of the produce a good deal. If an examination
•of the upper joints of the stem shows that these joints have shrunk, it may
be taken that the haj r is dry enough to stack. Until that shrinkage is ap-
parent the hay will be apt to sweat if stacked, but once the contraction of
the upper joints can be seen, the crop should be got in as quickly as pos-
sible, as otherwise it gets hard and is then more difficult to make up into
good chaff.
Admittedly very fair chaff can be made from poor hay, much then de-
pending on the manner in which the chaffing is done, but the farmer who
aspires to “ topping the market,” or who wishes to get full value for his
crop, will regard all the foregoing points as important, and will take care
that every one of them receives due attention.
The stack must not be made too big or one man will not be able to pitch
to the steamer or cutter, and an extra man becomes a necessity. A con-
venient size is a stack of 20 feet to 22 feet in diameter. Incidentally this
size is also the best because it can be made weatherproof more easily than
.a larger one.
Chaffing Hay.
The man who is pitching off the stack to the cutter should be instructed
to throw out all sheaves that have been damaged. A shower at stacking
time may cause several sheaves to turn mouldy, or a little rain may have
found its way in if the stack has not been well built, and although it is
frue that a damaged sheaf or two will do little harm to a large sample,


there is too much danger that the buyer will hit upon it when he comes to
inspect the consignment. If he does the farmer loses a substantial sum
by his neglect to throw out in the beginning that which was of little conse-
quence any way.
The Use of the Steamer.
Every farmer who has hay chaffed by contract should insist on the use
of the steamer, especially in dry districts. In cooler districts it is perhaps
less essentia], though frequently the quality of the chaff would be improved
were it used. The object being to toughen the hay so that it -will cut with-
out breaking, it is particularly necessary in hot districts, but it is also
desirable in cool districts where the conditions have been very dry during
the curing of the hay, and still are at the time of chaffing.
A certain amount of care and judgment are required in the operation. As
the steam is only used to toughen the hay, it will be found that a larger
amount of steam is needed for the top of the stack than lower down, the
Chaff-cutting.
hay at the top having dried much more than in the body of the stack. The
best guide is to examine the chaff as it comes to the bags, and to increase or
decrease the flow of steam according to the condition of the chaff.
The steam must be high-pressure, dry steam, for there is then no danger
of causing mustiness. If wet steam is used, the occurrence of mustiness is
probable, especially if the hay is itself somewhat damp. The best results
are obtained when a pressure of 90 lb. is maintained. The steam pipe should
be placed on the engine in such a position that dry steam is obtained, and
to that end the off-take should be from the steam chest. On a Marshall
engine at Coonamble the connection was made by inserting a T piece into
the pipe leading to the whistle. On no account should steam bo taken from
the smoke-box end of the boiler.
The hay naturally becomes heated in passing through the steamer, and in
the bag the chaff has a hot, damp, or slightly damp feeling, but provided the-
hay was quite dry before steaming there is no danger of any fermentation
in the bag.


Just as in the ease of the man who is pitching off the stack, the man who
is sewing the bags should be instructed to watch the chaff as it comes
through, and if any of the bags are not up to the standard they should be put
aside for home use, in order that they may not reduce the value of the whole
line.
Cutting.
The first point in connection with the actual cutting is that the “ runs ”
should not be too long. Much depends on the size of the machine, but if
the periods are long, the knives get blunt, and towards the end the chaff is
broken up badly (instead of being cut), and the sample is rendered uneven.
Short runs pay because of the higher quality of chaff.
The knives should be kept sharp, should have a good long bevel on them
with a fairly straight set, and they should set close up to the face plate,
which must be kept with a good angle. The angle, it will be found, requires
renewal after every 800 to 400 tons are cut, for otherwise it gets rounded,
and the knives cannot cut cleanly against it. It is also important that the
knife wheel should be set firmly, so that when cutting the blades remain
close against the face plate.
Sometimes the wheel becomes loose, and when the knives are being set
they are apparently right, but when the machine is put in operation the
wheel springs away from the face plate. Whether the knife wheel is loose or
not, can be ascertained by pushing against the wheel away from the face
plate, and if it is found not to be tight, it can be adjusted by moans of the
set-screws.
One point attaches to the bagging—second-class bags at once makes
second-class chaff. Good chaff should be presented in a manner that will
commend itself to the buyer, and an inferior or dirty bag does not produce a
favourable preliminary impression.
Attention to all the above points in cutting will enable a farmer to pro-
duce a very fair sample of chaff even from an inferior, “flaggy” hay. The
object in dealing with hay of this kind must be to prevent the flag being
broken into dust, and to give the chaff a good appearance —and that can only
bo achieved by care and attention to every detail in the machining.
Feeding Value.
Apart altogether from appearance, however, there is one feature in chaff
production that has yet to be appreciated by both grower and buyer—that
is, it may vary much in feeding value. It is a quality that cannot be
detected in the final product, but it is nevertheless a fact. The feeding
value of chaff depends largely on the class of soil on which it is grown, a
rich soil generally producing a chaff of high feeding value. At Coonamble
Experiment Farm it has been observed that chaff from hay grown on the
rich, black soil, requires to have very little grain added to make it a suffi-
cient ration for horses. Chaff produced on good soils has not always such
an attractive appearance as that which comes from the lighter soils, but if
the feeding qualities were better understood the former would be appreciated
more highly. To convince the Sydney market that this is so will take time,
no doubt, but meantime the farmer who has a strong soil can console him-
self that he can feed bis horses well with less grain than if he were located
on lighter land.


DESCRIPTIONS OF PRINCIPAL VARIETIES.
Bobs.
Bobs is rather a tall, erect, compact-growing variety, which stools moder-
ately. The foliage is erect, dark-coloured, but not plentiful. The straw,
when ripe, is white. It is hollow, and in good seasons likely to be weak,
The ears are creamy white in colour, bald, without tip-beard, of good size,
fairly long, and slightly tapering, with open, rather than compact spikelets.
The grain is small and plump, weighing remarkably well, with a good bright
skin and horny interior. Though it is rather harder and more difficult to
grind than the soft wheats, it is liked by millers because of the large
percentage of high-class flour, and small percentage of thin bran it produces.
As a milling variety, it belongs to the “New South Wales Strong White”
class, and is admirably suited for blending with weaker kinds.
Its defects are : It is bunt and rust liable; if sown early is suscep-
tible to frosting; when sown on rich land it is liable to lodge ; it also has a
slight tendency to shell.
Bobs was produced in 1896 as the result of mating a variety of barley
called Nepaul, or Bald Skinless Barley, with a strain of Blount’s Lambrigg
wheat, which, for record purposes, was called M. (F.), but which became
known later as Early Lambrigg. As the result of the artificial pollination
effected, only one shrivelled grain was produced. This was planted, and very
little difficulty was experienced in fixing a variety from it. Four years later
the progeny of this cross had become fixed, and was named Bobs.
This variety is really a hybrid, and not a crossbred, for it is the result of
mating two distinct species, viz., a wheat and a barley, together. A crossbred
is the result of mating two varieties of the same species together.
Bobs was the first Farrer wheat to be commercially successful, and
its introduction into general cultivation was at once the late William
Farrer’s triumph and an ample justification of the views advanced by
him before the Australian Association for the Advancement of Science in
1898, when such views were regarded by the majority of people as those
only of a visionary. Its successful and profitable cultivation proved beyond
doubt that the climate of the wheat areas of Australia was suitable for the
production of varieties from which “ Strong,” as well as “ White,” flour could
be milled.
Bomen.
This is a new variety which has been produced by the Department by
cross-breeding.
The cross was made at Wagga in 1901, and until fixed it was grown in the
bunt experiment section, where it proved itself a resistant variety. In 1910
it was sown in larger plots, and it has yielded well since at Wagga, and lias
also done well at Oowra. It was not named until the Departmental con-
ference of 1913. Its pedigree is as follows :
Jonathan x Zaff (an Indian variety)
V J
Power’s Fife x Unnamed
(a Manitoba variety)
'■ v /
Red Potocka x Unnamed
V , '
Bomen


Bobs.
Bomen.


Bornen’s season is about the same as Warren’s, and it ripens a little later
than Federation. It has a good head, well filled, bald and white in colour,
with a good length of white straw, without much dead flag. The grain is a
pale brown. The straw of the ripe crop has been said to “ cut like sticks,”
Its chief defect is a slight tendency to shell.
Its flour belongs to the “ Medium Strong” class.
In the farmer’s experiment plots, Bomen has yielded consistently well,
and in some cases has beaten Federation.
Bunyip.
Bunyipi is rather an erect, compact, quick-growing variety, which stools
sparsely, and is of medium height. The foliage is fairly broad, inclined to
be limp, and of good colour, though on the light side. The straw is yellowish
and stout in appearance, but it has thin walls; sown at the proper season,
however, its shortness enables it to stand up satisfactorily for harvesting.
The ears are good, stout, well-tipped, with slight tip beards, and the grain is
large, plump, attractive, and yellowish-white in appearance.
It is a crossbred, produced as the result of mating two other crossbreds—
Rymer and Maffra. Rymer, the mother plant, was produced as the
result of crossing Purple Straw on to Improved Fife, tbe latter being a
Manitoba variety. Maffra was the product of King’s Jubilee, mated with an
unnamed crossbred (Blount’s Lambrigg x Hornblende). Its pedigree is,
therefore, as follows ;
Blount s x Hornblende
Lambrigg
An unnamed King’s
Improved Fife x Purple Straw. crossbred Jubilee
Rymer x Maffra
Bunyip
The cross was made in 1897, and named in 1901.
It is a very early variety, and because of this extreme earliness it should
not be sown early in the season ; to do so is to court failure, unless precau-
tions are taken to eat it off. If sown early, the straw will be rather tall,
and break down easily, so that the yield will often be less than when sown
late. Early-sown crops of this variety are much damaged by frost. Sow
well after the middle of the planting season.
Under normal conditions the straw of Bunyip is on the short side, and:
rather coarse, and on that account it is not suitable for hay. It is bunt and
rust liable, but is early enough to escape rust in most years.
It suits the dry, warm districts, yielding a heavy crop of large, bright, even-
sized, plump grain. When ripening, the crop presents a very level-headed
and attractive appearance. As it does not stool too freely, the seed should
be sown comparatively thickly.
Canberra.
The young growth is rather erect, the leaves medium dark green, some-
what glaucous, and medium broad. The straw is of medium height, hollow,,
white, and rather slender. It stools fairly, with a moderate quantity of erect
leaves. The ears are smooth, light brown, half erect, slightly awned at the-
tip, of medium length, open and uniform with an acute tip. The spikelets-
are irregular and medium to widely spreading with medium sharp-pointed
glumes, which are not firmly attached. The grain is of medium size, slightly-
elongated, yellow, opaque, with a medium deep crease.


The variety is a hybrid between Federation (the dam) and Volga barley, a
two-rowed sort obtained as an impurity in a sample of wheat received from
Russia. It is a new variety, only having been named at the 1914 conference
of departmental officers.
It ripens quite as early as Comeback and is likely to prove specially suit-
able for grain production in the South-western Slopes and Riverina and in
the Central-western Slopes. The very wet seasons of 1916 and 1917 proved
it to be somewhat weak in the straw, but it is such a heavy yielder of grain
that it deserves attention from growers, notwithstanding its liability to
lodge under growthy conditions. In the North-west, the Inspector of
Agriculture, Mr. 11. W. McDiarmid, advises that for this reason it should
not be sown on the black and heavy soils. Mr. G. Stening, Inspector of
Agriculture in the Riverina and South-western Slopes, reported after the
harvest of 1917-18 as follows: —“Canberra has now been tested for four
years on the experiment plots, and has proved its superiority over all other
early maturers as a grain producer. It can be recommended to be grown
in preference to Bunyip, which it has easily outyieldcd in every instance
where the two varieties have been grown together during the past four
years. It matures a shade later than Bunyip, is just as weak in the straw,
but the straw is not so brittle. It is important that it should not be sown
until the latter portion of the sowing season, otherwise there is a tendency
for it to lodge.”
It yields a high percentage of flour, which is of excellent colour and belongs
to the “ Medium Strong ” class.
Cedar.
Cedar is a mid-season variety, which stools moderately and grows fairly
tall. The young growth is spreading, and its colour is rather light. The
leaves are not very abundant, are of medium length, narrow, and inclined
to be limp. When ripe the straw is whitish, long, and rather weak. The
ears are beardless and moderately tapering, with the spikelets not very close
together. The chafi is white, smooth, and closely attached to the grain.
The grain is red, hard, rather small and fairly plump.
Cedar is a crossbred, containing about three-quarters Manitoba and a
quarter Indian blood, and has the following pedigree : —■
T ~ Zaff (an Indian
Jonathan x ' . . ,
variety 7 )
v '
Power’s Fife (a rT ,
■ ■ ; , x Unnamed
Manitoba variety)
Power’s Fife x Unnamed
Cedar
Cedar is highly rust and bunt resistant. It will probably suit the districts
of medium rather than those of scanty rainfall. It holds its grain so
closely that it is difficult to strip or thresh, but this quality is lost to some
extent when it is grown in hot districts. It is a valuable hay variety, and
in suitable districts it is also a fairly prolific yielder of grain. As a milling
variety it is our best wheat; it produces a satisfactory quantity of flour, of
good colour, and very high strength.


The colour of the grain is red, and this prevents it being included in the
“ Strong White ” class. It is rather entitled to be included with the Mani-
toba as “Strong Red.”
Cleveland.
Cleveland is a vigorous, rather tall-growing variety. It stools abundantly,
and in its young state has rather a spreading habit. The foliage is fairly
abundant, and of a good dark green colour ; the leaves are narrow and erect.
The straw is white, and on the stout side, The ears are of medium size, and
slightly tapering, with white, smooth chaff. The grain is of medium size,
white and plump.
This variety is a crossbred, produced by mating Honnblende with Blount’s
Lambrigg, and then crossing Purple Straw Tuscan on to the progeny. Its
pedigree is therefore :—-
Hornblende x Blount’s Lambrigg
Unnamed x Purple Straw Tuscan
'
Cleveland
Cleveland is a late variety, and for this reason is more particularly suitable
for planting early rather than late in the season. It is a good general-purpose
variety, being equally suited for hay as for grain. It prefers a cool climate.
At Bathurst Experiment Farm it has proved the best variety yet grown.
It is rather a good rust-resister, and is not very susceptible to bunt.
As a milling variety it is in the “ Medium Strong ” class.
Comeback.
Comeback is a rapid-growing variety of medium height, which stools rather
sparsely. It does not appear to thrive in districts of very cold winters.
When young, its growth is inclined to be compact and fairly erect. The
colour of the foliage is on the pale side, and the flag is scanty, short and
fine. The straw is white, slender, slightly weak but elastic. The ears are
of medium to small size, bald and tapering. The chaff is smooth, white
and open. The grain is small, hard, plump and bright, and when fractured
it has a horny appearance.
Comeback is a crossbred, produced as follows :—lmproved Fife as a mother
plant was mated with an unnamed crossbred, obtained by crossing Vanessa
with an Indian wheat called “G.” Vanessa was a crossbred produced by
mating Hornblende (a Fife variety) with another Indian variety called “ A,”
the latter being the sire.
Its pedigree is, therefore :
Hornblende x Indian “ A ”
A'aneasa x Indian “ G ”
'■ y '
Improved Fife x Unnamed
Comeback
As the mother of this variety was a Fife, and its sire a crossbred of Indian
and Fife parentage, the fitness of calling this variety Comeback, because of
its origin, is apparent.


Bunyip.
Cedar.


Cleveland.
Comeback.


Comeback is an early variety, flourishing best under medium dry con-
ditions. It should not be sown early-—not earlier than the middle of the
planting season. If sown too early it is apt to become frosted, and to grow
too tall to stand up properly, unless the season happens to be a dry one.
It is early enough to escape rust in most seasons, and is also slightly rust-
resistant. It is not particularly susceptible to bunt. Sometimes a tendency
to shell is noticeable.
It is admirably suited for hay, the straw retaining its green colour until
well on towards maturity. The ripe straw is particularly clean, bright,
not coarse, and attractive.
In districts where Federation is the main crop variety, Comeback is very
suitable for completing the planting towards the end of the season, but, like
Bunyip, it should be sown comparatively thickly.
As a milling variety it belongs to the “ New South Wales Strong White ”
class. It is superior to Bobs, and is probably unexcelled by any variety in
general cultivation in any part of the world. Mr. Kahlhaum, a leading
miller of South Australia, has emphatically expressed the opinion that the
flour from it is better than the best imported Manitoba.
Amongst millers and exporters there is a keen demand for this variety at
slightly advanced rates. Farmers who grow this and other varieties of
the same class should, for commercial reasons, keep them separate, and make
a distinct class of them. It is not good business policy to mix them with
varieties of the “ Soft White ” class in order to make a sample of the f.a.q.
standard.
Federation.
Federation is a short, strong, erect-growing variety', which stools well.
The foliage of the young plant is of good colour, with broad, stiff leaves,
while the straw of the ripe plant is yellowish-white, stout and short. The
ears are bald, of medium to large size, full tipped, uniform and compact, with
the spikelets set rather closely. The chaff is brownish coloured, smooth and
fairly close. The grain is of medium size, white, soft and plump.
Federation is the result of a cross between a strain of Purple Straw and
Yandilla. The latter was produced by crossing Improved Fife with an Indian
variety called Etawah. Its pedigree is :
Improved Fife X F.tawah
» '
Purple Straw X Yandilla
Federation
This variety' is the most popular farmers’ variety in New South Wales at
the present time. It has reached this position because of its remarkable
ability to yield well and consistently throughout the whole of the wheat areas
not only of New South Wales, but also of Victoria and South Australia, In
some districts it is estimated that it yields at least a bag more per acre than any
of the old varieties.
The production of Federation was the result of a deliberate attempt on the
part of Mr Farrer to produce a variety' with short straw, specially suitable
for the Australian methods of harvesting with the stripper. The remarkable
popularity of this variety', as the result of its behaviour in the field, affords
abundant evidence that he was singularly' successful.


On account of its short straw, and erect growth, it is not an attractive
variety in the field, and does not appeal to the farmer who has been accus-
tomed to the luxuriant growth and pleasing appearance of Purple Straw
and similar varieties. If judged by appearances, Federation would never
have become popular. Fortunately for it, and for the farmers of the State,
it is the number of bags per acre which turns the scale when the merits
of any particular wheat are in the balance. As Federation, despite its-
unattractive appearance, is able to produce the necessary bags, it has become,,
and remains, the most popular variety of the present time.
It produces the maximum amount of grain for the minimum amount of
straw. Its upright head enables the operation of stripping to be done easily..
It holds its grain tightly enough to prevent shattering, yet strips without
difficulty. It is not easily damaged by storms, and because of this some-
farmers have called it “ storm proof.” The shortness of the glumes, or chaff,,
and the erect carriage of the head allow the rain to enter the ear, so that
the grain becomes bleached as the result of showers more readily than most
varieties, which makes it less acceptable in the North-west.
As a milling wheat, it is in the “ Medium Strong ” class, and it is ans
improvement upon varieties of the old Purple Straw type.
Federation is liable to rust, flag-smut and bunt. It also seems specially-
susceptible in the spring, chiefly in the cooler and moister districts, to-
attacks of powdery mildew (Erysiphe graminis), which, however, does not-
seem to exercise an injurious effect upon the yield.
Because of its short, stiff straw and brown colour, it is not a hay variety, and
cannot be recommended for that purpose, especially if the hay is intended for
market. Farmers use it for their own stock with very satisfactory results, and
the stock are said to eat it readily and with relish. The yield is also very
much greater than appearances would indicate, 2 tons per acre being quite
common; even heavier yields are frequently obtained.
Hard Federation. —This is distinct from the ordinary Federation, being-
a variation from the standard type which has been fixed and improved by
selection. In outward appearance the two varieties are similar, except that
the heads of Hard Federation are less dense (spikelets not set so closely
together), and are more full and bold-looking than those of the old type.
It ripens a week earlier than, and the straw is not quite so strong as, the
ordinary type, though it is quite stiff enough to stand until harvested..
Hard Federation received its name from the quality of its grain, and it is-
in this respect that the most striking difference is seen between the two-
varieties. Hard Federation has grain of a rather flinty appearance, and doe»
not bleach easily; this feature, together with its superior flour qualities, has
brought it into favour with millers. Harvest results have shown it to be a
heavy yielder of grain, ripening before the hot weather sets in—a quality
that may explain its superiority in recent seasons over the old variety in
Northern districts.
Firbank.
Firbank is a tall, erect-growing variety, which stools rather scantily ~
The young plant carries a moderate amount of foliage of good colour. The-
leaves are broad, long and limp. The ripe straw is fairly stout, and white in
colour. The ears are long, open and tapering, and are slightly tip-bearded.
The chaff is white, smooth, and inclined to he close. The grain is large p
white, and rather plump.


Federation.
Firbank.


Firbank is a half-sister to Bunyip, both varieties having the same sire. It
was produced by mating Zealand with Maffra. Its pedigree is :
Blount’s Lambrigg x Hornblende
Unnamed x King’s Jubilee
' r ''
Zealand x Maffra
Firbank
This variety is very early, being about a fortnight earlier than Steinwedel,.
and a few days later than Bunyip. It is specially suitable for hay, the
straw being sweet, soft, and of excellent quality. It is green right to the
base, with little or no dry flag.
It should be sown about mid-season or late. Early-sown crops are
subject to frosting and become ready for cutting before the weather is hot
enough to cure the fodder properly. But if sown early the crop will bo
ready to cut for ensilage or hay before the black oat falls, and if utilised in this
way it will prove a very valuable aid in profitably ridding dirty paddocks of
that pest. Its earliness and sparsely stooling habit enable it to thrive in dry
soils, and for this reason it should be a valuable wheat for the Western
Plains. As a hay wheat for sowing headlands and tracks in very hot and
dry districts, it can be strongly recommended. At Nyngan Demonstration.
Farm this variety has given consistently good results for a number of years:
past.
After it is fit to cut for hay the straw becomes brittle, and should rough,
weather be experienced at harvest time a good deal of loss may occur.
Firbank, though particularly a hay wheat, is by no means an indifferent
yielder of grain. As a milling wheat it is placed in the “ Medium Strong >F
class. It is, however, a good flour yielder and easy to mill.
Florence.
Florence is a very early variety, of medium heignt. It stools fairly welL
The young growth is of a good, dark colour, vigorous, erect, and compact. The
foliage is of medium quantity, with rather stiff, narrow leaves. When ripe
the straw is white and rather slender. The ears are slightly tip-bearded, of
medium size and tapering. The spikelets are not set very closely together.
The chaff is white, smooth, and rather open. The grain is good, rather horny,
of average size, and inclined to be plump.
Florence is a crossbred, produced as the result of an effort made to*
obtain a smut-resisting variety. Its pedigree is as follows :
White Naples x Improved Fife
Unnamed x White Naples Improved Fife x Eden
Unnamed x Unnamed
v y '
Florence
The cross was made in 1901, and introduced into larger plots for triaF
in 1907. In the severe tests to which it has been subjected, the crops-
resulting from heavily smutted seed have shown the following results :—la,




1903 the proportion affected was 4'76 per cent. ; in 1904, 14-28 per cent. ; in
1905, 13-41 per cent. ; in 1906, 3-09 per cent. ; in 1907, 0’53 per cent.; in
1908, 2-81 per cent.; in 1909, 2-79 per cent.; in 1910, 1T69 per cent.;
in 1911, 18-42 per cent.
Florence is suitable for hay or grain ; it is a very prolific yielder of grain,
but the grain is held so loosely that it is apt to shell. This is apparently
not the case in every district, for some reports to hand make no reference to
this defect. It is very early, and unless it is to be fed off, should on no
account be sown till mid-season.
As a milling variety the grain is of satisfactory quality ; in fact, it is one
of the strongest in the “ Medium Strong ” class.
Genoa.
The young growth is spreading, the leaves dark green, glaucous, and'rather
narrow. The straw is fairly tall, hollow, white, and medium stout, the plants
stooling rather freely, with fairly abundant, rather erect flag. The ears are
of medium size, yellowish-white, rather open, slightly tapering, smooth,
slightly awned at the tip, and rather erect, with regular, medium, widely-
spreading spikelets. The glumes are blunt-pointed, slightly incurved at the
tip, and fairly strongly attached. The grain is of medium size, regular,
yellowish-white, rather horny, with crease of medium depth. Its pedigree
is:—
White Naples x Improved Fife-
Unnamed x White Naples Improved Fife x Eden
Unnamed x Unnamed
Genoa
This variety is a sister to Florence, but ripens much later; it is a good
bunt-resister, and not susceptible to rust, but a moderate yielder in most
districts. At Glen Innes, however, it thrives well; although its stooling
capacity is much less than that of Haynes’ Blue-stem, its better grain-
holding qualities have brought it into favour for this district.
Haynes’ Blue-stem.
Haynes’ Blue-stem is a tall variety, stooling freely. The foliage is of
good colour, and the straw when ripe is white and is rather slender,
but very elastic. The ear is very slightly tip-bearded, and has white chaff,
which is covered with fine velvety hairs. The chaff is very open, and grips
the grain so loosely that it often protrudes from the glumes. The grain,
which is not very large, is reddish, hard and plump when grown under
good conditions.
Haynes’ Blue-stem is one of the varieties selected and distributed by the
Minnesota Experiment Station, and is also called by them “ Minnesota
No. 169.” It is considered by that Station to be one of the best varieties for
their conditions, and was the parent of a crossbred which for some years was
considered the most prolific and best all-round variety they had produced.
It is also known as “ South Dakota No. 1.”


It is a late variety, and only suitable for cool, moist, districts similar to
Glen Innes. It is resistant to rust, but shells so easily that it is quite
unsuitable for harvesting with the stripper, and should always be harvested
a little on the green side.
For hay in cool districts, it is admirably suited. At Glen Inne»
Experiment Farm it has so far proved the best for that purpose, consistently
yielding heavy crops of fodder of excellent quality.
Haynes’ Blue-stem is the only Fife-wheat grown locally which does not
belong to the “ Strong Red ” class. Its flour is one of medium strength, and
the wheat is classed with the “Medium Strong ” wheats.
Huguenot.
Huguenot, or “ Le Huguenot ” is a very tall variety, which stools very
sparsely. The young growth is rather compact and erect, and is of only a
fair colour. The amount of foliage is moderate, with leaves which are broad:
and stiff. The straw is stiff, coarse, and solid near the ear. The ear is bluish-
black, and is rather short, flat sided, uniform and beardless. The smooth
chaff clings to the grain tightly. The grain is of the macaroni type, and
is large, long, hard, fairly plump and translucent.
Huguenot is a selection from Medeah. A fairly beardless head was noticed
in a crop of Medeah, and from this head the grain carrying least beard was
selected and planted; the resultant seed was sown, and the ears showing
least beard again selected, until an even, beardless Medeah was produced,,
when the name “Le Huguenot ” was given it. The variety originated with
Mr. J. Correll, of the Arthur River, West Australia.
On the North Coast it has proved the most prolific variety ever grown for
green feed, and it is only recommended for coastal districts.
Sown in conjunction with field peas or vetches, it gives heavy yields of
fodder, the strong stalks of the Huguenot acting as supports to which the peas
cling. Yields of 11 tons of Huguenot alone and 13J tons of Huguenot and
field peas together have been obtained on the North Coast.
It is fairly rust and smut resistant.
As a milling variety it is remarkable for the large amount of gluten the-
grain contains. This ranges from 20 to 22 per cent., which is the largest
amount found in any variety examined by Mr. Guthrie.
Its flour yield is very low, though its strength is high. The colour of the
flour is so bad (almost black) as to make it useless from a miller’s and
baker’s standpoint
John Brown.
John Brown is a tall, erect, compact, free-stooling variety. The young-
growth is fairly vigorous, and of fairly good colour. The foliage is rather
abundant, with leaves inclined to be broad, rather stiff, erect, and of good
colour.


John Brown is the result of rather a complicated cross, and has the follow-
ing pedigree ;
Ble earre x Ward’s White
Improved Fife x Unnamed
Hornblende x Unnamed
Unnamed x Lambrigg Australian Talavera
John Brown
The cross was made in 189 G and named in 1901.
When maturing, the long, level-headed, brown ears of a well-grown crop
are a pleasing sight, and it was the brown appearance of such a crop that
suggested its name.
As a milling variety, John Brown belongs to the “Medium Strong
class ; but its cultivation for grain is discouraged because of the dark colour
of its flour.
Marshall’s No. 3.
Marshall’s No. 3 is a late mid-season variety, which is usually of medium
height, but which occasionally grows tall. It stools freely ; the young growth
is fairly vigorous, and creeping rather than erect. The foliage consists of an
abundance of broad, rather limp leaves of fairly good colour. The ripe
straw is purple, stiff, hollow, and stout. The yellowish-white ears are of
medium size, slightly pointed and slightly tip-boarded. The spikelets are
set moderately close together ; the chaff is white, smooth, and open. The grain
is of fair size, but not very plump, except under good conditions.
This variety is a crossbred which was produced by Mi'. R. Marshall, of
South Australia. Originally there were two varieties fixed from the same
cross. They were known respectively as “ Marshall’s No. 3, White Straw,”
and “Marshall’s No. 3, Purple Straw-.” In order to better distinguish
between them, the variety with white straw was later named “Silver 1 King,”
the variety with the purple straw retaining the original title of “ Marshall’s
No. 3.”
Marshall’s No 3 is rather more prolific than Silver King, though the latter
is the more rust-resistant.
Marshall’s No. 3 is’fairly rust-resistant—a quality which it derives from
one of its parents (Ward’s Prolific) —but it is bunt-liable.
As a milling variety it belongs to the “ Medium Strong ” class.
It is as valuable as a hay wheat as it is as a grain yielder. It should
usually be sowrr early, and it can be recomrnemhd for the Central Table-
lands, the Kiverina, and the Western Slopes from north to south.
Nardoo.
The young growth is partly spreading, the leaves dark green, glaucous,
and moderately broad. The straw is rather tall, hollow, white, medium
strong and not coarse. It is a medium profuse stooler with fairly abundant
flag. The ears are of medium size, smooth, medium erect, awnless, pale
yellow, medium open and tapering, with regular medium widely-spreading


Huguenot
John Frown.


Nardoo.
Marshall’s No. 3.


spikelets. The glumes are short, firmly attached, and blunt-pointed. The
grain is of medium size, regular, pale yellow, medium horny, with a medium
deep crease. It ripens at the same season as Bomen. Its pedigree is as.
follows; —
White Naples x Improved Fife
' > ' Jonathan x Lambrigg White Essex
Unnamed x White Naples ,
' i
Unnamed x Unnamed
Nardoo
As a milling wheat it is classed with the Medium Strong ” varieties..
It is decidedly smut-resistant, and produces hay of good quality.
Rymer.
Rymer is a mid-season to late, erect, tall-growing variety, which stools;
well. The young growth is fairly vigorous, slightly prostrate, and has ■
rather a good colour. The foliage is not abundant; the leaves are stiff,
narrow and erect. The ripe straw is white, not very stiff or stout, hollow,,
and somewhat slender. The ears are inclined to be pendant, are yellowish-
white and fairly long, tapering, very slightly tip-bearded, and the spikelets not
set very closely together. The chaff is white, smooth and open. The grain,
is white, somewhat horny, and rather plump.
Rymer is the result of a cross between Improved Fife and Purple
Straw. It is one of the few Purple Straw crosses that have proved worthy
of being fixed. It is suitable for early and mid-season planting in warm, dry
districts, and is a good yielder of both hay and grain. The ripe crop is very
level-headed and admirably suited for stripping; it strips easily, but is not
inclined to shed. It is slightly rust-resistant, but is smut-liable. It is not
suitable for rich soils, being then rather liable to lodge.
Rymer does well in the north-western and central districts, and may be
grown to replace Marshall’s Mo. 3, being of about the same season as that
variety, but usually ripening a plumper grain.
As a milling variety it belongs to the “ Medium Strong ” class.
Steinwedel.
Steinwedel is an early, rather erect, free-stooling variety, of medium;
height. The young growth is vigorous, of rather a pale colour, and fairly
erect. The foliage is abundant, with the leaves limp and drooping. The-
straw is purple, stout and strong. In colouring, the ears have a characteristic
mottled appearance, while in form they are large, full tipped and tip-
bearded, with the spikelets open and rather irregularly placed. The chaff is
white, smooth, and loosely attached to the grain, which is fairly large, white,,
and plump.
Steinwedel is a selection from South Australia, made by a farmer of that
name, from a crop of Farmer’s Friend. It is somewhat like the latter, but
the late Mr. Wm. Farrer found that “ there are constant but unimportant
differences between the two varieties.”
Steinwedel is rust and smut liable.
It is highly drought-resistant, however, and, like Firbank, it has proved
admirably adapted for the production of fodder in the hottest and driest
parts of the State. It is also a prolific yielder of grain, but is extremely


liable to shelling, and for that reason the grain crop must be harvested
with the reaper and binder, and just at the right stage, or the risk of loss
is very great.
Under average conditions it produces a heavy grain of bright, attractive,
plump appearance. As a milling variety it produces a large percentage of
white, starchy, flour, of a quality that places it in the “ Weak Flour ” class;
hence it is not recommended for grain production.
Improved Steimvedel has latterly taken the place of the main strain in
the Department’s recommendations, Its pedigree according to Mr. Pye, who
evolved it, is (Steinwedel x Purple Straw) x Steimvedel, It is particularly
adapted to dry conditions, where its dual-purpose character makes it valuable
as an early maturer. For early hay it is one of the best.
Sunset.
The young growth is erect, with medium light green, moderately broad,
leaves. The straw is below medium height, hollow, white, medium slender,
and slightly brittle. Its stooling capacity is sparse; the flag is medium in
amount and rather inclined to droop. The ears are rather erect, yellowish
white, smooth, awmless, of medium size, fairly open, uniform, with widely-
spreading spikelets. The glumes are sharp-pointed and sufficiently firmly
attached. The grain is of medium size, soft, regular, pale yellow, medium
opaque, with medium deep crease. This variety usually lies between the
“ Medium Strong ” and ‘‘ Weak Flour ” classes, and of those recommended
it is the earliest wdieat to ripen, thriving best in the Western Plains, where
it yields satisfactorily for both hay and grain.
Its pedigree is as follows: —
Hornblende x Summer Club
(White Fife)
Sport from Blount’s Lambrigg x Sunrise
W (F)
Sunset
Thew,
Thew is an early, medium tall, and fair stooling variety. The young
growth is vigorous, rather spreading, and of good colour. It has a medium
amount of foliage, which is green to the base of the plant. The leaves are
rather stiff and narrow. When ripe the straw is white, not very stout, and
inclined to be weak under good conditions. The ears are beardless, of
medium length and tapering, with the spikelets fairly open. The chaff is
white, smooth, and not very close. The grain is white, not very large, and
fairly plump.
Thew is a crossbred, with pedigree as follows :
Sinew x Improved Fife Improved Fife x Hussar
x , ' ' 1 '
Unnamed x Unnamed
C (F) [A selection from TT ,
Blount’s Lambrigg] x Unnamed
Thew


Rymer.
Steinwedel.


Thew.
Sunset.


It is probably its earliness that enables it lo escape rust rather than
.any constitutional ability to resist the pest, for in some districts it has been
reported as rusty.
Its soft straw, and habit of carrying green foliage right to its base, render
it a very suitable variety for hay.
On the South Coast it has eclipsed all other varieties of wheat for the
purposes of green fodder for cattle in the early spring, when the pastures are
generally somewhat bare.
As a milling wheat Thew belongs to the “ Medium Strong ” class, though
the colour of its flour is not quite up to the standard.
Warren.
Warren is a mid-season variety, which stools well, and which in height is
from medium to tall. The young growth is rather more prostrate than erect,
of good colour, with the leaves fairly abundant, limp and broad. When ripe
the straw is white, fairly stout, and rather long. The ears are beardless,
long, tapering and open. The chaff is smooth, white, and set fairly close to
the grain. The grain is of good size, white, and fairly plump.
Warren is the result of crossing Bobs with Jonathan, and then mating the
progeny with another crossbred called Warner.
It is smut-liable, but has proved one of the best rust-escaping wheats
grown at the Hawkesbury Agricultural College, and is specially valuable for
this quality. It is suitable for both hay and grain. In cool, moist, districts
its straw is inclined to become weak. As a milling variety the quality of
the grain is fair. It yields a satisfactory quantity of flour of excellent
■colour, but of low flour-strength. It is one of the “Weak Flour” wheats.
Yandilla King.
Yandilla King is a free-stooling, late variety of medium height. The
young growth is inclined to be prostrate rather than erect. The leaves are
a good dark colour, limp, and not very broad. When ripe the straw is white,
not very long, and rather stout. The ears are slightly tip-bearded, fairly
long, well tipped, the spikelets set rather closely together. The chaff is
white, smooth, and fairly closely attached to the grain. The grain is white,
large, and fairly plump.
Yandilla King is the result of a cross made by Mr. R. Marshall, of Park-
aide, South Australia, between Yandilla and Silver King (the latter being
■also known as Marshall’s No. 3 White Straw). It is interesting to note that
Yandilla King is a half-sister to Federation, both varieties being the progeny
of the common parent Yandilla. Yandilla is a crossbred produced by Mr.
Farrer, as the result of mating Improved Fife (a “ Manitoba” variety) with
an Indian variety called Etawah.
It mills a “Medium Strong” flour of excellent colour, and is recommended
for use on the Central Tableland, Western Slopes from north to south,
and Riverina.
Zealand.
Zealand is a tall-growing, free-stooling, late variety, of attractive appear-
ance. The young growth is fairly vigorous, and its foliage colour dark ; the
leaves are broad, limp and abundant. When ripe the straw is long, hollow,
rather strong and stout, and yellowish in colour. The ears are beardless,


Yandilla King.
Warren.


long and tapering, with the
spikelets rather open. The chaff
is smooth and white. The grain
is large, plump, soft, and dull
white.
Zealand is an old-established
variety, and is regarded as one
of the very best grown in this
State for hay, but for best
results it must be sown early.
The manager of Wagga Experi-
ment Farm regards it as his best
hay wheat.
Zealand is also known as
“ Berthoud.” It was originally
Imported from Prance, in 1888,
by Mr. Geo. F. Berthoud, and
grown by him in the Corowa
district. Mr. Berthoud also
grew another selection from a
local variety which he called
“No. 5.” Mr. Farrer called
this latter “ Berthoud,” to con-
nect it with its selector. Sub-
sequently he found that the
differences between Berthoud
and Zealand were so slight that
they could be disregarded, and in
consequence the two varieties
were considered one and the
■same.
Zealand should be grown by
farmers who cater for the Sussex-
street trade and who make a
specialty of growing wheat for
hay, but where there is much
grain to be harvested this
variety is altogether too late.
There is not sufficient time to
deal with it before stripping is
begun.
Under favourable conditions
Zealand produces a satisfactory
amount of grain, but for grain
production it is being ousted by
earlier varieties In the matter
of colour its flour is rather below
the standard required by millers,
though so far as flour-strength
is concerned it must be classed
with the “ Medium Strong ”
wheats.
t 17299—M
Zealand.


Table showing milling values of wheats.
Variety,
Weight
per
bushel.
Percentage
of
Flour.
Flour-
strength.
Percentage
of
Dry Gluten.
Australian Strong White Wheats—
ib.
Comeback
65 6
72-1
54-3
16-1
Bobs
666
729
51'3
13'4
Strong Red Wheats—
Cedar ...
665
710
56 3
13-6
Medium Strong Wheats—
John Brown
60-0
69-3
520
15-6
Haynes’ Blue-stem
614
68-7
49-7
13-2
Florence
659
71-0
493
15-0
Rymer
61-4
690
493
13-4
Bunyip
63 5
71-3
48-5
132
Milling Values of Wheats.*
In the following table are given the average bushel-weights, flour-yield,
and flour-strength of the different varieties of wheat recommended for cul-
tivation by the Department. By the term flour-strength should be under-
stood the amount of water, in quarts, required by the 200-lb. sack of flour
to make a dough of the proper consistency for baking. The figures, there-
fore, give actually the water-absorbing power of the flour, which is the most
ready and reliable means of determining what is understood by the baker
under the term “ flour-strength.” The classification is that adopted in the
entries competing for prizes at the Eoyal Agricultural Society’s Show, and
includes the four principal classes under which wheat are entered for compe-
tition. The “Australian Strong White” class comprise several of Mr.
Farrer’s crosses made with the specific object of providing a hard, strong-
flour, white grain, as distinguished from the ordinary hard wheats, which
are usually red in colour.
It is to the introduction of this class that the greatly improved milling
quality of local wheat is due. Australian, and particularly New South
Wales wheat, now enjoys a high reputation for milling excellence on
the English market, and possesses pre-eminently the valuable characteristic
of being suitable for milling without previous blending with other kinds.
It is always of excellent colour, and is a strong favourite with English
millers on this account.
It must be understood that the figures given represent averages taken over
a number of years. These figures will vary considerably in different samples
and also in different seasons. For example, the bushel-weights of grain har-
vested in 1913-14 were all abnormally high, the f.a.q. sample being 64, as
against 621 in the previous year. Several samples of Cedar actually went
over 68.
• F. B. Guthrie.


Table showing milling values of wheats — continued.
Variety.
Weight
per
bushel.
Percentage
of
Flour.
Flour-
strength.
Percentage
of
Dry Gluten.
Medium Strong Wheats— continued.
Marshall’s No. 3
lb.
61-2
70-1
48'5
12*4
Sunset
63'6
69 0
48-4
15-6
Thew
60 0
71-6
48-4
16-2
Zealand ...
61'0
68'3
483
13-7
Yandilla King .,
62-0
70T
48-2
14-9
Bomen
60-0
72-4
48-0
14-4
Firbajjk
62-7
72T
47'9
12-7
Cleveland
63-3
70'0
47'8
10-2
Warren
63'8
71-6
47-5
134
Federation
62-8
709
47 T
13-7
Weak Flour Wheat—
Steinwedel
63-6
69'4
46'0
10-3
Year.
| Weight per bushel.
Gluten.
Flour-strength.
(Water-absorption, quarts
per 200 lb. sack.)
t
Strong White
Soft White.
Strong White.
Soft White.
Strong White.
Soft White.
lb.
ib.
per cent.
per cent.
1905
63
64
10-0
9-7
46-6
45-2
1906
63J
641
110
9-8
48'5
45-7
1907
621
66
9-3
8-3
48'4
45-4
1908
1 641
65
12-2
102
52-5
46-4
1909
64f
65i
11-9
86
53'5
492
1910
641
64
13-8
12-1
50 0
47-8
1911
641
631
12'5
11-0
53-4
47'0
1912
65
64
13-4
10-6
52-7
45-2
1913
67
65J
15-2
11-7
531
469
1914
67|
67
12-8
10-6
52-3
45-0
1915
671
661
131
12-4
53 8
45-7
1916
671
671
13 0
12-3
53-3
47-5
1917
66
671
124
8-6
54-6
43'0
The following table may also be of interest in showing the variations in
quality of the “ Strong White ” and “ Soft White ” classes at the Royal
Agricultural Society’s Show for the past thirteen years.
It will be noticed that the bushel-weights, especially in the strong-white
class, have regularly increased.
Table showing average bushel-weights, gluten content, and water-absorbing
power of Wheats (“ Strong White ” and “ Soft White ”) milled at the
Royal Agricultural Society’s Shows, from 1905-1917.


For many years the northern wheats enjoyed an unenviable reputation
among millers and wheat-buyers, on account of their alleged softness, their
containing too much moisture, and their proneness to develop weevil. These
characteristics, especially the last, are particularly objectionable from the
point of view of the exporter, though it does not seem to affect their value
to the same extent when used as wheats for local milling.
On this account many Sydney wheat-buyers and shippers are averse to-
purchasing northern wheat, and some have gone so far as to object, in
previous years, to its inclusion in the f.a.q. sample.
Protests have been received from northern millers and farmers, who point
out that, during the last few years at all events, a harder type of wheat has
been cultivated in the northern districts, and that in bushel-weight, gluten
content, and flour-strength they are now in no way inferior to southern and
western grain. It is also pointed out that the tendency is for wheat-growing
to extend into the warmer and drier districts in the north-west of the .State,,
and a harder grain and one richer in gluten is the result. Further than
this, a considerable trade is developing with the East, where the demand is
not for such a strong flour as is required for the London and Continental
markets, and where a good demand exists for flours of high colour combined
with fair strength and gluten content, which can be supplied by the northern
wheats. The fact is also pointed out that it is not until the wheat is stored
on the coast that it develops weevil.
In order to test the matter, samples were obtained through the courtesy
of Messrs. Gillespie Bros, of their bulk of northern, southern, and western
wheats, cleaned and graded, and ready for blending.
These bulk samples were made up of wheats from a number of different
districts and from representative samples of the grain obtained from the
north, south, and west respectively.
The results of the separate milling of these samples by Mr. G. W. Norris
are given in the table on page 357.
From this table it will be seen that the northern mixture is in no respect
inferior to the others.' There is, as a matter of fact, very little to choose
between them. The northern is a heavy wheat, being equal to the southern,
and heavier than the western. It stands midway between the two in flour
yield. In colour of flour there is little to choose between it and western
wheat, the southern wheat being somewhat whiter. The same remarks apply
to strength and gluten-content. In both these points the northern and
western are almost identical and slightly superior to the southern.
Whatever has been the case in past years, it would appear that there is
now very little to choose, as far as milling quality goes, between the nor-
thern and north-western wheats and those from the south and west.
This may be due to the fact that stronger and hardier varieties are being'
grown, or to the fact that the westward extension of the wheat-growing area
is productive of increased strength and gluten-content, on account of the
drier and warmer conditions during the ripening period.
The question of the liability of the northern wheat to contract weevil, a
property which affects its keeping quality and its value as an article for
export, is a separate one. It seems to be the universal opinion that the
northern wheat is more liable to become weevily. The reason for this-


Comparison op Miller’s Mixtures.
Variety of Grain.
i
2
3
Northern Mixture.
Southern Mixture.
Western Mixture.
Appearance of Grain
Light amber, medium size, plump,
soft.
Light amber, medium size, plump,
Light amber, medium size, plump.
Weight (lb. per bushel)
65-0
65*9
64*2
Ease of Milli ng .
Easy to mill
Easy to mill
Easy to mill.
Flour
71-2
72-5
69*8
Percentage of
1 Pollard
14*5
14-4
171
mill products.
Bran
14-3
13-1
13*1
f Colour of Flour
Excellent
Excellent, shade lighter than Wes-
Excellent,
.
tern Mixture.
Strength of flour (in quarts per sack of
Nature of Flour. -
2001b.)
46-0
45-6
46-0
Percentage of dry gluten
14*4
12‘0
14*3
of wet gluten
Yellow, elastic, coherent, soft
Yellow, elastic, coherent, soft ..
Yellow, elastic, coherent, soft.
Notes
Both bran and pollard clean; semo-
Both bran and pollard clean ; semo-
lina faint } ellow and soft.
lina faint yellow and soft.
fairly clean ; semolina faint yel-
low and soft.


probably does not lie with the wheat itself, but with the conditions under
which it is harvested. Ail new wheats when bagged have a tendency to
heat, and this tendency would be much greater in wheats bagged in the
northern wheat-fields, where comparatively humid conditions prevail, than
in the drier atmosphere of the south and west.
This heating furnishes a more favourable temperature for the earlier
hatching out of the eggs.
When stored for any length of time without precautions against the hatch-
ing out of weevil, all wheats will develop them in the course of time. This
refers to the hardest macaroni wheats equally with the soft wheats. The
fact seems to be that the weevily condition becomes sooner apparent in the
northern -wheats because these are bagged under surroundings favourable
to a rapid development. This is a serious objection to the miller, since he
prefers a wheat with keeping qualities in order to keep a stock for blending
purposes, so that he can ensure a uniform flour all the year round.
To sum up, it would appear that the northern and north-western wheats
are in all respects quite as good milling wheats as the southern and western
wheats, but that the more humid conditions under which they are bagged
render them liable to develop weevil more readily than those bagged in the
drier districts, and consequently affect their keeping qualities.
Similar objection is raised to Northern River maize, because of its ten-
dency to develop weevil. As much as 2d. or 3d. more per bushel has been
paid for Tumut-grown maize than for the Northern River product on
this account. The cause is the same as in the case of wheat.
FUNGUS DISEASES OF WHEAT.*
The most common troubles that the wheat-grower has to fight are stinking
smut or bunt, and rust. Both are fungi, and from time to time both are
responsible for considerable losses. Rust, fortunately, is somewhat inter-
mittent in its attacks —several years sometimes elapsing between serious
outbreaks in the grain districts; but smut is ever present, and the farmer’s
only means of controlling is by treating his seed wheat with a fungicide
before sowing. Efforts have been made to produce varieties resistant to both
these fungi, and some success has been achieved in relation to rust, mainly
by the production of wheats that grow so quickly that they mature before
that parasitic enemy; but with bunt the case has been different, those that
have proved resistant not generally being prolific enough for cultivation on
an extensive scale.
Bunt or Stinking Smut (Tilletia tritici (Bjerk) Wint.; T. levis, Kuehn.).
Two pests are usually known as Smut —Bunt or Stinking Smut, and
Loose or Flying Smut. When, however, the farmer talks about “ smut,”
he almost without exception refers to Stinking Bunt or Stinking Smut,
which is caused by one or other of two closely-related fungi whose scientific
names are given above. Stinking Smut is so called from the objection-
able smell which is quite noticeable even if only a little be present in a
large quantity of grain.
* O. P. Damell-Smith, B.Sc., F.1.C., F.C.S., Biologist, and E. Maokinnon, 8.50.,
Assistant Biologist.


Fig. 1. —Ears of Wheat with Bunt. (From McAlpine’s “Smuts of Australia.")
A. Ear showing spikes standing out from axis and somewhat separated.
B. Ear with glumes removed to show the bunt balls and grains.
Fig. 2.—Healthy and Bunted Wheat Grains. (From Purdue Univ. Circ. 22.)
a. Normal grain, showing the longitudinal furrow.
b. Cross section of (a), showing furrow.
c. Bunted grain, showing absence of furrow.
d. Cross section of (c), showing absence of furrow, and the black spore mass which
has replaced the normal contents.


Fig. 3. —Part of “Brush” of Wheat Grain.
Shows spores caught by the hairs of the brush. It affords a comparison of the size of the spores
and hairs.
Fig. 4. —Stages in the Germination
of the Bunt Spore.
On the light three spores, showing
reticulate markings on the sur-
face. The central figure shows the
spore (A) which has germinated,
producing a tube (B) called the
promycelium, at the apex of which
is formed a whorl of conidia (C).
These conidia, which number from
four to twelve or more, usually
become united in pairs, giving the
appearance of the letterH. After
this fusion, a secondary conidium
is produced D or X, which puts
forth a slender germ tube (a) to
infect the wheat plant. The pri-
mary conidia (C) may produce
germ tubes, and infect the young
wheat plant without producing a
secondary condition.
(After Gussow, Wilcox, Freeman,
and Stackman.)


There are considerable differences between Stinking Smut and Loose
Smut; but, from the wheat-grower’s standpoint, the chief one is that Stink-
ing Smut (Bunt) can be readily prevented by treating the seed-wheat
before it is sown, whilst Loose Smut requires special treatment of the seed
for its prevention in the resulting crop.
As Loose Smut requires special treatment of the seed-grain for its
prevention the most practical way of getting rid of it after it has made
its appearance on a farm is to use for seed only grain which, as the result
of an examination of the growing crop at the proper time, is known to be
entirely free from this disease. To determine whether Loose Smut is pre-
sent in a crop the examination should he made from flowering time onwards.
In order to understand the reason for treating seed to prevent smut, it is
necessary to know what smut is. Some people are under the impression
that smut is a fungus disease which exists in the ground. Such is not the
case.
The minute black particles which are found adhering to a wheat grain,
and which are commonly called “ smut,” but which would be better called
“ bunt,” are the seeds or spores of a plant (a fungus), just as the grains of
wheat are the seeds of another plant. Fig. 3 illustrates a part of the brush
of a grain of wheat, and shows how very minute the spores are. Treat-
ment must be very thorough to kill these spores, as they cling to the fine
hairs, and when the grain is dipped bubbles of air are often caught amidst
the hairs and help to prevent the spores from being wetted and killed. Any
spores that retain their vitality after the treatment of the grain with the
fungicide, may germinate (Fig. 4) in the soil, when the grain is sown.
Under suitable conditions they enter the young plant, grow with it, living
on its tissues, and finally cause the “ bunted ” wheat ear.
The spores do not escape from the wheat ears in a powder, but are
enclosed in the ovaries and glumes, and although at first somewhat greasy,
they soon become dry and hard. The mass of spores in an ovary is known
as a “ bunt ball ” ; hence it is frequently spoken of as “ ball smut,” and
sometimes, on account of its hardness, as “ stone smut.”
Fig. 6 shows the various stages during which a developing plant may be
attacked.
The fungus growing in the plant reaches the developing ear, and pro-
duces its spores, forming the dark grain-like bodies (bunt balls) -which take
the place of the normal grain (Figs. 1 and 2).
It may be thought that the plant may also become affected with smut as
result of infection from soil which has previously grown smutty crops.
Experiments have shown that this is not the case, and it is now known that
the chief (almost the only) cause of smut is the sowing of seed which has
healthy spores adhering to it. It follows, therefore, that if the vitality of
these spores can be destroyed, or if the plants resulting from the germina-
tion of the spores are destroyed, the grain crop will be “ clean.” Methods
have been introduced for successfully destroying the vitality of the spores,
but no practical method has yet been devised for killing the smut plants
after they have germinated. Occasionally, as in the case of self-sown crops,
the natural conditions prevailing at the time the seed is planted are the
cause of a “ clean ” crop being produced from untreated smutted seed; but
to depend upon this chance method of obtaining clean crops is very unwise
and likely to lead to disappointment. It is far wiser and more business-
like to destroy the vitality of the spores, and thus prevent them growing.


Whilst the methods recommended
for treating seed-grain will destroy
the spores which have become free
from the bunt-halls, none of them
IS EFFECTIVE FOR DESTROYING THE
SPORES WHICH ARE CONTAINED IN
UNBROKEN BUNT-BALLS. It IS,
THEREFORE, NECESSARY, IF ANY
TREATMENT IS TO BE EFFECTUAL,
THAT THE UNBROKEN BUNT-BALLS BE
EITHER REMOVED OR BROKEN BEFORE
THE SEED IS “ PICKLED.” If this is
not done the bunt-balls are likely
to become broken, during the subse-
quent operationof planting, and their
contents (a myriad living spores)
spread over the treated grain, thus
nullifying all that has been done; the
effect of the treatment is mainly to
destroy the spores adhering to the
grain ; it does not render the grain
absolutely immune to the attacks of
smut or to other spores that may be-
come attached to it after treatment.
It has been calculated that in a
single bunt ball, no larger than a
grain of wheat—there are about
Fig. 5. —Bunt Balls.
The “Pickle” has no effect on the spores
contained in the unbroken balls.
Fig. 6.—Various Stages of Germina-
tion of Wheat during which Infec-
tion by Bunt Spores may take place.
(a) Primary rootlet, (b) stem, (c)
secondary rootlets, (d) protective
sheath, (e) point where first
green leaf pushes through the
sheath, after which stage no infec-
tion occurs. (Ottawa Bul., 73.
Drawings from diagrams in Ken-
sington Museum.)
4,000,000 spores, each of which is capable
of causing one wheat-plant to be smutted.
In a bushel of wheat there are 600,000
to 1,000,000 grains. There are, therefore,
in a single bunt-ball enough spores, if
regularly and evenly distributed, to provide
each grain in a bushel of wheat with from
four to six spores. The great necessity for
removing the bunt-balls or breaking them so
that the fungicide can act upon their contents,
is obvious.
Fortunately, it is easier to remove the bunt-
balls than to ensure that all are broken. Bunt-
balls are very light and float in water, so that
if the wheat to be treated is poured slowly
into the “ pickle,” and in such a way that
the bunt-balls will not be carried down by
the grain, they will float on the top, and
can be skimmed off and destroyed. As a fur-
ther precaution, and in order to release any
bunt-balls which may have been carried
down by the grain, the grain should be
stirred or raked; this is also likely to break
up any partially-broken bunt-balls which
have sunk and become soft.


Until bunt-resisting varieties have been introduced and are in general
cultivation it is advisable, in order to ensure clear crops, to assume that
all seed is more or less smutty, and requires to be “ pickled.” The spores
are so minute that it is quite possible for enough to be present on the
seed-grain to cause considerable smut in the crop and yet to escape
detection.
Experiments made in Italy have shown that a wheat seed which is
severely infected with the spores of bunt does not necessarily give rise to a
plant which will be attacked by the disease. The factor which in this case
determines the susceptibility to the parasite is the temperature at the
time of sowing and during the days of the early phases of development.
The more rapidly the wheat grows the more certainly it escapes from the
attack of the parasite, and vice versa. The same seed can produce 0 per
cent, of infected ears in the first case, as against 80 per cent, in the second.
These observations show that when it is wished to determine the efficacy
of a fungicide—a special method for bunt control —the condition of the soil
and weather at the time of sowing and afterwards must be taken into
consideration.
Effect of Formalin upon Germination of Wheat Grains.
Of late years, experience has established in many quarters a decided
objection to the use of formalin as a bunt preventive. Some experiments
carried out by one of us in conjunction with Mr. W. M. Came* on the use
of formalin as a fungicide demonstrated that the principal objection to the
use of this fungicide lies in its inhibiting effect upon germination. When
Fig. 7. —Normal Germination.
Fig. 8. —Normal Germination —Longitudinal Section,
formalin-treated grain is sown damp just after treatment, the ger-
mination afterwards approaches closely to that of the untreated. If
kept for a few days, however, before sowing, the germination is much
slower and the total less. The formalin appears to have a hardening
effect upon the pericarp, rendering it difficult for the embryonic roots to
develop normally. In our experiments the strength of formalin used was
1 lb. to 30 gallons of water, this strength, which is somewhat greater than
that usually recommended, being chosen so as to emphasise the effects. Our,
experiments showed that treated seed, to both the eyesight and touch, be-
comes much harder than untreated seed. Even when germinating, treated
• The Effect of Formalin on the Germination of Plants ; G. P. Darnell-Smith and
W. M. Game. Third Report of the New South Wales Government Bureau of
Microbiology, 1912.


seed does not swell to the size of untreated seed. Furthermore, germination
is considerably delayed, and when it does occur in all cases the first root,
instead of rupturing the root sheath, breaks it away as a cap, or else never
emerges. The first root, instead of being the strongest, either does not
Fig. 9. —Defective Germination after Treatment
with Formalin,
Fig. 10. —Defective Germination after Treatmeet with
Formalin —Longitudinal Section,
develop or is much less developed than the lateral second and third roots.
For these reasons the bluestone and lime treatment, a description of which
follows, is to be preferred to the formalin one.
The Treatment of Seed Wheat for Bunt.
The following statement of the method of treating seed wheat is supplied
by Mr. H. Ross, Chief Inspector:—
Various preventive methods have from time to time been employed,
including hot water treatment, corrosive sublimate solution, formalin, and a
host of proprietary preparations, but none of them have proved as efficient
as sulphate of copper or bluestone.
The success or otherwise of the bluestone treatment depends to a large
extent upon the manner in which the operation is performed.
A per cent, solution should be obtained by dissolving 1J lb. of bluestone
in every 10 gallons of water used. This is best done by tying the bluestone
in a small hessian bag and suspending it in the water, allowing half the bag
to be immersed in, and the other half to be out of, the water. In this way the
bluestone will dissolve in a short time, ■whereas if the bluestone is thrown
into the vessel containing the water it will take a considerable time before
it is entirely dissolved. Cold water serves this purpose well, and there is no
need to use boiling water. The most useful vessel is a wooden cask, but on
no account should it be of a metal other than copper.
The wheat to be pickled should be put in butts of not more than 1 bushel,
immersed in the solution for three minutes, and vigorously shaken up and
down; during this process any unbroken bunt balls present will come to
the surface and should carefully be skimmed off. Vigorous shaking of the
bag is essential, so that every grain may become thoroughly wetted. After
three minutes’ immersion the butt is lifted on to a plank constructed oi
bark or a hollowed-out log and allowed to drain, the drained-off liquor
flowing hack into the cask. Galvanized iron is not infrequently used to
allow the butts of wheat to drain upon; this is entirely wrong, as the
bluestone solution coming into contact with the galvanized iron loses the


very properties which make it valuable for pickling. After draining for
about ten to fifteen minutes the butt of wheat is put on one side, and will
be ready for sowing the following day.
The action of the bluestone during the process of pickling is that it kills
the tiny spores or seed of the bunt which adhere to the outside of the grain,
.but while bluestone has the power to kill these spores it has also the power
to impair the vitality of the grain, and even to kill the germ. To guard
against this the following measures should be observed. If there is no
prospect of immediate germination—that is, if a “ dry ” sowing is made,
the bluestoned wheat should, after having been allowed to drain for from
Fig. 11.—Weighing the Bluestone for the Treatment of Seed Wheat for Bunt.
ten to fifteen minutes, be dipped into a solution of lime-water, which is
made by stirring i lb. of freshly-burnt lime* into 10 gallons of water. This
mixture is allowed to settle; then the clear lime-water is decanted, and into
this the bluestone-treated seed is dipped for from two to three minutes.
The lime neutralises the effects of the bluestone, and so preserves the full
vitality of the wheat germ. If, on the other hand, a “ wet ” sowing is made
and an immediate germination of the seed is likely to follow, then there is
little need to dip the bluestoned wheat into lime-water.
* Should it be found Impossible to obtain freshly burnt lime it is recommended
that J lb. of slacked lime be mixed with 10 gallons of water, thus making milk
of lime, into which the butts of the bluestoned wheat should be dipped for a
period of from two to three minutes.
Milk of lime differs from lime-water in so far that in the former the particles
of lime are not dissolved but held in suspension, whereas in the case of clear
lime-water the particles are dissolved.


When using lime-water, care should be taken to make a fresh mixture
now and again, as the constant dipping of the bluestone-saturated butts of
wheat into the lime-water will change it eventually from an alkaline into
an acid solution, in which case it will be useless; and for that very reason
bluestone and lime should never be mixed together in a solution used for
pickling wheat.
The chief advantages gained from using lime-water, in addition to blue-
stone, are; firstly, that a farmer following this practice is in a position to
pickle all his seed wheat, say, in March, ready for sowing in April and May,
without running any risk of the germination being affected; secondly, that
a better germination will be obtained if the sown seed should lie in the
ground for some time before rain falls and germination takes place.
Little extra trouble is involved in the bluestone-lime treatment, and
farmers are strongly advised to adopt this method in preference to the blue-
stone treatment only.
Various other treatments have been proposed and.numerous experiments
have been tried by the Department. A good pickle should (1) prevent
the development of bunt, (2) do no damage to the seed wheat itself, and in
no way reduce its power of germination.
Judged by these two standards the treatment recommended above has
surpassed all others; the use of the lime-water after the bluestone is
extremely desirable, and farmers are urged to incur the small amount of
trouble involved, for while bluestone alone is excellent as a preventive of
bunt, its effects upon germination are very severe.
Loose Smut Of Wheat (Uslilago tritici (Pers.), Jens).
Wheat affected with this smut usually has the stalks somewhat stunted.
The smut is produced in the ovaries, and destroys the various parts of
the flower (Fig. 12). The spores produced form a blackish powder which is
easily blown about, and infected wheat ears are sometimes spoken of as
“ smutty ears.” The looseness of the spores serves at once to distinguish
the disease from bunt, in which case the spores remain compacted inside
the wheat grains. Loose smut has no objectionable odour. Infection takes
place, not through the seedling, but through the flower, and when the grain
is formed the fungus threads lie within it (Fig. 13), the treatment recom-
mended for bunt having, therefore, no appreciable effect.
Flag Smut ( Urocyslis tritici, Koern).
This smut is most commonly found on the leaf blades, but it may occur on
the stem, on the chaff, and rarely on the ovary. Its effect is to prevent the
formation of the ear, and in crops where it is prevalent the yield may be
seriously reduced.
The first indications of the disease upon a leaf are long lead-coloured
streaks running parallel with the veins (Fig. 14) ; later the epidermis rup-
tures and the lead-coloured streaks are replaced by black streaks, consisting
of black powdery spores (Fig. 16), hence the common name “Black Rust.”
Affected leaves often become curled and twisted up, and generally wither
early (Fig. 15). The spores drop from the leaves to the ground or pieces of
the diseased leaves fall to the ground, carrying the spores with them. In-
fection takes place in the ground. The wheat plant is generally held to be
infected at the seedling stage or when the young shoots are formed. The


Fig. 12. —Loose Smut of Wheat, showing the various stages in the development of a smutted head.
Heads emerging from boot (sheath), completely smutted mature heads, and bare .stalk after spores
blown off.
(U.S. Bureau Plant Industry. Bui. 152.)
Fig. 13. —Longitudinal Section of a Fife Wheat Grain,
through the embryo and deepest part of the groove.
Tlie section shows the location of the embryo with
reference to the bran layers. In an infected
grain the mycelium of the Loose Smut fungus
(Usiilago tritici) lives in the tissues of the
embryo.
(a) Outer bran layer, (&) inner bran layer, G the
first root] of the embryo, L the first leaf
(plumule), Q sheath covering'bud end of the
embryo, O feeding organ (Scutellum).
(After Bolley.)


Fig. 14.—Flag Smut on Wheat.
Black streaks on the leaves, caused by the ruptures along the flag, and the escape of the ’spores.


spores may occur singly, but more usually in spore clusters, consisting of
one to five spores; each spore is covered partially, or sometimes completely,
with a protective covering of small bladder-like appendages (Fig. 17). The
spores do not germinate readily in water directly they reach maturity, but
they will do so readily after they have undergone a resting stage of a few
months.
On germination each spore sends out a minute germ tube, which, at its.
apex, produces from two to six secondary spores, each capable of sending
out a fine germ tube and of infecting the host plant, if conditions are
favourable. A spore cluster may send out two or more germ tubes. It is
Fig. 15. —Wheat plant curled at the top, through an attack by Flag Smut, thus preventing the formation.
of an ear. (From McAlpine’s “Smuts of Australia.”)


generally held that crops sown late in a moist seed-bed are loss liable to be
attacked than those sown earlier. The explanation seems to be that if
wheat be sown in infected soil that is dry, both wheat and spores germinate
together when rain comes, and infection takes place ; but if the soil has
been moist some time before the wheat is sown any spores present will
have germinated, and, failing a suitable host, will have perished. The
usual treatments for preventing wheat from becoming infected with bunt
do not always prevent it becoming infected with flag-smut. Nevertheless
such treatment does act in a large measure as a preventive, and since flag-
smut may become a source of seriously decreased yields, and in some cases
has already done so, pickling of seed wheat should never be neglected. The
advantages of pickling wheat as a preventive against infection by flag-smut
have been demonstrated in various experiments carried out at different
experiment farms. Experiments on similar lines wore conducted during
1913 by Mr. Pridham, at the Cowra Experiment Farm.
The results of these experiments serve to emphasise the necessity for
pickling. The use of bluestone followed by lime is well known as a hunt
preventive, and here in the case of flag-smut—a disease which is showing
some signs of becoming serious—the treatment reduces the number of dis-
eased plants, produced from seed purposely infected, to a minimum. In
other words, judicious “ pickling ” reduces both the liability to disease from
bunt and from flag-smut.
The following paragraphs are extracted from a short article by Mr. J. T.
Pridham, Plant Breeder, which appeared in the Agricultural Gazette.
vol. xxiv, page 25:
Although the disease does not seem to be very common this season (1912),
it occurs more or less every year; and as It Is much more difficult to control
than ball smut or bunt, a short consideration of its behaviour this season at
the Cowra Experiment Farm will not be out of place.
The opinion is generally held that sowing in a dry seed-bed following a dry
summer is favourable to flag-smut, since spores and seed germinate together
when the rain comes. On the other hand, if the soil has been moist for some
time before sowing, the flag-smut spores appear to have lost to some extent
their power of infection. This view is borne out by the observations made at
Cowra this year (1912).
Federation would appear to be particularly flag-smut liable, and to transmit
this character to its offspring. A crossbred wheat (Federation x Jonathan x
Record), Cowra No. 9, had 3-475 per cent, of flag-smut from three rows. Of a
large number of F 2 generation crossbreds examined, in only three of them was
flag-smut found, and in each case Federation was included in the pedigree in
one way or another.
As regards other varieties, no flag-smut was found in—
-12 rows of Comeback; 6 rows of Steinwedei;
8 „ ~ Florence; 3 ~ ~ Dart's Imperial.
10 ~ ~ Rayah;
John Brown showed -520 per cent, in two rows, and Bobs showed 2-430 per
cent, in three rows.
The early maturing varieties were found most liable, but some of these differ
greatly in their susceptibility.
The previous history of the paddock in which the above were grown was as
follows;
1911—Algerian Oats. 1908—Wheat.
1910—Wheat. 1907—Tares.
1909—Rape.
It should be mentioned that the seed was not perfectly infected before sowing,
so that it does not follow that ail the above varieties were exposed to the same
amount of infection. The seed of the plots examined was not treated with a
fungicide before sowing.


Fig. 16. —Cross section of a small piece of Wheat Leaf.
Showing the masses of Flag Smut spores, which occupy large cavities extending longitudinally in
the tissues. These cavities rupture, and the spores escaping produce the long black streaks.
Fig. 17. —Spores ol Flag Smut.
Note the bladder-like cells surrounding- the spores. These help the spores to withstand
unfavourable conditions.


At Wagga Experiment Farm, in 1911, Mr. McDiarmld, the Experimentalist,
states that the field manorial trials showed a good deal of flag-smut in the crop,
though the paddock had not grown wheat since 1904; the seed, however, was
from a crop affected with flag-smut. The seed was pickled with formalin before
sowing. At Cowra, a plant of Federation, in which the lower stools showed flag-
smut in 1911, had the healthy ears thrashed out by hand. The seed was sown
in 1912 without pickling, and out of ninety-one plants resulting, six showed flag-
smut.
It seems at first sight from these two cases as if the disease might sometimes
be inherited, but it is exceedingly difficult to be quite sure that any grain is
spore-free at the time of sowing, and Mr. McAlpine, in his “ Smuts of Aus-
tralia,” concludes that the source of infection is confined to contact of seed with
spores at threshing time or with diseased stubble in the soil, or by contact of
the young shoots with diseased stubble or dung of horses fed on smutted chaff.
How long the spores of flag-smut retain their infective power, either in the
soil or out of it, has not been definitely determined; hence, the need of an
■extended rotation and the use of seed from a disease-free crop is evident where
this disease has made much headway.
Wheat Rusts ( Puccinia graminis and Puccinia triticina).
There are only two kinds of wheat rusts in Australia—the positively in-
jurious Puccinia graminis and the comparatively harmless Puccinia triti-
cina; this latter does not cause the grain to shrivel like the former. In
the following notes when speaking of rust, Puccinia graminis is referred
to.
Warm weather, with frequent showers and heavy dews, favour the
development of rust. Wheat, the straw of which is badly rusted, fails to
develop the grain properly. The presence of the rust appears to prevent
the food material elaborated by the plant being transferred to the grain,
which, in consequence, remains small and pinched. Affected wheat does
not appear to have lost any of its nutritive qualities when chaffed and fed
to horses and cattle, and is often greatly relished. Growing on wheat, rust
produces little brown tufts on the stem and leaves (Fig. 18), which are
found to consist mainly of spores upon short stalks; sometimes these spores
are one-celled uredospores (Fig. 21) —sometimes they are two-celled teleuto-
spores (Fig. 19).
The on' celled uredospores are produced early in the season in immense
number? They are very minute and light, and are easily distributed by
the wind. They may aid in carrying over the rust from year to year by
infecting self-sown wheat on headlands (Fig. 22), and they are frequently
to be found caught in the “brush” of wheat grains (see also Fig. 3, Bunt
Spores).
The two-celled teleutospores are produced towards the end of the season.
They will not germinate immediately, but only after a period of rest.
When these germinate in spring they produce other minute spores known
as sporidiola (Fig. 20). These have not been proved to infect the wheat
plant, so it is not known exactly what purpose they serve.
The wheat rust of Europe that is similar to the wheat rust of Australia
is capable of infecting the small barberry shrub, and when it does so a
third kind of spore is produced. In Australia barberry shrubs have only-
been introduced in a few places, and are not at all common, and so far all
attempts to produce infection with Australian wheat rust have failed. In
this respect at least, therefore, it differs from the European wheat rust.


Various remedies have been suggested for rust in wheat, but none have
proved efficacious. Wheat which has in any way been checked —as by a
dry spell at the early growing period—is particularly liable to suffer.
Often wheat grown upon land previously irrigated, or upon well fallowed
land, is only slightly attacked —perhaps because of its increased vigour.
stubble, rotation of crops, manures, and pickling the seed have all
Fig. 18.—Rust. Cross section of a small pieee of Wheat Stem.
Showing patches (sori) of the two-celled spores (teleutospores) of Puccinia graminU,
been tried without any markedly good results. A light rainfall, absence
of muggy weather, and a crop that ripens early, all tend to produce wheat
free from rust.
By judicious selection and cross-breeding, wheats have been produced
that are more or less rust-resistant, and it is by progress in this direction
that the greatest hope of freedom from the rust pest is to be entertained.
Experiments in this direction have been and are being continually carried
out by the Department, and a number of rust-resistant wheats are to be
obtained in Australia to-day, but it is to be noted that none of them are
absolutely rust-resistant; the term is only a relative one.


It should be specially noted that wheats which are rust-resistant under
the conditions obtaining in Australia are not so when grown in Europe,,
and, conversely, varieties that are rust-resistant in Europe are not rust-
resistant in Australia. We must concentrate all attention on breeding
plants suitable for local conditions. We have the wheat, the rust, and the
environment maintaining, as it were, an equilibrium; alter the environ-
ment and the equilibrium of the other two is at once upset.
Susceptibility to rust disease, together with resistance to the same, form
perhaps one of the most important instances to which Mendelian method
has yet been applied. Using a variety susceptible to rust, and another
Fig. 19.—A single soj;us of teleutospores of Puccinia graminis.
Note the two-celled spores, and on the left the epidermis which lias been ruptured by the
development of the spores.
practically immune to its attacks, Professor Biffen, who worked in Eng-
land, found that the first cross (El Generation) between the susceptible
and the rust-resistant variety was not perceptibly less attacked than the
rusty type. When, however, a further series of plants (the E 2 Generation)
was raised from the FI Generation, ordinary segregation (that is, the sorting
out of characters in the F 2 Generation) was found to take place, and the
green resistant plants, standing among the yellow ones, formed a very


Fig. 20. —Teleulospores (Puccinia graminis) germinating.
A germ tube is produced from either cell (or sometimes from both;, and gives rise to small bodies
called sporidiola, which in turn may possibly germinate and infect the leaf. {After Ward.)
Fig. 21. —Uredospores (Puccinia graminis) and their germination.
'Usually two tubes are produced, but only one develops to any extent, often branching-.
This long tube infects the leaf, entering through the stomata. (After Ward.)


striking spectacle. It has not yet been shown to what the resistance is
due, but it has been suggested—and some experiments that have been made
strengthen the hypothesis—that wheat plants containing a larger amount of
acid in their sap are the more resistant.
While temperature and water content in many cases play an important
part in the incidence of plant disease, the supply of food and other materials
in the soil is often of the greatest importance. In experiments conducted
at Eothamsted and at Woburn it has been shown that the susceptibility of
wheat to yellow rust has been increased by growing the plants with large
amounts of available nitrogen. Conversely 7, by starving highly susceptible
varieties, plants practically immune can be grown; but the yield is not
great enough to be profitable. From experiments carried out by Spinks
we now have to recognise that merest traces of different salts in the soil
may profoundly modify the plant’s susceptibility to disease. The question
has arisen as to whether immunity to disease and susceptibility to disease
are characters inherited by plants. If so, it -would seem possible by cross-
breeding to associate the valuable feature of immunity with the other
characteristics that the cultivator requires. With the recognition of the
work of Mendel, and the method of segregation pointed out by him, the old
vague conception that crossing “ broke the type ” has given way to methods
Fig. 22. —A small part of a section through a Wheat Leaf.
Showing a uredospore (ft) of Puceinia graminis resting on the surface, germinating, and sending its
branching filament (d) into the leal through the breathing pore or stoma (a). (After Bolley
and Pritchard.)
of greater range and precision in plant-breeding. Breeding for immunity
from disease along Mendelian lines presents special difficulties, but among
plants wheat presents one of the most favourable subjects, and some pro-
gress has been made as indicated above by Prof. Biffen. The problem pre-
sented by many plants attacked by fungi—and perhaps also even by wheat
in regard to rust—is that when the life-history of the fungus has been
worked out it does not indicate the primary cause of disease, -which, in
the majority of cases, is a physiological one. Our knowledge of the physio-
logy of plants, though extending, has given us so far no clue to the answer
to this problem. There is no doubt that immune plants can be produced
in any given place if sufficient attention is given to the subject, but com-
mon experience has proved that such plants, when cultivated at a distance
from their place of origin, lose their immune properties.


In the attempt to produce immune forms, the idea is sometimes held that
a plant can be so modified that its fungus parasite is unable to attack it,
but it must be remembered that a fungus is as capable of modifying its
mode of attack as its host plant is of modifying its method of repelling
it, and, in fact, in adaptability the fungi are usually superior to green
plants.
Wheat Mildew (Erysiphe graminis).
This fungus disease is becoming rather prevalent, especially in damp
seasons. It is known in some localities as “ flag fungus.”
It grows for the most part on the surface of the first leaves produced in
spring, forming white or pink patches, more or less extended and of vary-
ing thickness. Some of the fungus threads grow outwards, and become con-
stricted into a number of small cells like a string of beads (Fig. 23 a). The
outermost of these cells, or spores, are being continually set free as a fine
Fig. 23.—Wheat Mildew ( Erysiphe graminis),
A. Oidium stage, sliowing the production of conidia.
B. Perithecium with appendages.
C. Perithecium (more magnified) showing asci and ascospores. (After Frank.)
■white powder; these spores germinate readily and diffuse the disease.
The fungus is often reddish-grey in appearance, and is then sometimes
mistaken for rust.
If the weather be favourable the fungus changes as summer approaches
into a greyish-white thick felt, embedded in which can be seen with the
naked eye numerous minute black or brown spore cases (Fig. 23 b). Soon


after these spore cases have begun to appear the leaves that were covered by
the mildew felt die, and at length the felt drops off. Each spore case con-
tains a number of small sacs, each of which holds eight spores (Fig. 23 c).
It is these spores inside the black spore cases that carry the infection forward
from year to year.
The disease is usually most prevalent where the growth has been par-
ticularly vigorous, and feeding off in June and July -will, therefore, be
effective in reducing leaf growth, and admitting sun and wind, in the
presence of which the fungus will die. Crops attacked by mildew usually
recover on the advent of summer, but occasionally the disease has proved
very malignant, and it seems highly probable that it distinctly reduces the
yield in such cases. The burning of stubble is also likely in large measure
to prevent the continuance of the disease. Only seed from clean crops should
be sown.
Take-all (Ophiobolus graminis).
Take-all is caused by a fungus which exists in the soil, attacking the
roots of the wheat plant. When the attack takes place before the wheat
is out in ear the disease is usually referred to by farmers as “Take-all”;
when, however, the wheat is affected at the time it is out in ear it is
frequently termed “White head,” on account of the heads turning white.
Fig. 24.—"Take-all" on wheat.
Bases of young wheat plants killed by “Take-all” Fuugus (Ophiobolus graminis).
Note the characteristic blackened areas on the lower parts of the stems (“Black Feet”).
The disease makes its appearance in round patches, and not infre-
quently the yield on large areas is diminished by half; no remedial mea-
sures can be adopted excepting change of crops, and alternate fallow.
The following description of the symptoms is given by Mr. McAlpine in
the Journal of Agriculture, Victoria, 1904: —
If the disease is followed from its earliest appearances, it will be seen that
plants succumb at various stages of growth, according to the time and severity
of the attack, the nature of the season, and the condition of the plants them-
selves.


In some spots or patches where the fungus is prevalent, and the young plants
are attacked early, the disease may appear before the formation of the stalk.
The plants assume a sickly appearance, having lost their dark-green colour,
their leaves turn yellow, and soon they shrivel up and die. Again, the attack
may be later, or the plants are better able to withstand the fungus, and so they
linger on longer, but ultimately die. The fungus spreads from a centre,
attacking the plants in its vicinity, and so dead patches occur here and there
throughout the crop, to which patches the name of “ Take-all ” is given. It is
quite common for the wheat plant to produce its ears and look as if it were
going to All them, but suddenly, as it were, they become bleached as if pre-
maturely ripe, aud the plant dies from the root upwards. Every gradation has
been met with from the “ Take-all,” In which the plants died young, to the
“ White-heads,” in which the ears consisted of mere empty husks, or, if the
grain was formed, it soon shrivelled and did not come to maturity. In some
soils, especially rather firm sandy loams, the early destruction of the plants is
hardly so noticeable as on loose friable soils, and the plants seem better able to
withstand the fungus for a time at least, and when they do succumb, it is only
-after the ears have begun to appear.
If the dead or dying plants are closely examined at the root they will be,
found more or less blackened at the butt; hence the name given this disease in
France is ‘‘Foot-rot” or “Black-leg” (Fig. 24). If such plants are pulled
it will be found that the roots break off short, leaving only a short, densely
hairy, and swollen portion attached to the stem. It often occurred that new
roots had been given off by the stem above the diseased portion, and they were
sometimes able to prolong the life of the plant, but sooner or later they became
unequal to the task of keeping up the supply of food, and so death ensued.
The disease thrives on barley, barley grass (Hordeum murinum), and on
one of the Brome grasses. It has recently been recorded attacking oats in
England, and we also recorded it on oats at Bathurst in 1913.
For the following suggestions we are chiefly indebted to Mr. A. E. V.
Richardson, Journal of Agriculture, South Australia, 1910: —
Owing to the rapidity of development of the disease, and because it is
only observed after the fungus has made considerable progress, little can be
done to cure the disease directly. Much might be done, by way of
prevention of the disease, directly by destroying the spores, and indirectly
by starving out the fungus. Applications of iron sulphate, copper sulphate,
liver of sulphur, and corrosive sublimate have been used more or less success-
fully. Theoretically, it might be expected that burning the stubble would do
much to mitigate the disease by actually destroying large numbers of spores;
and in practice it is found that, wherever there has been a good stubble burn,
the resultant crops are free from “ Take-all,” but many spores are on under-
ground parts of the stems and roots, and so we must not be too sanguine of
success.
The most practical method of control would appear to be a resort to the
method of starving out the fungus. It does not usually live on the oat plant.
We have had one case only in New South Wales. The farmer suffering badly
from “ Take-all ” is earnestly advised to fallow early next season, keep down
by cultivation the plants or weeds that may act as a host for the parasite,
and substitute a crop of oats in place of the usual wheat crop. The spores
left in the soil from the diseased wheat crops are encouraged to germinate
by the process of fallowing, and if the fallow be kept free from possible host
plants such as barley grass, spear grass, &c., the spores that germinate die
out. A great many spores will pass through the season without germinating,
but will possibly be encouraged to germinate in the succeeding year. The
oat crop now occupying the land wdll probably not act as a host, and the
spores that have germinated necessarily perish. If, then, the land is fallowed


up again after the oat crop is reaped, and wheat is sown after the fallow, it
is reasonably certain that the " Take-all ” on that particular section will
nave been eliminated.
Such a rotation might be outlined as follows: —
1917 (1) Wheat (badly attacked by “Take-all”).
1918 (2) Early and well prepared fallow.
1919 (3) Oats.
1920 (4) Early fallow.
1921 (5) Wheat.
This rotation might, of course, be modified as follows:
(1) Wheat.
(2) Early fallow.
13) Oats (grazed).
(4) Oats (sown on stubble land for reaping).
(5) Fallow.
(6) Wheat.
The principle underlying all preventive measures, however, is exceedingly
simple It consists of starving out the fungus:—
(1) By inclusion of an oat crop in the rotation;
(2) By preventing any host plants from growing on the fallows.
Modifications will suggest themselves to each individual farmer to suit
the exigencies of his local conditions.
Ergot ( Claviceps purpurea).
Hard, dark violet excrescences, which usually fracture easily and are
white inside, make their appearance from time to time upon the ears of
cereal crops and grasses. These excrescences are known as Ergot, and as
they occur most frequently upon rye, the ergot of rye is by far the best
known. Ergot, how T ever, is found occasionally upon ears of wheat in the
form of black or dark violet protuberances, sometimes as large as a maize
grain. (Fig. 25.)
Ergots are really dense masses of fungus threads —or sclerotia —in-
tended to carry on the fungus from year to year, and capable of lying
dormant for a considerable period without germinating. They fall from
the wheat ears to the ground, and there remain dormant for some time.
When they do germinate they give rise to a number of fragile stems, each
terminating in a globular head. In each globular head vast numbers of
spores arise which are usually set free at the time when the cereal blooms.
The spores are carried by the wind, and some of them, coming in contact
with the open blooms, stick to their stigmas and again cause infection of
the embryos. Ergots are poisonous, and rye bread much infested with ergot
has produced serious disease. Wheat affected with ergot should not be
given to poultry or cattle, unless it has been stored some time, wlien the
poisonous qualities of the ergot greatly diminish.
The ergots or sclerotia will not germinate if sufficiently covered with
earth, hence the stubble of an infected crop should be deeply ploughed, so
that the ergots lying upon the ground are buried. Ergots or portions
thereof should be separated from harvested wheat grain by sifting.
Wheat Blight.
During a cold and backward season the young leaves of wheat often turn-
yellow and die prematurely. With this premature withering, fungi
belonging to the genus Septoria are frequently associated. These fungi


Fig, 25.—Ergot. Various Graminæ attacked by Claviceps purpurea, showing the production of Ergot
in the heads.
From left to right—Rye, Cocksfoot (2), Wheat (2).


Fig. 26. —Ergot on Darnel.
produce on the leaves very numerous minute
brown or black specks scarcely visible to the
naked eye. Each speck is a small flask-shaped
depression in the leaf blade, containing innu-
merable fungus spores, the spores themselves
are elongated, and are frequently provided
with a row of drops or with cross walls.
Three fungi belonging to the genus Septoria
have been recorded upon wheat in Australia.
Occasionally the crop may be seriously checked
by the presence of species of Septoria. It is
not possible, however, to apply a remedy, but
burning the stubble would doubtless destroy a,
large number of spores, and thus diminish the
spread of the disease and the risk of its re-
appearance.
“ Contortion.”
Several cases came under notice during the
season 1913, in which wheat straw had buckled
or twisted in its growth, as if constricted or
hindered in its normal rate of extension. A
kink in the straw resulted, and, as it ripened,
the wind caused the affected straw to break at
the weak point, the result being that the crop
sometimes looked as if people had been trampling
recklessly through it.
The appearance of the affected straw is shown
in the accompanying illustration. Mr. Pridham,
Plant Breeder, reported the occurrence of wheat
so affected at Nyngan, where field plots of Stein-
wedelshowed many of the straws brokendown; at
Wagga, where two selected bulk sowings, the one
of Rymer, the other of Bobs, were affected ;
and at Cowra, in the case of two crossbred
wheats which appeared to have strong straws.
The particular character of the straw seemed to
be of little importance, for the wheats at
Nyngan and Cowra had strong straw, while
those at Wagga were inclined to be weak.
Two explanations have been offered of the
cause of this kinking of wheat straw, viz., that it
is due to the attack of insects, and that it is due
to disproportionate growth in one direction as
contrasted with that in another.
Wheat affected similarly to that above
described was reported from Carrathool and
Deniliquin in 1900 (Agricultural Gazette, vol.
xi, p. 1169).
Mr. Froggatt visited the former place, and
found that instead of the Hessian fly (as had
been suspected) the damage was caused by
A phidce.


These insects attacked the wheat stalk when about 6 inches high, shel-
tered in the enveloping flag, sucked up the sap on one side, and caused the
young wheat stem to bend over or to twist almost into a knot before shoot-
ing again.
The aphides were subsequently destroyed by parasites; the wheat then
shot up, but when about 4\ feet high, and when the heads were filling, the
weight caused many of the stalks that had been attacked by aphides to
break off where the stems were twisted.
Fig. 27.—Portions of Wheat Straw, showing buckling near the lower nodes.
Specimens of straw affected in the season 1912-13 did not reveal the
presence of any aphides or of any fungus disease when examined at the
Biological Branch, neither were aphides observed attacking the wheat crops
at JJyngan, Wagga, or Cowra during this year.


Mr. Maiden, Government Botanist, who examined some of the affected
stems, stated in his report, “ It will be noticed that buckling takes place
nearer the lower nodes, that is, in the region of the greatest restriction of
growth. A phenomenon of this kind is called ‘ contortion ’ by Masters
(‘Vegetable Teratology,’ page 316), and is defined as follows; —‘An irregu-
lar twisting or bending of the stem or branches, the inducing causes being
often some restriction to growth in certain directions, or the undue or dis-
proportionate growth in one direction as contrasted with that in another.’ ”
Unfortunately the kinking of wheat straw, due to the attack of aphides,
or due to an abnormal growth contingent on an irregular rainfall, does not
admit of the application of remedial measures.
Mr. Pridham has called attention to another abnormal growth, seen in
some seasons when late rains come, viz., the formation of additional spike-
lets in the ear, giving it a crowded appearance. Seeds planted from these
ears do not again produce ears with additional spikelets unless identically
similar weather conditions occur during growth.
INSECT PESTS OF WHEAT.*
White Grubs.
These are the thick, white, curved grubs so common in the soil, and often
turned up by the plough. They are the larval or grub state of the common
“ King ” or “ Christmas ” beetles, and their allies, the “ chafers,” and vary
much in size, according to the age or the species, but are all very similar in
appearance. These grubs remain feeding in the soil on grass and crop
roots for two years or more before becoming full-grown, when they con-
struct a soft rounded earthen cocoon, pupate therein, and thus pass their
last winter in the soil, to appear the following summer as adult beetles,
which feed on foliage.
Where these grubs appear in maize or wheat crops, rotation is recom-
mended, such as clover following wheat or maize, or potatoes in newly
turned-up grass land found to be infested. The change crop in each case
is not so seriously infested, and return can afterwards be made to the
original crop. Deep ploughing in late autumn is recommended, as it destroys
numbers of those which have pupated, by breaking their earthen cells and
exposing the helpless pupae to other insects, birds, and frost. Treatment
of the soil with lime, apterite, &c., has not been found to give satisfactory
results.
Wireworms,
These are hard-bodied, smooth, yellowish-white grubs, common in the
soil, and varying in sizes up to inches in length. These active, wiry,
quick-moving grubs or wireworms are the larvae of the common brownish
beetles known as “click” or “skip-jack” beetles ( Elateridce ). They
feed on roots of maize, wheat, and other grains, and also on the freshly-
planted maize grains. The grubs remain at work feeding and growing in
the soil for from three to five years, when, like the white grubs, they con-
struct a small cell to pupate in, and then appear as the common brown
beetles mentioned.
* W. B. Gurney, F.E.S., Assistant Entomologist.


As they resemble “ white grubs " in food and habits, similar methods
are recommended. Ploughing and harrowing in the autumn destroys
numbers of the cells and pupse. Rotation of crops is also recommended.
Laboratory experiments have shown that wireworms are destroyed by
feeding on bran poisoned with Paris green, mixed as recommended for
cutworms. It therefore seems possible that over limited patches where
wireworms are at work, if a sprinkling of bran so poisoned were turned
into the soil just prior to sowing or during that operation, it might prove
of value. The absence of vegetation for two or three weeks before the seed
is sown or before it germinates would probably force the wireworms to try
the poisoned bait, and thus save the seedling wheat.
Cutworms.
The cutworm caterpillars, so prevalent throughout our State in wheat
and other crops, and also in gardens, are generally found to be the grubs
of the small brown “ Bugong Moth ” (Euxoa infusa). The swarms of moths
are in evidence about March, and each female lays several hundred
eggs on weeds and grass. These may hatch during April and do consider-
able damage to seedling wheat. Adjoining grass paddocks may be infested
with the cutworms, and a certain percentage may pass into the wheat pad-
docks, but in such cases they only spread for a short distance, in which
respect they differ from the “ Army Cutworms,” which really travel in
swarms from paddock to paddock.
It is difficult to combat the cutworms once they are in the wdieat field,
but bran poisoned with Paris green has been found most effective. One
ounce of Paris green is mixed dry with If! ounces bran, and this is made
into a dry crumbly mash with water to which a little salt has been added,
at the rate of, say, half a cupful of salt to a bucket of water; failing salt,
a little treacle adds to the attractiveness of the bait to the cutworms.
This is scattered lightly amongst the patches of seedling wheat where the
cutworms are showing up, or in front of their possible advance. The cut-
worms come from the surface soil, where they shelter by day, and feed at
night on the scattered bait and are destroyed in large numbers.
However, preventive measures as far as possible are to be recommended.
It is evident that as the adult moths lay their eggs on grass and weeds that
may be growing on the cultivation, it is necessary to keep the land
thoroughly clean in order to diminish their numbers. The caterpillars
hatching from the eggs laid on the grass must have something to feed on,
and it can be seen that thoroughly clean land provides no food, and they
consequently must die out. It can also be seen what a serious pest these
starving grubs become amongst the seedling wheat, and why resowing is
sometimes necessitated by the wholesale destruction wrought by them.
Whore it becomes necessary to resow, the land should first be thoroughly
harrowed or cultivated to expose as many cutworms as possible. The
bait scattered at this time would also be effective. Resowing might then
be done up to the middle of July or later, provided such early-maturing
varieties as Bunyip were used. Mr. H. Ross recommends that if Bunyip
is used for this late sowing, 60 lb. seed to the acre should be used, with
56 lb. superphosphate in order to force the wheat ahead as fast as possible.
It is of interest to note that though the frosts of winter destroy numbers
of these caterpillars, and cold greatly retards their activity, yet they
can be qnite a serious pest in early winter. Numbers of the full-grown
17299 —N


Bugong Moth
Euxoa (Agrotes)
infusa ).
The Army
Worm Moth
(Leucania
unipuncta).
Cutworm.
Grass Pest (Apino callisto.
In the caterpillar stage
this is a very destruc-
tive cutworm.
In the caterpillar
stage, this moth
is one of the
worst pests of
cropsand grass.


caterpillars pupate at this time, of course, and thus pass through the cold
weather, emerging presently as the moths that lay the eggs from which the
spring brood of caterpillars is hatched.
The habits of other cutworms differ slightly. They feed at night or
dusk, or on cloudy days, attacking grass crops, vegetables, and garden
plants. During the daytime they shelter in loose soil, dead leaves, or at the
base of plants. The caterpillars make their first appearance during August
or September, and in warm districts there may be as many as four or more
broods in a season.
They sometimes appear in spring in vast numbers with astonishing sudden-
ness; in some part this is due to the fact that some cutworm caterpillars
hibernate as partly-grown grubs
through the winter, and sud-
denly crawl from the soil during
the first warm days of spring.
Others, again, appear as moths
in the spring and lay eggs, from
which the new brood of cater-
pillars appears.
Army Worm Moth.
The Army Worm Moth (Leu-
cania unipuncla ) winters not
only as a pupa in the soil, but
also as a partly-grown grub, or
as an adult moth, or in the egg
stage. There, may be three or
more broods in a season. The
female moth may lay up to 700
ergs (usually depositing them on
grass leaves), and, therefore,
myriads of these caterpillars may
appear, and pass in hordes into
adjacent crops. The eggs hatch
in about ten days, and in three
or four weeks the worms or
grubs are full grown, when they
bury themselves in the soil,
change to the pupal stage, and
after two weeks emerge again as
adult moths. The grubs feed
and move about much more
freely in the daylight than other
cutworms.
Trench for destroying Cutworms approaching
Wheat crop.
When in the crops, the most effective method of destroying “ army
worms ” and night-feeding cutworms is the poisoned bran baits mentioned
above. Pellets of this mash should be spread along the rows or broad-
casted in the crop where the cutworms are : they feed on it at night
and are poisoned in numbers.
The running of a deep furrow in the front of the line of march of the
caterpillars temporarily checks their advance. Numbers are thus collected
and may be destroyed by oil-sprays or by a log-crusher drawn along the
furraw.


Where there is no danger to stock, poisoning the grass, or a strip of the
crop before the advancing caterpillars, is effective; for this purpose use the
following spray; —1 lb. of arsenite of soda, 4 lb. treacle, 16 gallons water;
or 3 lb. of arsenate of lead to 50 gallons of water.
Aphis.
The aphis hatch from eggs which have passed the winter on grass and
stubble, and attack the wheat. Without laying eggs, these aphis daily give
birth to numbers of young aphis, which, within a day or two, themselves
give birth to living young, and so on. The increase within a week or two
is, therefore, enormous; and they soon spread through the wheat-fields.
Later in the season sexed aphis are produced, the females of which lay the
winter eggs.
The growing wheat is attacked, and the clusters of aphides beneath the
stem-sheaths suck the sap, weakening the stems so that they become twisted
and later bend down or snap off with the wind. In this way many heads
are lost.
It is impracticable to spray infested wheat or maize crops, but preventive
measures are possible in the way of ploughing in or burning off stubble
or rank grass during the winter months to destroy sheltering aphides
or eggs. The natural enemies of the aphis are numerous, and include the
grubs of Syrphid Flies and Lace-wfing Flies, and both the grub and adults
of various species of ladybird beetles. All these insects prey on the delicate
aphis. There are also a number of minute hymenopterous insects which are
internal parasites, i.e., live within the body of the aphis. Some, or all these
various forms of parasites, soon put in an appearance and destroy vast
numbers of the aphis. Useful as they are, these parasites usually gain the
ascendency late in the season only, and after the aphides have done much
damage; but as they leave only a percentage of the aphis alive to lay eggs,
they are invaluable in preventing the pest reappearing the following summer
in overwhelming numbers.
Rutherglen Bug (Nysius vinitor).
A tiny, oval, dark-grey bug, with transparent wings folded over the back.
It will be found illustrated in connection with the potato crop in a later
portion of this Handbook. It is suggestive of a small narrow fly, but has a
slender sucking beak attached to the head and projecting horizontally beneath
the body. In the warm part of the day they are very active, running
quickly, and taking to their wings readily at the slightest disturbance.
Though usually common in grass, and a pest of vegetables, fruit-trees,
and garden plants, they occasionally attack wheat crops, sucking out the
sap, and are particularly harmful to the ears.
As in the case of aphis, spraying or treatment of the crops is impracticable,
and preventive means are recommended where this pest is known to appear,
viz., burning off, late in summer or during winter, all stubble and waste
grass at the edges of crops to destroy eggs and hibernating bugs.
Grasshoppers.
There are three species of grasshoppers in Hew South Wales which appear
in such swarms as to be a plague where they occur. These are “ The Larger
Plague Locust” ( Chortoicetes terminifera) , “The Smaller Plague Locust”
(C. pusilla), and the “Coastal Locust” ( (Edaleus senegalensis). They
attack grass, crops, fruit-trees, vegetables, and garden plants.


The female insert' the hind-body into the ground by working the two
pairs ot ovipositor valves at the extremity of the abdomen, and bores, vary-
ing according' to the soil, t rom an inch to o inches in depth, are made, in
which the eggs are deposited. The egg-laying i* commonly effected by the
swarm in comparatively limited patches of ground, varying from a few
hundred square yards up to several acres, depending upon the size of the
s wa rni.
The newly-hatched insect is delicate and small (about one-sixth of an
inch in length', shaped like
the adult insect, except that
there are no traces of wings
showing. As the insect feeds
it develops in size by a series
of moults. The period occu-
pied in passing through the
first three stages is about three
weeks. The next stage occu-
pies about ten days, and the
duration of the following stage
is two to three weeks. These
last two stages are marked
by the presence of wing-pads
or rudimentary wings on the
thorax.
Larger Plague Locust
(Chortoicetes
terminifera).
The adults or winged forms never grow larger, though somewhat variable
in size. The adult lives, it is thought, for weeks, and deposits several
batches of eggs.
When the adult stage is reached, the insects may move in swarms by a
series of short flights of a few hundred feet at a time, or rising higher into
the air, pass across miles of country, usually taking the direction of the
wind, and avoiding timbered stretches when settling again.
Several methods have been found more or less successful in destroying or
checking swarms.
Scarifying egg-patches in the autumn, to expose the eggs to birds, insects,
and frost is one.
Arsenic spray is found the best spray for the control of grasshoppers, and
applied universally throughout all districts where the egg-beds of the
hoppers are marked otf in the winter or early summer, is effective in
destroying the threatening swarms in their initial stage. Organisation
among pastoralists and farmers is necessary, and the moment the young
hoppers begin to appear, spraying should be carried out. The earlier this is
done, the easier the young hoppers are killed, and the less expense and
trouble there is in spraying, for the tiny hoppers are characteristically
massed in the vicinity of the egg-patches. As the hoppers grow older they
are more difficult to kill, requiring a stronger arsenic wash, and also scat-
tering more.
The following arsenical spray is applied freely, and with great success, to
cope with the huge swarms in the Transvaal and ISfataT.— jFormula: f lb.
arsenite of soda, 4 lb. treacle or sugar. Those substances are dissolved in a
gallon of hot water, and then diluted in 15 gallons water (making 16 gal-
lons of mixture). This strength is used for locusts up to fourteen days old.


Older hoppers need a stronger spray —diluted to make 12 gallons only, while
for older hoppers agani dilute to 8 gallons only. The winged forms are, of
course, too active and widely scattered to be sprayed. Spraying the grass
or other vegetation where, hopper- are present poison- the food, and the
hoppers die from eating this within about four days' rime. All, or a large
percentage, of each young swarm can thus be destroyed before they do
much harm or spread. Stock should not In; allowed where the spray has
recently been applied, but in a few days the patches so sprayed have turned
brown and died down temporarily.
A.—Stage when
spraying most
effective.
B, —Stage rather too
old for best results
from spraying.
The results of experiments show that for about three weeks after hatch-
ing, which is before wing-pads are well developed, the hoppers may also be
destroyed by the use of oil sprays.
The accompanying illustrations indicate (A) the stage and size when these
sprays can be most effectively applied, and (B) a stage when the wing-pads
are developed, which is too old for the best results from spraying.
A kerosene or red oil emulsion made according to the following formula
is effective; —
Oil . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 gallon.
Soft soap . . . . . . . . . . 1 lb.
Water . . . . . . . . . . 6 gallons.
The oil and soap should be well emulsified in 2 or 3 gallons of hot water
by spraying it into itself several times before adding the rest of the water.
Poisoned bait, consisting of Paris green and bran mixed in the propor-
tion of 1 to 16 or 10, and made into a mash with water sweetened with
treacle, and spread at the edge of cultivation paddocks, destroys numbers of
the hoppers as they enter a field; spraying a strip of the edge of the crop
with arsenite of soda spray has also proved a convenient protection.
Grain Weevil and Angoumois Moth.
These two pests of stored grain attack wheat as well as other grains, but
so far as farmers are concerned they are of more importance in relation to
maize, and references to them, as well as to the method- of control, will he
found in the maize section of this Handbook.


Area
under Oats in
New South
Wales.
For Grain.
For Hay.
Year.
Acres.
Production.
Year.
Acres.
Production.
bushels.
tons.
1909
59,881
1,119,558 |
1909
169,441
186,243
1910
81,452
1,966,586 ;
1910
178,968
255,781
1911
77,991
1,702,706
1911
142,805
193,064
1912
71,047
1,155,226
1912
147,710
155,653
1913
85,175
1,674,075
1913
182,955
212,266
1914
103,416
1,835,406
1914
211,606
256,814
1915
43,476
513,910 i
1915
161,320
147,436
1916
58,636
1,345,698
1916
176,183
259,476
1917
67,111
1,084,980 i
1917
161,723
211,053
SECTION V.
Cereals other than Wheat.
OATS.*
Oats are not cultivated to the same extent in New South Wales as they
are in New Zealand and Tasmania, for the simple reason that the climatic
conditions and rainfall of this State are much more adapted to the growing
of wheat.
The conditions which favour the successful cultivation of oats cannot
be considered altogether satisfactory from a wheat-growing point of view.
Speaking generally, our best oat-producing countries have a cold climate,
associated with a high average rainfall, whereas with wheat the best results
are usually obtained in comparatively warm countries, with only a moderate
or even a low average rainfall.
Apart from the climatic conditions and rainfall required for the success-
ful cultivation of this crop, the demand for the grain for making oaten meal
is never very strong, as this commodity is only used to a limited extent,
whereas from wheat the principal food of the human race is manufactured.
Oats, therefore, are never likely to be grown on anything like so extensive
a scale in this State as wheat. Efforts are being made by the Department,
however, to produce by cross-breeding and selection varieties of oats suitable
for warmer and drier districts than those in which the cereal is at present
chiefly grown.
To give some idea of the areas devoted to this crop each year, the follow-
ing figures, taken from the Government Statistician’s reports for the past
nine years, may be of interest;—
In addition to the above, considerable areas are also sown for green feed
{in 1917, 19,482 acres), particularly in the coastal districts.
A small quantity of the grain is purchased for the manufacture of oaten
meal, but by far the most important use is as feed for all classes of stock.
• Compiled from an article by the late J. W. Shaw, Assistant Inspector of Agricultur
and other sources.


Climate and Districts.
Oats may lie grown with n fair amount of success under a diversity of
ehmatie conditions, but they thrive best in a cold climate, associated with
a good rainfall that is evenly distributed throughout the crop-growing
season. As previously mentioned, the climate of this State, taken on the
"•hole, is much more adapted to wheat-growing; but in some of the colder
districts oats may be grown almost to perfection. In a general way, it can
be said that a good potato district will, as a rule, prove suitable for growing
oats, us these crops require similar conditions of climate. As an example
of this, we may take portions of the Northern Tablelands of the State.
Some of our very best potato districts are situated there, and at the same
time some of our best oat districts. Glen Lines, in particular, is a district
where the elimatic conditions are favourable to the production of potatoes
and oats of the highest quality; and there are other portions of the State
that are similar in their suitability for the two crops.
Speaking generally, it may be said that in districts with a lower average
rainfall than 25 inches, oats are better left alone, unless the crop is being
grown for some specific reason, such as on land where the previous wheat
crops were affected with Flag Smut or Take-all. The value of this cereal
as a remedy for checking these diseases cannot he over-estimated. It is
not suggested here that oats should not be grown in districts with a
lower annual rainfall than 25 inches; but as a main crop they are better
left alone if the rainfall does not reach this average. New Zealand is noted
for the production of oats, and the nearer the climatic conditions resemble
those of the Dominion, the better will be the results obtained.
On the Northern Tablelands, the country extending from about llralla
to Glen Lines is considered highly suitable for the growing of oats. On the
Central Tablelands, from Blayney to Orange is the pick of the oat country,
although some exceptionally good returns have been obtained in the
Bathurst district. On the Southern line, the best oat districts are situated
in the vicinity of Goulburn, Taralga, and Crookwell; and in the cooler
localities in other Southern districts some excellent crops have been grown.
The districts mentioned can be classed as about the best for oat-growing,
although excellent crops have at different times been seen in many other
portions of the State. The climate of the districts referred to being colder,
they are naturally more adapted to the cultivation of this cereal than other
parts of the State.
Soils.
Oats may be grown successfully on soils entirely unsuited to wheat, and
also on low-lying situations where it would be extremely inadvisable to
plant wheat. They may he sown on land that is too strong and rich for wheat,
and also upon heavy, wet soils that have a natural tendency to be cold and
sour. The red basaltic soils met with in the best potato-growing districts
produce excellent crops of oats; but the crop will do well on practically any
soil, provided it is worked into good tilth previous to planting and the
rainfall is not too low. Oats lend themselves to conditions entirely unsuit-
able to the growth of other cereals. Varieties of the Potato or Tree type
generally give the best results on the richer lands, while those of the
Tartarian or Side-bearing type appear to he very suitable to the lighter
soils.


The Preparation of the Land.
Land intended for oats should bo prepared in a similar maimer to that
intended for wheat, except that in the more favoured oat districts slightly
deeper ploughing may prove advantageous.. In the drier districts fallowing
is essential to obtain the best results; and, in regard to the time the
operation should be commenced, the same general remarks apply as to wheat,
and the implements to use for working the fallow are also the same. Clean
cultivation paddocks are very necessary to the growing of prime oaten hay.
as nothing detracts so much from its general appearance when placed on
the market as the presence of weeds, thistles, burrs, &c. When oats are
grown for green feed on the eoa.-t, the laud should always be prepared early,
say, about two months prior to sowing, provided, of course, the weather
conditions will permit. It is wonderful how great is the effect on the
resulting crop of a short fallow, A good, moist seed-bed is absolutely
essential for the reception of the seed, and every fanner who wishes to
obtain the best results with this crop must do all in his power to bring this
about by stringent methods of cultivation before planting.
When to Sow.
This will depend upon a number of factors, the chief being the object of
the grower —whether for green feed, hay, or grain—the district, and the
season of the variety it is intended to sow. For green feed on the coast,
oats should be sown in February and early March, as the variety which has
so far given the best results under coastal conditions, viz., Algerian, is a
slow grower, and if not sown very early will not be at its best to cut for green
feed when dairymen require it most, which is during the months of July
and August." On the tablelands and in many of the larger wheat districts
it has been a common practice not to sow oats until the planting of the
wheat is completed; but when we consider that our best all-round variety
(Algerian)—the one undoubtedly most universally grown in this State —
has a rather long-growing season, it can be understood that such a practice
is not a good one, if the best results are to be obtained. Like wheat, the
longer the growing season of the variety, the earlier should the sowing he
done, and vice versa.
In some districts the farmers sow any oats they intend growing as early
as in the first and second week in March, before the wheat planting com-
mences. In individual localities the circumstances will be altered, but for
the majority of districts in this State, Algerian oats should be sown between
the last week in March and the last week in April, for both hay and grain.
If sown before this, and the weather conditions are very favourable to
growth, they may grow too rank, and are apt to lodge unless the growth is
checked by feeding-off. From a hay point of view, very early sowing has a
tendency to induce a heavy growth of flag, which in wet seasons may turn
brown, and much detract from the quality of the resultant crop.
Selection of Seed.
Oats for seed should be obtained from a reliable source, and only sound,
plump grain, preferably graded, should he sown. Cultivated oats are sup-
posed by some to have originated from the Wild Oat (.1 rout failin' ), and
there are farmers who believe that they throw back to the original wild
strain. This argument is sometime* advanced by farmers as the reason


why black oats are so prevalent in wheat paddocks throughout the wheat
belt; but there are scores of instances where wheat paddocks are over-run
with this pest, though oats have never at any time been sown in them.
Farmers need have no fear that by growing oats in their wheat paddocks
they are likely to introduce black oats on to Their farms, unless, of course,
the seed contains seed of that pest. As a matter of fact, the cultivated oat
is hotanically quite a different plant from the wild or black oat.
It is a well-known fact that acclimatisation is a very important factor in
selecting wheat for seed purposes; but it does not appear to be of such
importance with oats. It has been found that seed imported from a cool
district to a hot one will, as a rule, give much better results than seed
A Good Crop of Oats.
selected in the hot district each year. Better results might naturally be-
expected from the imported seed the first year; but even after being grown
in the district for only one year, the seed does not give better returns than
seed freshly imported direct from a cold district. This has been most
apparent from a hay point of view. It has also been noticed that seed
imported from a cool district into a hot one has a tendency to vary in
colour, the inclination being to turn paler. This has been particularly
noticed with Algerian oats. The husk, too, is affected by the climate, being
usually much thicker on oats grown in a moist district than in the same
variety grown in a dry one. From the above remarks it will be seen that
climatic conditions have a very marked influence on the nature and general
quality of the grain.


Treatment of the Seed for Smut.
Many farmers labour under the impression that there is no necessity to
pickle oats previous to planting; but this idea is a very wrong one, and has
absolutely no foundation. If the crop is sown for green feed, pickling is
unnecessary; but if it be intended for hay or grain, the seed should always
be pickled, otherwise there is a great risk of smut appearing in the crop.
Some farmers will argue that a little smut in the hay is of no consequence;
but smutty heads always detract from the appearance, reduce the value
from a feeding point of view, and if the infection is serious, lower the
prices obtained on the market. Cases have been reported where stock have
actually refused to eat hay that has been badly smutted.
The same remarks apply to the grain. Large quantities of oats are
purchased to feed racehorses and animals doing fast work, and trainers
and agents authorised to buy will not touch grain that contains smut in
any quantity. It will thus be seen that methods of prevention must be
employed if a clean crop is to be harvested and top market prices obtained.
Both formalin and biuestone have proved effective fungicides; but as the
former requires much more careful handling, and is somewhat risky under
certain conditions, farmers are advised to use biuestone and lime-water
in the way recommended for pickling wheat. (See page 364 of this Hand-
book.) The same general method may be followed in every particular,
except that it is advisable to allow oat seed to remain in the pickle a
little longer than in the case of wheat. The reason for this is easily under-
stood when it is pointed out that the spores of Loose Smut of oats (unlike
Stinking Smut or Bunt of wheat) are blown about by the wind before all
plants have formed their seed; the result is that some of these spores often
find their way between the scales that ultimately clasp the seed firmly,
and any fungicide that merely wets the outside of the grain may not reach
the enclosed spores. Hence any treatment of the seed, to be effective, must
be sufficiently prolonged to allow' the solution to reach the spores which
have been enclosed beneath the hull of the cat.
If the seed is treated in a chaff bag. constant agitation whilst in the
biuestone is very necessary to ensure thorough wetting of all the grain.
Owing to the different formation of the seed, oats take considerably longer
to dry than wheat, more particularly if lime-water is used after the blue-
stone. The quickest method of drying is to spread the seed out on a piece
of canvas or a tarpaulin, which is raised from the ground on a stand, so as
to allow of a free current of air underneath the cloth. It will be found
that the seed will dry much quicker in this way, and that there is much less
risk of stones, sand, or grit of any description getting mixed with the seed.
Varieties.
There are a great many different varieties of oats, and they may be
roughly classified into three main types, as follows:
(1) Those resembling Algerian, having open, branching panicles, with
long, thin, light-brown or dun-coloured grains, purplish straw, and
flowering glumes adhering to the grain.
(2) Those of the Potato or Tree type. Laving open, branching panicles,
with whitish straw, short, plump, white grains, to which the
flowering glumes do not adhere.


( 3) Those having contracted, one-sided panicle-, with long. thin, white
grains, commonly known as “ side-bearers."
Illustrations of typical oats of these three classes accompany- this article;
but in addition to the above we have certain other types, which have open
branching panicles of the Tree type, with grain very- similar to those of the
side-bearing type; so that it is rather difficult to classify all the different
types correctly. Of all the varieties tried, those given under the three
different headings are likely to succeed best under the conditions of this
State. They are as follows; —
Algerian Type.—Algerian, Calcutta, Red Rust-proof, Guyra, Ruakura.
Potato or Tree Type.—Hutchinson’s Potato (the best of the Potato
oats), Abundance, Big Four, Sunrise.
Tartarian or Side-bearing Type.—White Tartarian; this is the only-
variety belonging to this class that is worth growing.
The following characteristics of the different varieties may prove helpful
in selecting varieties for different conditions: —
Algerian. —This is undoubtedly- our best all-round variety, and it has
given the best results under practically all conditions, for green feed, hay,
and grain. No other oat has proved more rust-resistant and better suited to
coastal conditions, while in drier districts it has proved a great drought-
resister. It may be called a profuse stooler, and usually hugs the ground
for a considerable time after planting. It has fairly fine stems, and should
be sown early to get the best results.
Calcutta. —This variety (which is similar to Cape, and by some considered
to be the same) is largely grown in South Australia, and has given excellent
results under the conditions of that State. It is a few days earlier than
Algerian, but it is shorter and coarser in the straw, and cannot be compared
with that variety from a hay point of view. Under certain conditions it
may give better results for grain than Algerian, and it would also fit into
a much shorter growing season. It is not such a profuse stooler as Algerian,
and the foliage is of a much lighter green.
Bed Bust-proof. —This is a variety very suitable to the drier districts,
having given very good results in parts of Riverina and the South-western
Slopes. It does not stool quite so freely as Algerian, the stems arc fine, not
too long, and it makes splendid rack hay. It is slightly- earlier than
Algerian, and the grain is fairly long and brown in colour. It is a suitable
variety for dry districts.
Guyra. —This variety matures in about the same time as Algerian, with
straw about equal in height to that variety, not too coarse, and fairly- strong.
It may be called a moderate stooler, has a compact head, and dark-brown
grain, with a fairly strong awn, like its parent (White Ligowo). The grain
is plump, and the husk fairly thin. Guyra will be found suitable to typical
oat districts.
Ruahura.- —This oat was imported from New Zealand, it having origin-
ated as a variation in a crop of Argentine oats at the Ruakura Experiment
Farm, in the Dominion. It is claimed that it is rust-resistant, and a
wonderful yielder. It has not been tried sufficiently long in this State to-
allow of any further comment, except that when sown beside Algerian, on
the South Coast this season, it promised particularly well, and compared
more than favourably with that variety from a green-fodder point of view..


Sunirise. --This is a very early oat, ripening quite a week before Algerian.
The straw is usually a foot taller than that variety, and liable to lodge,
though mu eh the same as to stoutness as Algerian. It stools rather sparsely.
The grain is fairly long, greyish white, with a thin husk. Sunrise is only
recommended for the warmer districts, and should not be sown as early as
Algerian. It occupies very much the same place amongst oats as Firbank
does amongst wheats.
Dun Oat.
Though this variety does well in New Zealand, others
are more suitable for New South Wales.
Potato Oat.


Big Four. —This is a rather coarse-stemmed variety, considerably later
than Algerian, with white, fairly stout grain. The young growth is very
procumbent, and the foliage of a very dark g re en. It should he sown early
and fairly thickly, so as to induce fine stems. It is only a fair yielder of
grain.
Hutchinson’s Potato. —This is the best strain of all the Potato oats that
have been tested. It is a late variety, grows about as tall as Algerian, has
very coarse stems, and is not at all suitable for hay. The young growth
is procumbent, and of a very dark green colour; the grain is short, plump,
and white in colour. It is too coarse in the straw for hay, but the grain
is much in demand for feed purposes. Buyers when purchasing oats prefer
seed of the Potato type.
Abundance.
Skinless Oat.


Abundance. —This variety is similar in season to Big Four, and the young
growth also resembles that variety in appearance. It is not quite as thick
in the stem, and is a very good hay oat. It is a poor yielder of grain, and
can be classed as essentially a hay variety.
White Tartarian. —This is the only one of the side-bearing varieties
worthy of special mention. It has given excellent results on the Northern
Tablelands for both hay and grain. It is supposed to be very bitter, and
not so palatable as other varieties, particularly if cut on the green side. It
is late in maturing, has a good length of straw, and a long, thin, white grain.
White Tartarian.
Algerian.


Quantity of Seed per Acre.
This depends upon a number of circumstances, the chief among which
are: the method of sowing (whether broadcast or with the drill), the use to
which the crop is to be put (whether for green feed, hay, or grain), the
time of sowing, the district, and the habit of the variety (whether it is a
scanty or profuse stonier).
Algerian Oats. Algerian Oats.
Manured with 1½ cwt. superphosphate per acre. Unmanured.
Yield: 11 tons 4 cwt. 1 qr. 6 lb. per acre. Yield: 5 tons 10 cwt. 0 qr. 4 lb, per acre.
Oats on Farmers’ Experiment Plots, Stewart’s River.
Ou the where oat* are largely grown for green feed, and where the
sowing is usually done broadcast, from 2 to 3 bushels per acre should be
sown. If sown too thickly, and heavy rain or showery, windy weather is
experienced, the crop is liable to lodge, and as a result it may be partially
or totally spoilt before it can be cut. A few farmers on the South Coast
have seed drills, and where this method of sowing Is adopted the amount of
seed can be reduced to half that recommended for broadcasting. No
matter what the crop may be intended for. drilling will always give the
best results.
For hay on the tablelands, to 2 bushels per acre is ample when sowing
is done with the drill. Like wheat, oats may be sown a little earlier for hay
than for grain, but the season of the variety must not be overlooked. In
the drier wheat districts. 1 to If bushels per acre is sufficient for a hay
crop, provided the variety being sown is not too coarse in the stem. Very
coarse-stemmed varieties, such as Potato and others, should always be sown
thicker than varieties with comparatively fine stems, such as Algerian, as
the thicker the sowing the finer the steins will invariably be in the resultant
hay. Where the rainfall is sufficient, thick seeding is preferable, especially


Sunrise—a natural crossbred from Algerian.


Guyra.


for .hay, as the finer stems make better quality hay and a better sample of
•chaff. This is a very important point, as there is always considerable waste
in feeding hay with coarse stems or chaff that has been cut from coarse-
stemmed varieties. L'nder certain climatic conditions, and with certain
varieties, 3 bushels of seed per acre would not be an excessively heavy
seeding for hay.
Oats for grain on the tablelands should be sown at the rate of 1 to Ij
bushels per acre, according to the time of sowing and the variety. In the
drier districts, a bushel to the acre is ample for grain; but under moist
conditions it may be advisable to sow as much as 2 bushels per acre, for
a heavy seeding under such conditions generally induces a more even
ripening.
Manuring.
Oats, like wheat, require manuring under most conditions, and respond
bountifully to the application of superphosphate. On most soils, from 40 to
56 lb. per acre will be found sufficient; but on poorer lands the quantity can
be increased up to I cwt. with beneficial results. They appear to respond
much more to heavy manuring than wheat. When sown early in the season,
i cwt. of superphosphate is ample; but as the sowing season advances, the
quantity can be slightly increased. In coastal districts, where there are
practically no drills, and the manure (if used) has to be broadcasted, the
quantity per acre should be increased to double that recommended for
sowing with the drill. In some experiments conducted by the Department
the addition of a little nitrogenous fertiliser in combination with super-
phosphate has resulted iu slightly higher yields, and on the poorer granitic-
soils sulphate of potash iu combination with sui>erphosphate may prove
advantageous; but it has yet to bo definitely decided that the increase in
yield due to the addition of the other fertilisers to the superphosphate is
sufficient to compensate for the additional cost.
Treatment of the Growing Crop.
Oats do not root as deeply as wheat, and do not appear to he benefited to
the same extent by frequent harrowing during the growing period, and they
are also much more readily torn up by the spikes of the harrows. If the
crop is sown very early, and has a tendency to grow too rank, it will be
advisable to feed it off; but considerable judgment must be used in this
matter, as it is very easy to do more harm than good. It is wise to avoid
feeding off if possible, as in the majority of cases the effect is to reduce the
yield. This has been very apparent from a hay point of view. However, if
the crop has a tendency to grow too rank, and it is decided to feed off, the
■earlier in the season the sheep are turned in the better.
When to Cut for Hay.
Although it is recommended that wheat should be cut for hay at the
flowering stage, to preserve the colour, &c. (one of the most important points
for the Sydney market in prime wheaten chaff), such is not the case with
oats. The best stage to cut oats for hay is when the upper tips of the
heads turn white; at this stage the grain is fully formed, but only in the
dough stage. The presence of grain in oaten chaff is absolutely essential
for the Sydney market, and the chaff should bo of a nice purplish-green
colour. In selecting varieties for hay, those that ripen from the top should
he selected.


Harvesting for Grain.
In the cool, moist districts, where the binder is usually used for harvesting,,
the crop should be cut when the heads are well whitened, of a nice even
colour, and the grain firm. It is very necessary to harvest before the chaff
opens, as otherwise a considerable quantity will be lost through shedding.
When the stripper or harvester is used, a considerable quantity of the grain
has usually shelled before the crop is quite ready to strip, consequently the
yield from a stripped crop is never as high as would have been the case had
the reaper and binder been used.
Oaten Hay for Market.
There is always a good demand for oaten hay on the Sydney market, and
if the sample is bright and clean, and has fine steins, not too long, and of
a nice, purplish-green colour, good prices are assured. It should be pressed
in bales about cwt. in weight, but certainly not heavier than 2 ewt. The
bulk of this commodity is utilised by horse-trainers for rack purposes, and
from these men the best prices are obtained. They prefer hay that has been
cut with the mower and cocked in the field, as it is usually more evenly
made. Algerian is the variety in greatest favour. The hay, if cut with the
binder, should have the bands taken off the sheaves, and should be shaken
up before being put in the press. On no account should the hay be pressed
with the butts showing all the one way at the ends of the bale. The bales
should have, three wire bands of No. 8 or No. 10 inch gauge. The hay
should not be pressed with a derrick press, but with one of the " Clyde ” or
“ Koertz ” type.
Oaten Chaff.
There is always a strong demand for prime oaten chaff on the Sydney
market. It should be about f of an inch in length, clean cut, of pleasant
odour, free from mustiness, and of a nice, purplish-green colour. Like
oaten hay, the bulk is used by horse-trainers or for horses doing fast work.
Unlike wdieaten chaff, oaten chaff is preferred with a fair quantity of grain.
It should be put up in new hags, weighing from 85 to 112 lb. Algerian is
preferred to “ white oaten ” on account of its generally being sweeter.
Oats as a Check to “Take-all” and “Flag Smut.”
Throughout the wheat-belt of this State two -wheat diseases, namely,
“ take-all ” and “ flag smut,” appear to be getting more prevalent from
year to year, and unless methods of checking these diseases are adopted
they will be the means of seriously reducing the annual production of wheat
in this State. As far as the writer is aware, “ flag smut ” has never been
known to attack oats, and there is only one case on record in this State
whore “ take-all ” has been found on this cereal. Each of these diseases is
due to a fungus, so it can be understood that by growing oats in paddocks
where the previous wheat crops were badly affected with either of these
diseases, they should help very materially in starving the fungus out. In
such cases the following rotation is recommended: —
Ist year. Wheat crop affected with “ take-all ” or “ flag smut.”
2nd year. Bare fallow, or fodder crop of rape or Algerian oats.
3rd year. Crop of oats for hay or grain.
4th year. Bare fallow, or fodder crop of rape or Algerian oats.
6th year. Wheat.


Loose Smut of Oat ( Ustilago avenæ). Natural size.
From McAlpine’s “The Smuts of Australia.”


Crop.
i
Area.
Production.
Average
per Acre.
Barley
acres.
5,195
bushels.
73,370
bushels.
14'1
Oats
67,111
1,084,980
16-16
Wheat
3,806,604
36,598,000
9-61
In the above rotation, if it be decided to sow a fodder crop on the land
instead of bare-fallowing, this crop would be sown in February, fed off with
sheep throughout the winter months, the land ploughed in spring and
fallowed as a preparation for the main crop in the following autumn. Such
treatment to a paddock over a period of three years should help very
materially in stamping these diseases out. Oats are a valuable crop to sow
for sheep feed, but for this purpose the sowing should be done not later
than February or early March. Rape, when used for the fodder crop, should
be sown at the same time as oats, or both crops may be sown together in
alternate drills.
Pests and Diseases ef Oats.
The insect pests of oats are referred to in other portions of this Handbook;
wireworms, cutworms, grasshoppers, &c., are dealt with in the wheat section,
and grain weevils in the maize section.
The fungus diseases of oats are not numerous, the most important being
loose smut and rust. The former is related to loose smut of wheat, but
there are marked differences in behaviour. The spores in the case of wheat
only retain their germinating power for a few months, while in oats they
have been germinated at the end of seven years. Again, in the case of wheat
infection takes place through the flowers, while in oats it is the seedling that
is infected. Hence the destruction of the spores on the seed will prevent
the disease, and treatment with bluestone and lime-water, as in the case of
wheat, but with a slightly longer immersion, is recommended, as stated on
a preceding page.
Rust in oats is exceedingly common, but in recent years systematic cross-
breeding and selection has resulted in certain varieties being produced that
exhibit some degree of immunity. To these varieties reference has already
been made.
BARLEY.*
Barley is a crop which is worthy of more attention on the part of farmers
on account of its productiveness and general utility.
The Statistical Register of New South Wales gives the following figures
regarding barley production as compared witli that of oats and wheat:—
Table showing Barley, Oats, and Wheat for Grain grown in New South
Wales, Season 1916-17.
J. T. Pridham, Plant Breeder.


Barley.
bushels.
Oats.
bushels.
Wheat.
bushels.
iNew ISouth Wales ..
14-7
19'0
11-8
United States of America
25'4
29'9
1.5-0
A comparison ol the mean average production per acre of barley, cats,
and wheat in New South Wales for the ten-year period 1907-1 0. with the
United States for the period 1905-10, is also interesting. It is presented
in the accompanying small table: —
Mr. Niels Nielsen, in his Report on Bulk Handling to the New South
Wales Government in 1913, stated that “barley is the most profitable crop
grown in America,” the returns per acre being, for—
£ s. d.
Barley ... ... 3 16 OJ
Buckwheat ... ... 3 3 10
Maize ... ... 3 1 61
Rye ... 214 1
Linseed ... ... 2 13 11
Oats 2 6 O'
Wheat ... ... 2 5 6J
Classification.
The barleys in cultivation may be classified in the following way —
Two-row barleys. Six-row barleys.
i i
i i J
Erect-eared as j Drooping Ear Cape. Skinless or
Standwell. ) or Chevalier Naked,
as Kinver.
The two-rowed barleys are so called because they have a row of grains on
either side of the mid-rib of the ear, while what we call the six-row type has
six rows of grains to the ear. These rows are not all level to the eye if an
ear is broken across, as in the true six-row type, which is not commercially
grown, but six-row barley is a convenient term for this group.
Skinless barley, though included, is a very distinct type ; there are no
beards to the ear, the grain is enveloped in thin chaff, and is easily threshed,
the absence of husk giving it the appearance of -wheat. In the bearded
barleys the six-row type can be identified by the presence of two smaller
twisted grains for each large straight one, while in the two-row type there are
no twisted grains. The seed of the latter is usually fuller and more rounded
with less husk than that of six-row barley.
Yield and Prices.
Mr. McKeown, Manager of the Wagga Experiment Farm, says : —“ During
a number of years our average annual yield for the best variety of barley
exceeded that of the best variety of wheat by 7 bushels to the acre.” In


Mr. Ft •acock’* experience at the 1 Bathurst Experiment Farm, ton, Farley on
the average yields decidedly better than wheat. For a period of eight years,
1901-1911, Professor Perkins, of South Australia, obtained an average yield
of dfi bushels 2o lb. from six-row barley as against 18 bushels 32 lb. from
wheat for the same period. In our small experiment plots at (Jowra, Wagga.
and the flawkesbury College, we have found that six-row barley has given
better yields than two-row barley, but in the cooler climate of Bathurst there
appears to he very little difference in productiveness between them. The
former has given very good results at the Coonamble Experiment Farm on
the Black Soil Plains,
Prices fluctuate between Is. and (is. (id. per bushel for a good sample of
two-row barley, but even if the grain is only of feeding ijiialitv the usual
value, as Mr. McKeowu says, is 2s. 9cl. to os. 6d. Tt may be said that
barley at 3s. would pay the grower when wheat is Is, per bushel, because of
the increased yield obtained from barley.
Climate.
A district with a comparatively good rainfall and a cool climate is well
adapted for two-row barley. The western and southern wheat districts
produce good samples, as do also the northern districts, except where a good
deal of summer rainfall is registered. In the warmer districts, where the
grain ripens quickly, it is not possible to grow a good sample of this class
of barlev, and the six-row varieties will bo found more profitable. Of course,
the latter will not command quite such a high price as two-row barley, but the
increased yield more than compensates for a lower price per bushel. Skin-
less barleys are drought-resistant and well adapted for grain production in
dry districts. They are also much used for green fodder on the coast, where
there is a good demand for the seed. In districts of good rainfall this
barley grows weak straw that lodges badly if the crop is left to ripen grain.
Soil.
For barley the soil should he only moderately rich; the best grain is
obtained after a crop of wheat or oats, given a sufficient period of fallow
between. The most important consideration is the condition of the soil ;
although any wheat soil will grow good barley, it should be so worked that it
is in a mellow and a friable condition when the crop is sown. The firm
seed-bed required for wheat is not at all essential for barley. It is an early
ripening cereal, and the root growth is shorter and less abundant than that
of oats and wheat, so that it is necessary to sow it on land that is in a high state
of cultivation. Too rich a soil will cause the crop to lodge ; while low-lying
undrained land is unsuitable, as barlev cannot withstand a great amount of
moisture in its young stages.
Rotation.
Barley should follow a straw crop, such as wheat or oats, though on light
or poor land it would be better to come after rape or a good fallow. The
plan followed by Messrs. W. G. Ileinhard and Co., of Wellington, who
have grown barley for many years, is to sow it after wheat which has been
cut for hay. If the hay stubble is ploughed as soon as possible there is
time for a few months fallow' before sowing barley in May. Another most
important consideration is that by this method there is no risk of self-sown
wheat in the barley, and if a hay crop of wheat is again sown after barley,


Cape Barley.


the farmer w ill be able to keep his land free from self-sown bar lev. Sheep
turned on to the stubble will usually pick up any fallen grain. Millers
strongly object to barley mixed with wheat, and such a sample is useless for
seed ; there are graders on the market, however, which will remove barley
from wheat.
In many districts where wheat-growing and sheep-raising are combined,
the rape crop is not a success, and barley under such circumstances will be
found an excellent substitute for fodder, either alone or used as a supplement
to the rape (sown as a mixture or in alternate rows). Barley stands feeding-
off well, and a crop of grain can often be harvested after the sheep have
twice eaten it down.
Time and Rate of Sowing.
May is the best month to sow' in the warmer districts, April in the cooler
parts of the State. The crop should ripen before the hot weather sets in, and
if sown much earlier or later than the months indicated the grain is liable to be.
more or less shrivelled. Very early sowings induce heavy stooling, and the
plants are unable to fill an unduly large number of heads. The quantity of
seed usually drilled is about 50 lb. per acre, and 2 bushels if sown broad-
cast, as is general on the coast. If sown too thickly the crop is very apt to
lodge, and as barley stools freely there is no advantage in heavy sowings.
Manuring,
The requirements of barley are much the same in this respect as those of
wheat, a similar amount of superphosphate being used and, if necessary, a
little potash fertiliser. Large applications of fertiliser are only necessary
on very poor land, but it should be borne in mind that barley is a short-lived
plant; its roots grow rapidly ; they are ill-adapted to surmount obstacles
such as are presented by a compact soil or to utilise fertilising matters which
are not ready and waiting to be assimilated.
Harrowing and Feeding-off.
Harrowing is not often necessary as it is with wheat, though circumstances
may arise in which rolling followed by harrowing will be beneficial, ora stroke
of the harrow alone.
Where the crop is grown for seed it is not advisable to feed-off unless the
winter has been mild and the growth too rank ; in such a case it should he
thoroughly fed down with sheep. There is no crop that responds better
after being fed-off with sheep than barley ; but it is not wise to put stock on
to the crop if cold, frosty weather has set in.
Harvesting.
This should be done with reaper and binder, if possible, though with care
a satisfactory sample can be made with the harvester. By the use of the
binder the grain is mellowed and improved by lying in the stocks ; and the
risk of loss from winds by harvesting when the grain is dead ripe, as is
necessary with the harvester, is avoided. The best time to cut is when the
grain is in the dough stage, and, when threshing, the machine must be set so
that the grain is not clipped and closely dressed—a little “ tail ”or beard left
on the seed is not objected to. If the harvester is used the combs should be
more open than is necessary with wheat, and it is an advantage to remove the


Skinless Barley.


concaves. All machinery agents will supply full information in regard to
harvesting, as they recognise that their machines require a little adjustment
before going from wheat into barley.
Stocking and Stacking.
Barley should be stocked the same day as it is cut to prevent discoloration
of the grain, and it must be dry before stacking. This is more important
than in the case of oats and even wheat ; if barley becomes heated in the
stack the colour and vitality of the grain will be affected.
On account of the soft absorbent nature of its straw, a barley stack
requires to be well protected.
Varieties.
Those recommended by the Department are ;
Two-row barleys (commonly called Malting barleys), Standwell and
Maltster, at the Bathurst, and Kiuver, Golden Grain, and
Goldthorpe at the Wagga .Experiment Farms, in the order named.
Gisborne or Duckbill has been suggested for further trial at the
latter farm.
Six-row (commonly called “ feed barleys ”), Skinless for green fodder for
winter and grain for stock in districts with mild winters. Cape
for green fodder and grain for stock in the cooler districts.
We have a few general purpose varieties of the Cape type, but of better-
quality, which were received some years ago from Algeria. They have done
well at the Oowra and Coonamble Farms, but are not yet available for
distribution.
Uses of Barley.
Although most of the grain produced is utilised for malting purposes, the
object of these notes is mainly to draw attention to the feeding value of the crop.
If a sample is not good enough for the brewery, it may be used for feeding to
stock. As a grain food barley is coming more into favour in Victoria, mainly
in the western districts and in the north-east. Professor Henry, of America,
says that “ barley lies between oats and maize in protein and carbohydrates,
and has less oil than either. On the Pacific Coast of the United States of
America it is much used for horse feed, because maize and oats do not grow
so well there. ... If ground it forms a pasty mass in the mouth ; it is
better to crush the grain between iron rollers.” Mr. McKeown gives his
working horses either wheat or barley at the rate of 4 lb. per day with good
results. The grain is scalded or boiled, and for horses not at work barley
straw is preferred to wheaten. Professor Perkins, of South Australia, says
that “ taking yield into consideration, barley is one of the cheapest concen-
trated foodstuffs that we can grow, and if not satisfied with local prices it
can always be converted into pork or mutton at a profit, or fed to horses
instead of oats.” In Asia, North Africa, and Southern Europe horses are
fed on barley grain and straw ; the climate is too warm for oats.
Its use as green fodder has already been mentioned, both on wheat and
sheep farms, and also in the coastal districts for dairy stock. Barley is the
earliest straw crop for green feed the farmer can grow ; Skinless barley is
ready first, followed by the six-row or Cape type, and the latest to mature is
two-row or malting barley, so that a succession of feed can be maintained.


Barley, No. 36 (Six-row Type).


Bariev rts human fo<*l is limited to a preparation known ns pearl 1 airier. As
poultry food it is valuable, and all pig-raisers attest to its high qualities as a
produeer of pork and bacon of the best grade.
Improvement of the Crop.
A prime sample of barley is high in starch and low in nitrogen, so that it
is not a difficult matter to increase the yield of this crop since proteids, which
are expensive to produce, do not enter largely' into its composition. A start
should be made just before harvesting the crop in selecting a number of
vigorous, healthy plants The seed of these should be bagged, and sown again
next season in a small plot, as described in methods of wheat improvement.
This plan will result in increased yields, as well as smut-free crops ; a stock of
high-class seed can soon bo raised in this way, and the grower will bo well
repaid for his trouble. In Wisconsin the average yield of pedigree barley foi
six years, as produced by the members of the Wisconsin Experiment Associa-
tion, is given as 34 bushels per acre, as against 29'3 bushels with other varieties.
Pedigree barley at the Experiment Station yielded an average of 44'8 bushels
per acre for the five years 190 S-12, while common barley grown by Wis-
consin farmers averaged, for the same period, 27’7 bushels. Mr. Beaven, in his
barley experiments at Warminster, England, when testing a variety of
barleyg grows it in alternate short rows with a standard sort, twelve seeds
to each row, and the total number of rows would be about 100. Each pair
of rows is considered as a separate experiment, so that the average of a large
number of results is taken, affording a reliable conclusion as to the relative
value of the two varieties. When harvesting, the eight central plants of
each row are weighed.
Mr. Peacock, of the Bathurst Experiment Farm, has grown a number of
very distinct types, originating from a natural crossbred which appeared
on this farm. They each breed true, hut have not been found sufficiently
productive to be propagated.
We have done a little artificial crossing with barleys, but nothing of any
particular value has been secured as yet. A beardless barley with fairly
strong straw would be valuable for fodder.
Disadvantages.
There are certain drawbacks to barley-growing, the chief of which is the
fluctuation in price. When there is a good season and a full supply', the
merchants cut down the price which is not regulated as in the case of wheat
by the world’s market, but has a purely local value. An export trade would
relieve such a state of affairs, also the more extended use of barley as a food
for farm animals—it is becoming more popular in America for this purpose.
Damage by unfavourable weather occurs in some seasons, causing a big drop
in prices ; rain at harvest time discolours the send, and is more apt to cause
lodging of the crop than in the case of wheat. The harvesting of barley
demands more care and attention than need be given to wheat ; cracked or
chipped grains are very objectionable. Although, as Professor Perkins says,
the farmer who grows barley is not compelled to advertise the fact in his
wheat fields, the mixing of wheat with barley' grain is found a source of
trouble on some farms. This can be overcome by' proper management, as
stated under the heading “ Rotation.”


Barley.
Wheat.
Russia in Europe ..
. 436,352,472 bushels.
621,813,850 bushels.
United States
. 217,016,000
708,064,000 „
Germany ...
. 153,485,416 ,,
160,180,258 „
According to the Commonwealth Statistician the export
■of Australian wheat from 1904 to 1913 were as follows: —
s. d.
values per bushel
s. d.
1904 ...
... 3
2
1909
. 4 2
1905 ...
... 3
5
1910 ...
. 4 2
1906 ...
... 3
3
1911
. 3 6
1907 ...
... 3
4
1912
3 11
1908 ...
... 4
1
1913
3 9
The Production of Malting Barley.*
8o long as ales and beers are brewed, one of their essential constituents will
be barley. The cereal is of almost world-wide production, and its importance
as a grain crop will be the better appreciated by a comparison with the produc-
tion of wheat in three of the leading grain producing countries for the year
1912, the latest figures obtainable :
In the United Kingdom the barley crop exceeded wheat by 804,896
bushels.
During the same year the figures for Australia show 3,859,116 bushels
of barley, as compared with 91,981,070 bushels of wheat, whilst (significant
fact) 546,177 bushels, valued at £109,466, were imported into the Common-
wealth during that period.
Apart from the use of barley for brewing purposes, the feed value of the
grain for various stock is not here properly recognised, though it is popular,
and justly so, as a green fodder crop.
Before it can be utilised by the brewers, barley requires to be converted
into malt, and the most profitable outlet for the farmer growing the crop is
per medium of the maltster. The requirements of the maltster call for grain
of good quality, with certain necessary characteristics. Many districts in
New South Wales are well adapted for producing such barley, and it has
long been a matter for surprise that in those areas the crop has not been
more generally grown.
In the New South Wales Official Year Book for 1914 the Government
Statistician says : —“ Barley is an important crop, but at present is produced
only on a moderate scale although there are several districts where the
necessary conditions as to soil and drainage present inducements for cultiva-
tion, and particularly with regard to the malting varieties.”
It requires no special cultivation which is not desirable with other cereals,
but care is necessary in the harvesting, and the element of risk through
damage by adverse weather conditions at harvest time is greater than with
wheat. Still, as compared with wheat, the yield is normally much higher
-and the market value almost invariably well above. A comparison on these
two points will prove of interest.
♦ This article was written by Mr. J. R. Davidson, and published in the Agricultural
•Gazette in November, 1915. The war has considerably affected the production of barley
in different countries, and it has been deemed inadvisable to attempt a revision of the
■figures.


Over the same period, for the average price of malting barley in the Melbourne
market, which governs the markets for this grain in other States, the
authority- mentioned gives
the following prices per bushel : —
s. d.
s.
d.
1904
3 6
1909
3
10
1905
4 0
1910
4
1
1906
4 5
1911
4
10*
1907
4 8
1912
5
Hi
1908
4 10
1913
3
111
I n the matter of average
yield per
acre in New South Wales over the same?
seasons, the State Government Statistician shows the following :
Wheat.
bushels
Barley.
bushels.
1904-5 ...
... 9-27
17-9
1905-6 ...
... 10-69
11-7
1906-7 ...
... 11-69
19-1
1907-8 ...
6-59
6-3
1908-9 ...
... 1111
17-5
1909-10 ...
... 14-34
18-1
1910-11 ...
... 13-11
11-6
1911-12 ...
... 10-54
11-9
1912-13 ...
... 14-56
171
1913-14 ...
... 11-86
14-7
The same authority, speaking of barley, says : "The average crop during the
last ten years has been 15 bushels per acre, but this rate should not be
regarded as characteristic, as the returns for many seasons indicate that an
average crop of 18 bushels per acre may be expected under normal
conditions.”
Shown in graph form, on the following page, the advantages to the grower
of barley over wheat, in both the above respects, are very apparent.
The aggregate barley crop in New South Wales for the season 1913-14, the
largest on record, was 303,447 bushels. Distinction is not made between,
that utilised for malting and for feed purposes, but a reasonable estimate for
the former in the season mentioned would probably be two-thirds of the total,
namely, 200,000 bushels. During 1913 the quantity of malt used in New
South Wales breweries was 809,171 bushels. This shows a deficiency in the
year in question of upwards of 600,000 bushels in the local supplies of malting
barley required by our maltsters and brewers. The latter imported by far the
greater proportion of this in the form of malt from other States of the Com-
monwealth and from overseas, thus not only finding employment for a large
number of hands in malt-houses outside of this State, but providing a con-
siderable market which could be availed of by our farmers. Certainly there
are not at present malt-houses in New South Wales to cope with the whole
requirements of our breweries, but the fact that new maltings have been
erected during the past year or two indicates clearly that capital will be readily
forthcoming for expansion in this respect when our farmers produce barley in
sufficient quantities to keep other new maltings employed, without the impor-
tation of barley being necessary.


t 17299—0
The Production of Malting Barley.


The possibility of. local over-production, in view of the, very considerable
shortage which exists in local .supplies, is therefore remote, and need not
occasion concern to intending growers of this crop for years to come. For
technical reasons connected with the conversion of barley into malt, as well
as the avoidance of risks attendant on the importation of grain, maltsters
prefer locally grown produce, provided the quality, which is the supreme con-
sideration, is satisfactory. One company has for years past offered and given
farmers an undertaking to purchase their crops, assuring a satisfactory
minimum price, on the one condition as to quality’.
Departmental Experience with Barley.
Some instructive comparisons may be made from reports of the managers
of the Experiment Farms, as recorded in the Agricultural Gazette. In June,
1911, Mr, O, M. McKeown, under the heading '‘Crops at Wagga Experi-
ment Farm, 1910,” says : “ The highest yield of Federation in the experiment
plots was 34 bushels. The rest of the paddock was occupied by Firbank
wheat, which returned 19 bushels 25 lb. per acre, and Kinver matting barley
37 bushels 6 lb. per acre.” Also, in the same article : “ Barley returned the
following yields per acre :
Skinless ... ... ... 22 bushels 42 lb.
Kinver ... ... ... 37 ~ 6,,
Goldthorpe ... ... ... 32 ~ 42 ~
Golden Grain ... ... 39 „ 21 ~
Gisborne ... ... ... 19 ~ 39 ~
World’s Champion ... ... 17 „ 43 ~
The two last-named are new varieties.”
In “ Paddock Accounts from Wagga Experiment Farm ” (Agricultural
Gazette , September, 1912) were set forth statements of account, “showing
the expenditure and returns from a farmer’s point of view, assuming that in
each case his paddocks had received similar treatment to that carried out at
the Experiment Farm.” Charges for seed, manure, ploughing, harvesting,
<fec,, are set out against the returns for each paddock, and the balance (or
profit) given. A comparison is made below of the best wheat paddock and
the only malting barley’ paddock shown in these accounts: —
Wheat (Federation). —Paddock No. 6,area 68 acres. Crop harvested—
-1,637 bushels, at 3s. Bd., or 24 bushels per acre. Gross return—
£3oo 2s. 4d., or £4 Bs. 3d. per acre. Profit —£166 7s. Id., or
£2 Bs. lid. per acre.
Malting Barley. —Paddock No. 7, area 35 acres. Crop harvested—■
938 bushels, at 4s. 9d., or 26'8 bushels per acre. Gross return—
£222 15s. 6d., or £6 7s. 3d. per acre. Profit, £165 16s. 7d., or
£4 14s. 9d. per acre.
It will be noted that, although the area of the wheat paddock was practically
double that sown with barley, the profit from each was about the same,
making the profit from the barley j er acre almost double that from the wheat.
In the Gazette of April, 1913, Mr. 11. W. Peacock dealt with the crops
grown at the Bathurst Experiment Farm during 1912. In this year the
conditions were abnormal, a very dry autumn and a cold wet winter. Mr.
Peacock said : —“The cold conditions of June, July, and August, together with


Kinver Barley.


the water-logging owing to excess of rain, had a very marked effect upon the
various crops—the oats and barleys thriving, whereas the wheats were placed
at a decided disadvantage. The oats and barley crops were very good, and
equal to those grown during the best of seasons, whereas the wheats were
seriously affected, &c.” Again, Mr. Peacock says : “ Throughout the farm,
the fact that oats and barleys withstood the conditions, when sown in a dry
seed-bed, better than wheat, was apparent.” The yield of the best wheat
paddock (Federation) was 26 bushels 57 lb. per acre, whilst the yield of
Stand well malting barley was 49 bushels 15 lb. per acre, and Cape barley
51 bushels 3 lb. per acre, so that these barley’s yielded almost twice as much
as the farm’s best wheat in this year—threefold and fourfold as much as
other wheats.
Dealing with his report for the same season of 1912, Mr. Peacock, in the
Gazette of November, 1913, supplies particulars of the returns from each
paddock. The following are his figures for the wheat (for grain) paddock
above referred to, and a barley’ paddock, in which was sown Standwell
malting, Cape, and Skinless barleys ;
Wheat. —Paddock No. 10, 10'2 acres. Gross returns (including straw) —
£74 6s. Bid., or £7 ss. 9d. per acre. Profit —£38 14s. 9d., or
£3 15s. lid. per acre.
Barley. — Paddock No. la, 7T9 acres. Gross returns (including straw) —
£79 2s, 4d.,0r£1l per acre. Profit —£45 Is. 7d., or £6 ss. 4d.
per acre.
If the wheat had been sold at milling rates (3s. 3d. per bushel) and the
barley even at feed rates (3s. per bushel), the returns for these paddocks
would have been more markedly in favour of barley, viz. :
Wheat—Profit, £l2 6s. 6Jd., or £1 4s. 2d. per acre.
Barley—Profit, £22 18s. Bd., or £3 3s. 9d. „
With respect to crops at the Cowra Experiment Farm, a return is published
in the Gazette of April, 1914, by Mr. M. H. Reynolds, the Manager, showing
the following comparative figures :
Wheat (for grain). —62 acres. Yield—l,l6s bushels, at 3s. 6d. per
bushel, or 18'79 bushels per acre. Gross returns—£2o3 17s. 6d.,
or £3 ss, 9d. per acre.
Barley. —2 acres. Yield—69 bushels, at 4s. per bushel, or 34’5 bushels
per acre. Gross returns —£13 165., or £6 18s. per acre.
For the season 1914-15, one of disastrous drought in Victoria and
South Australia, the Government Statists of those States, in their official
returns of the grain production for the season, give the following remarkable
figures :
Y ictoria—
Average yield of Wheat ... ... 1 "38 bushels per acre.
~ Malting barley ... 1P79 „ „
~ Other barley ... 7'43 ~ ~
South Australia—
Average yield of Wheat ... ... 1-41 „ ~
„ Malting barley ... 7'63 ~ ~
~ Barley (all kinds) 6-75 ~ ~
Comment is needless as to the respective drought-resistant properties of the
two crops.


Standwell Barley.


Requirements for Malting Purposes.
Below a certain standard barley is useless to the maltsters, but those
already established are too anxious to secure the right class of local grain to
find fault without full justification. It must be borne in mind that it is part
of the maltster’s avocation to be a judge of the quality of barley for his
purposes, and farmers must have considerable experience with the crop before
becoming similarly qualified as judges.
As the process of malting is dependent upon germination, the prime and
absolute necessity in barley for this purpose is vitality—that is, its germin-
ating capacity must not be impaired through any cause. This is the fact
which the grower of barley must keep most prominently in view when growing
the crop for malting purposes, and the risks of damage in this direction, right
up to the delivery of his grain, are the only ones the farmer really runs, apart
from absolute destruction from any such causes as fire and flood.
Damage to germinating properties may be occasioned by forces quite outside
the farmer’s ability to avoid, such as rain on a ripe crop, but other causes
may be avoided by care on his part. Carelessness in harvesting is the most
general cause of damage, and too much attention cannot be paid to this
operation, whether done by reaper and binder, reaper-thresher, or stripper-
harvester.
The last-mentioned method of harvesting, though the least desirable, is the
one most in vogue in this State, and comments which apply in this case are
largely applicable to the other methods. The machines must not be driven
too fast, and the grain must not be broken or damaged by-“nibbing” or
skinning. Even a comparatively small percentage of damaged corns will
spoil an otherwise good sample, as, in the malting process, such damaged
corns will spread mould and disease amongst the sound and healthy grains,
and render the malt unsatisfactory. Barley straw is very brittle, and the
crop threshes much more easily than wheat, so that danger of damage is
correspondingly increased unless attention and care are devoted to the
harvesting operation. Before this is commenced the machines should be
properly adjusted in regard to beaters, concaves, drums, screens, &c. The
hands working the machines should be specially cautioned as to the results
required, and the samples being obtained by each should be frequently
examined.
After being bagged the grain should not be left exposed in the paddocks
without covering, as rain on the bags will almost certainly damage the
contents, for barley absorbs moisture much more readily than wheat. For
the same reason it should always be stacked off the ground, and in course
of transit, or when stacked at railway stations, should always be covered
by tarpaulins.
Apart from freedom from damage, the maltster’s other important require-
ments in barley are plumpness, mealiness, uniformity, and good colour,
qualities all more or less dependent upon the soil, season, methods of culti-
vation, and weather at harvesting. At the same time much in regard to
these rests with the judgment and attention of the farmer at the time the
crop is ripening.
For instance, unless it is to be cut and stacked, it should not be harvested
on the green side —it should be fully ripe, but not over-ripe. If it is
not ripe, or is harvested when the grain is moist from rain or heavy dews,
sweating and consequent discoloration, with an impairment of its germinating


properties, will almost certainly take place in the sacks. Should the crop
not have ripened evenly, any sacks containing grain not fully matured mixed
through that which is ripe, should, if possible, not be sewn up immediately
or stacked, but the sacks should be stood on end in a dry place in such
a manner as to permit of the free passage of air between them until the
grain is thoroughly dry. Better still, if practicable, such grain should be
spread on covered floors and turned occasionally until it is so dry that
there is no danger of sweating when it is bagged. In some countries this
practice is invariably followed with all the barley after being threshed.
If a crop is harvested before thoroughly ripe, the grain will be “flinty”
or “ ricey,” and not mealy or floury in character when broken, as is required
in a prime malting sample.
All possible care should be exercised to see that the grain is reasonably
uniform in size and condition. If the harvesting machines used do not
permit of the screening of thin or unfilled grain from the bulk, in order to
obtain best prices from maltsters the harvested barley should be passed
through a grader. There should be no avoidable proportion of thin grain in
a sample to be offered for malting purposes. Even barley of small size, so
long as it is fairly well filled and uniform, and otherwise suitable, is prefer-
able to a sample which contains a quantity of bold, plump grain, but on the
whole is uneven.
Rather than the crop should be threshed so hard that the husk or skin is
partially removed, it is better that the awns or beards should not be entirely
dressed off the grain ; but it must not be understood that maltsters, and much
less persons buying for feed purposes, wish to have barley delivered in such
a condition that a large proportion of awns remain. When harvesting or
threshing is being carried out, the machines should be set so as to thresh off
as much as is possible of the awns without the grain being hit too hard.
Should there be included in a line of barley any undue proportion of straw,
unthreshed heads, or long awns, difficulty will probably be found in disposing
of it, or a risk run of rejection on delivery, as ordinary screening machines
will not satisfactorily treat such grain without a heavy loss being occasioned.
If a portion of the crop is poorer than the remainder, or not sc ripe, or
unevenly ripe, this should be harvested separately, and not allowed to get
into the same bags as the better portion, as even a small proportion of this,
if mixed through good grain, may spoil the lot for the maltster.
Colour is always an important consideration, and it should be the aim of
the farmer to preserve the bright natural light yellow of undamaged barley.
Weevil is a bugbear of the maltster, but it should not be necessary to
caution the farmer against using old, uncleaned bags which have previously
contained weevilly grain. If weevil has got into barns or stores it is not
only on account of barley that the pest should be thoroughly rooted out.
Before concluding, it may be mentioned that what is usually referred to as
“ Malting ” or “ English ” barleys are those of the two-row (or Chevalier
type) varieties. But six-row (or Cape type) barleys are very largely used for
brewing purposes, and are therefore malted. Hitherto, so-called “ Cape ”
barley has been little, if at all, bought by maltsters in New South Wales,
mainly due to lack of facilities. With, however, the extension of existing
malt-houses will come a demand for “ Cape ” barleys, and, although this class
of grain does not realise as high a price as two-row barley, it is usually a
heavier cropper, and not so liable to damage through careless harvesting.
Six-row barley must, for malting purposes, be of good quality, well filled, and
of bright colour. It is very necessary to have good seed, and trials are being
made with promising varieties.


The writer has in this article endeavoured to show the scope for increasing
the production of barley for grain in New South Wales, and at the same
time the requirements of the buyers who will pay the best price, viz., the
maltsters. These may appear somewhat exacting, but the difficulty of meeting
the same is more apparent than real, if reasonable attention to harvesting
is given by the farmer, and the main results desired are borne in mind.
Success with the crop means a very fine reward for trouble taken, as the
experience of many careful farmers, and the figures given early in this
article, attest. The results over a number of years will prove that the failure
to produce grain sufficiently good for malting purposes in an occasional
season still leaves a credit balance in favour of malting barley as compared
with wheat.
A Grower’s Advice.
In the course of an interesting letter, describing the advantages and dis-
advantages of growing malting barley, Mr. C, Jeffries Britten, of Tam worth,
makes this valuable suggestion ;
“ I recommend farmers to sow one quarter to one-fifth of their cultivation
area with barley; thatmeans that they will have sufficientharvesting machinery
to get the crop off - in less than a week, and that is important, for the grain
must be dead ripe before they start, and after it has been ripe for more than
a week the heads fall off the stalks very easily. I have seen many instances
of farmers getting a gross return of £7 or £8 per acre off' their small area of
barley, as against £5 or £6 per acre off their larger area of wheat : next
year they think it is a wise thing to sow all with barley, and, not having-
sufficient machinery to harvest the crop in a week or ten days, they are
disappointed with the result, and give up barley-growing in disgust.”
Pests and Diseases of Barley.
The insect pests of barley are referred to in connection with other cereals,
to which readers are referred.
Smut,*
In common with wheat there is both “ball” or “covered” smut, and
“loose” or “flying” smut to be reckoned with. The former is the more
common kind, however, and the bluestone and lime-water treatment as for
wheat will be found effective. For loose smut, the bluestone pickle is not
satisfactory, as infection with the disease occurs at flowering time, and soaking
in hot water is the treatment. This demands considerable care and the
use of a thermometer, and it is better to raise clean seed by selection rather
than go to the trouble of pickling each season. The Departmental barleys
are descended from healthy plants, and we never find smut in our bulks of
home-grown seed. If smutty seed must he sown the smut balls should he
floated off before putting in bluestone pickle; if this is carefully done the
crop will be comparatively free from smut.
RYE.
Rye (Secale cereale ) is cultivated to a very limited extent in New South
Wales, the climatic conditions being unfavourable to the production of
grain, except on the tablelands. For the ten years 1908 to 1917 the average
grain yield was 12-2 bushels per acre per annum. The area under the crop
has in that period ranged from approximately 5,000 acres in 1908 to under
2,500 acres in 1917, and the production from 54.000 bushels in 1908 to 31,000
bushels in 1917.
*.T. T. Pridham, Plant breeder.


The vegetative habit of the crop, and its adaptability to poor, sandy soil,
makes it quite worthy of consideration where a certain amount of green-
stuff is required under conditions that do not favour other cereals. A few
acres are grown nearly every year at Hawkesbury Agricultural College, the
grain being used for pig feed and the straw for various purposes on the
farm. In certain parts of the orchard at the College, where the soil is
particularly sandy, it grows better than anything else that has been tried
for green-manuring purposes.
The suitability of rye for the production of green fodder has been tested
on various experiment farms and on a number of farmers’ experiment plots
on the coast, and though the results generally have emphasised the value
of wheat and oats, it has also been apparent that on poor soils there is some
advantage in sowing rye. Experience shows that it is relished by stock
while it is young, the maximum of bulk and of quality being obtained if
it is cut just as the ear is peeping through the sheath; after that the flag
and straw become dry and harsh, and unpalatable to stock. At Wollongbar
Experiment Farm it has been found that it stands grazing better than any
other cereal, and the improvement of the milk yield when cows were trans-
ferred from silage to the rye patch was very perceptible.
Under somewhat limited circumstances, therefore, rye may be said to
have its utility and value, but general experience indicates that where the
conditions favour other cereals they should be preferred as better yielders
and as more succulent fodders.
The methods of cultivation that should be adopted in connection with
rye are the same as those for other cereals; but it may be remarked that
in the farmers’ experiment plots the crop has responded well to treatment
with fertilisers.
Of several varieties grown in New South Wales, two aie recommended by
the Department, viz.. Black Winter and White. Both are suitable for the
purposes of early winter fodder, for grain, and for collar making.
Rye and Oats at Hawkesbury Agricultural College, 1912.
Sheep were grazed on the crops, and they showed their preference for the oats by eating them oft'
close, and leaving’ the rye, which is seen in ear.


MAIZE.*
Introduction.
Maize is the crop next in importance to wheat in New South Wales, which
of all the States of Australia has the greatest area of land suitable for its
successful cultivation. The expansion of maize-growing is prevented at
present, however, partly by the uncertainty as to the price obtainable—the
market being essentially a local one —and partly by the greater profits to be
made in recent years from dairying. Indeed, since the advent of paspalum
on the North Coast, rapid progress has been made in the dairying industry
to the detriment of maize production ; but with the increasing number of
bacon factories, the growing impoverishment of the paspalum pastures, and
the establishment of industries for the conversion of maize into glucose,
starch and alcohol, an increase in the demand for maize and a corresponding
extension of the area under the crop is expected in the near future.
It is one of the easiest crops to grow on good land, as is evidenced by the
yields still obtained by the crude method of hoeing-in on stumpy or rung
alluvial land practised on some of our coastal rivers. Besides giving, on rich
bottom lands, yields of over 100 bushels of grain per acre, maize is one of
the most valuable crops for producing an abundance of green fodder (of
which a yield of 15 tons per acre has been recorded in New South Wales)
and extremely succulent silage, for which it is particularly suitable. In some
districts also, the “stover” (i.e., the stalks and leaves after removal of
the ears) has some value for late autumn or winter feeding. The value of
the grain for fattening stock has not yet been as fully realised in Australia
as in the United States of America, where over 3(3 bushels per head of
population are produced annually (less than 2 per cent, being exported), as
compared with an Australian production of less than 2 bushels per head.
Seeing that over 90 per cent, of the maize of the Commonwealth is
produced in New South Wales and Queensland,there is always an appreciable
export from these States to the others ; but even the requirements of these
States we seem unable to supply, as in recent year's the net imports into
Australia have been over 1,000,000 bushels per annum.
Two-thirds of the maize produced in New South Wales is grown on the
coast, chiefly along the river flats, and two-fifths of the State total on the
North Coast. Apart from the coast, the only districts devoted to maize to
any extent are the Northern and Central Tablelands, and the North-western
and South-western Slopes. Some is also grown on the Southern Tableland
and the Central-western Slopes, but very little elsewhere. The Northern
Tableland is a district that is rapidly increasing its area under maize; the
results obtained there, though not large, are profitable and dependable. There
is also room for further expansion in the districts of better rainfall, on the
Central-western Slopes, and (with the introduction of very early varieties) on
the Southern Tableland.
The best development and the highest yields of maize are obtained on the
coast with warm, moist, long-growing seasons, and deep, rich soils such as
obtain on the alluvial river flats. Frost will injure maize at almost any time
in its growth, but more particularly during the flowering and cobbing stages.
* H. Wenholz, B.So. (Agr.), Inspector of Agriculture.


Young maize has often been observed to withstand frosts of several degrees
especially on the tablelands—apparently the result of acclimatisation.
A good summer rainfall is almost essential ; indeed, many districts that
have suitable soil are impossible for maize just on this account. A sufficient
supply of moisture in the soil is urgently needed at the tas,selling and cobbing
stages, and if this cannot reasonably be expected, maize-growing is hazardous.
Many soils can, however, be considerably improved in their water-holding
capacity by the addition of large quantities of stable manure or green crop
residues ; and in districts of good winter rainfall, methods of cultivation can
be adopted to conserve sufficient moisture to enable an early maturing variety
sown in spring to produce its crop before the dry summer, with its attendant
high rate of evaporation, can affect the result. This is often done on the
Western Slopes. Another alternative is to plant in midsummer and depend
on the rnonsoonal rains during the late summer and autumn. This practice
is resorted to on the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area, with the exception that
irrigation takes the place of rainfall. It is found that pollination is not
interfered with when tasselling takes place during February, whereas the
hot scorching winds of midsummer “ blast ” the tassels and kill the pollen—
preventing fertilisation and the formation of grain.
Excess of rainfall is injurious, especially on heavy or badly-drained soils,
for maize will not stand “ wet feet,” especially also if the ground is cold.
A free, deep, well-drained loam, well provided with organic matter, is the
ideal soil for maize, and these conditions are best satisfied on the alluvia!
flats of the coastal and of some of our inland rivers and creeks. Deep
volcanic soils of basaltic or basic character grow excellent crops, both on the
coast and tablelands, and even the lighter granitic soils on the Northern
Tablelands are extensively used for growing profitable, though not heavy
crops.
Preparation of the Soil.
Maize, being comparatively shallow-rooted, especially in the later stages of
its growth, requires a thorough and deep working of the soil, for it is mainly
in this depth of worked soil that the roots are distributed and on which thev
depend almost wholly for the nourishment of the plant during later growth.
The ground should therefore be deeply ploughed—as deeply as possible (even
up to 12 indies or more) without turning over an undue amount of subsoil.
Tills ploughing should be given in the autumn or early winter, and the
ground allowed to lie in the rough state and to mellow down under the action
of frosts and winter rains.
In the moister districts on the coast, winter cover-crops, like wheat or oats
and field peas or vetches, may be grown on part of the land for green, feed or
green manure as required. Shallow soils which have been ploughed for a
number of years to the depth of the subsoil should not be suddenly deep-
ploughed ; it is better to deepen the ploughing by an inch or so every year,
until a sufficient depth is attained, and then to come back for one year to the
shallow ploughing. This method also prevents the formation of a hard- or
plough-pan in shallow soils with a heavy subsoil.
On heavy soils which are inclined to run together after rain, the mould-
board plough is the best to use, as it leaves the land rough and open for the
reception of the winter rains. The disc plough pulverises the soil too much,
and a heavy soil runs together too quickly after its use. The disc plough
should therefore not be used for a first ploughing on heavy soil, especially


where the winter rainfall is high. The disc plough is, however, a valuable
implement for turning under old stalks, weeds, or other rubbish. Where the
mouldboard plough is used for this purpose, it should be preceded by a
chopping roller or by a smooth roller and disc harrow.
Too many of our maize growers still allow their land to lie under the old
stalks during the winter, and are content with a single spring ploughing to
prepare the land for the next crop. It is estimated that this practice is
one of the biggest factors in lowering the acre yield all over the State.
In early spring the land should be given a second ploughing (prefer-
ably a cross ploughing), so as to destroy all weeds and make a good clean
seed-bed. This second ploughing should not be deep if it immediately precedes
The Chopping Roller, used for cutting old Maize Stalks prior to ploughing.
planting, as the seed-bed requires a certain amount of firmness. The spring-
ploughing should be followed immediately by harrowing to conserve moisture,
as evaporation is becoming more active ac this time of the year. If a green
crop or much weed growth is being turned under in the course of the spring-
ploughing, the furrow can be made a little deeper than would otherwise be
advisable, and the work should be completed at least a month or six weeks
before sowing. As soon as the top of the ground is sufficiently dry, the
roller should be used to consolidate the soil, and ensure that the buried
vegetable matter comes into firm contact with moist ground, thus facilitating
its rapid decomposition. If this is not done, large air spaces will be formed,
which are particularly injurious to the succeeding crop during a dry season,
This rolling should, of course, always he followed by harrowing. Rolling is
also sometimes found necessary to produce a proper seed-bed from cloddy
land, but the judicious use of the harrow on such land at the right time after
rain is better than the roller. The disc harrow is coming into great favour


of late years on the coast for preparing a seed-bed for maize, and it has been
found possible to dispense with a second ploughing in some instances by the
use of this implement.
The importance of a thorough preparation of the soil for maize cannot be
too strongly stressed, as it seems to be a prevailing idea with many that a well-
prepared soil is not so necessary owing to the large size of the seed of maize.
No greater mistake can be made, for no amount of after-cultivation can make
up for insufficient preparation of the soil for this crop.
Time of Sowing.
On the far North Coast sowing may commence with early varieties towards
the beginning of August, in order to catch the high price which usually
prevails in January and February. These crops are, however, often light
(sometimes failures) owing to the dry springs usually experienced, and large
areas of thick seedings are not recommended for them.
On the Clarence and Richmond Rivers the main crops should be late
varieties, sown in November and December. Such crops nearly always yield
well owing to the monsoonal rains of February and March being fairly
Maize Drill, with Fertiliser Attachment.
dependable. Further south, on the Macleay River, and along the lower North
Coast, sowing usually commences at the beginning of September and continues
till November.
On the South Coast October is the best month, and this month also sees
the bulk of the sowing complete on the Northern Tableland, in the North-west
(Inverell district), and the South-west (Tunnit district). In the western dis-
trict, the bulk of the maize should be sown either towards the end of Sep-
tember or in December, in order that tasselling or flowering shall not fall
during the hottest part of the summer. On the Murrumbidgee Irrigation
Area a December sowing stands the biggest chance of success.
For green fodder or silage, maize can usually be sown a month or six weeks
later than the latest safe time for sowing grain.


Methods of Sowing.
1. Plonghing-in. —This is a method which is largely used in some districts,
but which cannot be recommended except when the land has been well pre-
pared, and is in good tilth and not weedy. There may he some justification
also for using this method when the land is of a heavy nature, and bars been
beaten down by rain. Either single or multiple ploughs are used, the latter,
of course, ploughing the whole ground, and the seed being dropped by hand
behind the plough in every fourth or fifth furrow. Tf the ground is scarcely
moist enough to germinate the grain, sowing should be followed by a rolling,
and subsequently by a harrowing. The ploughing should only be shallow,
especially on heavy ground, or during early spring, so as not to turn too
much covering on the seed.
2. The Maize Drill. —The maize drill is easily the most satisfactory method
of sowing. Single- or double row drills may be used, and the depth of
sowing regulated by raising or lowering the runner wheel. The rate of
seeding can be accurately regulated by the use of plates, with various sizes
and numbers of holes, and a heavy press-wheel behind the planter box presses
the soil round the seed, and ensures immediate germination if the soil is
moist. Drills can be had with fertiliser attachment, and a scribe or marker
for marking the position of the next row. Some double-row drills are also
fitted with check wire for sowing in “ squares ” or “ checks,” dropping from
two to four grains per hill. This method can only be used in rectangular
paddocks, and where the ground does not slope badly. It is, perhaps, an
advantage in we-dy ground, in that cultivation may be given in two
directions. A disadvantage of most double-row drills is that the distance
between the drills is fixed, and they cannot be used where a-greater width is
required.
Sometimes a home-made marker is used for marking the rows, five or six
rows being marked at a time. Using marked sticks of equal length at the
ends of the field is also a handy way of getting straight rows of any desired
width with the single-row drill. A small lister furrow-opener on the front
of the drill is very useful on trashy ground. Deeper listing may be, obtained
by ploughing furrows, and then planting in these furrows with the drill.
This is an invaluable method in dry districts or hot climates, where the top
soil dries up quickly. It is especially recommended for late spring and earlv
summer plantings on the North Coast, as the young weeds which come up in
the furrows with the maize can be easily smothered as the furrows are filled
in by cultivation.
8. The Wheat Drill. —This implement may be used in sowing maize for
fodder. There is some difficulty in getting it to sow a crop thinly enough
for grain. With a 13-tube drill every tube but two should be plugged.
This will give rows about 3£ feet apart.
4. Broadcasting followed by Harrowing . —This method is only permissible
when maize is being grown for green feed or ensilage in good districts, and
then is only to he recommended where the ground is unevenly shaped, as on
the edge of a creek or river bank. Under most circumstances better results
will be obtained by sowing in drills, although there may be some justifica-
tion for broadcasting on newly broken paspalum sod, where cultivation is
difficult.
Width between Drills and Distance between Plants.
Sunlight is essential for the proper fertilisation and development of tin-
ears, and if the rows are planted too closely, especially in a cool, cloudy
season, the crop does not “ cob ” properly. Dry spells also seriously interfere


■with proper “ cobbing ’’ if the rows are too close, owing to moisture limita-
tions of lack of available plant-food material. With late tall-growing varieties
on the North Coast, the rows should not be planted closer than 4.1 feet
apart, and 5 feet would in many b- better still. In the North-west,
Central Tableland, and Central-western Slopes, the same distances should be
observed, not on account of the tall growth, but because of the. limitation of
moisture.
The plants can average from 10 to Id inches apart in the rows, according
to the fertility of the soil, the closer planting being adopted on richer soil.
In cooler districts, and where moisture is not so likely to be a limiting factor,
e.g., the South Coast, Northern Tablelands, South-western Slopes, or under
irriga ion in the West, the rows may be 31 to 4 feet apart, and the plants
from 12 to 15 inches apart in the rows. These distances might also apply to
the earlier varieties on the North Coast, On rich soils, or under conditions
in which varieties of maize sucker freely, it is better to sow three grains
every 21 to 31 feet apart in the rows, as this u hill ” sowing inhibits the
formation of suckers to some extent.
For green feed or ensilage the rows may be 21 to 3 feet apart, and the
plants average from G to 9 inches apart in the rows.
Quantity of Seed per acre.
The foregoing recommendations cannot be exactly translated into a given
quantity of seed per acre, as this depends largely on the variety of maize,
and the number of grains required to weigh a pound. The following figures
can therefore only be regarded as approximations. For late varieties on the
Coast, from 8 to 10 lb. will be required; for earlier varieties, 10 to 12 lb.
In the drier districts in the West, from 4 to 6 lb. is sufficient.
For green feed and ensilage from 2 to 21 tinms as much seed as is used for
a grain crop has given the best yields.
For broadcasting, from | to 11 bushels per acre are required.
Varieties.
Varieties of maize differ chiefly in maturity and growth, average size of
ear, size of grain (particularly breadth and length), colour of grain, and
general character of dent Some latitude must be allowed in the description
of a variety, because of the many different types of which a variety is
composed. The recognition of varieties is a matter of some importance to
farmers, on account of the recommendations which have been made by the
Department as to the most suitable varieties for particular districts as the
result of several years’ experiments.
The Department’s Recommendations.
For the purpose of the Departmental recommendations as to varieties, the
maize districts of the State have been classified as follows :
1. North Coast, comprising the Tweed, Richmond, Clarence, Bellingen,
Macleay, Hastings and Manning River districts, and the Dorrigo
and Comboyne Tablelands.
2. Central Coast, comprising the county of Cumberland and the Hunter
and Hawkesbury River districts.
3. South Coast, comprising the Illawarra, Shoalhaven, Milton, Moruya,
and Bega districts.


I. Northern Tablelands, comprising the Tentertield, Glen Junes and
Armidale districts,
5. Central Tableland, comprising the Bathurst district.
6. Southern Tableland, comprising Moss Vale, Goul burn and Mittagong.
7. North-western Slopes, comprising Inverell and Tam worth district s,
8. Western Slopes, comprising the Molong, Manildra, Mudgee, and
Canowindra districts.
9. Tumut district.
10. Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area.
The following is the approximate order of maturity of the varieties recom-
mended by the Department :
Early ... ... Early Yellow Dent,
Medium Early ... Silvermine.
Funk's Yellow' Dent.
Reid’s Yellow Dent.
Mid-season ... ... Hickory King.
Boone County White.
Learning.
Early Clarence.
Medium Late ... Improved Yellow Dent.
Late... ... ... Red Hogan.
The following varieties are recommended for the districts named :
North Coast.
For Grain —
Learning—most suitable for early sowing (September to November),
Improved Yellow Dent —for later sowing or main crop (October to
December).
Silvermine I f ol . Dorrigo and Combovne Tablelands.
Learning ( - *
Hickory King —for poorer or upland soils.
For Green Fodder —
Improved Yellow Dent.
Central Coast.
For Grain
Learning—for early crop (September and October sowing).
Improved Yellow Dent—main crop (October to December sowing).
Red Hogan—main crop (September to November sowing).
Hickory King—for poorer or upland soils.
For Green Fodder —
Improved Yellow Dent.
South Coast.
For Grain
Funk’s Yellow Dent ) „ , ,
Hiekor ' Kiin>- * 01 ‘ early crop (.September to Nuvcmoer
c ,.-, I sowing).
Silvermine j
Boone County White j
Improved Yellow Dent ■ for main crop (October sowing).
Rod Hogan )
Reid's Yellow Dent—for very rich soils.
Boone County White—for rich soils or for low moist situations.
Hickory King for poorer or upland soils.


For Green ladder —
Improved Yellow Dent—for fertile soils.
Hickory King—for poorer or upland soils,
Noe the i! \ Tabr.el a n i > .
For Grain —
Early Yellow Dent.
For Green Fodder —
Learning.
Hickory King.
Central Tableland.
For Grain— •
Funk’s Yellow Dent.
Silvermine.
For Green Fodder —
Learning.
Hickory King.
Southern Tableland.
For Green Fodder —
Learning ) f Ol . ear jy maturing crop.
Hickory King ) ‘ ° 1
Improved Yellow Dent—for late maturing crop.
North-western Slopes.
For Grain —
Funk’s Yellow Dent—-for October or November sowing.
Early Yellow Dent—for December sowing only, if necessary.
For Green Fodder —
Improved Yellow Dent.
Western Slopes.
.For Grain —
Early Yellow Dent j Only September or December sowings recom-
Funk’s Yellow Dent - , ,
c ,., • mended.
Silvermine I
For Green Fodder —
Learning.
Improved Yellow Dent.
Tumut District.
For Grain —
Early Clarence.
Funk’s Yellow Dent.
Learning.
For Green Fodder —
Improved Yellow Dent.
Murru.vibidc;ee Irrigation Area.
For Grain —
Silvermine I
Funk’s Yellow Dent f onl - v recommended.
For Green Fodder —
Improved Yellow Dent.


Descriptions of the Varieties.
The varieties recommended by the Department can be described as
follows :
Improved Yellow Dent. —This variety has been extremely popular on the
North Coast for many years, and of late years is being largely grown also on
the South Coast. On the North Coast it takes from five and a half to six
Improved Yellow Dent.
Improved Yellow Dent on Farmers’ Experiment Plots at Coramba.
Yield, 90 bus. 39 lb. per acre.


months to mature and is, in addition to being a good yielder of grain, the
most popular variety throughout almost the whole State for green fodder or
silage on account of its heavy yields and fine succulent stalks. It attains a
height of 12 to 15 feet or more on the North Coast, and though the ear-,
mostly remain erect at maturity, the husk covering is extremely good, which
makes the cobs very resistant to the weather and also to weevil attack.
Improved Yellow Dent on Farmers* Experiment Plots at Coramba.
Yield, 18 tons 13 cwt, of jaeen fodder per acre.
The ear is cylindrical in shape, 9 to 10 inches in length and 71, or 8 indies
in circumference. The dent is medium to rough, and the rows vary from
fourteen to eighteen in number, with a furrow of medium width between
them.
The grain is moderately thick, broad, and deep, and of a bright amber
colour, which makes it sell well on the market.
Learning. —This is one of the most popular varieties in the State. It takes
■about five months to mature on the North Coast, whore it is largely grown


for early planting. It has a fine stalk, which grows about Bto 10 feet high
on the North Coast. The oars are borne on moderately long shanks, which
cause the ears to droop at m Rarity.
The ears are 8 to 9 inches long and 6|- to 1\ inches in circumference,
mostly somewhat tapering, with a smooth to slightly rough dent. The
number of rows varies from eighteen to twenty-four, and curving or dropping
Original type of Leaming in centre with the improved type on
either side. The latter is being selected as a higher-yielding
type lor North Coast conditions.
oil the rows is not uncommon. The rows are usually irregular at the tip.
There is a medium to small furrow between the rows, and the grain is very
tight on the cob.
The grain is rather thick, narrow, and deep, with a dark amber colour and
a small bright cap.
Red Hogan. —This is one of the latest varieties of maize grown in the
State, being extremely popular on the Hawtkesbury River Flats and on the
Lower Hunter, where it takes about six or six and a half months to mature.
The stalk is stout, and grows to about 10 or 12 feet. It does not sucker
much. The ears are borne somewhat high on the stalk, but the stoutness of
the stalk usually resists the force of strong wind. The ears are often held
erect owing to the short thick shank, but they are mostly resistant to the
weather owing to the good husk covering.


The ears are cylindrical in shape, 9to 11 inches long and 7 ] to 8 inches in
circumference. The dent is medium to rough. The rows number usually
fourteen or sixteen, with a medium furrow between them.
Shewing the uniformity attained with the variety Red Hogan, at Hawkesbury Agricultural College,
after two years’ work in selection.
The grain is fairly thick, broad, and deep, of bright medium red colour.
Boone County White. —This is a variety which does best on rich soils, but
also does comparatively well on poorer soils well supplied with moisture. It
Boone County White.


does not seem to stanl t)0 hot a climate, and is therefore nut suite! to the
North Coast. It matures in about five months on the South Coast. The
stalks are not tall, but rather coarse. They do not sucker much, and under
good conditions the i ars, which are mostly borne singly, grow to a large size.
The ears droop at maturity, and the husk covering is fairly good.
The ears are cylindrical in shape, 9 to 11 inches long and 7 to 7} inches
in circumference. The rows vary from sixteen to twenty, and are usual) v
very straight and regular, with a medium to small furrow between them.
The grain is fairly thick, moderately broad, pearl white in colour. The
cores are of medium large size, but chaffy and comparatively light in weight.
Hickory King. —This is a popular variety on account of its large attractive
grain. It is, however, one of our poorest yielding varieties on good land. It
matures in about the same time as Boone County, and has established a
reputation for doing well on the highlands for fodder. The stalks are rather
fine, and the variety suckers freely. The ears are borne on long thick-
shanks, and they mostly droop at maturity. The husk covering is not good,
and many ears are spoilt when the weather is wet during ripening.
Hickory King.
The ears are cylindrical in shape, 8 to 10 inches long, and 6to Cl-
inches in circumference. The dent is smooth to slightly rough, and the
number of rows eight to ten and sometimes twelve, with a medium to wide
furrow between them ; and there is a great tendency to irregularity in shape
of grain.
The grain is thick, broad, and of average depth. It is pearl white in
colour.
Silvermine. —This is a small, white variety which is popular on the
Northern Tableland and Western Slopes on account of its earliness and
drought resistance. It is also becoming popular now on the Murrumbidgoe
Irrigation Area and on the South Coast. It will mature in four and a half
months on the coast, and grows a very short stalk compared with most other
varieties. The ears are carried on long shanks, and readily droop at
maturity.
The ears are cylindrical in shape, 8 to 9$ inches long, and about 6J to
7 inches in circumference. The dent is rough, and mostly pinched, with the


upper end drawn out into a projecting beak or spur. The rows are straight
and regular, with narrow furrow's between them. The cores are small and
very light in weight. The number of rows varies from sixteen to twenty.
The grain is rather thin, narrow, ami of moderate depth when grown
under dry conditions, but very deep under good conditions.
Reid’s Yellow Dent. —This variety is one of the prettiest that we have for
symmetry of ear and regular uniform grain, and it wins most of the prizes
Silvermine.
at the shows where it competes. It requires good conditions for its growth,
such as rich soil and good rainfall or irrigation. Like Boone County White,
it is too soft and tender a maize to stand the hot weather on the North
Coast. The stalks are slender, and do not grow very tall, though they
often carry two or more ears. The ears are borne on long, rather slender,
shanks, and easily droop at maturity.
The ears are cylindrical in shape, 9 to 11 inches long, and about 7 inches
in circumference. The dent is rough, and often pinched. The rows range
from eighteen to twenty-four, with a very small furrow between them.
The grain is thin, medium broad and deep. The colour is pale yellow, not
differing markedly from the pale-yellow colour of the cap of the grain.


Funk’s Yellow Dent. —This variety has been evolved from Reid’s Yellow
Dent by the selection of a different typo, and it is important to note that
this selection has fitted the resultant variety for conditions under which the
.-original Reid’s Yellow Dent would not grow successfully. Funk’s Yellow
Dent is gaining rapidly in popularity on the Northern and Central Tablelands,
North-western Slopes, Central-western Slopes, the Murrumbidgee Irrigation
Area, and the South Coast, on account of its ability to beat other varieties
Reading from left to right:—
Reid’s Yellow Dent; Funk’s Yellow Dent; Early (w Cent.
under dry conditions, it has a poor husk covering, hut this defect is not of
any great account in these districts. It has somewhat the same fit Id
characters as Reid’s Yellow Dent.
The ears are cylindrical, and of approximately the same length and
circumference as Reid’s Yellow Dent. The rows number from sixteen to
twenty-two, straight, and with a medium wide furrow between them.
The grain is very tight on the cob, thick, medium broad and medium
deep. It is thicker and shallower than Reid’s Yellow Dent, and the dent
is smooth to slightly rough. The colour is dark amber, with a small bright
yellow cap.


Early Yellow Dent. —This is the variety that is extensively giown on the
New 7 England Tableland, where it can be depended on to mature before
frost, as well as to give very profitable yields. It is not a suitable variety
for the coast, but is sometimes sown on the Western Slopes on account of its
curliness. The stalk is short and thick at the base, and the ear mostly
stands erect at maturity on a short thick shank.
The ears are tapering, 8 to 9 inches long, and 61 to 7 inches in circum-
ference. The dent is smooth, and the rows number from fourteen to eighteen.
The space between the rows is medium to large, and the grain is tight on
the cob.
The grain is fairly thick, moderately broad and not deep. It has a pale
amber colour w r ith little variation in shade from that of the cap.
Early Clarence. —This is a local yellow 7 variety w 7 hich has been
acclimatised to the Tumut district. It matures in about months. The
stalks are stout and not very tall. The ear is large, with a large core. The
Early Clarence.
dent is fairly rough, and the rows, which vary in number from sixteen to
twenty, are fairly straight, with a medium to small furrow between them.
The grain is thick, fairly broad and not very deep. It is of excellent colour
and quality.
Selecting the Seed.
There should be no excuse for any maize-grower who neglects to save his
own seed itiaize. The effect of acclimatisation is so marked that one should
never go outside the district for seed maize. In spite of the argument
sometimes heard, that seed maize is run out and that a change of seed is
required, there is abundant evidence to show that by proper selection of
seed the yield of a variety can not only be maintained but greatly increased.
It is surprising that more selection of seed is not done by farmers, because
the comparatively large size of the ears, the large number of grains they
contain, the few ears it is necessary to select in order to plant an acre,
together with the easily observable types and characters of the different ears,
all make the selection of seed maize an interesting and easy operation.


Selection in the Barn.
There are certain fundamental points in the selection of seed ears of any
variety of maize, the observance of which makes for continuous improve-
ment. The chief of these points are desirable features in weight and per-
centage of grain per ear, shape, length and circumference of ear, filling of
tips and butts, uniformity, depth and shape of grain, and space between the
rows and grain on the ear. Combined with greater attention to field
characters and to uniformity in the main characters that define a variety of
maize, it is possible to effect fairly rapid improvement, especially by the
establishment of special seed plots in which cross-fertilisation takes place
only between the more desirable types.
One of the most important points in the selection of seed ears is the choice
of those of average size which, when dry, are heavy in proportion to their
size. Practical farmers are not asked to weigh their ears on a balance or on
scales to get their exact weight; it is easy after a little practice to select the
heavy ears by a rough estimation of weight in the hand. One who' keeps
The weights ol these ears reading from left to right are 15 oz., 13 oz., 13 oz., 1 lb. 3 oz., 1 lb. 1 oz.,
1 lb. 1 oz., respectively. The three on the left are too light in weight in proportion to their size, a
fact which is readily discovered on handling the ears.
this in mind will find several ears of good size and appearance in the reject
heap at the end of the day’s work, The outside appearance of the ear is
sometimes deceptive, but the rough estimation of the weight is found to be a
very reliable guide in selecting ears with good solid weighty grain.
The shape of the ear varies from nearly cylindrical to very tapering. As a
general rule, the cylindrical ear is the more desirable type for selection,
because it not only carries more grain than a tapering ear but also grain of


more uniform size, shape, and depth. Straight rows and regular grain are
also desirable features. As to the size of the core, it is well to remember
that the larger the core the more grain it can carry, and there is no objection
The three ears on the left have too small a core and circumference of ear for their length. It
will readily be observed that they will not shell as much grain as the ears with cores of moderate
size on the right. The three centre ears have too thick a core and too large a circumference for
their length.
The ears on the right show straight regular rows of uniform grain, while those on the left have irregular
rows and grain, and are undesirable for seed.
to a core of moderate size for this reason, It is possible, however, to err on
the side of excessive thickness of core. Such cores take a considerable time
to dry out, and in moist districts constitute a menace in the storage heap


because they become mouldy so easily. The ideal of many fanners in
selecting seed ears is to get deep grain with a small core. Under conditions
of good rainfall and soil, such as exist in most maize districts, the best
yielding types seem to lie those with a core of moderate size, and it appears
that in these districts, at least, there is a big loss in yield by selecting fur
small cores. There is, however, apparently a correlation between small cores
and drought resistance, and this is worthy of note in the drier maize districts.
Ears should have no large amount of space between the grains on the cob,
cither at the tip of the grain next to the cob or at the crown or dent end of
the grain. Ears of good external appearance sometimes have a wide space
between the tip of the grains which, when shelled, are seen to be pinched
and of poor weight and colour.
A wide furrow between the rows of grain also means a lower weight of
shelled grain from the ear, but when the furrow is almost absent the grain is
not only of poor shape and colour, but mostly also shallow and pointed, with
weak germs.
Ears with grain tight on the cob are always to be preferred to those with
loose grain.
A mistake is often made by farmers in saying that ears with a rough dent
have pinched grain. The roughness of the dent is usually an indication of a
higher soft starch content, but also a rough dent is usually indicative of deep
grain. Pinched grain is indicated at the tip end, not at the dent end, and
the rough-dent type of grain is usually the best yielding type in a late
variety on the North Coast.
In the selection of seed ears, more attention should be paid to uniformity
in the appearance of the ears, and also in the size and shape of the grain, than
is usually done. Ears that are uniform in size, shape, appearance and
character of dent, indicate greater purity of variety. This means greater
uniformity in maturing and more uniformity in time of flowering.
Owing to the manner in which a maize plant in the field depends on its
neighbours for the fertilisation of its flowers and the formation of its grain,
this uniformity in time of flowering is very important. Those plants in a
field of maize which flower much later than their neighbours have little
chance of being fertilised, and barren stalks are the result.
The more uniform it is possible to get the sample of grain for planting, the
more uniform wall be the dropping or sowing from the maize drill, and the
bettor will be the yield.
Uniformity in colour of grain is also important, as grain of mixed colour
brings a lower price on the market.
Selection in the Field.
Although in the preceding pages we have closely observed the characters
visible in the seed ears, we have as yet taken no cognisance of the field
characters of the mother plants from which the ears have been selected. In
the first place, a large ear may be due to the fact that its stalk had an
advantage while it was growing in the held. It may have had a greater
space, or a richer bit of soil, or more abundant moisture. Any of these con-
ditions will enable a plant to produce a larger ear. Such an ear cannot
be expected to yield wel', unless it has the same advantageous conditions
when it is sown in the following season. The best ears to select in the field
are those of good or moderate size, which have been produced under normal
or even adverse conditions in the field,


Plants which produce a large ear in comparison with the size of stalk
constitute a valuable basis for the improvement of the grain yield of any
variety.
Selection for two or more ears per stalk is not likely to give increased
yields, unless the first ear is up to normal size ; otherwise there is the danger
of merely increasing the number of ears per stalk and reducing the average
size of the ears.
1 2 3
Types of Ears, showing—1, husk open and much of the ear exposed
to insect and fungus attack. 2, tip exposed.
3, a well-covered ear.
Stalks with one or two suckers have been regarded, curiously enough, as
undesirable in field selection, hut our experience shows that they should not
always be rejected. Some varieties sucker more freely than others, and in
some cases, especially on rich soils, it might be difficult to select ears only from
suckerless stalks. There is no reason why stalks bearing good eais should not
be selected, even though they have suckers.
In tall-growing, late varieties on the coast, where the stalks are sometimes
12 feet or more in height, ears should be selected that are growing at a
moderate height from the ground, as high ears render harvesting more difficult
and induce lodging, both of which result in an increase in the cost of
harvesting, while the latter also diminishes the yield.
In those districts where the autumn or winter is wet a large amount of
maize is spoilt in those ears which stand erect at maturity, being held so by
a short thick supporting shank, especially if the husk covering is deficient.


In these districts it is desirable to select ears which turn down at maturity.
On the North Coast, where such insect pests as « oevil and grain moth are
abundant, much damage is done where the husk does not completely cover
the tip of the ear, for in those ears which are completely and tightly covered
no trace of weevil can be found. By increasing the number of such ears by
“election it is possible to keep the crop longer in the field, and the unhuskod
ears longer in storage.
Field selection may be done during the ordinary process of harvesting, a
small box being attached to the dray or waggon in which the selected ears
are placed, to be kept separate in the barn from the bulk, and there subjected
ro a further scrutiny and selection, as in the case of ordinary barn selection
already mentioned.
Apart from the improvement in field characters which can he effected by
selection in the field, the yield can also be increased by this method.
Increases of up to 7 bushels per acre have been obtained from field-
selected over barn-selected seed, but for the best results both field and barn
selection should be practised.
Improvement of Yield by Ear-row Tests.
Having considered all the visible factors in selection, both in the ear itself
and in the mother plant in the field, it might be thought that no further
progress can be made in improvement by selection. Such, however, is not
the ease. It is only within recent years that a method was discovered in
America by which the yield and the quality of maize can be still further and
more rapidly improved. This method, which easily surpasses all others in
obtaining results, is known as improvement by the “ear-to-row” test. This
is simply a test in separate rows of equal length planted with grain from
individual selected ears. Ears are selected to the best of the farmer’s ability,
as far as hand and eye. can judge, but when compared in an actual test of
yielding capacity by the ear-row test remarkable differences are obtained. A
typical test plot has given us such differences between the individual rows
that the highest and lowest weights harvested from two separate rows of
equal length, sown with different ears, were 225 lb. and 85 lb. respectively.
To plant these rows, which were about 4 chains in length, only half the seed
from each ear is, used, the other half being kept until the following year.
By marking these ear residues with a number corresponding to the row in
which the fellow grain has been sown, we are able to say, when the results
of the test are known, which are the high-yielding and which the low-yielding
oars. The residues of the best five or six out of the forty or fifty ears so
tested are planted in a plot isolated from, or planted later or earlier than
other adjacent maize to prevent cross-pollination ; we thus have in this plot
all the high-yielding strains freely intercrossing, but no others, so that the
low-yielding strains have been eliminated. Seed from this plot constitutes
an improved yielding strain, which is used for planting larger areas. Tests of
this improved seed have shown an increase of 11 bushels per acre at Hawkes-
bury Agricultural College and 10 bushels per acre at Grafton Experiment
Farm, over seed selected from the barn in the ordinary manner practised by
most farmers.
Manuring.
Maize is one of those crops that make great demands on the plant-food
in the soil. It has been estimated that a 50-bushel crop of maize removes
from the soil approximately 75 lb. of nitrogen, 30 lb, of phosphoric acid,
and 50 lb. of potash. On very heavily manured fields of small area in?


the United States < £ America, yields of up to 255 bushels per acre have
been produced. This is lather valuable evidence that it is impossible to have
the soil too rich for maize—a remark that cannot be made of many other
crops. Although good cultivation to a large extent unlocks the store of plant-
food present in the soil, we are beginning to see, on our well cultivated
alluvial soils, increasing evidence of diminishing maize yields compared with
those of fifty years ago. This is surely a sign of failing fertility. We have
only to consider how the yields of maize are suddenly increased on “ worn-out ”
land which has been sown to pasture for a few years, and how- comparatively
good crops are produced on some virgin soils for only a year or two,
to realise what is lacking Undoubtedly it is humus, or decayed organic
matter, without which the soil richest in mineral constituents may become
quite poor. The retention of moisture by the addition of humus to the soil,
together with good cultivation, will do much to explode the id»a that maize
must have rain at the tassel ling stage in order to produce a successful crop.
In America, where the conditions necessitate the housing of cattle in the
winter, organic matter can be supplied to the soil in a ch'-ap and excellent
form, in the shape of farmyard manure. Wherever it is possible to obtain
farmyard manure by any means under our conditions it should most certainly
be applied. To supply that valuable ingredient, humus, it will be found
necessary, under most conditions here, to resort to the ploughing-in of green
crops, particularly legumes. The most suitable for our maize districts are
velvet beans, cowpeas, field peas, vetches, and the clovers. Besides supplying
humus, such crops as these gather nitrogen from a cheap source —the
atmosphere—and fix it in the soil. This element is removed by the maize
crop from the soil in large amounts, and is the most expensive element
purchased in the form of chemical fertilisers. Indeed, it- seems that the
application of readily-soluble nitrogenous fertilisers to maize is likely to have
the effect of promoting a soft and sappy growth, to which a dry spell in the
later stages is particularly injurious.
Experiments with fertilisers have been carried out for several years by the
Department on all classes of maize soils in different districts, but not with
such distinctively 7 uniform results as would point to any particular fertiliser
or mixture. From the mass of figures, however, it seems that a mixture
containing 1 cwt. superphosphate and cwt. sulphate of potash has given
best results in the majority of soils on the North Coast, while on the cooler
South Coast, especially in moister soils or seasons, a mixture of equal parts
of superphosphate and bone dust applied at the rate of 2 cwt. per acre at a
cost of about 12s. has given the best yields. On the Northern Tablelands from
J cwt. to 1 cwt. superphosphate has been most profitable, while in the South-
west (Tumut district) a substantial increase has been obtained for 2 cwt.
superphosphate per acre.
For green fodder, increased yields have been almost universally obtained
from the use of any manure. Particularly is this the case on the Southern
Tablelands, where up to three times the yield from the unmanured crop has
been secured with fertilisers.
The Growing Crop.
Important though a thorough preparation of the soil for maize has been
made to appear, it is no more important than a thorough after-cultivation.
The cultivation of maize should begin almost from the day the crop is planted,
and the first operation should be a light harrowing. This harrowing may-
be left with advantage until four or five days after planting, as it then


becomes almost imperative if rain falls soon after sowing, especially on
heavy land. Under such circumstances, this harrowing will make all the
difference lietween a poor and a good germination. The advantage of this
liarrowing also lies in the fact that it kills a heavy crop of \ oung weeds, and
aerates and warms the soil. The use of the harrow should be continued
until the maize is about 6 inches high. The single-horse cultivator is an
implement that is used far too early in the cultivation of the crop by many
fanners. Many cannot yet reconcile themselves to the use of the harrow on
the growing crop, but the practice is growing rapidly, for it is a case of
once tried, always used.” There are, however, two words of caution to lie
remembered when harrowing growing corn ; the first is to select a bright
day for the work, as the plants are soft and brittle on a cloudy, cool day, or
in the early morning, but quite tough and supple in the heat of rhe day ; the
•econd is to keep the harrow free from clogging rubbish, as this is the cause
of many plants being torn out. The use of the harrow on young maize saves
a very large amount of more expensive cultivation and hand-hoeing later on,
as it destroys a big crop of young weeds and grass which later becomes
troublesome.
The next cultivation should be done with a riding implement which
straddles the rows—either a spring-tooth or rigid-tooth cultivator, or a disc
cultivator, The last-named is an implement which has rapidly gained favour
in the maize districts on account of the good clean work done by it. It can
be made to throw as much hill to the rows as is desired by altering the set or
cut of the discs, and it is a considerable improvement on the objectionable
practice of hilling with the plough. The rigid-tooth cultivator is a better
implement than the spring-tooth for tearing out summer glass, couch or
paspalutn, which threatens to obtain a hold, and which is not so easily dealt
with by the disc cultivator.
When the maize becomes too high to “ straddle ” with a two-horse culti-
vator, recourse must be had to a single-horse implement, the use of which should
be continued for as long as practicable up to the tasselling stage.
The depth of the cultivation should be regulated according to the height of
the crop, it being borne in mind that as the crop grows in height its roots more
nearly approach the surface. 'During the early stage of growth, cultivation
may be given to a depth of I or 5 inches, but, later, this must be reduced
to 2 or 3 inches, or a large number of valuable feeding roots will be destroyed.
Hilling.
For this reason the practice of hilling with the plough is not recommended,
as, when the maize is 18 inches or 2 feet high, a large number of roots are
cut through by ploughing close to the rows. If hilling is thought necessary
at this stage, it should be done with a disc cultivator, or with mould-
board sweeps on the single-horse cultivator. It is thought, however, that
hilling is a practice for which, in many oases, no good reason can be
given. In some instances, where hilling has been done to prevent the stalks
being lodged by wind, it has been observed that the stalks were snapped on
account of their too great rigidity. Where young maize “ goes over ” with
the wind, it usually “ picks up’’again readily of its own accord, and hilling
is not necessery for this reason alone. The only justification for hilling with
the plough is in a wet season when a heavy weed growth or grass has obtained
a good hold in the rows, and requires early smothering to kill or check it.
But this condition can be avoided in most seasons by a thorough preparation
of the soil before planting, and by ban-owing after planting both before and
after the maize is up.


Harvesting and Other Problems.
(1.) For Silage. —As the maize plant matures it increases in water-free
substance, feeding value, and digestibility. Although this is the case right
up to maturity, it has been found advisable to cut for silage while the crop
is fairly green and contains a fair amount of moisture, as otherwise it does
not pack well in the silo ; air spaces are left and mould develops. The best
stage to out for silage has been found to be when many, but not all, of the
ears are dented or “glazed,” a portion of the husks dry, and the upper leaves
Front View of Maize Harvester.
.still green. Tf maize is cut before or after this stage, the loss in the silo is
the greater. It is, of course, possible to ensile maize beyond this stage of
maturity when other green material, such as lucerne, is chaffed together
with the maize, or even when water alone is added. Too immature or
succulent a growth is apt to cause an over-acid condition in the silage.
(2.) For Fodder. —The best stage for fodder is slightly more mature than
that recommended for silage, and the grain should he fully glazed'or dented.
Maize is, however, often out in the milk or “ roasting ear stage for fodder
1 17299—t*


of high palatability, and sometimes even in the silk or only in the tassel when a
continuous supply is required, though in these cases the feeding value is
seriously reduced. Tn the glazed or dented stage it possesses the advantage
of being in a suitable condition to “ stook ” or “ shock” in the field without
danger of mould.
Green maize fodder is harvested either by a special maize harvester, which
cuts and binds the stalks in bundles, and is capable of harvesting from 6 to
8 acres a day, or it may be done by a home-made implement in the form of
a sickle or blade attached to a sliding platform. The ordinary cane-knife is
used for cutting maize by hand.
Side View of Harvester.
(3.) For Grain and Stover. —Where the stover is required to be of as
much feeding value as possible while the grain is also needed, it will be
necessary to harvest the whole stalk before the grain is mature, and to cure
the stover in the field for another month or so in “ stocks ” or “ shocks ”
containing from 200 to 300 stalks. The best stage of cutting for this pur-
pose is when the ears are nearly all dented or glazed and the husks dry,
though the upper leaves and stem are still green. After curing, the ears are
husked from the shocks and the stover fed to stock or stored for future use.
It may be stored either (a) by cutting up into silage at once with other green
material, and well sprinkled with water if required, or ( h) by drying the
fodder and stacking it.
When the grain is allowed to thoroughly mature on the stalks, the latter
are of very little value for feeding purposes.
(4.) For Grain only. —The ears are snapped off by hand with the husks
attached -when they are properly dry, and carted to the barn, where they are


stored for husking. In seme districts the ears are husked from the standing-
stalks and bagged in the field. A crop is usually fit to pull when about
80 per cent, of the stalks are quite yellow.
Yields.
A yield of 45 tons per acre of green fodder has been obtained on the South
Coast, and 100-bushel crops of grain are still obtained on the coast in good
seasons. The yields vary greatly with the district. On the coast 60 bushels
of grain or 20 tons of green fodder are reckoned to be good crops. On the
Northern Tablelands, a 30-bushel crop is profitable, although 45 bushels per
acre and over have been obtained. On the Central Tableland and Central-
western Slopes 30-bushel crops are obtained in a good season, but often not
more than 10 or 15 bushels per acre. Under irrigation in these districts 60
or 70 bushel crops should be possible. In the North-west (Inverell district),
a yield of 60 bushels per acre is often obtained in a good season. In the
South-west (Tumut district) 80-bushel crops are not uncommon.
Storage.
Satisfactory methods of storage on a large scale have not yet been evolved
to enable the grower on the coast to dispose of his maize at his own pleasure,
owing to the presence of weevils and grain moth, which soon reduce sound
maize to a riddled condition, especially on the warm North Coast. Appar-
ently the best that can be done is to store in the husk in well-ventilated
barns, with sides of open battens or round timber. A certain measure of
success is believed to have been obtained in Queensland in tanking” the
shelled grain, but the chief trouble in this method is to get the grain down
to a sufficiently low moisture content to prevent it becoming mouldy in the
tank. Mechanical driers will have to be resorted to for this purpose.
In saving a small quantity of maize for seed, it should, after thorough
drying, be stored in the ear in air-tight bins with | lb. naphthalene flakes or
balls for every 20 to 25 cubic feet of space. Before being put away, however,
the ears must be kept freed from weevil by fumigating in an air-tight receptacle
with carbon bisulphide, using about 1 oz. or more of the liquid to 16 cubic feet
of space, and placing it in a shallow lid or vessel on top of the pile of ears.
After fumigation for twenty-four hours, the ears should be taken out and
well aired to get rid of the fumes. Care must be taken to have no naked
light near the fumigating bin, but further reference is made to this subject
where the control of the grain weevil is dealt with a few' pages further on.
Husking and Shelling.
If the grain is to he used for pig-feed, the husking may be left to the pigs,
or the pigs may be allowed to “ hog down ” the ripe corn in the field. This
is done by temporarily fencing off small areas in the paddock and running
about 20 to 40 pigs to the acre, or at any rate as many as will clean up the
area in two or three weeks. In this way little will be wasted.
Pulling and husking, if done by contract, costs from 10s. to 15s. per acre,
according to the crop. A good man should be able to husk about sor
6 bushels per hour of ordinary sized corn.
Shelling machines range in size from small hand-machines, with a capacity
of 2 bushels per hour, up to power-machines with a capacity of 50 bushels
per hour. Shelling costs about Id. per bushel when done by contract.


Combined buskers and s hellers are now on the market, which turn out
from 40 to 200 bushels per hour. The saving has been calculated to be
about Bs. an acre on a crop of 50 bushels.
Maize Husker and Sheller, in use at Grafton Experiment Farm.
Cost of Production.
The cost of preparing the land, planting, and cultivation on the coast has
been estimated at from £1 to 255. per acre, and the total cost of production
for a 40-bushel crop, including rent, about £4 per acre. This means the
cost of producing a bushel would be about 2s. This cost will have
increased to a higher figure at the present time (1918). The profit per acre
on the yield quoted here would have been over £3 per acre. The winner of
the Clarence Pastoral and Agricultural Association acre-yield competition
in 1915 was estimated to have made a net profit of £ll per acre from his
77-bushel crop.
At Glen Times a profit of £6 per acre has been made on a 43-bushel crop.
Sweet Corn.
Though the culture of sweet corn is chiefly confined at present to small
patches in a few market gardens and to a few stalks in borne vegetable
plots, its use as a green vegetable is slowly gaining ground in New
South Wales, and seed of many varieties can now be obtained from local
seedsmen. Apart from the small local market for this product, it is possible
that it will be profitable to export to America during our summer and
autumn, which is their “ off” season. The local canning of the product
might also develop into a profitable industry, as -we at present import
the whole of our canned sweet corn from the United States and Canada.
Sweet com differs markedly from field maize not only in its better flavour—
due to a higher sugar content —but also in the appearance of the seed and
the growth of the plant. Hickory King--a well-known white field variety—


is often put on the market as sweet com ; but there is a great difference in
flavour between it and good sweet corn. The seed of the latter is trans-
lucent, of waxy appearance, and wrinkled over its whole surface. Sweet
corn does not grow very tall, and, besides suckering profusely often beam
two or more ears per stalk, which seldom attain the size of the hardy dent
or field maize.
It is even more imperative than for the field crop that sweet corn should
be grown on rich soil well supplied with organic matter and humus to retain
the moisture in the soil during grow th. The addition of stable manure is the
best way of increasing the humus content, and this needs to be supplemented
hv 1 to 2 cwt. of superphosphate to supply the phosphoric acid in which
stable manure is deficient. A top-dressing of 1, to | cwt. of nitrate of soda
about six weeks after planting will hasten the growth, especially where
nitrogen is deficient in the soil.
Sweet corn should not be planted too early, as the seed rots more quickly in
cold soil than field maize, and the young plants are also more sensitive to the
cold. In order to have sweet corn duiing the whole of the season, successive
plantings should be made about every three weeks. At least two (better
three) rows should be sown at one time, as with single rows the cobs are not
properly filled with grain, the result of poor fertilisation at flowering time.
It is best to sow the corn in “ hills ” 3 feet or 3| feet apart each way ; and
better results will always be obtained by sowing about six grains per hill and
thinning out to two or three plants per hill when they have attained a height
of 6or 8 inches. In this way the strongest-looking plants can he left in
each hill and the weakest removed. In the Sydney district, planting can
commence towards the end of September and continue until-February.
The cultivator should be kept going between the rows to conserve the
moisture in the soil, but this cultivation should never be deeper than
3 inches, especially when the plants are well up, otherwise a lot of valuable,
feeding roots will be destroyed.
The usual practice is to remove the suckers, but this should not be done
too early. It is better left until after flowering has finished.
The correct stage to harvest is only recognised after some practice. If
pulled too young and before being fully developed the quality is poor, and
two or three days after the proper stage readily permits the corn to become
too hard and without flavour. The proper stage is when the grains are in
full milk and just about to turn to dough. Outside indications are when
the ear is plump, the silk changing from brown to black in colour, and the
tassel brown or changing from brown to white.
As sweet corn rapidly loses its flavour after picking, especially in hot
weather, it is advisable to leave the harvesting until as late as possible before
marketing, cooking or canning, for a few hours makes an appreciable
difference in the quality.
As a rule, the late varieties, like Stowell’s Evergreen, Country Gentleman,
and White Evergreen give the largest and the greatest percentage of market
able ears, but some of the early varieties like Golden Bantam and White
Corn are suitable for the home garden on account of their excellent flavour.
A fair yield is frem 300 to 500 dozen marketable ears per acre, and the
market price is usually about 3s. per half bushel case or crate, which generally
holds just over two dozen cobs.
In saving seed the corn should be allowed to thoroughly ripen on the stalk*
and it should be husked and harvested from the stalk in the field on a warm,


dry day, as it moulds very easily.. The husked ears should be left in small
piles in the sun for an hour or so, and then hung in a well-ventilated barn to
cure thoroughly.
The ear-worm is the worst pest the grower of this crop has to contend
with, and no methods have been devised to deal with it on a large scale,
although in the home garden a lot of damage can be prevented by hand-
picking the grubs and destroying them.
Sweet corn may be eaten fresh or cooked in the ordinary manner as a
vegetable. One of the most appetising forms in which it can be served is by
boiling it on the cob with corned meat. If it is desired to remove the grain
from the cob, it should be given a preliminary boiling for ten or fifteen
minutes, then dipped suddenly into cold water, and the grain scraped from
the cob with a sharp knife. With the removal from the cob before proper
cooking, however, it appears that much of the flavour is lost.
There are many districts in this State that are too early to mature
ordinary maize where sweet corn can be successfully grown. It grows well
wherever field maize is grown, and is becoming more popular in the home
vegetable gardens in the cities.
Fungus Diseases of Maize.*
Ear-rot of Maize ( Diplodia ze<r, Schw., Lev.).
This fungus, producing “ Dry rot” or “ Ear-rot” of maize, was first found
producing its spores on the dead stalks, and was looked upon as a saprophyte,
but it is now well known upon the living corn cobs. The disease is a serious
one, and appears to be spreading.
The mycelium produced by the fungal threads is white in colour, and
much branched. The slender threads penetrate the young tissues of the
grains, cob, and husks. After the cob has become entirely involved, or the
growth of the parasite has been checked by the maturing of the corn, the
fungus enters upon its reproductive stage. The fructifications consist of
small black bodies (pycnidia), which develop in the husks, cobs, and more
rarely in the grains themselves. These pycnidia contain large numbers of
brown two-celled spores, and appear as minute black points slightly elevated
above the surface. They frequently become particularly well developed upon
the scales which surround the inner ends of the grains, and may be clearly
seen when the maize cob is broken across. On the husks they usually occu-
singly, but, on the cob, under favourable conditions, they may be grouped
together in masses. Diseased cobs, if left in the field under natural condi-
tions, may develop numerous pycnidia in the grains, giving them a black
appearance. The pycnidia vary somewhat in shape—usually they are round
to oval.
It is from the fungus when living upon dead tissue —the saprophytic stage- 5 -
that infection chiefly occurs, innumerable pycnidia crowded with spores
developing upon dead parts of the stem and cobs left in the field. The
spores, carried by the wind, lodge upon the developing cobs of the new crop,
and, if conditions are suitable, germinate and infect them. The conditions
most favourable to infection are a warm temperature and a certain amount
* G. P. Darnell-Smith, B.Sc., F.1.C., F.C.8., Biologist.


of moisture. The first of these conditions is usually present on the North
Coast, and the amount of moisture necessary must have a wide range,
as the rot has been prevalent in a dry as well as a wet season. Apparently,
therefore, the requisite conditions for the propagation of this disease may
be said to be always present there. The variations in its extent may be due
to the variability of the wind at the time when the cobs are in the moat
susceptible stage, to the amount of spores available from old crops, and to
the power of resistance of the variety of maize grown.
Treatment of the seed by “ pickling ” is of no avail as a preventive of
the disease. The source of infection must be attacked.
(а) Old stems, old leaves, and maize stubble must, if the cobs have been
found to be infected, be gathered and burnt. Ploughing-in does
not destroy the spores, and corn planted on the same land may be
infected the following year.
(б) Since “ dry rot ” is one of those diseases that cannot be carried by
the seed itself, it is of the utmost importance to secure seed free
from disease. As has been pointed out, infected cobs, if broken
sharply across, will disclose small black spots, particularly on the
scales at the base of the seed. The seed itself when removed from
a diseased cob is usually relatively light in weight, and is frequently
of a peculiar brownish hue.
(c) Rotation of crops is strongly recommended.
(d) Varieties of maize which are specially resistant to the disease are
not at the present time known, but possibly the most hopeful
method of combating disease lies in the selection of resistant
varieties.
American Maize Smut ( Ustilago zece , Beckm., Ung.).
This is not a common smut on maize in New South Wales. The first
specimen recorded was forwarded to the Department of Agriculture by Mr.
G. H. Johnston, of the Bathurst Experiment Farm, the variety of maize
infected being an American one, viz.. Funic’s Yellow Dent. One of the
specimens examined showed two large smut boils present on the stem just
above the ground level. On other specimens the boils were present in the
“ heads ” and tassels, and on the stem and leaf bases. Where the heads were
affected there was much greater swelling and destruction than in the case
of the ordinary “ Head Smut.”
The destruction of the smut boil or smut gall by cutting it out and
burning it is the method to be adopted in coping with this pest, as it
deprives the spores of the opportunity to infect other plants or other
parts of the same plant. Moisture is necessary for infection, and hence
damp weather is most favourable to the spread of the disease. Stevens
and Hall state that the only practical way of dealing with this smut is to
go through the maize-field at regular short intervals and cut out, collect,
and destrov the galls before they have a chance to liberate their spores. It
is unwdse to feed the diseased plants to stock, as many of the spores pass
through the animal uninjured, and are able to develop to a certain degree
in the manure, which may thus become a fresh centre of infection.
Head Smut Of Maize (Sorosporivm reilianum, Kuhn, McAlp.).
Until comparatively recently this was the only smut of maize known in
Australia. In districts where maize is largely grown it is spreading. It


attacks the cobs and tassels, and is usually confined to them, but, in
exceptional cases, a few patches of smut may appear on the upper leaves.
The smut is enclosed at first in a pinkish membrane, which soon ruptures
in order to allow the escape of the spores. It is distinguished from
American Corn Smut by not enlarging the ears and forming large smut
boils, by generally confining itself to the inflorescence, and not attacking
the leaves and stems, and by the spores being large and more finely spined.
Showing the effect of Smut infestation.
The mode of infection has not been determined. There is some evidence
that infection does not occur through the young seedling, as in the case of
bunt, but the fungus may be in the grain itself; hence, for sowing purposes,
it is necessary to obtain pure seed from uninfected areas.
Maize Rust (Puccinia niai/dis Bereng).
The genus Puccinia includes more than half of all the Australian rusts,
and is important, not only on account of its numbers, but from its appear-
ance on so many of our cultivated crops. It occurs on all the cereals and
many of the grasses, on celery, on chicory, and on fruit-trees, as the peach
and the plum. On maize three kinds of spores are produced—uredospores,
teleutospores, and mesospores.
The uredospore is primarily a spore for the rapid reproduction of the
species. As a rule it is produced in immense numbers; it is provided with
a thin wall, having projections of some sort to act as a holdfast, and it
generally infests the leaf or sheath, through which it breaks in longitudinal
fissures.


The teleulosporcs are generally formed towards the end of the active
vegetative period of the host plant, and are often called “ winter spores,” in
contrast with the uredo or “ summer spores.” They are specially adapted
and equipped for continuing the species over periods of drought, or damp,
or cold, or seasons of scarcity.
Mesospores simply represent imperfectly developed or abortive teleuto-
spores. They may. however, in certain cases, perform the function of a fully
developed teleutospore.
Formerly the rust occurring- upon sorghum was thought to be the same
as that occurring on maize, but the two are now regarded as distinct species.
The prevention of rust is to be sought by the selection and cultivation of
the most rust-resisting plants, and by the adoption of the best agricultural
methods, clean cultivation, Judicious rotation, and suitable manuring and
fallowing.
Maize Leaf Stripe (Hebaiathosporium turcicum Pass.).
This disease, which often injures maize, has been recorded from Southern
Europe, Australia, and the United States.
Small pale patches appear on the leaves, and continue to increase in size,
and run into each other, forming large patches, until finally the greater
portion of the leaf is covered, the mid-rib alone remaining rigid. The spots
finally change to a light brown, often surrounded by a lighter border, and at
this stage are more or less covered with a very delicate dusky mould. In
some eases the blotches become much elongated, and do not'run into each
other.
This is a difficult disease to check. Burning the stubble when practicable
after the corn has been harvested will, to a certain extent, prevent future
infection. Rotation of crops, however, is the most certain preventive.
Moulds.
Upon maize which has been allowed to become and to remain damp, various
moulds speedily develop, the most commonly found genera being Mucor,
Penicillium, Aspergillus, and Fusarium. All of these rapidly develop
innumerable spores, and they may give rise to disease in animals or birds in
two ways—either (a) by direct infection from spores, or (b) by setting up
disturbances of the digestive or nervous systems when eaten. Direct
infection from spores is not very common, but birds may become infected
by the spores of Aspergillus fumigatus, the symptoms being listlessness,
moping, and disinclination to follow the rest of the flock. When made to
run they soon become exhausted and fall, and have great difficulty in
breathing. There is great thirst and a diminution of appetite. The birds
become rapidly emaciated, comb and wattles become quite pale, and there is
intense diarrheea. Very little can bo done in the way of treatment in the
case of birds. To prevent the disease, do not feed mouldy grain.
It must bo admitted that experiments carried out by feeding animals
with mouldy maize have given contradictory results; nevertheless, there can
be little doubt that feeding mouldy maize may. and frequently does, give rise
to disturbances of the digestive or nervous system more or less serious in
their nature, and that mouldy maize ns feed for horses, cattle, or fowls is to
ho avoided.


Insect Pests of Maize.*
The commonest insect pests of maize are dealt with in other portions of
this Handbook, and for descriptions of them, together with suggestions as
to their control, the reader is referred to page 384 for white grubs, wire-
worms, and cutworms, and to page 388 for grasshoppers.
The Black Lamellicorn Beetle.
A thick-bodied black beetle, a little over i inch long (Pentodon australis),
has been recorded attacking seedling maize (seed and rootlets) in the soil,
and thus destroying a large percentage of the crop and necessitating re-
planting. It seems probable that the grass previously growing on the soil
may have been infested with this beetle, and when the ground was planted
with maize they turned their attention to the new crop. It has not since
appeared as a serious pest.
The Slender Black Corn Carab.
This little black, narrow-bodied species of the genus Clivina , upwards of
half an inch long, burrows through the soil, and eats into the recently
planted maize seed. When plentiful, a large percentage of the sown seed
is destroyed, the adult beetle eating out part or nearly all the kernel of the
seeds. It is suggested that the seed be dipped before planting in a repellent
mixture, such as thin tar, and then into lime-dust, with which a little Paris
green has been mixed. This method, which is also used for protecting seed
against wireworms, is recommended by Dr. H. P. Fernald, and it is found
not to affect the germinating qualities of the seed.
Grain Weevil.
The grain weevil (Calandra oryzoe) is a beetle. The Angoumois grain
moth —which destroys grain much as the weevil does —is sometimes con-
fused with it, but the moth grub is a tiny, six-legged caterpillar, whereas
the weevil grub is a short, fleshy, legless creature.
Briefly, the life-history of the grain weevil is as follows: —The female
beetle eats out a small portion of a grain and deposits an egg in the hole.
This may occur in the field, or in the harvested cobs, but more usually when
the grain is in the bags. From the egg hatches a tiny, legless grub, which
feeds inside the grain. When full-grown the grub transforms into a pupa,
from which stage it emerges as an adult beetle (male or female). From the
laying of the egg to the adult state occupies about six weeks in summer.
The adult stage is lengthy, and the beetle is destructive to the grain, as well
as being an egg-producer. In cool districts there are about three genera-
tions in a year; in warm districts, six or more broods. Usually only one
grub is developed in a wheat grain, but in maize three or four grubs may
develop in a grain. Cool conditions retard development. Our commonest
species, Calandra oryzce, is a tropical and sub-tropical insect, and cool dis-
tricts would be unfavourable to it; but C. granaria is equally common and
destructive elsewhere in cold countries, such as England, and may bo expec-
ted to flourish in the cooler districts of Hew South Wales. Fortunately,
* W. B. Gurney, Assistant Entomologist.


this European species lias been noted twice only in imported grain, so that
our predominant species is still C. oryzw. borne weevil-resistant types of
maize may yet be discovered, which would mean an immense annual saving
to our growers. Maize grown in such districts as Tumut and the Snowy
River has in many instances shown a considerable degree of immunity,
which, however, may be due not so much to any innate hardness or other
characteristics as to the fact that the grain is grown in a cool climate, and
is rarely infested at the time it is bagged, and therefore does not develop
weevil later.
Control. —For the destruction of weevil in grain, and also of Angoumois
moth, and other insect pests of grain, beans, peas, &c., the fumes of crude
commercial carbon bisulphide are best. Dr. Dwight Sanderson, quoting
from experiments by Hinds and Hunter, recommends that 5 lb. or more of
carbon bisulphide should be used to every 1,000 cubic feet, according to the
tightness of the bin or room. A very important consideration is the tem-
perature, Hinds and Hunter having demonstrated that by far the best
results are obtainable from the carbon bisulphide fumes when the tempera-
ture is over 70 degrees Fah. If applied at temperatures below 70 degrees
the results are relatively much poorer, and of doubtful efficiency. The
liquid is poured into saucers or pans or on to cotton waste placed on top of
the grain, or even directly on to the grain; the liquid quickly evaporates,
and the fumes being heavier than air sink and spread through the grain,
destroying moths, weevils, &c., and even the grubs wdthin the grains. The
grain is best fumigated in close-fitting bins, lidded, or else covered well
with blankets or tarpaulins and left exposed to the fumes for about tw r enty
to twenty-four hours. This treatment will not affect the grain either for
milling purposes or for seed, but grain for seed should not be left more than
thirty-six hours exposed to the fumes. The granaries should be kept clear
of loose grain accumulations, or the fumigated grain soon becomes
reinfested.
Caution. —Carbon bisulphide fumes breathed in small quantities are not
harmful; but to stay in strong fumes would be dangerous and eventually
fatal. The vapour is highly inflammable, but no trouble is experienced
provided that all fires in the immediate vicinity arc put out, and no lighted
match, pipe, cigarette, or other light is allowed near the bins or building
where fumigation Is being carried on.
Angoumois Moth ( Situlroya cerealella).
This is a common granary pest, which attacks wheat, oats, barley, rye,
maize, and sorghum. The moth grub is a minute whitish caterpillar, with a
brown head and eight pairs of legs and prolegs. It spins a trace of silk
webbing on and amongst the grains, which weevils never do. Generally
one, sometimes two, grubs may develop in a single grain of wheat; in a
grain of maize, one to four grubs may be found. The tiny grub feeds within
the grain and becomes full-grown in about three weeks’ time, when it eats
towards the surface, leaving a thin, circular lid; it then changes into a
chrysalis (pupa), and later into a moth, which pushes through the lid,
escapes, and either flies to the grain fields to lay eggs, or lays them on
stacked heads, or reinfests the stored grain. Again grubs appear and feed
in the grain; moths develop and lay eggs, and so the life cycle is repeated.
Maize is attacked when ripe in the field or when in store. As the female
moth lays some sixty to ninety eggs, the increase of the pest is enormous as
the warm season advances. The number of broods varies according to
climatic conditions —warm conditions being favourable for the pest. The


grubs may winter in the grain, the cold retarding development, and the
grubs not pupating till spring. The adult moth is a tiny yellowish moth,
with two pairs of pointed wings fringed with hairs, which much resembles
in size and appearance the tiny common clothes-moth.
The destruction of this pest can be accomplished in just the same way as
that of grain weevil.
SORGHUM*
Sorghum, from its adaptability to soil and climate and great productivity,
is an exceedingly valuable forage crop for the dairy-fanner, pig-raiser, and
sheep-owner in most parts of the State. It is inferior to maize where that
crop can be grown, but it will thrive on poorer soil, when mature will stand
more frost, and has greater resistance to drought. The last-named quality
points to its value in the drier districts of the State. Where irrigation
cannot be practised, no other crop is so fitted to supply green feed-for
breeding ewes during the lambing period as sorghum. The extension of
dairying into the drier districts also creates a demand for this drought-
resisting green fodder, which makes an excellent substitute for chaff and
other purchased feeding stuffs, as well as counteracting the tendency to
colic and other diseases prevalent when only dry feed is available.
In dairying districts, sorghum supplements maize by continuing the green
feeding into winter, and when mature stands more frost than maize, which
is cut off early. Sorghum retains its succulence, which makes it a valuable
crop for autumn and winter feeding.
It is particularly valuable to farmers in the wheat-belt in seasons when
the hay crops have failed for want of rain. Sorghum can then be sown
early in the summer, and will provide from 6 to 12 tons of greenstuff per
acre in a very few 7 months. The crop is a very hardy one, and once the
plants are above the surface it will wait long periods for rain. Where only
a small amount of chaff is available, horses can be kept in good condition
by giving them chaff for the midday meal and sorghum at night. They
become very fond of it on account of its sweetness, and will waste very
little, even when it is not chaffed. Wheat paddocks where the grain has
failed can usually be worked into the necessary fine condition for sowing
without much expense for cultivation.
The Soil.
Sorghum makes small demands upon the soil compared with maize, and
good crops are obtained where maize fails to thrive. It has a vigorous root
system, which enables it to exploit a considerable area of soil.
The most suitable soils are deep, sweet loams or alluvial soils, where heavy
yields are obtained. Little manuring is required on such soils, and expensive
tillage operations are unnecessary. But poor land, unsuitable for most
crops, can be made to give profitable crops of sorghum. It is extremely
hardy, and seems to have the power of drawing upon refractory soils for
its requirements.
Where both maize and sorghum can be grown, the poorer land may be
utilised for sorghum, and the more fertile areas for maize. A farmer should
draw up a plan of operations each year, so as to provide for a continuity of
green feed, and to get the best results it is necessary to know the peculiarities
of each crop.
* A. H. E. McDonald, Manager, Trangie Experiment Farm.


Sorghum has abundantly xnovcd its value for greenstuff on all soils of the
Hawkesbury sandstone scries and the Wianamatta shales of the county of
Cumberland, as well as in many of the granitic and basaltic soils of the
Coastal and Centra! Divisions of the State. It can also be recommended
for all soils too poor for best results with maize. It gives profitable results
on poor sandy country and on poor stiff clay soils.
Climate.
Frosts will kill sorghum if they occur whilst the crop is young; but the
range of varieties is so wide that it is only in the very coldest districts that
it cannot be grown. Broadly speaking, the higher the temperature the
greater its development. The optimum conditions are high temperature,
humid atmosphere, and abundance of moisture. A crop then sown can be
cut several times without re-sowing.
Sorghum—Early Amber Cane —at Hawkesbury Agricultural College.
It must not be assumed that plenteous rainfall is necessary; sorghum is
more drought-resistant than any other fodder so succulent. The young
plants require good conditions, but when established will pass through
extremely dry periods, lying dormant until rain comes, when they imme-
diately make vigorous growth. Maize under such conditions becomes
stunted, and fails to recover. Provided the seed germinates well, and the
plants get a good start, sorghum merely requires one or two good falls
during the growing period to cause a heavy growth.
Frost injures growing sorghum, but does not affect the mature growth as
much as it does maize. Further growth is prevented, but the leaves and
stems remain succulent for a month or more afterwurds. A common practice
on dairy farms is to sow maize at successive periods to provide feed until
May, -when frosts will cut it down. Sorghum planted about January will


continue the supply till the end of June. With good soil and favourable
climate, sorghum is frequently sown earlier and cut, so that a second
growth is available for winter feed. A continuous supply is thus available
until the autumn-sown cereals are available.
Preparation of the Soil.
With fertile soil and assured rainfall during the growing season, the more
expensive methods of cultivation required on poor soils or in dry climates
are unnecessary. But in all cases deep ploughing is advisable, to allow
the extensive roots to freely develop, and to assure the availability of soil
moisture which the luxuriant growth demands.
On the valuable coast lands, fallowing is only permissible under special
circumstances. Rotation and judicious manuring must be adopted to main-
tain fertility. Plough the land deeply immediately it is available, and work
it down well with heavy harrows. Allow it to lie idle until sowing time,
then cross-plough and sow at once. The cross-ploughing should only be
shallow, to avoid displacing the sweetened surface soil by the infertile sub-
soil. Deep ploughing at this stage would loosen the soil and tend to increase
the loss of moisture.
In normally dry districts different methods are required. Even in the
coast districts, which generally have good seasons, precautions against dry
weather are advisable when cows or sheep have to be fed. Timely working
of the land is essential, and fallowing, despite its drawbacks in the tem-
porary loss of the land, is recommended. In dry districts the rainfall
during the growing season must be augmented by conservation of previous
falls. This earlier moisture germinates the seed and starts the crop well,
which is nearly half the battle. Sowing can thus be done at the required
time, independently of the weather.
Commence three or four months before sowing, plough deeply and harrow
at once; or, if dry, immediately sufficient rain falls to soften the clods.
Harrow or cultivate at periods of about a month until just before sowing.
Shallow plough, and sow immediately. The harrowing is a matter of
extreme importance, as it keeps the surface loose and broken, and checks
evaporation.
On poor soils it is necessary to release the dormant plant-food. This will
be achieved by very much the same methods as required for conserving
moisture in dry districts, and the same practice should be followed. Green
manuring is particularly necessary to keep the land in good heart.
Manuring.
The application of farmyard manure or green manuring will supply
humus, keep the soil friable, and maintain its power of retaining moisture.
Where farmyard manure is not available, leguminous crops will supply
humus and increase the supply of nitrogen in the soil. Cowpeas, vetches, or
clover, according to suitability of soil and climate, may be grown, and should
be fed off and the residue ploughed under. This will wonderfully improve
the soil, and at the same time give a monetary return in milk, meat, or
wool.
Where farmyard manure is available, apply it broadcast at the rate of
10 tons per acre and lightly harrow it in.


Sorghum saccharatum.
Early Amber. Cane.
SOME LEADING VARIETIES OF SACCHARINGE SORGHUMS.
Planter’s Friend.


.Neither of those method* will alone maintain fertility ; artificial manure*
must make up the deficiency. If farmyard manure is applied, add f to 1 ewt.
superphosphate per acre. Where green manuring is practised, use the same
quantity of superphosphate plus I end, of potash.
A good complete manure, where green or farmyard manuring is not done,
consists of —
Superphosphate or hone-dust . . , . 1 ewt. per acre.
Sulphate of potash . . . . . . . . y ~
Dried blood . . . . . . . . . . f
On light sandy soils, add more potash and dried blood; mi good clay
soils, less potash is required. Superphosphate or other phosphatic manure
gives good results on any class of soil, and should not he omitted. On
some soils a mixture of equal parts bone and blood (RB.) and super-
phosphate at the rate of If to 2 ewt. per acre gives good results, but potash,
must be added to make a complete manure.
Artificial manures should always be sown by the fertiliser attachment'to
the drill. If the seed is sown by hand in drills, scatter the manure along the
drills first; if broadcasted, sow the manure the same way. Broadcasting-
manure, however, does not always place the fertiliser where the young plants
can immediately utilise it, and best results cannot be expected.
Sowing.
Various methods of sowing are practised according to climate. Where
the rainfall is good, broadcasting makes the stems grow finer and easier to
cut, and little trouble is experienced from weeds. But should dry weather
occur, broadcast crops cannot be cultivated —a very serious disadvantage.
The best results are obtained by drilling. Cultivation can then be given
between the rows whilst the crop is growing, which checks the evaporation
of moisture, and this often makes the difference between success and failure.
Drilling, moreover, ensures even germination by placing the seed in moist
soil. In one experiment at Hawkesbury Agricultural College, broadcasted
seed entirely failed to germinate on a dry surface, whilst drilled seed on the
same block germinated perfectly.
In drilling, the seed may bo sown on the flat, or a furrow 4 inches deep
may be opened out and the seed sown at the bottom with a corn-dropper,
fitted with seed plates of the proper size. The furrow is made with a plough
fitted with a mouldboard to throw a furrow to each side, or with an ordinary
plough with a fairly long, low mouldboard. This method is best where the
surface is dry and the lower ground moist.
Seed is sown on the flat with a corn-dropper or wheat drill, with some of
the holes closed to place the rows 3 feet apart.
In drilling, 4 to 5 lb. of seed per acre is sufficient to give the plants fine
stems. In broadcasting, 15 to 20 lb. of seed per aero is required.
Varieties.
The sorghum family is divided into three distinct groups:—
1. The sweet, or saccharine group;
2. The non-saccharine group, which contain no sweet juice, but have
pithy stems;
3. The broom-corn group, with long branching heads, only valuable for
broom-making, which is referred to elsewhere.


ii.) Xneekurim: I'aneliee.
Custom entitles these to the name of sorghum, and generally they are best
for forage purposes. Typical examples are Early Amber Cam- and Planter’s
Friend. They are distinctly sweet, have long fine -ti-m-, and dernier iea'-vs
sot wide apart. The seed head has
rather open panicles, but in some
varieties it becomes compact when
the grain matures. The seed itself
is usually smaller than that of the
second group. These varieties are
more affected by drought than the
second group, but nut so much as
maize. Where they can be grown
they give more valuable fodder,
relished by stock.
Mazzagua is a variety of sweet
sorghum from which much was ex-
pected at one time, but trials at
Grafton Experiment Earm and on
the Mim-umbiilgee Irrigation Areas
have shown that it has little to
recommend it. It is slow in matur-
ing, and requires a moist season or
frequent irrigation. The yields are
fairly heavy, but the fodder is coarse
and requires to be chaffed ; the other
sweet varieties of sorghum are easier
to grow and, on the whole, more
palatable to stock.
(2.) ]fuu-sacoharine Varieties.
These include Kafir Corn, the
Dhouras, Jerusalem Corn, ami
Milo Maize. They are generally
known as “ Kafir Corn,” but really
comprise two classes Kafir Corn,
with erect, rather long, slender
heads and rounded seeds ; and
Dhouras, with compact, short, droop-
ing heads and flattened seeds. A
Kafir Corn (non-saccharine).
heavier yield of seed is obtained than with the saccharine varieties. In
Egypt and South Africa the seed is ground and made into porridge lot
human consumption. Yields of 30 to 50 bushels per acre arc fairly
common.
These varieties are very drought-resistant, and thrive where the sweet
sorghums fail. The stems are pithy and unpalatable, but the leaves are
large, broad, and in some cases set so closely as to hide the stems. They are
succulent and heavy, and relished by stock. The sparsely-leaved varieties
should not be grown.
Kafir Corn is highly esteemed in Kansas, where the conditions are some-
what similar to those of the drier parts of our State.
Most of these varieties mature in about three months. They should he
cut and used immediately they come into head, or the sterns will become
hard and indigestible. Some varieties tiller prolific-ally.


Seed of the Kafir group is sometimes sold as Planter's Friend. The
difference is slight, but the expert eye can usually detect it.
Climate and period required for feeding determine the best varieties to
grow. In most farming districts sweet sorghums can be grown successfully,
but in the very dry areas Kafir Corn gives best results. Of the varieties
readily obtainable, Early Amber Cane, Planter’s Friend, and Sorghum *
saccharatum are the most valuable of the sorghums; and White Kafir Corn
in the non-saccharine group.
Cultivation.
The young plants appear in from five days to a fortnight. They are
tender, and cultivation must be carefully done to prevent ill-treatment. A
very narrow-toothed cultivator is best, as it will not smother the young
plants with soil.
After a fortnight or three weeks the plants become hardy, and grow
rapidly. Cultivation must then be consistently carried out, until the
flowering stage is almost reached, to conserve moisture and destroy weeds.
It is usually required about once a month. If a crust forms on the soil,
as it does after rain, loss of moisture by evaporation will be rapid unless
the crust is broken by cultivation. Cultivate after every shower.
Weeds exhaust the soil moisture and rob the ground of fertility. The
best time to destroy them is when they have just germinated. Timely
cultivation disturbs them in their beds and destroys them, and they do not
get a foothold.
On small areas the one-horse cultivators are quite satisfactory, but on
large areas a two-horse implement is more economical. It straddles the
rows, and can be used until the plants are 3 or 4 feet high, after which
cultivation is rarely needed, as the plants protect the soil. If it is required
then, a single-horse implement must be used.
Many of the sorghum roots are near the surface, and in order that these
should not be damaged the cultivation should be shallow. Generally 3 inches
is deep enough. It is important to carry out cultivation from the com-
mencement of growth. This encourages deep rooting, and no injury is done
by the implements. If no cultivation is given for a couple of months, the
roots will have formed in the surface soil, and the cultivator tines will sever
them. Under these conditions cultivation is much worse than leaving the
plants alone.
Harvesting.
The crop should not be harvested until the seed has formed in the head
and has reached the milky stage. At this period the greatest yield is
obtained, and the food is most palatable and digestible. Sweet sorghums
remain succulent after this, but Kafir Corn rapidly deteriorates. Hence it
is particularly necessary to make successive sowings of Kafir Corn to get a
continuance of palatable and digestible feed.
Broadcast crops are best cut with a good strong mower. When grown in
rows, the mowing machine is not effective, owing to the closeness of the
plants.
A sickle is frequently used, but entails much labour. Small hoes with
short handles are more effective, the plants being severed with one hand and
caught in the hollow of the other arm.
A very useful and inexpensive implement for cutting maize or sorghum
can be made by attaching a scythe blade to a small sledge. This is drawn
by a horse close to the row. It will be found illustrated in Section XII,
“ Silos and Silage.”


The maize harvester cuts and binds the crop, and is a splendid machine
for handling maize or sorghum grown in rows, provided the plants are not
too short.
Feeding Value.
Sorghum is chiefly valuable for green feed when other crops cannot be
grown. It is not equal to maize in nutritive value, and has no special
utility where that crop will grow; but on poor soils or in dry climates it
makes a good substitute, and it is also more resistant to frost.
Sorghum and maize contain about the same amounts of carbohydrates and
ether extract or fat, but maize is much richer in protein. A right propor-
tion of protein and carbohydrates is absolutely essential, and sorghum should
be fed with foods rich in protein, such as lucerne hay or bran.
The sweet sorghums are superior to Kafir Com as green feed, on account
of the palatable and digestible sugar juices which they contain. Palatability is
an essential feature in feeds, and sorghum possesses it in a remarkable degree.
Harvesting with the Maize Harvester.
Tlie yield of greenstuff varies, but under ordinary favourable conditions
it is about 15 tons per acre. With good soil and rainfall the crop is not as
heavy as maize, but under unfavourable conditions the yield is higher.
Sorghum Silage and Hay.
Sorghum is more difficult to cure into sweet silage than maize, owing to
its high content of saccharine juices, which are converted into acids during
fermentation. But when the crop is cut at the right stage, and precaution
taken to exclude air, very satisfactory silage results, and is readily eaten by
stock.
It makes excellent coarse hay, the fine-stemmed, sweet varieties being most
suitable. Surplus sorghum not required as green feed and insufficient for
silage can be effectively conserved as hay. In the drier regions of America
sorghum hay is extensively used for fattening steers. The practice of hay-
making would be more common here if farmers understood its value.
Cut the crop when the seed has formed, and after partially drying, gather
it into windrows or small cocks, and finally into bunches of about half a
ton. It may he allowed to remain in these till required for feeding, or put
into stacks. The stems will not shed water, and the stacks must be protected
from rain by thatching or other covering when built in the open.


Sorghum Poisoning.
Sudden deaths amongst cattle feeding upon sorghum have been fairly
common in Australia, and have also been reported from America and Egypt.
The suddenness of death after eating small quantities indicates that it is not
due to hoven. Investigation by the Scientific Department of the Imperial
Institute, amongst others, resulted in the discovery that the cases of poison-
ing were due to a substance which readily decomposed into prussic acid.
The poison exists in young plants, but not in old plants or in seed. It is
very volatile poison, which accounts for the suddenness of its action.
The poison lessens as the plants mature, and entirely disappears by the time
seed is formed.
Stock should not be allowed to eat young sorghum, especially 7 when wilted
through dry, hot weather. Stunted sorghum and immature frosted sorghum
are also dangerous. Mature sorghum may be fed with perfect safety. By
strictly observing these rules all risk of loss is absolutely avoided.
Sorghum under Irrigation at Murrumbidgee.
Spring sowing on the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas has invariably given
somewhat unsatisfactory returns, while midsummer sowing has given pay-
able results. This is accounted for by the prevalence during the summer
months of severe winds, dust storms, and extreme heat, which frequently
catch the spring-sown crop at tasselling and cobbing time, and which usually
are abating when the maize sown in midsummer reaches the critical stage
in its growth.
For success with spring growing, it is essential to have a soil that will
absorb and retain large quantities of water. Irrigation is necessary at
frequent intervals, depending on the general weather conditions. A posi-
tion sheltered from the westerly winds is also desirable.
Farmers’ experiment plots have shown that, if sovm in summer, sorghum
can be more or less successfully grown on the Areas, even in the driest
season, the stiff red-clay soils being least suitable. The best results have
been obtained from crops drilled about 2 feet apart, the land being more
quickly shaded, less cultivation and furrowing being necessary, and the
growth finer, more suitable for feed, and usually taller.
Grain Sorghums for Dry Districts.
For some years the Department has been conducting experiments -with
certain varieties of grain sorghums, with the object of ascertaining whether
they could be profitably 7 grown for grain in districts of low rainfall where
maize does not yield well. Though not yet conclusive enough to justify the
recommendation of certain varieties for specific purposes and districts, the
results have been encouraging and such as should lead farmers to watch
further trials with interest. Farmers have been somewhat prejudiced
against these sorghums in the past, being ignorant of the nutritive qualities
of the grains, but in reality 7 they are nearly 7 as nutritious as maize, and,
under dry conditions, arc much better croppers. Moreover, the fodder
remains green up to the time of harvesting the seed, and can be utilised
either as roughage for pigs or as ensilage for cattle. Under differing con-
ditions, White Kafir Corn, Standard Milo, Manchu Kaoliang, and Feterita
have all yielded well.


Sorghum and Artesian Irrigation.
Sorghum is one of the best summer forage crops for both the coastal and
drier districts of the State. During dry spells it displays greater recupera-
tive powers than maize, for even when badly wilted it will come back and
respond readily to any change of the weather. In this stunted condition,
however, it is sometimes unwholesome for stock, and should not be used
until mature.
Sorghum is peculiarly adapted for growth on clay soils, and being very
tolerant to alkali, grows particularly well on the black soil plains under
artesian irrigation. Under those conditions at Moree a crop of Amber
Cane sorghum produced over 20 tons per acre. The seed was sown at the
rate of 12 lb. per acre with the ordinary wheat drill, in rows 3 feet apart,
by blocking up the vents of the drill not required. The drilled crop was.
harrowed, and the soil occasionally cultivated between the drills.
The crop was chiefly utilised for feeding sheep, being cut and carted daily,
to them in the green matured state. The sheep had never seen sorghum
before, but after a few days they developed a great liking for it, and eagerly
followed the dray around the paddock. It was noticed that they first picked
out the seeds, then the leaves, and left the thick stalks ; but after a few
days they came back and ate the stalks. Towards the end of the feeding,
as the stalks became drier and tougher, a greater proportion was left on
the ground, and a great deal wasted. For this reason it is advisable to so
arrange the sowing at different periods that the crop can always be utilised
in the most succulent, yet matured, condition.
The green stalks were relished by all classes of stock, 'and also made
splendid silage when chaffed or stacked. The second growth was easily cut
and bound with the ordinary reaper and binder, and the sheaves of fine
stalks, when cured, made rough chaff, which was eaten by horses in
winter.
In regard to the crop referred to at Moree, it might be of interest to
record that 2-| acres of the irrigated Amber Cane sorghum fed an average
number of 201 sheep for three months (or 80 sheep per acre). This will give
some idea of the number of stock that could be fed from the crop in a
drought period where artesian water is available.
Other cases have been noted where the sheep were turned in to graze on
the crop. The sheep soon got into the knack of pulling down the stalks and
stripping the leaves, flower-heads, or seeds. When all the leaves were eaten
the stalks were attacked, and were then eaten right down to the ground level.
When one portion, say 5 acres, was eaten out, the movable fencing of
hessian or wire-netting was moved on to another portion, and the process
repeated. The Amber Cane sorghum, after being cut or fed off, was
irrigated, when a second, third, and even a fourth growth was obtained.
Cases have been noted of sorghum under these conditions having lived two
and three years. It is more profitable, however, to treat the crop as an
annual, and replough after second cutting.
It has sometimes been reported that ground that has produced a heavy
crop of sorghum under artesian water will not afterwards grow any other
crop. This, however, was not the case at Moree, for the same land that pro-
duced 20 tons of sorghum to the acre was afterwards sown with lucerne,
and produced several heavy cuttings during the succeeding three years.
On an irrigation area sorghum can be planted on the lower lying and
uneven or ungraded portions, where it will stand more extremes of wet and
dry conditions than any other farm crop.


MILLET.
There are many varieties of this group of forage plants, which belongs to
the same natural order as maize and grass, and is very closely allied to the
.sorghums.
It has been found of service to grow millet as a catch crop. The seed
will germinate and thrive well on land recently cropped with wheat, rye,
oats, or barley, or where a crop has failed, or between two crops. Millet
is a good crop after clover, soy-bean, or other legumes. It is further
known that it succeeds best on bare fallow. The cost of cultivation is low,
as little is needed once the crop is in. It is found good practice to feed off
the first crop with sheep, and allow the second to grow for hay. In any
ease, when fed or cut, the crop (i.e., the stubble) should be harrowed, to
Crop of White French Millet.
loosen the soil and conserve the moisture. By this means a good second
growth can be obtained. In many instances this is found to be heavier
than the first.
As an example of the value of millet as a catch crop, the following
experiment, carried out at Hawkesbury Agricultural College, affords a
good instance. A portion of a paddock was prepared and sown in the


autumn for a crop of turnips. One hundredweight each of bone-dust and
superphosphate was used as manure. Owing to the failure of the autumn
and winter rains the seed did not germinate, and it was decided to test the
White French millet on this land as an early summer crop. After cultivation
the seed was sown broadcast, 7 lb. to the acre. From the 6th September to
the 11th November, or sixty-five days, when the crop matured, there were
falls of rain making a total of 5 inches.
The land was poor sandy loam, and undrained. On 11th November the
crop ranged from 3 to 4 feet high. The well-laden seed panicles in their
green and succulent stage were very prolific, the broad, leafy foliage was at
its fullest development, and the sturdy and juicy stems contributed in no
small degree to build up a forage plant eminently suitable at that time of
the year for green forage, hay, or ensilage.
By a series of cuts it was estimated that the crop averaged 10 tons of
green forage per acre, and provided about 3 tons of coarse hay. It was
cut with the reaper and binder, and whilst it was realised that such a crop
would test the stability of the machine, yet, in the absence of special
machinery, it was the only means of rapidly harvesting it at the most
nutritious stage.
Varieties.
The various millets are recognised through the distinctive colour acquired
by the ripened seed, and are grouped as white, yellow, or red. They vary
considerably, even under those heads, and possess peculiarities in their
growth and colour of foliage. The standard variety for hay is Hungarian,
and up till lately it held first place also for green fodder. Lately, however,
it has been found that the Manchurian varieties yield heavier crops of
fodder and also mature earlier—a very important point, as millet is
generally used as a catch crop. Two Manchurian varieties, Hsiao-mi White
and Hsiao-mi Yellow, have been grown at Grafton Experiment Farm for
a number of years, and in the Manager’s opinion are the most valuable of
all the millets, yielding exceptionally heavy crops of both forage and seed.
In the year 1914 seed of both varieties was sown on 26th January, and at
the flowering stage, which was reached on 25th March, the estimated yield
was 10 tons of greenstuff per acre. Subsequently 41 bushels of seed per
acre were harvested from both varieties, but the Yellow generally gives
the largest yield of seed. Japanese and Pearl Millet are also valuable fodder
plants.
Soil.
The millets are very hardy. They require a medium quantity of moisture,
grow luxuriantly on a variety of soils, and endure drought remarkably
well. They do best in a mellow soil, rich in humus, but they thrive on a
great variety of soils, and loams with a medium admixture of clay and sand
answer well. It has to be remembered that this plant secures its nourish-
ment chiefly from the surface soil, and it is good farm practice to stimulate
that with readily assimilable fertilisers, or rotted farmyard manure, keeping
in view the need for the supply of nitrogen, phosphoric acid, and potash in
their most soluble forms. The fertilisers are best harrowed in, and the
farmyard manure applied before ploughing.


Owing to its sturdy habits millet lias always been found a splendid crop
to grow on foul land to get rid of the weeds.
When used as a catch crop, late in the season, it is surprising what hard-
ships the crop will endure, and the wealth of the yield. It will give good
returns on higher and drier soils than most grasses.
Sowing.
Considerable disagreement ex-
ists as to the quantity of seed to
be used per acre. This must be
estimated in keeping with the
character of the soil and other
local conditions, as well as the
purity of the seed. Sown
broadcast, 7 lb. to the acre is
usually sufficient, but there are
instances where it has been
found necessary to sow J 2 to
15 lb. to the acre.
Where the land is rich and
well cultivated considerably less
seed will suffice. Thin seeding,
however, often results in the
growth of coarsc-stalked plants,
and renders the crop unsuitable
for hay.
In sowing, it has always to be
remembered that millets are very
susceptible to low temperatures
and frosts. Where there is an
absence of fodder—such as in
periods of drought—it is best
to sow continuously every two
Stem of White French Millet.
or three weeks as long as there is warmth and moisture sufficient to germi-
nate and raise the crop, while avoiding the danger of early frosts.


Late Sowing.
it can be used for forage, hay, or ensilage with equally good results. It
may be sown to the end of January, and even later. Some advocate drill-
ing the seed as against the usual method used of broadcasting. It is
claimed that less seed need be used, and, further, that if the soil cakes, it
can be cultivated betiveen the rotvs to conserve moisture. If for grain pro-
duction or ensilage then drilling would be advantageous. More seed is
Hungarian Millet.
required on exhausted soil than on new or rich soils. In all instances
sowing should he carried out after rains, or when the soil is moist, in order
to give the crop a start.
Harvesting.
The farmer has to exercise keen judgment to decide the time at which the
crop is fit to cut for forage. This should be the stage at which it is richest
in nutrients, and most palatable and digestible. When cut too green millet
is laxative in its effect on stock. Further, it has to be cut before the seed


in the panicles commences to ripen. Strict attention must be paid to this.
When the majority of the seed-heads or panicles have formed in the green
pendulant stage, then have the whole crop properly cut. It is better to err
on the side of greenness. If too ripe there is a possibility of the food becom-
ing unpalatable. The green crop is heavily charged with moisture in both
stalks and foliage, and in consequence will take longer to cure than ordi-
nary oaten hay. It should be placed in cocks and allowed sufficient time to


thoroughly dry. If the crop be intended for ensilage, then it may stand a
little longer after heading out, but it must be cut prior to ripening. Unlike
other crops, no liberties can be taken at the time of cutting. When convert-
ing millet into ensilage it is advisable to add a quantity of clover, lucerne,
cowpea, or other legume, to increase the proportion of nitrogenous food.
Manchurian Millet (Hsiao-mi, White),
Grafton Experiment Farm.
Manchurian Millet (Hsiao-ml, Yellow),
Grafton Experiment Farm.
Fodder Value.
It is one of the most nutritious and attractive of the green fodders that
can he used for stock, in so far that it is available at a time when the spring
grasses have failed, and green fodders are scarce. It is essentially a
summer fodder.
In point of digestibility the millets are similar, owing to their compo-
sition being approximately alike. From a variety of analyses we conclude
that this class of fodder, either in green food, hay, or ensilage, is very useful
for dairy cattle, sheep, and young stock. As pasturage it has been found
to be excellent food for sheep and calves. The ripened seeds are being
largely used for pigs and fowls.


Effect upon Horses.
Considerable mistrust as to the wisdom of feeding with millet was aroused
by the outbreak of an ailment known as millet sickness amongst horses in
North Dakota. This was found to arise whore the animals wore fed exclu-
sively on millet hay, but insufficient grounds were forthcoming to condemn
it as a food. The adoption of a rational system of feeding, in which millet
hay formed only a portion of a ration, soon dispelled the cause of complaint.
On horses, when the fodder was cut too green, it acted as a laxative, and
when too ripe it over-stimulated the kidneys like a strong diuretic. It has
also been noted that if the crop is cut on the ripe side the seed awns become
harsh, and cause irritation.
It is, however, claimed by prominent stock-raisers and veterinarians, that
a judicious diet, in which millet hay forms a chief ingredient, restore*
healthy functions, and stimulates the vigorous maintenance of vital energy,
Filling the Silos at Hawkesbury Agricultural College.


SECTION VI.
Root Crops.
THE POTATO.*
Though largely grown in New South Wales, the potato as a crop has not
received the attention from farmers that is due to it, and for a number of
years this State has had to import largely from Tasmania and Victoria to
make up the deficiency in our production, the importations being almost
equal to the quantity grown within the boundaries of the State.
The oft-asked question, why potatoes from other States are worth so much
more than the local product, is best answered by visits to the wharves in
Sydney' harbour where the interstate supplies are unloaded, and to the
Eedfern railway yards where our local produce is sold. The interstate
potatoes are well graded, of good shape, free from dirt, and put up in new
bags, whereas the local tubers, in the majority of cases, are of all shapes
and sizes, and put up in second-hand bags which very often contain a large
percentage of dirt. A few of our local growers pay special attention
to their potatoes, with the result that their name is soon established, and
buyers can purchase with every confidence, and consequently pay higher
prices ; but the bulk of our produce is marketed in anything but an attrac-
tive manner.
Preparation of the Soil.
Although the potato as a pioneer crop may be sometimes relied upon to
yield good returns with little cultivation, it is usually found that the crop
requires the best of attention in every detail.
On the coastal areas the extensive culture of potatoes during the autumn
is not recommended, because the conditions favour Irish blight, and growers
should confine their attention during this period of the year to the prepara-
tion of the soil for the spring crop by planting a preparation crop. Mr.
A. H. Haywood, when Manager of Grafton Experiment Farm, advised
farmers to practise fallowing between their maize and potato crops, even
though the period was short. When maize is harvested in June the land
should be ploughed at once, the stalks being turned under and allowed to
decay, forming the humus that is so essential to fertility.
He found at Grafton that whenever the ploughing was left till imme-
diately prior to sowing the succeeding potato crop, there seemed to be more
trouble with insects as well as a reduced yield. “We never practise even
that short fallow of a couple of months,” said Mr. Haywood, “ without
getting better crops and greater freedom from insect pests.”
On the tablelands the preparation of the soil should be commenced during
the winter months. There are many advantages attached to early and
thorough working of the soil, some of them being direct and others indirect,
but all are quite important in relation to the final result.
* Condensed from Farmers’ Bulletin, No. 75, “ The Potato,” compiled by
A. J. Finn, Inspector of Agriculture.


The first direct advantage is the exposure of the soil for three or four
months to the sweetening influences of sun, air, and frost, and the second
the increased capacity of the soil for the absorption and retention of any
rain that may fall. If this early ploughing is followed with cultivation by
means of the spring-tooth cultivator, the effects are to preserve a surface
mulch which conserves moisture, and at the same time to bring sorrel (which
infests most of our potato soils) to the surface, so that the roots are exposed
to the sun.
The early ploughing should be at least 8 to 10 inches deep, in order to
ensure that when the seed is planted it will have a good depth of worked
soil beneath it. The practice of many farmers of ploughing only 4 inches
deep, and then putting the seed on the hard bottom, is the reason for many
of the yields that compare so unfavourably with those obtained where better
methods have been employed. Towards the end of the winter the land should
be cultivated with the spring-tooth cultivator, and this should be repeated
occasionally to conserve the moisture. If heavy rains have occurred during
the period of preparation, it will be necessary to plough the land again; hut
in this case a shallow working will be sufficient. The effect is to open up
and aerate the soil which has been hardened down by the rain, to give it a
better physical condition, and to turn under any weeds that have grown.
The aim in all operations should be to loosen the soil, as any rain which
falls after the potatoes are planted will soon compact the seed-bed.
As stated above, one of the greatest advantages of this early and deep
working is the absorption and retention of moisture.
The result of this treatment is that the soil is in such good condition when
sowing time arrives that it is unnecessary to wait for rain to plant the seed.
The farmer can start operations with the knowledge that he is sowing at the
right time, and that he can go through with the business to the finish without
delay.
Again, the grower can plant cut seed. It is well known that cut seed
cannot he planted in a dry seed-bed, for the simple reason that the seed dries
up and poor germination and a patchy crop results. If, however, prepara-
tions have been made in the way advised, there is ample moisture in the
soil, so that a big area can be sown with cut seed, no delay for rain being
necessary at any stage.
The same reserve of moisture has an important influence on fertilisers,
if they have been used. Soil moisture is essential for best results from
fertilisers. If the soil is dry at the time of planting, the young plant derives
no advantage at the start. It is true that wet weather at a later stage will
have an effect upon the fertilisers, and the crop will benefit to some extent
then, but one of the greatest advantages of these manures is the vigorous
start they may give when first the seed puts forth leaf and root. This is
lost if the land is dry at seeding time. Ensure moisture by early working
if you want to use fertilisers with confidence as to the results.
Besides the benefits which thus attach to early ploughing and working of
the soil, a large amount of plant-food is also released and made available
for the needs of the crop. Analysis has shown that the bulk of our soils
contain sufficient plant-food to produce potato crops for hundreds of years,
but the trouble is that this plant-food is not in an available form, and on
continuously cultivated soils it is only by a proper system of cultivation that
a sufficiency of plant-food is secured for the crop.


The main trouble with our potato soils is the lack of organic matter. In
new land there is always a good supply of humus, and the land when
broken up is in good physical condition, but after a few years of cultivation
all the organic matter becomes exhausted, and unless additional supplies
are returned to the soil, either in the form of farmyard or green manure,
the soil soon becomes compacted and consequently cannot produce a maxi-
mum crop.
The presence of humus in the soil improves its texture, lightening and
loosening it, and preventing the compaction of the surface, so that it is of
special value in the preparation of potato soils. The humus in the soil is the
ingredient which is most subject to alteration and destruction, and under
dry conditions it is more or less rapidly destroyed. As soon as it has lost its
moisture and become dry, it is rapidly burnt out by the combined action
of sun and air. As its presence is most essential where it is most liable to
destruction, the necessity for renewing it is apparent.
In order to maintain this supply of humus, the following rotation is
recommended
(1) Potatoes.
(2) Oats or wheat.
(3) Field peas or rape.
The cultivation of the potato crop prepares the soil for the cereal crop,
which in potato districts is usually oats for hay. After the hay crop is
harvested the land should be ploughed as soon as possible so as to participate
in the usual February rainfall, after which rape (February sowing) or field
peas (March sowing) should be planted. Of the two, field'peas are recom-
mended. These crops can be utilised as sheep-feed during the winter, but
they should not be completely eaten off, and care should be taken that
the soil is not trampled out of condition by grazing heavily during wet
weather. The crop residues should bo turned under during late winter, and
not later than August, the ploughing being fairly deep. The soil should
occasionally be harrowed to conserve moisture, and should be in a fit con-
dition for planting with potatoes during November.
Seasons of Growth.
For the purposes of this crop the State is divided into two sections as
regards season, viz., coastal and tableland, the time of planting varying in
different parts of the State, and growers must be guided largely by local
conditions.
In the warm coastal districts two crops of potatoes can be grown each
season. The first crop is planted in July or August, and is called the “ spring
crop”; the second, in January or February, is designated the “autumn
crop.”
The weather conditions generally prevailing throughout the growth of the
spring crop are such as to be unfavourable to the development of Irish
blight, and consequently damage is very rarely caused. This crop usually
meets with a big demand, owing to the market being bare, and it realises
high prices. The autumn crop meets with conditions favourable to the
rapid spread of the blight fungus, and in addition the tubers are marketed
at a time when potatoes from the tableland districts are available, and prices
are consequently low. The growing of the autumn crop on the coastal
area is only recommended on a small scale sufficient to meet local require-
ments.


■Where potatoes art grown for early market the aim is to plant as early
as possible—that is. as soon as danger from frosts is over —provided there
is an ample supply of moisture. -Nothing will be gained by planting in a
■ioil that is excessively cold and wet. Covering with litter, such as straw,
when the plants are breaking above ground, will often ward off the effects
of frost. The covering of the land with litter immediately after planting is
not recommended, as it reduces the soil temperature, and germination is
slower and sometimes hindered.
On the tablelands, potatoes are planted most extensively during October,
November, and early December —November being the month of heaviest
planting. During October planting is always associated with a certain
amount of risk, as the occurrence of frosts during early November is not
'uncommon. Although the haulms may be cut back by frosts, it is only very
heavy frosts which entirely destroy the crop. Usually with late frosts the
tops are at the most cut back to the surface of the soil, and fresh shoots are
produced from dormant buds lower down the stem.
Seed Potatoes.
On the quality of the sets planted much of the success of the potato crop
depends. When selecting seed the utmost care should be taken to see that
the variety is true to type and perfectly free from disease. Always make
A good whole Tuber Set,
about 3 oz. in weight.
it a point to obtain seed from a
reputable seed merchant or some
reliable grower. For main crops
one or two varieties of sorts that
have been tested, and are known to
do well in the particular district on
similar soil, should be selected.
In the tableland districts during
past years seed potatoes have been
picked in a haphazard manner, and
have generally consisted of the
grade between the “pig’’ and
marketable sizes ; in fact, anything
that was left at the end of the
season afterall marketable tubers had
been sold. With all other varieties
of crops the seed is carefully
selected from the best available,
and it is apparent that some
change should be made in the
selection of seed potatoes. If
growers object to planting largo
potatoes, a system such as the following could be adopted :
Each grower should select, when digging, the very best roots, and reserve
them for a special plot the following year. This plot would yield a con-
siderable quantity of potatoes, all of which could be used as seed the next
season. By this method a system of continual selection would be carried out,
and the progeny from run-out plants eliminated. Boots which offered
resistance to blight could also be selected, which would materially assist in
the production of a disease-resisting strain.


Over-developed Sprouts.
The sprouts shown in ’.he ntx: illustration are just at the proper sta-e for planting
f 1729G--Q
A good type of Tuber Seed; medium size.
The lir.es show the most economical way to cut for four sets.


There is considerable diversity of opinion as to whl h is the best size of
tuber to use as seed. Small potatoes can be divided into two classes —(1;
the late-formed tubers of a strong, robust plant; (2) the produce of a plant
of low vitality. The former would probably yield as well as its parent, but
the latter could only be expected to produce a crop of poor quality. When
small potatoes, selected from the pit, are used year after year, reduction in
yield must follow, since every year the produce of weakly plants would be on
the increase.
Experiments carried out by this Department with whole and cut seed
have not produced results more favourable to one than to the other. If
the season should be dry at planting time, it would be preferable to use
whole potatoes, as the cut seed would dry out considerably- before shooting,
and consequently would not be able to give the young plant the same start
Tuber cut for two sets.
in life as a whole tuber. When cutting is resorted to, it is advisable that
the planting should be done as soon as possible after cutting. The cut
surface may be hardened by sprinkling with ashes or slacked lime.
In cutting the seed, the sots should be made as even in size as possible,
with the least possible cut surface.
The practice of storing seed in largo pits without providing ventilation
has been the cause of a good deal of fermentation and consequent injury to
the germ, with the result that the eyes of such seed fail to develop or the
shoots are small and spindly, eventually dying off. In order to obtain seed
with strong vegetative power, it is essential that all heating and fermenta-
tion be avoided from the time the potatoes are taken out of the ground
until planted.
As the condition of the seed has a big influen , ’e upon the yield, the follow-
ing methods of treatment are recommended;—fl) Place the seed tubers in
shallow boxes or trays, and store in a well ventilated and lighted room.


The trays should be made with the ends higher than the sides; this will
admit light and allow of a proper ventilation, Ey this method it will be
found that the buds are short, dense, full of colour, and sturdy enough to
resist fairly rough handling. Potatoes stored in this manner are not so
liable to rot, and any diseased tubers can readily be removed, together with
any that have produced weak shoots. The chief advantages of this system
Tuber cut for three sets.
are that the sets produce fine, healthy plants, and are in readiness for an
early planting. As early crops are more likely to escape blight, this is in
itself a big advantage in its favour. (2) A modification of the above method,
which would involve less labour, would be to spread the seed as shallow as
possible on the floor of a shed; or (3) store in a rick made of saplings, the
floor of which should be about (i or 12 inches above the ground level. The
spaces between the saplings would allow plenty of ventilation.
For autumn planting on the coast only whole tubers should be used, as
under humid conditions cut seed is liable to rot.
The amount of seed required to plant an acre varies according to the
size of the seed and distance of planting, ranging from 7 cwt. to 13 cwt. per
acre.
Varieties.
The number of varieties grown in this State is large, but some of them
are not of first-rate value. The following are some of the best varieties
to grow, but while one potato may give a heavy crop or fine quality in one


place, it might be unprofitable, if not totally un-mituble, m another. Ooner-
ally speaking, the e jrly varieties do best or. the coast, whereas the late
varieties give the largest yields on the tablelands.
Early Varirtier. —
Bliss’s Triumph.—A good cropper, round in shape, and of a nice bright-
red colour: cooks well; eyes rather deep I very early; a great
favourite on the Rivers, where it is miscalled Ruby Red.
Satisfaction. —A red-skin variety of excellent shape, large and clean; in
fact, it is one of the host all-round potatoes. It seems to be
especially well suited for the North Coast districts.
Satisfaction
Brownell’s Beauty.
Early Rose. —A well-known variety, which has long been the standby
for early planting. The tubers are oblong; the skin smooth and
red in colour, with a slight tinge of salmon, and the flesh is white.
The tubers do not keep long, having a great tendency to sprout.
The true strain is now difficult to obtain.
Main, Crop Varieties. —
Brownell’s Beauty.—Without doubt our standard variety. There is
probably no better known red-skin variety, and certainly no potato
more largely grown. It gives splendid results in nearly every dis-
trict. It yields heavily, can always be depended upon, and i« one
of the finest table potatoes in cultivation.
Up-to-date.—Kidney shape, flatfish, white skin, very few eyes and heavy
cropper.
Carman No. I.—A white-skinned tuber of good appearance. It is a
good cropper, and well liked on the market, possessing first-rate
cooking qualities.


Manhattan. —A dark purple-skinned potato, genera IB monied, flash
white ami of good quality; one of the hardiest varieties; good
cropper in suitable districts, and keeps well. It is probably the
best cutting potato grown in the State. Its habit is to produce
nearly ail its crop in the form of marketable tubers.
Coronation. —This is a late maturing blue-skin variety, somewhat re-
sembling .Manhattan, but considerably later. It generally yield-,
very' even, clean-grown tubers of a good marketable size. This
variety appears synonymous with the Xew England Blue Skin, also,
called Russell’s Seedling and Guyra Blues. It is a heavy yielder.
and with Queen of the Valley has consistently occupied top place it.
variety trials on the farmers’ experiment plots.
Manhattan
Coronation.
Queen of the Valley.—This is a late maturing red-skin variety, and a
heavy yielder, producing’ a good average sample. It stood out as
the best blight-resistor in trials extending over the whole of the
potato-growing districts during the outbreak of Irish blight in this
State. The tubers somewhat resemble a rough Brownell’s Beauty
in appearance. It is a splendid table potato, boiling white and
floury, with a delicious flavour.
Surprise.—A late maturing variety, suited for the tableland districts.
The tubers are rounded in shape, light-pink in colour, with deeper
pink in the eyes. This variety is better known to our farmers
under the name of Freeman, but this is a misnomer, the original
Freeman being a white-skin. The tubers have a tendency to become
hollow, and the large potatoes do not keep very late into the season.
It is a splendid table variety, and the bulk of the tubers produced
are of a marketable size.


A number of oilier varictii-. including Marly id ani-tce. Sussex. Marly
Vermont ( until respect to which three the reports are encouraging). Hector.
Ac.piisition. Blue Imperial. Dalmeny Hero, Dalluaisie, Mactor. Lungwort by,
I.riusdown, .Mac. S.M, and Windsor Castle, arc being tested by the Depart-
ment to determine whether, under our conditions, they have any advantage
in cropping capacity or disease resistance.
Queen of the Valley
Surprise.
Planting and Cultivation.
The best depth to plant is 4 inches; it should not lie more than 5 inches.
The most common method of plant inn is hv dropping at every third or
fourth furrow during ploughing, according to the width of furrow cut
and class of plough used. The rows should not be less than 27 inches
apart, and a distance of d(l to 32 inches is preferred; on poorer soils this
should be Increased to 3 feet apart.
The dropping of the potatoes is done by hand, and the sets should be
placed on the ploughed side of the furrow, reducing the possibility of their
being damaged or knocked out of position by the furrow horse when being
covered. The tubers are dropped from 12 inches to IS inches apart, and for
the rank growers, like Magnum Eoniini. up to 20 and 24 inches apart.
On small areas the single furrow 7 is in general use, but on the larger
areas where the acreage under potatoes runs to or approaches three figures,
multiple ploughs are used. On these ploughs the dropping is made lighter
by having a box fastened on the plough to hold the seed, and a galvanized
iron pipe, into which a man or boy, sitting on the plough, can feed the
seed with his hands, the potatoes being dropped in the second furrow, and
covered by the third sod.
Another system is to open out furrows with the plough at the required
distance, covering the sets with plough or harrows. The drills should be
covered as soon as possible to prevent drying out.


Of recent years the Use ot planting machines lm.s been on the increase
.Some of the.se machines arc for use on multiple ploughs, being worked
by chain-drive from off the land wheel. Another class includes those of
American make, which are complete machines on their own wheels, and
fitted with fertiliser attachment. These machines open out the furrow
’plant the seed, and manure and cover in the one operation, and they tend,
too., toward better farming methods. The potatoes are planted in straight
rows, and the manure is placed in close proximity to the sets, even on wind.',
-days. Planting can he carried on in the hot weather with little loss of soil
moisture, as the necessity of ploughing at this time is dispensed with. For
these machines the land is prepared early in the year, being fallowed and
cultivated until planting time. Planting on these line- is the ideal method
if mechanical diggers are to be used for harvesting.
Soon after planting, the field should be lightly harrowed to break down
the furrow ridge, thereby reducing evaporation. Just as the young plants
are showing through, the field should he again harrowed, this being the last
opportunity of killing young weeds between the plants, as all future culti-
vation is between the roves. When the haulms have grown sufficiently to
distinguish the rows, the cultivator should lie used to loosen the soil, keep
■down weeds, and retain the earth mulch so essential in retaining moisture.
A cultivator of the Planet Jr. type is the most suitable, because when the
tops become at all large the width of the cultivator can be narrowed, so
that there is less damage to the haulms and the young roots in close
proximity to the stem. Cultivate frequently in the early stages of growth,
as the destruction of weeds at this time is easier, and means a clean crop
later on. Towards flowering time the rows should be slightly hilled t>
protect the tubers from sun-scald, frosts, and potato moth. The hilling
can be effected by using the moldboard attachment during the last working
with the cultivator.
Excessive hilling is not recommended, as it intensifies the injurious effects
■of dry weather, and also results in damage to the roots between the rows.
The now tubers always develop over the old set, and as they become large
may even he half out of the ground, and unless the crop has been hilled
the newly-formed tubers become exposed.
Hilling is also a preventive of rot during outbreaks of Irish blight, inas-
much as the greater thickness of earth over the tubers to a large extent
prevents the washing of the spores from off the foliage on to the tubers.
Potatoes under Irrigation.
Work the land well, and if it be dry, irrigate just before ploughing.
Plough deeply as soon as the land is dry enough, and plant immediately.
Keep the ground well harrowed until the young plants are well up. One
good irrigation (or at the most two) is all that is required for spring crops,
and these should he given before the young potatoes are any size, as later
watering will induce a second growth, which spoils the tubers.
The secret in potato-growing is good cultivation, combined with as little
water as is necessary to keep the plants in good growing condition.
The spring crop should be planted as soon as the severe frosts arc over,
which is usually from July to September, and the fall crop in February.
They should be planted in drills 3 feet apart, and when it is found necessary
to irrigate, furrows may be drawn midway between the rows and water


it lowed to run until the ground is well soaked. As belore staled, two water-
ings, with good cultivation, should be sufficient for any spring crop of
potatoes. The autumn crop will naturally require more waterings during
its earlier stages, as the ground at this time of the year is drier and the
neat more intense.
Tuber showing second growth.
Tubers such as this should not he used for seed, because they are never robust, and are a sure
sign of degeneration.
Second growth mostly occurs when rain follows a very dry period, and
it has been rather frequent of late years, owing to the lateness of the mon-
soonal rains. A similar condition often occurs when potatoes arc irrigated
after a dry spell.
Manuring.
The use of fertilisers by potato-growers should be common farm practice,
for their value has been proved.
Xitrogcn is the most expensive of artificial manures; hut, fortunately for
the farmer, it can be obtained from the air by the growth of leguminous
‘■rops, such as hold peas. These, when ploughed under, add to the soil
nitrogen at no other expense than that incurred for seed and labour. In
addition to the nitrogen supplied, a large amount of organic matter is added,
which has an important influence on the soil's fertility. When land is
cropipcd for a number of years, unless organic matter is added in some form,
its humus becomes exhausted, and a marked change takes place in its char-
acter. It loses its fine friable nature, and has not the same power of absorb-
ing and retaining moisture. In other words, it lias lost what is generally
known as “ condition.” The loss of retentive capacity is largely the cause of
the noticeably poorer yields obtained from some soils after several years’
working.
If farmyard manure is to be used, it should be partly fermented to destroy
weed seeds, and should be incorporated in the soil some time previous to the
planting of the crop.


The fertiliser mixture which has given heat returns on the farmers' expert*
incut plot* is u mixture, known in 1 >epartmental publication.- us ]>(-, mud t
ui> in the following proportions;
Superphosphate, It! cwt.
Sulphate of potash, 3 cwt.
Sulphate of ammonia, 4 cwt.
This mixture is applied at the rate of 3 cwt. per acre; but the references
in an earlier portion of this Handbook (page 1H) to the manuring of this
crop should also be perused.
When to Harvest.
The spring crop on the coast is grown for carliness, and the tubers are
harvested when considered largo enough to market. At this stage the haulms
are green, and the young tubers are very soft. Very often the potatoes could
be profitably left for another week or so, because being nearer maturity they
arrive in a much better condition on the market, and the additional weight,
even in this short time, is considerable. Some of the potatoes dug very
early present a very poor appearance on arrival at market; being devoid of
skin, they are much bruised and black in colour.
Other than the spring crop, the time to harvest is determined by the
dylng-off of the tops and the maturity of the tubers. If the tops have been
destroyed by frost, it will he necessary to allow the tubers to remain In the
ground until the skin is firm and docs not peel on handling.
Harvesting.
The most common method of harvesting is digging with the pronged
digging fork, hut digging machines have been increasingly popular in recent
years.
Digging machines are of two types—(a) English.— The principle is for a
share to pass under the row of potatoes, the earth and tubers being thrown
to one side by revolving arms at the back-, so that the tubers are left exposed.
One form of Potato Digger. Rear view, showing tubers leaving revolving apron and
falling on riddle.


ready for picking' up. The machines are light in draught, hut the large-
spread given the tubers is one of their worst faults. (I) American. —The
principle is for a share to pass under the rows, the tubers, together with the
earth, then being carried on to a revolving apron. This apron, which is of
cross bars, arranged up and down alternately, revolves rapidly, being given
a sifting action by elliptical sprockets. The earth passes through the bars
and falls back into the furrow already dug, the tubers passing over the back
and being deposited in a row on the loose earth recently dug.
The tuber- after digging tire treated in different ways, A large per-
cent-age of the growers have of recent years been sending their produce to
market straight from the paddock. In this case the largo potatoes are first
picked up and bagged and carted immediately to the station, the smaller
tubers being bagged separately and stored for future use for seed and pig-
feed. The crop is got out of the way in the quickest possible time in this
way, but if the soil is of a kind or in a condition to adhere to thd tubers it
will be found better business to store them for a while, and to pick them
over before selling. The improved sample will bring an enhanced price.
Storing.
The question of the treatment of seed tubers after digging has already
been discussed. With those intended for culinary purposes it must be
remembered that light causes a yellowing of the flesh, and produces bad
boiling qualities; consequently, when any method of storing is adopted, it is
necessary that the light should be excluded.
In order to prevent the spread of rot, the potatoes should be perfectly dry.
no matter which method of storage is adopted. Pitting is not recommended
where it can be possibly avoided.
It is preferable that the storing be carried out in sheds which are well
ventilated, the potatoes being covered with straw or hes.-iau to exclude light.
Where large areas are grown and pitting must be resorted to. a system of
ventilation should be provided by leaving opening- and filling them with
straw, covering in such a manner as to keep out the rain, and at the same
time to allow a free passage of air.
When dug, the potatoes should be left exposed to the sun for a little time
before bagging. Tills will allow them to dry thoroughly, and there will be
less adhering earth.
Preparing for Market.
Intimately bound up with the whole matter of profitable potato-raising is
the demand of the market. It is not sufficient alone to grow potatoes, but it
is equally necessary to send the product to market in a condition so as to
be most acceptable to the buyer. In these days of keen competition buyers
pick and choose to an extent not realised by one who has not witnessed the
disposal of goods put on the market. The most essential points are to
grade, classify, and bag in clean, new bags. In grading, all diseased, de-
formed, over-large and undersized tubers should be rejected from first grade.
Before bagging, care should be taken to remove all soil that might be
attached to the tubers, and the bags should be shaken down to ensure tight
packing, but not too tight, for either too loose or too tight packing results
in bruising, and decay follows. Second-band bags are frequently the


medium of currying discuses that attack the potato, and they should certainly
not bo used unless they are clean wheat or flour bags, or have been obtained
through agents who can offer some guarantee that they have been disinfected
by boiling or steaming at a sufficient temperature before despatch to th *
farm. Xcw hags may. perhap-. he a little more oxpensh ein the initial co-t.
but they well repay the extra outlay. Each grower should adopt a special
brand or mark, preferably a stencil plate, and use it on his first-grade pro-
duce. If he is marketing other grades he should use another brand, and
mark the laias seemid and third grade-.
Insect Pests of the Potato.
The potato is subject to many diseases, and, unfortunately', these appear
to he on the increase each year. iSearly all of them could he controlled, and
many eradicated, if the well-known preventives and remedies were applied.
It is seldom a farmer will be found making any attempt in this direction.
The probable reason is not that lie is careless, and neglects his crops as far
as cultivation is concerned, but rather that ho is ignorant of the trouble, and
is at a loss to know what to <l.* and what remedies to apply to prevent or
exterminate them; or if he does know, he does not believe that the results
•obtained would pay fur the trouble involved.
Potato Moth (L it a Kolanel/a ). v
This pest is more or less in evidence in every potato-growing district
throughout the State, and the loss caused by it annually is enormous. The
injury produced by the worm is extremely evident to the housekeeper, os
much of the infected tuber is cut to waste, and is well known to all dealers
in potatoes, but very generally they' do not understand the nature of the
insect producing the trouble. The injury done to the plant in the field is
considerable, but not so great as that to the potatoes in store.
Potatoes left in the field after the previous season's harvesting provide the
main harbour, and moths bred from these are on the wing and ready to
infect the growing crop. The moths usually lay their eggs in the foliage,
generally at the base of a leaf; the larva, when hatched, burrows its way down
the stalk, and when full grown seeks a secluded spot, generally in the wilted
tops, and there pupates. If any tubers are not completely covered with soil
they will be infested. Potatoes are liable to infestation whether left in
the field or placed in store after being dug.
The injury' to the tuber is very similar to that done to the plant. The eye
of the potato is usually the spot selected by the moth to lay its eggs. The
larva, when hatched, channels its way through just beneath the skin, or
through the substance of the tuber. Its presence can usually be detected by
the castings or excrement which it throws out. Several larva; have beer,
found in the one tuber.
In suggesting remedies to control this pest, it is as well to point out ti.at
unless every grower does his part thoroughly and well no diminution need
he expected; it will be of no avail for one grow'er to use every means to
fight it if his careless and negligent neighbour does nothing but harbour the
pest.
* E. D. Butler.


The biitile should begin wiu-ji cultivating. Where hilling is the practice
it should bo done with care, -o that all tubers should be well covered with
well-pulverised soil, and no cloth should be permitted, as they form crevices
bur the moth to make its way in and do its word of destruction. Where-Hat
cultivation is practised, plant deeply and keep the soil well stirred. When
the potatoes tire dug they should be bagged without delay; if they are
i xposcd even for a, short while- infestation is almost sure to follow, it will
be particularly noticeable in a season when showers are frequent that the
percentage- of infected tubers when dug is considerably smaller than in a
•omparatively dry one. Tins is mainly owing to tin, rain breaking down
nil.- i-lud, and compacting the soil, etfecrually closing any crevices, thus
preventing the moth from gaining an entrance to the tubers.
-Many growers, after filling the bags, and before sewing them up, cover
the mouth of the bag with stalks and leaves, probably to shade them from
the sun. This practice cannot be too strongly condemned, as the moth is
generally lurking in the haulms, and will immediately leave them.to attack
the potatoes. All stalks and foliage should he removed and effectually
destroyed as soon ns possible. The bags should be sewn up immediately
after filling and removed without delay to suitable storage. If it is not
convenient to remove them for some time they should he placed in stacks
and closely covered with some cloth or tarpaulin. Extreme care and watch-
fulness all along the line are necessary, particularly in storage. The
majority of growers think that there the tubers are immune from attack.
Ear from it; more damage is done while in store than elsewhere. But if
suitable storage is provided, the ravages of the moth can he better controlled
than in the field.
Frequently potatoes are stacked in the open shed on the farm, and no pre-
cautions taken in the way of securely covering them. To prevent infestation
they should be stacked in a tight room. On top of the stack place a shallow
vessel, and into this pour some bi-sulphide of carbon, and close the door
tightly. This liquid becomes a gas when exposed to the air, and being-
heavier than air the fumes diffuse among the potatoes and destroy any moths
and larvae This should ho repeated every ten to fourteen days, in order to
kill any larva; or moths that might emerge from the egg stage. Four or five
charges should he sufficient. About 5 lb. of liquid bi-sulphide of
carbon to every 1,000 cubic feet of space should be used. As the gas is
highly inflammable, the greatest care should he exercised. Tfo lights of any
hind should be near, or disastrous results will follow.
Of course it is recognised that many growers may not, perhaps, be in a
position to provide themselves with a suitably-closed room, but every effort
should he made to do so. and to adopt the treatment recommended. It will
be found that the potatoes, being free from infestation, will realise better-
prices. and the trouble and expense will lie warranted. In the absence of
such a store-room, the potatoes should he drawn into a heap, a saucer
containing carbon hi-sulphidc placed on top. and the whole covered closely
with a cloth.
Covering with grass from some place remote from the potato crop, or hay,
and occasionally sprinkling with water, is a primitive method, hut is found
to keep the attack in check.
The moth may also he captured by use of lantern traps. The traps may
be placed on stakes driven into the ground, about 100 feet apart, a lantern
being placed in the middle of a wide, shallow dish, containing water and a
little kerosene. This method might he suitable on small areas, hut its
use would hardly he warranted on large ones.


THE POTATO
MOTH.
A—A potato showing
traces of moth in-
festation on one
side.
B1 The larva.
The lines Indicate the
natural size.
B2-The adult Po-
tato Moth.
C—The same potato
cut open, showing
how the larva; affect
the flesh.


Rutherglen Bug XifSIUS vee / /eC ; '
Till* little, plant-hug is a tiny brown in.-cct with siivery-grey wings, and
measures about one-sixth of an inch in length. They suck up the sap with
their beaks, and, where numerous, .-ooii cause the plants to shrivel. Iney
appear in summer from eggs that have been deposited on the grass and
weeds by the autumn brood of the previous season, and are particularly fond
Rutherglen Bug (Nysivs vinilor), a pest of grain crops, vegetables, and fruit trees.
of potato and tomato plants, though they infest many other plants and
trees. They fly very well, and in the warmer part of the day are very
active, and for this reason are difficult to destroy by a. contact spray used when
they are active; and, again, those that do not rise on the wing frequently
are sheltering on the under surfaces of the foliage, and thus escape the
spray. The best method to rid the plants is to use a shallow dish or iron
tray containing a mixture of water and kerosene, and draw this along
between the plants, someone following behind, and, with an old broom or
piece of brush, beating the foliage on either side as the tray of oil passes.
If this is done in the early morning or in the dusk, thousands of the bug.->
are brushed in or fall into the oil and are destroyed. A sheet or strip of
* W. B. (turnej-, Assistant Entomologist, Department of Agriculture.


canvas can be drawn along, and the inactive bugs -iiuilurly collected, and
then the sheet and bugs dipped into oil. It is generally necessary to
repeat this operatSen several mornings running, or while the bugs still
appear.
Eelworms or Gallworms.
These are minute curved worms which live in the tissue, and are generally
so small as only to !«• distinguished by the aid of a lens or microscope. They
sometimes infest potato plants, and. when numerous, the growth of the
Potatoes infested with Eelworms.
plants is affected, and shrinking and crumpling of the leaves occur, while
poor or small tubers, or even none, are developed. On the surface of
infested tubers numerous nodules or flat blister-like excrescences are to be
seen; these excrescences of infested tissue do not necessarily extend deep
into the potato, but the market value of the produce is reduced, and care
should he taken never to use even the most slightly affected ones for seed,
or the soil, the resultant plants, and the adjacent plants, are likely to
become infested with this pest.
* Reference to this pest is also made in connection with Root Knot or Root Gall
few pages further on.


A’e/a caries and l J rari>nl.ion.~ De-rr.y oil inflated plant' and those unmij-
cliatcJy adjacent, apply lime to the whole patch of soil where infestation was
found, and leave fallow for a season or replant with some dissimilar crop,
such as wheat or barley, which i.„ not attacked by the parasite.
Fungus Diseases.*
Late Blight, or “Irish Blight.”
The potato is liable to be affected with many different fungus diseases, but
the most widespread and destructive one of all is “ Late Blight.” No
fungus disease of any other plant has caused so much human suffering and
so much monetary loss. If weather conditions are favourable for its develop-
ment, Late Blight may rapidly spread through a whole country, devastating
the potato crop. All countries have had epidemics at some time or another,
and the serious nature of this disease is seen from the losses that have been
recorded ; e.g., in New York State, in 1904, the loss was £2,000,000; in Wis-
consin, £1,000,000; Ohio, in one year, £400,000; New Zealand, 1905, £200,000.
There w r ere epidemics in parts of India in 1900 and 1912 ; and for the whole of
the United States of America it is estimated the annual loss due to Late
Blight is over £7,000,000. From 1840 to 1845 the disease spread over Western
Europe, and in 1845 in Ireland a widespread outbreak caused an almost total
failure of the crop, thus bringing about a terrible famine. From that time it
has been customary for us to call the disease “ Irish Blight.” In New South
Wales we had the most serious epidemic, commencing about the middle of
1909, and during 1910 it was widespread over all the potato-growing areas.
It was also severe in all the other States, where it had been reported in all of
them (except West Australia) one or two months before New South Wales.
Owing to the dry conditions prevailing in Australia for the past few years we
have not suffered much from blight; but with the return of more favourable
seasons we should be prepared for fresh outbreaks. It will be readily
understood that such a widespread disease, whose ravages result in
such loss, would engage the attention of numerous investigators all over the
world, with a result that further advances have been made in our knowledge
of the life history of the fungus, the principal methods of infection, the
persistence of the fungus in the tubers or the soil, and the best means of
controlling the disease.
Several other diseases resemble Late Blight in the effects on the leaves, and
others in the condition produced in the tubers. Hence there has been some
confusion among growers in discussions on potato diseases, and it is clear
that Late Blight is not readily recognised, and its undoubted presence is
sometimes denied.
The disease is caused by a fungus known as Phylophlhora infeslans (Mon-
tague) De Bary It is a native of South America, growing on the wild
potato in Chile and Peru— the original home of our cultivated potato. The
fungus is an active parasite, and can attack all parts of the plant—leaves,
stem, and tubers. As a rule it does not attack the loaves until after the
blossoming period, hence the name Late Blight.
* G. P. Darncll-Smitli, B.Sc., F.1.C., F.C.8., Biologist; and E. Mackinnon, B.Sc.
Assistant Biologist.


It should be distinguished from Early Blight, due to Altermriu tolani. which
appears as dark, irregular spots on the leaves usually marked by
concentric rings. These spots appear earlier in the season and more par-
ticularly in drier weather. The leaves mav curl up and become brown, and
often the spots fall out.
Another leaf condition that may be confused with Late Blight is “ Tip
Burn,” in which the leaves also turn brown and curl up. beginning at the tips
and margins.
Leaves affected with Late Blight usually become yellowish-green and
develop characteristic irregular dark areas. These frequently appear
near the margins and tips and take on a water-soaked, muddy-brown
appearance. If the weather remains damp the diseased areas
rapidly enlarge and blacken. The leaves become wilted and soon rot,
emitting a strong odour. On the under surface, within the advancing
edge of the patch, a delicate whitish mould or downy mildew may be
seen, especially if the leaf is held in a very slanting position. The destruction
spreads to the whole leaf and then to the stem. Finally the whole plant
wilts and becomes a crumpled, rotten black mass. The appearance is some-
what like that resulting from a very severe frost. If a dry spell or a succes-
sion of drying winds should occur after infection, the brown patches may
become brittle, crack, and dry up. This condition may mislead the grower,
as the appearance is like that caused by Early Blight and Tip Burn. Very
often the first signs of infection may be seen in the lower leaves on plants,
here and there. Although the disease usually becomes serious after the
flowering stage, plants may be attacked at any stage of growth. From the
time of infection of a healthy leaf until outward visible signs of disease
uppear a period of only five days is necessary, when the new generation of
spores produced will be capable of infecting neighbouring plants.
With favourable weather conditions an infected leaf may be killed in a
day, so that all plants near the original source of infection may be killed
within a week. The area of infection continually spreads anc) a field may be
largely infected before the attack is noticed. The fungus may be spreading
through many plants for days, living within the tissues without apparent
injury to its host, and then suddenly assume a devastating virulence, a
condition chiefly controlled by the weather, but also having some relation to
the food supply afforded by the host plant.
Before the rapid killing of the potato plant takes place the fungus grows
in the form of fine filaments or hyphse, which thread their way chiefly
between the cells, pressing closely against the walls, but frequently pushing
them in and sometimes penetrating them. It has been shown also that thov
may send special absorbing organs (haustoria) or short branches into the
cells. These enable the fungus to absorb its nourishment more readily from
the cell contents, and are known to occur in any parts —the stems, leaves, or
tubers, though not constantly.
The fungus may thus be said to pass through an incubation period, after
which it prepares for reproducing itself. Through the openings (stomata) in
the leaves on the under surface, it sends out branching filaments, called
conidiophorcs or spore bearers (Fig. 1), on the ends of which its spores or
conidia are produced. A conidium is formed first at the end of a branch,
but later becomes pushed aside and remains for a time attached by a slender
stalk, while the branch grows on and produces a second conidium (Fig. 2).
This process continues many times, a new conidium being for’ 1 id at die c-.ij,




and a swelling marking the place where each previous one has been borne.
Those branching threads and their spores form the downy mildew, best seen
near the advancing edge of the brown spots of the leaves. The production
and further development of these couidia depend, as alreadv indicated, on
weather conditions. It has been proved by much experimental culture work—■
(1) That the best growth of the fungus takes place between the tempera-
tures of 60 and 70 degrees Pah.
(2) That above the temperature of 77 degrees Fah. no conidia are formed,
but the mycelium continues to grow.
(3) That above a temperature of 88 degrees Fah. no further growth of
mycelium takes place.
(1) That conidia also readily germinate between the temperatures of 50
and 77 degrees Fah.
Sections of Potatoes.
Showing progressive stages of destruction by Late or Irish Blight {Phyiophlhora infestans).


Thus it is scpii that great heat is not necessary: in fact the cooler tempera-
tures are better if the supply of moisture is adequate. In many of our potato
districts about the tune of diguing the tubers the temperature at night is
quite suitable for the promotion of an active growth of the fungus, so that,
with a few cloudy or wet days, there will be a continuous period of active
growth of the fungus, finally resulting in a destructive epidemic. Should the
weather become dry the conidia will soon perish and the development of the
fungus and the spreading of the disease will be cheeked. It will thus be
understood why some growers attribute the disease to the weather alone, and
do not recognise the fungus as the cause, and so fail to take satisfactory
measures to prevent the outbreak of Late Blight.
The conidia are the agents for the produc'd ion of two important results ;
(1) Rapidly spreading the disease through a standing crop by infecting
the leaves of healthy plants.
(2) Infecting the tubers and thus providing the means of propagating
the fungus through its mycelium (collection of threads or hyplue in
the tissues), which assumes a dormant condition in the tuber.
(1) A conidium alighting on a healthy leaf, will, if weather conditions
continue favourable, soon bring about infection. The contents may become
divided up into a number (usually five to eight, but varying from three to thirty)
of irregular masses of protoplasm, which soon escape from the enclosing wall
of the conidium (Fig. 3). They become provided with two hairs or cilia, by means
of which they swim about actively in the small drops of dew or rain collected
on the leaves. These shapeless specks of protoplasm, living like minute
animals, are called zoospores. They soon come to rest, lose their cilia, and
become rounded in form, with a more definite envelope. They next push out
a tube, which as it grows may become septate, or divided by cross walls, and
branched. This germ tube may either enter the leaf through one of the
breathing pores or stomata, or pierce the epidermis and grow into the tissues
below. The fungus soon spreads its hyphte through the tissues and finally
reaches the reproductive stage again, producing new conidia, which com-
mence the life cycle afresh. Linder less favourable conditions the conidium
itself sends out a germ tube instead of producing zoospores, and thus directly
infects the leaf. Temperature has a certain influence on these results. At
50-66 degrees Fah. about two-thirds of the germinations are by zoospores,
while at 77 degrees Fah. about half are by zoospores and half by germ tubes
direct. The whole course of this development may be very short. Conidia
have been observed to produce zoospores, the zoospores grow germ tubes,
and the epidermis of the leaf to be pierced all within a period of three hours.
(2) Many conidia will fall to the ground and others will be washed down by
dew and rain. These may reach the tubers in the ground and produce infec-
tion. This raises the question as to the best time to dig, when a field becomes
badly blighted. If the tubers are dug while the ground is covered with dis-
eased tops, immediately after their collapse, there is danger of exposing many
to infection from contact with the diseased plants, whereas if left in the ground
for some days there is the other possibility of infection by the spores -washed
down through the soil. It is also known that the mycelium may pass down
the stem, and cause infection through the underground parts. Experiments
have proved that there is less loss if the digging is delayed a week or more
after the death of the tops, except in very -wet weather and on low heavy
soils, m which cases early digging becomes essential.


Fig. l.—Diagrammatic representation of a square cut from a potato leaf infected with
Phytopkthora infestans.
The branching conidiophores are shown emerging through the stomata on the
under-surface of the leaf, and bearing many conidia.
The other structures shown are two kinds of plant hairs (a) Long-pointed hairs,
and (6) Short hairs with knob ends.
(Redrawn after Bureau of Plant Industry Bui. 245.)
Late Blight of Potato, commonly known as “Irish Blight.”


Infected tubers may show little or no change. Typically there are dark-
coloured areas on the surface, which become more or less sunken and crumpled
and easily stripped of peel. If the skin is removed from these areas brown
patches or streaks are to be found just beneath, extending varying distances
into the flesh. As the disease advances these brown patches extend further-
inwards, and finally the potato shrivels and dries. This condition has given
rise to the name of Brown Rust. More frequently, however, the diseased parts
become softened and emit a peculiar foetid odour, or rapidly become a foul
smelling, soft, rotting mass. This condition is brought about by the entrance
of bacteria, which set up putrefaction. A sound potato infected with blight
alone will become brown and dry up. The soft rotten condition is the more
usual, as potatoes are very often dug just after an attack, during damp
weather. Without being cleaned or dried they are put into bags, and may
remain in them for days during transportation. They are thus exposed, in
the first instance, to every chance of infection, if not already infected, and
then placed under conditions most favourable for the attack to spread. The
bacteria follow in the wake of the fungus and complete the destruction, with
the result that the potatoes often reach market in a soft rotten condition —a
dead loss or even an expense to the grower. Unless the foul smelling rot is
present some people think the disease is not due to blight, while many
growers attribute the wet rot condition to weather alone. While the presence
of the fungus in the tubers may produce such changes, there may be, on the
other hand, no visible indications of its presence. The mycelium may pass
into a resting or dormant condition, and only resume its activity when the
tuber is planted. This is the most important way in w 7 hich the fungus is
perpetuated and a new crop is infected. It is by this dormant mycelium
that the disease has been spread all over the world.
When an infected tuber is planted the fungus may grow into the shoots
produced, finally developing its spores which commence the infection of the
new crop. Haulms and potatoes from i i preceding diseased crop, if left in
the field, may also cause infection. The fungus may also spread from tuber
to tuber in the soil, more particularly when the soil remains wet.
Control.
The methods to be adopted for the control of this disease may be referred
to under the following headings ;
(1) The use of blight-free seed.
(2) The treatment of the previous crop and its remains.
(3) Spraying.
(I) The use of resistant varieties.
(1) The use of blight-free Seed. —As the mycelium may be dormant in the
tuber, and often show no outward signs of its presence, no seed should on any
account be used from a crop that is known to have been diseased. Seed
should be obtained from a place known to have been free from blight for
some years. Any seed showing traces of “Brown Rust” should be picked
out and destroyed by boiling or burning. Often the grower saves his
own seed, after sending the best to market. It would pay him to keep the
best for his own sowing, remembering that “ the best is never too good.”
(2) If the previous crop was potatoes which were blighted the infected
field should be carefully cleaned. Parts of the plants, small or rotten pota-
toes left in the ground, and the soil are all dangerous, owing to contamination


with mycelium or spores. All remains should be carefully collected and
burnt on the spot. Tbe practice of ploughing in potato haulms is liable to
produce greater loss through disease than any increase in yield from the
manurial value. It must be re-
membered also that infection
may be carried to other parts by
the implements of the workmen.
Where it can be arranged it is
very advantageous to grow some
other crop for the next season
or two.
(3) Spraying. —There is now
abundant proof that spraying
has proved an almost complete
remedy for Late Blight. It
will not do to wait until
plants show signs of disease.
Spraying should commence
early, and every care should
Fig. 2. —Sketch showing the successive development of
conidia at the end of a conidiophore. (After Ward.)
be taken to thoroughly .spray both the lower and upper surfaces of
the leaves as well as the stems and the soil. It has been proved that
spraying the soil prevents tuber infection by the spores that are washed
down through the soil. Spraying must be repeated often enough to keep the
whole plant covered with the fungicide, and to protect newly-formed foliage.
It is not to be looked upon as a cure for blight, as once a-plant is attacked it
is hopeless, and should be dug out and burnt Several sprayings should be
Fig. 3. —The formation of zoospores from the contents of the conidium (top row), and the
progressive development from the zoospore with two cilia (bottom row, left end) to
the spore with Its branching germ tube (bottom row, right figure). (After Ward.)
given in February and March to protect the plants from infection induced
by the active growth of blight owing to the summer rains. Either Bordeaux
mixture containing 6 lb. copper sulphate, 4 lb. quicklime, in 50 gallons of
water, is recommended for the spray, or Burgundy mixture containing 8 lb.
copper sulphate, 10 lb. washing soda, in 40 gallons. In experiments conducted
jH Ireland the latter has proved the better spray.


(Q liettMant VariHi**. —In countries where the disease has existed fer
many years it has been found that some varieties are much less liable to
attack than others, and it should always be the aim of the grower to secure,
if possible, a disease-resisting strain. It has to be remembered, however,
that a variety that is resistant in one place may not prove so under different
environmental conditions. A new variety called Xew Era has been grown
for several years in New Zealand, and has so far yielded excellent results,
both as to blight resistance and yield. This variety was raised from a single
plant that remained unaffected in a Held that was entirely devastated by
blight. Much work of a similar nature is being done in Xew South Wa! m
with our most resistant varieties, such as Queen of the Valiev I but so far no
variety has yet been produced that is totally immune to attack.
Bordeaux Mixture.
For this best known of all fungicides the formula recommended for use
in connection with potatoes is as follows
Copper Sulphate (Bluestone) ... ... Gib.
Lime ... ... ... ... ... 1 lb.
Water ... ... ... ... ... 50 gallons.
Two or three fairly large wooden vessels are required to make the mixture.
If, for instance, it is intended to make 50 gallons of spray, two tubs or
barrels capable of holding 25 to 30 gallons of water are nbeded and one of
a capacity' of 60 gallons.
For the copper solution, wooden vessels are preferable, though copper ones
may he used. Iron should bo avoided. For the lime, use wooden tubs or
barrels.
Samples of bluestone sometimes come on the market which contain a
•quantity' of sulphate of iron, and it is as well that the fanner should
know the difference. Bluestone proper should be in the form of dark-blue
crystals, while the adulterated mixture is a lighter blue ; indeed, the charac-
teristic colour of sulphate of iron is a light green. The bluestone may be
tested by dissolving a few crystals in water and adding a little ammonia, A
pale blue precipitate is formed which dissolves to an intense blue colour, and
the solution remains perfectly clear and free from sediment if allowed to stand
for a while. If a reddish sediment settles, it is due to the presence of iron.
It is of importance that the lime should be freshly burnt. To test whether
it is so, a few lumps should be placed in a heap and sprinkled with wan n
If freshly burnt, these will gradually fall to pieces, becoming very hot in the
process, giving off a quantity of steam, and crumbling to a fine, white powd-r.
If it does not get hot enough to give off steam it has not been freshly burnt.
The first operation in making Bordeaux mixture is to dissolve the copper
sulphate and to make the milk of lime separately'. Jt is for this that the
smaller vessels are required.
It is a common practice is to crush the bluestone crystals and then to
pour boiling water over the powder. To dissoh'R the 6 lb. recommended in
the above formula, 2 gallons of hot water should he sufficient When it is
seen that the bluestone is dissolved, cold water should be added to bring up
the quantity to half the total quantity of spray to be made. That is to say,
if 2 gallons have been uted to dissolve the 6 lb. of copper sulphate, then


gallons will lave T “ oe added mi as In bring the water up to lb gallons,
which is half the total quantity to he made. Fanners often omit this hist
point, simply obtaining the solutions and mixing them before adding the
requisite quantity of water : but the practise has a distinct effect upon the
quality of the spray mixture, lowering its etficienev am! increasing the
probabilities of the nozzles becoming clogged.
It is not essential to dissohe tiie blues tone in hot water. Half the water
(that is -o gallons if oU gallons are being made) can he put in the cask,
and the bluestone suspended in a porous sack, as near the surface as possible.
If thrown loose into the bottom of a tub of eold water bluestone will not
ilns'iii'H in a week.
1 he lime, which as stated aoove should be freshly burnt, is slaked by the
addition of about half a gallon of warm water. Sutiicient water must be
a:-cd to ensure the whole of the lime being slaked, and it should be added
from time to time in small quantities, to keep) the action even ami ensure
perfect slaking. It is a common mistake to add too little water at this
stage, with the result that too much heat is developed and the lime is
burned, in which ease there are many meal! lumps that do not slake down
properly, and they have to be thrown out in the straining to prevent the
nozzle becoming clogged.
The lime being reduced to a fine powder, water is added to produce a thin
whitewash, and the whole should then lie strained through coarse sacking to
remove any lumps that may cause trouble in the nozzle. Enough water is
then added to bring the quantity of milk of lime up to half the total quantity
of Bordeaux mixture that is to be made. In other words, just as the copper
sulphate solution was brought up to 2b gallons, so the necessary waiter is
added to the lime wash to bring it up to 2b gallons.
Ihe bluestone, solution and the milk of lime are now read} r to be brought
together. This must be done in such a way as to ensure their being thoroughly
mixed. Pouring one into the other is not satisfaetorv. They should both
be poured at the same time into the large vessel mentioned above. The
operation can be best performed by two men, each with a bucket, one
handling the bluestone solution and (lie other the milk of lime, and both
pouring in together and stirring frequently.
The object of Bordeaux mixture is to apply copper sulphate to the potato
’plants so that it may attack fungi (hat happen to be growing thereon ; but
it also attacks the plant tissue, and the lime is added to neutralise it, and
prevent harm being done. The proportions mentioned in the above formula
supply ample lime to more than neutralise all the copper sulphate, provided
that the lime is pure, that it is freshly burnt, and that it is all made into
milk of lime. It not infrequently happens that one of these three conditions
is not complied with, and sometimes not more than half the quantity of lime
recommended actually becomes combined with the copper sulphate. * In such
cases there will he free copper sulphate in the spray, and it will then be liable
to injure the crop. It is desirable, tlnrefore, to know’ whether the copper
sulphate has been completely neutralised,
A rough but useful test consists in placing a clean knife blade in the
mixture tor a few minutes. If copper sulphate that has not been neutralised
is present, a reddish stain will be left on the steel, and it will be necessary
to add more milk of lime, and then test again. Should there be no mark on


the bla.de mis rime it may ire considered that the copper sulphate is
neutralised, though it will be as well to add a little more milk of lime to make
quite sure-.
If, however, the proportions recommended above-, and the methods of
handling described are carefully followed, there should be no reason to fear
the burning that free copper sulphate causes.
The copper sulphate solution and the milk of lime may be made and kept
separately for some time, but once they are mixed they should be applied
immediately.
.Sulphate of copper is a poison, and the crystals and solution should be
handled accordingly.
Burgundy Mixture.
In this mixture copper sulphate is again the most important constituent,
but its corrosive action upon the plants is prevented by the use of common
washing soda as the neutraliser instead of lime.
It often happens that it is difficult to obtain freshly burnt lime' for
Bordeaux mixture, and the washing soda may then he used to produce
Burgundy mixture. According to the Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland, Burgundy aim has certain direct
advantages over the better known mixture ; the spray mixture adheres
longer to the foliage, it is more easily prepared, and the nozzles are less
likely to bi-eome clogged.
The formula recommended is as follows :
Copper Sulphate (Bluestone) ... ... bib.
Common washing soda ... ... ... 10 Ib.
Water ... ... ... ... ... 10 gallons. .
The copper sulphate is dissolved in the same wav as -in the case of
Bordeaux mixture, but the Irish Department recommends that the bulk of
the water .should be used for this purpose when making Burgundy mixture.
If 40 gallons of spray is being made, 35 gallons of water should be poured
into a clean barrel and the bluestone suspended in it in a bag.
The balance of the water should be put in another vessel and the washing
soda dissolved in it in the same way.
When both the materials are fully dissolved, the s'da solution should be
poured slowly into the bluestone water, stirring continuously. The blue-
stone solution should never be poured into the soda solution.
Even when the above conditions are accurately carried out the mixture
may not give the best results, owing to differences in the strength of the
sulphate of copper and of the washing soda. Those who wish to get the best
results should dip a piece of blue litmus paper in the prepared mixture. If
the paper becomes red, more washing soda should be dissolved and added in
small quantities at a time to the preparation, and with continuous stirring,
until a fresh piece of paper dipped in the mixture remains blue. One
pennyworth of litmus paper, which may be obtained from any chemist, is
sufficient for a large number of tests.
There is no harm in dissolving the sulphate of copper and washing
soda in separate vessels, and holding the solutions over for several days,
but once the solutions are mixed together the mixture should be applied
immediately. If held over even for a day it deteriorates rapidly, and is then
■much more readily washed off the plants by rain.


Effective in every .stage of the opera Ton i-, essential ( > -ucce-w.
•Sulphate of copper Is poisonous, therefore the vessels in which sulphate of
copper mixtures have been prepared should not after wards he used to hold
food or water for consumption.
Leaf Spot, or Early Blight.
The cause of this disease is a fungus, Alt'-maria solani (or Macrosporium
folani), which is capable of living as a saprophyte (that is, upon dead
organic matter) in the soil, or as a parasite, attacking the living potato
riant. Apparently as a saprophyte the iungus exists in the soil, perhaps
quiescent enough during the winter, but developing with the warmer weather
up to the point of producing spores which the wind or other means of trans-
port may carry into potato plants. Here the spores germinate, forming the
usual filaments or hyphtc which penetrate the openings (stomata) in the
-kin (epidermis) of the leaves, and extend within them between and
through the tissue cells. In this way the fungus conies to permeate the
leaves and stem, hut it does not invade the tubers, which are affected by the
disease only in a secondary way owing to destruction of the above-ground
foliage. In course of time the fungus produces spores, which are borne on
hyphfe pushed out from the leaf. They continue to be formed on old dead
pieces of potato plants in which the fungus may remain actively living
owing to its saprophytic capabilities, hieing dropped upon the soil, or
reaching it with bits of decayed plant, the fungus passes there its winter
period of rest, to rouse itself and form spores against next season as already
mentioned. Since the tubers are exempt from attack the fungus is not
carried in them; the danger as far as they are concerned is the possibility
of spores being transported in the soil or dust which clings to them.
As one of the names signifies, the disease may appear early in the season
upon quite young' plants, hut is apt to become more common and destructive
as the season advances. Tho plants are said to be liable at the blossoming
period, when approaching their natural loss of vigour; quite healthy strong
plants possess considerable resistance. When attacked the leaves first show
small more or less circular brownish patches which slowly enlarge and join
together and cover the greater part of the leaf, tho affected tissue becoming
brown, withered, and brittle. The surface of these areas is marked with
tine wrinkles which form imperfect rings lying one inside the other like
markings on a target. The diseased leaves curl up, especially at the tips and
margins; the affected parts lose their healthy green colour and become
sickly-loohing and yellow. The stems may remain free, and stand defoli-
ated after the destruction of the leaves; but it is said they may be attacked
first, the disease working upwards from near the ground. Whichever be the
first point of attack, the end is usually the death of the whole plant. The
tubers show no sign of disease, but will only be in such a state of maturity
as they may have reached when the foliage perished, since at that period the
food material supplied to them by the leaves is cut off, and they cannot
further grow. Thus, whilst the disease itself docs not attack them, their
incomplete development spoils them for market and exposes them to rot
from other causes.
The preventive measures consist of the avoidance of infected ground and
of seed from infected or suspicious sources; and spraying with Bordeaux
mixture before the disease is prevalent. The chance of cleaning the soil
demands that it be kept free from potatoes for several years.


Dry Rot.
A very common form oi’ disease is the dry, whitish. crumbling e.jik Litioii
of tubers. If such tubers are kept dry they mostly shrink up and become
hard, whereas if kept at all moist, or stored in a damp place, they soon
become covered with an abundant white, felt-like growth of fungus threads.
Investigations have proved that this dry rot can be produced by many
species of Fusanmu. some of which are true parasites and ran entirely
destroy the tubers, while others are saprophytes which cannot lay them-
selves destroy the tubers, but only assist in the destruction after the tubers
are attacked by other fungi and bacteria. The species causing dry rot are
not the same in ail countries, and although some occur in both Europe ami
the United States of America, others are confined to one or other of thorn
areas. The potato (plant and tubers) is the host for about thirty different
forms of Fumrium, at least twenty being distinct species. While some are
confined to the tubers, others occur in the stem parts. One species.
F. orimporum, is a very serious pest of the plant in ITS. A. It is typical!,'
found in the vascular system, clogging up the conducting vessels, and
producing’ a wilting of tin- plant. It does not cause any dry rot of the tuber,
but sometimes makes its way into the stein end of the tuber, where it may
live through the winter. In this way it may be introduced into Australia.
At present it is apparently confined to the United States. Time "Eusariun.
wilt ’' is not known to occur in the British Isles or the continent of Europe.
Its presence in the tuber is indicated on cutting across the stem end, by a
dark ring a short distance below the surface. But "wilt'' or "blight’' or
the- growing plant and '‘stem-end ring" discoloration must lie distin-
guished from dry rot of the tuber. This brown ring may he produced by
many of the other species of Fusarhnu that cause dry rot, and is
often one of tin 1 symptoms of the presence in the vascular ring
of many species of Fusai iam. It has been found that even when
the brown ring is visible, it may not be caused by a fungus, so that this
condition cannot be looked upon as absolute evidence of any fungus disease.
The ring may not always be present, as the fungi may gain entrance through
wounds. One specie's that enters this way is F. solani (Sace.). which has
been confused with F. oryxporum, but although common in Europe and
America, it is a saprophyte only, and not the common cause of dry rot in
either continent. Previously, all records in Australia have attributed dry
rot to F. solani, or to F. oxysporum, which has been regarded as the same
organism. Our species cannot be definitely stated until investigations by
standard methods now adopted in Europe and America are completed here.
In all probability it will bo found that true F. oxysporum (Schlecht) docs
not occur in Australia. As to those causing dry rot and brown ring, their
further spread and injury should be prevented by careful selection of the
seed. Where there is any suspicion that the seed may be diseased, it would
be advisable to cut all tubers, and any showing brown ring should be rejec-
ted, and so also should those showing any signs of surface rotting. As the
fungi can live for some time in the soil, badly infected areas should have a
rotation of crops.
Bacterial Diseases.
The potato is known to be the host for many species of bacteria, both
parasitic and saprophytic. Of the parasites only two need he referred to
here, as thev cause the diseases known as Brown Pot and Black Leg.


Brown Rot. —The cause of this disease is Bacterium solanacearum (Erwin
Smith), which attacks potato, tomato, tobacco, and egg plants. The struc-
ture of the bacterium is very simple, consisting of minute red-shaped
bodies, with rounded ends. Each little rod is a complete individual, which
multiplies by dividing into two. This process of multiplication may take
place under the most favourable conditions with some bacteria every half-
hour. It is the collective result due to such extraordinarily rapid increase
that soon brings about great changes in the host. In the plant the bacteria
fill the sap channels (vascular system), and cause the plant to wilt. On
cutting across an infected branch, brown discolorations are seen, and the
bacteria may ooze out as a dirty white slimy mass from the cut surface.
As the infection spreads, the stem turns prematurely yellow, shrivels, and
wilts, or it may wilt suddenly without loss of green colour, and the whole
plant may soon collapse. The bacteria pass up and down the stems con-
siderably in advance of the shrivelling, and the accompanying brown stain
Brown Rot, or Bacteriall Rot.
can often be seen through the younger and more translucent stems and
petioles, as long brown streaks, although the surfaces of these parts still
appear to be normal. The roots, as well as the stems, are subject to attack.
In the tuber itself, infection first shows as a browning of the vascular ring
at the stem end, and on cutting across, the dirty greyish bacterial slime
may ooze out. Infection may take place in twm ways: (1) If slightly
infected potatoes are used for seed (the disease will not be noticed unless
the tubers are cut), the bacteria are able to spread to the growing plant;
(2) leaf-eating insects feeding on diseased plants can transmit the disease
from plant to plant. Thus, the chief means of control are careful selection
of seed, and spraying to keep down insects. The disease has been very rare
in New South Wales; in fact, its actual existence here is questioned. No
satisfactory bacteriological proof, with isolated pure cultures and inocula-
tions, have yet shown the undoubted presence of the disease. Isolations of
bacteria have been made from some suspiciously affected plants, but suffi-
cient proof has not yet been obtained in New South Wales. It apparently


occurs in Queensland, Victoria, and New Zealand, but reliable bacterio-
logical proof is still wanted. There is, however, always the possibility of
its introduction, and we would strongly advise growers to submit ample
specimens to the Department whenever any suspicious symptoms occur, and
to carefully dig up and burn any other plants, never digging in or burying
any diseased plants of any kind.
Blade Leg. —This disease, also called Black Stalk Eot, has been met with
once in New South Wales, and it also occurs in Victoria. The cause of a
similar disease has been investigated in several countries, and each investi-
gation has given a different name to the organism causing it; e.g., Ireland,
Pethybridge, Bacillus melanogen.es-, Canada, Harrison, B. solanisaprus ;
Germany, Appel, B. phytophthorus. The bacillus causes the seed tuber to
rot early, sometimes before the sprouts break through the ground. The rot
spreads up the base of the stem, which turns quite black, shrinks, and rots
as far as the surface of the soil, and often above it. This is the best indica-
tion of the disease. As a result of this injury, the whole plant begins to die,
generally without setting any tubers. Wet and cold weather apparently
favours the disease. Other plants such as turnips, swedes, carrots, and
parsnips are also attacked. As it is practically confined to the underground
parts, the disease may be greatly controlled by carefully digging out and
burning all diseased plants. Selection of seed and dipping in formalin or
corrosive sublimate also assist in preventing its introduction.
Brown Fleck.
This is a fairly common condition. Tubers that to all external appear-
ances are healthy and sound, when cut open show rusty markings of various
sizes and shapes. These discoloured areas consist of dead tissue, and must
not be confounded with blight. In the latter ease, the diseased parts are,
at least at first, immediately beneath the skin, whereas in Brown Fleck the
markings are more internal, scattered, and usually not in contact with the
skin. No signs of disease are to be found on the stem or leaf parts of the
plants which produce such tubers, and the cause of Brown Fleck is not
known. It is not hereditary, for the disease does not necessarily appear
if seed with Brown Fleck is planted. Many conditions relating to the
nature and composition of the soil, amount of moisture, and weather, have
been investigated as contributing causes, but no definite conclusions have
been arrived at.
Scab.
Not many years ago an organism, discovered in 1881 by an American,.
E. Thaxter, and placed by him in the fungi under the name Oospora scabies ,
was looked upon as the universal cause of scab in all countries. This view
has now been abandoned, and, although this organism, now recognised as
one of the thread-forming bacteria under the name Actinomyces chromo-
genus, causes scab in the United States, there is no reliable evidence that
it produces scab in Europe, and apparently the same applies to Australia.
Various fungi, besides other agencies, are now known to give rise to a
roughening of the skin of potatoes.
Sometimes the trouble produced by one or other of these agencies has been
designated as “ true scab,” sometimes as “ scab,” sometimes as “ so-called
scab,” until, at the present time, when a man talks about scab in potatoes,
there is no possible means of knowing to what he really refers, beyond the-
fact that the potatoes do not possess a normally developed skin.


The confusion in the use of the word " scab ” is so great that it would be
better to drop it altogether, but it is in such general use among growers that
this is rendered impossible. The best thing, therefore, appears to be to
accept the term “ scab ” as meaning a roughening or abnormal growth of
the skin of the potato, with the proviso that the term conveys no suggestion
as to how the abnormality is caused.
The skin of a potato is really of the nature of cork; it is only a thin
layer, but so long as it is intact it is highly protective. When it suffers an
injury, the potato endeavours to repair it by producing an extra amount
of corky cell substance around the seat of injury, and thus isolate it from
Brown Fleck.
the healthy tissue. In this way a scab is produced, and scabbing may bo
regarded as the manifestation of the efforts of the plant to repair injury
■and to protect itself from further attack. Various conditions have been at
times suggested as the cause of scab, such as the presence of lime, ashes,
fresh stable manure, cinders or grit in the soil; also the dryness of the
'season, and the nature of the soil (acid, alkaline, sandy, heavy, &c.). Where
•experiments, carefully conducted with proper scientific precautions, have
•been carried out, it is becoming evident that some living organism is always
the cause, and that the above conditions may influence its growth. In New
South Wales the best known scab producers are eelworms, and then the
fungus Rhizoclonia.


Rhizoctonia.
It is quite common to find on the surface of tubers dark-brown lumps of
irregular shape and size, like small lumps of soil, but which become black
and show up distinctly in contrast to the potato skin when wetted. They
do not adhere very firmly to the skin, and can be scratched off with the
finger nail or easily rubbed off; when removed they leave very little scar on
the skin. This condition is sometimes called Black Speck Scab. Some-
times, however, the lumps may be found to be deeper in the tissues, and
even beneath the skin. Each of these lumps is known as a sclerotium, and
consists of a mass of fungus tissue, which is iu a resting condition, is cap-
able of resisting adverse conditions for long periods, and under favourable
conditions gives rise to new growths of hypha;. When planted with the seed
the young shoots may be attacked by these hyphae developed from the sclerotia,
and many plants are killed. The stem of young plants are often rotted
round the collar or beneath the soil. Some die from what appears to be a
wet rot.
Various other conditions have been found associated with this fungus,
such as a bunching or rosette appearance of the tops and small potatoes
formed on the stem above the seat of injury, and sometimes in the axils of
the leaves along the stem. Such unusual growths, however, may be caused
by many other conditions, and must not be taken as absolute indication of
the presence of Rhizoctonia.
Besides causing the death of plants, the fungus also produces a rotting of
the tubers. This typically consists of a dry brown rot, which extends
inwards from the skin, and very much resembles the {me rot produced by
Late, Blight when bacteria are absent. This condition is common in Tas-
manian potatoes, and is known as Brown Rust. As indicated above, the
sclerotia are the chief agents in spreading the disease. The remedy is
selection of seed and the dipping of all seed before planting. The sclerotia
are hard to kill, requiring about two hours’ soaking in a solution of 1 part
formalin in 200 parts water, or a solution of 1 part corrosive, sublimate
in 1,000 parts water. According to some Departmental experiments, even a
l-in-300 solution of formalin is apparently injurious to any young shoots
developing from the eyes at the time of dipping, and in such circumstances
a solution of 3 part formalin in 500 parts of water can be used. In many
States of Xorfh America formalin at the rate of 1 in 240 parts of water is
used as the dipping solution. In Victoria, India, and some other countries,
corrosive sublimate has been found to give the best results, a solution of
1 part in 1,000 to 2,000 parts of water being used. Corrosive sublimate is,
however, a very strong poison, and its use must be attended with great care.
Root Knot and Root Gall.
The disease known as Root Knot or Root Gall appears to be spreading very
much in New South Wales. Such plants as the following are attacked: —■
Field crops: lucerne, some eowpeas, soy bean, pumpkins, melons, tobacco;
vegetables; all kinds, as cabbage, cauliflower, spinach, lettuce, beans, peas,
tomato, potato, carrot, and parsnip; many flowers and trees. About 500
different kinds of plants are known to be attacked. The disease is readily
seen on examining the roots. Irregular enlargements, either scattered or
so close that the whole root system is abnormally thickened, will be seen.
These enlargements interfere with the functions of the roots, and often
the first indication of attack is the wilting and failure of the plant.


In the potato plant, the tubers themselves are usually attacked. Elister-like
jumps are formed, and often the surface of these break, thus producing a
very scabby appearance.
The cause of the injury is a tiny round worm, Ueterodera radicicola,
often called an eehvorm, and also (from the effects of its attack) a gall-
worm. It belongs to a group of worms known as Nematodes, many of which
are injurious to plants, while others attack animals. The life history of the
worm is briefly as follows; —It hatches from an egg less than inch in
length. The young larvae move through the soil with considerable activity,
and on finding a root bore their way into it. Once inside, the 5 7 oung worm
ceases its active movements, and begins to enlarge. Ey means of a spear-
like organ within its mouth, it commences to feed on the root tissues. Its
presence irritates the tissues, and so stimulates them to enlarge, thus form-
ing the gall. At the end of two to three weeks the differentiation of the
sexes becomes apparent. Eventually the female becomes pear-shaped, and
large enough to be just visible to the unaided eye. It requires about four
weeks in all for the female to develop from the egg and commence her own
egg-laying. The eggs laid may be ten to fifteen a day, and in warm w 7 eather
they develop in about three days, but they take longer in cooler weather.
The young worms are not very resistant to unfavourable weather con-
ditions, and soil treatment aims at destroying the worms while still young
and tender, as the eggs have a resistant coating, and the mature females
are safely protected inside the root. Drying out of the soil, or flooding the
soil, is usually fatal to them in a comparatively short time. Soil kept free
from vegetation for about two years usually results in the worms being
killed out.
There are a few plants that are practically immune to attack, so that the
most economic way of controlling Eoot Knot is by a proper system of rota-
tion, at least two years coming between each crop of potatoes. The following
plants are not at all, or very rarely, attacked by eelworm: —Barley, broom
millet, maize. Iron cowpea, peanut, pearl millet, rye, sorghum, velvet bean,
wheat, and winter oats. Potatoes used as seed should be free from scab, as
the scab areas may contain tbe worms. In a small garden, two or three
treatments of the soil, at intervals of about eight or ten days, wuth formalin
1 part in water 50 parts, applied at the rate of 2 gallons to a square yard,
should be used. It is of advantage to cover the soil with sacking after each
application.
TURNIPS AND SWEDES.
Turnips of first-class quality for sheep and for domestic use and market
can be produced abundantly in many parts of this State. In the coastal
and tableland districts the crop can be grown with comparative ease; and
in many of the wheat districts where the rainfall does not fall below an
annual average of 20 inches, turnips are well worthy of attention if sheep
are kept in conjunction with cereal production; and a quick-maturing
fodder crop can be thus profitably utilised in rotation.
The turnip crop may be either left in the ground to be eaten out by the
sheep during winter, when greenstuff is scarce, or it may be harvested,
trimmed, and stored in puts made by stacking the roots on straw 7 in a long,
narrow, ridged heap, and then covering with a thick coating of straw 7 and
soil.
t 172!)!)-R


Almost all soils are suitable for the production of turnips, the govern-
ing factor being more the supply of moisture than the richness of the
land. Hence it is desirable to employ a soil with a fair percentage of
sand, if possible, the physical condition then favouring the retention of
moisture.
Preparation of the Land.
The turnip is a shallow rooter, and every effort must be made in the
cultivation of the soil and in the application of manures to retain the
plant-food near the surface where it can be readily drawn upon by the
crop.
The land should be ploughed deeply, if possible, a couple of months at
least before sowing, and then lightly reploughed just previous to sowing.
The soil should then be brought to a very fine tilth by means of the harrows
and cultivator. This is essential to ensure the proper germination of
the fine seed of the turnip. On very loose soils the hand-sower at times
shows an inclination to run too deep, and in order to lighten the' work
it is advisable to use the roller to compact the seed-bed. In such cases
it is necessary after sowing to break up the rolled surface between the
rows by giving a light scuffling.
Time to Sow.
In most parts of the State it will be found that February and March
sowings will produce the best results, but on the tablelands earlier sow-
ings are not out of place. Swedes do not do well in New South Wales
when sown early in the summer, the crop being one that is native to cool
conditions, and hot weather being, therefore, unfavourable to proper
development. The attacks of aphis in summer time also contribute to
failure, while the heavy moisture requirements of the crop further demand
that it shall be grown at a time when the rainfall is most regular.
Autumn sowing avoids the hot weather and the attacks of aphis, and
allows the development of the roots at a time when the rainfall is
usually more regular, and the evaporation very much less. Moreover,
the February-March sowings of Swedes bring the crop to maturity at a
time when graziers find it of greatest value. There is almost always need
for succulent feed in the winter and early spring, especially for ewes
approaching lambing, or with lambs at foot, and Swedes sown as suggested
will mature at the time required.
White turnips can be grown at almost any time of the year, except in
midsummer, though in vegetable gardens where water is available there
is no need to avoid even that short period. The sowings of these varieties,
however, should only bo sufficient to cover the immediate requirements
of the season, especially in hot weather, as they readily run to seed.
Sowing.
In the coastal and tableland districts 2 lb. of seed is generally sown
in drills about 2 feet 6 inches apart, and 3 lb. to 4 lb. broadcast. In the
drier districts a smaller quantity of seed, say 14 lb. drilled per acre, would
be ample.
When turnips and Sw T edes are grown under dry conditions, the best results
will be invariably obtained when they are planted on the flat, in land deeply
worked and well cultivated.


Fertilisers.
The results of experiments with fertilisers for Swede turnips go to show
that a supply of soluble phosphoric acid is very essential to the crop,
owing, not so much to the quantity taken from the soil as to the peculiar
inability it appears to have, in comparison with many other ,crops, of utilis-
ing the supplies naturally existing in the soil. Superphosphate, applied at
the rate of i cwt. to 1 cwt. per acre, supplies a readily available form of
phosphoric acid, and the crop responds to its application with a largely
increased yield. It has a marked effect upon the young plants, inducing a
vigorous, healthy growth from the very start; indeed, no crop is more
readily benefited by applications of this useful fertiliser, or makes more
efficient and apparent use of it when the results are determined by the
weight of the yield.
Treatment of the Growing Crop.
As soon as the young plants are about 1 to 2 inches in height, it is
advisable to thin them out. Tor a field crop the plants should be left 12 to
15 inches apart in the drills. The thinning out is best done with a sharp
hoe. The soil between the drills must be kept well loosened with a culti-
vator. This will keep down the weeds and help the soil to catch and retain
moisture.
Value as a Stock Food.
The following may be taken as the average composition of a Swede
root: —
Water ... ... ... ... ... 88'fi
Ash T 2
Protein P 2
Fibre ... ... ... ... ... 13
Carbohydrates or Nitrogen-free Extract... 7 - 5
Fat... ... ... ... ... ... - 2
IOO'O parts.
Although the percentage of water appears high, it must be remembered
that the dry matter is practically all digestible. This cannot be said of a
great many other stock foods. Succulence, bulk, palatableness, digestibility
of the dry matter, and the high percentage of sugar contained, give turnips
a peculiar value as a food. Sheep and goats fatten readily when fed on them
alone, and they are also valuable for pigs and cattle, coming in at a time
when other foods are often scarce. They should be fed to dry stock on the
dairy-farm in preference to milch cows, as if given to the latter the milk
will be tainted. The Swede turnip possesses good keeping qualities, and
may be either stored or left in the field for a couple of months till required.
If left for any considerable length of time the proportion of woody matter
increases, rendering the root unpalatable and less easily digested.
Swedes should be cut in pieces before being fed to cattle, as the animals
are apt to swallow the whole or a large portion of a root, and the shape
of the piece may result in it becoming stuck in the gullet when it is forced
back into the mouth for rumination. The choking so produced has killed
more than one cow.
Sheep may be utilised for feeding off a crop without the labour of
digging; when confined to limited areas by means of portable fences, they
will eat out the whole of a crop, leaving only a thin shell that, together
with the animal residues, -will plough in to advantage.


Turnips as a Catch Crop.
The cheapness of the seed, and the ease with which a crop of Swedes cun
be grown in the tableland areas, offer considerable inducements to those
engaged in mixed farming to sow a fairly large area each season as a
rotation crop. Following, for instance, a crop of hay, w'here the stubble is
ploughed immediately after harvest with a view to sowing potatoes in the
spring, it is possible for the farmer to sow, say, 4 lb. to 1 lb. of turnip seed
per acre in February, or just after rain in March, and with very little extra
cultivation to produce a crop that can be used either as stock feed, or, if prices
warrant it, as vegetables for the market. In such a case, the preparation
of the land would be little more than would be required for an early fallow
after the hay crop, and the practical certainty of a good yield, together
with the possibility (always present) of good prices for Swedes in the vege-
table market, should make the venture a good one.
The seed should be mixed with, say, 56 lb. superphosphate, and sown
through the manure box of the wheat drill, certain feeders being blocked
so that the mixture of seed and superphosphate shall be sown only through
every fourth feeder. Care will require to be taken to maintain a proper
mixture of the seed and fertiliser, or the seed will all work to the top, just
as in the case of rape. The hand should be run through the manure box
every now and again to mix the contents up evenly, or the drill will
presently be sowing all superphosphate, and then, as it empties, all seed.
No more than sufficient to sow one acre should be put in the drill at one
time, and as only one-fourth of the feeders will be sowing, it will be neces-
sary to set the cogs of the manure drive to sow at about _2 cwt. per acre.
In districts favoured with good rainfall, such as the Dorrigo and Com-
boyne, profitable crops have been obtained by simply broadcasting seed on
the ashes after a successful “ burn.’ -
These suggestions for the use of turnips as a catch crop, however, must
not be allowed to obscure those for their production on more systematic
lines, whether for farm or for vegetable garden purposes, as described above.
Varieties.
For Table Use. —White Stone and Nepaul appear to be the best varieties
of turnips. Orange Jelly is a first-class variety as far as quality is con-
cerned, but it is a somewhat light cropper.
Of the Swedes, Champion Purple-top, Imperial Purple-top, and Garden
Swede may be mentioned as good table sorts.
For Btoch Feed. —Green-top and Purple-top, Yellow Aberdeen, and White
Pomeranian Globe are fairly good croppers among the turnips.
There are a number of good varieties of Swedes suitable for feeding to
stock. Imperial Purple-top, Champion Purple-top, and Skirving’s Purple-
top may he mentioned as good, even croppers.
Diseases and Pests of the Turnip.
The turnip, like most cruciferous plants, is subject to several insect and
fungus pests. It will scarcely pay to spray large areas of turnips, and the
best means of control is to stimulate the crop to such an extent by means
of good cultivation that the plants may resist the ravages.


White Rust of the Turnip, Cabbage, &C. {Albugo {Cgslopus) Candida, Pers.).
This fungus attacks nearly all plants belonging to the crucifer family,
in every part of the world. Among species of economic value may be enu-
merated cabbage, turnip, cress, horse-radish, and radish. Among crucifer-
ous weeds, Shepherd’s Purse suffers most severely, and as this and other
related weeds may harbour the pest particular attention should be given to
their destruction. The fungus attacks the plants when they are seedlings,
entering into the tissues through the stomata of the tender young leaves.
The fungus threads or mycelium grow up with the plant, and at a later
stage produce on the leaves, stem, and flowers small white areas presenting
the appearance of little blisters.
Those little blisters are due to the presence of the fungus beneath the
cuticle of the host, and when later the cuticle bursts, countless small spores,
which are borne in chains, the oldest being near the apex, are set free. Each
of these spores, after being for a short time in a film of water, sets free
several minute spores, which swim freely in the water, and thus make their
way to fresh spots, to again set up infection.
A second kind of spore—the oospore —is sometimes produced, but this
likewise eventually gives rise to minute spores, which swim freely in a film
of water, and thus spread infection. When it is borne in mind that the
infecting bodies are free swimming spores that can only make their way
about when a film of moisture is constantly present on the host plant, and
when it is remembered, further, that infection can only be effected during
the seedling stage of the host, it will be realised that seed-beds should
occupy a fairly dry, open situation.
The effect of the fungus upon the different hosts are somewhat various.
In the case of the Shepherd’s Purse, for example, the stems become enlarged
and distorted; usually no malformations of the flowers or leaves occur,
though in the radish the flowers often become strikingly modified.
Controls. —These may be briefly stated thus: —
1. Rotation of crops.
2. Destruction by burning of all diseased plants.
3. Destruction of cruciferous weeds, such as mustard, Shepherd’s
Purse, &c., which harbour this fungus.
4. Dust on the plants a mixture of equal parts of freshly-slaked lime
and sulphur.
There are other fungus diseases of turnips that are common to cabbages
and cauliflowers, references to which are made in connection with cauli-
flowers and cabbages in the vegetable section of this Handbook.
Turnip Aphis (Aphis rapes, Curtis).
This is the common turnip aphis, which infests the under surface of the
leaves, in the first instance, causing them to become wrinkled and curled up.
The last brood' of the winged summer aphides lays winter eggs, protected
with a stout skin, and attached to the plants and rubbish. These eggs
produce the first generation of wingless females. These produce larva}
which become the second generation of winged males and females.
It is the first brood from these wingless females that, forming little
colonies, spread over the plants, sucking up the sap and aborting the tissue,
cause the damage to the plants. These aphides mature and multiply with
such marvellous rapidity that, unless some precautions are taken, the plants
soon sicken and stop growing, or at least produce poor turnips.


The males are dull yellow creatures with long slender antennae, delicate
glassy wings, and very soft bodies. The females are similar in form, but
somewhat larger, and deep green in colour.
Clean cultivation is the most satisfactory method of control, the eggs
deposited by the last brood of the season being destroyed, and the following
crop thus saved from attack. It is difficult to spray turnip fields, but,
if it can be done, any oil emulsion is cheap and effective, provided it is
used as soon as the first aphides appear. If once the plants become badly
infested, it is very hard to keep the aphis down.
In the case of field crops, the promotion of vigorous growth by surface
cultivation and manuring will help more than anything else. Fortunately
there are an immense number of parasites that live upon and in all kinds
of aphis, and they are a great factor in ordinary years in keeping the pests
under control.
Other Insect Pests.
A small light-brown moth (Godara comalis) will, in its caterpillar stage,
attack the foliage of turnips and the horse-radish. Where plentiful enough
to seriously affect the turnips, a spray of arsenate of lead (1 lb. in 20 gallons
of water) could be used.
Cabbage moth (Pluiella cruciferarum) will occasionally attack turnips,
and garden crops could be treated with lime and tobacco dust, in accordance
with the suggestions as to' the control of this pest under cauliflowers and
cabbages, if the infestation becomes severe. For field crops reliance must
again be placed on clean cultivation, and the destruction of rubbish on
neighbouring land, where the moth is likely to deposit eggs.
MANGELS, MANGOLDS, OR MANGEL-WURZEL.*
The mangel is well adapted for providing food for pigs, cows, or stud
sheep, because of its succulent and palatable nature. On fertile soil, with
an abundant rainfall, a greater yield is obtained than from any other crop;
but although under such circumstances the roots reach their highest deve-
lopment, profitable crops can be raised on medium soils, and with a com-
paratively low rainfall. In England it occupies an important position
amongst bulk feeds, and large quantities are raised annually for stock of
all kinds; but in this State little attention is paid to it except for pig feed,
and in isolated cases for dairy cows. This is partly because green crops,
such as maize and barley, can take its place, and are easily raised; but,
nevertheless, mangels possess certain qualities which make them a desirable
addition to our list of crops, especially at certain periods of the year, when
green feed is scarce.
The Soil.
Analyses of the roots show that a crop of 22 tons removes from the soil
the following quantities of chief plant food ingredients per acre: —
lb.
Nitrogen . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Phosphoric acid ... . . . . . . . . 36-4
Potash . . . . . . . . . . . . 222-8
* A. H. E. McDonald, Manager, Trangie Experiment Farm.


These quantities, especially of potash, are larger than those taken away by
most other crops, but although .-.o much plant-food is required, the crop is
not so difficult to grow, even on soils which cannot be called first-class, as the
figures would seem to indicate. It is not necessary that the total quantity of
plant food required should be in an available form when the seed is sown:
indeed, few of even the richest soils, when in constant cultivation, contain so
much soluble material at one time. A large proportion of the food substances
absorbed by crops becomes available during the time they occupy the land,
and since mangels have a long growing season satisfactory yields are possible
•on land which would not support a quick-maturing crop, such as turnips.
The heaviest crops are obtained on rich alluvial soils and deep clay loams
of a friable nature. Light loamy soils are suitable, but sandy soils are, as a
rule, unsuitable. The root system is extensive, and the soil should be deep,
or, where shallow, superimposed upon a fairly open subsoil. Very stiff com-
pact soils prevent the free development of the root owing to the resistance
they offer to its expansion.
Climate.
A fair amount of moisture is required by the crop, and, given this, it can
be grown in warm districts in either winter or summer. Good crops have
been obtained on the Hawkesbury in both seasons, but a heavier rainfall is
required by the summer crop, because of the greater evaporation. A summer
crop in 1906 gave a yield of 174 tons per acre, with 15 inches of rain;
while in 1908 a winter crop gave 15 tons, with 11 inches. In cool districts,
such as the tablelands, the best crops are obtained in the summer season,
as growth is retarded by the cold weather.
The culture of mangels is likely to be confined chiefly to the coastal area
and tablelands. On the slopes and plains the rainfall in all but exceptional
seasons is too precarious, and this, combined with the dry atmospheric
conditions, precludes the hope of its successful cultivation except under
irrigation.
Preparation of the Soil.
Thorough cultivation is necessary to bring the soil into the deep friable
condition essential to the free expansion of the roots, and to enable the
feeding roots to penetrate easily and come in close contact with every part
of the soil. If shallow ploughing is given, or the soil left in a rough cloddy
condition, root growth is arrested, and the crop prevented from drawing
upon the constituents it requires. Large quantities of plant-food are
required, and the soil must be worked deeply to extend the area which can
be exploited by the roots in their search for this food. Moisture is also
required in large quantities, to induce successful germination and to ensure
subsequent development.
The preparation should commence as early as possible, and if the ground
is moist when the first ploughing is given, harrowing should be done at
once; but if it is dry, surface working should be given immediately
sufficient rain falls to moisten the clods. This work brings the soil into
a fine, firm condition, favourable to the absorption and retention of
moisture, and destroys the large open spaces which, by admitting too much
air, tend to hasten evaporation.


A line, mellow seed-bed is minimi. iJtep preparation immediately before
towing it objectionable, except under special circumstances, as it destroys
tier firmness, and in the inversion of the soil buries the rich surface, which
hf>- become fertile by weathering, and brings up poorer soil to form the
<->■< .l-bed.
Manuring.
Mangels are exhaustive, and should never he grown on the same land two
years in succession, but in a rotation, so that the crop will occupy the same
ground not oftener than once in four years. r lhe land might be brought
.5. t0 good condition by applying heavv dressings of farmyard manure when
ova liable.
Farmyard manure is extremely useful, because of the plant food it adds
no the soil, and its power to increase the moisture-holding capacity. The
plant food it contains seems to be in a peculiarly suitable form, and creates
a more natural growth than artificial fertilisers. Well-rotted manure is the
best, ns its plant food is readily available, and it contains no troublesome
weed seeds. Fresh manure can be safely and profitably used if applied just
after the first ploughing and thoroughly worked into the soil by harrowing.
I rorn ten to twelve loads may he applied per acre. Farmyard manure
somewhat deficient in phosphoric acid, and about 1 cwt. of superphosphate
Mould he applied with the seed.
1 he application of manures is necessary on the poorer soils to secure the
highest yields, and even on good soils their addition proves beneficial,
probably because of the quick, healthy growth they induce in the young
crop.
Large quantities of potash are taken from the soil, and the application of
manures supplying this is particularly useful to mangels. Phosphoric acid
is essential, and its addition in some form generally results in larger yields,
ft seems to hasten germination and cause a vigorous growth in the young
piant. A dressing of nitrogenous manure on poor soils increases the yield,
but it is not so important as other mineral fertilisers, when judicious
cropping and cultivation are practised.
Sowing.
Ihe best results are obtained when the seed is -own on ridges. The roots
must be able to expand freely in growing, and land containing much clay
becomes too hard and compact to allow them to do so unless ridged. The
ridges should be 2 feet (i inches to 3 feet apart, and are made by throwing
two furrows together witli a. plough haring a fairly long mouldboard.
After the ridges have been made, a light roller should- be run over them
immediately in the direction they run to make the soil firm.
The sowing can be done either in the autumn or spring. In a warm
‘■iimate autumn sowings give the best crops, while in cool climates the best
yields are obtained from spring sowings. March and April are the best
Months for autumn sowing, and September and October for those made in
‘pring. The seed is rather shy in germinating, and some care is required
to secure a good stand. If possible, cool sbowery weather should be selected,
and under any circumstances the soil must be moist. Sometimes the seed is
soaked in warm water for a short time before sowing to start germination,
beat if the seed is good, and suitable weather is selected, this is not necessary.
Tiie quantity of seed varies, and depends upon, the weather conditions and
41 . e amount of moi-ture in the soil, ruder favourable conditions ,3 11). per


acre arc sufficient, but if there is any doubt of a favourable germination
7to 8 lb. should be sown. The seed purchased is sometimes defective, and
before sowing should be tested by placing a small quantity between damp
blotting paper or flannel, and keeping it in a warm room "for a few days".
What is commonly called the seed is really a fruit containing three to five
seeds, and 100 of these should give at least 90 to 100 per cent, of young
plants.
Varieties.
The best kinds are Mammoth Long Eed and Yellow Globe. On deep,
well-worked soils the former gives the better results, while the latter is more
suitable for shallow soils.
Cultivation.
Under favourable conditions, the young plants appear in about nine days,
but, if the soil is dry, the seed may remain in the ground several weeks
before germinating. Weeds must be kept down by hoeing and cultivation,
but the ridges should not be destroyed in the working. As the roots take
firmer hold of the ground, the cultivator can be worked up closer to them,
but care must be taken that the roots are not injured, as this causes bleeding
and decay. This cultivation is very important, as upon its proper per-
formance depends very largely the amount of plant food and moisture which
will be available to meet the wants of the growing crop. Loosening of the
surface checks the loss of moisture and facilitates the aeration of the soil,
and thereby encourages the activity of those agencies which increase the
stores of available plant food.
Harvesting,
The crop takes between seven and eight months to reach maturity, which
is indicated by the cessation of growth and the leaves losing their healthy
green colour, and becoming yellowish and mottled. Harvesting should be
delayed until maturity is reached to secure the highest yield and best
quality, but in hot districts it must not be left later, as the plants commence
to produce seed and the roots deteriorate in value. Immature mangels can
be fed in small quantities to pigs, but not to cows, as they impart a bad taint
to milk, and are likely to cause scouring. Ho bad effects follow the feeding
of mature roots.
The mangels should be carefully pulled, the adhering soil shaken off, and
the top cut or twisted off just above the crown. Roots which are to be stored
must not be injured in handling, as bruises provide a vulnerable point for
the attack of disease.
Storing.
In a warm climate the successful storage of roots is usually difficult,
owing to the temperature being favourable to the development of the agencies
which cause decay. If, however, mangels are carefully handled they can
be stored for some time, especially in the cool winter months. The best
method of storing is to place the mangels on a bed of straw, in a well-
ventilated shed, in stacks about 2 feet deep. Where sheds are not available
they can be kept fairly well by stacking on dry straw on a well-drained
piece of land in the open.


Average daily gain of pigs fed on grain and mangels.
10 lb. roots--1 lb. -rain. s lb. roots = l lb. ”rain.
Lots A, B, C, I) ... ... Grain, '76 lb. ; roots, 'S3 lb. Grain, *85 lb. ; roots, ‘86 lb.
Feeding Value.
Mangels are the most watery of all roots, but, because of the large yields,
the actual amount of food produced per acre compares well with any other.
The following results of experiments, taken from Henry’s “Feeds and
Feeding,” show' the comparative value of mangels and grain as feed for
pigs:—
The figures show that 10 lb. of roots are more than equal, and that 8 lb.
are about equal to 1 lb. of grain.
Since an average crop of maize returns about 2,240 lb. of grain, while an
average crop of mangels equals 20 tons, or 44,805 lb., it can be seen from
these results that 1 acre of roots produces as much pig feed as 2J acres of
maize.
As regards its value as cow feed, Mr. O’Callaghan, Commonwealth Dairy
Expert, states: “Of the various root crops, mangels are the most valu-
able to the dairy farmer; they do not taint milk like turnips, and, If
properly stored, will keep well, and come in at a time when other feeds are
scarce, viz., the beginning of spring. Mangels are noted for stimulating a
heavy flow of milk, and in this they are somewhat like brewers’ grains.
When fed largely, that is, more than 21 lb. a day per head, cows will fall
off in condition unless some more concentrated foods are supplied.”
Mangels sown early in autumn mature about October, and help to provide
suitable food for pigs and cows at that time, when other feed is scarce, and
add variety to the feeds. The roots can bo fed either cooked or uncooked,
but, except where cooking appliances are already at hand, the added value
would not justify much expense in this regard. Where the necessary
machinery is installed, it is advantageous to pulp the roots, but they can be
satisfactorily fed either whole or roughly chopped.
SUGAR BEET.
Attempts have been made to establish the sugar-beet industry in Aus-
tralia, chiefly in Victoria, but other crops have proved to be more attractive,
and no great amount of progress has been made.
All the principal varieties of sugar beet have been tried in various parts
of New South Wales, and the returns, both as regards weight of crop and
sugar-content, have been highly satisfactory.
The sugar beet requires a well-drained, deep, friable loam. In calcareous
soils the yield of sugar is increased.
The seed is sown at the rate of 16 to 20 lb. per acre, in spring, in drills
about 16 inches apart, and the plants are thinned out to 8 inches apart.
The seed should not be covered too deeply, 1 inch being sufficient in moist
soil, and slightly deeper if the land is somewhat dry.
When the leaves turn yellow and become flabby, the roots are fit for
harvest.


Variet\’.
Weight.
Pereentage of sugar
Wanzlebener
5
lb. 2 oz.
16-69
,j ... ...
5
n ,,
18-24
Maffra
6
ii „
15-34
7 7
5
ii „
17-30
Giant Half-sugar White ...
7
8 „
2-88
}’ 7 7 • • •
H
8 „
5-20
The principal purpo-e fur which sugar beets are cultivated in Europe and
America is to make sugar. In Xew South Wales, for the present, at all
events, their principal use is for stock-feed, and for this purpose they are
excellent for dairy cattle, pulped or crushed, and mixed with dry fodder.
The trimmed roots can be stored for use in winter, generally in pits so
constructed as to provide for drainage of storm-water, and protected from
the air by means of straw or other dense covering.
The cultural methods required for this crop arc very similar to those for
mangels, and many of the remarks under that heading- apply to both crops.
Under Irrigation at Yanco.
Excellent results attended one experiment with sugar beet at .Yanco
Experiment Farm.
Three varieties were sown, viz., Wanzlebener, Alaft'ra, and Giant Half-
sugar White. The seed was sown in rows 4 feet apart, after it had been
soaked in hot water for twenty-four hours, and it germinated somewhat
badly. While it was recognised that the distance mentioned was much too
wide for profitable beet cultivation, 20 inches being much better, 4 feet
was selected because other crops were sown the same distance apart, and
this facilitated irrigating.
The plants made very slow growth until towards the late autumn, when
the Matfra variety made a good deal of top growth. The plants were irri-
gated, and kept well cultivated during the season.
The yields per acre were: —
Wanzlebener ... ... ... 10 tons per acre.
Maffra ... ... ... ... 8 tons 8 cwt. per acre.
Giant Half-sugar White ... 12 tons 2 cwt. ~
The roots of the last-named variety were much larger than tbo.H- of the
other two, some specimens weighing up to 20 lb. each.
Two specimens of each variety were submitted to the Chemist’s Branch
for analysis, with the following result: —
The roots were admittedly large and badly grown (owing to the extreme
distance apart), as the best sugar beets run from 1 to 2 lb. in weight. The
percentage of sugar, however, is very good under the circumstances. Fur-
ther experiments are being conducted with Wanzlebener and Muffra.
THE SWEET POTATO.
The sweet potato is not cultivated in this State as it deserves to be, or as
extensively as our climatic conditions will allow. At present its cultivation
is confined almost to the thin fringe of coastal area, but its range of suita-
bility has by no means been determined; in fact, its determination has


hardly been commenced. it' proper care be taken with regard to the raising
of the "plants, - ' and the selection of varieties, many districts hitherto
regarded as totally unsuitable will be found to suit this crop. Sweet pota-
toes have been successfully grown at Queanbeyan and Howlong, and in a
few isolated parts of the dry west where water is available. Generally
speaking, better results may be expected in the warmer districts on the
coast or inland than on the cool tablelands.
At Hawkesbury Agricultural College the crop has proved a splendid
drought-resister. If a little attention be devoted to keeping down weeds
and conserving moisture by hoeing—hand or horse —it is surprising how
much dry weather the sweet potato will resist; and as for heat, some of the
varieties simply revel in .it.
Soil Required.
The ideal soil for this crop is a sandy one, well supplied with organic
matter. In a soil of this character, the plants possess almost all the hardiness
of weeds, and the roots develop well, being even in quality and of good
shape. Light loams are also very suitable; but the more clayey a soil is,
the more unsuitable it is. In poor sandy soil, 4,5, and 6 tons per acre are
obtained with but little trouble.
Preparation of the Soil.
Usually two ploughings are considered necessary to prepare the soil for
this crop. The first is done during the winter or early spring but sufficiently
early to allow the soil to settle and become compact before planting. It will
then be in a suitable condition for the young plants to utilise the moisture
in the subsoil should it be required. This first ploughing can be as deep as
the soil will admit without bringing the sour subsoil to the surface. The
second ploughing, on soils at all light, should be only shallow —say, about
4 inches. Unless this precaution be taken the roots in sandy soils are apt
to become excessively long and thin, rather than chunky, which latter
characteristic is to be desired. Some varieties, notably Pierson, are not as
bad in this respeet as others.
Manuring.
If the roots are intended to be used as a vegetable, the direct application
of farmyard manure to this crop is not recommended. Whilst stable manure
improves the yield both of vine and roots, it is at the expense of quality in
the latter.
If plenty of farmyard manure be available, it is a good plan to apply it to
the crop preceding the sweet potatoes.
The practice at the College, attended with excellent results, is to main-
tain the supply of organic matter in the soil by the system of cropping
adopted, and to use file following mixture of fertiliser: —
Superphosphate . . . . 4 parts.
Sulphate of potash . . . . 1 part.
This is applied at the rate of 3 ewt. per acre in the drill when the plants
are set out. In cool districts it is likely that the application of 25 to 50 lb.
of nitrate of soda in addition to the above mixture will be found beneficial.


Propagation.
Many failures with this crop have a risen through planting it in a similar
manner to that adopted with the ordinary potato, using the roots whole
or cut as sets. Whilst this practice will produce a crop, though somewhat
bitty in the .North Coast or long-season districts, yet in a short-season or a
dry district to adopt such a practice is to court failure at the outset.
The crop is best propagated by means of shoots or ” plants ” which grow
from the tuber. When bedded or planted (see Fig. 1), sometimes as many
as fifty “ plants ” will grow from a single small tuber, and two or three
pullings may be obtained in a single season.
How to raise “Plants.”
The plants necessary for producing an early crop are obtained by placing
the roots —usually small, slender tubers, kept over for this purpose from
the previous season —on sand in a cold frame or hot bed. These seed tubers
are placed close together, but not touching each other. They are then
covered with 2or 3 inches of sand (river sand preferred); the whole bed is
then well watered and covered with a glass sash or frame of hessian. By
raising a corner of the frame, enough air is admitted to prevent rot setting
in. The bed should he kept moist, but not wet, and covered until the plants
show through the sand. The covering is then removed during the daytime,
but replaced at night. This is done until all danger of frost is past. The
" plants.” when 6or 8 inches long, are ready for planting out. (See Fig. 1.)
Fig. 1. —Sweet Potato “root,” with plants ready for breaking off and planting out.
By bedding the roots early, the addition of bottom heat is unnecessary
in comparatively warm districts. If tubers are set in the frame about the
end of July or beginning of August, plants will be ready as early as it is
safe to put them out. Plants raised on sand, and without artificial heat,
are hardier than if raised in a rich compost and on a hot bed, and in addi-
tion, the risk of introducing disease is lessened. In a cold district, or where
bedding-down has been delayed, it will probably be found necessary to use
some sort of bottom heat.


I'or raising early plants, a cold trame. covered with a of glass (see*
i'ig. 2) lias given tlie most satisfactory results. Where glass is not avail-
able, hessian or bagging may be used to retain heat and keep off frosts (see
fig. I!) ; it gives good results, but in the end is more expensive as it
requires renewing each year, whilst glass, with care, lasts indefinitely. One
or two tubers, bedded in a small box or kerosene tin, if placed in a sunny
situation, and covered at night, will supply sufficient plants for a kitchen
garden.
In mild districts, plants quite early enough for a main crop can be
obtained by bedding the tubers in the open ground in a sheltered situation
with an easterly aspect, or cuttings 6 or 8 inches long may be made from
the vines of the early-planted crop and set out in the same way as the plants
obtained by bedding. These cuttings will grow quite readily, The crop
produced by planting them seems to keep better than the early crop. Small
tubers are the best for producing plants; 1 cwt. will produce at one
‘‘pulling” 4,000 to 5,000 plants, and will occupy 90 to 100 superficial feet
in the cold frames.
Raising tubers specially for Bedding Purposes.
Though small tubers are the best to use for bedding-out, it is poor policy
to use the small ones or culls from the main crop for this purpose. Prof.
Massey, of the North Carolina Experiment Station, some years ago advo-
cated the growing of a crop of small tubers specially for bedding purposes.
This plan has been adopted at Hawkesbury Agricultural College with very
satisfactory results. The method recommended by Prof. Massey is as
follows:—•
Cuttings 12 to 15 inches long arc taken from the growing vine, and after
being rolled around the hand arc planted in the usual way, with just the
tip showing. At the College this planting is done about the middle of
January. Almost every joint of the buried vine produces a cluster of
potatoes. The result is a large number of small tubers, the best of which
are selected and are just the right size for bedding.
Planting Out.
The planting is commenced at any time when all danger of frost is past.
It can be continued in the coastal districts right up to the beginning of
January with every hope of a good crop.
The shoots or plants 6 or 8 inches long are carefully drawn from the bed,
and are set root downwards in a bucket of water or a mixture of cow-dung
and water. They are then taken to where they arc to be grown. They arc-
drawn from the bucket as required, and placed, with the roots dripping,
2 feet apart in rows which are 3 feet apart.
The plants may be ploughed in at the time the ground is getting its second
or final ploughing. When this method is adopted, the plants are placed the
required distance apart in every third or fourth furrow, the necessary
covering being given by the plough as it turns the succeeding furrow. (See
Fig. 4.)
A common plan is to thoroughly prepare the ground first and then dibbl
the plants in with a spade (see Fig. 5). This method is somewhat slower
than ploughing in, but for ordinary conditions it has been proved the mo-t
satisfactory. A man and a boy can plant with a spade 3,500 plants in eight
hours.


Fig. 2. —Glass frame bed, in which
to raise Sweet Potato plains for
setting out.


Fig. 4.—Planting: Ploughing in.
Fig. 5.—Planting : Dibbling in.


A point of very great importance when planting by cither method is to
see that the soil is thoroughly compacted around the plant. This is especially
necessary in dry weather. When the plants are dibbled, this compacting is
done by the man pressing the soil firmly against the plant with his foot.
When ploughed in, a heavy roller with a large diameter should follow the
planting. A roller with a small diameter will drag the plants up. Whatever
method of planting is adopted, if the ground be at all moist, the plant will
root without difficulty.
It is the practice of some growers to plant on ridges. In cold districts
this is probably beneficial, but at the College satisfactory results have always
been obtained without the trouble and expense of ridging.
After-cultivation.
The subsequent cultivation given to this crop is such as will keep the
weeds down and conserve moisture. Cultivation with a small-toothed
.scuffler may commence as soon as the plants are set out, and can be continued
until the vines cover the ground. Other than disturbing the vines whilst
cultivating, no attempt is made to prevent them rooting where they touch
the ground.
Harvesting,
Plants set out early in October should produce tubers fit for the table
by the end of December. This time, however, will bo determined by the
nature of the season. In a forward season sweet potatoes fit to eat may bo
available before Christmas, but in a cool year the earliest potatoes may not
be ready until the middle of January.
The mature stage can be determined by cutting one of the potatoes. If
the cut surface dries white and does not turn greenish-black round the edge,
the potato is fit to eat. 'lf a milky juice exudes which, on exposure to the
air, turns black, the potato is not mature enough.
The potatoes will continue to grow until the first frost is experienced;
this destroys the vines, and, of course, the tubers will cease to grow after
this. The crop may be left in the ground until then, and, if the frosts
are not very severe, they may be left until they are required, but the vines
should be removed, or when they decay they will communicate rot to the
tubers.
During the last two months of the growing season the yield per acre is
very much increased; in some cases it almost doubles itself. Where,
therefore, bulk is a desideratum it is well to leave the tubers in the ground
for as long as possible after they become fit for the table.
The harvesting is usually done by hand labour. Some diggers prefer to
use a pronged hoe, others a digging fork; it is a question of use. With
some varieties which produce their roots in clusters around the “plant,”
the labour of digging may be lessened by throwing a furrow away from
each side of the potatoes. Digging machines are in use in the United States,
where considerable areas are devoted to this crop.
When digging, care should be taken not to bruise the roots; a bruised
potato rots easily, though a clean-cut one keeps well.
Storing.
Uo difficulty has been experienced in keeping small quantities in dry
sand. The tubers on being dug are allowed to dry in the sun for a few
Pours, and are then placed away in sand, and keep through the winter
perfectly.


in America large quantities are kept through the winter by storing. In
mild climates they are stored in conical heaps under a shed. A thick layer
of straw is placed on the ground, the tubers, about 15 cwt., are piled on this
straw and then covered with the same material; they are allowed to remain
like this for a few days, until the sweating period is over. After this the
whole heap is covered with several inches of earth. In cold climates the
method of storing is somewhat similar, but specially constructed buildings
are necessary so that an even temperature can be maintained.
As a Stock Food.
In addition to the value of the roots as a vegetable they are also a valuable
stock food, and the vines make an excellent cattle food. The roots have a
slightly higher feeding value than common potatoes, but like them are
producers of fat, heat, and energy rather than of flesh. Pigs are very fond
of the succulent roots, and can harvest them without difficulty or assistance.
It is said they keep the kidneys and bowels in good order.
Pig farmers wdio have poor sandy land would do well to consider the
advisability of raising this crop extensively in the place of maize for
fattening.
It is estimated that it requires 4| bushels of sweet potatoes to equal
1 bushel of maize grain in feeding value. But much sandy soil that does
not produce 40 bushels or 1 ton of maize could, with little trouble, be made
to produce 5 or 6 tons of sweet potatoes.
Varieties.
There are several varieties in cultivation, but only two, White Maltese-
and Pink, have been grown to any great extent in Sew South Wales, though
there are one or two others worthy of attention. The following brief notes
on four that are probably the best will be of interest: —
Big-stem Jersey Yellow. —A vigorous and very productive variety. The
vines are abundant, with rather large leaves of the ivy shape. The roots are
a good shape, yellow in colour. A rather late variety.
White Maltese. —This- is a reliable old favourite. The vine is semi-
bushy in character, with little tendency to root at the joints. The leaf
is quite distinct in shape from most other varieties, except Bush Vineland.
The roots are white in colour, with a tendency to grow very long in loose
soil. Many of the roots weigh 11 lb. each. The roots are of fair quality,
somewhat dry. They keep remarkably well. A mid-season variety.
Pink. —A late variety. A good yielder, but rather coarse; more suitable
for stock feed than for the table. The growth of vine is not excessive, but
the runners attain a great length and root at every joint. The leaf is small,
of the usual type. The most prolific, but the worst for the table. A fair
keeper.
Pierson. —A vigorous grower. Produces plenty of vine, with large leaves
of the ivy type. A good cropper. Roots of good shape, but inclined to
crack; of good quality for the table; the roots keep well; the colour of the
roots is a deep cream. This variety is one of the best of the introduced
ones. The roots cluster round the main stem, are attractive and chunky
in appearance. An early variety.


WHITE MALTESE
Fig. 7.
Fig. 6.—Typical leaves of some of the principal varieties of
Sweet Potatoes.


Fig. 9.
Fig. 8.


Diseases and Pesls.
So far this crop has not shown itself susceptible to many diseases or pests,
it is possible tins is due as much to the hardy varieties grown as to the
inherent ability of the plant to rehst disease. In most districts where
the crop is grown, an occasional root may be found to be affected with rot
in a season, but not more.
An exception must be made of the Iliehrnond Hirer district, however,
where a disease locally known as "Curly Top' - ' has caused serious losses
cut a number of farms during the past few years. Experiments have been
conducted by the Department, but the real nature of the disease, and the
actual method of attack, remain somewhat obscure. From the fact that
treatment of the tubers with formalin before planting was not beneficial,,
it may be assumed that the organism that causes disease is not present,
in the potato itself, but that it attacks the vine.
In the district named, many farmers plant sweet potatoes early in Octo-
ber, when the ground is cold, and when the plant (being native to distinctly
warm conditions) is cheeked in its growth; under such circumstances the
disease is allowed a freer attack. On the other hand, setting out the plants
somewhat later, when the ground is warm and moist, and the growth more
rapid, may enable the plants to resist the disease more effectively. Whether
such late plantings will have a detrimental effect upon the yield of tubers
may be debatable, but in some cases plantings as late as February have
returned very heavy crops.
Farmers should watch the reports of the experiments that are being con-
ducted by the Department, and adopt any suggestions made in connection
therewith.
In January, 1903, caterpillars attacked the vines at Hawkesbury Agricul-
tural College, and some of them grew to an immense size while feeding
on the leaves. They completely denuded certain plants of leaves and
-terns, but a single application of Paris green destroyed them, after which
the plants threw out fresh leaves and seemed none the worse for the
attack.
A hawk moth which is sometimes a pest of sweet potato is Protoparce
convolvuli, the caterpillar of which feeds on the leaves. The caterpillars
also attack convolvulus and privet foliage. These caterpillars are of a
general green colour, with paler-coloured diagonal streaks along the sides
of the body, and possess a spine or horn on top, near the hind end of the
tody. The caterpillars may vary much in colour; some are yellowish, and
others, especially well-grown specimens, may he brown and almost black.
They feed voraciously, riddling and even eating the leaves completely off.
The caterpillars may grow to 3 inches in length, and are thick-bodied.
When full grown, they bury themselves several inches down in the soil,
where they pupate, changing into a dark chocolate-brown pupa, with a
curved exposed beak, shaped like a jug handle. The first brood of pup®
produces a second brood of moths, which again lay eggs on foliage, and give
rise to the second brood of caterpillars. The second brood, on pupating in
♦he soil, may remain over winter as pup®, and produce the first spring brood
of moths next season.
, The adult moth is dark-grey on the body and wings, with two rows of
pink patches on the upper surface of the hind half of the body.


Controls. —Once an attack has commenced, spraying with arsenate or
lead (about 1 lb. to 20 gallons of water) can be recommended wdiere the
foliage is not very thick. This would be mote effective against the young
stages of the caterpillars. In dense plots of sweet potatoes there seems to
be nothing to do except to now and again shake the plants and search for
and destroy the caterpillars.
To prevent an infestation, turn up the soil in autumn and winter to
expose and destroy hibernating pupae in areas where they have previously
attacked the crop.
THE JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE.
This plant belongs to the sunflower germs and grows to a height of 6 to
9 feet, resembling closely in appearance an ordinary sunflower with a
miniature flovrer.
It produces a large cluster of rhizomes or tubers, as shown in the illustra-
tion, useful for culinary purposes, and of special value as fodder for pigs.
The leaves and stalks are of some value for sheep and conversion into silage,
but it is almost invariably for the abundant crop of tubers that the plant
is grown.
The Jerusalem artichoke is very persistent in growth, and, if raised in
suitable soil, it is difficult of eradication. Enough tubers, as a rule, are left
each year to continue the crop; hence it is wise to set apart a permanent
paddock for it, or the odd corners of a farm or
waste places of little value for other crops may
be used for growing artichokes.
Suitable Climate and Soil.
The plant is extremely hardy. “Whilst the
best crops are raised on good mellow loams,
profitable yields are secured on stiff clay lands,
light sandy or gravelly soils.
The land is best suited where the drainage is
good. In fact, any soil suitable for potatoes
will answer for artichokes. It is a crop that
requires little attention when it is established.
The soil needs thorough cultivation. It
should be deeply ploughed about May or June,
During the winter it may be harrowed occa-
sionally, lightly reploughed about September,
and well manured as if for sweet potatoes.
A cluster of rhizomes.
Tho tubers are then planted by dropping them into furrows 3 feet apart,
with a space of 2 feet between each tuber. If the sets arc small, plant whole,
while large ones may be cut. Cover by turning a furrow over them. About
I cwt. of tubers wall plant an acre.
Ripening,
The crop matures In five months. Should rain fall immediately after
planting, the harrow’ may be run over the land to fine tho surface. This
should be repeated when the plants are about 4 inches high to cheek evapora-
tion and destroy weeds. Later on the cultivator should be kept moving
between the rows about once a month.
When the crop flowers and the tops droop and die, about April or May,
it is ready for harvesting.


1 Water.
i * ,
| Ash.
1 Protein.
.Carbohydrates.
Fat.
Nutritive ratio.
Artichoke ...
79-5
1 i-o
2'5
1 16-7
0-2
1 : 7
Potato
78-9
i
1-0
2-1
17-9
0-1
1 : 8'6
Fodder Values.
In feeding to pigs it is best to turn the animals into the crop to root
out the tubers. It must be remembered that where it is desired to continue
the crop the pigs should be removed before all the tubers are eaten out, and
the only cultivation then necessary is to plough the land and keep the surface
loose and free from weeds until the next growth is above ground.
Few foods are more relished by pigs. The tuber in the raw state is very
nutritious, more especially for pregnant sows, and also sows reduced in
weight and condition after suckling and weaning big litters.
Young growing pigs make considerable growth when fed with artichokes
for a short period. The exercise obtained in harvesting or rooting up the
tubers has a beneficial influence.
A number of tests go to show that for fattening purposes these tubers
must he given with grain, and have a similar result to feeding with ordinary
potatoes; 325 lb. wheat, fed with 820 lb. artichokes, gave 100 lb. increase.
The average composition of the artichoke is shown here in contrast with’
the potato:—
A crop of Jerusalem Artichokes.


SECTION VII.
Leguminous Crops.
Evkky farmer is now familiar with the group of plants known as legumes.
In several respects they are of the highest value and possess characteristics
that distinguish them from all others, notably in the high protein content
of their seed, in the excellent feeding value of their whole vegetative system,
and in their capacity for storing nitrogen in their roots, and thereby leaving
the soil actually enriched in that important item of plant-food.
In .New South Wales legumes are grown for various purposes; Lucerne
for hay, field peas, vetches, and cowpeas for green fodders, the same varieties
for green manuring and soil renovation, and garden peas and beans for the
vegetable market and home use. Their place in our farm practice, indeed,
is even larger than might be apparent at first sight, for the “ herbage ” that
springs so abundantly on wheat lands when these are “ left out,” and that
is so highly esteemed as pasture, consists largely of trefoils, which are as
much legumes as lucerne or clover.
The secret of the value of these plants to the farmer is the possession of
a source of plant-food that is not accessible to most other planjs, particularly
not to cereals. The practical experience of hundreds of years led farmers
of past generations to believe that leguminous crops possessed some peculiar
power of making succeeding crops grow better, and it was not till the last
twenty-five or thirty years that this could be explained. It is now known
that association with certain bacteria in the soil enables legumes to make use
of the air in a way that other plants cannot do. This association is one
of mutual helpfulness, or symbiosis, the bacteria requiring considerable
quantities of certain binds of food that are generously supplied in the plant
juices of legumes, while the plants derive from the bacteria, in some way
not yet fully understood, a supply of nitrogen that the bacteria have taken
from the air and built into nitrogen compounds within their own cells. It
is supposed that the nitrogen compounds thus manufactured by the bacteria
are diffused through the cell-walls and absorbed into the general circulation
of the plants, where they are used for the building up of the protein com-
pounds that are characteristic of the legumes in whatever form they are
considered. The presence of these bacteria is indicated by the development
on the roots of the little growths now universally known as “ nodules.”
These little swellings vary from the size of a pin-head to the size of a small
pea, and they may sometimes be seen by carefully digging up a plant with
as many of the small roots as possible and then washing away the earth in
a gentle stream of water.
The soil conditions that in general favour nitrification also favour the
presence of nitrogen-fixing bacteria in association with legumes, and conse-
quently the number and development of the nodules. 111-drained, acid soils,
deficient in organic matter, tend to weaken or destroy the bacteria, and it
is probable that this in part explains the failure of leguminous crops under
such conditions. The introduction of bacteria cultures into the soil (com-
monly called “ soil inoculation ”) has been attended with considerable


smwe-s in some parts of America, and has been much advertised as a method
, f promoting fertility, especially where the growth of legumes is proposed.
Soil inoculation in some parts of the Tinted States, in fact, appears to be
advi-uhh—even necessary. That dees net apply to New South Wales.
Bacterial Nodules (natural size) on roots of Tares at Hawkesbury Agricultural
College Orchard.
however, for experiments with cultures Slave revealed no advantage from
their use (page 7S). the soil and atmospheric conditions apparently favouring
nitrification in a natural way. as explained on page !S4 of this Handbook.
In this section prominence is naturally given to lucerne as the legume
most in cultivation, but cowpeas. field peas, tares, and clovers receive atten-
tion. being valuable in their respective spheres. Those legumes that are
grown for the vegetable market —beans and peas—are dealt with in the
vegetable section of this Handbook, a few pages further on.
LUCERNE.*
Lucerne is now the chief leguminous crop in New South Wales, and its
fodder value is becoming more and more widely recognised. Its most extensive
cultivation in earlier years was in the Hunter district, and at Tamworth;
but it has shown itself capable of adapting itself to a variety of soils and
climates, provided its peculiar sensibilities are studied carefully, and it is-
now spreading over a much wider area of the State.
♦Condensed from Farmers' Bulletin No. 37, “ Lucerne.'


Suitable Soils.
It is seldom safe for a farmer to say that lucerne will not grow profitably
on his land before he has tried it. It thrives on an extraordinary variety
of soils, though maximum results eauiiot be expected from land which oft'er-
viulenee to the essential qualities of the plant. It is sensitive in certain
respects, and disregard of its special susceptibilities will result in reduced
yields, but payable results may be expected from almost any land, except
that which is badly drained, or is very sandy. The plant roots very deeply,
and it is obvious that a deep, permeable subsoil contributes to maximum
results. Still, this is not an absolute essential to successful growth, as is
proved by the results obtained on soil that at one time would have been
considered quite unsuitable.
The heaviest yields are obtained on the very best alluvial soils found on
river banks, particularly deep, free soils well supplied with lime and potash,
and with free water 15 to 30 feet below the surface. A farmer possessing
such ground will find it hard to discover a more profitable use for it fhau
to grow lucerne. The suitability of lucerne to such a soil is the secret of
success on the Hunter Elver flats, where comfortable livings are made on
30-acre holdings, and where first-class lucerne land brings from £7O to £loo
per acre.
Drainage is absolutely essential to success, and if the soil is not naturally
drained to a depth of at least several feet, action must be taken to bring
.about this condition before lucerne-growing is attempted. Where badly
drained patches occur in the soil, the lucerne soon dies out absolutely, and
its place is taken by couch grass and weeds of other kinds. Flood-waters
do not affect it, because as a rule they soon run off, but to cover a lucerne
field with water for two or three days is a sure means of eradicating it
altogether. At the Tanco Experiment Farm, a check filled by afternoon
is drained off before noon next day. Where on one occasion this could not
be done, owing to rain filling the drains, some of the lucerne perished.
Lucerne will not grow in sour soil. Lime is extremely beneficial, if not
absolutely necessary, probably on account of its sweetening effect on the soil
more than its mechanical effect.
Where the ground has become exhausted through frequent cropping or
is naturally poor, artificial fertilisers will be required, and the suggestions
made in an earlier portion of this Handbook -with regard to fertilisers for
lucerne, clovers, and leguminous crops should be studied.
Preparation of the Soil.
The first matter to be considered by the farmer proposing to grow lucerne
is the question of weeds. Young lucerne plants grow comparatively slowly,
and are apt to be killed by weeds during their earlier stage of growth.
For this reason it is generally preferable to sow lucerne in autumn, when
the growth of weeds is not so great; but even then, in some districts, the
problem is a difficult one.
If the ground be ploughed several months before sowing, and the weeds
which then spring up destroyed by frequent cultivation, a large proportion
of the weed seeds will have germinated and will be effectively disposed of.
This method, however, will not be sufficient in districts or on soils which
are specially subject to the growth of weeds, and cleaning crops such as
barley, Hungarian millet, cowpeas, &c., to suit the district, can be grown to
profitable advantage, the land being thoroughly cultivated and kept clear
■of weeds and couch grass while they occupy the soil.


Lucerne is a deep-rooting plant, and although Its roots Lave great
penetrating power, the plants will thrive better, and a better stand will be
obtained, by opening up a stiif subsoil as deeply as possible. Plough 8 inches
deep, if the nature of the soil will permit, and follow in the furrow with
a subsoil plough from 1 2 to 14 inches. This depth of loose soil will enable
the young plants to root well, after which they will be strong enough to
pierce even a very stiff subsoil; though, of course, the deeper the friable soil
goes the better.
A good rainfall cannot always be depended upon at seeding-time, and light
falls of rain may have the effect of germinating the seed without being
-uffleient for further growth. For dry districts, therefore, fallowing can be
recommended, and the land should be ploughed in autumn or early winter
the year before it is intended to sow the seed. Plough 9 inches deep, provided
the top soil reaches down to that depth. In case the top soil is only 5 or
tj inches deep, then the land should be ploughed to that depth, and a second
plough, with the mouldboard taken off, should follow the first plough, and
stir the subsoil to a further depth of 6 inches. Care must be taken not to
bring any of the subsoil to the surface.
The ploughed land should then be allowed to lie in the rough state during*
winter, and be broken down in the beginning of spring with harrows
During the summer mouths the land must be frequently worked with harrow
or cultivator, so as to allow neither growth of weeds nor the formation of a
hard crust on top. If the seed-bed cannot be worked down sufficiently fine
with the harrows, a one-way disc cultivator or roller will soon do all that is
necessary. If the land is rolled it should be harrowed immediately after
the rolling.
The success of lucerne-growing in dry districts depends almost entirely
upon the thorough preparation of the soil, and the ideal conditions to be
aimed at are a deeply ploughed soil, in which the previous year’s rainfall
has been conserved, together with a finely worked surface as a seed-hed.
The Seed-bed.
Just before the seed is sown a light ploughing should be given, and the
land well harrowed and rolled, to level the surface, and to give a firm, fine
seed-bed. Generally, about three or four harrowings and one good rolling
are required, but in some circumstances it is necessary to roll twice. If
weeds or grass are still present they should be worked out with, a spring-
tooth cultivator and removed.
Since the surface soil undergoes the greatest change, it follows that it
becomes the most fertile, and it is necessary to retain it where the young
plants will be benefited by the enhanced fertility. The seed is planted near
the surface, and it is there that the young roots gain the sustenance required
by the plant. If deep ploughing is given the second time, this improved
soil is inverted and put beyond the range of the young roots. The second
ploughing should, therefore, be shallow.
Selecting Lucerne Seed.
Good lucerne seed should be sound, mature, plump, bright, well saved, and
reasonably even in size. It should not contain more than 1 per cent, by
weight of impurities and weed seeds, with no dodder or harmful weed seeds
present (purity standard 99 per cent.). It should be free from insect pests
and fungus disease : and there should not be less than 85 germinable seeds
in every 100.


If grown in New South Wales, it is likely to give better results than
imported seed, even though the germinating powers may be alike. It is
wise to test all seed for purity and vitality.
To do this, take a given weight, say 1 oz. of the seed; spread it out on
a sheet of white paper, and pick out all impurities. These may consist of
sand, dirt, vegetable matter (small twigs of the plant, for instance), mouse-
dung, weed seeds, or insect remains. These should lie carefully weighed,
and the proportion in the sample arrived at thus;—
Total weight j \ weight or j actual
of sample ; impurity J 1(0 J •' perra-ntagft
tested ) / round \ 1 of impurity.
The weighing can be done with very little trouble. If the individual
cannot manage it, no doubt the local chemist would oblige, the simplest
weights to use being avoirdupois, 437) grains to 1 oz., or 7,000 to the lb.
The calculations are then easily made.
If it is found that seeds of noxious weeds exist (more especially dodder),
the bulk should be sifted, using a mesh that will retain the lucerne whilst
allowing the dodder and other small things to pass through. Broken and
small seed may pass through also, but this will be no loss.
Varieties of Lucerne.
Farmers have so far given hut little attention to the subject of varieties
of lucerne, the local strains, Taimvorth, Hunter River, and Mudgee, having
such an advantage in acclimatisation as to make the discovery of a better
a difficult matter. The Department has tested a number of lucernes from
other lands, however, seed being obtained from time to time, as the published
reports appear to suggest their possible utility here. Amongst the varieties
and strains that have been tested at the different experiment farms in com-
parison with the local ones may be mentioned Peruvian, Arabian, Kansas,
Turkestan, Provence, Montana, Algerian, Oasis, and Chubut. Two varieties
that are credited with being crosses between the yellow-flowered lucerne and
the ordinary type, Sand and Grimm, have also been tried at the farms.
Dodder and Lucerne Seeds.
(Magnified.)
The results of these trials, although these have
extended over some two or three years —in some
cases even longer—still make it extremely doubtful
if any can be recommended in preference to the
local strains that have been deservedly popular for
so long, but there are two exceptions that are
promising in respect of one particular part of the
State —viz , Montana and Algerian, at Glen Innes
Experiment Farm, where the long winter appears
to favour these types. Montana lucerne comes from
♦ he North American State of that name, where
the winter is extremely cold and the summer
very hot. The advantage that it seems to possess
over Taimvorth is its stooling properties during the
colder weather, and as a result of the success
of the smaller trials a much, larger area has been put down at the farm
named, and also promises to do well. Algerian has much the same habit as
Montana, but the latter seems to be the better.
Sand lucerne has shown more capacity for drought resistance than Tam-
worth in the dry western districts, but the trial has not proceeded sufficiently
■to justify a recommendation. Farmers should watch the reports of these
■trials as they are published from time to time.


Time of Sowing.
Jn land which has previously been infected with Turley gru-.g. or other
weeds whose seeds germinate in autumn, August and September arc the
best months Tor sowing; and under irrigation in the western dFmcl.s spring
sowing is preferable on necount of the rapid growth which ww«U make in
winter, whilst lucerne is comparatively slow in germination during the cob:
weather. But throughout the bulk of the areas where lucerne is grown
autumn sowing is preferable. For instance, on the Xnrth Coast, if lucerne
is sown in spring or summer it will have but a poor chance of surviving
amongst the heavy growth of weeds, and -March and April are the months
recommended. On the Xcnv England tableland an. l similar elevated districts
the seed should be sown in March, so that the roots may be well down
before frosts set in; in the most important of our lucerne ureas ibe -owing
should be a little later than that. In the southern and south-western
districts, whore lucerne might be profitably grown on many farms, a little
discretion should be exercised, autumn being the be-t lime if the -vis
has been a wet one and the soil conditions are such os favour early ger-
mination, while in the case of a dry summer and autumn rbe -owing sbo-iM
be delayed till about September.
Quantity of Seed.
The quantity of seed applied varies widely with the method and the
district. On the dry uplands at Wagga Experiment Farm 4 lb. per acre,
sown through the grass-box of a seed drill, gave good results, while S lb.
to 10 lb. per acre are used when broadcasting. In the Richmond River
district heavy seeding, 15 lb. to 20 lb. per acre, is strongly recommended.
In the regular lucerne districts of the State from 12 lb. to 15 lb., and even
20 lb., per acre is applied, and the hand-broadcaster, known us the " fiddle,’
is employed. For dry districts, such as the Riverina, 10 lb. to 12 lb. will
be found ample if evenly applied.
It is not wise to run the risk of a thin crop through a little parsimony in
seeding. It is all-important, with a permanent crop such a- lucerne, that a
good stand should be obtained at the outset. Re-seeding cannot be done
without again breaking up the laud, and this means that a year or more i-
lost. If re-seeding is not done, the yields are permanently affected through
the poor stand. Attempts are sometimes made to remedy unsatisfactory
stands by sowing further seed, but they are seldom successful. The soil is
not in a receptive condition, and what plants do grow have to contend with
established vigorous plants.
At tho same time it is a mistake to endeavour to remedy defects in pre-
paration, or in the state of the soil, by heavier seeding. Favourable con-
ditions are required to promote germination and to help the young plane
and seeding- should only he done after they have been obtained. If the
ground should happen to bo dry at seeding-time, heavier seeding will not
secure a proper stand.
Machines for Sowing.
Farmers generally prefer to broadcast the seed, but the drill is recom-
mended. Mr. G. Yalder, Under Secretary and Director of Agriculture,
obtained excellent results once by closing up every alternate vent of a
wheat drill, and sowing tho seed in rows 14 inches apart.
A method of sowing that is well suited for wheat districts is to m;x
thoroughly 70 lb. of superphosphate with 10 lb. to 12 lb. of lucerne seed;
put the mixture into the manure-box of an ordinary seed drill, and set the


drill to sow about SO lb. of manure per acre. The discs or hoes of the drill
should not be set into the soil too deeply. Some drills, especially when new,
cannot be set to a shallower depth than to 2 inches; in such a case a good
plan to follow is not to set the lever of the drill into the first notch, buf
to let it dangle. The cogs of the drill will be in gear, but the hoes will not
go down as deeply as if the lever had been set into the first notch. In this
way the seed will be sown about | inch deep. Special care must be taken
not to fill the manure-box right up. Not more than sufficient seed and
manure for 1 acre — i.e., about 80 lb.—should be put into the drill at one
time, and this should be stirred up occasionally to prevent the seeds rising to
the top of the manure. In order that the seed may be thoroughly covered,
it is advisable to either improvise a brush harrow at the back of the drill,
or to harrow with light poppy harrows after the sowing.
A fine, level, rolled surface is required for sowing. The seed must be
covered not more than 2 inches deep, nor less than half an inch, and to
secure this, fineness is essential. An even distribution of the seed is
required, and although some men are sufficiently expert to obtain it by hand-
sowing, such a method is not recommended. Many good machines are avail-
able which do the work satisfactorily.
If a farmer is compelled to resort to hand-broadcasting, half the seed
should be sown in one direction across the paddock, and the other half at
right angles across the first cast, so that strips missed the first time will
receive some seed. Select a calm day or early morning, as it is hard to
distribute the seed evenly on a choppy, windy day.
Covering the Seed.
The seed should be covered with a light harrow, though a brush harrow
is often used. Adjustable lever harrows are very effective for this
work, as the depth can easily be regulated. Ordinary harrows, with the
tines set obliquely backwards, will also ensure light covering. The seed
should not be covered deeply, and precautions must be taken to prevent a
crust forming on the surface. The harrow is generally followed by the
roller, the effect being to give a more finished surface, and at the same
time to bring the moisture from below to the surface, thus ensuring a more
even and generally a quicker germination. The compacted surface produced
by the roller results in increased evaporation of moisture, but before the
evaporation can take place the moisture must have been concentrated near
the seed, which thus benefits. Moreover, unless the roller is used a cloddy
surface is left, which is ruinous to the knives of the mower.
In heavy, cloddy ground, which cannot be broken down finely, it is better
not to cover the seed in any way, as under fair conditions it will germinate
freely on the surface like the clovers.
Cultivation and Early Mowing.
Lucerne sown in autumn should receive no cultivation until the following
spring at earliest. The young plants are tender, and will not stand rough
handling. On friable, loose soil especially the effect of cultivation would
be to pull many of the plants out, and consequently the harrowing must be
light, and should not be attempted until the roots have a firm hold, but
after the second cut, particularly on ground that sets hard, the harrow can
be used.


The method of keeping early spring weeds in check is to mow frequently.
The mower should be put over the crop before any of the weeds have com-
menced to Tower, and the operation should bo repeated a month or two
afterwards. Two mowings will generally be sufficient. They must not be
omitted if weeds are getting a foothold, even if the lucerne is not ready to
cut, as the object is to destroy the weeds. If the quantity should warrant it,
the cut material can be raked for green feed, but if left on the ground it
makes a useful mulch.
Once lucerne becomes well established its vigorous growth keeps most
weeds in check, but a certain amount of cultivation is necessary. The crop
should be disced and cross-disced early in the summer, before the first
growth if possible, or after the first cut, and again about midsummer. The
discs should be set rather straight, and the harrow weighted to cause it to
sink to the right depth. The loosening of the surface allows moisture to
percolate to a greater depth, and prevents it from wasting by flowing away
over the surface. Owing to the depth to which even light showers then
penetrate, less loss occurs through evaporation. The splitting of the crowns '
by the discs encourages tillering, and the crop thickens.
If a disc-harrow is not available, an ordinary spring-tooth cultivator can
be used very effectively, and one fitted with special narrow tines is satisfac-
tory on moist ground. The spading harrow is also a useful implement for
the cultivation of lucerne fields. The lucerne cultivator, which is practically
a spiked roller, has given satisfactory results at Bathurst Experiment Farm
when the soil is in a desirable condition as regards moisture.
At Wagga Experiment Farm, a light ploughing with rotary disc ploughs
has proved successful when the soil has become set.
Lucerne under Irrigation.
Throughout the western and south-western districts of this State there
are many thousands of acres of land admirably adapted to the growth of
lucerne under irrigation. The main requirements of the crop are plenty of
sunshine, high summer temperature, sufficient moisture, and a deep, well-
drained soil, rich in plant food. Any porous soil with proper natural drain-
age will be found suitable for the growth of lucerne under irrigation. Heavy
clay land should be avoided on account of its close texture, which prevents
the free percolation of air and water, and also on account of the mechanical
obstacles which it offers to cultivation. Bnt clayey loam is quite suitable,
and heavier soils will yield good results if they are of such a nature that the
lucerne roots can penetrate freely through the subsoil.
Limestone country is particularly suitable for lucerne, and has the addi-
tional advantage of being naturally well drained. Lucerne under irrigation
docs particularly well on such soil. V. b.erever large mallee timber grows
there is usually plenty of limestone in the soil, consequently in such country
lucerne usually grows to perfection.
Ploughing and subsoiling arc strongly recommended, in order that the
land may be brought to a loose, open condition encouraging root develop-
ment as well as free percolation of water. The land must be levelled off
evenly; no hollows must be left, or they may become filled with standing
water, which will result in patches of the lucerne dying out.
Either spring or autumn sowing will give good results with lucerne under
irrigation, but in the western districts, where irrigation is particularly neces-
sary. spring sowing will be found tbe more advantageous. The reason is


that lucerne is not a particularly strong winter-growing plant, whilst the
application of water to the western soils causes an abundant winter growth
of weeds. Autumn sowing therefore places the lucerne at a disadvantage,
as the weeds will grow much quicker and tend to choke out the young plants,
if sown in spring, however, the lucerne will more than hold its own, with the
warm sunshine and the irrigation, and very few weeds will be found strong
enough to smother it.
By watering first, then sowing the seed, and allowing the plants to attain
a fair height before again irrigating, a better and healthier stand is obtained
than by watering soon after sowing. Let the lucerne stand five or six weeks
;tter sowing, if possible, before again irrigating. It should be left as long
as possible without injury to the plants.
It is difficult to explain this phenomenon, but it is a fact, particularly on
soil inclined to be heavy, that lucerne sown after irrigation makes better
growth than lucerne irrigated after sowing. The water seems to chill the
young plants and check their growth. The fact applies to hay crops as well
as to lucerne.
Give a thorough irrigation immediately after each crop is removed. The
quantity of water applied should be equivalent to a rainfall of from 4to
o inches, according to the nature of the soil. But avoid irrigating the
lucerne in winter or early spring until after it has started to grow.
Lucerne Haymaking.
Lucerne is more difficult to cure and greater loss occurs when improper
treatment is given, than in the ease of any other kind of hay crop. Careful
handling is required from the time the crop is cut until the hay is baled for
market. The eagerness with which buyers snap up well-cured lots of lucerne
indicates the importance of curing and marketing hay in the very best con-
dition. They prefer hay which is bright, green, dry, free from weeds and
other rubbish, and contains a large proportion of leaf. A dirty appearance,
indicating careless handling in the field, or the slightest sign of heating in
the bale, causes buyers to reject the lot or to only accept it at much reduced
prices. Since quality is of just the same importance when lucerne hay is
fed on the farm, the same care is necessary in its treatment.
Lucerne should be cut just after the first flowers have appeared, though
many growers pirefer to watch the crown for the young shoots of the next
cut. Much more depends upon the selection of the right time to cut lucerne
than with other hay crops. In the latter cases loss is chiefly due to deteri-
oration in digestibility, but in lucerne the loss is not confined to this, but
extends to actual loss of weight in the hay and to poorer growth in th&
succeeding crop. After lucerne flowers, the nutriment in the stems and
leaves is withdrawn and transferred to the upper portions of the plant, and
the stems harden and become indigestible and of less value as food. The
leaves wither also and begin to fall, which results in loss of weight, and as
these are the richest portion of the plant every effort should be made to retain
them in the hay. Mo advantage is obtained when the crop is allowed to
remain uncut past the stage recommended. The only time when such a
course is justifiable is when the weather is unsuitable for hay-making, and
the crop is left standing until good weather is assured. A loss in the suc-
ceeding cuttings also follows when cutting is left past the time indicated.
This loss is due to two things. When the crop is left uncut until past
flowering, it is found that the succeeding crop does not start away so quickly
as it does when the cut has been made earlier. Secondly, loss occurs through
the greater time which the crop occupies the land. Lucerne only grows


during the summer, and, provided rain is plentiful, good crops can be
obtained at frequent intervals. If the average time for a cut of lucerne be
taken at six weeks, and five cuts are obtained in a season of thirty weeks,
it means that if each cut is allowed to stand seven weeks, only four cuts can
bo obtained, which means an actual loss of 15 cwt. to 1 ton of hay per acre
per annum.
It usually' happens that owing to the cool weather the first growhli of the
season is late in flowering, and the leaves begin to drop and the stems to
harden before the bloom appears. The crop should bo carefully watched and
the cutting made when the lower leaves begin to change their colour.
Mowing Lucerne, Hawkesbury Agricultural College.
Cutting is done with the mower or scythe. A time should be selected
when the crop is at the right stage, and when there is a prospect of fine
weather lasting until curing is completed. Showery or cloudy weather ren-
ders curing difficult, and hay of the best quality cannot be made. The usual
practice is to start the mower going in the morning as early as possible, but
if a heavy dew is on the crop, cutting should be deferred until it has evapo-
rated. External moisture, owing either to rain or dew, is objectionable, and
causes deterioration in the quality.
Handling the Crop in the Field.
If the day continues fine the rake should be started about midday, so that
the cut crop will be raked into the windrows before nightfall. Hay should
not be allowed to lie in the swath too long, especially in hot, scorching
w r eather, when it should be put into the windrows almost immediately after
cutting. The heat causes rapid drying of the tender leaves, and these
become quite dry, while the steins arc still sappy. When the hay gets into
this condition in the swath, a large amount of the leaf will shake off when
raking into the w'indrows, and in cocking. In good hay the quantity of leaf
ranges from 45 to 50 per cent., and as it is considerably richer than the
stems in nutriment, a very serious loss in both quality and quantity may
occur through careless handling,
t 17299—S


After the hay lias wilted a few hours in the windrows it should be put
into cocks. The time varies according to the condition of the weather. In
cool, fine weather it may be left about half a day, while in hot, scorching
rveather it should be put into cocks almost immediately. In cloudy, dull
weather it is left from one to two days. Drying is done to remove the exces-
sive quantity of moisture, and to get the hay in such a condition in the field
that when stacked it will not heat too much nor become mouldy. The
moisture is removed by the heat and wind drawing it off directly, as it is
removed from a wet cloth, or by the leaves transpiring as they do when the
crop is growing. Heat dries the tender leaves rapidly, causing them to
become too dry while the stems are still insufficiently dry. The hay dries best
when the activity of transpiration in the leaves can bo maintained. This
gradually exhausts the moisture of the stems, and the curing takes place
Students harvesting Lucerne, Wagga Experiment Farm.
more evenly. This natural transpiration of moisture is obtained by putting
the hay into cocks soon after raking into windrows. The leaves in the cocks
are protected from the direct rays of the sun, and are not scorched. By
following this plan the loss of both quality and quantity is materially
reduced. Hay cured in this way is sure to keep well in the stack, while if
dried in the swath or windrow it is almost sure to blacken or burn.
The cocks should be made narrow and high, rather than broad and flat.
In wet, muggy weather, moulding is liable to start in the cocks, especially
where leafy, sappy stuff is handled. To obviate this danger the cocks should
occasionally be gently moved to let in the air. Just before stacking, the
cocks are sometimes moved to expose the lower hay, which is inclined to be
slightly damp. Exposure to the air for an hour or two soon drives off the
moisture and puts the hay in a proper condition for stacking.
The time the hay is allowed to remain in the cocks depends upon the
weather conditions. In fine, hot weather it can be stacked two days after
cutting, while in cool weather three to four days are necessary. Care has to
be taken that it is not stacked whilst so damp that combustion or mould will
occur in the stack, but, on the other hand, it is equally important that it
does not become so dry that its palatability, digestibility, weight, and
appearance are injured. It is work in which some experience is required to
secure the best results. A farmer with a large quantity of valuable hay


lying in the field is tempted to bring it in too early to avoid the risk of
damage from rain, while in good drying weather he is inclined to leave it
longer than necessary to avoid the risk of loss in the stack. It must be
remembered that good colour is of great importance, and by leaving it
too long, the hay on the outside of the cocks will bleach, and lose its
green colour, and seriously affect the appearance of the whole of the hay.
Generally speaking, good drying weather can be obtained in most of the
lucerne-growing districts of the State, and the chief danger to provide
against is over-drying.
Stacking.
It is almost impossible to indicate exactly when the hay is at the
right stage for stacking. Little danger exists of insufficient drying of the
leaves; the chief danger exists in the stems. These should be examined
carefully to ascertain whether they have lost their sappiness. If they are
sappy and moist, the hay should not be stacked. Generally it is right to
bring in when it has a crisp feel rather than a dead, damp feeling. Lucerne-
hay should preferably be stored in sheds. It does not shed rain well, and
should never be stacked in the open unless thatched or otherwise covered to
protect it from rain. Storing in sheds, besides being more convenient, has
the advantage that when baling or feeding no damage can be done to the
hay by rain or heat. Before building, a foundation of poles should be laid
down to give ventilation to the bottom of the stack; if stacked on the
ground, some of the hay is sure to spoil. In building the stack, the centre
should be kept high, so that rain will not run in from the sides.
Under some circumstances the hay is liable to become so heated in the
stack that firing occurs. In other cases heat is generated, but not sufficient
to cause firing, and the hay is only charred. As a rule, spontaneous com-
bustion is found to occur in hay which has been made from heavy, sappy
crops, especially if it is made when the weather is not suitable for drying.
Great difficulty is experienced in getting the moisture out of very green
lucerne, and even when the stuff is apparently dry, charring or combustion
may occur. When the crop is very sappy, and the w’eather not favourable to
drying, the hay should be put up in narrow cocks, and left in the field until
uo trace of moisture can be detected. As the first cut of the season is
generally rather sappy, extra care should bo taken with it.
Baling and Marketing.
Although baling is sometimes done direct from the field, or very soon
after stacking, the practice is not a good one. Curing is not completed in
the field, but continues in the stack, and time must be allowed for it to
sweat and mellow before baling. If hay which has not had time to sweat is
put into tightly-compressed bales, rapid heating is induced, and the slightest
suspicion of heat will cause buyers to reject it. Of late the old large-size
bale has fallen into disfavour, and many buyers now prefer a smaller-sized
bale.
It is to the farmer’s own interest to put his product up in such a way that
it will command the best price, and it is absolutely certain that if he does
not send his produce to market in a proper condition a fair price will not
be realised. The keenness with which buyers note the different brands of
produce on the market is indicative of their desire to be sure of the quality
of the stuff they buy. Good known brands are snapped up readily because
they have been proved by experience.


Brown Lucerne Hay.
Tins is made either accidentally or by design. Sometimes, when it is
intended that dry green hay should be made, it is stacked whilst containing
slightly too much moisture, and the changes in the stack result in a brown
hay being formed. This is claimed by some to have certain advantages over
dry green hay. It is more succulent, freer from dust, and stocky in some
cases, showed a decided preference for it. Generally speaking, the price
obtained is slightly lower than that for prime green hay, but when the
sample is good the difference is not very marked. Probably brown hay would
be more largely made, especially for dairy cows, were it not for the greater
risk of loss by firing. The methods of cutting and curing are the same as in
making green hay, except that the hay is not allowed to become so dry in
the field. The risk of spontaneous combustion is therefore greater than in
the case of green hay, and experience is required to get brown hay.
Grazing.
In dry districts the value of lucerne as a grazing crop commends itself to
stock-owners. Being very drought-resistant, it often provides an acceptable
green bite when other succulent fodder is scarce or non-existent, whilst after
a long dry spell it is almost an axiom that luberne is the first plant to grow
when rain comes.
The pasturing of stock upon lucerne, however, is attended by two risks—
to the plants and to the stock.
It should not be pastured during the first or second season of its growth,
as the plants are not then sufficiently strong to withstand the inevitable
trampling, nor will it stand continual grazing at any time, and the method
should bo to put sufficient stock on to eat it down quickly, and then to move
them off before the young plants have commenced to shoot. A lucerne
paddock should be subdivided into small lots for grazing, so that the stock
can be moved from one to the other in quick succession. Temporary fences
should be erected and shifted as required. This prevents injury to the plants,
and reduces the loss of feed.
Even with reasonable care, the use of lucerne as a pasture will inevitably
lessen the life of the plants. Unirrigated lucerne fed off by stock in the
drier districts will probably require to be resown after a very short period—
perhaps as short as four years. Whenever possible, a cut for hay or green
feed should be taken.
“ Bloat,” or ‘‘ hoven,” is caused by feeding stock upon green, succulent
fodder at a time when the stomach is practically empty; or by giving an
abundance of gas-producing feed before the digestive organs of the animal
have been accustomed to dealing with such material. Cattle and sheep
appear to be the only domestic animals subject to the danger. If the
lucerne is wet at the time of eating, the liability to bloat is increased, and
the danger is especially great -when the crop is in the early stages of growth.
In the drier districts there is not as great danger of bloat as on rich
alluvial flats, for the simple reason that there is not the same abundance
of succulent fodder.
Stock should not be put on lucerne when it is wot. The danger is accen-
tuated in humid, windy weather. If possible the animals should go on with
a full stomach. They should first have their appetite appeased with grass,
green maize, sorghum, or other similar feed. Bloating usually occurs when
hungry animals are put on the feed and eat large quantities, and it also
occurs if they are put on and taken off for periods. They should be kept on
continuously and never allowed to get hungry.


if the stock cannot be placed in the paddocks with full stomachs, they
should be taken on and herded for twenty minutes or so, and then taken off
for about an hour; then put on for another twenty minutes, and the process
repeated untd the stock are no longer hungry- This practice is recom-
mended whenever stock are: being introduced to lucerne after other feeding.
When they have become accustomed to the feed they can be left alone.
Soiling is far more economical than pasturing for all kinds of live stock.
Animals grazing on lucerne generally destroy far more than they eat by
trampling down the fodder. \ anous estimates are given of the increased
number of animals which can be earned on a given area by this method,
several authorities stating that from three to six times as many head of
stock may be maintained by soiling as compared with grazing. The advan-
tages claimed for soiling over grazing have been summed up thus in the
A ijriculturaJ Gazette :
T It saves land.
2. It saves fencing.
3. It economises food.
4. It keeps cattle in better condition and greater comfort.
5. It produces more milk.
fi. It increases the quantity and quality of manure.
7. There is greater docility and discipline of animals,
S. There is less breaking of fences.
9. There is increased order in all business of the farm.
10. It ensures regularity of feeding and output.
The Lucerne Seed Crop.
The production of seed is mostly confined to those districts where lucerne
has been grown for a number of years, and the practice is to allow one crop
to go to seed when the conditions appear to be suitable. The venture is a
somewhat risky one, but experienced growers appear to be able to judge the
conditions with considerable accuracy. A well-established and somewhat
thin “ stand ” is preferred for the purpose, though sometimes three-year-old
plants are utilised. As a rule it is the second cut, or the one that would
produce hay early in December, that is allowed to go to seed. The crop
should be cut when the pod has turned a deep yellow, but before it has
turned brown. The grain is then also yellow, and, though quite soft, will
mature into prime seed after it is cut. If it is left standing too long in the
paddock the colour will be spoilt, and, rightly or wrongly, buyers have a
prejudice against dark-coloured seed. Should the crop not be ripening
evenly, the aim should be to harvest when the greatest quantity of prime
seed may be expected; otherwise the matured pods will burst and the grain
be lost. The crop is cut with the mower early in the morning and in dry
weather. Sometimes the swathboard is attached to the mower and the crop
left in the swath for two or three days, then drawn into heaps with pitch-
forks fuot rakes), and left another day before being carted in and stacked.
If the swathboard is not used it is put into heaps on the same day or the
next morning, and carted in about the third day. In cither case the handling
must be with care so that the pods will not be knocked off.
The crop is threshed from the stack, an ordinary wheat thresher with very
fine screens or a special lucerne thresher being used, together with a blast
winnower through which the seed is put to clean it. The seed is usually
stored in air-tight iron tanks, or in double bags in a dry place where it
matures before it is marketed. During this period it must be kept perfectly
dry or it will turn brown and depreciate in value.


Lucerne seed is a profitable crop, -1 bushels to b and & bushels per acre
being obtained, and with the price to growers reaching and oven exceeding
Is. per lb., the monetary return is good, but the risk is considerable. If the
weather proves unfavourable the farmer finds he has lost valuable time in
the extra period the crop has occupied the land, and that he has to be satis-
fied with an inferior sample of hay.
Breaking-up Lucerne.
The time during which lucerne, once properly established, will continue
to yield payable crops will be found to vary with the nature of the soil and
subsoil, and the use to which the plants are put. On the best soils, such as the
deep, well-drained alluvial soils of the Hunter Valley, the period for which
it will pay to crop lucerne before breaking up the ground is much longer
than on granitic uplands with an unfavourable subsoil or rock close to the
surface. Grazing any kind of stock on lucerne is much more injurious to
the life of the plants, owing to the consequent trampling, than removing the
cuttings for hay. While, therefore, it may be said that the average profit-
able life of a lucerne paddock is seven years, this estimate will be found to
be the mean between rather wide extremes.
Lucerne gradually dies out, the termination of the life apparently being-
due to the plants losing their vitality, as all plants do; but the termination
of its profit-yielding period is governed by other factors as well. The con-
tinuous growth of the one class of crop exhausts the fertility of the soil,
although lucerne, unlike clover, does not appear to cause land to become
“sick” in the ordinary sense of the term. After the land has been utilised
for other crops for a time, it can again bo successfully laid dowm to lucerne.
Enemies of Lucerne.
Dodder.
This is the greatest enemy of lucerne. It is a parasitic plant, with long.
leafless stems, orange yellow in colour.
The dodder-seed germinates in the
ground, and the young plants attach
themselves to the lucerne seedlings.
As soon as the thread-like vine is
firmly attached to the lucerne plant, the
stem connecting it with the ground
withers away, and the dodder draws its
sustenance from the lucerne by means
of tiny suckers, which enter the tissues
of the host plant. The dodder flowers
are a beautiful golden colour. As the
parasite develops, the tangled masses in
which it occurs have the appearance
of ringworms, working from the centre
outwards.
On no account should dodder be sown
with the lucerne seed. Fortunately the
removal of seeds of dodder is a simple
process, as they are much smaller in
size than lucerne seeds, and can be
removed by screening through a mesh
Lucerne and Dodder.


sufficiently close to retain healthy lucerne seed, whilst allowing the dodder
to pass through. If dodder appears in a lucerne paddock it should never
be allowed to seed, but the affected growth should be removed as soon as pos-
sible. The plants should be chipped to the crowns, or straw' should be
carted on to the patches and burned. The patches should be mown and
treated before the general crop is cut, as otherwise the parasite may be dis-
tributed throughout the field by the machinery. Burning is the safest
remedy, and will not injure the lucerne plants.
Insect Pests.*
Tortrix glaphyriana, Meyrick (Lucerne Web Moth).
The little leaf-rolling caterpillar of this moth is a well-known pest among
the lucerne fields in the Maitland district, and is more or less in evidence
nearly every season, but it is only now and then that it increases in such
numbers as to become a very serious pest. As a general rule, it appears
early in September, and does not disappear until the end of February.
The caterpillar is a bright green grub, slightly over half an inch in length
and slender in form, with a white hair or bristle on the sides of each seg-
ment. Generally several live upon each head of lucerne in a mass of silken
threads and curled leaves, finally pupating in loose cocoons among the foli-
age. The small moth, which measures slightly over half an inch across the
outspread wings, is dull yellow, mottled with dark brown on the fore wings.
When a crop is found to be badly infested by this moth the farmer usually
cuts it down close and keeps it well fed off with stock.
Bruchophagus funebris, Howard (Lucerne Seed Wasp).
This is a microscopic black chalcid wmsp that punctures the young seed
and deposits her eggs beneath the skin, under shelter of which the little
maggot feeds upon the contents and pupates in the empty shell. When
matured it emerges from the pupal covering and gnaws its way out through
the side of the seed. Such a large percentage of lucerne seed is often so
damaged that the parcel is worthless.
The only method of dealing with this seed-destroyer is to cut the crop
before the seed has ripened, and utilise it as a green fodder or convert it
into hay.
Fungus Diseases.
Lucerne has two common fungus enemies in Australia, both of them
mainly attacking the leaves.
The first, known as “ Bust,” is the fungus Uromyces striatus, Schroet.
The leaf becomes dotted with small brownish spots, which, if closely exam-
ined, are seen to be raised above the general surface of the leaf. Some may
have burst open, exposing a red-brown mass of rust spores. The spots are
usually better defined than those produced by the leaf-spotting fungus.
The discoloration is practically limited to the rust pustule, whereas in the
other case the margin of the spot is frequently ill-defined, though the mid-
region of the “ spot ” is much darker in colour, and becomes raised to form
a pustule, in which the spores are produced.
The fungus Pseudopeziza medicaginis, which causes “ leaf-spotting,” is
very different from the rusts in its characteristics. The leaf shows its
presence by numerous small brown discolorations on both sides. The green
colour is soon lost, and the bleached leaf readily falls to the ground, whence
the spores become scattered to attack fresh host plants.
# W. W. Froggatt, F.L.S., Government Entomologist.


The usual method for combating both diseases is the frequent cutting of
the crop, as the affected portions of the plants, or the greater part, arc
removed each time before the fungi produce their full crops of spores.
Downy Mildew, associated with the fungus Fcronospora Irifoliorurn, De
Bary, has only recently made its appearance in Australia. It was first
described by Mr. C. 0. Brittlebank as occurring in Victoria in January,
1912, and it has since been detected in New South Wales.
In the plants attacked the
stem and leaves are covered
by a thick greyish or violet-
grey downy layer. It often
occurs more profusely on the
under than the upper side
of the leaves. The leaves
attacked are usually of a
yellowish colour, and their
edges curl downward and in-
wards towards the mid-rib.
Such loaves fall quickly.
Since this fungus is new to
this State, and may occur on
the stems, leaves, and petioles
of clovers and lucerne, often
with disastrous effect, steps
to arrest its spread should be
taken. If small patches of
the field be attacked, they
Lucerne Leaves showing Rust and Leaf-spot.
should ho at once covered with straw and burnt over to de-troy all diseased
plants and fallen leaves. When a crop is once infected the disease spreads
rapidly if the weather remains warm and moist, whereas a spell of bright
dry weather often stamps out the disease. If the pest spreads, it is best to
cut the crop before the leaves fall to the ground.
COWPEAS.
The cowpea is a summer-growing annual, more closely related to the bean
than to the pea. Its habit of growth may be recumbent, semi-recumbent, or
upright, depending on the variety, the soil, and such conditions as the
thickness of seeding. It is not a true climber, having no tendrils, but the
long vines twine around any adjacent support and cling to it. The leaves
are trifoliate, the flowers variable in colour, hut usually whitish or whitish-
purple, while the pods and seed vary considerably in shape, size, and colour.
Every year this plant plays a more important part in farming economy.
As a summer green manure it can hardly be excelled, it is grown as a forage
crop, and either fed off, soiled, or mixed with other materia] and converted
into silage. Though it is very difficult to harvest and handle, yet it makes
an excellent hay. The young pods can be used for human consumption, while
the ripe seed commands a constant and satisfactory price on the market.
The plant thrives best under warm and moist conditions, and, while it
readily adapts itself to dry weather, it must be warm or the plant will not
develop. Its home and origin is probably in or near India, where it is claimed
to have been cultivated for two thousand years.


Poona variety, grown in sandy soil; yield, 14 tons 6 cwt. per acre.
Black variety, grown under similar conditions ; yield, 14 tons 8 cwt. per acre.
CoWPEAS AT HaWKESBURY AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE.


No.
Name.
Colour, &c.
Drills 3 feet apart.
Founds Pounds
of Seed : of Seed ;
Plants • Plants
9| inches 6| inches
apart. apart.
i
Black
... Black, white hi him
... ; 7
10
2
Warren’s Extra Early
... Large, very light red ...
9i
m
3
Wonderful
... Dull brick red, elongate
5J
8
4
Clay-coloured ...
... Bull brick red ...
7
10
5
Whip-poor-Will
... Speckled, liver colour ...
6i
84
6
White ...
...: White, black eye, white
hilum 6J
84
7
Upright-growing
.... Small, pale brick red
2
2J
8
Warren’s New Hybrid
Angular, pale brick red
6
8i
9
Iron
... Light brown
5J
8
10
Poona ...
...| Small, light brown
2
3
Preparation of Land and Seeding.
The land can be prepared in much the same way as for maize and other
summer crops. Very earl} 7 sowing is not to be recommended. It should be
deferred till the soil is warm enough to germinate the seed rapidly, as
otherwise it is likely to become mouldy and rot in the ground. As a rule
the crop is sown in rows 2 feet 6 inches to 3 feet apart, and the seed from
6 to 9 inches apart in the rows. Such a practice enables the crop to be
cultivated, which is an important factor in the production of seed, or when
grown in a dry district. It is also economical with seed —an important
consideration when it is not a direct money crop, and every endeavour is
being made to reduce expense.
The seed varies in size to such an extent that the accompanying list of
varieties has been tabulated to give some idea of the comparisons ;
Sekd Table.
When broadcasted or sown with a wheat drill, using every run, considerably
more seed is needed. There seems to be a strong tendency in America to
broadcast thickly, whether sown alone or in a mixture with millets or
sorghums. From 1 to bushels of seed are sown per acre, and this,
especially with upright-growing varieties, greatly facilitates harvesting with
a scythe or mowing machine. The seed drill, using the coarse runs, is
undoubtedly the best machine for this purpose, as the seed is covered to an
even depth. If, after broadcasting and merely harrowing in, heavy rain falls,
a quantity of the seed may become exposed and does not germinate. More-
over, sowing wide enough to allow of cultivation may be performed with the
same drill, by sowing only through certain drills and blocking up the rest.
It must be remembered that, with seed at 15s. per bushel, thick sowing is
going to considerably swell the cost of production.
Especially in cool districts, the young plants are slow to develop. The
plant has, however, strong drought-resistant properties. Being a deep rooter it
is not only enabled to resist drought, but is correspondingly valuable as a soil-
renovating crop. Nodules are formed on the roots, as is the case with other
legumes, and, whether the whole crop or merely the stubble is ploughed in,
the nitrogen content of the soil is considerably increased. It is not infre-
quently found that the second and successive crops succeed better than the
first, owing to the soil evidently being inoculated more thoroughly with the
bacteria that carry out the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen.


Nitrogenous manures of any kind are rarely necessary. At Hawkesbury
Agricultural College phosphoric acid was proved in trials to be the most
important manurial ingredient. Sulphate of potash, though it increased the
yields, was too expensive ; while nitrogenous manures, especially nitrate of
soda and sulphate of ammonia, were decidedly detrimental, reducing the
yield by as much as 50 per cent, below the unmanured. In the trials
referred to the sources of phosphorus in their order of efficiency were rock
phosphate, Thomas’ phosphate, bone-dust, and superphosphate. The last-
named, though least effective of all, is nevertheless the one most easily procured
by the average farmer. Dressings of about 1 cwt. per acre will in most eases
considerably increase the yield.
Varieties.
There are a very largo number of distinct types or varieties of cowpeas.
Considering that in many cases the names of similar varieties vary according
to the district, a full discussion of the question would hardly be profitable.
Of the large number imported at
different times from India, America,
and other places, a few only are in
general cultivation. Of these the
Black is the most popular, while the
Poona, a variety introduced from
India, has rivalled the Black at the
College. The following notes on a
few of the more common may be of
interest:
White or Black Eye. —The seed of
this variety is white with a black
patch on the concave edge of the
grain. It is a very early maturing
variety, ripening pods in about three
months. The growth is procumbent,
but, as a rule, it does not bear very
heavy crops of either grain or green
forage.
Upriyht-growin g. —Like White,
this is an early maturing variety
and valuable on that account. The
seed is clay-coloured and very small,
while the pods are of corresponding
size. Growth is upright, which
quality considerably facilitates
harvesting.
Iron. —Is a fair producer of pulse
and heavy producer of vine. The
seed is a light brown or clay-coloured
and the growth procumbent. It is
a mid-season variety and in appear-
ance closely resembles the Black.
It is claimed that this variety is
immune to the attacks of eel-worms.
Maize and Cowpeas, showing the tendency of the
Cowpea to climb the Maize stalk.
This trouble, which is so frequently present in sandy soils, is common amongst
the cowpeas of the College. The damage done there is never extensive, and
it has not yet been possible to prove the immunity of this variety.


Black. —This, which is no doubt the best all-rouud variety, is distributed
more widely than any of the others. It is late maturing and semi-recumbent
to recumbent in its habit of growth, and gives heavy yields of both green-
stuff and pulse. The grain is large and black in colour, the pods from 7to 8
inches long, and easy to pick. One of its chief qualities is the even ripening
of the pods, which necessitates fewer pickings than do many of the other
varieties.
Poona —A very late-maturing variety, which does not mature its pods as
evenly as the Black, but which equals, if it does not excel, it in the produc-
tion of green fodder. It is a distinctly upright-growing variety, therein-
facilitating harvesting and cultivation, till the pods begin to form and the
vines fall and block up the path between the rows. The seed is light brown
and very small, the pods being only 4 inches long. This latter characteristic,
together with the uneven ripening of the pods, will no doubt go against its
general cultivation. At the same time it should be remembered that only a
small quantity of seed is required to sow an acre.
As a Green Manure.
Cowpeas form a very valuable green-manure crop for orchard and general
farm work. Their deep-rooting and nitrogen-fixing propensities especially
adapt them for this purpose. A good deal of difficulty is experienced in plough-
ing the vines in, and the use of the mouldboard plough, even with a good disc
coulter, is only partially successful. It is the usual practice at the College
to roll the crop first, and then, after running over it with a cornstalk chopper
or disc cultivator, to plough it in with a single-furrow disc plough. The type
used there is a Secretary disc with subsoiler attachment, and though the vines
are not completely covered with the disc it is on the whole more satisfactory
than the mouldboard.
The crop should be ploughed soon after the pods are set. At a later stage
than this, the stems become woody and are hard to deal with. If it is
desired to collect some seed for the next year’s planting, it would he more
satisfactory to allow certain rows to mature all their seed, rather than allow
the whole crop to mature to that stage when it is ready for the first picking.
Ploughing the crop under in this manner is sometimes a very wasteful
practice. It has a very high feeding-value, and if the crop be fed of! on the
ground where it is grown, at least 50 to 75 per cent, of the manorial value
will be returned, while the full feeding-value of the crop will also have been
obtained.
The growth of such crops as maize, sorghum, and millets, with the cowpea,
is a fairly common practice, and for this purpose sorghum and millet are the
most satisfactory. Such a mixture not only forms a better mixed ration for
stock, but to some extent at any rate the cowpea climbs the stems of the
more erect plant and facilitates harvesting. There is a tendency to exaggerate
the benefits to be derived from the latter factor. In the trials at the
College it might be said that the system assisted very little in the harvesting,
but that the total produce was somewhat increased, and that the resulting
fodder was better balanced.
The seeds of the legume and cereal are usually sown together in rows 2 feet
6 inches to 3 feet 6 inches apart, and there is a tendency for the cowpeas to
climb the upright-growing crops—more particularly the sorghum and millet.
The tw r o former crops can be broadcasted with cowpeas, and make a good stand.
The sorghum stalks are finer and more suited to dairy stock, while the


B.—Showing galls caused by eel-worms.
A.—Showing bacterial nodules on roots.
When galls such as indicated in B are noticed on roots, specimens should be submitted to the Department for identification aid advice as to trealmeni. Where
soil is allowed to become thoroughly infested with eel-worms, the production of healthy crops is almost impossible.
Roots of Cowpeas.


cowpea vines keep off the ground better and are easier to harvest. The high
price of cowpea seed is often a determining factor in the case, and whore
the rainfall is scanty and soil poor, crops grown in rows will give bettor results.
In rows, sorghum at 6 lb. and millet at 3 lb. per acre mixed with 8 to 10 lb.
of cowpeas per acre is about
the usual quantity to sow.
If broadcasted, about one-
half to three-quarters of a
bushel of cowpeas, sown
with 7 to 10 lb. of millet,
or lo lb. of sorghum, are us-
ually required. The varia-
tion in the size of these
seeds makes the drilling of
these crops rather difficult.
With a wheat drill the
millet can be broadcasted
with grass-seed attachment,
anti the cowpeas with the
drill. As such machinery
is rarely available in dairy-
ing districts, the crops
would easily be broad-
casted by hand.
A system that has proved
very profitable on theKorth
Coast is to sow the cow-
peas down between the
rows of early corn. They
are sorvn with a maize
dropper immediately after
the last cultivation of the
corn, which should not be
later than January, if it is
intended to harvest the
cowpeas for seed. Yields
of 10 bushels per acre are
quite common, and as high
as 16 bushels per acre
have been gathered by this
method. It forms a valu-
able adjunct to the maize
crop and manures the land
at the same time.
Cowpeas by themselves
usually form an inferior
sample of silage, often
acid in character, and poor
in colour and smell, and
more or less decomposed.
A single plant of the Black variety of Cowpeas.
They are much better’when mixed with sorghum, maize, or millets, which
can be done at the silo. American experience indicates that the best plan
when sowing together is to broadcast the cowpeas at 1 bushel per acre, and
the sorghum or Kafir corn at about 10 lb. of seed per acre.


Undoubtedly the best plan of utilising- the green crop is by feeding it otf.
If it has to be cut and fed to stock either as green feed or as hay, a marked
difficulty is met with, inasmuch as there is really no satisfactorily’ rapid
method of harvesting. Machinery for this purpose has from time to time
been placed on the market, but we have not yet obtained any 7 implement
that can be recommended.
The upright-growing varieties, such as Poona and Upright-growing,
especially when grown thickly, can be harvested with a scythe and sometimes
with a mower.
The cowpea will make good bay, but not only’ is it difficult to harvest, but
also very difficult to handle. The leaves fall very readily when dry, and the
greatest care has to he exercised or the loss will be considerable.
Growing for Seed.
One draw'back to any extensive cultivation of this crop for seed is the
difficulty’ attending the harvesting of the pods. No machinery for this
purpose has been perfected, and with present methods, the whole plant }ias
to be harvested, and threshed, or the pods picked by hand. Men and boys
with baskets or sugar-bags attached to the waist, go through the crop
picking the pods. Mr. George Morrison, of Chatsworth Island, two or three
years ago informed officers of the Department that it was his practice to
pay the pickers at the rate of ss. per cwt. for peas in the pod, and that in a
good crop they' can earn from 7s. to 10s. per day. Three cwt. of these peas
in the pod give, when threshed, one bag of peas weighing 240 lb.
Before threshing the pods are allowed to dry thoroughly, when the hull
becomes brittle, and the seed separates quite easily. For, small lots, a bag
can be half filled with pods, and after tying up the mouth, threshed
with a flail in the ordinary' way. This saves the seed from being shattered,
but is not so quick as threshing them loose on large sheets.
Pea hullers can be obtained on the market, but they seem to be only
partially successful, as is the case with the one in use at the College, their
chief objection being the cracking of the grain.
The Colonial Sugar Refining Company usually pays about 10s. per bushel
for cowpeas on the Rivers, while seedsmen will pay about 12s. 6d. per bushel
delivered in Sydney’. The average retail price for cowpea seed is about 15s.
per bushel. These prices, together with the cost of picking, refer to the Black
cowpea. The price of Poona, for example, which has very small seed, is
usually something over £1 per bushel. These prices have altered very
little during the last twenty years, and there seems every prospect of their
being maintained at the present level.
Cowpeas in the West.*
An area of about 2J acres was planted at the Nyngan Farm, on the 18th
November, 1911, with Black cowpeas, and from the date of planting until
the 16th December following, the rainfall totalled 616 points. This gave
them an excellent start, and thoroughly saturated the ground with moisture,
causing luxuriant growth: but for the subsequent five months, only 64
points of rain fell. Nevertheless, throughout the very- hot and dry summer
months they retained their fresh appearance and made excellent growth.
The best patches would have yielded about 5 tons per acre had they been
cut at the stage of maximum growth.
*H. J. Kelly, Manager, Nyngan Demonstration Farm.


District.
Weather Conditions, &c.
Result,
Bonvillc, North Coast...
Dry
All but one seed failed to germinate.
Wollongbar, North Coast
Seeds failed to germinate.
Bichmond
Completely eaten off by rabbits and
hares, while cowpeas sown with them
were untouched.
Unanderra, South Coast
Dry
Only as much seed saved as sown.
Bathurst...
Irrigated
50 per cent, germinated.
Tamworth
Dry
No results obtained.
Cowra
Hot and dry
When plants were 12 inches high all
plants died off without producing any
seed.
Wagga
Moist, then hot and
Such plants as germinated died off
dry.
during hot weather.
Albiiry
Dry
Bud germination, and all plants died.
Yanco
Good conditions
Bad germination ; weak plants and only
a few seeds saved.
Nyngan
Ample rain to cause
Weight of crop one-thirtieth of that of
germination, but
Black cowpeas.
dry later.
It will be seen that the growing of cowpeas for green fodder (or for
making into hay or silage as a reserve for such times as it will be required!
is well worth the attention of the western settlers, as it would cause lamb-
raising to be much less speculative than at present. Of course there are
other crops that can be profitably grown, and which may, under some con-
ditions, be more suitable than cowpeas; but for periods when there is not
sufficient moisture close to the surface to germinate autumn-sown crops, it
is probable that the cowpea for green fodder is without a rival.
SOY BEANS.
” On paper ” there is no question about the value of soy beans as a
farmer’s crop. American experience is that compared with cowpeas they
are more valuable as a grain producer, are hardier and more drought-resis-
tant, can lie grown earlier and later in the season, thus ensuring a longer suc-
cession of feed, and produce a grain much richer in protein. Unfortunately
they do not do well in Kew South Wales. experiments have been
carried out by the Department with a view to obtaining a variety suited to
our conditions, but so far these have all proved unsuccessful.
A typical case is that of experiments conducted in October, 1911, when
seeds of a variety supposed to be especially suited to our conditions were
obtained from Victoria.. The results have been very briefly summarised in
the following table: —
Summary of Trials of Soy Beans received from Victoria.
As a fodder plant for the dry districts of this State, according to the
opinion of Mr. H. J. Kelly, Manager of Nyngan Demonstration Farm,
the soy bean is not nearly so suitable as the Black cowpea, which is a
much better drought-resister and a quicker and much more vigorous grower,
and productive of a much greater quantity of fodder.


Picking cowpeas. A convenient arrangement for holding the bag.


PEANUT.
Tlie peanut or earlli-nut (Arachis hypogaa ) is not only edible for human
consumption; but is valuable as stock feed and as a soil renovator, it grows
about a foot high, is creeping in habit, and as the flowers grow the stems
curve downwards towards the soil which they penetrate, and eventually the
seed-pod ripens underground.
Fodder Value.
The peanut, or kernel, contains largo proportions of fat and protein, and
hence is of exceptional feeding value. The average composition is:—
Protein, 28 per cent.; fat, 46 per cent.; carbohydrates, 15 per cent. The
yield per acre of nuts ranges from 35 to 60 bushels of 22 lb., though up to
120 bushels have been obtained in trials on certain of the experiment farms.
Such a crop would also yield 1 to 2 tons of hay of quality equal to clover
hay' in its feeding value. Careful field selection of seed, the judicious
application of fertilisers, and improved methods of harvesting would
probably' result in even better yields.
As pig-feed the peanut is attracting considerable attention in the United
States, and our experience suggests the advisability of trying it here on an
extended scale. Tests conducted at Arkansas and other experiment stations
in TJ.S.A., where pigs were fed on peanuts, showed daily gains of up to
0-57 lb. pork. The returns for a quarter of an acre of peanuts gave 313 lb.
of pork, while a like area of maize in grain produced 109 lb. of pork. A sole
diet of peanuts produced a soft, oily quality of lard and an inferior class of
flesh. This was corrected by the addition of maize to the ration; 140 lb.
peanuts with 190 lb. maize gave 100 lb. pork. Pigs relish this class of fodder,
and will eat the plant during any stage of its growth, or when cured.
For the present the prospects of the crop being grown here for the edible
nut are not good, on account of the labour involved in harvesting, picking,
and cleaning.
Soil and Situation.
The plant thrives well in light, sandy soils, although it will accommodate
itself to clay loams and rich chocolate loams. In fact it will grow well on
any good agricultural land. The soil should be well cultivated. Like all
the legumes, it responds best after a light application of lime.
Sowing, Cultivating and Harvesting.
The seed should be planted in rows, 3 feet apart, with the seed 14 inches
distant. The nuts may be planted whole, or the kernels may be removed
and sown singly. The quantity of whole nuts required is from 27 to 35 lb.
per acre, and of shelled nuts Bto 10 lb. Sow in September and October.
As soon as the plants appear, cultivation should follow to keep down
weeds and conserve moisture. In doing so leave the soil loose, friable, and
ridged towards the plant in order that the flower stems may readily force
their way downwards.
When ripe, the plants are raised, the soil is dusted off the pods, and the
whole stacked in ricks or cocks. Machines are on the market in America
that remove the nuts from the vines at the rate of 200 to 800 bushels per day.


Varieties.
Peanuts have been grown in the State for n number of years, though
no particular attention has been paid to the question of variety. Within
the last year or two, however, experiments with imported varieties have been
conducted at llawkesbury Agricultural College, and at Grafton and Yanco
Experiment Farms. The strain hitherto grown in this State, known for
convenience as Local, is hardly a distinctive variety, and in trials has
generally proved inferior in quantity and quality of yield to such introduced
varieties as Spanish (a strong growing, hardy, erect kind, carrying rather
small pods) and Valencia (a consistent yielder with abundant dark-green
foliage, and medium-sized, clean, bright pods).
FIELD PEAS.
These crops deserve more extensive cultivation than they have received in
the past. As a fodder for sheep, pigs, and other stock they have been found
excellent. For several reasons, however, they are more frequently grown
with wheat, oats, or barley, forming a very palatable and well-balanced
fodder. In many parts, where climatic conditions are suitable, large areas
are annually grown for the production of grain. It is intended here to
discuss them only from the point of view of their soiling and grazing-
properties.
The most suitable soils are loams and clay loams of an open nature.
Sandy soils give but poor results, partly on account of their general lack of
plant-food, and partly because of their tendency to dry out- rapidly and
become warm during a spell of hot, dry weather. On such soils it is
advisable to use farmyard manure whenever obtainable, and many stock-
yards where manure has accumulated for years could be sweetened and very
profitably used by growing peas in combination with oats or barley for
green feed.
On the Belmore Kiver, a tributary of the Macleay, large areas of field-peas
are grown each year for feeding milch cows. Besides producing a rich
milk-producing food, the refuse is ploughed under in the spring, and the
soil considerably enriched for the summer crop of maize. By this practice
several farms which were formerly considered too poor for growing maize
are now giving profitable returns.
For fodder purposes peas may either be grown in row's or broadcasted. In
the former case the row’s are drilled 2 feet to 3 feet apart, and the seed sown
at the rate of 15 to 30 lb. per acre, the exact quantity depending on the size
of the seed and the luxuriance of the variety. When broadcasted, the seed
is sown from Ito 1) bushels per acre. In a good season this produces a thick
stand of succulent but nourishing fodder. Until nearing the flowering stage
the vines grow fairly upright, and are easy to harvest. At a later stage this
operation is more difficult, but the full feed value of the crop is obtained.
When grown for pigs the vines are allowed to bear pods, and when in the
dough stage are eaten off. The pigs will harvest the pods and eat at the
same time a good quantity of the greenstuff. If the vines are dead ripe
trouble is often experienced from the pigs eating the hard dead-ripe grain,
and consequently suffering from digestive troubles.
Field-pea hay is of excellent quality, but very difficult to make. This is
especially so when the vines are allowed to reach that stage when they
contain their full nutritive value.


Suntop Pea.
Blue Field Pea.
Grey Field Pea.


A question of importance in broadcasting is to bury the seed sufficiently
deep, which in normal soils will be 2 to 3 Inches. Harrowing it in on
freshly-ploughed ground will often act satisfactorily, as the seed mostly
falls between the crowns of the furrow's. Seed should not, on any account,
be sowui on smooth land with the intention of only harrowing it in. If the
land needs a second and a shallow ploughing, the seed can be broadcasted in
front of the plough.
Varieties.
There are three varieties which have been very successfully grown,
viz.:—The Grey Field pea, the Blue Field pea, and the Suntop pea.
The Grey Field pea will in most cases give the heaviest yield of green-
stuff. It is later than the others, and is a very hardy and vigorous grower.
In comparative trials at the Flawkesbury College the yields were as follows;
Grey Field Pea . . . . 9 tons 15 cwt. per acre.
Suntop Pea . . . . . . 6 tons 2 cwt. per acre.
Blue Field Pea •• •• 4 tons IT cwt. per acre.
The Blue pea is largely grown in Tasmania and other cooler parts for the
production of seed. For fodder purposes it is hardly to be recommended,
as the yield is not great, and the variety is not very hardy.
The Suntop pea has given very satisfactory results in the drier parts of
the State. It is earlier than the other two varieties, which may partly
account for its success. The seed is also smaller, and a correspondingly
smaller quantity is therefore needed for sowing.
An autumn and a spring crop can be grown. The latter is very uncertain,
especially if growm for grain, as hot, dry winds are likely to do a great deal
of damage when the crop is podding. Sowing for the autumn crop can
commence in February and continue till May. If a succession of sowings
be made every fortnight or so, the crop can be used up much more economi-
cally, and there is less waste. If cut or fed-off rapidly before there is any
sign of the appearance of fknvers, and the weather is suitable, a second crop
can sometimes be obtained.
The value of peas as a fodder lies very largely in its adaptability for
mixing with cereals. This question is more fully dealt with a few pages
further on under the title “ Autumn-sown Legumes combined with Cereals.”
VETCHES AND TARES.
The vetches for the most part are slender climbing plants, producing
numerous tendrils at the ends of the leaves. Their habit of growth is
recumbent, and to facilitate harvesting they require to be grown with a
cereal crop. To most farmers the terms vetches and tares are synonymous,
and are used indiscriminately to include all varieties of this crop. Correctly
speaking, there is a botanical difference between the tare ( Vida sativa ) and
the vetch ( Vida villosa). The difference, however, does not seem to be
taken into account by the seed merchants, and is therefore of little practical
importance.


Vetches may either be used as a fodder or as a winter green manure. If
for the former, they are usually mixed with oats, barley or rye, and give a
iieavier yield and a better balanced ration. If as a green manure, they may
be sown alone or in a mixture.
This crop can be grown in most parts of the State where there is a fair
rainfall during the winter. In the moist coastal districts it grows very
luxuriantly in the cool weather, and produces a valuable fodder during
winter and early spring.
The best soil is a loam or clay loam. Sandy soils are not generally suit-
An average plant from a crop of Tares grown lor
green manure at Wagga Experiment Farm.
able, although they will do better
than peas on such soils, and, given
a good season, they do moderately
well on the poor sandy soil at the
Hawkesbury College.
Seeding may commence about
February, and continue till May.
When sown with a cereal, about 30
lb. of vetches and 40 to 60 lb. of
oats, barley, or rye, will usually give
a good stand. The seed can be
mixed and sown broadcast or with
a wheat drill. If sown alone in
drills with a maize-dropper and
sorghum plate, a much smaller
quantity of seed will be required.
Besides this, the crop can be culti-
vated for a limited period before it
spieads across the rows. The seed
is difficult to harvest, and con-
sequently somewhat high in price,
averaging about 12s. per bushel.
For this reason the use of smaller
quantities of seed may be found to
be more economical.
The value of maize stalks as a
winter fodder can often be enhanced
by sowing the seed of vetches
between the rows of late maize
after it has received its last cultiva-
tion. This should be some time
during or after February. Seed-
before this month can be made
more satisfactorily with cowpeas.
The difficulty attending the har-
vesting of this crop prevents it
from being of much value as
hay, although the quality of the
fodder thus preserved is said to
bo very good. When mixed
with cereals the growth is more
upright, and correspondingly easy to harvest. The pods, when dry, shell
very easily, and if allowed to mature, seed is scattered about, and the plant
is likely to beeome a nuisance. This is especially the case where wheat is


Hairy Vetches (Vicia villosa).
A crop o( Hairy Vetches at Hawkesbury Agricultural College.


grown, for the seed gets harvested with the wheat, and it is not easily-
separated by grading. According to Voorhees, the vetch has become a
nuisance as a weed in Michigan, U.S.A., and is said to have made profitable
wheat-growing impossible in certain sections.
When grown with barley, oats, or rye, it rarely has an opportunity of
seeding, since the cereal is ready to be fed off before the vetch has
commenced to flower.
I his crop makes demands on the soil similar to other legumes. It enriches
the soil considerably in nitrogen, hence its value as a green manure. Under
such circumstances it is advisable to encourage as much growth as possible,
and manures can often be more effectively used by applying them to the
green-manure crop rather than to the main crop, or to the fruit-trees.
Feeding off Black Tares, Bathurst Experiment Farm.
Some orchardists object to them as a green manure on account of their
late maturing, and claim that when allowed to reach their maximum growth
before being ploughed in they are not decomposed sufficiently to assist very
much in the production of early fruits. In most cases no doubt this could
be eliminated either by sowing a little earlier, or ploughing them in before
they are fully developed.
I he chief varieties, and the ones most commonly quoted by the seedsmen,
are the Black and the Golden vetch or tare. They are both very similar in
growth, and are earlier maturing than the other varieties. The Hairy vetch
is a more vigorous grower, and a much later variety. It is remarkably
hardy and drought-resistant, and care has to be taken that the seed does
not spread, as self-grown plants may give trouble later.


AUTUMN-SOWN LEGUMES COMBINED WITH
CEREALS.
The benefits which are derived from mixed pastures of grasses and clovers
are similar to those obtainable from growing combination fodder crops.
Such mixtures should, where possible, contain legumes, and these can be
divided into two classes —first, those legumes which do not withstand frost
and are therefore grown during summer with such crops as sorghum, maize
and millets; secondly, those of a more hardy nature, which are commonly
sown in the autumn with the smaller cereals —wheat, oats, barley, and rye.
Huguenot Wheat and Grey Field Peas, showing how the Peas are supported by the Wheat.
A good deal of judgment has to be exercised in deciding on the most
suitable combination, and the question cannot of course be definitely settled
without due trial. The exact time they each take to mature is an important
factor, and it should be arranged so that they will both give their maximum
yield, and bo ready to harvest at the one time.
When grown alone many of these legumes creep along the ground, but
when sown with a cereal they stand more upright, and are consequently
easier to harvest. Tor use on the farm they can be made into excellent
hay, but there seems to be no demand for such mixtures on the New South
Wales market, and the presence of any foreign matter, regardless of its
feeding value, will reduce the price of the chaff.
Vetches and Tares.
These crops can be mixed with wheat, oats, rye or barley. They take a
long time to mature, and, to obtain the best from them, should be mixed
with late-maturing varieties. Tor cutting and feeding to dairy cattle.


Crop.
T rials.
Average Yield.
tons
cwt. urs.
Huguenot Wheat and Vetches ...
5
6
5 1
Huguenot Wheat and Field Peas
r)
7
2 2
vetches are best sown with oats or wheat. Such varieties of wheat as
Huguenot are to be strongly recommended. The strong and upright growth
is better able to support the vetches, and they seem to do better with wheat
than with oats. Algerian is the most popular variety of oats, especially along
the coast, where rust is likely to cause considerable damage.
Twenty to thirty pounds of vetches, mixed with 1 to 1J bushels of either
wheat per acre will give a good stand.
Huguenot Wheat and Black Vetches, showing how the Vetches are supported by the Wheat.
Where the soil is somewhat poor and sandy, vetches will often do better
than peas, and are hardier. As a rule, however, the reverse is the case, and
peas yield more heavily than vetches. The following results obtained from
Farmers’ Experiment Plots, conducted on the North Coast, give a good idea
of the comparison:—
Field Peas.
These, like vetches, can be grown with any of the winter cereals. They
are earlier in maturing, however, and for this reason work in better with
most of the cereals. The mixture of peas and oats is a well-recognised and
valuable combination where these crops will grow. Although so popular,
the yield from wheat in the place of oats has given decidedly better results
on the North Coast.


Crop.
: No. of
! Trials. :
Yield.
Huguenot Wheat and Field Peas
8
tons ewt.
9 3
qrs.
0
Huguenot Wheat alone ...
s
7 9
3
Algerian Oats and Field Peas
t
6 S
4
Algerian Oats alone
7 :
5 S
0
As a green manure, peas can best be mixed with either barley or rye.
Especially on poor sandy soil, the rye combination gives a mass of green-
stuff which is of great value in improving the texture of the soil, and
excellent results have been secured with this mixture in the College orchard.
The peas should be carefully drilled, or broadcasted on rough land, so that
they will be covered to a fair depth. The cereal can be broadcasted and
harrowed in afterwards, or the two crops may be sown together. The
difference in the size of the grain, and the different depths at which they
should be sown, make it somewhat inconvenient to mix the seed.
Rye and Grey Field Peas for Green Manuring at Hawkesbury Agricultural College.
From one and a half bushels of the cereal, and one half to one bushel of
peas per acre are usually sown. It may often be found advisable to alter the
proportions, and this can be settled only by trial.
The average of a number of results with mixtures in the Farmers’ Experi-
ment Plots is as follows: —


Farmers’ Experiment Plots, North
Coast District.
Field Pea* with Wheat w.vp.s 1 Wheat alone.
Varieties.
Xinihin. Irvington. /, *'^ HI
■ ~ Orara.
* Stuart's
Point.
Gladstone, Wanohope.
i
t. c. q. 11). 1 t. e. q. lb. ' t. e. q. Hi.
Wheal and Field Peas 1‘2 9 0 12 9 17 2 20 i 4 o 2 24
t. e. q. It).
4 110
t. e. q, lb, t.
10 0 1 22 ; 10
€. q. lb
6 2 22
Wheat alone ..
.. 8 0 2 24 7 14 1 4 4 12 0 10
4 3 0 4 .
4 s 1 1(5 1 7
10 3 1G
* At these plots the field peas made very little growth ovvin
g to dry weather in early sprin
g.
Experiments have been conducted at various centres solely for the
purpose of comparing wheat alone against wheat in combination with field
peas. The wheat by itself was sown at 2 bushels per acre, but in the
combination it was reduced to !A bushels, and tield-peas substituted for the
remaining half bushel.
Besides the varieties already mentioned, Medeah and Thew are both good
wheats for the coastal districts. Medeah, however, has a harsh beard, which
may cause trouble, and Thew is usually too early to get the best out of the
legume mixed with it. Rye gives heavy yields, and affords good feed while
young, but it should not be allowed to mature, otherwise it becomes harsh
and unpalatable.
CLOVERS.
Clovers possess qualifications which make them peculiarly suitable for the
dairy-farmer and pig-raiser; they are also suitable for the poultry-farmer
who requires green feed. They arc rich in protein, and in this respect are
equalled by few other green crops. As a rule the cereals, including maize and
sorghum, form the chief supply of green feed, but they are deficient in
protein. To obtain the best results from the feed, it is necessary to supply
this deficiency by feeding more flesh-forming foods. Bran and oil-cake are
usually purchased for this purpose, but their function in the nourishment of
animals can be economically replaced by leguminous crops such as clover and
lucerne. The latter is deservedly the most popular because of its permanent
nature and its greater suitability for conversion into hay. Still several of the
clovers make excellent hay and also silage. On almost every farm there is
room for the extension of the growth of clover.
Several varieties are available, all of which differ in some respect, the most
important difference being the length of their life. They are divided into
perennial, biennial, and annual kinds, and the choice depends upon the
climate. They essentially require temperate conditions, and experience has
shown that in hot climates the perennial varieties, with the one exception of
White Dutch clover, are not satisfactory, and that only annuals which can
be grown in the winter are suitable. The perennial varieties, of which
Perennial Red clover (Trifolium pratense perenne ) is chief, are preferable
wdiere the cool climate, so essential to their growth, prevails. Red clovers
stand the summer well on the higher tablelands, such os New England,
especially on the clay soils.


A. Perennial Varieties.
White Dutch Clover (Trifolium repens).
This perennial variety is a useful pasture plant. It is not recommended as
a soiling or hay crop, as it does nut grow tali, but it forms a most valuable
addition to pastures. It grows on almost
all soils, in nearly all climates, and is very
palatable and easily digested. It is one of
the few plants that can grow successfully
with paspalum. It, will thrive under hotter
and drier conditions than most varieties,
through it must be remembered that clovers
will not do well under extreme temperatures.
It has deep main roots, and has a creeping
habit, rooting from the stems as it spreads
about. The dowers are set on long stems,
and are white with a brownish tint, and
roundish in shape.
Perennial Red Clover (Trifolium pratense
perenne. )■
Very similar in appearance to the common
Red clover {Trifolium pratense) referred to
later, but perennial in nature, with the
stems more solid and the flowers of a darker
purple. On the cool tablelands it is prefer-
able for permanent pasture.
Chilian clover, a strong-growing form of
Trifolium pratense perenne , has been grown
for several seasons at Hawkesbury College
with very encouraging results. At Grafton,
Glen Innes, and Yanco trials conducted for
one or two seasons have been promising.
The fodder is sweet and succulent, and the
leaves broad. It grows well in winter, even
in cool districts, and should prove useful for
pastures, hav, or rotation, though its value
in large areas in this State has yet to be
proved.
Alsike or Swedish Clover {Trifolium
hijhridum).
This is probably a cross between Red and
White Dutch clover, and is a perennial.
The stem is solid, but the plant has more of
a fereepiug nature than the Red clovers.
The flowers are pinkish white ; the loaves
Chilian Clover.
Showing extent of Stem Growth.
are like those of White clover, but larger and sharper at the points. It
grows well in cold, moist situations ; but lot, dry conditions do not suit it.
B. Biennial Varieties.
The most valuable of these is Common or Eed clover (Trifolium pratense).
It has strong, deep roots, somewhat fibrous in nature, stems usually hollow,
with leaves largo and broad, generally strongly marked with crescentic


bands; the dowers are usually of a light purple colour, massed together
and forming oval-shaped heads. It is a biennial, but may be carried on
in a pasture for a number of years in Xew England by allowing it to seed
in the autumn of each second year. Running the harrows over when
the heads are brown and withered helps to shake out and distribute seed
evenly. There is a fertilising agent other than the bumble-bee which
frequents clover paddocks, and wdiich promotes sufficient seed for carrying on
a pasture. It is very useful as a rotation crop and for ploughing in w'hen
green, as it provides both organic matter and nitrogen to the soil. It can be
sown to advantage with the wheat crop, as the two plants of different natures
are helpful to one another. Wheat is a capital nurse crop, and oats might be
used as a substitute. Red clover makes excellent hay; it should be cut when
in nearly full blossom, great care being taken to save the leaves.
Flower Heads of Chilian Clover.
C. Annual Varieties.
These are undoubtedly the more valuable in this State, as they can be
grown during the winter months in the hot, dry districts.
Crimson or Scarlet clover (Trifolium incarnatum ) is the most im-
portant annual clover, and is extensively grown. It will grow' in poorer
soils than most clovers; and it makes capital green feed for all kinds of
stock, as well as being useful in silage. It is also a very important crop in
rotations, on account of its high nitrogen-content.


Hie llower Leads have a very attractive appearance when in bloom, being
scarlet or crimson in colour, as its name implies. It is as a green manure
crop that it is most valuable. It helps to renovate the soil, and other crops
do well after it has been grown.
In common with other leguminous crops, it is enabled by micro-organisms
j unctioning in nodules upon the roots to fix the free nitrogen of the atmo-
sphere permeating the soil. This fixed nitrogen is available for the plant—is
Crimson Clover (Trifolium incarnatum).
stored up in its tissues, and becomes available for future crops after decom-
position if the plant is ploughed in. Where the crop is grazed, a considerable
amount in the fodder eaten by stock is returned to the soil in the solid and
liquid excreta. When cut for hay and removed from the field, the combined
nitrogen contained in the residues of roots, stubble, and fallen leaves adds
materially to the stock of nitrogen in the soil. For soils lacking sufficient of
this element, the growth of legumes is frequently the moat economical method
of making good the deficiency.
The main defects of Scarlet clover in rotation for wheat are the slow
initial growth, which allows of weeds to develop which may ripen seeds
before the clover is fit to feed oil or cut, and the fact that the bulk of the
fodder is generally available only in spring, when other foods are plentiful,
instead of during the winter when they are scarce. It cannot be compared
with rape in covering the ground quickly, as rape smothers weeds, and
provides autumn and winter fodder.
When cut for hay it should be harvested shortly after it blooms. Owing
to the hairy nature of the plant, it is credited with forming hair-balls in the
stomachs of animals.
One or two of the Medic family, in addition to lucerne, are also of
considerable value.


Black Medic (.1 ledicugo tupulma).
(Nonsuch Clover; Hop Trefoil; Yellow Trefoil; or Yellow Clover.)
This trefoil grows well in most soils, and is relished by stock. It is
perhaps more adapted to light soils. It is an annual, but it has a pro-
cumbent habit, and seeds freely, propagating itself well from seed. The
seed-vessels are black when ripe, grow together in clusters, and, unlike the
common trefoil, are not injurious to wool. It flourishes in cool districts, and
proves valuable for many parts of the tablelands.
Burrless or Hookies'- Medics (Mfdiraf/o orhirulan#, ike.).
These are of much the same nature as Black Medic, but have large,
roundish seed-pods entirely without hooks. Like those of Black Medic,
these are not injurious to wool. The varieties are well worthy of attention.
Snail clover (Medicago scutellata ) has a large, shining, spiral pod with-
out injurious appendages; but it is not so hardy as the common trefoil, and
requires favourable conditions.
Burr Medic, or Burr Trefoil (Medicago maculata).
This is common in many parts of the State. The pod clings to wool by its
many hooks, and is very injurious to that product. In drought, however, the
seeds, which are fattening, are eagerly picked up by sheep. The growth of
this variety should be discouraged in favour of those with the burrless pods,
as the latter possess all the good qualities of M. maculata.
The Soil.
Clover requires fairly good soil. Those of a clayey nature, such as stiff
clays and loams, give good crops; light loams also prove satisfactory. Rich
alluvial flats are eminently suitable, and usually give splendid crops. Sandy
soils are unsatisfactory, and good crops are rarely obtained from them. An
abundance of potash and phosphoric acid encourages its growth, as does also
lime. This last is essential as a plant-food, but its chief value to the clover
crop appears to be that it increases the amount of soluble potash in the soil.
It is noticeable that where lime is applied to clay soils clover appears spon-
taneously in the pasture. It rarely so appears in sandy soils, except perhaps
to a limited extent.
The land must be worked down to a fine, level, firm condition. Deep
ploughing should be given, and the harrow and roller used until the right
degree of fineness is reached. The seed should not be covered deeply.
Seeding.
When sown alone, about 12 lb. of seed per aero or more should bo used.
It is rather difficult to sow such small seed by hand, and the machines
recommended for sowing lucerne should be used. Clover will not stand the
heat of summer, and the sowings must be made so that it will make its
full growth before hot weather begins. Sowings can bo made from the
beginning of March to the end of April, but upon rich soils with good
rainfall later sowings will be found satisfactory. The seed should be covered
with a light iron harrow or a brush harrow. Rolling is not advisable after
sowing, except on very light open soils.


Manuring.
Fairly liberal manuring is required on poor soils. Lime is beneficial, and
can be applied at tin- rate of one ton per acre. Wood ashes and gypsum also
form good manures; they can be applied at the rate of 10 ewt. per acre.
Nitrogenous manures are not usually required, but in some cases may be
necessary. The plant should be encouraged to obtain its nitrogen from the
air, through the agency of bacteria. At the same time a small amount of
nitrogen may be helpful until the plants are able to gather it from the air,
and some suggestions on the subject arc made on page 122. to which attention
may he directed.
Feeding the Crop.
Clover can be used either as a green feed, hay, or pasturage. .For green
feed or hay it should be cut when about one-third of the bloom is out. The
hay is a little difficult to cure, but if the methods recommended for lucerne-
are followed, good hay will be obtained. Care should be taken in feeding
green clover, as it is liable to cause bloating. Stock should be accustomed,
to it gradually, and given some other feed in addition. Clover hay is equal
to lucerne hay, and, like it, improves the feeding value of green maize or
silage.
A Good Soil-renovator.
t 17209- T


Season.
Acres.
Weight of Fibre in
| Average Yield or
| Fibre per acre
-
.... ....
i in ewts.
1907-8
3,158
19,319
6-6
1908-9
1,85!
! 12,365
6-8
1909-10
2,099
' 16,692
8-1
1910-11
4,467
39,451
8-9
1911-12
2,647
22,579
8-5
1912-13
1,828
11.154
6‘i’
191314
1,970
12,044
6-2
1914-la
2,027
10,400
5-1
1915-16
2.422
15,168
fi-3
1916-17
1,72!
8,795
5-1
SECTION VIII.
Miscellaneous Crops.
BROOM MILLET.*
From time to time numbers of inquiries are received from different parts of
the State asking for information regarding the cultivation, harvesting, and
marketing of broom millet. In recent years the price has fluctuated consider-
ably, according to the supply and demand, and in the seasons which follow
an unusually high market many farmers attempt to grow this crop who have
hut a slight knowledge of the requirements of the plant, and of the practical
details from the selection of the seed to the harvesting, curing, baling, and
marketing of the brush. The result is that the market is glutted with millet
of inferior quality, and the returns give little, if any, profit to the grower.
Besides this, manufacturers, in order to obtain the qualily necessary for
making their best goods, are compelled to import a large proportion of their
supplies. We have in New South Wales soil and climate fully capable of
producing the very best quality, and it is significant that those growers, whoso
practical knowledge teaches them to produce only’ the very best, are hand-
somely repaid for their outlay.
At the present time there is » Federal duty of £4 per ton on broom millet,
and with this protection there is no reason why we should not only produce
enough for our own requirements, but become exporters as well.
The following table will convey an idea of the area under cultivation since
the season 1907-8
The value of the tibre produce'! in the season UU4-15 was approxhnatei.v
1114,5(10 at the farm; in the reason 1915-1(5 it was £21,050; and in the season
l!nd-:17, £19.190.
d'ho seed is also a valuable crop, though the production is not largo. la
1'.'14-,15, (1,580 bushels of seod were produced, the estimated value being
81,580: in 1015-1(1. 18,0(;o bushels of seed' were produced, valued at £4.0(10:
end for 101(1-17, the respective figures were 8,800 bushels and tT.uOo,
*< -. Marks, Manager, Grafton Experiment Farm. It should be noted that some of
the prices mentioned here refer to pre-war conditions. Local prices hate soared since
then, owing to lack of imports.


Fig. 1.-Broom Millet.
A—Italian Hurl, showing how it is put up in bundles of uniform quality.
H —Samples of brooms made from same.
C —Samples of brooms made fiv-m New South ‘Wales millet.


A—Shows how millet is placed on Sydney market by some New South Wales growers.
B— A bale of Californian millet. C— A bale of millet from the Manning River.
D—Bundles of Italian millet, showing the great difference in length, quality, and get-up,
Fig. 2.


Fully 90 per <ent. of the millet, produced in tins State is grown on the rich
alluvial lands of the North Coast ; and on several of these rivers—notably
the Hunter, Manning, and Richmond the industry may he looked upon as
lucrative and permanent. Many farmers have reported their success with
this crop, and would not think of reverting to the far less remunerative
occupation of maize-growing. The raising of millet need not be confined to
these districts, as, with the necessary care, and the aid of a few home-made
contrivances, any land which produces 25 or more bushels of maize to the acre
will yield profitable returns. The experimental cultivation of broom millet
on the irrigation areas in the western districts has been attended with fair!y
satisfactory results. It is advisable, before entering extensively into the
production of broom millet, to ascertain from agents or manufacturers the
probable requirements of the trade, with the view of obtaining an idea of the
prices likely to be obtained during the season. At the same time, should the
prices fall after the crop is harvested, the millet may, if properly cured and
baled, be stored for a considerable length of time without injury.
Requirements of the Trade.
In the manufacture of brooms, three classes of brush are required, which
are popularly known as “inside,” “cover,” and “hurl.”
“ Inside ” millet is used for forming the inside of the broom, and is
generally not more than 17 inches long.
“ Cover” is the class used for covering the inside and also for forming the
shoulders. It is longer than the former and must be from 17 to 20 inches
in length.
“Hurl ”is the longest brush, ranging from 20 to 25 inches. It must also
bo fine and straight, and forms the outside covering of the broom. To give
a nice finished appearance, only prime hurl can bo used.
About 11 lb. of brush are required to make an ordinary broom, and the
three grades are used in about equal proportions.
The soil, climate, and methods of cultivation determine largely the quality
of the brush, but in an average season there would be sufficient of each pro-
duced to satisfy the requirements of the trade. When grown under excep-
tionally favourable conditions, a larger proportion of long brush is produced.
It may be used as covers, but owing to its length a certain amount has to
bo cut off, so that its use for this purpose causes unnecessary waste. On
the other hand, a dry season will Lave the effect of stunting the growth,
producing a large percentage of “ inside ” millet, which can only be worked
in the inside of brooms. Manufacturers have consequently to purchase
elsewhere to satisfy their requirements.
Condition of our Supply.
At the present time there is a great deal of dissatisfaction amongst pur-
chasers concerning the manner in which locally-grown millet is placed upon
the market—so much so that the expert trade has been injured, and the
attention of the Federal Authorities has been drawn to certain dishonest
practices with the view of bringing broom millet under the provisions of the
Commerce Act. Whilst a large number of producers grade and bale their
millet in a manner that compares favourably with the imported article, it is
to be regretted that a certain section pars very little attention to these details.
The chief faults may be divided into two classes lst, those the result of


ignorance and carelessness : and, 2nd, those which are brought about by
unscrupulous individuals with the sole object of obtaining an unfair and
undue advantage over the manufacturer. Those of the former class may he
summarised as follows:
1. The millet is not graded. All classes are packed indiscriminately
in a bale.
1. The seed is not removed, or only partially so.
3. Broken, bent, or coarse brush is mixed with the good.
4. The cut is not uniform. Some are cut close to the brush ; others have
10 or 12 inches of stalk.
5. The colour is not uniform.
C. Bales badly packed and pressed. Many are irregular in size and
shape, and not bound with a sufficient number of wires to stand
ordinary handling.
7. Brush destroyed by being packed before it is properly dried, causing
it to develop moulds of various descriptions.
8, Absence of distinguishing numbers or marks signifying the quality
and weight.
A few of the faults of the second class may be mentioned :
1. The use of heavy billets of timber in bales.,
2. Watering the interior of bales when packing with millet that has
been properly dried.
3. Placing in the bales bundles of stems and leaves, useless brush,
bagging - , scrap-iron, sweepings of floors, quantities of unripe
seed, Ac.
4. Dressing the outside of bales w ith prime hurl and the middle with
inferior material with the seed left on.
It is unnecessary to enlarge upon some of these dishonest practices, as
their effect upon any market must be injurious. Owing to the bales being
tightly pressed, and from 4 to 5 cwt. in weight, it is not always easy to detect
these faults till they are opened in the factory. However, buyers are
naturally becoming very alert, and they are compelled to give lower prices,
on account of the risk they run. Many manufacturers prefer to leave
the local product alone, and import their supplies, finding it cheaper to
purchase Italian millet at £4O per ton than use local material at £2O. The
size, shape, and general appearance of hales is fairly constant with individual
growers, so that buyers very soon become familiar with them. These
dishonest practices have already severely affected the Aew Zealand trade,
and oui- millet is being replaced by Italian and Californian samples. As a
consequence, every honest grower has to suffer through the evil reputation
that this trade has acquired, and receive considerably lower prices for a first-
class article, because of the fear that the agents will have to make some
allowance to the buyers on account of possible adulteration. The demand for
broom millet in this Htate is limited ; and if its production is to be extended
and made profitable, it is essential that the export trade be encouraged in
every possible way.
The following information may enable beginners in broom millet-growing
to avoid some common mistakes, and to neglect none of the important
operations which are essential to«success.


What Broom Millet is.
Andropogon sorghum vulgare is a non-saccharine variety of sorghum.
It is air annual, somewhat similar in appearance to maize while young ; but
it has thinner stems and narrower leaves, and, instead of having male and
female flowers on separate parts of the
plant, they are both found together in
the brush at the top. The flowers are
of two kinds—perfect and imperfect,
The former are set directly upon the
branch, and are accompanied by some
■of the latter, raised upon little stalks.
The fine stems of the panicle or brush
are the valuable portions ; the other
parts are incidental. The brush should
he composed of seed-stems, uniform in
size, length, elasticity, and toughness,
and of a nice bright colour. The soil
and general methods of cultivation will
largely affect the character and quality-
of the product, even though good seed
be used. By long and careful culti-
vation and systematic selection certain
desirable qualities have been developed
and fixed, which remain only so long
as the conditions which brought these
changes about are reasonably observed.
When a plant is grown for a particular
purpose it should be the cultivator’s
aim to keep improving it in the direc-
tion most profitable to him. This
necessitates a careful study of the plant
and its requirements, and the conditions
which make for its proper development.
In broom millet it is not desirable to
obtain a heavy yield of seed, a large
development of stalk and leaf, or a sap
full of saccharine material, but a special
and unusual development of the long,
thin stems of which the brush is com-
posed. It makes very little difference
whether- a large plant is produced or a
heavy crop of seed is obtained, prov ided
these sterns are long and fine.
Class of Land required.
The soil requirements of broom millet
are similar to those of maize. The
best results are obtained from the deep,
rich, well-drained alluvial lands of our
rivers. It is, however, capable of adapt-
Fig. 3.—A Broom Millet Plant, White Italian
Variety—one of the best kinds grown in
New South Wales.
mg itself to a variety of conditions, and, with proper care and attention, sandy
and even gravelly soils, if thoroughly drained, will produce fair returns.
Undrained lands make the working and cultivation more difficult: the growth


is generally slow and uneven, ami there is always the liability of the crop
becoming stunted and diseased. To ensure evening in ripening a soil
uniform in character and fertility is essential.
Place in the Rotation.
In the general rotation on the farm, broom millet takes the same place as
maize. It is not advisable to adopt the practice of growing it in the same
piece of land continuously, unless suitable fertilisers are applied. It has been
found, however, in drv seasons, that it does not thrive as well on land
following millet as where the previous mop was maize. The reason of this
appears to he that, being more drought-resistant, it continues to grow and
thus exhausts the soil of its supplies of moisture and plant-food, when maize
would probably cease growing. At the same time, as the brush is usually
harvested soon after the flowers have set, the crop can scarcely be classed as
a very exhaustive one, particularly if the stalks are cut down immediately
afterwards. Where possible, it should follow a leguminous or root crop.
Preparation of the Land.
To obtain the best results, the land must be properly prepared and brought
to a fairly fine tilth before sowing. The previous treatment should be such
as would destroy weed seeds. The presence of weeds in the early stages
seriously interferes with the growth and cultivation of the young plants.
Deep ploughing is recommended. This not only ensures greater feeding
room for the, roots, but it also has the effect of increasing the moisture-
carrying capacity of the soil—a fact which must always be remembered,
especially in those districts where the rainfall is limited and irregular.
The nature of the subsoil must also be considered, flays should not be
brought to the surface, but can he materially improved by subs.filing.
Ploughing operations should be commenced a couple of months before sowing
time. This not only allows the land to sweeten by exposure to the weather,
but all vegetative growth turne d under is generally well decomposed by the
time the second ploughing takes place. In early spring the Imd should be
■we]! fined down bv means of the harrow, ilisc, roller, ,tc.
Sowing and Cultivation.
Sowing should not take place until all danger of frost is over and the soil
is thoroughly wanned, so that die seed will germinate at once September,
October, and November arc usually the be-t months. On tin* Northern
Rivers excellent yields are obtained by sowing up to the end of January.
In these districts, frosts, if they do occur, come bite in the season,
and after the millet crop is matured. If planted too early, there is
nor sufficient heat in the soil to cause the seed to germinate, and it
will either rot or the voting plants will be so weak that the weeds
will very quickly outgrow and smother them. It may be sown about the
same time as maize, or two or three weeks later, with advantage. Drills lor
1) inches deep are struck out with a plough fa double mouldboard one is
preferable) about o or 3. 1 , feet apart, and the seed planted along these by
hand or machine. The latter is preferable, as it sows more uniformly ; and
by using a fertilising attachment, chemical fertilisers may be applied at the
same time. An ordinary maize seed-drill, which sows and covers the seed
in the one operation, is one of the b-st for the purpose. During hot or dry
weather the seed should be sown soon after the drills are opened, and before


Bides of Italian millet, showing one opened and the arrangement of the bundles and the uniform
quality throughout it Will be noted that the bal es With bessin and fastened b,
Fig. 4.


Fig. 5.—Bales of Hutter River Broom Millet


r-he soil has had time to dry. When this system is adopted, hilling can b-»
dispensed with. It prevents a great deal of evaporation from the soil by
exposing a smaller surface. Besides this, the plants, having their roots deep
in the soil, have plenty of support, and are not so quickly affected by dry
■weather.
In districts having a good rainfall, and where at sowing time the soil is
very moist, the seed may he sown by the machine direct, and without
opening out drills with the plough. A marker, consisting of a light wooden
beam set at right angles to the length of the machine, and which is free to
swing on a pivot at the hack, should bo used to facilitate operations. Tie-
outer end is kept at right angles to the line of the drill by a cord or light
chain fastened to its outer end, and connected with the head of the machine.
A marker, which may consist of an iron or wooden pin inserted through tie-
bar and projecting to the same distance on either side, is placed at the
distance it is intended to plant the drills apart, and as the machine is drawn
.along, this marker scratches a line showing the position of the next drill.
In turning on the headlands, the arm with marker is merely moving over
the machine to the opposite side as each drill is planted. The same attach
■merit can be fitted to the ordinary drilling plough as well. It is a very
simple arrangement, and saves a great deal of time that would be otherwise
occupied in shifting sighting sticks, in order to keep the drills straight.
The practice of broadcasting broom millet cannot be recommended. 'Tin;
chief objections are that cultivation operations—so essential for good results
—cannot be carried into effect, and also that the harvesting and curing
cannot be carried out so expeditiously.
On big areas the ordinary wheat drill can bo used for planting by merely
stopping up the openings of a number of the seed tubes so as to leave free
those that would sow at the requisite distance apart. In a similar manner
these machines can be used for distributing fertilisers also, closing all hut
those which correspond with the seed-sowing tid es.
The amount of seed varies from 5 to 8 lb. to the acre.
When the plants are C inches high, they should be thinned out
to 3 or 4 inches apart for rich soil, and more space allowed each
plant in poor ground. With good, dean, and evenly-graded seed,
the sowing may bo adjusted so that very little thinning is necessary,
thereby saving a tedious and rather expensive operation. Tire quality
■of the brush is affected to a very large extent by the manner in
which this thinning is carried out. If too much space is allowed, the plant*
grow very strong and vigorous and produce brush which is coarse and
unsuitable for market. On the other hand, if crowded too much they become
very fine and weak. To obtain an even crop, it is essential to have
uniform sowing and germination, and later on to thin the plants to a
uniform distance.
Some growers prefer to sow the seed in “hills," 15 to 20 inches apart
in the drills, leaving from six to ten stalks to each. The seed should
be covered from J to 1 inch deep, the depth depending upon the
character and condition of the soil. If it is dry, deeper covering is more
necessary than would be the case if the soil were in a good moist condition.
TV here labour is scarce, several sowings should be made in succession t>
enable the grower to deal with his crop at regular intervals, and not have the
whole area mature at the same time. Rolling the land as the seed is planted
ensures a quicker germination and a better stand, particularly' if tire soil is a.
little dry. hen drilled, the roller at the rear of the machine is quite


Fig. 6. —a—A good sample of Brush.
b —Sample of Brush from a neglected crop.
sufficient. Should heavy rains fall after sowing, and before the seed has
germinated, a light harrow should be used as soon as the condition of the soil
will admit. When 6 inches high, the crop may be harrowed to keep the soil
loose and to gradually fill in the drills, and thus destroy any young weeds.
Broom millet makes rather slow growth for the first couple of weeks, and the
cultivator should be kept going every fortnight or three weeks, to keep the
surface soil loose and friable, to conserve moisture, and prevent weed growth,,
and in every instance after rains. For large areas, a two-horse spring tine


cultivator may be use i. When the crop is half grown, under favourable
conditions cultivation may cease ; in any case the surface loots must not be
disturbed by cultivating too deeply. In moist and exposed situations the crop
may be lightly hilled, as an extra support is necessary. It is during the early
•stages of growth that (he cultivator is of greatest value, as the soil mav then
lie loosened fairly deeply. The most critical period is when the heads are
forming. If dry weather should set in then, the brush will be short and
stunted. It may be necessary in some districts to sow early or late in the
season so that the crop will not come into flower during such trying conditions.
Where irrigation is practised, it is essential to plant in suitably graded land
and convey the water by means of open drills between the rows. After
each application of water, and as soon as the nature of the soil will allow, the
soil must be well cultivated to prevent caking and to conserve moisture.
Manuring.
On soils that are somewhat poor, it is advisable to apply fertilisers. Such
crops as cowpeas, field-peas, vetches, and clovers are suitable for green
manuring, and may be ploughed under when they have reached the
blooming stage or have been grazed off by stock. This latter system
works well when mixed farming is carried out, and stock of different kinds
are kept. Any vegetable matter should be ploughed under early, to give it
ample time to decompose before sowing. Farmyard manure, if available, is
also a first-rate manure to apply, as it not only supplies the elements
required by the plants, but also improves the mechanical condition of the
soil. Chemical manures are also valuable, and are very easily applied.
Superphosphate, bone-dust, dried blood, and sulphate of potash will be
found the most suitable. The quantities used for maize dr sorghum will do
equally well for broom millet. The following make a complete fertiliser,
and mav be applied at the rate of 2 to 2J cwt. per acre :
Superphosphate ... ... ... ... 80 lb.
Dried blood ... ... ... ... ... 64 ~
Bone-dust ... ... ... ... ... 50 „
Sulphate of potash ... ... ... ... 30 ~
The manures should be passed through a sieve, to remove lumps and foreign
substances that would prevent them from passing freely through the drills.
They should be thoroughly mixed just before sowing, as, if mixed any great
length of time before required, they are very liable to “ set,” especially if
the weather is at all damp, and this necessitates breaking up and re-screening
before use. It is impossible to state definitely what quantity of manure is
required for each class of soil. Growers would do well to conduct experi-
ments on a small scale with manure, mixed in varying proportions, and to
notice which give the best results. Soils, even in one locality, often vary
considerably in their chemical and physical characters, and by such tests
the farmer may soon determine the most suitable mixture for his land.
An excessive dressing of manure tends to produce a strong coarse brush.
Bending the heads over.
The practice of bending the heads over is not carried out extensively in
this State, and as a result a large amount of bent brush is sent to market,
which can be used only as “insides” or “covers.” In many parts of the
United States of America this operation is never neglected. When allowed
to grow in the natural way, a large percentage of the brush will spread out,


and bend over on account of the weight of the seed, and thus reduces its
marketable value. This is especially the ease if there is good rain when the
brush is forming. The rapid growth causes the panicles composing the head
to become tender, and unable to bear the weight of the growing seed.
Fig. 7.—A stalk of Broom Millet with
the head turned down.
Strong winds, at this particular period,
will also cause this, and grain-eating
birds, when plentiful, are sometimes
lesponsihle for a great deal of damage.
The illustrations, Fig. 6 h and Fig.
d, show samples of the brush thin
destroyed.
It should he understood that it H
quite ptossible to grow millet withon*
turning down the heads. Some of the
best millet on the market is grown by
farmers who do not favour the opera-
tion. At the same time, there are
seasons when a fairly large percentage
is completely spoilt, and such losses
could have been prevented by the
adoption of this system. The stalks
are bent about a foot below the base of
the head, and, if the plants are very
tall, there may he two bends, as shown
in illustration, Fig. 7. The heads
should hang clear of the ground, s->
that they will not be damaged by
rubbing, or discoloured by the splash
ing of mud in rainy weather.
Harvesting and curing.
No matter what care has been
bestowed upon the cultivation of the
crop, sound judgment must bo exercised
at time of harvesting. An excellent
crop) maybe brought successfully as far
as this stage, and yet the result may Is-
unprofitable on account of inattention
to or ignorance of some apparently
unimportant detail. The time to har-
vest, and the various other operations
required to preptare the millet for
market, a,re such as require some ex
pterience in order to do them prnpierlv.
Even experienced growers are not
unanimous on the point of when to
harvest the brush, some cutting the
iieads when in blossom, and others
harvesting later so as to obtain better
developed seed possessing considerable nutritive value. The time to cut wii,
<lcpend upon the weather and the colour required, Manufacturers genera)if
prefer a millet having a green tinge. It is then much tougher than when
allowed to become nearly ripe. To obtain this green colour the millet should
he cut when the seeds are In what may be called the dough stage. The


brush is then fully developed but the grain is soft. Tor some classes of
goods a golden colour is preferred, in which case the crop is left till the grain
is fairly firm. With a little experience it is easy to harvest a large area, and
yet maintain a uniform tint. A strong knife (a pruning-knifo is very suitable)
is used to cut the brush, and at least 0 inches of stalk should be left on.
Fig. 8. — An instance where artificial bending-down would have
been profitable.
In dwarf varieties the brush may be pulled instead of cut. Select tine
■weather for ■ this operation. Some growers bend the stalks of drills towards
each other diagonally, about 2 or 3 feet from the ground, forming a sort of
platform upon which the cut heads are placed to dry. Others cut the whole
of the stalks, and lay the millet upon them.
Drying in the Field.
In this State the millet may be properly dried in the field during the
greater portion of the summer months. Should thunderstorms occur the
brush must be placed in heaps and covered with tarpaulins, sheets of iron, or
other material. The time required for drying depends upon the season, but
still, with fine bright weather, two days should be sufficient. The brush must
not be allowed to get wet, as rain or dew soon discolours it.


Drying under cover.
The finest colour is obtained by dryintr under cover, or a way from the
direct, rays of the sun. The millet is left a couple of hours in the field for
some of the moisture to evaporate before being taken to sheds fitted up
with racks one above the other, so that the brush mav l.e spread out in
Fig. 9. Drying Millet in the field.
layers about ■ > inches deep. It must be turned regularly at frequent
intervals, and when nearly dry may lie placed in thicker layers. This
method requires plenty of space and a good deal of attention, and it takes
longer to drv.
Removal of the Seed.
The seed is removed by means of a hackler,
i'he machine consists of a roller studded with small iron spikes, mounted in
a frame and made to revolve at high speed. A handful of the brush is
held so that the roller comes in contact with the seeds, which are speedily


stripped off. Machinery for the purposes of the nnih'i grower i- ohtaiuaom
in hand and horse or IHt power, for about £ I Ills, and £■") IO.S. respectively.
For small quantities a handy man can 'cry easily make mi l ', hut it is host
to purchase one. properly constructed, for treating largo crop!
Fig. 10. — Covering Millet to protect from rain or heavy dews.
Grading.
The grading of millet is most important, and mast not: lie overlooked.
While grading cannot bo (lone so cheaply or expeditiously on the farm as in
the factory, still, in the grower’s own interest, it is essential that some
grading tie done, Jt should hi' sorted into at least tliree classes, “Inside,’
“Covers,’’ and “Hurl,” and any which cannot lie honestly included in any of
these classes should he discarded. Green ami golden should also lie kept,
separate.
Millet mav also he graded as what is termed “ self-working.” ThC
consists of short, medium, and long millet in about equal proportions. Some
buyers prefer to buy millet in this manner. “ Self-working ” millet contain !
all the grades necessary feu- making brooms.
Baling.
The various grades should he baled separately. For this purpose a press
Is required. One used for lucerne or other hay, can be conveniently adapted
for this purpose. It is important, especially where space is charged for in


freight, to reduce the bulk as far as possible. The brush is laid with butt
ends outwards, and the heads overlapping in the middle. Battens may be
placed on top and bottom of the hales, and when pressed, the whole is secured
by five fairly stout wires. The size varies with individual growers ; but a
hale 46 in. x 30 in. x 24 in,, and weighing from 300 to 400 lb,, can be recom-
mended. Each bale should be legibly branded with an indication of the
quality. There are several styles of home-made presses in use, but one that
is coming largely into favour is made on similar lines to a wool-press, having
wire ropes and a lever.
Fig. 11.—Samples of Millet Heads, from prime (A and B) to rubbish (D, E, F).
Yield.
The yield ranges from 10 to 13 cwt. of clean marketable brush, and 23 to
30 bushels of seed per acre. The price of broom millet fluctuates consider-
ably with the season, and while it may vary from £lB to £4O per ton, the
general average for prime hurl may be set down at £3O, cover millet at £25
to £3O, and inside millet at £2O per ton. Should the prices, however, be
somewhat low when harvesting takes place, the millet may be stored for any
length of time without deterioration, and disposed of when higher prices are
obtainable.
On account of the seed not being properly developed, it is best to consume
it on the farm. Its value may be estimated at 4s. per 4-bushel bag.


Second Crops.
in the warmer parts of the .State, more particular! v the W rihern Hi vers,
where the rainfall is good, excellent .second crops can he obtained from a
held of millet by cutting off the stalks close to the ground immediately after
the first crop of brush is harvested. As the plant is still in a green sappy
condition at the time the brush is liar vested, the warm moist conditions
favour a suckering or stooling from the old roots. Immediately the old
stalks are cut and removed, the soil between the drills should lie well stirred
and cleaned by thorough working of the cultivator. With the early-sown
crops it not infrequently happens that a second crop of brush is obtained
that yields more heavily than the first or main crop. In these localities tie
season is sufficiently long to permit of the second growth maturing. Even
if the cooler weather does not produce the finest hurl, a good crop of short
millet can generally' he depended upon, which is just as essential as the other
for broom making.
'With late-sown crops a second cutting cannot he considered, ami tim
plough should he brought into use as soon as possible after the crop is
harvested.
Selection of the Seed.
.Special attention must he given to the selection of the seed. That-
obtained in the process of stripping should not be used for sowing. The
practice of using such would speedily lead to deterioration, and the produc-
tion of inferior brush.
Good reliable seed can only he obtained by sowing in special areas and
allowing the plants to mature their seed naturally. Individual plants ma t
he allowed to ripen their seed in an ordinary field, hut there is always ■>
danger of them being hybridised by pollen from plants having inferior brush
In any ease, seed should be obtained from those which produce the best heads,
and which have not been cross-fertilised with degenerated millet, nr haw-
been grown near areas of stock-feed varieties of the sorghum family.
Of late years there has been a marked deterioration in the quality of the
broom millet grown on many farms. This is accounted for by the fact that
on these farms millet is planted alongside or in close proximity' to areas of
“sorghum," or “Planter’s Friend,” grown for stock-feed. The varieties
readily cross where they' tiower at the same period, and it can be leadiiv
understood how such conditions lead to rapid deterioration of broom millet.
The short stunted brush, with the panicles growing out at right angles from
the main thickened stem along its full length, and its general straggly
appearance, are largely attributable to this practice.
By proper cultivation and selection the quality and yield of any variety may
be improved. Where seed-eating birds arc troublesome, it may be necessary to
cover the heads with some light material, such as muslin, when the seed i-
oommencmg to fill out. The ends must be tied loosely round the stalk so ns
not to interfere with the free circulation of the sap. After harvesting, tin
heads are thoroughly' dried, threshed, cleaned, and kept in a place- secure
from weevils and damp.
Where the conditions for saving seed are not. suitable, it is best to pur-
chase from reliable seedsmen. There are several varieties on the market,
but so far White Italian has given the host results in this State. At the
same time, growers art; advised to experiment with new varieties from tium
to time, or introduce fresh strains of those kinds they have in constant
cultivation, with the view of finding out the particular kind which is
most suited to their conditions.


By-products.
The object of the cultivator should be to produce brush of the best quality ;;
consequently all other uses of the plant must give way to this. In former
years millet was allowed to develop a fair proportion of seed, but the
diminished value of the brush was not compensated for by the value of the
seed obtained. The finest green brush is usually obtained while the seed is in
an immature condition, but in the production of good golden-coloured millet,
a fair proportion of the grain is more or less developed. This contains an
amount of nutriment, and can be utilised for the feeding to stock, thus
assisting in reducing the expenses of the crop, it is, however, generally more
or less soft and doughy, and if intended to be kept for any great length of
time, should be thoroughly dried by spreading out in thin layers on tarpaulins..
Growers who insist upon ripening their seed will secure brush of an inferior
quality, which brings a low price upon the market, and if exported injures
the trade.
Stalks and leaves.
The plant cannot be recommended as a particularly useful one for feeding;
purposes. While young, a certain amount of sugar exists in the sap, but
this soon disappears, and by the time the brush is cut the stalks are more or
less dry and pithy, and contain a large proportion of fibrous matter which is
unpalatable. For this reason very little use is made of them beyond turning,
stock in after the harvest to feed upon the leaves. The refuse should
afterwards be cut up with a heavy disc harrow, or cornstalk cutter, and,
ploughed under for manure.
Prospects.
As the demand for broom millet in the Sydney market is limited, it is not
wise to undertake the cultivation of extensive areas, unless the product is
properly prepared and suitable for export. For this purpose, prime brush
only should be baled ; and if the necessary details in harvesting and curing-
have been observed, there is no reason why millet should not be exported in
a wholesale and profitable manner. On almost every farm the implements
to plant and cultivate the crop are found. It will not pay any farmer to
obtain the necessary apparatus to treat his brush unless he intends to grow
the crop for a number of years. When prepared to do this, and he produces
and sends to market millet of the best quality only, it will be found a very
remunerative undertaking.
Those interested in the subject of broom-making on the farm may be
referred to Miscellaneous Publication, Xo. 1,753, copies of which are obtain-
able free of charge from the Department.
RAPE.
Rape (Brasfsica napus ) is a cruciferous plant with small yellow flowers,,
belonging to the same natural order as the cabbage and turnip. In the early
stages of growth it closely resembles the Swede turnip, but usually attains a
greater height than the turnip, and the root is not bulbous.
It is best adapted to temperate climatic conditions. In the Xew England
and other cool districts it will grow best during the summer months; but in
the coastal districts, and in many of the wheat districts on the Western
Slopes, it does better as an autumn-sown crop.
Of it, Mr. H. W. Potts, Principal of Hawkesbury Agricultural Col-
lege, writes that it “is yearly becoming more popular. It is very rapid
in its growth, and in favourable seasons is ready for feeding in from twelve


to fifteen weeks. The growth by May is very luxuriant and fleshy, and may
be eaten down by sheep or pigs when it reaches 6 inches in height. The
advantage of feeding the rape crop down this month (Alay) is that a vigor-
ous second crop follows. This naturally depends to some extent on the
class of soil and the abundance of moisture, and in the autumn we usually
have favourable conditions. Sheep, when eating the first crop, are liable to
eat it off too close. This can be avoided by turning them ofi when they
remove the first lot of leaves. They generally eat those first, and return to
more closely remove the lower tendrils, leaves, and stems. Horses and cattle
will eat rape, but in doing so they injure the plant and retard the second
growth. In every case very hungry animals, especially cattle and sheep,
eat it greedily, and are liable to sudden attacks of hoven or bloating. It
is advisable to break them into feeding it gradually, and after a week’s
attention allow them free use of the paddock. It is a good practice to feed
all animals half on grass and the balance on rape. Hoven is more prevalent
during wet weather or when heavy dews fall. Whilst on rape, cattle and
sheep do best when given free access to rock salt. An average crop should
feed ten to fifteen sheep to the acre, and fatten them for market in sixty days.
The pigs proved to be more thrifty and in healthier condition when fed with
rape than when fed with grain alone. Considerable saving in labour is
effected in grazing pigs on rape. Moreover, the ground is enriched from the
excreta of both sheep and pigs.” The same officer makes the remark that
experience has shown poultry-farmers the need for a green feed of a hetero-
geneous character as a substitute for more expensive nitrogenous foods,
such as bran and pollard, and rape is most valuable for the purpose, as
repeated trials have fully demonstrated. Milking cattle should not be
grazed on rape.
As a change crop in the wheat belt, and as an adjunct to fattening sheep
in conjunction with wheat-growing, practical experience at Bathurst Experi-
ment Earm has proved it to be a nutritious fodder for sheep. In moist
seasons it may err in being over-succulent and thus induce scouring.
Trouble in that direction may be minimised by. feeding dry grass, chaff, &e.,
in conjunction with it. In the laboratory, analyses have shown that rape
contains a fairly large proportion of nitrogenous substances.
As a sheep food it is extremely valuable, especially for ewes suckling
lambs and for the topping up of broken-mouthed sheep. When the ordinary
pastures are dry, the corrective effect of the rape is exceptionally desirable.
In districts with temperate winters, ton to twelve sheep may be depastured
per aere throughout the winter.
It also is a good cattle food, excepting for its liability to cause bloat
and to taint the milk of dairy cows.
For pigs it is very desirable, as they are not liable to hoven. When fed
in conjunction with grain for topping off, excellent results are obtained.
In all classes of poultry-farming it is valuable, and a run upon rape is
very beneficial.
Value as a Soil Renovator.
Besides its value as a fodder, rape is extremely valuable as a soil reno-
vator, and it may be ranked next to vetches as a green manure crop in
orchards. Its vigorous root system penetrates the subsoil for several feet,
and comparatively large air-channels are formed upon the decay of the
tap-roots, which assist materially in the amelioration of the soil.
Rape, in common with other plants having broad leaves, obtains compara-
tively large quantities of carbon from the atmosphere which, when ploughed


Ituder, increase tlic humus of the soil, so essential to the beneficial micro-
organisms of the soil that are indispensable to fertility. It also ensures the
physical condition necessary to circulation of air. Soils deficient in humus
readily get out of condition with heavy rains, and fail to exhibit that live-
liness -which farmers like to see.
On account of the vigorous growth allowing numbers of stock to lie
carried for several months of the year, large quantities of readily soluble
plant-food are returned to the soil in the forms of liquid and solid excreta.
After the crop has been grazed off, the land should bo ploughed and the
residues turned in. Humus is thus added to the soil, and this, together with
the improved physical conditions, allows the soil bacteria free scope for the
-discharge of their functions. Plant food is thus rendered available to give
the following wheat or other crop the fillip in the early stages that is s-.
necessary to vigorous development.
Seme indication of the quantity of feed that rape wall supply is afforded
by an experiment conducted tit Hawkesbury Agricultural College. Five,
different plots were planted on the 30th March, and on loth May, less .than
seven weeks later, various plots gave yields (computed) of 3 tons to II;
tons per acre.
Suitable Soils and their Preparation.
The soils best adapted for rape are the rich, friable loams. Those whb-h
grow' maize and potatoes profitably are very suitable, but with good culti-
vation rape does -well on ordinary wheat land.
The land should be ploughed, whenever practicable, some time before
sowing, to allow such necessary tillage as harrowing, &c., to be given.
Areas cut for hay can be ploughed earlier, and time allowed for the proper
preparation of the soil. Better still, however, is the devotion of a small
portion of the fallowed land to rape growing. It can easily be understood
that a crop of rape will do very much better on fallowed land than on non-
fallowed land.
The surface should be w'orked down fine prior to seeding to ensure thai
the seed shall be covered uniformly from J inch to 1 inch deep. The seed,
being small, docs not germinate when covered too deep.
In numerous experiments with different varieties, Dwarf Essex has in
every instance given the best results from a fodder point of view, and it is
the one that must be recommended to farmers.
Sowing and Manuring.
Suggestions as to sowing rape on the wheat farm will be found on page
i BS of this Handbook, but it may be remarked here that in the absence of
a seed attachment to the drill the best results are obtained by mixing the
>eed with superphosphate ami sowing through the manure box. Regular
and thorough mixing of seed and fertiliser is necessary, as the seed is apt
to work to the surface with the vibration, and the sowing to he uneven.
For the same reason it is unwise to put in the manure box more of the mixed
seed and fertiliser than will sow one acre at a time.
Where it is intended that rape shall he cut as green fodder and supplied
to stock, it is advisable to make the sowing much lighter than where it is
to be grazed by either sheep or pigs. The drills should then he made 2 feet
6 inches to 3 feet apart, instead of T inches, and H IK to 2 Hr of seed pro-
acre sown instead of 4 lb. Everything being equal, drilled rape grows
higher than broadcasted rape, which is an advantage in cutting the fodder.


Almost throughout the State, the end of February or the beginning of
March is the best time to sow. In cold districts like New England a spring
mowing may be made, and poultry-farmers near Sydney can sow a succes-
sion of small patches in the spring’ and again in autumn, but as a grazing
Top in wheat districts early autumn is the most profitable season for sowing.
When grown in small areas there is nothing equal to ordinary farmyard
manure for this crop. Unfortunately, this material is produced in limited
quantities, and large areas, if manured, must be treated with concentrated
fertilisers.
When rape is sown in rows better results can be ensured by keeping down
all weeds by cultivating constantly between the rows. The effect is not only
to remove the competition of the weeds, but to conserve moisture and
enhance the growth of the crop.
Feeding-off.
If the season proves favourable, rape should be lit to graze in about eight.
*o ten weeks after sowing;. If there are several paddocks, they should bo-
grazed alternately, one being- grazed, say, for a fortnight, and the others
A Crop of Rape, Bathurst
Experiment Farm.
allowed to recover. Continuous hard grazing is not satisfactory. If
there is only one paddock, it should be subdivided and treated as above.
Wire-netting and stakes make an excellent temporary subdivision for sheep,
and areas of any size may be operated upon, very little labour being’ entailed
in shifting the fence.
Sheep or cattle should not be turned on to rape whilst hungry; they
should be partially fed on other foods first. When hungry they eat raven-
ously, and hoven or bloat may be set up, and losses ensue.
To minimise this risk other foods should be available. It may be wise
to have a crop of rye, barley, or wheat in one portion of the paddock, upon
which they could graze in conjunction with the rape. Quick-growing ryes,
oats, and barleys can be sown to advantage with the rape, 15 lb. of rye or
other cereal and 3 lb. of rape being sufficient seed per acre. Care should
be taken during moist, windy weather, as stock are more liable to bloat upon
such fodders at such times. If any are bloated, Stockholm tar placed in the
month, or bicarbonate of soda given as a drench are good correctives.
If scouring is induced by the over-succulence of the fodder, the stock
should have access to a dry grass paddock, or be fed partially upon dry hay
or chaff.


In cold district' growth may be suspended throughout the colder month,-.
Upon clay soils in districts of heavier whiter rainfall, the tramping of the
stock would interlcre with the satisfactory conditions of the soil for ir-
growth. Under such conditions, tlie sandy friable soils would he preferable
for winter grazing.
The disease.- and pots of rape arc chiefly (hose that attack other onall '■ a-
(cabbage. cauliflower;-, turnips, iVc,). and they are dead, with elsewhere ii
this Handbook in eoimeetion with liaise crops.
KALE.
The several varieties of kale belong to the same family as the cabbage,
but do not form hearts like the latter plant. The open leaves and tender
stalks possess considerable feeding value, whether used for soiling cattle or
for grazing- sheep. Kale is also an excellent feed for pigs and poultry. It
thrives well in districts which are sufficiently cool and moist, but its culti-
vation is not recommended in the hotter and drier parts of the State.
A well-drained soil should be selected for the crop, and tile land 'Drought
to a fine tilth. Seed should be sown in drills as soon as the frosts bar-.-
ceased; or plants may be raised in a seed-bed and transplanted. The latter
method requires less seed, but, of course, entails much more labour. Green
fodder will be obtained from April to October of the following year. To
avoid tainting milk, it should lie fed to dairy cattle just after milking.
The following from the Agricultural Gmci/r of September, 1909, giving
the experience of Mr. W. IT. Webb, will show how the plant behaves in the
Bathurst district:--
Thousand-headed Kale.*
For about nine years I had a fancy for Thousand-headed Xale, but hesi-
tated, fearing that it would not stand dry weather, and I did not relish the
idea of transplanting and keeping the weeds down until it got a good start.
After seeing- favourable accounts of it from Tasmania, and having read
many times Mr. G. Valder’s experience of it, as published in The Farmers
and Fruitgrowers’ Guide of 1897, I at length determined to try it on about
2 acres of rich alluvial on 29th May, 1908. On account of the dry autumn
* tV. H. Webb, Hathrop, Bathurst..
Sheep Depastured on Rape.


t.March 21 points, April 09, and -May 110 points) the laud did not come to
a nice tilth all over. It was harrowed and rolled. Ten pounds of seed were
put on the surface with a drill, every second hole being blocked to get the
rows about 18 inches apart. Two hundredweight of No. 3 manure to the
acre were dropped on the surface at the same time, and then the harrows
followed to cover the seed.
We had 81 points of rain during Jone, the heaviest fall being 28 points;
July 944 points, heaviest 28; August 118, in six falls; September 154, in
eight falls; October 50 points, in four falls. The frosts were very severe,
one in July registering 10 degrees Tab., being 22 degrees of frost on the
grass.
On 9th October the land between the rows was worked by a horse-hoe.
From the sth to the 9th October, 8,000 plants were removed by thinning
out the rows, and put in on higher ground (covering about 1 acre, being in
rows 24 feet apart each way). From this land the water runs away smartly
Thousand-headed Kale.
Jersey Tree Kale.
and crops had failed on it for three years. During the transplanting on
the sth and 6th October the weather was fearfully hot and dry—hence plants
were watered the next day—but the 7th, Bth, and 9th were cool and cloudy.
During November seven falls of rain gave 1404 points, and in December
four falls gave 122 points. Notwithstanding the dry winter, the exceedingly
dry spring—which was said by many to be the worst ever known here —and
the hot winds, by the 13th November the kale on the 2-acrc flat was flourish-
ing, much being Bto 12 inches high, and all strong and healthy. The lot
that was transplanted to the higher ground also grew well, and the plants
wen- from 8 to VI inches high on 13th November. On the 19th November
about forty persons, including many farmers, came by invitation to see the
crops. They were surprised to see the healthy state of the kale, and thought


it had been irrigated, or at least watered; neither had been done, except as
stated above. The grass around the district was dead and dry, even the
lucerne was curled up and dying off, yet the kale was green.
The Bathurst Daily Argus, referring to the inspection, said: —
Astonishment was expressed by all who saw the crop, and one result of the visit will
undoubtedly be many trial experiments of a similar character in the future.
Following the dry weather of December, the climax came on 3rd January,
when the thermometer registered 105, and at 5.15 p.m. a fearful dust-storm
(which was followed by another at 6.45 p.m.) made darkness come over the
paddocks so that one could not see 5 yards. On 4th January the heat was
106, and yet another fearful dust-storm occurred on the 13th at 5.30 p.m.
Lucerne and grass all dead or dying, and the kale was beginning to look
sick. Being attacked by aphis, it was treated with arsenate of lead.
On 18th January rain, giving 125 points, followed by 10, 38, and 111
points on three successive days, set things right. The recovery of the grasses
was slow, and the kale was the first to be ready for stock, beating ever,
lucerne, many leaves running to 11 x 8 inches by February.
On 12th February, 1909, thirty-two rams were put on the 2-aore plot and
kept there until 10th April, by which time they had eaten the kale at the
gate end so short that most of it died. They should have been hurdled in
sections on the kale.
On 29th February, 100 ewes were put on the acre plot and kept there
about one hour daily until sth March. This, and one feed of chaff daily,
kept them improving in condition. On Bth March thirty-nine ewes were
put on the acre plot and left there until 10th April, when the kale was
stripped, leaving the stalks only.
During the winter the stalks sent out leaves just like Brussels sprouts,
and forty-nine ewes were on the 2-acre plot for some time. The acre plot
was kept for some special sheep, and on the 18th July, 1909, a few of the
plants were measured around the top parts, and gave 53, 54, 76, 55, and 72
inches. On this plot they all had fair heads. These were eaten off, and
then allowed to run out strongly, so as to supply green food during Decem-
ber and January, when green food safe from hoven is scarce in dry times.
If sowing again I would select the spring. In Tasmania, some gentlemen
told me, they grow Thousand-headed Kale to weigh 70 lb. each. Some I
put in the garden last spring weighed 26 lb. in July. I consider the test
the above kale had was a very severe one, as the season was very bad. Many
farmers had no crops, while others cut 200 acres for 20 tons, and so on.
Besides Thousand-headed, the two best known kales are Jersey Tree and
Marrow (Chou moellier). Jersey Tree is a first-class variety, but Chou
moellier has a larger proportion of stem to leaf than the other two, which
somewhat discounts its value.
Chou Moellier.*
This fodder-plant belongs to the kale or borecole family of plants, and is
characterised by its thick, tall stems, and large, succulent leaves.
The crop grown at Hawkesbury Agricultural College was sown in drills
on the 16th June, 1909, and although the summer of that year was very dry,
the plants withstood the severe weather conditions without the application
• A. J. Finn, Inspector of Agriculture.


of water. Eain fell at the latter end of December, and caused a rapid
growth of the plants, which at present (one year after planting) are 5 feet
high, and still growing.
During the month of June a small area was harvested, producing a yield
of 27 tons 17 ewt. of foliage per acre, and, in addition, 38 tons 18 cwt. per
cere of stems.
The best soil for its growth is a warm, sandy loam, preferably one that has
received an application of stable manure the previous season.
The seed may either be sown in drills and eventually thinned out, or the
plants raised in a seed-bed and transplanted into rows 3 feet apart and 2 feet
between the plants. On account of the seed being expensive, viz., os. per
lb., the latter method is recommended. When planted by those methods the
cultivator can be used to keep down weeds until the plant becomes sufficiently
advanced to need no further cleaning.
Chou Moellier at Hawkesbury Agricultural College.
If several cuttings of the foliage are required, the large leaves should be
pulled from the stem, leaving the younger ones to develop and be of use at
:< later period. The practice of allowing the crop to remain for more than
one season is not recommended. After one year’s growth the plants attain
a height of 3 to 7 feet, and only a comparatively small amount of leaf is
formed at the top.
The crop is especially valuable for poultry, as well as for all classes of
stock.
Feeding tests at the College have demonstrated that the foliage is relished
1-y all stock, but the stems are eaten by pigs only.
Besides its value as stock-feed it is also eaten as a vegetable, but only the
younger leaves can he used. When prepared for the table it presents a
dark-green colour, and possesses a fuller flavour than cabbage.


Although producing a good quantity of feed per acre, it does not possess
any special qualifications which would warrant the recommendation of it
before Jersey Tree or Thousand-headed kale.
Kale and Chou moellier are subject chiefly to the same diseases and pests
as other Crucifers, and they will be found dealt with iu connection with
cauliflowers, cabbages, and turnips.
SUGAR-CANE.
Tor convenience, the production of sugar-cane may bo considered in two
sections —First, for sugar; and second, for cattle fodder.
The only portion of the State suitable for the successful growth of sugar-
cane is the coastal areas from the Clarence Elver northward, and during
recent years the area devoted to it for sugar purposes has contracted con-
siderably. This has been brought about by various conditions, but princi-
pally by labour troubles and dissatisfaction with the prices paid for cane.
On the Tweed Elver the banana is ousting the cane on the hills, the cost of
carriage to the deep-water frontage, in conjunction with cutters’ demands,
rendering profitable production of sugar-cane impracticable.
In land free from stones the soil should be thoroughly broken by means
of subsoiling to a depth of a foot or more, the surface soil being turned over
by ploughing in the ordinary way, the subsoil being broken and retained in
its natural position by following in the same furrow with a subsoil plough.
Where a proper subsoil plough is not available a simple substitute may be
made by removing the mouldboard from a plough of ordinary construction.
Some of the heaviest crops of cane produced in the Eichmond Eiver dis-
trict have been grown in stony land, where manual labour only would be
possible, the increased yield amply compensating for the greater cost of
production.
The best months for planting are September, October, and November.
The “ sets ” or plants should be procured from healthy and vigorous
canes, the upper portions of the canes being the best for the purpose,
although the whole of the cane may be used. Each set should have from
two to four sound eyes, and should be planted from 9 inches to 1 foot deep,
about 3 inches of soil being placed over them, the drills being filled to sur-
face level after the plants have made some growth. The drills should be
6 feet apart, and the plants 6 feet apart in the drills. The system of wide
planting favours the production of more vigorous cane, and renders the
work of thrashing and tillage much easier than is the case where close plant-
ing is carried out.
The best implement for tillage during the growth of the crop is the Planet
Jr. horse-hoe fitted for scarifying with narrow tines. All weeds should be
destroyed in the earliest stages of their growth, for this purpose a horse-hoc
with a set of “sweep” fittings being the most effective.
Owing to the expense of thrashing cane, i.e, removing dead leaves prior
to cutting, the practice is commonly adopted of burning the cane. Provid-
ing the crop is cut and crushed within a few days, there is no loss of sugar,
hut the blackened canes are not pleasant to handle.
Before entering upon cane-growing it will be necessary for new planters
to contract with sugar-mill proprietors carrying on operations on the nor-
thern rivers, otherwise they may be unable to find a market for their cane.
The best and most economical method of renovating old cane lands is by
green manuring, and for this purpose the cowpea is the most suitable crop.


Varieties.
The investigations of the chemists at the mills, determined by exhaustive
analyses extending over different periods of the year, and with canes at vari-
ous stages of* growth, have revealed many phenomena. Great differences in
the weights of cane yielded have been observed, as well as striking
in the values of these canes from a sugar-content point of view. It has also
been noticed that the continuous cropping of land, without rotation, fallow-
ing, or systematic manuring, is responsible for great variations in yield
.and quality. As with many other plants, such practices result in the dete-
rioration of the vitality to such an extent that varieties “ run out.”
It has been the practice at many mills in the State to conduct experi-
ments to maintain and improve varieties of proved merit; and from time to
time new varieties or crosses have been introduced, with the object of
enabling farmers to secure varieties best suited to their conditions, and for
sugar production generally.
Sugar-cane being a tropical plant, loves a deep rich soil, with abun-
dance of heat and moisture, and, given these conditions, certain varieties
are capable of yielding as high as 100 tons of clean cane per acre, fit for
the mill. Although the majority of the varieties under cultivation are able
to stand a few light frosts without serious harm, it must be stated that
many or severe frosts are decidedly harmful, and occasionally it happens
that unduly severe winters are responsible for killing out completely certain
areas. In order to combat these troubles, endeavours have been made to
secure a variety that while it embodies all the desirable qualities of a cane,
will be able to withstand frosts. If such a variety could be procured, the
area upon which cane could be grown would be vastly extended, and the
sugar output correspondingly increased.
The Department has conducted experiments with different varieties at
Duck Creek Farm, in the Richmond River district. The most remunerative
results have been obtained from Malabar Ho. 20, Mahona Ho. 28, Hew Guinea
Ho. 14 (large), and Mauritius Seedling, 1900. Malabar was produced
locally, having originated from green-coloured sport stalks found among
Striped Tamm cane; it has proved a considerably better cane for Rich-
mond River conditions than the parent, the sugar-density being regular and
good, and the- cane easily thrashed. Mahona was introduced from Hew
Guinea, and is now recognised as one of the sweetest canes growing on the
river. Mauritius Seedling, 1900, which comes from Queensland, produces
heavy yields of good-quality cane. Hew Guinea, Ho. 14, is one of a large
number of varieties of cane introduced from Hew Guinea; on the Clarence
River it was quite'extensively grown at one time, its resistance to frost
being its chief recommendation, but it subsequently proved difficult to
thrash and harvest, and has fallen into disfavour.
A Farmer’s Suggestions.
Some suggestions of a very practical nature, made by Mr. Ralph Warby,
a farmer in the district, at a meeting of the Coraki branch of the Agricul-
tural Bureau, may be referred to here. Mr. Warby took to the meeting a,
number of samples of sugar-cane of different varieties, and discussed each
briefly.
D 1,135 CDemerara), he said, was a good frost resister, a big stooler, and a
good cow cane, for it had little fibre and was soft. It was a 2-year-old cane,
and sent out from fifty to sixty stalks to the stool on suitable land. Mahona
was a good, soft cane with a hard skin, familiar to every cane-grower. Innes


115 was a splendid 1-year old variety; one of the best sugar runes, fairly soft,
had a good top. and was a noted frost resister. It was a new cane, and not
much of it was yet in evidence on the Richmond. It was very fibrous, perhaps
too much so for cattle. New Guinea 23 Black was a very big stooler and good
rooter; did not grow much the first year, but in localities unaffected by frost
i t was a particularly line cane. It sent out up to sixty to seventy stalks' to the
stool. New Guinea ( yellow! exhibited similar characteristics. O 117, another
Demerara. —About the number there was souk- doubt, In consequence of which
it was usually called “Green.'’ It was not a big stooler. but it was a big
rooter, and eminently suited for stiff, clayey soils. It would thrive where
Mahona would prove a failure, and showed to advantage in the second crop.
Clarence tor Garvin i 10.—Another new cane and a big stooler, did not grow
much In the first year. It belonged to the same family as No. 12, grew large
tops, would flourish in poor, sandy soil, and grow where other varieties would
prove a failure. This cane Mr. Warby grew on the worst portions of his laud.
If planted on rich soil it went down and broke off; after a storm the crop
looked as if a steam roller had been over it. 1900 Seedling.—A cane with a
big, cabbage-like top, possessing the virtue of growing upright again if it goes
down in a storm. He had grown stalks with as much as 15 feet of mill cane
below the top. It was, however, liable to Fiji disease; a soft cane not possess-
ing much fibre. It was a good cropper—B4 tons to the acre hud been grown
on his laud two years ago. for.which he was paid 14s. per ton, clear.
Most of the above varieties Mr. Warby considered suitable for cow canes, hut
primarily a man’s land must decide what varieties he should grow. In swampy
soil or rich alluvial Mahona was one of the best of canes, and in clayey soils*
along the river hank it would be hard to beat D 117; but to get the best results
farmers should grow small experimental plots of each variety, and test for
themselves what their lands were most suited to grow. As to the planting of
cane, the result of his experience was that deep cultivation and light covering
were essential. It was a mistake to cover the plants deeply; he had found
that out to his cost. There should be just enough earth put over the plants
with a hoe to nicely cover them. Sets thus planted would shoot a week earlier.
Three or four eyes should be left on each set, and they should not be planted
too closely—s feet between the drills at least (G feet was better), and not less
than 4 feet in (he rows. Cane should have room to spread and to stool, and for
that reason the mistake of planting too close must lie avoided. With a good,
square paddock, plant the sets 5 feet on the square. The drills should be
thrown up one way. then cross-drilled, and a set put at each cross furrow.
The plant cane must he carefully cut to avoid injury to the eyes. The sets
should be dropped hi with the eyes on the side —not on the top. This would
avoid injury to the eye when tramping with the foot after hoeing over the light
covering of earth. The hoe was slower than a light plough for this work, but
it was more effective, and the grower gained by the results.
Another essential was to have the ground well drained. A good disc plough
and a scoop were indispensable in this regard. He made It a practice to scoop
out the headlands and throw the earth back on the field. This had a triple
effect—it banished weeds from the headland, assisted in drainage, and gave
an even depth of ploughing, and consequently a more uniform crop. They
would often notice In farms how the cane petered out towards the headlands.
That was because the plough ran shallow, but the judicious use of a scoop on
the headlands prevented that. He attached special importance to drainage,
and regarded it as an absolute necessity on low, flat land, if successful results
were to he achieved. Wide, shallow drains he found to answer admirably,
and they were easy to construct.
As to diseases. Mahona was the only cane, with, perhaps the exception of
some of the New Guinea varieties, that had proved itself free on the Rich-
mond. The Fiji disease was very prevalent, and was going to prove a serious
menace if care was not exercised. It began by causing the top leaves to
wither, if they cut these leaves with a knife, and took a microscope they
would see certain congested cells, the congestion causing the leaves to stop
growing, and wither away. The disease worked down into the stalk, the top
of which gradually died, and a fresh shoot then shot out from the eyes. The
disease in full-grown cane did not affect the milling quality. But no infected


-cane should be used for planting. If it were used, it would only put out a
large number of withered, stunted stalks, which would not come to anything.
Moreover, if the disease were allowed to progress, the wind blew the infection
on to adjoining cane stalks, and the trouble quickly spread. Rooting out and
burning the affected stalks was the only remedy. So far as he knew. 11*00
.Seedling and I) 1,135 were more susceptible to this disease than any other
canes.
In conclusion, he recapitulated the best advice he had to offer from practical
•experience: “Cultivate deeply, cover the sets lightly, and do not plant close
and get spindly cane.” If D 1,135 were planted wide, it could be cultivated
over a series of years. In hard, lumpy ground run twice ia the furrows, in
soft ground once.
Diseases and Pests of Sugar-cane.*
While Mahona is one of our best canes, as remarked in the above, it is
unfortunately subject to disease on the Clarence. Its stools die off hero and
there without apparent cause, and sometimes considerable areas are so
affected. The disease has been investigated, but does not appear to bo
■clearly understood as yet.
Other varieties have also developed diseases, but cutting out and burning
■diseased plants checks the spread of the trouble. Dry weather invariably
increases the loss under this head.
A disease that has made its appearance for several years is that locally
known as “ arrowing ” —the cane running up to flower. The trouble is also
greatest during dry seasons, and there is little of it when the conditions are
good. It results in a great increase in the fibre content of the stalk, and
diminution of the sugar content to such an extent that it does not pay to
crush it.
Rats are very troublesome, and cause great destruction. They are fond
<;f the sugar-cane, and attack it by gnawing through the base, which is the
sweetest portion. Frequently they select a cane that is lying on the ground,
and after having damaged it beyond recovery they move on to another. It
is not easy to suggest a remedy other than keeping down all undergrowth
■and rubbish around the fields, particularly on the river and creek banks.
As, however, this undergrowth helps to prevent erosion of the banks of
streams, farmers have to some extent to make choice of two evils, or at least
to exercise discretion in avoiding one or other.
INDIAN CANE.*
As is the case with all plants of economic value, Indian cane has its limi-
tations, and it is feared that many farmers, not thoroughly conversant with
it, are attempting to grow this plant in latitudes not favourable, or in situ-
ations not conducive to the best results. It is a variety of sugar-cane
(Saccharum officinarum'), though not grown here for sugar production, and
It is not, as has been erroneously supposed, one of the sorghum family.
Prior to the introduction of this variety, sugar-cane had been in cultiva-
tion for many years on certain areas adjacent to the Tweed, Richmond, and
Clarence Rivers, and the value of sugar-cane as a fodder had long been
known to farmers. During the cane-cutting season, which usually extends
from July to December, the leafy tops that are cut off in preparing the
cane for the mill form almost the sole food for the horses or bullocks that
■are employed in hauling the loads. They do well, stand the work as if fed
* George Marks, Manager, Grafton Experiment Farm.


oi; a grain ration, and finish the season in good condition and with sleek
.oats. On most of the cant farms, portions of standing cane are usually
reserved for whiter feed, and on account of the somewhat hard and woody
nature of the canes, the usual practice is to chaff them prior to feeding.
With the advent of the dairy industry, and the gradual stocking up of the
:arm=, it soon became apparent that something would have to be done to
counteract the shortage caused by the failure of the paspalum pastures to
maintain their reputation during the winter months. Sugar-cane was tried,
end although it could not be stated that it improved the milk flow, it kept
the animals in condition; and in dry and severe weather, that in itself was
of immense value. Similarly, cane was fed to pigs with equal benefit, and
gradually cane came to be planted on many farms expressly for stock.
Later, the introduction of Indian cane provided farmers with a variety
more suitable for fodder purposes, and it is now highly esteemed as a
valuable stand-by in times of drought. Dairymen must not grow it for the
express purpose of stimulating milk production, or they will be disappointed,
though used with regard to the nature and composition of stock foods gene-
rally—in other words, as part of a properly balanced ration —it has its place
on the average dairy farm, and may be one means of preventing many of
the losses that unforeseen circumstances or want of forethought sometimes
incur.
lii a memorandum, ilr. A. IT, Haywood, when Alanager of Grafton
Experiment Farm, compared “cow cane” with Indian cane, and referred
to the true utility of the latter in the following sentences: —“I obtained
some cuttings of cow cane from Wollongbar Farm three years ago, and
still have a small patch on the farm. I never enlarged on this, as it did not
• ome up to its reputation, and is infinitely inferior to Indian cane. Cow
sane is slow in growth, is not any easier for stock to manipulate, is more
subject to frost, and does not adapt itself to different soils and climates like
Indian cane.
Indian cane is a splendid fattening food, especially when chaffed, and
is very useful for feeding in conjunction with lucerne to dairy stock, dry
cows, and calves. It has been subjected to a lot of abuse, because it has not
been used with discretion Ly dairymen who expected it to stimulate milk
production and were disappointed. It was never meant to be used alone for
•hat purpose, and the dairyman should feed it in conjunction with other
food? rich in protein. For maintaining c ondition on all classes of stock
i: nm-r valuable."
The Range of Indian Cane.
Indian cane has proved itself in its adaptability to a variety of both soil
and climatic conditions to be suitable for growing over a great portion of
the North Coast. Excellent results have been obtained as far south as
Gloucester, and in a few well-sheltered situations on the Hunter. It is a.
perennial plant, which is propagated by “sets” ("portions of cane having-
several eyes or buds), and grows to a height of from 10 to 14 or 15 feet,
according to situation. The stem or cane is composed of a series of joints or
nodes, at each of which is a bud or eye. Under normal conditions these-
buds do not sprout unless the canes are broken down and come in contact
with tire soil, or unless the dead leaves which encase them are kept moist
lor nn unusual length of time. As the plant grows the lower leaves die anu
many fall off) or, as is usually the case, they are kept supported by the mass
of other leaves and numerous stalks that come from one root. The stems
i re usually soui'-what yellowish in colour, slender, and much softer than


those of the average variety grown for sugar. At the same time the outside
casing' is somewhat hard and woody, and this fact must be borne in mind
when much of it is fed to stock. At the top of each plant are to be found
several pairs of long, narrow pale green leaves.
The canes and leafy top form a valuable stock food. Unlike maize and
other crops that die otf upon reaching maturity, cane always remains green,
so that if at any particular time of the year it is not required to be used it
may be allowed to stand without danger of deterioration.
It prefers a deep, rich, well-drained soil, situated in a locality where there
is abundance of heat and plenty of moisture. The steamy conditions which
are so prevalent on the coast suit it admirably. At the same time it will
succeed W’ell on hill lands situated some distance from the rivers, provided
it is protected from undue exposure. Though the cane is able to stand a fair
amount of frost, it must be distinctly understood that it will not stand very
heavy or continuous frosts. Slight frosts will probably do little more than
cheek the growth, but heavy frosts will kill the leaf development, whilst a
continuance of very heavy frosts will completely destroy the plant. Case's
have occurred where cane which has been growing in exposed situations
subject to severe frosts has been checked in growth and completely killed
out, while in sheltered localities no harmful results were noticeable.
These facts should be borne in mind when selecting land to be planted,
particularly in the southern districts. The plantings should be kept in the
higher lands if possible, and special care taken to avoid depressions or
hollow’s that are frequently met with on our alluvial farm areas. Numerous
instances have come under notice where cane was completely killed in such
depressions by frosts, while that adjacent to it on land only a few feet higher
was scarcely affected. In hilly situations preference should be given to
easterly, north-easterly, or northerly slopes, so as to obtain the maximum
of heat and the necessary protection from fierce cold or dry westerly winds.
Any little consideration that can be given in this direction will be amply
repaid by increased returns.
Preparation of the Land.
The land should be ploughed at least 10 or 12 inches where practicable.
Cane is a gross feeder, and as one planting occupies the land for a number
of years, more attention should be given to this operation than for a crop
that matures in a few months. Its drought-resisting qualities depend in
no small measure upon the development of a deep root-system, and this
development should be encouraged in every possible manner, by having the
land in good heart and properly prepared.
In timbered areas, such as are found in the soft-wood scrubs or in partially
cleared areas, it is advisable, after brushing and felling the scrub, to get a
clean burn, and then planting can be proceeded with, using the mattock, a
specially-constructed grubbing hoe, or an old adze to make the holes to
receive the sets.
On stony headlands or spurs, hand labour has also to be resorted to, and
it is surprising how the cane thrives in such situations, provided, of course,
that there is reasonable depth and quality of soil.
Time to Plant.
Cane can be planted at any time during the spring and summer, from,
say, September till .January, but it is preferable to have the planting done
during the first hot month, usually October. If planted earlier, the some-
what cold nature of the soil does not admit of quick sprouting, and the spring
t 17209—U


showers favour a more rapid weed growth. It must have plenty of heat in
order to promote quick growth, which during the early stages of the plant
is always more or less sluggish. Late plantings do not admit of the plant
making too much headway before the cold wintry conditions set in, and
being more tender at this stage, it is not able to withstand such adverse
conditions as could be borne by an older plant.
Planting.
Cane is propagated by “ sets.” These are portions of the cane containing
several eyes or buds. In the choice of sets, due regard should be paid to
the selection of well grown stalks having large and well developed buds.
There should be at least four sound buds to each “ hole.” The buds are
arranged alternately on the nodes, and the roots of the future plant start
out from all round the nodes. During growth these buds are protected by
the dead leaves which may not have been removed, but it is not absolutely
necessary to remove these at planting time unless it be to examine the buds.
Otherwise such leaves afford protection from any injury that may occur in
the ordinary handling and planting of the sets.
The sets should be planted fairly deeply, but only covered with a light
layer of fine soil, so that they will get the full amount of heat to start
sprouting. As the plants grow, the earth can be gradually drawn in around,
and brought to the level of the surrounding soil, which will also smother any
weeds at the same time. Shallow planting is not favourable to free stooling;
droughty conditions affect the crop more readily, and it is more likely to
break down with its own weight, or the effect of winds and storms. Hilling
can be carried out to remedy some of these evils in affording the necessary
support, hut in naturally open or porous soils, or those situated on hillsides,
this practice cannot be recommended.
The distance at which the sets are planted varies with different growers,
and a good deal depends upon the situation and fertility of the soil. Close
planting tends to develop longer and thinner canes than wide planting, and
is of some importance when the product is not chaffed before feeding. In
general practice, however, it is found that the be§t results are obtained by
planting the sets 4 feet 6 inches or 5 feet apart each way.
On level land free of obstacles, it is advisable to plant on the square
system. This is done by laying the land off in checks, 4 feet 6 inches or
5 feet apart each way, by striking out shallow drills, working up the soil at
the intersection of these drills with a hoe, and planting the sets. This
method enables the land to be cultivated or ploughed each way afterwards.
Regular and constant cultivation is required while the crop is young,
particularly to keep down weed growth, and also to bring about those favour-
able soil conditions that proper and systematic cultivation ensures. After
a few months’ growth the leaves of the rows should overlap, the soil between
is completely shaded, and the crop looks after itself.
Cutting.
With an October or November planting, the crop should be fit for feeding
to stock by the following winter, when there should be no difficulty in getting
from 20 to 30 tons per acre. In particularly favoured situations, as high
as 40 tons may be obtained from twelve months’ growth.


It is most important that the crop be properly cut. The future growth
and life of the plant is influenced to a very large extent by the manner in
which this work is carried out.
The canes should be cut with a sharp implement (preferably a cane knife)
slightly below the surface of the soil. Breaking the canes or cutting with
blunt instruments damages the base of the stalks, and the surfaces do not
heal as quickly as they should, whilst in addition the bruised or split portions
favour the introduction of moulds, &c., which set up decomposition.
Some people actually turn stock into cane and graze it off. This is
undoubtedly done with the object of economising labour, but the practice
is one that cannot be too strongly condemned, and nothing is calculated to
destroy a plantation quicker than this trampling and constant nibbling. If
the crop is not required for present consumption it can be allowed to
stand.
A number of inquiries have been received regarding the suitability of
Indian cane for converting into silage. Good silage can be made from it,
either by itself or in combination with other crops, but as cane always
remains green it is neither necessary nor desirable to go to this extra
trouble and expense.
Later Crops.
In the ordinary course of harvesting, most of the dead leaf or “ trash ”
will have been removed. The land should then be ploughed between the
rows, or well loosened with the cultivator early in spring. As soon as the
warm weather sets in the roots will stool again, young stalks starting from
the buds at the base of the old canes. These will increase in number after
each cutting, but will become gradually weaker. The first crop, termed
“ plant ” cane, is usually the heaviest and best, whilst the succeeding cuts,
known respectively as the “ first ratoon, second ratoon,” and so on, become
gradually lighter until it is necessary to plough the whole area out.
However, with ordinary precautions, a good crop of cane will last many
years before it has to be replanted.
When the cane has been planted in recently fired scrub lands, it is
advisable to fire the refuse or trash. This will enable a large quantity of
dead timber and stumps to be got rid of, and also destroy many forms of
borers and other insects that are harmful to cane. Where vermin such as
hares, rabbits, paddymelons, &c., are plentiful, it may become necessary to
enclose the plantation with wire-netting.
The Limitations of Indian Cane.
As stated previously, Indian cane is being grown extensively throughout
the North Coast, and quite a number of dairymen, whose spirits were buoyed
up on the reputation of this plant, have been disappointed, and in a few
instances have condemned it, but only because the crop was not understood.
Cane contains a large amount of saccharine matter, which tends to fatten
rather than to stimulate milk production. For the milking herd it is
essential that foods rich in protein, such as lucerne, clovers, vetches, peas,
&c., should be given.
At the same time, if other fodder is not available cane is far better than
nothing, and if it does nothing else than pull animals through a somewhat
severe winter in good condition its value should not be overlooked. In
any case, young or dry stock can be fed on this fodder, while any milk-
producing foods that may be grown can be reserved solely for the milking
herd.


Feeding to Stock.
Indian cane is specially suitable for working bullocks. In the timber
districts the country is not usually of the best for grazing purposes, and it
not unfrequently happens that through a scarcity of ordinary or even rough
herbage many teamsters are compelled to turn their teams out for a rest
during winter months. At such periods the weather conditions generally
favour good roads, so that the teamsters are compelled to lose valuable time.
The cultivation of cane in favoured situations in many of these localities
enables the animals to be fed, and with the w r onderful powers of endurance
thus obtained constant and profitable w T ork may be engaged in. In a similar
manner horses will also work well, but, of course, it is preferable, if very
heavy work is being performed, to include a little grain.
In the feeding of this fodder to stock, however, there are certain dangers
which must be guarded against. All well matured cane ought to be chaffed.
Though much softer than many varieties of sugar-cane, there is a fair
amount of hard or woody fibre, which has a very bad effect upon the teeth
of stock. Chaffing minimises this danger to a very large extent. Probably
no deleterious results would be noticed in feeding small quantities over two
or three years, but, on the other hand, liberal feeding of unchaffed cane over
lengthened periods does injure the teeth and otherwise impair the health
and comfort of animals.
Instances have been recorded where stock have been killed through eating
cane. Post mortem examinations have revealed the presence of large accumu-
lations of undigested fibre. Similar troubles occur in drought times in
other districts where animals are forced to subsist on nothing but dry foods.
This raises another point of considerable importance regarding the feeding
of stock, and that is, that endeavours should be made when feeding large
quantities of dry foods, or fodder containing much dry matter, to have also a
liberal supply of succulent material, such as green crops or silage. A mixed
diet is always preferable to a single food.
There is another danger associated with cane. There is always a risk
of fire from the presence of so much dead leaves or trash. For that reason
care should be exercised in the selection of sites, so that they are not
situated too close to scrub or other material that may be burnt, c-r to forest
areas that are periodically raided by bush-fires. In harvesting the cane also,
lighted pipes should be prohibited.
ELEPHANT GRASS.*
Introduced into New South Wales some three or four years ago, Elephant
or Napier's Fodder grass (Penniseium purpureum) has already given such
promising yields of edible green fodder that it may be recommended to the
attention of farmers, especially for light soils.
The plant is a native of Central Africa and Rhodesia, where it grows
extensively on marshy areas, and under favourable conditions, such as the
delta of the Zambesi, forms extensive reed jungles. It first came under the
notice of the Rhodesian Agricultural Department in 1910, its recommenda-
tions being its rapidity of growth and capacity to stand dry weather. The
reports there led the Department here to procure some seed and to sow it
in the Botanic Gardens. Sydney, with the result that it made very rapid
growth and speedily attained a considerable height. In appearance it rather
* E. Breakwell, B Sc,, Agrostologist.


resembles a coarse-growing sorghum, but its sap is not saccharine. In a
very short time it stools out into a large permanent plant, sending up stalks
that attain a height of 10 or 12 feet, or even more. It may be propagated
from cuttings, slips, or roots, but of its seeding habit under our conditions
not much is yet known. It stands cutting well, the severed parts sending-
out fine stems that produce smaller leaves of finer quality than the original
growth.
Analyses of the grass by Mr. F. B. Guthrie, Chemist, show it to be of good
feeding quality, the albuminoid ratio being 1 to 4 3, and the nutritive value
18-90, which compares very favourably with other grasses analysed here.
Elephant Grass at Wollongbar Experiment Farm.
Yielded 25 tons of Green Fodder per acre after four months’ growth.
At Salisbury, Rhodesia, a comparison was made with sugar-cane fodder,
which showed that though Elephant grass contained much more woody fibre,
it was superior in protein and very nearly equal in carbohydrates.
Field Trials in New South Wales.
Cuttings and Footings were distributed to most of the Department’s
experiment farms, and on the coast in particular it has more than fulfilled
expectations. At Grafton Experiment Farm roots and cuttings were planted
C feet apart in November, 1910, and in four mouths some of the plants had
grown to 12 feet high, and some had as many as forty stems to a stool.


When cut, the plot at this farm yielded at the rate of 16 tons of green fodder
per acre, while at Wollongbar Experiment Earm even better growth was
made, the fodder running 25 tons to the acre. At Hawkesbury Agricultural
College during the season 1917-18, 30 tons of green fodder per acre were
obtained in three cuts, with every probability of a total yield of 60 tons
per acre for the season.
Elephant grass has been observed under our conditions to make its greatest
growth in the summer months, and to respond very readily to moisture.
Palatability tests have had reassuring results. At Hawkesbury Agri-
cultural College it was fed in the rough, and also as green chaff, to stall-fed
Jersey cows. The cows ate the young leaves in the rough, but neglected the
coarse growth; the chaff was eaten up greedily in every case. Similar tests
were conducted at Grafton with Ayrshire cows, and at Wollongbar witk
Guernseys, the results being the same.
Already several farmers in the State have tried it and have obtained satis-
factory yields. Mr. M. S. Gunther informed the Department that at two-
neighbouring farms at North Eyde, in the Metropolitan area, both horses
and cows ate it up readily. Mr. E. Riddel, Stuart’s Point, Macleay River,
reports that on one root planted on 20th September, 1917, several stems four
months later had attained a height of 16 feet. The root was planted at the
end of a patch of Indian cane, which at that time was 10 or 12 inches high,
but the Elephant grass easily outgrew it, and may be regarded as very
promising for that district. Mr. P. Spinage, of Swan Bay, in the Coraki
district, stated that his roots grew wonderfully. There were 60 stalks on
one stem, up to 16 feet high; he considered that it beat anything he had
grown at Swan Bay. Both these farmers found every evidence that their
stock relished the fodder. More, recently other farmers have reported most
favourably on the grass as regards both the high yield of fodder and the
palatability.
LINSEED.
War conditions have called attention to this plant, which is grown for two
main purposes—(l) the production of flax, the fibre used in the manufacture
of linen; and (2) the production of the seed for oil, &c. While prices are
apparently attractive at the time of writing, no one should undertake the
crop without a knowledge of the many limitations attending its growth.
Under most conditions it is quite impracticable to utilise the crop for
both seed and fibre, as the quantity of seed sown and the resulting growth
cf the plant arc quite different. In the ease of fibre the labour involved is
very considerable.
Linseed for flax can only profitably be grown in a cool and continuously
moist climate. It is easily impaired by late spring frosts. The soil should
be rich in soluble organic matter, and light sandy loams are rather better
than heavy clay loams. For seed, any climate or soil in which wheat can
successfully be grown has been found suitable.
Owing to the fact that the crop is subject to a wilt disease, and the diffi-
culty of treating the seed to kill the internal spores, land soon becomes flax
sick, and many areas formerly devoted to flax culture have been abandoned
on this account. This is one of the reasons why in most countries the crop
is grown only once in seven or eight years.


lor fibre, broadcasting should be practised, as when sown in drills the
outer parts of the drill-row are coarser and more branching- than the inner
ones, and this materially reduces the uniformity of the product. From 84
to 12(1 lb. of seed is required per acre.
For seed, 30 to 40 lb. of seed is usual, and this can be drilled in during
April or early in May. In most cases about J cwt. of superphosphate is
advisable. The ordinary wheat drill can bo used, sowing through every cup.
The crop ripens about November, but it is advisable to cut it wdth reaper
and binder before it is thoroughly ripe. It has subsequently to be threshed.
As regards yield, 14 bushels have been obtained under irrigation at Yanco
Experiment Farm, but this is not profitable in comparison with other crops
which can be grown on the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area. American
experience indicates that the yields average five-sixths that of wheat grown
on the same class of soil.
In England, where the crop has been receiving increasing attention, the
yield of dressed seed has been 4 to 5 cwt. (8 to 10 bushels) per acre on hand-
weeded soil.
Experiments are being conducted by the Department at several of the
experiment farms, and on some of the farmers’ experiment plots, to further
test its cropping capacity under our conditions.
The world’s yield of fibre has been produced in countries where cheap
labour prevails, Russia growing about three-quarters of the total. It is
sparingly produced in Ontario, Canada, and a few of the northern states of
America; but the tendency has been to grow it only on newdy broken-up
lands, and thus the production, after a certain stage of progress, has tended
to recede.
The best flax is pulled—
(1) to secure straw of full length;
(2) to avoid stain and injury which would occur from soil moisture
soaking into the cut stems cvhilst curing in the stock or shock;
(3) to secure the better curing of the straw and ripening of the seed;
(4) to avoid the blunt cut ends of the fibre.
The dry stems of flax contain from 20 to 27 per cent, of bast, and of this
58 per cent, is pure fibre. A further 26 per cent, constitutes other substances
soluble in water, and 17 per cent, soluble in alkalis.
There are no mills in this State where the fibre can be treated, but flbre-
growing on a commercial scale is being encouraged, under Federal auspices,
in a district in Victoria. To ensure success, several thousands of acres of
suitable soil within a comparatively small radius would be necessary (to
avoid cartage over long distances), and a considerable area would need to
be laid down each year to guarantee regularity of output for the mill.


SECTION IX.
Vegetable Crops.*
In this section only crops are dealt with that are grown by farmers under
what may be called field or extensive conditions. To attempt to include
all the numerous lines that go to make up an ordinary vegetable growers 7
produce for the city market, or even all that are grown by farmers for their
own use, would he to make undue demands upon space. Hence it is that
only a limited number of crops are dealt with, and in a manner that pre-
sumes production on a fair scale, though the alterations in method where
only a small area is contemplated will really be few.
Tor convenience, certain crops arc included in the section devoted to
root crops—the potato because it is grown on such a large scale as to ’make
it the most important of all roots, and others, like the turnip, the sw T eet
potato, and the artichoke, because they are grown even more extensively
as food for stock than as vegetables for human consumption. Sweet corn
is treated in conjunction with maize, to "which it is closely related,
CAULIFLOWERS AND CABBAGES.
This article deals with ihe growing of these crops in large areas, but certain
recommendations can be modified to suit small growers, e.y,, plants «in be
set closer in small garden plots, as all cultivation is carried out by hand, and
there is not the same necessity for leaving so much space.
With the e'er-increasing population of Sydney and inland towns, it would
appear that the cultivation of these crops can yet be extended with every
likelihood of profitable returns to the growers. Apart from the metropolitan
markets, there are many instances in which cultivation for local requirements
could be extended. Even in the most fertile division of the State— i.e., the
North Coast —it is common to see large quantities of these vegetables on the
boats from Sydney. Abo in many of the inland towns, where the conditions
are suitable, the quantity grown is not sufficient for requirements. At
Goulburn, for instance (which by virtue of its situation should be on a level
with the Bathurst district in production), consignments are sometimes
obtained from as far back as Wagga.
Many people are under the impression that the growing of these vegetables
for Sydney market is confined to the Chinese ; but such is not the case. In
the vicinity of Sydney the market gardens are practically all controlled by
Chinese ; but in inland districts, where the gardens are not of such a mixed
character—where practically only one or two varieties of vegetables are
grown —the areas cultivated are chiefly worked by Europeans.
About 1,000 tons are imported annually from Victoria. The charges for
handling and boat freight have increased considerably of late, and the
produce is generally not as fresh as it should he when marketed due to
unavoidable delays in delivery—so that there is an excellent opportunity
offered for local growers to supply the whole demand. A local commission
agent, who handles a considerable quantity' of Victorian cabbages and
cauliflowers, has stated that the expenses attached to shipment from
Victoria are equal to the cost of the vegetables in that State.
* Compiled by A. J. Finn, Inspector of Agriculture


Cauliflowers grown by Mr. T. Kook, “Rock Mount,” Inverell.
Watered by natural rainfall only. Weight, 20 lb. each.


Cauliflowers.
Although belonging to the same family as the cabbage, the cauliflower is
not grown to nearly the same extent This is due chiefly to the necessity for
more favourable conditions during the growth of the plant than are required
by other members of the same order.
Extent of the Industry.
The district in which the greatest area in this State is devoted to
cauliflowers is in the vicinity of Bathurst, including Esrom, Orton Park,
Perthville, Campbell’s River, and White Rock. The extent to which this
crop is cultivated may be gauged from the quantity sent away from the
Perthville railway station. In the year 1910 there were 1,805 tons
despatched, and in 1911 the quantity was 1,350 tons. In addition, they are
abo trucked from Kelso and Bathurst in large quantities.
The crop is also grown fairly extensively in the Hunter River Valley,
chiefly in the vicinity of Bolwarra, Louth Park, Oakhampton, Miller’s
Forest, Raymond Terrace, Nelson’s Plains, and Raworth, mainly to supply
the Maitland and Newcastle markets.
Good cauliflowers are produced in many other districts, but their
cultivation is not so extensive as in the districts named. One of the chief
limiting factors in the success of the crop is the med of a quick train
service to market. It is essential, if best prices are to be obtained, that the
produce should be placed on the market within twenty-four hours of
harvesting.
Climate.
It is preferable to grow this crop so that the flowers form in the cool
months. The ideal climate is one in which the days are fairly warm and
the nights cool, such as is experienced in the tableland districts.
The Soil and its Preparation.
The soils most suitable for their cultivation are alluvial flats that are fairly
rich in organic matter, due to periodical flood deposits. These soils are
usually fairly loose in texture, and, being situated on the banks of rivers and
creeks, are generally well drained. As a rule the rental value of land of
this character ranges from £2 to £i per acre.
The land should be well prepared, and this is best effected by working at
rotation on the farm. A crop such as early potatoes could be harvested in
time to allow of cauliflowers being planted out. Again, the cultivation during
the growth of potatoes reduces the soil to a suitable tilth, and renders it free
from weed--. By employing such a rotation, the land is in use during the
spring and early summer months. On account of the risk of reducing the
amount of available moisture in the soil by the growing of a crop during the
spring months, the practice is not recommended in districts where irrigation
cannot he carried out and the rainfall is scanty. If it is desired to
bare fallow the land before planting, the soil should be ploughed in spring
and cultivated during the summer months to kill weeds and conserve
moisture. If it is intended to supply farmyard manure, this should be
ploughed under when the spring ploughing is carried out.


Seed.
Good seed is of the utmost importance, and most growers are fully aware
•of this fact. The Chinese growers are very particular in selecting the most
suitable strain of seed, very few of them, during the past season, paying less
than £3 per lb. for their seed, whereas the bulk of the Europeans are
paying about 12s. per lb.
Bad seed is dear at any price, because, no matter what attention is paid
to the crop during growth, there will always be a large proportion of useless
plants.
The members of the Cauliflower Association of Long Island (United
States of America) placed so much importance on the selection of seed that
they sent a representative to Denmark to select a crop from which seed was
■saved and purchased for the Association. The price charged for seed by the
Association at the time of writing is £3 6s. Sd. per lb.
Cauliflowers at Campbell’s River Lagoon.
Good seed should give a 90 per cent, germination, and should not be kept
-for more than three years after harvesting. As there is little difference
between one and two-year-old seed, it is advisable for the grower to buv his
supply of seed one year in advance. This allows of a small portion being
planted, so that its relative value may be gauged one year in advance.
Raising the Plants.
In small gardens, cauliflowers can be grown over a longer season than is
possible on large areas. The small gardeners are prepared to take risks that
it is not advisable for larger growers to take.
For main crop sowings, the plants are put out from the end of December
to the end of February, the seed being sown about six weeks prior to the
■lime of transplanting.


Make the seed-beds where they will be constantly under observation, and
where every care can be bestowed upon them. The beds should be wire-
netted, as it does not take long for a rabbit or fowls to cause almost
irreparable damage.
The beds should not be too wide ; they should allow of half being weeded
from each side. A suitable width would be about 4 feet. A bed large
enough to produce plants for one acre when seed is broadcasted would he
’2O feet long and 4 feet wide. It is always advisable to put in sufficient seed
to raise more plants than are actually needed. This allows for loss by pests,
faulty germination, and the transplanting of healthy plants only.
Two or three ounces of seed is more than sufficient to supply plants for
one acre.
The best method of raising plants is to sow the seed in drills in the
seed-bed, allowing about 4 inches between the rows. Plants raised in this
manner are usually sturdy, and differ from the lanky plants obtained from
beds where the seed has been broadcasted. The seed should be sown thinly
and each ounce of seed should sow a length of about 200 feet.
Another method sometimes adopted is to sow the seed broadcast in boxes,
and when the young plants have two good leaves on they are pricked out
and planted into other seed-boxes in row's about 1 inch apart, where they
are left until they obtain their fourth leaf. After this the plants are
transplanted into rows 4 inches apart in the beds, remaining there until
ready for transplanting, being then about 4or 6 inches high. This method
is more often employed for cabbage when seed is raispd during the winter
months.
It is advisable to protect the seed-boxes dtfring frosty nights by screening
with hessian. The seed-beds should have a north-easterly aspect, and should
be protected from the westerly winds.
The young plants should be watered occasionally in the- seed-bed, but
should not be forced so as to make them spindly.
The soil in the seed-bed should be of good texture, and, if possible, a
quantity of well-rotted farmyard manure should be incorporated. The
organic matter supplied by the manure regulates the water-holding capacity,
and also offers less resistance to the tender roots in their development.
After the seed has been sown, it is advisable to scatter dry, finely pulverised
manure lightly over the surface of the bed. This acts as a mulch, and
prevents caking of the surface soil, thus offering no resistance to the young-
plants when germinating.
Transplanting.
If possible, a dull day should be chosen, but -with a large area it is im-
possible to choose so carefully. If (he weather is very hot and the planting
cannot be postponed, it should be done during the latter part of the
afternoon. When this is the case part of the morning can be employed in
lifting the plants in readiness for afternoon planting. The plants when lifted
should be laid straight and covered with wet bags.
Unless the soil is very dusty and hot, the dibber holes are better left dry
until after planting, but the roots should be covered with puddle (liquid mud)
to prevent injury. After the soil has been pressed firmly round the roots, a
quantity of water should he applied in order to give the plants a fair start.


The quickest method of planting by hand is to have a boy dropping the
plants a few holes ahead of the man planting. The boy can then carry the
plants in a bucket, so that the roots are constantly in puddle.
If the plants are somewhat large, it is wise to screw the tops off the leaves.
This considerably reduces transpiration, and the roots are able to keep up
the supply of moisture needed.
In America, planting machines have been tried extensively of late, but
the bulk of the growers have again fallen back to hand-planting, as they
consider this method, although slower, gives more reliable and better results.
One of these machines has been used in the Moss Vale district. The
A Useful Stamp of Transplanter.
machine requires a driver and two lads to drop plants. A barrel of water is
carried, and at each click which marks the time for dropping a plant, about
half a pint of water is delivered into the furrow. As the lads cannot
always drop the plants just at the right moment, the water is usually allowed
to run all the time.
For early varieties the planting is usually closer than for the later
varieties. For the former the distance is usually 3 feet x 2 feet 6 inches,
requiring about 5,800 plants per acre, and for the latter 3 feet x 3 feet,
requiring 4,810 plants per acre.


Manuring.
It is essentia] that soils for this crop should be well supplied with organic
matter. Unless frequent applications of organic mmures are made, the
supply of this constituent is soon depleted, and the grower’ wonders why his
soil does not produce profitable crops. The tendency of European growers
is to grow these crops until the natural fertility of the soil has been consiih r-
ably reduced, and then abandon cauliflow.er cultivation.
Most of the river flats are rich enough to grow several crops without the
application of farmyard manure, and where the land is subject to per iodical
floods and benefits by flood deposit, there is scarcely any need for heavy
manuring. The Chinese growers are constantly enriching their soils by the
application of farmyard manure.
The following extract is taken from the Cornell University Agricultural
Experiment Station’s Bulletin, No. 292, being a treatise ort cauliflower-
growing on Long Island, where the area under crop approaches 3,000 acres; —
The cost of horse manure is |l ’5O to $1 ’65 a ton (over 65.), f.o.r. buyer’s station.
A ear of manure weighs anywhere from 25 to 35 tons, and most of a carload is required
"to dress an acre—say from 20 to 25 tons.
Surely if this money can be expended where the price of the produce is
considerably lower than in New South Wales, the local growers would do
well to follow the practice.
In addition to stable manure, the use of commercial fertilisers is universally
adopted, and the Department’s recommendations in this connection will be
found on page 126 of this Handbook.
Cultivation.
Cultivation between the rows with horse cultivator should be continued at
short intervals, until the plants are too big to allow of it being carried on.
If plants are not planted on the check system, and do not allow of cross
cultivation, chipping-hoes will have to be used to keep down weeds, and
establish the earth mulch between the plants.
Tying,
This is the practice of tying the outside leaves over the plant to protect the
flower from weather influences. The system has its drawbacks, and is
seldom adopted in this State. The chief difficulty in adopting this method is
the trouble of determining whether the plants are ready to harvest. Some
growers use a different coloured band each day, so that when examining for
fitness for market they can pick out the mature heads by the various coloured
bands. This method is a satisfactory one, if the development of the heads is
even.
It is very important that the flower should be kept clean and while.
While the head is small, it is well protected by the young leaves surrounding
it, but when the coral head begins to grow rapidly, it must be covered in
some manner to protect it from sun and frost. This is usually accomplished
by breaking off some of the largest outside leaves, and placing them amongst
the other leaves so as to properly cover the head, or it may be done by
bending over some of the larger inner leaves.


Harvesting.
As soon as an}- of the plants become fit for harvesting, examination of the
field must be made daily, and heads must be cut before they show signs of
the flower stalks breaking away, thus giving the head an uneven, loose
appearance.
The cutting is usually done with a large knife, the plants being cut about
3 inches below the head, keeping all but the outside, dirty leaves to avoid
damage in transit. The plants, when cut, may bo carried to convenient
heaps round the field ; or, if the waggon or cart can be taken through the
crop without damaging the growing plants, they may be loaded direct.
The weight of cauliflowers, as marke’ed, varies with the size, ranging from
fifteen to twenty dozen per ton.
Yield and Returns.
The yield varies considerably, according to the season and the variety
grown. When good seed has been used, and irrigation has been practised,
the yield from main crops can be reckoned at about 400 dozen per acre. This
allows of very few misses, but this yield is frequently obtained under the
above conditions, even when planted 3 feet x 3 feet apart.
With cauliflowers selling at from 3s. to 3s. 6d. per dozen, a yield of 400
•dozen per acre would give a gross return of from £6O to £7O per acre.
This return should allow of a substantial profit being made after paying all
expenses.
The prices taken for the purpose of showing the probable return are the
average prices obtained for medium grade. Prime cauliflowers would average
at least 5s per doz"n, while the small ones would not bring more than Is. 6d.
per dozen. This latter grade is often sold to the local pickle factories.
Cure should be taken not to plant a greater area than can be properly
attended to. By attempting too much, many a grower lias failed. The area
to be worked per man should not exceed 3 or 4 acres.
The cost of transport by road can usually he estimated at Is. per ton.per
mile.
Varieties.
Veitch’s Autumn Giant is, undoubtedly, the chief variety grown. It is a
late variety, with long stem and large undulating dark leaves. The head is
large, very white, and well covered by inner leaves.
Dwarf Erfurt (also known as Early Erfurt or White Queen) is an early
variety, and is practically the only variety grown by the Long Island (U.S. A.)
growers. It is a plant of medium size, producing a fairly large, solid, heavy
head of good shape.
Snowball. —This variety is a good early sort, and is much favoured in the
Goulburn district. It is a little earlier than Dwarf Erfurt, but not equal to
it in quality.
Early London. —A fairly early variety, grown largely in the metropolitan
gardens.
Broccoli greatly resembles cauliflower, and should receive the same treat-
ment. It takes longer to mature.


Cabbages.
The cultivation of this crop is practically identical with that of cauliflowers,
and it will only be necessary here to deal with any points of difference.
The largest cabbage-producing district in this State is undoubtedly Burra-
wang, situated about 9 miles east from Moss Male, and in the surrounding
localities, including Wilde’s Meadow, Myra Vale, &c., and extending to
Robertson and Kangaloon. About SOO tons are consigned from Moss Vale
Station every month during the season, and large quantities are also sent out
of this district from Bowral. Large areas are also grown in the suburban
gardens, as well as at Gosford and in the Maitland district.
The crop can be grown in practically every district in the State. Nearly
any soil will grow cabbages successfully if sufficient manure and decaying
vegetable matter are added to keep it in good physical and chemical condition.
As a rule, in the Burrawang district, the rich volcanic soils are chiefly
used for the winter crop, and the lower land for the summer crop.
This vegetable has, perhaps, a wider range than any other, being more’ or
less successfully grown in the hot interior and on the cool tablelands. It is
essentially a cool climate plant, and when grown in the hot districts must
be planted so as to mature before the heat of summer.
In some portions of the State, and chiefly during the winter months,
cabbage plants are raised from seed in hot-beds, and gradually hardened oft’
before planting. As with cauliflowers, the seed should be sown six weeks
before the plants are required in warm weather ; but during the cooler part
of the year two months should be allowed.
The distance varies according to the variety used. For the smaller varie-
ties, such as St. John’s Day, 2 feet 6 inches x 2 feet is sufficient, and for
larger sorts, as Savoy and Succession, 3 feet x 2 feet. If the soil is of poor
quality the plants should be given more room, and should be planted 3 feet
x 3 feet. When planted at this latter distance on rich soils, the tendency
is for the plants to become too large.
The time to harvest is when the heart, is fully developed, and does not yield
to pressure from the hand.
Cabbages being planted closer than cauliflowers, the yield is, consequently,
larger in number of heads, and a yield of from 500 to 600 dozen per acre can
be expected in average years. The average price is about 2s. per dozen.
Succession ( Henderson’s ). —This is a very popular variety, and the one mo 4
largely grown. It is fairly early, has largo flat heads, closely packed, carries
well, and is a favourite on the market. It stands the heat of summer fairly
well, and does not run to seed quickly. The beat all-round variety grown
St. John’s Day. —This is one of the best for hot climates. It is very early
and produces a firm heart. A small cabbage.
Improved St. John’s Day. —This is the best of summer cabbages, and alto-
gether distinct from the small St. John’s Day, being somewhat later and larger.
Savoy. —This is a very crinkled type of cabbage, having a very dark green
colour and a distinct flavour. It is especially suitable for the cooler portions
of the State, being planted in February so as to mature during autumn and
winter, the flavour being considered best after exposure to frost.
London Market.—-This is a good main crop variety for autumn planting.
Early Jersey Wakefield. —An early sort, and largely grown in small gardens.
It has a very pointed heart, and should be cut as soon as ready for use, other-
wise it will run to seed.
The cultivation of pickling cabbages is identical with that for the other
varieties. Most of these are red in colour.


Fungus Diseases of Cabbage and Cauliflower.*
Black Rot.
This disease, popularly known as Black Rot, but sometimes as Dry Hot,
Brown Eot, Black Stem, Black Vein, &c., is a bacterial one, caused by
Bacterium campestre (Pammel), Erwin Smith. Most cruciferous plants
are liable to attack, e.g., cabbage, cauliflower, kale, kohlrabi, rape, turnip,
swede, radish, &c. The following account refers more particularly to cab-
bages and cauliflowers.
The plants are attacked in all stages of growth. When young plants
are attacked early and severely they may be destroyed in a few weeks. The
severity varies with the season. In moist weather the disease may become
epidemic and destroy an entire crop. In ordinary weather it may take
several months to cripple the plants or destroy a crop. Infection takes
place through wounds, but chiefly through the water pores on the margins
of the leaves. The bacteria brought to the leaf often commence develop-
ment in the drops of water exuded by the leaves, and then enter through the
pores. They rapidly multiply and spread through the veins (vascular
system) of the leaves, and finally travel down the leaf stems (petioles) and
stem of the plant. The affected area of the leaf becomes dry and leathery,
and the veins have the appearance of black streaks. In the thick petioles,
the black streaks may not show from the surface, but on cutting across or
along them the streaks will usually be seen. Often a part of a leaf or one
side of a plant only will be attacked, and the black streaks can then be
traced down the corresponding side of the leaf petiole and stem of the plant.
Dwarfing, one-sided growth, yellowing of foliage, gradual loss of leaves,
and brown streaks in the vascular bundles are the chief symptoms of the
disease. The cortex and pith of the stem are usually free from bacteria.
The gradual and successive shedding of the leaves often result in the pro-
duction of a long, dry stem with the conspicuous scars of the many cast-off
leaves upon it.
In ordinary weather, the picking off and burning of all affected leaves
helps to check the disease; but when the plants are about ready for market
no time should be lost in harvesting them, as they will not keep. It has
been proved that the bacteria are capable of living for months (even a year)
on the surface of the seed, and that infection is spread in this way.
The chief methods of prevention are: Disinfection of the seed for fifteen
minutes in a solution of formalin 1 part, water 260 parts; or corrosive sub-
limate 1 part, water 1,000 parts. The latter is a very strong internal poison,
and must be handled with care. All insects should be kept down, to prevent
them spreading the disease, and if a field is infected, all refuse of old.
diseased plants should be collected and burnt, not buried, and crop rotation
practised.
Club Root.
Plants affected with Club Root are characterised by swellings of the
roots, sometimes as large as two fists. Few or no lateral roots are formed.
Affected plants have a wilted appearance during the day, but recover at
night. Plants are generally attacked when young or in the seed-bed, and
when so affected have a stunted and sickly appearance and seldom grow to
'* G. P. Darnell-Smith, 8.8 c., F.1.C., F.C.S., Biologist, and E. Mackinnon, B.Sc.,
Assistant Biologist.


maturity. The malformations may be confused with root-knots caused by
eel-worms (or gallworms), but these as a rule are not so large as the mal-
formations associated with Club Boot.
The cause of the disease is a small parasite known as Plas-
modiophorn hrnsdew ( W'oronin), one of a lowly group of organ-
isms known as myxomycetes. This particular parasite lives within
the cells of the roots of certain plants, especially these belonging to the
Club-root of Cabbage.
(Plasmodiophora brassicæ.)
natural order Crucifer®. 11 is
mostly confined to the cortex,
and within the cells the parasite
passes through some of the stages
of its development. At one
time the cell is filled with what
appears to be a number of shape-
less specks of jelly (protoplasm).
These later unite to form one
mass, the plasmodium, which
practically fills the cell, the
original contents of which have
been absorbed. Still later, the
plasmodium divides up to form
numerous spores covered with a
thin membrane. The parasit-
ised cells and also the neigh-
bouring ones are stimulated to
very active growth. They in-
crease in size and also in number
by rapid cell division, thus pro-
ducing the remarkable enlarge-
ments of the underground parts
of the plant. The parasite be-
comes distributed within the
tissues by this cell division, but
it is also able to penetrate the
cell walls. By the decay of the
attacked parts, the spores are
set free into the soil. Under
favourable conditions, the spore
germinates and gives rise to what
is known as a zoospore (or swarm
spore), a speck of protoplasm
provided with a long appendage
or cilium. These swarm spores
move about in the soil and are
capable of entering a root apparently through a root hair. Once within the
plant the swarm spore goes through the stages outlined above.
We thus see that the parasite is confined either to the soil or to the
underground parts of the plant, and therefore no sprayings of any kind
are of any use against this disease. The majority of Crucifer® are sus-
ceptible, but it appears that varieties of cabbage vary in their susceptibility.
Soils of an acid nature are favourable to the development of the parasite.
Lime is the most valuable substance to use to check it. Applications of 2to
4 tons per acre are recommended, after all refuse of diseased crops have


been removed and burnt, not buried Seedlings should be carefully ex-
amined, and if they show any signs of Club Root should be burnt. As the
soil may remain contaminated for some time after a crop is attacked, a
rotation of crops should be made. What the rotation should be, the fanner
will determine for himself, provided that cabbages or other Crucifer® be not
grown more often than once in three years.
Downy Mildew.
This disease probably occurs wherever cabbages are grown, but as a rule
does not cause any serious loss except in seed-beds. Hence the chief control
measures are concerned with the seedlings. Any plants found diseased
and all remains of dead plants should be destroyed. The seedlings should
not be grown too thickly nor kept too wet in the seed-bed. When attacked
they can be thinned out and sprayed about every ten days with a weak
Bordeaux mixture (6 — 4 —100).
Tho cause of the disease is a fungus, P eronospora parasitica (Pers.)
De I: ary, which may attack any cruciferous plants. It first appears as a
whitish downy mould in spots mostly on the under side of the leaves, but
may overrun the plant-stem and leaves. The parts of the leaf immediately
surrounding the diseased area appears yellow and later turns brown and
dries up. Frequently a mottled appearance results. The hyph® of the
fungus live entirely within the tissues, and send out branches into the
open air, and on these are borne numerous spores or conidia, which
are readily carried from one plant to another by a gentle breeze or
by insects. The conidia germinate and send their hyphse into the
leaves through the breathing pores (stomata). The disease is carried over
the winter by means of another kind of spore (oospore), which is much more
resistant to unfavourable weather and soil conditions than the conidia, and
these will re-establish the disease in the spring. Hence the need of destroy-
ing all refuse of old plants. This disease is sometimes associated with
another disease that is common on Crucifer®. It is known as “ White
Rust,” as it appears like a white crust on the plants, and is due to the
fungus Albugo ( Cystopus) Candida. The same conditions and precautions
apply to both diseases.
Black Leg.
This disease occurs on cabbages and cauliflowers, especially when young.
Infection frequently takes place on the stem at the surface of the ground,
just below the junction of the leaves, and also at the margins of the leaves.
The disease spreads downwards to the roots and around the stem, often
completely girdling it, giving it a black appearance —hence the name.
Often the fibrous roots and the lateral roots are killed. Before the plant
dies, a purplish tint is developed in the foliage and persists until the plant
dies. Wilting of the plant is very characteristic, the leaves adhering to the
stem and drooping. On the leaves sunken spots occur, and later these dead
areas become covered with numerous minute black specks, which are the
pycnidia of the fungus enclosing numerous spores. In New South Wales
the fungus is apparently Phoma oleracea (Saec.). It is harboured for the
most part in the soil on decayed stems and leaves of plants. Hence, in
preventing the disease, the need is shown, as is usually the case, of collect-
ing all refuse of present and past crops, and burning it. No leaves or parts
of diseased plants should be thrown on manure heaps, to harbour the
disease for the next cron. Reed-hods can be snvaved with we-dr Bordeaux
mixture (0 —4 —100), and only clean seedlings should be planted out.


Insect Pests of Cabbages and Cauliflowers.*
The Diamond-backed Cabbage Moth.
Under the name of “cabbage grub” or “cabbage worm,” the caterpillar of
this little moth (FluteUa cmciferarum, Zeller), once a European turnip
pest, but now world-wide in its range, is well known to Australian cabbage-
Diamond-backed Cabbage Moth, viewed
from above. [Enlarged.]
growers, and also to the cabbage
consumer when he finds the little
green worms among the leaves of
this useful vegetable. It has
been known from a very early
date among the English farmers,
where it is more a turnip pest;
but it attacks both turnips and
cabbages when grown under the
same conditions.
It was probably introduced
into Australia from England,
though it may have come vid
Mauritius, where it was a well
known pest, and with which
island there was a good deal of
direct trade in early days. It
was identified by Mr. Meyrick
from descriptions furnished in
1883 by the 'late Sir William
Macleay, who stated that it was
common in many parts of Aus-
tralia, and had been for some years previously, particularly about Adelaide.
It feeds upon all kinds of plants belonging to the family Crucifer*, such
as the turnip, cabbage, cauliflower, mustard, cress, as well as charlock and
a number of similar weeds often found about neglected gardens.
The life-history of the Diamond-backed Cabbage Moth is so well known that
it need only be briefly outlined in these pages. The moth, on the wing among
the herbage, appears to be of a uniform brown tint, and does not show the
distinct angular row of pale markings along the upper margin of the folded
wings from which it takes its popular name, “diamond-backed,” and by which
it can be so easily identified among pinned specimens from all other allied
species. It measures slighily over half an inch across the outspread wings.
Emerging from the stout chrysalid skins, which, attached to bits of cabbage
leaves, stalks or weed*, have protected them, under shelter of their flimsy
cocoons, through the winter months, these active little moths lay their eggs
upon the foliage of the young cabbage plants, and remain in hiding among
the weeds and on the under side of the cabbage leaves. As soon as the fine
weather sets in, if one walks through a cabbage patch, and sees numbers of
small brown moths rising up before him, he will, even if the plants have not
begun to show its effe -ts, know that the cabbage moth is about. If he investi-
gates the plants, he will find the leaves marked with glassy spots where the
tiny, black-headed, pale green caterpillars have been at work. So like the
surface of the leaf are these caterpillars in coloration that they would be easily
passed over, if it. were not for their gnawing off the epidermis of the leaf.
* W. W. Froggatt, F. E.S., Government Entomologist, anil \V. I Gurney, Assistant
Ent imologist.


Leaf of Cabbage showing damage caused by Caterpillars of Cabbage Moth,
with larvæ and cocoons on the leal. [Reduced.]
Caterpillar. [Enlarged.]
Cocoon enclosing the pupa. [Enlarged.]
Pupa (chrysalid) removed from cocoon. [Enlarged.]
Cabbage Moth, side view. [Enlarged,]
The Diamond-backed Cabbage Moth cruciferwion, Zeller).


As they increase in size, they become slender, bright green caterpillars
(popularly known as “ cabbage worms ”), resting upon the surface of the leav es
and gnawing holes right through them. At first confining their attention to
the larger outer leaves, as they increase in numbers they gnaw all through
the cabbage, and if they are allowed to reach this staue the cabbages and
cauliflowers are soon of no marketable value. The caterpillars are active
little creatures, and if touched they roll away or drop from the leaf to the
ground, often hanging suspended on a silken thread, and thus they escape their
many enemies. When full grown, they’ betake themselves to the shelter of
the under side of the leaf upon which they have been feeding, and spin
a lattice-like, elongate, oval cocoon, or rather hammock, of silken strands,
■securely attached to the leaf, but open at both ends. It is such a flimsy,
delicate structure that one can observe the transformation of the insect. At
first a green pupa, it changes to dull brown, and finally reveals all the delicate
outlines of the coming moth, enclosed in the pupal skin.
To the grower, the length of time occupied in the development of the moth
from the egg, unlike that of the codlin moth, is not of much economic
importance in Australia, because we have almost a continuous brood of these
moths and their caterpillars, cabbages being grown in many districts all the
year round. Though economic entomologists have carried out many
•observations as to the time taken in their development, the results hdve been
very variable. In England the caterpillars are said to feed for nearly’ a
month, and the pupae remained in the chrysalid state from ten to seventeen
days. In Australia, in the early summer, the eggs in suitable situations will
hatch within a couple of days; the caterpillar state does not last over a
fortnight; and the pupal state a week; but all this it? regulated by the
climatic conditions, warmth accelerating and cold retarding their develop-
ment, as with other insects.
It might be here noted that while cold and even frost have little or no
•effect in destroying insect life, yet heavy continuous rain and wind storms do
an immense amount of good by T destroying insect pests, particularly those
that infest field crops exposed to the fury of the storms and rain.
Such insects as the Diamond-backed Cabbage Moth form a large portion
■of the food of our small field birds, such as robins, fly-catchers, wrens, white
eyes, ground larks, wood swallows and many others; and these birds—when the
younger generation have learnt to appreciate them for the good they do in
■destroying pests, if not for their beauty—will be just as carefully protected
from harm as they are now carelessly’ destroyed.
Our cabbage and cauliflower growers in many districts, with few breaks,
■grow these vegetables all through the year, the young plants being often set
out alongside those ready for cutting, or upon the abandoned patches from
which the marketable vegetables have been cut; for there is no real winter
in many parts of the State. Thus, with a continuous crop, the cabbage
moth can breed all the year round, even if there are no cruciferous weeds
growing in the gardens, such as wild charlock or mustard weed, upon which
they flourish. This is one of the reasons why the cabbage moth is such a
serious pest in New South Wales.
Many’ of our growers are not careful enough in seeing that the young
■cabbage plants which they buy’ in bundles from dealers, or from each other,
are perfectly free of moth grubs. Anyone going around the Sydney shops
when the suburban resident is busy planting his kitchen garden, and th re
is a brisk demand for cabbage plants, will see plants for sale with leaves
riddled with holes caused by the cabbage moth, and with grubs ami eggs


still upon them. Yet the ordinary man takes these home, and plants them
out without any precautions, such as dipping them in tobacco and soap wash
or other mixture ; and then later on he will wonder why they are grubby.
The regular market gardeners, or farmers and orchardists who combine
both industries, either grow their own plants in seed-beds, or buy them from,
the Chinamen (when they will sell them); but I have seen them, in the
white man’s seed-bed as well as in the Chinese garden, badly infested with
moth grubs. Unless the young growing plants in the seed-bed are treated
until the time of planting out, they soon attract the moths from old cabbage
patches. If all cabbage plants were carefully clipped and washed befoie
they were planted out, they would have a fair start in life, without any
aphis, cabbage moth, or other pests infesting them.
Then again, our cabbage and cauliflowers are grown in open fields, like
the turnips on English farms ; and as soon as the cabbages are ready, all the
marketable ones are cut and bagged ; while all the unsaleable ones are left
on the ground, to rot or run to seed, and remain until the owner wants the
ground for something else, which may not be for months. This neglected
plot is the breeding-ground for the cabbage moth and all other cabbage
diseases, insect and fungus.
Controls. —There has been no lack of remedies suggested and advocated by
the different writers upon the cabbage moth ; but the greater number, though
more or less successful in a small garden, are not practicable when dealing
with market gardens or farmers’ crops.
There is no question that the application of boiling water will kill all the
grubs with which it comes in contact, without doing any serious damage
to healthy plants. It is applied with a watering-can with a fine rose, the
operator walking down between the rows and giving each infested cabbage
or cauliflower a good sprinkle. This is very handy for a small garden patch,
but in a large field the difficulty is to keep a large quantity of water at
the proper temperature, and to distribute it over a large area.
In the United States, the cabbage-growers chiefly depend on kerosene
emulsion, and keep the young plants clean until they begin to heart, when
they consider the danger is over. This preventive is also used in this State.
A large grower, an up-to-date Chinese gardener, told me that he used
nothing else on his cabbages, and that where the moth was plentiful he gave
them regular sprayings until the plants got ahead of the pest. The spray
can be made much weaker for cabbage moth than for scale insects, and the
grower will soon find the minimum quantity of oil and soap which will kill
the grubs. The main thing is to mix the soap and oil well with the water.
Lime and tobacco dust as a dry powdered mixture, is a very effective
remedy, used by a large number of the Gosford market-gardeners. One
kerosene-tinful of tobacco dust is mixed with four tins of fresh-slaked lime,
thoroughly mixed and applied as a dust. Mr. G. Dening, of Erina, uses it as
soon as the cabbages are well established, and says he can dust T,OOO cabbages
in an hour, but it must be used while the leaves are wet with the dew. Four
tins of tobacco dust and sixteen tins of lime will dust 8,000 cabbages. This
mixture remains about the plant for a long time after the application, and is
death to all insects that feed upon the surface of the leaves.
As before noted, the main thing is to start with clean cabbage plants in
clean ground, and keep the ground clean ; and after the crop is marketed
clean up the cabbage patch. Then, whatever remedies one uses will have
their full effect upon the pest, and the reinfestation will be less. If, on the


other hand, the land all round the cabbages is full of infested material and
weeds, the grower will have to be going all the time, or he will lose a large
percentage of the crop.
Cabbage Aphis.
This insect (Aphis hrassicw, Linn.) is one of the worst with which the
growers have to contend. It breeds very quickly, and lives on the juices of
the plant, giving most trouble in a dry season when the plants are stunted
and not growing.
The young, when first hatched, are yellow ; in the second, wingless, stage,
a dull olive-green, covered with a mealy bloom ; when full-grown, of a greyish-
green tint, with the eyes, legs, spots on either side of the body and tips of the
antennae black ; the winged forms are of a much lighter green colour.
Controls. —Spraying with tobacco and soap wash early in the season, when
the plants show the first signs of hs attack, is recommended ; also dusting
with soot or lime early in the season.
Spray with kerosene emulsion, made on the following formula :—Hard
soap | lb., kerosene 2 gallons, boiling water 1 gallon. Dilute or dissolve in
22 gallons of water. To make, dissolve t !b. of hard soap in 1 gallon of
boiling water : then remove the vessel from the neighbourhood of the fire,
add bite kerosene and churn for ten minutes. One essential condition of
success in making this emulsion is that the liquids should be as warm as
possible. It is also necessary that the water be as soft as possible.
In preparing this compound, the main trouble is in getting a true emulsion,
which can only be done by thorough agitation. This is best done by pump-
ing the mixture into itself for some minutes. When this creamy mixture
becomes cold, it gets thick and almost solid, and there should be no trace of
free oil on the surface. If there is still unemulsified oil, the best plan is to
add some more boiling soap solution and pump again. Free oil destroys the
foliage. Care should be taken to use the best kerosene and good soap.
Kerosene being highly inflammable, particular attention should bo paid to
the directions for mixing well away from the fire. Boil the soap and water in
one vessel and carry it away from the fire before mixing with the kerosene.
Any kind of vessel may be used.
Kerosene attacks india-rubber ; consequently the tubing, and indeed the
whole spraying outfit, must be well washed with hot water directly after use.
Sometimes it is of advantage to prepare a quantity of emulsion as a stock,
for use as required. When this is done and it is required to dilute it to make
up a spray, this should he done by adding boiling water to it, and not by
melting it over tbs fire, which is dangerous, especially indoors.
Cutworms, Eel-worms, and Rutherglen Bug.
Cabbages and cauliflowers are also attacked by the above-named insect
pests.
Suggestions for the control of cutworms will be found in the latter part
of the wheat section of this Handbook, while eel-worms and Rutherglen bug-
are dealt with in connection with potatoes. The change of crops advised in
connection with these pests will, of course, be adapted by the grower to his
own conditions. Those mentioned in reference to eel-worms, for instance,
are not likely to suit the grow T er of cabbages, but the principle still applies,
viz., change to some crop that the eel-worm will not attack, or, in other
words, deprive them of their natural food and starve them out.


THE ONION *
The onion (Allium cepa) is one of the oldest vegetables of European
gardens, and away back, in remote ages, it grew wild over great tracts of
Asia. The ancient Egyptians cultivated it, and to-day it is a valued crop
and a vegetable that is much relished, it is one of the most profitable crops
that can be grown; there is no heavy labour attached to its cultivation, and
quick, active boys can do all that is required in this direction. Another
point in its favour is that, unlike most other crops, it does not exhaust the
soil or require that the land be rested at intervals, but yields heavy crops
year after year. As a matter of fact, many experienced growers make it a
point that once the onion-bed is prepared it is kept in a fine state of tilth
and free from weeds, for weeds are one of the greatest obstacles to suc-
cessful onion-growing.
The quantity of onions imported into this State annually is enormous,
various countries contributing to our requirements. Evidently, therefore, the
quantities grown do not meet the demand of our market. With our varied
soil and climate there should bo a much greater extension of onion cultiva-
tion, for it is a crop that will yield substantial profits under the best treat-
ment and suitable conditions. There is always a large demand for these
bulbs, and it is likely to increase with our growing population.
The most Suitable Soil.
To grow onions successfully and extensively, much care should be taken
in the selection of the land. Certain districts, such as the Hunter Kiver and
around Wellington, have been noted for onion-growing,' but there are
numerous other localities well adapted for the crop. Many kinds of soil can
be brought into the desired state for onion culture, but it is a question of
how far the expenses incurred will leave a margin of profit. The main
consideration is to obtain a suitable soil; it should be a moderately light
loam, deep, well drained, and fertile, and capable of being readily worked,
mellowed, and cleaned, and rendered firm without becoming consolidated.
The onion will also grow to perfection on chocolate soil. Fairly heavy or
clayey black soils, if not too tenacious, produce an onion of strong skin,
great substance, and firm flesh, an onion that, as a rule, stands well the
handling in transit to market. Unquestionably the prospect of successful
culture of this vegetable on very heavy land is a poor one, and much too
risky a speculation to be recommended. Soils with an abundance of decom-
posed vegetable matter will be found eminently suitable. The situation of
the land must be open and sunny, and should be fairly free from weeds, so
as to avoid expense in cleaning.
Preparation of Land.
It is a great advantage to get the land ready as early as possible, so that
any weeds which appear can be got rid of and much subsequent labour thus
saved. The land should be ploughed as deeply as the subsoil will permit.
The character of the soil should determine the proper depth of ploughing.
If the land is loose, rich, and friable, ploughing to a depth of 10 to 12 inches
is recommended; there is little danger of ploughing too deep. It is not
desirable to turn up a stiff heavy subsoil in preparing ground, for this
invariably diminishes the yield, renders cultivation more difficult, and
* E. D. Butler, Department of Agriculture.


requires more frequent tilling. Frequent cross cultivation and borrowings
are essential to reduce the soil to a firm tilth; the finer the tilth the better
for weeding and hoeing. The soil cannot be too tine for the reception of the
seed, and must be firmed with the roller, for that condition is requisite to
ensure the proper development of the bulbs. A disc harrow is almost indis-
pensable if clods and lumps are numerous. The roller and this implement
may be used alternately with advantage. Soils which are stiff and heavy,
and are deficient in fertility, may be greatly improved by growing and
ploughing under cowpeas. The effect of such treatment is to enrich the
soil, making- it loose and friable, and free from many weed seeds. Maize
and potatoes are good crops to precede onions.
Selection of Seed.
It is a most essential point to obtain fresh, reliable seed true to name.
Onion seed loses its vitality very quickly, and none older than last season’s
crop should therefore be procured. Growers sometimes make the mistake of
purchasing seed of uncertain vitality because it is cheap, but it is impos-
sible to secure satisfactory results without seed of superior quality. A
good plan to determine the vitality is to place some of the seed in a mois-,
tened cloth, put it in a shallow dish, and note the number that germinate.
Many experienced growers invariably save their own seed, for by selec-
tion and judicious cultivation through a series of years it is possible to raise
the standard of excellence. To do this, large, well-matured, evenly-formed
bulbs of the respective varieties should be selected and carefully stored each
season and planted out in the followfing season in rows, about 3 feet apart,
stakes being placed to each bulb to secure the heads from being blown and
knocked about and probably broken by the wind. If the season is favourable
—that is, dry and hot —a fair amount of well-ripened seed should be
obtained.
Promptness in harvesting is essential, for if delayed too long the seed
receptacles open, and part of the seed will be lost in handling. When the
tops turn yellow, remove them with about 6 inches of the stem, and place
them in strong paper bags, and hang up in a well-ventilated place to dry.
Frequent turning will hasten the drying, and most of the seed wfill drop out
in the operation. Any seed remaining can be beaten out with a flail and
cleaned by winnowing. The seed should be stored in a well-ventilated place
free from excessive moisture.
In other cases it might be possible to secure the seed from a neighbouring
■grower, whose stock is known to be good, and suited to the district. Where
this is not convenient or possible, the seed should be obtained from a reliable
seedsman. Mixed sorts should be avoided, in order that one part of the crop
■shall not ripen before the remainder.
Varieties Recommended.
The number of varieties of onions is very considerable, and among the
recognised types are Silver Skin, Extra Early Globe, Yellow Globe, Brown
■ Spanish (Portugal), James’ Keeping, Giant Rooca, Flat Italian Tripoli,
and others.
Being one of the earliest, Extra Early Globe is recommended for early
-crops. It is a fine, well-shaped globe onion, small in the neck, and a heavv
•cropper. It is ready for market three or four weeks before any other sort,
.and has a hardy and good skin. Silver Skin is also a good early variety.


Brown Globe is a good strain, and coming in between early and late kinds
is suitable for a mid-season crop. It is a good cropper, and has a solid flesh,
good colour and skin. Brown Spanish (or Portugal) is without doubt the best
late onion in cultivation. It is of handsome shape and appearance; has a
skin of deep brown colour, and white and solid flesh. It stands handling in-
transit well, and is unequalled for storing. Many other varieties will be-
found suitable for the various soils and differences of climate. Varieties,
should be selected which contain desirable characteristics or command the-
highest price in the market. The best type for general purposes should be-
nearly globular in form, hard and compact in structure, and mild and sweet
in flavour, fine skin and small neck, and medium size.
Time to Sow.
The time for sowing varies with the district. On the coast and in the-
warmer inland districts, May and June are the best months; but in the
tablelands, the main crop might be sown in July and August. It is wise to-
make a few inquiries on this head, and to follow the practice of successful
growers in the locality.
[Sowing.
The ground, having had a thorough course of preparation, should be-
rolled and firmed for the reception of the seed, otherwise the plants will
run to neck and leaf. While maintaining a firm soil, the grower may"
with advantage maintain a mulch on the surface by the movement of the
hoe in keeping down weeds. Though broadcasting is still practised, sowing
in drills is increasing in favour, and this is the system recommended. The
seed should be drilled to a depth of about 1 inch, and the rows 15 to 18-
inohes apart; these distances will admit of efficient weeding operations. It
is an important matter to have straight rows, with a uniform distance
between them; it adds to the attraction of the field and facilitates the use-
of the wheel hoe. A line may be stretched as a guide by which to drill the-
first row; if the spaces become irregular as the operation proceeds, the rows-
should be straightened by means of the line. The quantity of seed required
per acre, if drilled, is from 2 to 3 lb., and if broadcasted, from 4 to 6 lb.
The plants should subsequently be thinned out to about 4 to 6 inches-
apart, but transplanting is greatly favoured by some growers, and if this
method is adopted the plants should be transplanted from the seed-bed to
the required distances when about 4 inches high. The first leaves generally"
die away, but if planted in cool, moist weather, the plants soon become-
established. The method is more costly than any other, but has the advan-
tage of ensuring a clean field at a later period in the growth of the crop.
Cultivation.
A few days after sowing a light harrowing might be given. To keep down
weeds, successive harrowings should be made as required in the same direc-
tion as the rows, but in about three weeks the seed will germinate, and
harrowing should then cease, and later cultivation should keep the ground’
free from weeds, and the surface well stirred so as to form a mulch that will'
prevent evaporation, especially the formation of a crust after rain.


Harvesting.
Onions take from six to seven months to reach complete development.
Bending the stems over is a great aid to ripening. When the tops have
withered and are dry and crisp, the bulbs should be lifted; the plants are
simply pulled by the hand, three or four rows forming one windrow. They
should be allowed to remain in the sun for about five to seven days, the
length of time depending on the weather, but they should not be allowed to
scald. If the weather is wet it may be desirable to take the bulbs under
cover, spreading them out in an open dry shed and turning them occa-
sionally. Some growers adopt the method of bunching and suspending
them. Before bagging, the tops and roots should be trimmed off, leaving
about an inch of the top on the bulb; sheep shears are very suitable for the
purpose. Great care should be taken not to bruise any of the bulbs, for
■decay sets in quickly. Storage is best effected in cases in a w 7 ell-ventilnted
shed.
Under fair conditions a yield of 4 to 6 tons per acre can be expected. •
Insects and Diseases.
The worst insect post is the onion maggot (Phorba ceparum). The mag-
gots come from the egg deposited on the plant, and require about a week to
hatch; the larv£e burrow into the bulbs and remain there about two weeks,
then emerge and pupate in the ground. The first indication of their pre-
sence is the tops turning yellow in colour, then withering, and finally dry-
ing before the bulbs have matured. It is difficult to suggest a remedy, but
liming the soil is found to be beneficial. If the infestation is very severe,
rotation of crops should be tried.
Another disease that attacks the onion is onion smut ( Urocystis cepulce).
It attacks the young plants, causing dark spots on the leaves. As the onion
develops these spots crack open, exposing a black powder which contains the
spores of the fungus. If very severe, it causes the tops to die, and often
spreads to the bulbs. If the disease shows signs of spreading all infected
plants should be pulled up and burned at once. Dusting with lime is recom-
mended. All tops should be burned after harvesting. Rotation of crops is
the most effective remedy.
GARLIC.
This plant is grown and used extensively in Europe for its strong onion-
dike flavouring qualities. In this State its cultivation is limited, but most
Aorth Coast dairy-farmers grow small quantities in order to secure the
bulbs which, when cut into small pieces, may be inserted under the skin in
the necks of young cattle as a preventive against “ black leg.”
The soil and cultivation requirements of garlic are similar to those of
other crops of the onion family. It is propagated either by planting
bulblets or cloves 6 inches apart in row r s 1 foot apart, or the whole bulb
envelope, which consists of about ten cloves, is planted at distances of 1
foot apart. In either case, planting should be very shallow, and may be
carried out during the autumn or -winter.


BEANS AND PEAS.
Beans.
There, are a number of species of beans, all of which can be grown in
this State. The best known are the Broad bean, Kidney or French bean,
and Runner bean. The first named, which is grown for the seeds, does best
in the cooler portions of the State, or in warm districts as a winter crop.
The Kidney or French and Runner beans are esteemed for the edibility of
their pods, and can only be grown in the warm seasons of the year, being
very susceptible to frost.
The crop is influenced to a considerable extent by the quality of the soil,
a. light, shallow soil giving much inferior returns to a rich alluvial one
Bean, plants of all kinds respond readily to dressings of manure, those tha‘
are most beneficial being those containing phosphoric acid and potash. As
with all other legumes, there is little necessity for nitrogenous manures,
but some advantage in the use of lime. The crop has long been known to.
farmers as an excellent soil-renovator, and it is particularly valuable in a
rotation.
Farmyard manure cannot always be used with advantage in connection
with beans, its application, particularly on heavy soils, being apt to produce
too much leaf growth at the expense of the crop of pods.
Kidney or French Beans,
The first thing to take into consideration in bean culture-is the prepara-
tion of the soil. It should be thoroughly ploughed twice, and harrowed; if
the season is inclined to be dry, and the land cloddy, the roller may be used
to advantage before planting.
The soils best suited for growing beans differ considerably with the con-
ditions and the time of sowing. For instance, if an early spring crop is
required, a rich loam is found very suitable, as this class of soil is generally
sweeter in the spring than the low-lying lands. But if a summer crop is
required, then the lower lands are found to produce very prolific crops.
Beans should be planted in rows 3 feet apart, and from 3 to 6 inches
apart in the rows, according to the quality of the land, the thicker sowing
being made in the richer soils. They should be covered to a depth of
2 inches. The usual practice is to strike out shallow drills with a plough,
and then to drop the seed by hand at the intervals named. The covering
can then be done with an ordinary light harrow. Some growers have had a
special plate made to fit the maize planter, and sow their seed in that way.
The plate requires to be a very thick one, in order to save the grains from
being cracked. Tinder ordinary conditions, from S bushel to 1 bushel of
seed is required per acre.
When the plants* are a few inches high they should be worked through
with the hoe. On low-lying land the beans may show a pale green colour,
and a furrow should then be taken away with the plough, and left open for
a couple of days if the weather will permit. This allows the ground to
sweeten. The cultivator should be put through as often as possible,
until the plants are tall enough to be hilled with the plough, and the middle
should then be cleaned out. If the weather is dry, or a heavy downpour
of rain comes, the cultivator can again be used to advantage, breaking the
crust, and a l so checking any weeds that might spring up after rain.


On land that does not answer to the description “ low-lying,” the culti-
vation can be confined to intertillage between the rows with a cultivator of an
ordinary type.
French beans may be planted at any time after the frosts, say in August
on the Nvrth Coast, and later in districts further south, until in such locali-
ties as the Hawkeshury River, September is the most reliable month for
early sowings. On the tablelands it would be risky to plant before, say, the
end of October or beginning of November.
Successive sowings can be made in all the localities mentioned until just
sufficient time is allowed to enable the crop to mature early enough to miss
the first frosts of autumn.
Harvesting must commence as soon as the pods are of sufficient size, and
should continue at frequent intervals. If the pods are allowed to become
too ripe, not only is that particular picking spoiled, but the cropping power
of the plant is considerably reduced. They are usually forwarded to market
in full ehalf bags, and delivery must be effected as quickly as possible, in
order that the produce may reach the market quite fresh.
Of varieties, ■ that most esteemed for commercial purposes is Canadian
Wonder,
Runner Beans.
This class of bean is grown under similar climatic and soil conditions to
the French bean, though not on such an extensive scale. It is usually sown
in rows and staked, and in gardens it is very useful in covering fences,
thus occupying the minimum of space. As a support for these tall varieties,
wire-netting is often stretched on posts erected along the rows with a strand
of plain wire to prevent sagging. The dead vines can be burnt out at the
end of the season, and the wire rolled up and put away until required again.
In very warm districts, however, wire netting is apt to become too hot on
days when the sun shines bright and clear, and the vines suffer in conse-
quence; for such conditions wooden stakes must be recommended. Another
common method of growing beans of the climbing class is to put stakes
along each row, sloping them towards each other in pairs of rows, so that
as the beans grow they climb the stakes and intermingle at the top, each
pair forming a pyramidal mass. Under conditions so favourable as to light
and air, large quantities of pods are produced, and can be conveniently
gathered. Some vegetable gardeners even make use of a couple of pairs of
such rows to afford shelter from winds for more tender crops.
The planting and cultivation in the early stages is very similar to that
suggested in connection with the dwarf variety.
The Runner bean that has been most popular in recent years is the
Epicure, which is a heavy cropper, producing its beans in clusters. If the
picking is constant, the plant will hear throughout the summer months, and
almost until frost or cold weather cuts it back. The Scarlet Runner was
for long the favourite, but it has been largely displaced by the Epicure.
Broad Beans.
This crop requires heavier land and a better supply of humus and of
nitrogenous manure than the other classes of beans, its growth, in most dis-
tricts, being made chiefly in the w'inter months. Very good results have
been obtained on heavy clay soil by ploughing fowl manure under during
the early preparation of the land.


Sowing generally takes place during the months of March, April, and
May, though in cool districts the seed is often sown in February.
The method usually adopted is to strike out drills about 3 feet apart in well-
prepared land, and to drop the seeds in the rows about 6 inches apart. The
seeds, which are large, should be covered fairly deep—not less than 2 inches.
As evaporation is slow in the winter, broad beans do not usually require so
much intercultivation as the summer beans. They form fairly strong grow-
ing plants, and if planted in places sheltered from wind should not require
any support.
When the plants begin to flower, the tops should bo pinched out to induce
the formation of large pods. The crop is ready for gathering as soon as the
seed is large enough, but before the “ eye ” turns black.
Broad Windsor is the variety most favoured in New South Wales, but the
crop is not grown extensively, its chief recommendation being its winter
habit.
Lima Beans.
The large Lima-bean is a climber, and is to be found growing on trellises
and poles in gardens in various parts of the State, but only to a very small
extent. This bean has never received anything like the attention it should
do. It is a most valuable summer vegetable, and should bo grown in hun-
dreds, or even thousands, of acres in this State. In California and other
parts of the United States it forms one of the principal summer vegetables,
being grown very extensively. It requires but little rain, great heat, and
very little care. No station and farm in the warm parts of this State should
fail to have a large patch of this bean. Not only does it produce enormous
crops of green beans during the hot summer months, hut the dry beans,
when soaked for about twelve hours and then boiled in the same manner as
haricots, forms a most desirable addition to the winter vegetables.
Seeds of this bean can be obtained from almost any seedsman. On no
account should sowing commence until warm weather sets in. Many people
have failed with this crop through sowing too early. The plant requires
heat, and will not stand the cold nights so often experienced here during
August and September.
A number of people in different parts of the State who have tried this
vegetable report that they regard it as superior to any shelled bean they had
ever tried.
Sow the beans in drills about 4 feet apart, dropping a seed every foot in
the drills. Cultivate well between the drills until the plants commence to
cover the ground. After this they will take care of themselves.
There are several dwarf varieties which are cultivated in a similar manner
to French beans. Of these, the large-seeded varieties lately introduced are
by far the best.
Peas.
The popular garden pea, valuable as any summer vegetable next to the
potato, can be grown in almost any part of New South Wales, though allow-
ances roust necessarily be made for climatic and other conditions in con-
sidering the proper time to plant.


The pea plant itself is not subject to frost, though an inopportune
“ freeze ” at flowering time will destroy the pollen, and therefore the
capacity of the plant to set its pods, and will even damage the pods while
in their tenderest stages. Young pods that have been frosted, and that are
unlikely to develop, may be distinguished by a characteristic white mottled
appearance on the outside skin. The pea is naturally a cool-climate plant,
and little success can be expected from it in the height of summer except
in cool, elevated districts.
Soils and Districts.
A sandy loam is most suitable for the crop, but almost any soil of fair average-
quality will yield good results. As with all legumes, the supply of nitrogen
in the soil is matter of less moment than that of phosphoric acid, potash,
and lime, and hence it is that in some localities dressings of fertilisers that
contain the last three have a material effect upon the yield. The crop has
the strong recommendation that in addition to yielding profitably, it con-
tributes to the fertility of the soil for the purpose of subsequent crops by
increasing the store of nitrogen, and by enabling the gardener or farmer to
add to it a considerable quantity of top-growth of a kind that humifies
readily when turned under. It does well on newly-broken land, and can be
used as a preparation crop; indeed, there are some farmers who own a decided
preference for it as a first crop in their own districts.
The crop is largely grown in central coastal districts, considerable areas
being devoted to it on the Kurrajong, round Gosford, Penrith, and Camden,,
and on the Hunter River. These localities supply the early market require-
ments, and there are favoured parts, such as on the Kurrajong, that main-
tain the supply well into the winter months.
In early districts the first plantings are made from June onward. These
make their growth during the winter, and come into flower late enough in
the spring to miss the late frosts. In these districts there are practically
two defined planting seasons, the second being from January and February
until just sufficient time is given to allow the crop to be gathered before the
early frosts of winter.
On the tablelands plantings are made continuously from September until
the end of January. In certain localities such ns Bowral, Mittagong, Moss
Vale, Yetholme, &c., the city market is specially catered for, the last
planting just catching the Easter season.
Sowing, Cultivating and Harvesting.
The water requirements of a crop of peas are considerable, and the pre-
paration of the soil should be commenced early enough to enable a supply
of moisture to be stored. The ploughed land should be cultivated as required
to conserve all rain that falls, to destroy weeds, and to produce a good tilth
in which the roots will find favourable conditions.
Both the maize drill and the wheat drill can be used for planting the
seed, but in the latter case sufficient of the feeders must be closed up to
obtain the proper distances between the rows. It is much the more common


practice, however, to open up shallow drills, drop the seed by hand, and
e-over to a depth of about 2 inches by means of a harrow, light cultivator,
or hand hoe.
In small gardens, where the work is all done by hand, the rows are set
much closer than in the ease of field crops, where often horse-power is used
ui the operations of intereultivation. In gardens the rows are placed from
15 inches to 24 inches apart, but in the field they vary from 24 inches to
36 inches apart, according to the implements to be used in cultivation.
The 24 inches is rather close for horse-power, but lends itself to the hand
cultivator, while 30 inches is sufficient for the free movement of horses. In
the rows, the seeds are generally dropped 2 inches to 3 inches apart, and
about 1 bushel is required for an acre. Where the seed is drilled in, the
fertilisers are usually applied through the manure box, but in the case of
hand planting, the manure must be dusted along the furrows before covering
in.
So soon as the crop appears above the ground, defining the rows, the soil
Metween should be broken up with a cultivator, and should be kept con-
stantly stirred throughout the period of growth. It may become necessary,
as the plants attain a height of a few inches, to hand-hoe the weeds that
are growing where the ordinary cultivator will not reach them.
Though in the garden it is the practice to stake the rows, a few dry sticks
being pushed into the soil on either side, in the field this is unnecessary, the
vines being allowed to trail on the ground.
Picking should commence as soon as the peas in the pods are large enough,
and while still fresh and young, and should be continued at frequent inter-
vals. Under no circumstances should any of the pods be allowed to approach
ripeness, as the effect upon the plant is to exhaust it before it has yielded
all that, with eave and prompt picking, it is capable of producing. The
business of picking is somewhat laborious, and no farmer should venture
upon a large area without having assured himself that his resources in this
respect are sufficient for the quick removal of the crop. Picking is usually
lone by contract, tire standard price being about Is. per bushel, or 6d. per
Kerosene tin, at which rate children often make good wages.
Chaff bags are used to contain the pods when they are forwarded to
market, the practice being to cut the bags in two, and to put 2 bushels into
each half. The peas are not so liable to sweat, and are more conveniently
nardlod in ibe small bags than in the large ones.
Varieties.
There are a number of good varieties of peas, each of which has its
admirers, but the most popular is Yorkshire Hero. It is a main crop
variety, hardly maturing quickly enough to justify its use for very early
purposes. Ft produces a rather small pod compared with some other
varieties, but the pods are usually well filled. Daisy, a dwarf variety, is also
grown in considerable quantities, its chief recommendation being that it
:s a little earlier than Yorkshire Hero. Of late years it has come much
•-nto favour on account of its cropping capacity and the size of the pod;
it seems to do better in the warmer parts of the State, apparently standing
hot weather better than Yorkshire Hero. Stratagem is also favourably
regarded by many growers, its chief recommendation being the size of the
pods. Of other good varieties, Win. Hnr=t may be mentioned for its very
early habit and its prolificacy.
+ :72m--.\


Fungus Diseases of Beans and Peas.*
Antbracnose or Pod Spot.
The disease known as Antbracnose or Pod Spot is caused by a fungus
that has been most generally known as Colletotrichum lindemuthianum.
Recent investigations show that there may be several species of Oolleto-
trichum tha f attach
beans, and that C.
lindemuthianum is only
one stage of growth in
an ascomycete fungus,
known as a Glomeralla.
We shall retain at
present the name of
Golletotrichu rn linde-
muthianum, pending
further investigation.
The disease occurs all
over the world where-
ever beans are grown,
often doing very serious
damage. It attacks
pods, stems, and leaves,
but the most conspicu-
ous injuries are the
spots on the pods. The
fungus penetrates the
affected parts to a con-
siderable extent, and
the seeds in the pods
beneath the spots are
often spotted or dis-
coloured. The fungus
is present in the seed,
and by the use of in-
fected seed the fungus
is readily distributed.
It appears upon the
cotyledons (seedling
leaves) of the young
plant when badly in-
fected seed is sown.
The fungus spreads
from the seed leaves to
the first-formed true
leaves of the plant.
The stems of plants are
often so badly diseased
near the base that
Bean Pods attacked by Bean Antbracnose.
they may fall over and die. The pods, when quite young and succulent,
offer the best conditions for the growth and development of the fungus,
which develops best with continued wet weather or with heavy dews.
* G. P. Darnell-Smith, B.Sc., F.1.C.. F.C.S., Biologist, and E. Mackinnon, B.Sc.,
Assistant Biologist.


Spores from diseased spots on steins and leaves may fall on the pods, where,
in the presence of moisture and a sufficiently high temperature, they
germinate rapidly and produce the spots, which enlarge and darken until
nearly black. The dead tissue dries and shrinks. Spores are produced by
the fungus in these spots in great abundance, and ooze out, forming pink
masses held together by a mucilage, which, when dry, sticks them to the
spot. When dew or rain falls on these spots the mucilage is dissolved and
the spores set free in the water. At this time any disturbance of the bean
plant will scatter these spores to other plants. For this reason beans should
not be cultivated nor handled in the early morning while the dew is still
on them, or after a shower. The spores are scattered wdien wet, and hence
a rainy season is most favourable to the spread of the disease.
Prevention and Treatment. —Since diseased pods and steins left in the
fa-ids will provide infection for the new crop, all diseased plants, leaves, and
pods should be collected and burnt.
Only clean seed should be used in any future planting. This should be
obtained from some source known to be free from disease. All seed should
be hand-picked, and any showing spots or discolorations should be dis-
carded. This is the best preventive, and if these two factors (burning
refuse and selecting seed) be rigidly carried out the new crop may be free
from disease.
The seed should not only be selected, but the pods should also be selected
in the field, and as a further precaution all seed should he disinfected. The
most satisfactory dip is a solution of about 1 oz. corrosive, sublimate or
mercuric chloride in 6J gallons of water. The seed should be soaked in
this for ten minutes. This method of disinfection is also of great service
in checking other diseases.
A rotation of crops is useful and also good farm practice. It affords
time for the spores in the soil to die out.
Spraying helps to keep the growing crop clean. Bordeaux mixture, made
on a 64 —100 formula, following the method of manufacture described
in this Handbook in connection with Late Blight of potatoes, should be
sprayed on when the first true leaves are unfolding; a second spraying should
be given about two weeks later, and a third when the young pods are being
formed. The pods, stems, and leaves should bo well drenched with the
fungicide.
Permanganate of potash solution, in a i per cent, strength, has proved
effective in treating anthracnose on sweet peas.
Soil w T ell fertilised with stable manure some time previous to planting
has been beneficial in promoting active plant growth and also reducing
disease. The grower should also be on the lookout for resistant varieties —
selecting seed from any plants that show resistance to the disease at any
time. In other countries the wax variety has proved susceptible, while
Lima beans have been quite resistant.
Rusts.
Several species of rust fungi, belonging to the genus Vrornyces , affect
varieties of beans and peas throughout the world. In New South Wales
our commonest species is probably Uromyces phaseolorum, De Bary
(= U. appendiculatus (Pers.) Link), which occurs upon the ordinary


varieties of our garden beans (Pkascolus vulgaris) and also on the tow-
pea. The fungus appears usually late in the season and is destructive to
foliage and may thus result in an earlier
ripening of the crop as well as a reduced
crop. .Spots appear on the leaves (especially
on the under surface though occasionally
cm the upper), at first blister-like and
small. These rupture and the spores pro-
duced give an iron rust colour to the mass.
The fungus is harboured by the old leaves
and vines ; hence when this disease appears
in a crop it is advisable to burn all refuse
and neither to throw any on the manure
heap to be returned later to the field, nor to
turn any under with the soil. Early spray-
ing with Bordeaux mixture should be given.
Later, when the pods are well developed the
English practice is to use permanganate of
potash, about 1 oz. in 8 to 10 gallons of
water. The grower should always be on
the lookout for selecting seed from any
resistant varieties.
Another species that has been recorded in
Now (South Wales is Uromyees fahee (De
Bary) on broad heaps ( Vida J'abd). This
attacks pods, leaves, and stems, and in
other parts of the world occurs on garden
peas (Pisum sativum) and several species of
vetch, e.y. , common vetch or tare (Vida
Bean Rust (Uromyces phaseoli).
saliva). If it bo remembered that these rust fungi commence their attacks
from germinating spores that have hibernated on parts of old plants, it
will be evident what benefit will be derived from collecting and burning all
old refuse.
Mildews.
Beans and peas and allied crops suffer attack by a number of fungi which
produce appearances known as Mildew. The most important of these are —
(1) Damping-off Mildew, duo to Pyihium de Baryanum (Hesse).
(2) Downy Mildew, due to Peronospora view (De Bary).
(3) Downy Mildew, due to Phytophthora phaseoli (Thaxter).
(4) Powdery Mildew, due to Erysiphe pohjgoni (D.C.).
Damping-off Mildew. —Seedlings of many kinds are often affected with a
disease known as Damping-off. The conditions which favour its develop-
ment arc a considerable degree of warmth, abundant moisture, and a
weakened condition of the seedlings. It is common when plants are grown
in a crowded condition. The fungus attacks the seedlings at or near the
surface of the ground, the stem shrinking and the plants falling over.
Thinning out seedlings, reducing the water supply, and allowing the free
access of air and sunshine will check the further development of the fungus.
Downy Mildew due to Peronospoia. —The fungus Peronospora vicin' (De
Bary) attacks the leaves of various leguminous plants, such as broad bean,
pea, vetch, molilotus, &c., producing fclt-likc patches of hyphen, which


become dense and whitish to greyish in colour. The hyphse produce many
branched conidiophores, and the spores, borne on the ends of the pointed
brandies, rapidly spread the mildew in moist weather. When favourable
conditions change, the fungus produces a globular thick-walled resting
spore which can live from one season to another in any decaying parts of
the plant. The destruction of all plant refuse, the reduction of the moisture
on the plants by the access of sunshine, and the free circulation of air will
check the disease. Spraying with lime-sulphur (commercial mixture), 1 in
100 parts water, or potassium sulphide solution (liver of --ulphur), about
4 oz. in 10 gallons water, is useful.
Downy Mildew due to Phytopkthora. —A downy mildew, similar to Late
(or Irish) Blight of potatoes, but caused by another species, Phytophthora
phaseoli (Thaxter), causes destruction of Lima beans in some countries,
attacking young shoots, flower clusters, and leaves, causing them to become
dwarfed and distorted, and also forming a dense, woolly-white growth on
the pods. This does not occur in New South Wales, but might be intro-
duced at any time. The preventive measures used are: —The use of clean
seed, rotation of crops to get rid of the resting spore stage, destruction of
old plant parts, and spraying with dilute Bordeaux mixture.
Powdery Mildew. —A powdery mildew, caused by the fungus Erysiphe
polygoni (D.C.), is a common disease that attacks over 300 species of
plants, including many of the Leguminosse, e.g., garden peas, beans, and
vetches. On peas in moist seasons it may form a dense, persistent myce-
lium, covering stems, leaves, and pods. When mildew attacks young plants
the crop is generally a total failure. The fungus produces spores in great
profusion, and in later periods develops its perithecia (cases enclosing
asci which hold about two or three ascospores). This stage will carry the
fungus on till the next crop, The fungus may hibernate in the seed
derived from affected pods.
Spraying with potassium sulphide, as for Peronospora mildew, or dusting
with flowers of sulphur, is recommended.
Leaf Spot.
A disease that has recently appeared here on the French bean is that
known as Leaf Spot, caused by the fungus Isariopsis griseola (Sacc.). This
attacks the leaves and stems, producing brownish patches, and causes the
loaves to fall away. The spots become large and angular; they are often
limited by the veins. Bordeaux mixture should be used as for other diseases
such as Pea Spot.
Pea Spot.
This disease, due to the fungus Ascochyta pisi (Lib.), attacks French
and haricot beans, garden and sweet peas, hairy vetch, lucerne, and some
other leguminous plants. The first indications of disease on the pods is
the appearance of pale green spots of variable size and irregular shape.
These spots continue to increase in size, and eventually become whitish,
bounded by a dark line, and dotted with minute black points, which are
the pycnidia of the fungus and contain numerous spores. The fungus may
grow through the pod into the seed, and thus the disease becomes further
distributed. The mycelium hibernates in affected seed, reduces the ger-
minating power, and carries the fungus over to the succeeding crop.
Similar spots may occur on leaves and stem. The spots often penetrate
through the woody part and eau=e wilting of the plant.


On young plants the disease often assumes the character of a ;i damping-
off " disease. Spraying with dilute Bordeaux mixture (6 —4 —100) on the
first appearance of the disease checks its spread. As the disease is also
distributed in affected seed careful attention should he given to the
selection of good seed. As in the case of Anthracnose, any spotted seed
should be discarded, and all seed should be dipped. It is safer not to obtain
any seed from a source known to have the disease.
Selerotium Disease.
A disease that is common to very many different plants, including beans
and peas, is that known as Selerotium disease. It is associated with the
fungus Sclerotinm sclerotiorum (Massee). This attacks the stems, com-
mencing as a white mould at the ground line and working upwards. After
the fungus has developed for some time the leaves become yellow, and wilt,
and finally the stem collapses owing to the mycelium of the fungus blocking
up all the water-conducting channels. When the stem of the host is
hollow the mycelium is produced in considerable quantity in the cavity,
and. forms numbers of lumps or sclerotia that are white at first, then black
externally. When the stem is solid the sclerotia are formed in its substance
and become visible on the outside. These sclerotia, varying in size up to
that of a pea, form a resting stage of the fungus. They remain either free
in the soil or in decaying plants, and in the spring develop small, brown
mushroom-like structures on long stems, w’hich produce spores that are
able to infect a new crop.
Diseased plants should be burned and not allowed to lie on the ground.
The sclerotia lying dormant in the soil are difficult to deal with. In small
gardens the top few inches of soil can be removed and replaced by fresh
soil mixed with quicklime. If all infected plants be pulled up and burnt
as soon as the first indication of disease is observed, the formation of
sclerotia may be forstalled. As an additional precaution it is well to spray
the infected area with Bordeaux mixture or with a 2 per cent, bluestone
solution.
Insect Pests of Beans and Peas.*
French Bean Fly.
This little black fly (Agromyza phaseoli), about one-twelfth of an inch
in length, does a good deal of damage to Trench bean crops in some dis-
tricts. The fly lays its eggs upon the stem near the ground, and the result-
ant maggots tunnel along under the skin, leaving the stem rusty-red and
cracked, so that the plant eventually dies.
Growers report that spring crops are seldom, if ever, damaged by this
moth to any appreciable extent, but as the weather becomes warmer the
flies gradually breed up and develop in such numbers as to be very destruc-
tive in the fall of the year.
In good growing weather some advantage can he gained over the pest by
hilling up the soil round the plants, so that the stems are covered; the
bean plant then puts out a fresh supply of fibrous roots above the damaged
tissue. The hilling up of the bean rows also protects the stems if it is done
before the flies first appear. TSTo spray or wash that has been used seems to
• W. W. Froggatt, F.L.S., Government Entomologist, and W. B. Gurney, Assistant-
Entomologist.


1. Bean plant, showing ravages of the fly.
2. Pupa. [Much enlarged.]
3. French Bean Fly. [Much enlarged.]
4. Larva. [Much enlarged.]
French Bean Fly (Ayramyzaphaseoli).


have any effect upon the flies; and as the maggots do not feed upon the
surface of the plant but under shelter of the tissue, no poisonous spray upon
the foliage would injure them.
As with many other pests, this is a ease for clean cultivation. The
maggots pupate in the bean stems, from which, if the plants are allowed to
remain in the field, the flies emerge in due course. It would be advisable to
pull and burn all infested bean plants as soon as the last picking has
been gathered; otherwise, if the plants remain dead and dry, many pup®
may drop out of the cavities in the stems, and, falling on the earth, remain
in the ground long after the dry stalks have been removed. Several growers
have reported that, although they had cleaned up and burnt all the old beans
the previous season, they found the following year, when they planted beans
in the same land, that they had not got rid of the flies. Probably some
pup® had dropped from the damaged bean plants before they were removed.
Bean Aphis.
The small bean aphides develop through the summer months on various
plants, including the many varieties of beans. At this time they are all
females, some winged, but many wingless, and they give rise to their
young without the aid of males, the young aphis being born viviparously,
that is, extruded alive. The aphis are born in rapid succession, and the
numbers increase with amazing rapidity. The effect of these thousands of
tiny insects, each sucking up sap by means of its little beak, is to cause
the plants to weaken and wilt. Towards the end of summer, winged forms
are developed more numerously, and the aphides spread. Winged males are
also now developed and fertilise the females, which then lay eggs known as
the winter eggs. These eggs tide the winter over and hatch in the follow-
ing spring to start the broods of that season.
Controls. —Spray with tobacco and soap wash, or sunlight soap wash, or
even a dilute kerosene and soap wash, say, 1 part of kerosene to 30 parts of
water; the mixture must be very thoroughly emulsified with soap to prevent
burning of the tender parts of the flowers and foliage. Further, it is
recommended that stubble and weeds in the bean fields be thoroughly
destroyed or well turned in to destroy any aphis or e-ggs.
Pea Aphis.
Peas are attacked by an aphis which may be controlled in the same way
as bean aphis. It has been found in the United States, however, that
brushing them into trays of oil and water drawn between the rows, as
described in the- ca«e of the next pest, is effective.
Green Bug.
These plant juice-sucking bugs ( Cuspicona ) are sometimes numerous and
destructive. They are wide-bodied, green bugs, about one-third of an inch
long, with a triangular plate or shield in the middle of the back.
Controls. —Oil spraying is not so effective as hand-picking, i.e., collecting
them by hand (preferably in early morning), and destroying the limited
number which may be present. The use, as follows, of a tray of oil and
water can also be recommended. A shallow iron trough, 1 foot or 18 inches-
wide. 2 or 3 inches deep, and about 3 or 4 feet long is made; a sheet of


galvanized iron may bo used, the ends and sides being turned up and
soldered. About a cupful of kerosene or other oil and half a gallon of
water are poured into the tray, which is then drawn slowly along between
the rows, while someone follows behind and beats or brushes the bean plants
with a bundle of brush, dislodging numbers of tbe bugs, which usually fall
into the trough of oily water. Ilepeated two cat three times, say, once every
four to seven days, the limited number of bugs present may be muck
reduced.
Tomato and Bean Bug.
The distinctive bright green and unmistakable shield form of this plant
bug (Nezara virultda) have become quite familiar to vegetable growers in
coastal districts, where it is now known as a post on the fruits and foliage
of the tomato, on the foliage and young pods of Trench beans, and on the
foliage of potato plants. In Florida, U.S.A., the species is known as a pest
of orange trees, and in some districts of A'ew South Wales it has acted
similarly. They damage plants by sucking tbe plant juices from the tcu-
dorest parts.
The accompanying plate illustrates the typical shield shape. The insect
■can run and tiy very well, but it generally drops to the ground when the
plaut is disturbed. The female lays her eggs in little patches on the surface
of the foliage of the young beams, and the baby bugs, when ready to emerge,
push off the flattened lid, leaving the empty eggs like tiny glass cups. The
bugs are dark-coloured when they first emerge, but during successive moult-
they gradually change to a lighter colour until they appear as the perfect
green shield bugs. They may be present among- the foliage of si plant in
numbers, and yet escape detection, so closely does their colour harmonic-
with the background.
Controls. —The clusters of round, flat-topped, glassy eggs are very notice-
able on tlie foliage, and if the infested leaves are snipped off and destroyed
largo numbers can be destroyed before they oven hatch. If the bugs are
noticed on plants, a sheet could be spread on the ground and the plants
shaken suddenly over it; most of the bugs will drop on to the sheet and
can be collected and destroyed. In the early stages of development, the
little bugs have not yet fully developed wings, and an oil spray, or tobacco
and soap wash, can be used effectively.
Pseudo-Looper or Silvery Plusia Moth.
The green caterpillar of this species (Plusia argentifera) commonly feeds
on the foliage of beaus, creepers, and potatoes. They pupate in loose, silken
cocoons, which they spin on the foliage or stalks and sometimes on the
ground.
Controls. —Brushing into a tray of oil and water as is described above in
connection with Green bug is recommended. Spraying with arsenate of
lead in the proportion of lb. arsenate of lead to 50 gallons of water, is
also advantageous where the foliage is not too dense.
Cutworms.
These insects attack picas as well as other vegetable and field crops. They
can bo destroyed with poisoned baits as described in connection with wheat,
on page 385.




Bean and Pea Weevils.
The grubs and adult beetles of several species of the genus Bruchus
commonly attack various peas and bean seeds. The cowpea weevil
(Bruchus chinensis ), the common bean weevil (B. ohtechis ), and another
species (probably B. quadrima-
culatus), are recorded doing
damage in New South Wales.
Though these beetles will lay
their eggs in the field, their
ravages are not generally suffi-
cient to be noted until after the
crop has been gathered and
stored. Then the grubs become
full grow-n, pupate, and change
to the adult form within the
beans or peas, as the case may
be. This brood will again lay
eggs on the seeds around them
in the store, and the infestation
is thus increased and with it the
damage.
Controls. —For destroying
these pests, which are the cause
of the loss of a large percentage of
stored seed, fumigation with car-
bon bisulphide is best, the method
being similar to that described in
connection with maize. About
1| lb. of the carbon bisulphide
to every 100 bushels of beans or
peas, the fumigation lasting
for thirty hours, is effective. A
Bean Weevil (Bruchus obtectus).
barrel or bin is a convenient receptacle for treating this class of seed, but
it should be as nearly full as possible. The fumes are highly inflammable,
and no lights or pipes should be allowed near.
Cowpea seed was kept in cold storage (35° F.) from August till Decem-
ber in one year, and, though infected, the weevil was found not to have
developed. The seed planted in December yielded a good crop, and did not
seem affected by the cold. This method destroys the grubs and beetles, and,
even if it does not destroy the eggs, prevents their development. Cold
storage, though presenting practical difficulties, will certainly save a large
percentage of grain that would otherwise be lost.
THE TOMATO.
The extensive cultivation of the tomato is of comparatively recent years,
but it has advanced so rapidly in public estimation as a most useful, whole-
some, and delicious fruit or vegetable, that very large areas are annually
planted with it. In this State the production of early tomatoes for domestic
use and mid-season crops for sauce manufacturers is a distinct and pro-
fitable business, occupying considerable areas.


The best land for tomatoes is a rich mellow loam, with a little sand in the-
upper layer, and a good day subsoil. For early crops a. northern aspect is
desirable. Poor and medium quality lands will frequently give early crops,
but not heavy ones. Where this plant is to be grown in quantity for manu-
facture or the open market, when quantity is of more consequence than
earliness, the -oil must be either naturally rich or artificially made so.
Preparation of the Land.
Having selected the land for this crop it must be prepared during the
autumn previous to planting in the spring. If new' land bo taken it must
be broken up and prepared with all the care advocated for onions and
potatoes.
Planting in the open cannot take place until the district is clear of frosts
unless means he taken to shelter the young plants every evening as the
Chinese do. Meanwhile the young plants have to be got ready in a cold
frame, or some warm sheltered spot.
The Seed Bed.
The seed or plant bed may be made of any desired size, according to the
extent of cropping. A frame of boards of the required size may be built
on this plot, and covered with calico or new hessian; the latter should be
made to shift or roll up, as will be frequently needed. The seed may be
sown in shallow boxes under cover, or in the frame, and covered with a
sprinkling of fine loamy soil. One to two ounces of seed will produce more
than sufficient plants for one acre. As soon as the plants are large enough
to handle (2 or 3 inches high) they should be transplanted into the frame,
which by this time should have been worked up to the finest condition and
tilth.
The plants may be set out, say, 5 or 6 inches apart, both in row's and
spaces, setting each plant opposite the space in the former row. Here they
may remain and grow until time for transplanting into the field; and by
removing the calico, giving them air, light, and sunshine on fine days, and
covering up in the evenings or during cold spells or frosts, they should
presently became stout and stocky plants. After they are once set out, do
not give them much watering, or they may be inclined to draw up and
become lanky and tender.
The main point in a frame or bed of this character is to keep it dry and
warm, and in transplanting into it, care must be taken that the plants are
not much lower than they sat in the seed-bed, as the deeper they are set the
more liable they are to damp off. If any plants have got rather down in
the seed-bed, and become long-shanked, they should be laid slanting, just
below' the surface, and they will take root along the stem, and become stout
and stocky plants after all. The drier the bed is kept (with discretion) the
better. When they become 5 or 0 inches high, some will want to outrun
their neighbours; these should be pinched in a little, so as to allow the
weaker plants to come up uniform in strength before putting out. Any
suckers that may appear should also be removed if it is intended to grow
for early fruit.


Tor successive crops seed may be sown at intervals in the open, after the
frosts are gone. Prepare a bit of rich soil, and strike out drills not more
than half an inch deep. >Sow thinly, cover lightly, and water sparingly.
The young plants should show up within a week, and if it is desired to push
them along, transplant into a nursery bed when they get their third leaf,
putting them 5 or 0 inches apart as previously advised, and then follow on
as before. Seed may be sown from June to end of January, and crops may
be grown for eight months in the year —in some favoured spots even longer.
Transplanting.
When all is ready for removing the young plants into the field, they
should have a good watering some hours before, so that the roots will retain
hold of as much soil as possible. The earth may be cut both ways between
the plants with a sharp spade or knife, and lifted underneath also. When
the plants are lifted out, as much soil should go with each as may remain
with the roots, taking care not to break the fine rootlets, so that the plants
may suffer as little shock as possible. A large number may be lifted, and
carried out to the field at one time by using large board trays or other rough
appliances made for the purpose. In fact the plants may be treated in
every way the same as when transplanting cabbages, cauliflowers, celery,
&c., either with the plough, spade, or trowel. Plant at least one inch
deeper than in the frame, and if the quantity is not very large, evening is
the best time for moving them, or after showers.
Unless the soil is dry, do not use water in the transplanting as the plants
are liable to damp off in cold wet soil. They may need shading a little in the
heat of the day for the first two or three days after moving, otherwise the
more light and air they get the better.
It is better to plant 4J feet or 5 foot apart, and to stake them up like vines
in a vineyard, instead of letting them trail on the ground, as some do.
These latter hardly bear as well, and are far more subject to disease than
those supported from the earth. The land should be kept clean between
the rows and plants, as in any other well-tended crop.
Pruning.
If it is intended to keep the plants well pruned throughout their growth
(and for early fruit this will be necessary) 4-J feet will be found ample space
in the rows, and 5 feet between the rows, but if quantity' of crop is of more
consequence than earliness, little or no pruning will be needed.
Pruning should commence as soon as suckers get to be an inch long.
Frequently these will appear immediately the plants are set out in the field,
and if the tendency' is not checked by their removal, the plants generally
lose their first bloom and earliest fruits. Some experienced groovers prefer
to leave one sucker and the main stem, some two suckers, and others the
main stem only, until the first or second cluster where it will fork, then
leaving the fork or two stems. Pruning for an early crop is specially
referred to a few pages later.
When working amongst the crop, diseased plants or fruit should be imme-
diately' removed from the field and burnt, and after the crop is gathered the
haulms or stems should be collected and burnt also. It is not advisable for
tomatoes to follow a crop of tomatoes on the same land, at any rate without
a crop or two of a totally different nature intervening. This precaution is
necessary to prevent the spread of disease.


Picking, Packing, and Grading.
Care should be taken when gathering the fruit that it be not bruised, or
it will decay rapidly. Tomatoes that are to travel long distances, or occupy
days in transit, should be picked when they begin to colour at the blossom
end.
When packing, the fruit should be graded according to size and ripeness,
all in each package being as near alike as possible. The grading should be
something like this
1. Large ripe fruit. 4. Small medium ripe.
2. Small ripe fruit. 5. Largo green fruit.
3. Large medium ripe. 6. Small green fruit.
The fruit will thus look better, sell better, keep better, and pack or travel
better; the arrangement will be found advantageous to the buyer and more
profitable to the seller, besides establishing a reputation for the brand
amongst buyers. Each package must have the contents and quality faith-
fully marked on the outside, so that buyers may learn to rely on the brands
without wanting to overhaul the fruit.
Culls should not be marketed, but fed to pigs or destroyed, as is done
with other refuse fruit.
Varieties.
There are several good varieties from which the grower can make his
selection. Sparks’ Earliana is an excellent early tomato that has done well
at Hawkesbury Agricultural College, where the vines are trellised. Chalk’s
Early Jewel is also favoured by some growers for the early crop. Burwood
Prize, which shelters its fruit beneath abundant foligge, is largely grown
in the Hawkesbury district under field conditions for the purposes of the
sauce-making trade. Dwarf Champion is also used for field crops, its
strong, upright stems saving the labour and expense of staking. For private
gardeners, Ponderosa can be recommended, but it has the disadvantage
that it does not carry well.
Growing for the Sauce Trade.
When it is realised that the Sydney market consumes some thousands of
tons of tomatoes annually, some idea may be formed of the extent of the
industry at the present time. The greater bulk of this is used by the various
factories in making jam and sauce, for which purpose the late Captain
W. B. Douglas cultivated tomatoes on a rather extensive scale in the season
1908-9, in the Hawkesbury district.
At the beginning of each season the different jam and sauce manufac-
turers let out contracts for the tomatoes they will require during that sea-
son. One firm alone deals with over 400 tons annually, and lets out con-
tracts for about 50 tons to each man willing to supply. The contract is
only binding to a certain point. If the season turns out unfavourable, and
the grower cannot supply the full amount, no attempt is made to compel
him. On the other hand, if a man grows the tomatoes and tries to dispose
of them in a more profitable direction he will certainly be brought to book.
The contract price for the season referred to was £3 10s. per ton delivered
in trucks.
As nothing is gained by getting early tomatoes for this trade, the seed
need not be sown till all danger of frosts is over. Seed sown in September
is likely to escape frosts, and at the same time will come on better than the


earlier-sown beds. .Burwood Prize stands easily first in the district men-
tioned as the best all-round variety. It is a sure and even cropper, a good
carrier, and, wdiat is very important also, a most vigorous grower. During
the very hot scorching days of December and January the fruit will scald
very badly unless well protected by the foliage, and this is one reason
why the Burwood Prize is so popular.
One ounce of seed is sufficient to sow 2 acres in rows 6 feet apart, if it
germinates well.
It>was considered better to sow in shallow drills, about 9 inches apart, as
it facilitated watering (wdien necessary), and the weeding could be accom-
plished more expeditiously.
A 9-acre Tomato Plantation at Richmond. N.S.W.
Owing to the continued frosts in 1908 planting was not started till the
second week in November. The ground on which the bed was planted was
9 acres of a rich black alluvial, which had been cultivated to a depth of
9 inches. As no rain had fallen for some considerable time, it was neces-
sary to water the plants as they were put in. Drills were opened out 6 feet
apart, and small holes were dug every 6 feet along the furrows for the
plants. About 1J pints of ■water -were put in each hole before the plant,
w r hich was just pushed into the mud, and some soil pulled round it. Out
of about 15,000 plants put in, the loss in transplanting was not 5 per cent.,
so it will be seen the above method was effective, despite the unfavourable
season. A man with a team of horses and two boys can waiter and trans-
plant about 1 acre of tomatoes per day. This includes digging the holes for
the plants, but not the drilling. If the weather is at all favourable, the
plants will want cultivating in at least a month’s time, and a week or two
later will require hilling. It was found better to turn two furrows to the
plants, and then clean out the intervening spaces wdth a cultivator. The
plants very soon spread all over the spaces between the drills.
The crop started to ripen in February, but it was not till the beginning
of March that pulling was started in earnest. The cases used are the


Ditfc.
Price per
half-ease.
Date.
I’rii'e per
half-ca*-.
s.
(1.
1
1
S.
<1
30 November. 1911 ...
8
0
IS
December, 1011 ...
(>
0
4 December ,,
S
0
20
,,
6
1)
8 „
i
0
27
(i
0
11 „ ...
( 7
0
•)
January, 101:!
4
b
i (i
fi
iT
6
0
14
(>
(>
i.-,
0
_ .
...
standard 1-bushel case, holding about 221 lb. of tomatoes, and were supplied
by the factory. A good puller can pull and pack fifty to sixty eases a day
in a good crop, and about 100 cases go to the ton.
Being a large bed, things were very busy for a few weeks. On some days
as much as 3 tons of fruit were put on the trucks. Pulling continued ti!.
18th April, when an early frost brought things to a finish. The bed yielded
an average of 5 tons to the acre, which was satisfactory. With tomatoes at
£3 10s. a ton, this shows a gross return of £l7 10s. Against this is the
pulling, which ran into £2 10s. per acre; carting, ss. a ton (255. per a(?rc) ;
transplanting, 15s. per acre; A oz. seed, Is. 3d. This leaves a net return of
£l2 18s. 9d. to cover rent, ploughing, and general cultivation. This would
reduce the actual profit to about £lO per acre, which is a good return.
There are few other crops grown under similar conditions, which can show
a return equal to the above, but the intending grower should take care that
he has a market ensured before planting largely, as the factories naturally
favour their own clients, and the returns in the ordinary market are often
very disappointing.
Early Tomatoes at Hawkesbury Agricultural College •
The prices received for tomatoes raised at the College, and placed upon
the market before the bulk crops come in, are so very satisfactory that a
description of our methods should prove valuable. It is necessary to force
the growth of the young plants during the winter months, and to protect
them from frost; and it is also essential to plant them in the field, and
prune them in such a manner as to ensure their ripening as early as
possible; but the results more than justify the small expenditure and the
considerable amount of light labour required.
We have sold £l3O worth of fruit from a third of an acre of land. It is
not our practice to dispose of ail the fruit grown on this third of an acre
devoted to early tomatoes each year, as the needs of the College, with its
staff, students, and visitors, averaging more than 250 per day, have to be
met first. Our very earliest tomatoes are not sold, but the value at tin;
date they are available is ascertained and the orchard account is credited
with the value of all tomatoes supplied for College consumption.
The following prices were those actually received for tomatoes grown at
the College, and sold through an agent at the Sydney fruit markets; —
lu November they were 10s. per half-case, but none were actually sold at
that price, though a supply was available for College consumption. To a
man who has a small area of sandy loam, handy to market, with facilities
for irrigation and an adequate supply of farmyard manure, the industry
offers a splendid chance. Probably there is no other crop which will give
such quick returns from a small area.
* James Alford, Orchardist.


Avoidance of Frost.
The tomatoes should not be planted out in the field until all reasonable
danger of severe frosts is passed. Consequently, an "early" district has
an advantage over a "Tate” one. Ours is not an early district by any
means, as the belt of country in which the College is situated is far more
subject to frost than, for example, the lower part of the Hawkesbury Valley.
Our seed is sown about the middle of July, in seed-boxes covered with glass
and placed in a hot-bed, where the growth of the young plants is forced, and
■where they can he covered from frosts at night.
Early Tomatoes at Hawkesbury Agricultural College, showing the Trellising Method.
Varieties.
The variety always used for early fruit at the College is Shark's Earl ian a.
This is a very good tomato, fairly smooth and round, and admirably adapted
for trellising and pruning. In a number of comparative trials at the
College it has always come out best for early fruit.
Burwood Prize, a tomato largely grown, is not suitable for this purpose.
Its growth is very sturdy, and it is not adapted for trellising; and, more-
over, it is not nearly as prolific at Earliana.
.Dwarf Champion is a good bearing variety, and does not require staking.
It is used at the College for mid-season sowing for main crops. As tomatoes
are cheap in season we do not attempt to trellis or prune this variety.
For late fruit, in a district suitable for such crops, Spark's Earliana could
be used again. Wo do not attempt the winter crops, our latest tomatoes
being picked about the middle of May. These are Dwarf Champions, and
the seed for this is sown late in January.
To sow half an acre of Spark’s Earliana, 2 ounces of seed will be found
sufficient.


The Hot-bed.
For half an acre of tomatoes the hot-bed will need to be about 24 feet
long by 0 feet wide, if it is proposed to set out the plants about 2 inches
apart each way without pots. If 3-inch pots are to be used, which we prac-
tise and recommend, the hot-bed will need to be proportionately larger for
the same area of tomatoes.
A few loads of fresh stable manure are put in a heap, and allowed to heat
for about a fortnight. When quite fresh it heats too rapidly, and will burn
the plants, so it should be allowed to ferment a little before use, and turned
over at least once to regulate the heat. This should be spread out evenly
to a depth of 2 feet on the surface of the ground facing, for preference, the
north-east. The quantity- of manure required can be gauged from the size
of the hot-bed proposed to be made.
Around the hot-bed, build a frame of battens, 2 feet high at the back, and
IS inches high at the front above the level of the manure. Cover the sides
and ends with bagging or
other such material. Over
the top place a hessian blind
fastened at the back, and at
the front put a long piece of
round wood, upon which the
blind can be rolled back to
admit sunlight and air. Glass
is largely used for covering
Fig. 1.
the frames, but we find the hessian blind quite as satisfactory and much less
expensive. The blind is lot down at night to protect the plants from frost,
and rolled up in the morning. fSee Fig. 1.)
The Seed-boxes.
These may be made from kerosene cases. One side of a ease is removed,
and the top closed so as to give a flat box about 10 inches deep. Put
3 inches of rotten manure or similar material in the bottom for drainage
purposes, and then 3 inches of nice, free, sandy soil. This will leave about
4 inches of space for the seedlings to grow. Sow the seeds in the box, and
place a sheet of glass over it in order to exclude the cold air. Plunge the
box into the hot-bed, so that the heat may germinate the seeds. Draw down
the hessian blind each night. As the plants come up, the glass cover is
gradually tilted back to give ventilation, until eventually it is removed
altogether.
Pour such boxes will be enough for half an acre of tomatoes.
The seedlings must be taken out of the boxes as soon as they are strong
enough—generally when about 2 inches high. If left too long they will
grow spindly and possibly “ damp off.”
Planting in Hot-bed.
The practice of pricking the young seedlings into 3-inch pots, and plung-
ing the pots into the hot-bed, is preferable to planting direct into the hot-
bed. The advantage is that the plants can afterwards be turned out of the
pots into the field without suffering any check. In case the pots are not
available, however, 4 inches of soil may be put on top of the hot-bed, and
the seedlings planted out 2 inches apart. This will necessitate much care
when planting in the field afterwards; otherwise the plants may receive a
severe set-back.


In the hot-bod, whether in pot- or not, the plants -boold be -haded from
the bright sun for three or four days after setting out. Then all shading i,
removed by day, but at night the hessian blind is let down to protect them
from frost. The tomatoes are kept under shelter in this way until all
reasonable danger of severe frosts is gone.
Trellising.
The plants are put in trellised rows 4 feet or 4 feet 6 inches apart, ana
15 inches apart in the rows. The trellises are made of 3 inch x 2 inch or
3 inch x 3 inch posts, 9 feet apart, with light 2 inch x 1 inch battens nailed
to them, and laths fastened perpendicularly every 15 inches. But where a
man has land in such a position that long rows can be laid out, it will be
cheaper to use wire to support the laths. Posts can be placed IS feet apart.
and two wires run —one a foot
from the ground and the other
I feet above —so that the top
wire is 3 feet from the ground.
The posts, of course, need not bo
of sawn timber. Then the laths
may be fastened to the wires
every 15 inches with string or
tie-wire (see Fig. 2). Builder's
laths, bamboo sticks, or light
saplings will do. They should
be long enough to extend from
the ground to well above the
top wire. Stout wire is some-
Fig. 2.
times used instead of laths, but this often burns the plants in hot weather.
A tomato plant is set out at the base of each lath.
After planting out, we watch the weather for late frosts. In such cases
our practice is to put a tea-tree bush on the south-west side of each plant.
This shelters the plant from the cold winds, but leaves it open to the sun.
-on the north. We have never lost any tomatoes by frost.
Pruning.
This is the most important operation in the whole process. It is no exag-
geration to say that by careful pruning, tomatoes can be made to ripen a
month earlier than they otherwise would.
All lateral growth of shoots
is pinched off, leaving only
the main stem, which is
trained up the lath. A lat-
eral shoot starts from just
above each leaf on the main
stem. The leaf must not be
interfered with, but the shoot
must be pinched oif as close
to the stem as possible with-
out damaging the leaf (see
Fig. 3).
Fig. 3.
The trusses of bloom which give the fruit are thrown out along the main
stem. Care must be taken not to injure these when priming. When the


main stem reaches the top of tlie lath it may be pinched off, but not before.
This priming should be practised regularly, about onee a week. Wherever
laterals appear they should be pinched off.
The tomatoes will start to ripen from the base of the plant, and the ripen-
ing will proceed gradually towards the top.
Watering and Spraying.
The tomatoes, whether in the seed-box, hot-bed, or in the field, must bo
regularly but not excessively watered. The soil should be kept always in a
moist, growing condition. Harm can be done by too much watering, but
mil should never be allowed to get dust-dry. At the College we irrigate
tomatoes and vegetables with the effluent from the septic tank.
If there is danger of frosty nights, the best practice is to water the young
nredlings in the mornings. If the plants are watered in the evening and a
cold night follows, the plants will receive a check. In warm weather, how-
ever, watering at night is the rule.
The plants are sprayed occasionally with Bordeaux mixture, 6—4—50
formula, to cheek fungus diseases. The method of manufacture is described
o'! connection with potatoes.
If the weather is wet, we may spray once a fortnight; but in fine weather
it is not necessary to spray so often.
Diseases of Tomatoes.*
Black Spot.
The “'Black Spot ” disease of the tomato is very widely spread in New-
South Wales, and probably no tomato disease causes greater loss.
“ Black Spotusually makes its appearance first at the flower end of the
fruit ns a small brown discoloration. The discoloration spreads, and
the spot becomes more distinct and definite in outline. At the same time it
becomes depressed and darkens in colour. The larger spots, which may be
an inch or more across, have a dark-brown or black appearance, and are
often somewhat velvety in texture. Later the whole blossom-half of the
fruit may be involved. The affected tissue collapses and becomes firm and
leathery. This collapsing of the diseased tissue, together with the continued
development of other parts of the fruit, may produce a definite depression
on the blossom end of the fruit, or often it results in only a flattening of
the surface.
The first effects of the disease are not always superficial. Fruit that
appears entirely normal from an external view often has the tissue of
several, or sometimes all, its placentae collapsed and blackened in the parts
nearest the blossom. The velvety appearance that develops later on the sur-
face is due to a growth of a fungus, a species of Macrosporium. This
fungus is not, by itself, capable of producing the rot, and is apparently a
secondary infection. The disease is not due primarily to bacteria or fungi,
but to various physiological conditions, and is not infectious.
Experiments indicate that water supply is of the greatest importance in
the production and the control of Black Spot. The disease has been pro-
duced on vigorous plants by a sudden decrease in the available water supply.
Excessive water supply has also produced the disease more readily and uni-
formly than a scant or intermittent one. Plants receiving a moderate and
regular supply of water develop less rotten fruit than cither lightly or
• G. P. Darnell-Smith, B.Sc., F.1.C., F.C.S., Biologist, and E. Mackinnon, B.Se.,
Assistant Biologist.


heavily watered one-. Too much exposure to the suu also tends to an
increase of the disease,, so that methods of growth that allow for the foliage
.-hading the fruit, assist in cheeking the appearance of rot.
The effects of fertilisers on the production of the disease vary with the
nature of the soil and the amount of water supplied. Experiments by
Brooks in New Hampshire, U.S.A., gave the following general conclu-
sions:—Lime is of value in reducing tig; disease, especially if the plants are
well watered, but under drought conditions it has little tendency to decrease
the disease; potash has no tendency to increase the disease, but nitrogenous
fertilisers favour its development. Soil factors that decrease the disease
are all such as favour oxidation, while those that have increased it—aside
from water supply—are either of such a nature as to cheek oxidation, or
else to increase the organic compounds that would require oxidising, e.g .,
nitrate of soda, being an oxidising agent, has less tendency to increase the
disease than ammonium sulphate and organic fertilisers having an equiva-
lent amount of available nitrogen. Heavy applications of stable manure
increase the disease out of proportion to the increased vigour of the plants.
As the disease is not primarily due to fungi or bacteria, spraying will not
control it; hut this docs not imply that spraying should bo neglected. The
plants are liable to be attacked by other fungus diseases, and systematic
-praying is necessary to keep these, and also insect pests, under control, and
so promote the growth of healthy, vigorous plants.
Blights.
The tomato is included in the family of plants known as the Solanacea?,
which also includes the potato and the tobacco. Many parasitic fungi attack
one or more species of plants in a definite family, hence it is natural to find
the same fungus diseases occur on the tomato, potato, and tobacco. This is
well shown by several of the fungi causing the diseases known as “ Blights.’'
The tomato suffers from the following blights :
(1) Early Blight, due to Alteniaria solani.
(2) Late (or Irish) Blight, due to Fhyiophthora injeslans.
(3) Bacterial Blight, due to Bacterium solanacearum.
(4) Leaf Blight, due to Septoria lycopersici.
The first three are common to the tomato and potato, and will be only briefly
dealt with here, further details being given in connection with potatoes in
an earlier part of this Handbook.
Early Blight. —The fungus that causes this disease attacks plants
at any stage of their development. The first sign of attack is the presence
of small brown or black spots on the leaves, especially the lower ones. At
first these spots are scattered and inconspicuous, but later they increase in
size and number, and finally cause the death of the leaves. Spots may
develop on the stem, and arc brown or black, more or less circular, and
slightly depressed. Fruit may become spotted either on the plant or after
picking. The disease may grow into the interior of the fruit and rot it.
The fungus causing the disease is A Uernaria (or Macrosporium) solani.
Abundance of spores are produced on the dead spots, and they frequently
spread the disease from some centre where infection started. The fungus
probably passes from one season to another on old diseased parts of the host
plant.


I u the control oi this disease the destruction by burning of all parts of
old plants is the first consideration. Very' often after a crop the refuse of
old plants is turned under, and in this way a resting place is afforded for
the fungus. Spraying with Bordeaux of a strength of o—l—loo0 —I—loo should bo
regularly carried out to prevent infection.* If the disease is serious in arc-
year a rotation should be practised, but potatoes should not follow nor
precede the tomatoes.
Late (or Irish ) Blight. —This disease is caused by Phytophthora infestans
(Mont.), De Bary, the same as that on potato.
It affects all parts of the plant above ground, making them look as it
killed by frost. Small blackened areas appear on the leaves, branches, and
stalks, and under favourable conditions rapidly grow in size and number
until the whole plant blackens and dies. Dark spots appear on the fruit,
which rapidly decays. Fruit in all stages of ripening may be attacked, and
diseased spots continue to develop after picking. ,Young plants even about
3 inches high may be attacked. Tomatoes and potatoes arc often grown
in the same area, and thus the fungus finds a living host throughout the
whole year. Bordeaux mixture is the best spray to use to prevent infection.
Bacterial Blight. —This is primarily a disease of the vegetative part;
rather than of the fruit, and is due to Bacterium solanacearum, the same as
the Bacterial Brown Hot of potatoes, q.v. On tomato plants it causes an
early development of a great number of incipient roots in the form of small
nodules, which appear on the shoots. Infection usually takes place through
the leaf, by biting and sucking insects.
Although we have had the disease in potatoes, we have not yet noticed it
in tomatoes. The spray's used must be those to keep the various biting and
sucking insects in check, and thus prevent infection. Once the plants are
infected, spraying with ordinary fungicides will have no effect.
Leaf Blight is caused by a fungus, Septoria hjeopersid (Speg.), which
attacks the stem, fruit, and caly'x, but more especially the leaves. It pro-
duces small circular brown spots on the lower leaves first, and if these are
seriously affected they turn yellow and die. If weather conditions favour
the fungus, the attack progresses upwards, and in severe affections little of
the plant may remain but bare stems and small stunted fruit. The wither-
ing of the leaves makes the attack look like “ blight,” but the spots on the
leaves distinguish it from other diseases. Affected leaves have a tendency
to curl dorsally throughout their length, and may hang loosely on the stem.
With severe attacks, old leaves may be killed faster than new ones are
produced, and the plant is finally' checked to such an extent that little fruit
is produced, or what has been produced may be ripened quicker.
The fungus produces its spores in pycnidia, developed on the spots on
the upper surface of the leaves, and lives through the winter in old fallen
leaves and other parts of the plant. Thus in controlling the disease al!
such refuse should be collected and burnt.
The disease often attacks young plants just after setting out in the field
Bordeaux mixture promptly sprayed on the plants after the disease appear;
will check it. Spraying, however, should be considered as a necessary opera-
tion in tomato-growing, and not be delayed until some disease makes it;
* The method of making Bordeaux mixture is described in some detail in connection
with potatoes.


Tomatoes affected with Late (or Irish) Blight.


appearance. Lor plants less than S «>r !• inches high, Bordeaux of the
strength of 0 —4 —100 should be used. As tlie plants increase in size and
hardiness, the strength of the solution can be increased until 6—4 —50 is
used.
Wilt.
This is -primarily a disease of the plant, caused by a parasitic fungus that
invades the vascular tissue, and by its action produces a wilting- of the plant.
A plant that is attacked gradually sickens, loses its green colour, wilts, and
finally collapses to the ground. Plants arc attacked here and there in the
field, and if a badly-affected one or a dead one be pulled up, the roots art.-
found to be decayed or destroyed by a dry rot. Several species of Fusarium
have been found to produce a wilt, one being Fusarium lycopersici. Other
species of Fusarium also cause progressive rots of the fruit. As F. lycoper-
sici is a soil dweller and a root parasite, spraying is of no value in treating
this disease. Good cultivation and rotation are the chief preventive
measures.
Ripe Rot.
Unlike Wilt, this is a disease of the fruit, appearing usually when the
fruit is ripe or nearly ripe. It is due to a fungus, Glwosporium fructi-
yenum, which may cause much loss after pulling, as the rot may spread
rapidly through the fruit, and also affect other fruit in contact with the
diseased fruit in the eases. Large, sunken, decayed spots appear which
become covered with small dark pustules formed in concentric rings, and
later the spots become white to pinkish, as the spores are produced and
forced out over the surface of the diseased area.
The fruit should be handled carefully to prevent any injury, as spore-
readily infect sound fruit if the skin be damaged. On no account should a
tomato showing - signs of Ripe Rot bo included in a case of sound fruit.
Sunburn.
Fruit sometimes becomes scorched by the sun, spots being formed that
at first are pale yellow, and later black. The spots sometimes resemble the
diseased areas produced by Ripe Rot, and soon become infected by various
fungi. Varieties with more foliage can be grown, or methods of cultivation'
adopted that will provide for the foliage shading the fruit. Plant as early
as possible, so that plants will attain good growth before the approach of
hot weather. Spraying will do no good.
Insect Pests.
The tomato is such a vigorous plant under conditions even fairly favour-
able, that it is not much affected by insect pests. The tomato and bean
bug, described in connection with beans a few pages above, may be men-
tioned. Its control in this case can be achieved in the same way as tlie-
other.
Root Knot is due to a minute round worm known as Hetcrodera radicicola.
for particulars of which readers arc referred to the potato section of this
Handbook.


PUMPKINS, SQUASHES, MARROWS, GRAMMAS.
Tor market and for domestic purposes, and as cheap, nutritious, and long-
keeping fodder for stock of all kinds, many of the varieties coming within
this group have proved to be worthy of attention. There is some confusion
as to the correct designation respectively of each distinct section of this
family, but for all practical purposes the following classification will
suffice; —
Pumpkins. —There are two distinct types of pumpkins— Tails, medium
size, generally flat, with thick flesh, fine-grained. The seed cavity is small in
proportion to the size of the pumpkin. Cattle, large size, somewhat spheri-
cal in shape, flesh coarse and sometimes with woody lumps. The seed cavity
is large in proportion to the size of the pumpkin.
Of the table pumpkins there are four well-known types —Tronbark, Crown,
Button, and Turk’s Cap. Most of the cattle varieties are red in colour, and,
of very large size. Some of the varieties are better adapted to hot districts
than others, but generally speaking the Ironbark and Crown varieties can
scarcely he excelled in any district for productiveness, for value for both
table and stock purposes, and for keeping qualities. Owing to the ease with
which cross-fertilisation takes place, it is not wise to grow the table varie-
A Crop of Cattle Pumpkins at Grafton Experiment Farm.
ties in proximity to the coarser cattle pumpkins, or it will be found that the
<-eed fif sown next season) will produce a crop exhibiting some of the
characters of the less desirable type.
Squashes. — Of this group there are many varieties of fanciful shape and
colour. Those best known for table purposes are Hubbard, Delicata, and
Custard. The last two may be described as soft squashes, arid the Hubbard
as a hard squash, presenting more of the pumpkin characteristics.


Marrows. —There ere numerous varieties o£ marrows, all of which are
adapted for table use. The best-known types are the elongated ribbed, such
as the Bush Marrows.
Grammas. —These are sometimes called Suminer Squashes or Rios, and are
the largest members of the family of cucurbits, and in many districts
provide a large bulk of nutritious fodder for live stock. One type of
gramma (of a shorter kind than the Crookneck) is largely used for culinary
purposes, chiefly for pies. All types are also very good for jam-making.
Suitable Districts and Soil.
All plants of the pumpkin family are very susceptible to frost, and there-
fore must not be planted until the danger of frosts is past for the season. All
of them have been tried throughout the State, and provided the soil selected
is well-drained, friable, and abundantly supplied with organic matter in its
natural state, or has been enriched by heavy dressings of well-rotted stable
manure, they can be depended upon to yield satisfactorily in almost any
district.
Preparation of Soil.
The land should be thoroughly worked before planting. If possible this
work should be undertaken in June or early in July, especially if stable
manure is to be added, so as to give the soil every chance to become mellow-
before the seed is sown.
In some districts pumpkins are grown between the rows in maize crops,
and on rich alluvial soil this plan answers well. When pumpkins are grown
by themselves they are usually planted in groups of two or three plants at a
distance of 10 feet apart each way.
The soil should be deeply ploughed, and care should be taken when adding-
liberal dressings of organic manure not to excavate in retentive subsoil pits
deeper than the surrounding ploughed soil. If this be done water will lodge,
and the plants will either “ damp off,” or refuse to run and produce a satis-
factory crop. The manure should be thoroughly incorporated with the sur-
face soil throughout a space of 3 feet or so in diameter. In many districts
sandy or stony ridges prove to be highly suitable situations for this crop.
Naturally in such places it is necessary to add a large amount of well-
rotted stable manure, with perhaps a small quantity of bone-dust or com-
plete fertiliser, and also to provide a few loads of fairly fine bush Takings
for a mulch. The great secret in obtaining heavy crops of pumpkins is to
keep the plants moving from the time they show above ground, and every-
thing that can be done to the soil to enrich and increase its power to retain
moisture will help to achieve that end.
Sowing and Cultivating.
As a rule, about 2 lb. of seed will suffice for an acre. Five or six seeds are
sown a few inches apart, in groups, and when the plants are a few inches
high they are thinned out to two in each “hill.”
Care must be taken to keep the soil well scarified to check the growth of
weeds and to conserve moisture, and these precautions cannot be discon-
tinued until the plants are running- and able to cover the ground.


It is a good plan to pinch back the runners in order to force the plants to
produce a dense mass of foliage over the roots, which will resist hot, dry
weather, and will also increase the production of fruit.
How successful is the system of planting pumpkins among maize is indi-
cated by the accompanying photograph of seven fine specimens grown at
Cattie Pumpkins grown by Mr. R. C. Anderson, Carr’s Creek, Crafton.
Carr’s Creek, Grafton. Numbers of farmers follow tire same system as this
particular grower, saving the seeds of the biggest pumpkins from successive
crops until something approaching those illustrated is produced.
In the case of pumpkins, both for table and fodder purposes, it is cus-
tomary to leave the fruit until the vines have died away. Table squashes
and marrows may be picked as required as soon as they become firm to
the touch and emit a wooden hollow sound when tapped with the knuckles.
MELONS.
Water-melons, preserving melons, and rock melons are grown in practi-
cally the same way as pumpkins. Like all plants of the eucurbitaceous
family, they are susceptible to frost, and require rich, warm, and thoroughly
well-drained soil.
Soil and situations favourable to the production of maize will suit melons
admirably. They also do pretty well on sandstone ridges, but their culture
in such places should be limited to domestic purposes. Where melons are


grown for market, they should be planted in the open, where they can at all
times during the earlier stages of growth receive cultural treatment in the
way of checking of weeds and conservation of moisture.
Owing to the ease with which all plants of this family are cross-fertilised
at the flowering stage by the agency of bees and other insects, it is difficult
to maintain purity of variety for any length of time, and to avoid deteriora-
tion it is necessary to obtain from time to time fresh seed from reliable
sources.
Water-melon.s. —For market purposes melons of fair size, firm flesh, and
good keeping qualities are preferred.
The best-known varieties possessing these qualifications are Phinney's
Early, Cuban Queen, Ice Cream, Kolb’s Gem, and Kleckley Sweets.
Roch Melons. —Many of the most delicate fleshed rock melons are bad
carriers. Emerald Gem may bo mentioned as an excellent variety, but for
the reason stated elongated delicate varieties are not as profitable for market
purposes as the globular-shaped, firm-fleshed types, of which the most popu-
lar are Eocky Ford (or Hotted Gem), Hackensack Early, and Eordhook.
Preserving Melons. —There are a number of varieties of preserving or
pie melons which are in considerable demand for jam-making, and also for
juicy stand-by fodder. The Citron is a well-known and generally approved
variety.
Cultivation of the Water-melon.
It is important in connection with melon culture that the plants should
be obtained early, so that the fruit shall be available at the season when it
is most desirable—the height of summer. This is especially important
where melons are being grown for commercial purposes, and various devices
are adopted for germinating the seeds early and ensuring that the young
plants shall suffer no check when being set out. Indeed, the young melon
plant is particularly tender, and will not survive transplanting if the root
system is disturbed.
Some successful growers collect old jam and other tins, and, after
melting off the tops and bottoms, arrange them, filled with fine mould, in
shallow boxes or trays. A couple of melon seeds are sown in each tin very
early in the season, and the boxes are placed in some warm and sheltered
place. By the time the season is sufficiently advanced to permit of safe
planting in the open the plants are a fair size, and can be readily set out.
With a little care the tins can be slipped off without interfering witli the
roots.
A variation of this system is in use in parts of the United States, where
the seed is sown in what are descriptively called “ dirt bands.” Thin strips
of wood veneer, 3 inches wide and IS inches long, are scored at intervals of
I inches, so that they can be bent without breaking, and are folded into
squares so as to resemble small strawberry boxes without the bottom. These
squares are placed close together in a hot-bed, and filled level full with fine,
rich soil. With a block of wood shaped for the purpose, the soil within the
squares or bands is pressed until it is I to 2 inch below the top. If only
part of the soil is put in first and pressed down firmly, and the balance is
then added and similarly treated, a more compact square of soil is obtained,
which will hold together better during transplanting. The bed is then
•thoroughly wetted, unless the soil was very moist in the first instance.


Next, three seeds are placed in each square, and covered with enough tine,
loose soil to bring all level again with the tops of the bands. This last layer
is not firmed.
The hot-bed for melon plants should have full exposure to light, and be
maintained at a high temperature—about 85° Tab. during the day, and
65° to 70° at night. As much ventilation should be given as the weather
will permit, and care exercised to avoid over-watering.
As soon as the plants are started, they are thinned to two in each square
by cutting ofl the weakest with a sharp knife. When they are about four
weeks old from planting, they are deemed large enough to transplant to the
Kolb’s Gem Water-melon.
field. The bed is thoroughly watered, and the bands, enclosing their masses
of earth and plant roots, are lifted by means of a spade, placed on a flat
surface, and carried to the field, where they are set out with the aid of a
flat trowel, care being taken that the bottom of each square is in close
contact with the soil of the hill. The band is then removed and fine, moist
soil is drawn in and firmed against the little square.
Tor the production of water-melons on a commercial scale, a warm cli-
mate and an assured supply of moisture, are essential; fur market purpose,-,
therefore, the crop is practically limited to the coast, or to areas in the
west that can be irrigated.


In field cultivation, the usual practice is to strike out furrows with the
plough, say 10 feet to 15 feet apart, according to the soil conditions. Hills
are worked up in the furrows, with ordinary or pronged hoes, and the seed
pushed under the surface, or the plants set after having been raised as
described above. If seed is planted out at once, plenty is used to allow for
losses. Some farmers throw a few handfuls of dry farmyard manure on
the top of the hill, so that the soil will not cake.
The land is cultivated between the rows as long as the vines will permit,
after which they are left to themselves.
Cuban Queen Water-melon.
The melons are usually marketed in open trucks, without either bags or
crates. Large numbers of melons are grown on the banks of North Coast
rivers, and those also are marketed without any packing, the growers simply
having taken the precaution of scratching a brand on the rind.
In the case of home-grown crops, greater care is taken in preparing the
hills, more manure being used, and the plants being specially treated with
liquid manure.
As remarked above, water-melons should be grown with the object of
having them ready as early as possible, and one of the systems of raising"
plants which are described above will be found of value to that end.


Rock Melon Culture.
In the hope that they may be of assistance to other growers, some sugges-
tions for the cultivation of rock melons, which were made hy Mr. J. Brown
at a meeting of the Lower Portland brunch of the Agricultural Bureau, are
reproduced:—
Unlike water melons, rock melons like a good stiff loam—not the stiffest
of soil, but land that responds well to cultivation. The land should be
ploughed early, say about June, and left open till nearly spring, when it
should be harrowed and ploughed, &c,; It will then be in good order. On no
account should the sol! be worked while it is wet, for it will then go hard,
and out of condition, and in that state will not produce good crops.
An experience of forty years had shown him that fowl manure was by
far the best. Pig manure and sheep manure were also very good, and
stock-yard manure was not to be despised, but ho preferred the first-named.
To prepare this ho dug a hole or ditch of suitable size, and throughout the
year put in all the manure from the fowl pens. By spring it was quite decom-
posed, and second to none for growing rock melons. He had also tried artificial
manures, but had had no success -with them.
He always “shot” the seed, soaking it for about twenty-four hours and
then putting it into a rag-bag, and placing this in the centre of a bag of about
a bushel of greenstuff cut up lulo chaff. This soon heated, and a close watch
had to he kept, as the seed would shoot very quickly and spoil. He had
planted seeds with shoots an inch long, but great care was necessary as the
shoots were very easily broken off.
He generally made the drills about 9 feet apart, and the holes G feet apart
in the drills, leaving only three or four plants in each. By planting this way
he got the vines to properly cover the ground, and one year he took 190 gin-
cases of fruit off half an acre, to say nothing of dozens of melons that were
wasted or given away. When planting, if the ground happened to be dry,
he put some water in the hole, and when it had soaked away he placed the
seeds in the wet ground and covered them lightly.
Like all other crops thorough cultivation was necessary. As soon as the
plants were large enough the plough should he put through, turning the soil
away from the rows to let the warmth into the roots, the rows in the mean-
time being worked by hand with the hoe or pronged hoe. Before the plants
were too large the plough should be put through again, this time turning
the soil up to the rows; judgment was necessary to determine whether to
harrow down or not. Rock melons were very delicate plants, and care had
to be exercised in working through them not to injure the vines,
CUCUMBERS.
To produce early cucumbers for the Sydney market the seed should be
sown in June or July, in a warm corner with some bottom heat, or in tins
or squares as in the case of melons, and when danger of severe frost is over
the plants should be transferred to the warmest situation available and
protected by covering at night.
The soil should be deeply worked, and a liberal supply of well-rotted
stable manure thoroughly worked into the hills, which should be placed
about 6 feet apart.
The plants should bo mulched and well watered, if the weather prove dry,
and as high winds are prevalent in the spring the vines should be secured in
position by means of pegs, otherwise they will become matted and twisted
together.
For the Sydney market the fruit should be carefully packed, in layers
separated by fine dry straw, in cases having a capacity of about a bushel,
.and constructed so as to admit air.


In addition to tile demand fur cucumbers for salad, there is a lair market
lor cucumbers for pickling; in this case there is not so much import-
ance attachable to earliness, but the crop is harvested at a much younger
‘-rage. It is advisable, before planting, to arrange a contract with gome
pickle manufacturer, as otherwise it might prove difficult to place the pro-
duce when it is, ready.
The varieties that do best in this State are Apple-shaped (most suitable
for private gardens), Long Green Prickly and White Spine (both popular
in the Sydney vegetable market), Gherkins (a small variety grown chiefly
for pickle). Fordhook Pickling, and Small Green Prickly (both good
pickling sorts).
Pests and Diseases of Cucurbitaceae.
Pumpkins, melons, cucumbers, and related plants have their share of
j ests and diseases, lint the most destructive are the leaf-eating beetles.
The Banded Pumpkin Beetle. #
This beetle ( Aulocophora olivieri) is particularly destructive, being per-
haps the worst of all leaf-eaters that attacks garden crops. It usually makes
its appearance just as the plants have made a good start, and if the season
be favourable the infestation becomes so serious that the whole bed will
soon be destroyed unless steps be taken to prevent it. Fortunately, the
beetles are not often so numerous as this, but they must seriously reduce
A. —The Banded Pumpkin Beetle
(Aulocophora olivieri).
B. —Indicating the natural size of
the Beetle.
The 28-spotted Ladybird ( Epilachna
28 -punctata).
the returns in almost every season. In an ordinary season they appear
about the middle of October, and are at their worst until the middle of
iNovember. They swarm on the upper surfaces of the leaves, eating off the
tissues till nothing but the dried skeleton remains; then they start on the
next leaf. The flowers are also attacked from the edges and eaten off in
the same manner.
The adult beetle is of a general rich orange yellow colour, marked with
black, and measures about a quarter of an inch in length. It is rounded on
the upper surface, and can be easily distinguished from the true ladybird
beetles by its general form being elongated, and the thorax forming a neck
between the head and body, whereas in the ladybirds the head and thorax
fit so closely into the hind portion that the whole is almost circular. As-
• W. W. Froggatt, F.L.S.. Government Entomologist.


there are a number of closely-allied species, the 'following more detailed
description will enable anyone who has the beetle before him to identify it;
Colour —Upper surface rich orange yellow, with the first three basal joints
of the long eight-jointed antennae yellow, and the five terminal ones black.
The prominent rounded eyes are black, so also are the jaws; though the
thorax is apparently all yellow, the edges are finely marked with black.
The wing-covers, narrow behind the shoulders, or hind margin of the thorax,
are elongated and broadly rounded to the extremities, are of a rich orange
yellow', with the base a broad transverse band across the lower half of the
wing-covers, a faint dorsal stripe towards the tips, and the whole of the
tips rich blue black. On the under surface the shanks and feet (tibia' and
tarsi) are black, with the segment between the middle and hind legs black,
so that connected with the black blotches on the wing-covere it forms a con-
tinuous band round the
body. The last two seg-
ments of the body are all
black on the under surface,
but on the upper surface
the first of them is barred
with yellow on either side.
The larv;e are dull
whitish coloured, elon-
gate grubs, with the
hind portion yellow, and
measuring about two-fifths
of an inch. They ar o
active little creatures,
feeding on the stem and
roots of the vines, and
sometimes gnawing their
way into the base of the
stem. When full grown
Portion of a Pumpkin Leaf, showing ravages of
Epilachna 28-puntata.
they pupate at a distance varying from 1 to 6 inches below the surface of
the soil, and later emerge as the perfect beetle, ready to make a fresh attack
on the surrounding vegetation.
Controls. —lf the plants are freely dusted on the upper surface with dry
tobacco dust and slaked lime, using 1 lb. tobacco dust to 4 lb. lime, the
beetles will be kept away. The work should be done in the morning, when
the dew causes a better adhesion of the dust to the leaves. The beetles can
also be collected on the foliage in the early morning, when they are more
or less torpid and slow in rising if disturbed. Large numbers can be
destroyed by drawing between the rows of the plants a shallow dish con-
taining water and kerosene oil and shaking the larger leaves over it.
The discovery a few years ago that the lan’ffi infested the stems and
roots, and the pupae the soil beneath, indicated another important means of
control. It is obvious that if all dead pumpkin and melon plants are
cleaned up and burnt with any other rubbish on the ground, the hibernat-
ing beetles and their eggs will he destroyed, and if the soil is turned over
early in the season and thoroughly disturbed, most of the delicate larvae and
pupae in the soil will also be killed. Nor should pumpkins or melons or
related plants be grown on the same soil in successive years.
Clean cultivation and rotation are thus as important in relation to the
pests of these crops as any other.
t 17299—Y


Other Insect Pests.
Much the same damage as that wrought by the Banded Pumpkin Beetle
is done by the 28-Spotted Ladybird (Epilachna 28-punctata). It may be
controlled by dusting the plants with tobacco and lime dust as recommended
above.
Thousands of aphides are often found upon the leaves of vines, frequent-
ing the undersides. The most practical way when the young vines are
attacked (and it is only then that curative treatment is payable) is to
gather in the lateral growths, and cover the whole plant with an inverted
tub, under which fumes of carbon bisulphide are allowed to evaporate.
Pumpkins and squashes are often attacked by crickets, and nothing is
better for this form of attack than poison-baits made of 1 oz. Paris green
to 1 lb. bran, and enough treacle to make a paste, and deposited in pellets
among the vines.
Squash-blossom and Squash-tip Diseases.
This is a blight that is very fatal to squashes. The first indication the
grower has of an attack is the appearance of a dark colour near the tip of
the young squash, where the withered blossom still clings. This coloration
extends backwards as the squash grows, and long before it is ripe the squash
is a worthless rotten mass. The colour of the rot, as it shows on the
surface, varies according to the variety of squash. Near the base of the
A Squash, showing effects of squash-blossom and squash-tip disease.
Fig. A shows a squash whose tip is discoloured and rotten on account o. the attacks of the disease.
Fig. B shows the same squash cut open, so as to show the progress of the disease in the tissues of
the young squash. The diseased tissue appears spengy and darker coloured.
withered blossom the colour is black or dark-green and velvety, and it is
here that the surface of the fruit first becomes shrivelled and wrinkled. A
little farther from the tip of the fruit the rot is dark-brown, and this shades
off through light-brown into the healthy colour of the rind of the fruit.
This description is of a half-rotten squash about half-grown. When the
destruction is more rapid, and the squash is killed while very young, the
appearances are somewhat different.
The cause of the disease is a fungus belonging to the genua Macro-
sporium, and the dark-green velvety appearance caused by it, as described
above, closely resembles the appearance caused by the black-rot fungus of
the tomato, which fungus belongs also to the genus Macrosportwm. When
split in halves so as to show the changes in the flesh due to the disease, all
that portion of the squash near the tip is seen to be discoloured and spongy.


When the flesh is sound it presents the characteristic orange colour of
healthy squash; but near the tip, where the outside was seen to be dis-
coloured by the rot, the flesh has changed to a brown or ochre colour, and is
less solid than elsewhere. The mycelium, or “ roots ”of the fungus, extends
as far as the brown or ochre colouration, and is found more particularly
near the surface, and in connection with the fibro-vascular tissue.
Accompanying the dark-green felt produced by the fungus just described,
one usually finds a snowy-white or pinkish growth on the surface of the
rotten part of the squash. The snowy appearance is due to a growth of
spores of a very different appearance, and therefore formerly always referred
to a distinct species of fungus. These spores occur in patches among those
of the so-called Macrosporium.
The constant occurrence together of these two sorts of spores admits, a
priori, of either of two explanations, viz.; (1) Either they are different
spore-forms of the same mycelium, and are therefore to be classed together
as belonging to one species; or (2) they are two separate species, one'of
which is parasitic on the other, or at least finds its favourite nourishment
only in the presence of the other.
Control. —TSTo remedies have, up to date, been devised against this disease.
Dr. Cobb suggested that as the disease manifests itself almost as soon ns the
blossom has set, all such blossoms should be pinched and prevented from
fruiting.
Pumpkin-leaf Oidium ( Oidium erystphoedes).
Well known to all growers of pumpkins, squashes, and melon, is the white
and powdery or mealy fungus which blights the leaves, causing them to
turn first yellow, then brown, and finally to die. The fungus, which belongs
to the group of fungi known as Erysiphew, or in other words the Oidium
group, is mostly external, like its relative the vine oidium.
Controls. —(l.) Where practicable, burn or otherwise destroy affected
material. Do not plough it in.
(2.) Practise a rotation of crops. Do not grow pumpkins two years in
succession on the same land. When possible, put them on now land.
(3.) This disease has been combated with entire success by using flowers
of sulphur, as for oidium of the vine. It is necessary to be particularly
careful to hit the lower surface of the leaves.
(4.) Bordeaux mixture is often beneficial when applied as a spray.
ASPARAGUS.*
Asparagus is a branching herbaceous plant, attaining a height of 5 to 6
feet. It is a perennial, possessing a large root-stock and fleshy roots, in
which it stores nutriment to tide it over the winter. It is upon the vigour
send up, upon the return of warm weather, quantities of young sprouts,
of this root-stock and root system that its value depends, thus enabling it to
which are used extensively as a vegetable. Its period of most active growth
is during the summer, it being dormant throughout the winter.
* Compiled from an article by A. J. Finn, Inspector of Agriculture, and other sources.


Of the edible species, there are several of what are considered distinct
varieties. These are probably the result of differences of soil, -climate, and
culture. Of the varieties grown at Bathurst Experiment Earm, Connover’s
Colossal and Pride of Brunswick have proved the best. Erfurt Giant,
Giant Dutch, White Mammoth, and Camden Park have also been tried.
Among market gardeners the two most popular varieties are Connover’s
Colossal and Palmetto.
The Soil and its Preparation.
Asparagus can be grown on a variety of soils, in fact any that can be
made into a good garden loam. It thrives best upon sandy loams, moder-
ately deep, and rich in vegetable matter. River-flat lands that are moist
and well drained are considered ideal. Heavy clays, and those with a hard-
pan, or any that are cold and wet, should be avoided. Soils containing
The root-system of a plant of Asparagus—eight years from seed.
stones are undesirable, as they interfere with the cutting and cultivation.
As asparagus requires all the sun it can get, the land should have a nor-
therly aspect, and should not be shaded by trees and shrubs. It responds
well to irrigation.
Soil which has been worked deeply and manured heavily with farmyard
manure for root crops, and kept free from weeds, is most desirable. The
land should be subsoiled to the depth of from 18 to 20 inches, unless it is
loose and friable to that depth. The old method of trenching to the depth
of 24 to 30 inches is not practicable in field culture, nor is it necessary.
Asparagus is a deep-rooting plant where the conditions are favourable; the
roots of the 8-year-old plant in the accompanying illustration had gone to
the depth of 4 feet 4 inches. The land should be thoroughly worked during
the autumn and left to mellow during the winter, when it should be again
ploughed and drilled ready for the reception of the roots in the early spring.


The raised-bed method, as generally practised in garden culture, is not to
he recommended under Australian conditions, and is only permissible where
an abundance of moisture is ensured. The flat field culture has much to
recommend it.
Raising the Plants.
Fresh seed should be sown in the spring in well prepared soil, in rows
about 2 feet apart and about 4or 5 inches in the drill. The seed germi-
nates slowly, and if soaked in warm water for twenty-four hours germina-
tion will be hastened. Cover about 1 inch deep. The land should be well
worked and kept free from weeds. By liberal treatment vigorous yearlings
are produced. In setting out care should be taken not to expose the roots
to the sun or drying winds. It should be done just prior to their new
growth in the spring.
Only vigorous plants should be used. Select those that have the thickest,
most succulent, and vigorous stems. Choose tall rather than shrubby plants.
Vigorous yearlings are much to bo preferred, but if 2-year-old plants are
used, only those with imperfect flowers which do not bear seed should be
selected. Seed-bearing is exhausting.
Planting Out.
As the beds or fields will, with proper care, last a life-time, it is im-
portant that the planting out be done carefully, and sufficient room be left
for root expansion. In rich, moist soils the plants should be drilled 4 feet
apart each way, and the roots set in their intersections. In light soils
they may profitably be planted 5 feet each way. This allows of cultivation
both ways, which is a consideration in the eradication of weeds and con-
servation of moisture. The drills should be opened out about 9 inches
deep and the roots sot in the bottom, care being taken to keep the crown
upward, and to spread the roots in their natural positions. The crowns
should then be covered by 2 or 3 inches of soil. If “ blanched asparagus ”is
required the crowns should be placed about 6 inches below the surface; if
“ green asparagus ” they should be planted shallower. The natural growth
of the crown forces it towards the surface, and the original depth can be
maintained by applications of abundance of farmyard manure. The drills
are levelled by cultivating towards the plants.
A French Method.
A more economical method of establishing a bed, however, is that known
as the French method, the seeds being sown in the fields at once, and the
work of planting-out saved altogether. The system is as follows:
After the land has been ploughed and cultivated, strike out furrows from
5 to 6 feet apart, according to the richness of the soil. The ploughing
should be deep—up to 12 inches if possible—and it is preferable to plough
twice in the one drill, throwing a furrow' each way from the centre of the
row. Then work a single-horse cultivator (closed up) in the bottom of the
furrow, to loosen the soil in the bottom of the drills.
Make hills 20 inches apart in the furrow, mixing the soil of each with a
shovelful of well-rotted fine manure. Sow four or five seeds in each hill,
and cover lightly with good soil. The hills should then be watered and


kept moist until germination, which will take about three or four weeks.
After germination the plants should be thinned out, leaving only the
strongest plant in each hill.
Keep the soil loose and free from weeds, and as the plants grow well-
rotted manure and soil are applied, a few inches at a time, round each. The
filling-up goes on steadily (care being taken not to choke the plants) until
the drills are filled.
After-treatment.
After planting out, the land should bo kept free from weeds throughout
the summer, and frequently cultivated to conserve moisture. When the
stems turn brown they should be cut down and either carted off or burned
on the beds or fields. The land should be thoroughly cultivated, and where
possible a liberal application of well-rotted farmyard manure applied; this
can be more economically applied during winter than in the spring. Early
in the spring the land should be again thoroughly cultivated, and any
artificial fertiliser used should be applied then.
The summer cultivation must be continued each year, as it is most
important. During the summer months the plants are preparing fresh
stores of food in their roots and l require liberal treatment; neglected plants
are longer in becoming remunerative. In the autumn the stems should be
cut off before the seeds fall, as asparagus seedlings are one of the worst
pests. Where practicable, it would be wise to go through the plants and cut
out all seed-bearing stems rather than cut the whole. Later, the bed should
be treated as during the first year.
Cutting.
Old established roots can be cut for about ten weeks before being allowed
to run up to stem and leaf. Younger roots must be cut lightly and it is
better not to make a cutting till the fourth spring. Throughout the cut-
ting season the small as well as the marketable shoots should be cut clean
away; otherwise they exhaust the roots, and reduce the marketable output.
The field should be gone over and the shoots cut each day, as the leaf-buds,
which form the tip, should not be allowed to open before cutting.
The method of cutting varies with the demands of the market. If
“ blanched asparagus ” is required, it should he cut when the tops show 7
above the ground, and about 8 or 9 inches below the surface; this system
necessitates the earth being ridged over the crowns. In cutting, care should
be taken not to injure other ascending shoots. Eor “ green asparagus,” the
shoots are cut when about 7 inches high, cutting about 2 inches below the
surface. An intermediate method is to cut when about 4 inches high, and
about the same distance below the surface; the product is then half white
and half green. In this State green asparagus is the most popular. After
cutting, the stalks should be subjected to as little exposure as possible in
the fields, and any dirt rinsed off. If the bunches are to be kept over night,
they should be dipped in clean water and stood on end upon clean straw
which has been thoroughly wetted. The bunches should be from Bto 9 inches
lone, and tied with raffia, fibre, or string. If for local market, one string is
sufficient; if to travel any distance, two are preferable. The stalks should
be graded into different qualities.


Manuring.
Asparagus, to be profitable, should be forced, and quick-growing succulent
shoots should be aimed at. To ensure such, the manuring must be liberal.
Large quantities of farmyard manure mixed throughout the lower layers of
the soil are not necessary, excepting when required to ameliorate heavy
soils. Fifty or sixty tons of well-rotted farmyard manure to the acre is a
fair dressing, and can be applied most economically after the stems are
taken off in autumn. It should be w-ell rotted previously, to destroy seeds
of weeds. Applications of commercial fertilisers should be made in the
Average bunches of Asparagus grown at Bathurst Experiment Farm.
spring’, directly after the cutting is finished, and prior to cultivation. Ap-
plications of the following have given good results 1 upon many soils: —
250 lb. nitrate of soda, 400 lb. superphosphate, and 150 lb. muriate or chloride
of potash per acre.
Common salt is now but little used by commercial growers; the appli-
cation of such manures as nitrate of soda and chloride of potash to some
extent takes its place.
Asparagus Culture In the Goulburn District.
This ci'op has proved a profitable side-line to orcharding in the Goulburn
district —one grower, Mr. 1. Stone, getting a particularly good return. The
asparagus is planted in single rows midway between the rows of trees, and
the beds are now a few feet wide. The asparagus is cut in the morning,
and graded, bunched, and packed during the afternoon, so that the produce
is on the Sydney market early the following morning. The bunches, when
tied, are tightened by pushing in a few extra sticks, and are then placed
upright in shallow trays of water, in order to keep them fresh; each bunch
is carefully scrubbed clean with a brush before packing. When packing
into boxes, moistened paper is placed at the butt of each bunch, and each
layer of bunches is separated by a sheet of moist paper; consequently the
asparag’us arrives at its destination in a very fresh condition.
Beds near Sydney.
A considerable quantity of asparagus is grown in the metropolitan dis-
trict, chiefly in the vicinity of Mascot, where the soil is of a sandy nature.
The crop is also grown in the Gosford and Camden districts with gooc
results.


At Mascot the asparagus is planted in single rows either 3 feet or 4 feet
apart, but these distances are considered too close when the plants are fully
grown, and do not allow of earthing up. As the roots cover a wide
surface a large number of shoots are eventually found in the pathways. A
better distance to plant is 5 feet. Usually the pathways between the beds
are filled with long-strawed stable manure to prevent evaporation. The
beds are given an application of salt occasionally.
The cutting of the grass is done with an asparagus knife (usually home-
made), which consists of a saw-edge of a few inches long on the end of a
knife-blade. A small bread-saw with the end 2 or 3 inches filed, and given
a fine serrated edge, acts admirably.
In this locality the bunches, after having been tied with home-grown New
Zealand flax, are made tight by placing a large butt of asparagus, cut wedge-
shaped, into the end of the bunch. This is a practice that should be dis-
A prolific Plant.
The growth from a 14-year old plant. The earth has been scraped away to show the number of
shoots since the cut two days previous.
eouraged in favour of tightening with full sticks. The best “ grass ” is tied
with two bands. The use of raffia, strips of New Zealand flax, or red tape
is recommended, as giving a better appearance than binder twine.
Duration of Beds.
As an instance of the lasting qualities of the crop when properly tended,
it may be mentioned that a small bed of this crop belonging to Hr. Edward
Twynam, of Goulburn, is still bearing heavily, although it was an estab-
lished bed when Mr. Twynam purchased the property in the year 1868.
This makes the bed now at least fifty years old.
On the other hand, the Chinese growers at Mascot cut the crop for too
long a period each season, and do not allow sufficient top growth for recu-
peration, with the result that the beds remain in cultivation for only a few
years.


RHUBARB.
Rhubarb is a perennial plant having- thick acid steins, which are largely
used for pies and tarts. It requires rich soil or heavy feeding by fertilisa-
tion, chiefly in the shape of organic matter, such as stable manure. Several
years’ growth is necessary before the plants become profitable, as it is
essential that the root crowns be fully formed before large pullings of the
leaves are made. Hauy people make the mistake of drawing on the plant
almost as soon as any large leaves have formed. As with asparagus, this
treatment does not allow of the development of the plant; and consequently
large yields cannot be expected for any length of time.
For planting out, the roots of older plants may be divided and set —care
being taken that each root-piece contains a bud or crown —or one-year-old
roots may be used. These can be purchased from any seed merchant, or the
plants may be raised from seed. The latter method takes a year longer in
establishing the plantation, but it is the cheaper of the two.
If this method is adopted, the seed should bo sown in the spring in pre-
pared seed-beds containing very rich soil. It should be sown in shallow-
drills about 1 foot apart, and when properly up the plants should be thinned
to a distance of 6 inches apart in the row. Every care should be given
and the plants induced to make growth by watering with liquid manure as
occasion demands. These should be fit for transplanting to the field by the
end of winter or early spring. The plants should be set at distances o:
4 feet x 4 feet apart, or even more. Unless the soil is naturally rich, such
as is found on the alluvial flats adjoining a number of our rivers, the
places in the field where the plants are to be set should have been fertilised
with well-rotted stable manure prior to planting.
The first year’s cultivation in the field should aim at keeping down weed
growth and stirring the soil, and no pullings should be made. During the
following autumn or winter each plant should be given a dressing of farm-
yard manure, which, later, should bo dug in around the plants. A light
pulling may he made the next year if the plants have been well tended
during the previous year, but it is bettor to defer this until the following
season. Each autumn the crop should be well manured and the soil kept
loose between the plants throughout their growth.
When the crop is in bearing only the larger leaves should he pulled, and
this is done by holding the leaf stem well down towards the crown and
making a straight pull, or making a jerk downwards while, at the satna
time, giving the stalk an outward twist. The leaves should be tied in
bunches of suitable size for marketing, and the stems in the bunches should
he of one grade. The smaller leaves are allowed to grow, in order to recoup
the plant for some of the loss occasioned by the pulling of the larger leaves
Should the plants attempt to run to seed, the seed heads should be imme-
diately cut out as seed-bearing is very exhausting. If it is desired that the
bed should last for any length of time, pidling must only be carried out
during a few months of the year, and not too many stalks should be pulled
from the plant at the one time.
In order to obtain extra long stems it is usual to place half barrels or
boxes without tops or bottoms over the plants, and thus, by partially exclud-
ing the light, to cause elongation of the stems.
Of the several varieties on the market the following may be mentioned aa
among the best:—Hyatt’s Victoria —large, red stemmed, very productive,


good late sort. Matt's Linnaeus —a second early or main crop variety,
stalks pink tinged inside, large strong grower. Topp’s Winter—a variety
used to supply the late autumn and early winter demand.
CARROTS.
The carrot is one of the most easily grown vegetables, but it is not culti-
vated in this State to the extent that it deserves, more especially by the
householder with a small allotment. Where the garden space attached to
the house is limited and required for greenery and flowers, there is no
reason why the carrot should not be given a place as a border plant, as its
foliage is well suited for the purpose.
Almost any soil can be brought into a fit condition to grow this crop, but
a deep, sandy loam is best. A fine tilth should be produced, and care must
be exercised in the manuring. Farmyard manure should not be incor-
porated with the surface soil just prior to planting, but a plot may be
selected which had been well manured for some previous crop. Farmyard
manure may, however, be used, provided it is covered to a depth of about
9 inches, and if this is done it is not likely to cause any serious branching
of the roots, and will be found of great benefit to the crop. Artificial ferti-
lisers will also prove beneficial, especially on poor soils. A mixture of
superphosphate and sulphate of potash, in the proportions of four parts of
the former to one of the latter, should give satisfactory results when applied
at the rate of 2 or 3 cwt. per acre, but the quantity required depends,
of course, on the richness of the soil. Artificial manures, in conjunction
with a plentiful supply of water, result in early maturity and crispness—
the latter being a most important factor.
The soil should be deeply tilled to allow of the full development of the
roots. Early preparation of the land is recommended, but the surface
should be loosened just prior to the serving of the seed. For spring serving
it is always desirable to have a winter fallow. The rows can be sown fairly
close —usually a distance of from 12 to 15 inches. This permits of the use
of hand wheel hoes for cultivating. The seed can bo sown either by hand
in a shallow 7 furrow, raking a light covering of soil over it, or by means of
a hand seed-drill, planting to a depth of about half an inch. Fresh seed
should be used and may bo mixed with sand to allow 7 of a uniform sowing—
the seeds having a tendency to stick together on account of being slightly
hooked. If the germination is good it will be necessary to thin the plants
lightly to prevent rvedging, and as the roots develop the larger ones should
be removed as soon as they become large enough for use. By this means
the usefulness of the bed is also increased. A spring sowing should provide
carrots fit for use from a few months after planting right on throughout the
winter. When growing for market it is better to make successive sowings,
and thin to about 3 inches apart while quite young, thus allowing of a more
even development of the roots and a consequent uniform harvesting. The
spring sowfings are the most satisfactory, as the plants become properly
established before the hot weather is experienced. Sowing can, however,
be carried out during the summer months, and with proper care and atten-
tion to watering and cultivation good crops may be obtained.
Carrots are sometimes grown as a field crop, more especially on sandy
alluvial river flats, of which portion of the Hawkesbury district is typical.
They are also grown for stock feed, but under these conditions it is usual


to plant a coarser variety, such as \\ hite Belgian, and to make the rows
from 30 inches to 3 feet apart. About 4 lb, of seed per acre is required for
this purpose.
The harvesting is a simple mutter where the soil is of a light texture,
the crop being very easily pulled out of the ground. But should the soil
be at all compact or hardened or the carrots very long, it will be necessary
to loosen the soil with a fork. The crop is usually marketed in bunch form,
but may be sold loose by the bag. For the best returns it is advisable to
wash the roots before selling'.
For the earliest crop, and on shallow soils, the shorthorn type (Early
Shorthorn) is preferred; for main crop, and on deep soils, the longer
varieties are best suited, namely, Intermediate and Altringham.
During the cool months the roots may be stored by pitting in sand,
something after the method of storing potatoes in pits. It is usual to cut
off the top growth before heaping.
A local firm is now drying carrots and has had difficulty in securing
sufficient supplies of this crop for that purpose. It may, therefore, pay
some growers to test the field culture of the crop and secure contracts for
the supply of large quantities.
PARSNIPS.
The early cultivation of this crop is very similar to that of the carrot,
the greatest difficulty being to obtain a proper germination of the seed,
which must be fresh or the result will be disappointing.
As the parsnip is a deep-rooting plant it is obvious that a deep soil, and
one that is free from “ hardpan ” is the most suitable. Even where the
soil is of a shallow nature the crop can usually be grown successfully, pro-
vided that the land be deeply worked. A sandy loam, if not too light in
character, is the best for the cultivation of this crop, but fair results can
be obtained in almost all soils with proper methods of cultivation.
Manuring of the surface soil with organic fertilisers immediately pre-
vious to planting is apt, as in the case of carrots, to cause branching and
distortion of the roots, thereby making them unsaleable except for stock
feed, and then at a reduced rate. Hence, a good plan is to work parsnips
into a rotation so as to follow a heavily manured crop, such as cabbages.
When planted in spring, the parsnips are ready for use in early autumn,
hut, if so desired, can be left in the ground throughout the winter. It is
usually considered that a frost before harvesting improves the eating
quality of the vegetable.
Sowing during the hot months of the year is not likely to succeed to the
same extent as the spring sowing, as in the former ease the young plants
have a chance of becoming firmly established before the hot weather sets in.
Owing to its poor germinating qualities the seed should be sown very
thickly. It is planted in rows 15 to 18 inches apart and covered to a depth
of about 1 inch. The thinning of the crop when necessary is different to
that of carrots, and should be carried out in the one operation as soon as the
young plants are of sufficient size. A distance of 4or 5 inches should be
left between the plants. The tops -will quickly make a strong growth, and
the only attention required will be the keeping down of weeds and a
thorough cultivation between the rows during the early stages of growth.
On deep soils this crop lends itself to field practice, and under these
conditions from (1 to 8 lb. of seed per acre will be sufficient.


The crop is harvested as required and, as already stated, the roots may
be left in the ground throughout the winter with perfect safety ; but if the
land is needed for other crops, storing in pits in a cool situation will be
found quite satisfactory. For lifting, it will usually be found necessary
to loosen the ground with a fork. For marketing, the roots should be
washed, and may be bunched or forwarded loose in bags. It is always
advisable to grade the produce.
The most popular variety is Hollow Crown, but Student is also largely
grown and gives excellent results under vigorous cultivation.
BEET.
Beet-root cannot be classified as one of the important vegetables, but it
may be considered as well within the second group, being a favourite
summer vegetable.
It can be grown almost anywhere and on practically all soils, but those
of a heavy clayey nature are the least suitable, and good crops of best
quality can only be expected under the best conditions.
The preparation of the soil should bo similar to that of carrots and
parsnips, as the beet also has a tap-root, and therefore requires deep work-
ing of the soil. Very rich soils are not altogether suitable, as with this
crop extra large roots are not popular. For the same reason it is well not
to over-plant too early in the spring, as if not quickly used', they become
too large before the season is over. Smaller successive sowings will be
found to answer requirements much better. The seed can be planted
throughout the year, except during the cold, wet, winter months. For good
quality, the crops should be quickly grown, as otherwise they become some-
what tough, woody, and coarse flavoured.
The position should be a sunny one, and, for household plots, rows 12
inches apart are sufficient. For commercial culture the rows should be
spaced not less than 15 inches apart, and even up to 30 inches. The seed
as purchased is fairly large and has a corky appearance; this is really the
seed fruit which contains several seeds. The germination is sometimes
disappointing, but this is mostly due to faulty sowing. Should the surface
soil be dry and light in texture, the seed must be planted deep in order to
reach the moisture, but should the surface soil be damp a depth of about
1 inch is sufficient. To get the moisture through the corky covering of the
seed is always very difficult, and to overcome this it is usual to soak the
seed overnight previous to planting. Where possible the seed should be
spaced about 1 inch apart in the drills and thinned to at least 6 or 9 inches
apart, according to the variety. When young, the plants can be transplanted
if carefully handled so as not to interfere with the roots, but this course is
only recommended where there are wide spaces in the rows as the result, of
faulty germination; the plants from the thicker portions of the field may
then be utilised for this purpose. The crop needs little attention other
than cultivation to keep down weeds and a sufficient supply of moisture.
The roots can be used for household purposes as soon as they are large
enough, but they should not be forwarded to market until more fully
developed.
Great care must be exercised in harvesting, as bruising or breaking of
the tap-root is a serious drawback, causing bleeding to take place in cook-
ing, which leaves the vegetable very pale in colour. The beet is rich in


sugar, and if allowed to bleed a large quantity of this constituent is also
lost. In cooking, if the utensil is large enough it is always advisable to
allow the tops to remain, but if the vessel will not permit of this, screwing
off the tops is preferable to cutting them.
The long varieties are not favoured by housewives on account of the
difficulty of accommodating them in ordinary pots; for this reason the
turnip-rooted sorts are more popular. Varieties recommended are: —
Eclipse—tumip-rooted, early, smooth-skin, globular shaped, with a highly
coloured flesh. Egyptian—turnip-rooted, very early, roots rounded and
flattened, and resting on the. surface of the soil, suitable for shallow
soils, skin smooth, violet or slaty red, flesh dark blood colour. Silver
Spinach—This is a variety of beet-root the loaves of which have been
developed for culinary purposes. The cultivation is identical with that of
the ordinary beet, except that the plant should be spaced at a distance of
not less than 15 inches apart. The leaves are used as required, and are
boiled and minced the same as ordinary spinach.


SECTION X.
Introduced and Native Grasses.*
The greater bulk of the pastures of Xew South Wales consist of native
grasses and other native fodder plants, such as saltbush, wild carrot, &c.
These usually receive no treatment except that connected with judicious
stocking. Attempts to replace the indigenous growths in the interior with
introduced grasses have up to the present been practically unsuccessful.
The principal factors underlying the failures of such attempts have been
the low rainfall and the long, hot summers. The introduced grasses on the
market have for the most part originated from countries enjoying a good
rainfall and a temperate climate—conditions non-existent over the greater
part of our State.
On the tablelands and in the coastal districts, however, the climate ami
soil are, in many parts, adapted to the success of introduced grasses. Many
old pastures of cocksfoot and rye, introduced by the early settlers, may still
ho seen. Tor a very long period these grasses were the only ones cultivated
to any extent with good results on many parts of the coast and tablelands,
but with limited success on the northern rivers. The advent of paspalum
and Rhodes, however, marks a new era in the dairying industry of the State.
The remarkable success achieved by such grasses has not only produced a
rapidly growing extension of cultivated grass areas, but has also induced
farmers to experiment with the less-known grasses, in the hope of producing
a “ second paspalum.”
It must not be assumed that native grasses find no place on the tablelands
and coast. In certain positions—for example, on poor soils, or on slopes
where cultivation is impracticable—the native grasses are indispensable. It
is questionable whether, under any process of tillage or cultivation, any
introduced grass could be found superior to our native couch on poor, sandy
soils, or in the Cumberland district in general. If, again, the seed of
our native, grasses were capable of easy germination, and on the market, it
would be a difficult matter to replace such grasses as water couch {Paspalum,
distichum). Paddock Love Grass (Eragrostis hptostachya), Slender Panic
Grass (Panicum gracile), and many others.
But it is now generally recognised on the coast and tablelands that where
the soil is suitable, and where cultivation is practicable, the laying down of
introduced grasses substantially increases the carrying capacity of the area,
and produces a greater revenue. Particularly is this the case with newly-
cleared scrub lands. In such positions the best of the native grasses would
soon be eaten out after clearing, and their places taken by the more worthless
grasses and weeds. A surer and quicker revenue is produced by laying down
to paspalum. Rhodes, or other introduced grasses, where the rain, falling
on the newly-formed ashes, renders the seed capable of easy germination.
It is worthy of note that the best results are obtained from those pastures
which are re-cultivated and re-sown after a certain period. Generally speak-
ing, no pasture more than twelve years old that has received no treatment
“E. Breakwell, 8.A., 8.50., Agrostologist.


since its inception, can be expected to produce good results. It is a frequent
occurrence to find pastures, particularly on the South Coast, much older than
this, but on closer investigation it is found that about 20 or 30 per cent,
consists of good grass, and the remainder of such worthless plants as
Parramatta grass and dandelion, and far too much of “ rib grass.” The
expense attached to the renewal of such a pasture is small compared with
the increased revenue to be derived from it.
Introduced Grasses.
The principal introduced grasses, in order of importance, in New South
Wales, are as follows: — Paspalum dilatatum, Perennial Eye, Cocksfoot,
Rhodes, .Kentucky Blue, Prairie, Phalaris hulhosa, Bromits inermis, Texas
Blue, Timothy, Peslttca arundinacea. and Sudan grass,
Paspalum dilatatum.
This is primarily a coastal grass, and revels in hot, moist conditions. The
winters of the tablelands render it unsuitable for these areas; and the low
rainfall of the interior is also against its successful development.
Paspalum reaches its maximum production on the basaltic or alluvial soils
of the northern rivers. It also grows luxuriantly, however, on the Macleay,
Manning, and Hunter Elvers, on the alluvial soils of the Shoalhaven, and
on the volcanic soils of Milton, Moruya, and Tilba Tilba.
Paspalum dilatatum.
The history of paspalum on the North Coast reads almost like a romance.
In the short space of about twenty years sleepy villages have been trans-
formed into busy centres of thriving dairying districts, and land has in-
creased tenfold in value; in short, the discovery of paspalum has proved a
veritable gold mine.
Very few complaints -were received about paspalum in the early period of
its introduction. The bulk of feed produced was a delightful change from
what the dairymen had been accustomed. When the first glow of enthusiasm,
however, had worn off, and they had become familiar with the new con-
ditions, paspalum on the northern rivers was found to possess two striking
disadvantages. These are its tendency to spread on to areas where it is not
wanted and its excessive root development, which, in time, mats the ground
to such an extent that the grass is eventually choked, and dies off.


Farmers who have put their eggs into the one basket by laying down the
greater part of their areas to paspalum, find it an extremely difficult matter
to get rid of it when once established. Many dairymen are profiting by
this experience, and the best results are produced by laying down only a
limited area of the grass, and keeping it in check on the remaining portion
by constant cultivation to fodder or other crops.
The excessive root development renders an untreated pasture of paspalum
practically useless after a period of about twelve years. The root-fibres lock
and interlock to such an extent that a mat, impervious to air and moisture,
is formed. To what extent a paspalum pasture can deteriorate is well shown
by an experiment carried out at Wollongbar Experiment Farm. Stock were
excluded from a 16-years-old pasture, and different portions treated with
An old Paspalum pasture, disc-ploughed. Wollongbar Experiment Farm.
different manures. Tire grass failed to respond to any of the fertilisers, and
did not make 3 inches of growth for the nine months which stock were
excluded from it.
It has never been realised, however, that a successful method to combat
this disadvantage in paspalum is to plough the pasture in a certain way. A
single mouldboard ploughing is not sufficient. The new grass simply follows
the furrows nt intervals, producing a stunted growth, which soon becomes
worse than that first established. In other words, the roots are not suffi-
ciently broken up. By double disc-ploughing, however, the first time 3 inches
deep, and the second deeper, followed by harrowing and cross harrowing,
the roots are sufficiently broken to produce a rejuvenation of the pasture.


Cost of treating a 6-acre Paspalum Pasture,
16 years
old.
£
s.
d.
Disc-ploughing (twice)
3
12
0
Harrowing
0
14
0
Manuring (bone-dust and superphosphate) ...
o
5
0
Sowing manure ...
0
3
6
Second harrowing
0
14
0
Rolling ...
0
3
6
18 lb. of clover seed (3 lb. per acre) ...
1
6
Sowing clover seed
0
i
6
Total
... £9
i
0
Cost per acre, £1 10s. 2d.
Manurial treatment and a re-sowing with clover can afterwards be given.
Mr. McMillan, then Manager of Wollongbar Experiment Farm, subsequently
provided the following figures as to cost: —
If a fodder crop, such as maize or Planter's Friend, is produced on the
re-cultivated area, the stand of grass is considerably improved.
That such a process will have to be followed is evidenced by a merely super-
ficial examination of the paspalum pastures on the Richmond. The successful
results produced at the Experiment Farm have already induced many dairy-
men to follow this method.
The development of paspalum in the north is far ahead of that on the
South Coast. As a matter of fact, its tendency to spread, and its excessive
root development, have induced a certain amount of caution in the South
Coast dairymen. The prejudice against the grass in many parts is so great
that they will not have it “at any price.’'" But this same prejudice is more or
less unjustifiable, for two reasons, namely, the smaller rainfall does not
produce such a rank growth, nor does it induce the same tendency to
spread. In no case where investigation is made can it be found that pas-
palum cannot be kept in check, with a little care. The same trouble with its
excessive root development will in the course of time bo found, but it has
already been shown that cultivation can minimise this evil.
It is, of course, clear that there is not the same need for the laying down
of paspalum pastures on the South Coast as on the North Coast, owing to
the adaptability of other grasses, like cocksfoot and rye, for these districts.
But for three or four months of the year, namely, from November t,-.
March, these grasses are practically dormant. A paddock of paspalum for
this, its best, period would be very useful, and it would probably be found
that the increased revenue from such an area would well repay the cost of
laying it down.
The best period for sowing paspalum is autumn —February or March —on
the South Coast, and up to the cud of April in the north. Of good
seed 8 lb. per acre is the quantity recommended. Although the seed germi-
nates in roughly-cultivated land, and in ashes, such a method is inadvisable.
Hillocks caused by rough ploughing not only produce on unsightly appear-
ance, but are against the best development of the grass. Paspalum, like any
other fodder plant, produces results in proportion to the treatment it receives.
In all cases, sowing with a few pounds of white clover is beneficial. The
clover not only helps to keep the ground loose against the root-spreading of
the grass, but also provides a very valuable mixed ration for the greater
portion of the year.


Perennial Rye Grass.
This famous grass was introduced by the early settlers from England,
since which time its area has rapidly extended along the coast and on the
tablelands. Generally speaking, rye grass reaches its maximum development
in a temperate or sub-temperate climate enjoying- a good rainfall and an
equable temperature. Such conditions are best found on the South Coast,
and at Moruya probably the best rye pastures in the State may be seen. A
striking factor connected with the popularity of this grass is its capability
of easy germination. A stand can invariably be secured where the ground
is moist. The subsequent success of the grass depends, however, on the soil
and on the climatic conditions. It will stand a good deal of frost, and no
A clump of Perennial Rye, Glen Innes Experiment Farm.
part of the tablelands is too cold for it. The low rainfall of the southern
tableland is, however, against its best development, and the hot summers of
the northern rivers are also unfavourable to it.
The grass requires a good deal of moisture, and in districts possessing less
than a 30-inch rainfall it is advisable to sow on the lower areas. A clay soil
is best adapted to its successful development, although it thrives also on
volcanic or alluvial soils. Sandy soils are unsuitable.
Eye grass grows well with white, red, and alsike clover. White clover is
generally grown with it on the South Coast, and red or alsike in the New
England district. The best method is to sow the clover at right angles to
the grass in the proportion of 20 lb. of rye grass to 10 lb. of clover.
Autumn, in all cases, is the best period for sowing. It is advisable to
only lightly stock during the first year, and at intervals it should be allowed
to seed.


Root Systems ot Cocksfoot and Perennial Rye. Note the deep fibrous root system of Cocksfoot.
A Cocksfoot Pasture, 6 years old, continually stocked, Glen Innes Experiment Farm.


Cocksfoot.
This is also a strong favourite among the dairymen of New South Wales.
This grass has been found to be more adapted to dry conditions than rye
grass, and in a mixture with the latter is the last to disappear. Its root
system is much better developed than that of rye grass. It is well adapted to
clay, basaltic, or alluvial loams, but, like Perennial Eye, will not thrive on
sandy soils.
One of the greatest objections to cocksfoot is its tendency to form clumps.
This characteristic is diminished by seeding with other grasses and clover;
scarifying and rolling are also beneficial.
The grass is appreciated by stock in its young state, but if allowed to
become mature it is likely to become somewhat harsh, and the stock do not
care for it. It will stand a fair amount of stocking, and it is always the best
policy to keep it eaten down. In both the United States and England this
grass is largely grown for hay, which, in nutritive qualities, is equal to that
of the cultivated grasses.
In all cases autumn sowing is the best. If sown in a mixture with rye
and clover, the quantities recommended are 20 lb. of rye, 10 lb. cocksfoot,
5 lb. clover.
Rhodes Grass.
This is a product of South Africa, where its cultivation was taken up by
Cecil Rhodes. New South Wales owes the importation of this grass to the
late Mr. Sylvester Browne, of Whittingham, near Singleton, where some
fine pastures of this grass may still be seen. The grass is adapted to a larger
area of New South Wales than any other grass so far tried. Its seed is
capable of most easy germination after rain, and when once established, it is
remarkably drought-resistant. A plot of Rhodes grass at Nyngan Demon-
stration Farm has thrived very well for the two years it has been in exist-
ence, and a plot at Wagga Experiment Farm has also done very well. The
red soil of the Clarence River also produces a good growth.
In habit Rhodes grass is well adapted for running, and resembles couch
grass in this direction. The central clump, however, is much larger than
couch, and the roots from the nodes on the suckers are much smaller. For
this reason Rhodes grass thrives better on loose formations, where the roots
can get established.
It is very susceptible to frosts, and its cultivation is thus impracticable on
the tablelands. It is more adapted to lighter formations on the coast than
paspalum. On the lighter scrub lands of the coast it is rapidly coming into
favour as a grass furnishing a quick stand, or as specially adapted for clear-
ing weedy and dirty land. Its success on the richer formations has not been
so noteworthy as that of paspalum, and it has been accused of becoming
harsh under these conditions, particularly when mature. There is good
reason to believe, however, that stock eat it readily, even when this is the
case. i
There is no doubt of its palatability on the lighter formations. It is an
extremely difficult matter to get it established in newly-cleared scrub lands if
stock are allowed on it when it is just up.
Rhodes grass is very little grown on the South Coast. There is a great
scope for its cultivation on the lighter formations, such as the area between
Wollongong and Albion Park. On the North Coast many fine pastures can
be seen, particularly on the red soils. Judging by its success at Nyngan
Demonstration Farm, it can be strongly recommended for the red soils of
the interior.


Rhodes Grass at Nyngan Demonstration Farm after a very dry period.
Rhodes Grass at Grafton Experiment Farm.


The best periods for sowing vary for different districts. In areas with
somewhat severe winters, like the Eiverina or the south-western slopes, for
•example, late spring or early summer sowing is the best. In other parts,
however, autumn sowing can be generally recommended. It is advisable to
sow it so as to catch the seasonal rains. The seed germinates very readily
after rain, and the grass makes rapid growth if provided with moisture.
As the seed is very light, a small quantity of seed —4 lb. per acre —is suf-
ficient. The seed can be made to go through the tubes of an ordinary grain
drill by mixing a heavy fertiliser like Thomas’ phosphate and soil with the
seed.
Kentucky Blue Grass.
This grass has earned a much wider reputation in America, where it forms
one of the principal pastures in many of the American States. Very little
is grown in New South Wales so far, yet the results with it have not been
disappointing. At Glen limes Experiment Farm it rivals Perennial Rye
for pasturage, and has a tendency to spread on to cultivated areas, thus
proving its adaptability as a pasture grass.
It is primarily a cool climate grass, and is useless in districts with long,
hot summers. It could not be recommended for the interior or the northern
rivers, but on the tablelands and the South Coast the indications point to
its success if systematically tried.
Kentucky Blue grass has characteristics that should commend themselves
to all pastoralists. The foliage is of a fine texture, and its underground root
system is capable of forming a good sod.
It is not advisable to stock this grass heavily during the first year; it
reaches its greatest development during the second or third seasons. It
grows well after being cut or grazed, and responds very readily to rain. It
is a favourite sheep grass, although cattle also readily eat it. It is as sus-
ceptible to hot weather as Perennial Eye, and for this reason should be sown
on the lower formations.
Spillman, the American agrostologist, writes concerning this grass:
“Were it not for its habit of remaining dormant during the dry, warm
months of summer, the length of time required to secure a good stand of it,
and its comparatively low yield of forage, it would leave nothing to be desired
of it.”
An objection that dairymen have to it is the lengtn of time it takes to
become established. The ground requires to he particularly clean when the
seed is sown, and all danger of weed-growth should be eliminated as far
as possible.
Kentucky Blue is particularly adapted as a lawn grass on the cooler parts
of the tablelands. It only produces one flowering stalk a year, and where
water is available there need he no fear of it being killed. Heavy seeding
produces a fine flag, and if mixed with white clover a better stand is secured,
as the clover increases the nitrogen content of the soil.
Autumn sowing in all cases is the best.
Prairie Grass.
This is a favourite winter grass with all pastoralists. It is cosmopolitan
in character, and during the cooler months of the year grows just as well in
the interior as on the tablelands or the coast. It will grow on all kinds of
soils, but so far has proved to be best adapted to basaltic or alluvial loams.
In most parts the grass is annual in nature, and makes its best growth in


Hungarian Brome Grass (Bromus inermis) (1)
Prairie Grass (Bromus unioloides) (2) compared.
A Promising Brome Grass ( Bromus pumpellianus) (3)
Root Systems of Hungarian Brome Grass (Bromus inermis) and Phalaris bulbosa . Both possess
good “dry weather” root systems.


the spring and early summer months. On the tablelands, however, it keeps
green the greater part of the year, and in such situations it will form almost
a permanent pasture if allowed to re-seed occasionally.
The capability of this grass to seed is one of its remarkable features.
Even when growing on the poorest of soils, and when only showing an inch
above ground, half of that inch will be seed-head. The grass is a most succu-
lent one, and induces a great flow of milk. It can be cut many times in a
good season, and in such cases often produces a good yield of hay.
It can be recommended for sowing alone or in all mixtures in any part of
the State. If sown alone, 32 lb. of seed per acre should be used. Autumn
is the only time for sowing. Owing to the cheapness of the seed and its
ready germination, farmers often include this grass in a mixture of
cocksfoot, rye, and other English grasses.
Phalaris bulbosa.
For bulk and palatability of feed, this may be considered the best winter
grass yet introduced into New South Wales. It reaches its maximum
development on the basaltic soils of New England, but trials at different
experiment farms have shown it to be also well adapted to the coast,
Bathurst, Cowra, and Wagga districts. The grass is supposed to have come
Phalaris bulbosa (late spring growth), Glen Innes Experiment Farm.
-originally from Italy, whence it reached Australia under the name of Phalaris
commutata. Further investigation, however, has shown it to be wrongly
called by this name, and it has now been provisionally named Phalaris
hvlbosa. It may be stated that some of the seed of P. hulhosa on the Sydney


market produces a plant inferior to, and different in habit from, that grow-
ing at the experiment farms; and, for the present, cannot be considered-
equal in value to the original P. bulbosa as introduced.
This grass has been stocked for two years at Glen Innes Experiment Farm,
and has stood the test very well. In a palatability test, also carried out at
the Farm, it proved superior to all the other introduced grasses.
Its power to withstand the heaviest frosts is remarkable. In a climate
like that of New England it provides feed for the greater part of the year,,
but for hot summer districts like those of the coast or Wagga, it dies down
for a short period during the hot season.
Phalaris bulbosa (winter growth) at Wagga Experiment Farm.
This grass, owing to its stooling habit, is best sown in drills about 2 feet
or 2 feet 6 inches apart. It grows readily from seed, and, if sown in drills, a
light sowing of 6to 8 lb. per acre is all that is required. Autumn sowing is
the safest under all circumstances.
Stocking should not be heavy for the first year, but, at the same time, it
should not be allowed to run into seed, as this somewhat weakens its growth.
Hungarian Brome Grass (Bromus inermis).
This has made good in many parts of the continent of Europe, and also in
the United States of America. It has not received the attention in this
State which it certainly deserves. The grass has done so well in the grass
garden at Glen Innes that it was decided to establish a pasture of it. It has
since done well in the larger area, and is producing a good stand. No stock-
ing, however, has yet been carried out, so any report on its suitability as a


pasture grass is premature. The grass comes with a highly flattering repu-
tation from America, where growers have gone in for it extensively, and
good results are anticipated from it in different parts of New South Wales,
particularly the tablelands and coastal districts.
The grass belongs to the same family as Prairie grass, but whereas Prairie
is an annual, Bromus inermis is a perennial.
It does not arrive at its best development until the third or fourth year.
Tt grows in clumps, but the grass never becomes harsh in nature. It will
stand a good deal of trampling. At Glen Innes it grows well with red clover.
In a palatability test at Hawkesbury Agricultural College, Hungarian
Brome proved to be one of those most liked by the cows. It is promising
well under irrigation at Yanco and Hay.
A clump of Hungarian Brome Grass, Glen Innes Experiment Farm.
Texas Blue Grass.
This is another famous American grass, but very little has been done so
far in laying down Texas Blue pastures in this State. Where, however, it
has been tried, the results are most striking. At Bathurst and at the Hawkes-
bury Agricultural College it grows remarkably well, and its drought resist-
ance at Bathurst Experiment Farm during the hot summers of 1913-14 was
most noteworthy.


The grass is a very shy seed bearer, and the only safe way to propagate it
is by root-planting. A sod can be separated into very small pieces, and, if
these are planted a foot apart each way, the spaces will soon be covered. It
is well adapted to light and sandy soils. Its roots penetrate deeper than do
those of Kentucky Blue grass. It will stand heavy stocking, and its after-
math is very good.
The grass is more adapted for cattle than for sheep.
Texas Blue (on left), Phalaris bulbosa (on right) compared, at Saumarez, Armidale.
The Texas Blue is spreading with remarkable rapidity.
Timothy or Cat’s Tail.
This is the celebrated hay-grass of America. Spillman says of it; “ This
is the principal hay-grass of America, because (1) it has good seed habits;
(2) it is easily harvested, and retains its vitality remarkably -well; (3) the
hay is easily cured, it bears handling -well, and the grass may be cut any time
between the blossoming and the ripening of the seed; (4) it is exceedingly
palatable to horses.”
Timothy is well adapted to the clay loam soils of the more elevated por-
tions of the tablelands and of the coast. West of the mountains, the hot, dry
conditions are inimical to its success.
So far the grass has only been grown on a large scale in New England,
although in some parts of the South Coast it is used in mixtures. Although
primarily a hay-grass in America, it is not grown for this purpose in New
South Wales. In many parts of New England its growth is often large
enough to make it suitable for hay.


The success of Timothy as a pasture grass has not been remarkable in
this country. It grows in the form of loose tufts, with few short leaves, so
that red clover is usually sown with it to furnish a heavy bottom growth of
leaves. The amount of starch and other fat-formers in Timothy is very
large, and, when mixed with red clover, the two together make a complete
food, the excess of fat-formers in Timothy off-setting that of muscle-makers
in the clover.
Sheaves of grasses grown by Mr. Giles Moore, Guyra. The principal grass in the sheaves Is
Timothy. Between the sheaves are growing Phataris bulbosa in the foreground
and Texas Blue in the background.
The surface root-system is against Timothy as a pasture grass. It is
extremely hard hit by dry weather, and very few Timothy roots can be
seen after a few years.
Tall Fescue Grass (Festuca arundinacea).
This grass has been tried in different parts of New South Wales, but its
adaptability is confined mainly to districts possessing fairly equable tem-
peratures. On the South Coast it has grown well at different places, and
trials with it on the Manning River have shown that it will grow well
there also.
On the tablelands it has been shown to endure the cold conditions
-extremely well, and grows through the greater part of the year.


This grass possesses two distinct disadvantages as a pasture grass, viz., its
habit of forming large clumps or tussocks, and its tendency to become ergot-
ised in damp situations.
Festuca arundinacea (commonly known as F. elatior ) is a rather coarse
grass, and suitable for cattle only.
A grass called Sheep’s Fescue (Festuca ovina ) is, however, of much finer
growth, and well adapted to sheep.
The grass is increasing in popularity in this State. It does extremely
•well under irrigation at Yanco and Hay.
Tall Fescue Grass (Festuca arundinacea) at Kangaroo Valley.
Sudan Grass.
Sudan grass (Andropoyon sorghum, var.) is believed to be a form of
sorghum native to Africa. It has been cultivated for a considerable time in
Northern Africa, and latterly has been introduced into the United States
of America, where its performances were such as to lead the Department
of Agriculture in New South Wales to obtain a little seed in 1913, and to
try it on several of our experiment farms. The results have been so
encouraging that it may now be recommended to farmers’ attention as a
quick-growing summer fodder crop.
Sudan grass resembles Johnson grass in appearance, but whereas the
latter is a perennial spreading by underground rootstocks, the former is
an annual, and requires to be re-sown each year, so that farmers need not
fear that they are introducing into their cultivation paddocks a weed that


may prove almost ineradicable. Care must be taken, however, to ensure
that parcels of seed of Sudan grass do not contain also seed of Johnson
grass. In the field the difference between the plants is difficult to dis-
tinguish, but the creeping habit of Johnson grass is generally apparent if
the roots are examined, whereas there is no such tendency with Sudan
grass.
As a summer grass. Sudan is remarkable for the readiness with which it
germinates, the rapidity of its growth, its free stooling habit, its resistance
to drought, and for the succulence of the flag. At least two cuttings can
'oe obtained in this State; sometimes a third, and even a fourth growth
that can be grazed off late in the autumn. In utility it may be compared
Sudan Grass at Yanco.
with the millets, to which it is superior. Its first growth is not so abun-
dant, but it is produced sooner than the first cut of any of the millets,
while the second growth is far more abundant, and the third is often better
than the first.
How quickly and abundantly good palatable fodder is available from this
variety may be indicated from a few of the Department’s trials. At
Grafton Experiment Farm, a plot sown in February, 1914, gave two crops
before the winter. In a subsequent season an October sowing gave three
cuts aggregating 10 tons per acre, while Manchurian millet in two cuts
aggregated 5., lons, and Hungarian millet, also in two cuts, totalled tons.


At Hawkesbury Agricultural College an area sown in December, 1916,
proved its superiority over millets sown at the same time. The impression
was gathered that Sudan grass is more resistant to cold and frost than is
generally believed. Considerable variation was also observed in the height
of the plants, which suggests that marked improvement may be achieved
by selection. Nor are the North Coast and the Central Coast alone suited
to Sudan grass; three trials in different parts of the South Coast gave
very promising results.
Plots at Nyngan, Coonamble, Wagga, Cowra. and Tamworth have all
yielded encouragingly, and farmers in western districts should certainly
give it a trial, for it shows considerable resistance to spells of dry weather.
Under irrigation at Yanco and Hay it gave a prolific growth of soft,
succulent foliage, suitable for bay; in one case 7 tons per acre of green
fodder were obtained in two cuts, only four mouths separating the sowing
from the second mowing.
Sudan Grass at West Tamworth.
Seed sown December, 1915. Photograph taken 11th March, 1916. 2 tons of dried hay
were taken from the ½-aere plot, though it immediately followed a 2-ton
wheaten hay crop. No irrigation.
Palalability has been established in many ways. At Yaueo Experiment
Farm, for instance, two experiments were sown in 1916 —one in October
and the other in December —the Sudan grass being tried alongside of plots
of several different millets, and the whole was subsequently grazed off with
cows under observation. At first the Japanese millet received most atten-
tion, but for the second growth (after irrigation) Sudan grass stooled well,
made excellent growth, and was quickly eaten off; the millets made little
.second growth, whereas the Sudan grass was grazed a third time and at


various other periods until May. The cows preferred the Sudan grass
while it was young, though even when past maturity the bulb was eaten.
It is advisable to feed-oil the first growth early to encourage stooling.
Numerous packets of seed were distributed to farmers in the year 1917,
and all the reports received are most favourable. At Tallawang over 4 tons
of hay per acre were obtained.
For coastal districts the optimum rate of seeding appears to be 10 lb. to
16 lb. per acre, broadcasted or in close drills; but for the interior a lighter
seeding, from 4 lb. to 8 lb. per acre, in 24 to 30-inch drills, seems preferable.
The crop may be cut for hay with an ordinary reaper and binder, and
the sheaves can be stripped of their seed with an ordinary winnower.
Grass Mixtures.
It is a mistake to sow a mixture of grasses without attending to their par-
ticular habits. The experience at Glen Innes has been that, if coarse grasses
are mixed with the finer varieties the latter will, in time, be killed out.
The germination of the finer varieties is not usually so good as that of the
coarser sorts, and the stock also eat the sweeter varieties out first. If cocks-
foot is sown with a fine grass like Kentucky Blue or rye grass, the latter is
eaten out first, and the cocksfoot, left to become harsh, forms unsightly tus-
stocks, which are apt to spoil the pasture. In such cases as these discretion in.
stocking is necessary, so that one grass will not suffer at the expense of
another.
Native Grasses.
New South Wales is particularly rich in native grasses, most of which are
succulent and nutritious, and many extremely drought-resistant.
It would be invidious to draw comparisons between many of these grasses,
but, from the standpoint of popularity the following tentative list has been
a rranged:—■
Cynodon dactylon (Couch grass).
Paspahim distichum (Water Couch).
Danthonia sp. (White Top or Wallaby grass).
Astrebla sp. (Mitchell grasses).
Pollinia fulva (Brown Top or Sugar grass).
Anthistiria ciliaia (Kangaroo grass).
Anthistiria avenacea (Tall Oat grass).
Anthistiria memhranacea (Landsborough or Flinders’ grass).
Andropogon sericeus (Queensland Blue grass).
Andropogon intermedins (Rare Blue grass).
Andropogon, bomhycinus (Silky heads).
Andropogon erianthoides (White Top).
Chloris sp. (Star or Windmill grasses).
Panicurn sp. (Panic grasses).


Couch Grass ( Gynodon dactylon ).
This is one of the most valuable grasses in New South Wales, and at the
same time one of the most cosmopolitan,—its eastern limits are the ocean
beaches, and its -western limit the boundary line between the States. It will
grow on all classes of soils, and in all sorts of situations. Many areas in this
State, such as the county of Cumberland, would be poorer country were it
not for couch grass. The grass is so common that it is often despised, and
the land cultivated for better grasses. Many farmers, after attempting to
lay down their poorer soils to introduced grasses, have been compelled to fall
back on their old friend —couch. It is extremely useful for binding drifting
sands, and the loose soil of embankments. No grass will better resist the
trampling of stock.
Although the seed of couch grass is a marketable commodity, it is an
extremely difficult matter to obtain a stand from seed. If seed is used, the
ground should be harrowed as fine as possible, and about 6 lb. of seed per
acre used. The best method of establishing a pasture is by sod-planting. A
sod can be divided into pieces, each having a portion of the underground
stem 2 or 3 inches in length. Every piece having a node is capable of pro-
ducing a new plant when placed in moist soil. The fragments of sod can be
dropped in furrows 2 or 4 feet apart each way. If the ground is hard, one
man can make small holes with one stroke .of the hoe, while another drops
the sods, and covers them with his foot. The rapidity with which the grass
grows soon enables it to cover all blank spaces.
Couch grass often becomes a pest on cultivated lands, and once established
is extremely difficult to eradicate. The best method of eradication found in
this country has been to plough up during the frosty weather, and expose it
to a good freeze. It will be found necessary to again plough in the summer,
carefully cleaning with the harrow. In all cases it generally takes twelve
months to thoroughly rid the land of the grass. As the grass does not like
the shade, laying down partially-cleared land to a cereal crop will materially
aid in ridding the land of it.
In districts with a mild winter, couch is an excellent lawn grass. Turf
planting is the best method of establishing such a lawn. It will be found,
however, that a couch lawn requires more care in weeding than a strong
growing grass like buffalo.
Water Couch (Faspalum distichum).
This grass belongs to the same family as the famous Faspalum dilatatum,
but does not produce the same bulk of feed as the latter. It is mostly con-
fined to the coastal districts, and grows best on the lower formations, particu-
larly on alluvial soils. It will stand the swampy conditions, and, at the same
time, it is fairly drought-resistant. Some fine pastures of this grass may
be seen on the Manning River, where the grass compares favourably in pala-
tability and drought resistance to Faspalum dilatatum. Like the latter, it is
very susceptible to frosts.
The seed of this grass is rarely on the market, and a pasture is best estab-
lished by «od-planting.
t 17 299-z


The Danthonia (White Top) Grasses.
The two most important Danthonia grasses in New South Wales arc
Danthonia semiannularis and D. pilosa. The seed of both of these is obtain-
able from the seedsmen.
The Danthonia grasses are splendid grasses for sheep in this State. They
are permanent in character, enduring both cold and hot conditions, and
capable of standing a good deal of stocking. Some of the finest sheep in
New South Wales are raised on the Danthonias.
Pure Merino sheep at Vale View, Yass, on country carrying a close turt, chiefly consisting of
Danthonia semiannularis and Festuca bromoides.
They are particularly adapted to the poorer soils unsuited to other grasses,
and large areas of such country are placed under Danthonia pasture in New
Zealand.
It is essential that cool, moist conditions should prevail for the germina-
tion of the seed. Under such conditions the seed germinates readily.
Autumn is the season for sowing, at the rate of about 16 lb. of seed per acre.
Mitchell Grasses.
The Mitchell grasses ( Astrebla elymoides, A. triticoides, and A. pectinata)
are famous throughout Queensland and the northern and western
interior of New South Wales. They are permanent in character, drought
resisting, extremely nutritious, and quickly respond to rain. A noteworthy
feature of the grass is the production after rain of several leaves from each
node of the stem.
The seed of both Astrebla elymoides and Astrebla triticoides is obtainable
from the leading seedsmen, but the price, Bs. per lb., is somewhat prohibitive.
Particularly is this the case when the risk of sowing native grass seed is


taken into consideration. It has been found by experiment that Mitchell
grass seed will germinate only under warm, moist conditions. The best
practice is to sow a small area first, and, if successful, extend the area.
Mitchell Grass (Astrebla elymoides), Moree District.
A good drought resister, providing nutritious feed in summer and autumn.
Experience with this grass at Nyngan Demonstration Farm shows that
the seed germinates quicker than Andropogon sericeus, and as a consequence
it is likely to become established sooner after a thunderstorm than A.
sericeus.
Brown Top or Sugar Grass (Pollinia fulva).
This grass is well adapted to parts of the northern district like Singleton,
to many portions of the tablelands, and to the black soils of the interior. At
Hawkesbury Agricultural College and at Bathurst Experiment Farm it has
proved to be very promising under cultivation. It is an extremely drought-
resistant grass, and on soils like the black soils of the interior will be found
to retain its verdure when most of the other grasses are dried up. The heads,
unfortunately, seed irregularly, and often drop their seed before it is mature.
The grass readily propagates itself by root-planting.


Kangaroo Grass {Anthistiria ciliata).
Although still very common on all classes of soil in Xew South Wales,
this grass rapidly disappears under stocking. Owing to the infertility of
the seed the cultivation of this grass by seed sowing is impracticable. The
grass is much more appreciated by stock in the western districts than on the
tablelands.
Kangaroo Grass (Anthistiria ciliata).
Tall Oat Grass ( Anthistiria avenacea).
This grass is well adapted to the black soils of the interior, and is an
excellent cattle food. It has been shown to do well under cultivation.
Less Known Grasses.
Anthistiria membranacea (Landsborough or Flinders’ Grass). —This may
be considered the best of the Anthistiria grasses. It is extremely nutritious,
drought resistant, and palatable to all classes of stock. It is well adapted
to the conditions of the interior.
Andropogon sericeus (Queensland Blue Grass). —This is a favourite
grass with all landholders, owing to its extreme palatability and its perma


nent character. In the interior this grass grows during the greater part of
the year. It is well adapted to the northern districts, the northern and
central tablelands, the south-west, and the interior. The seed is obtainable
on the market, and germinates readily under moist conditions.
Andropogon intermedins (Hare Blue Grass). —This grass has shown
great promise at Glen Innes Experiment Farm and at Hawkesbury
Agricultural College. It produces a larger bulk of feed than A. sericeus,
and, as far as investigations go, endures drought conditions as well as that
grass. It should be adapted to most portions of the tablelands, and to the
semi-arid districts of the interior.
Andropogon bombycinus and A. eriantJioides are somewhat alike in habits
and appearance. Both are very succulent, drought-resistant grasses, and
should be adapted to the tablelands and interior.
Chloris sp. (Windmill Grasses). —The most important of these grasses are
Ghloris truncata, G. acicularis, and C. ventricosa. They are all adapted to
most portions of the State, and will grow on the poorer class of soils.
The Panic grasses are very numerous, and, at the same time, among the
most important in the State. The most promising varieties that have been
tested at the experiment farms are Panicum prolutum , P. ftavidum, and
P. decompositum. They all respond readily to cultivation, and are very
heavy seeders. All, however, are very susceptible to frost. They are very
succulent, and, in most cases, germinate readily from seed. They are adap-
ted more to tableland and interior conditions than to the coast.
Panicum flavidum does extremely well under irrigation, proving pro-
mising for the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area.
OVERSTOCKING.
Much has been written, and still more spoken, about overstocking. All
readily acknowledge its evil consequences, and many try to make amends.
There appears, however, to be in many places a wrong impression as to what
is really meant by overstocking. Many graziers think that if the stock
remain for any length of time in good condition the land is not being over-
stocked. Such an idea is misleading, because by running all the stock an
area will carry for a certain length of time, a grazier is actually overstock-
ing, and the result will surely be decrease in the carrying capacity in future
years.
The problem can be best understood by considering the land as having a
“ maximum ” carrying capacity, and a judicious or “ optimum ” carrying
capacity. By “ maximum ” carrying capacity is meant the largest number of
stock a holding will carry without taking into account the condition of the
area itself for future production; whereas by “ optimum ” carrying capacity
is meant the largest number of stock the land will carry without injury to the
pastures, and at the same time providing for future grasses and the eventual
best results to stock-owner and State.
When is Land Overstocked ?
It is evident that no hard-and-fast rule can be laid down as to the exact
number of stock any particular area will carry. Observations of the con-
ditions of the pasture themselves must guide the owner. If the grasses are
not allowed to seed at least once in the year, or if any spots are allowed to
be completely depastured, and the grasses to be replaced by thistles or other
weedy herbage, the land is certainly being overstocked. In a few seasons the
consequences will be easily discernible. The good grasses become fewer in


number, and as they are replaced by the weeds the stock leave the latter and
eat the few remaining good grasses. The natural consequence is the substi-
tution of weeds and noxious grasses for good pasture plants. Once such
deterioration commences it increases, not in the same constant proportion,
but in a ratio that multiplies year by year. Miles of country 7 in the north-west
are now covered with thistles and other similar herbage in consequence of
such neglect.
The spread in Kew South Wales of Barley grass, Barren Fescue (Festuca
homoides), Soft Brome grass (Bromus mollis), and other grasses of low
value, has been remarkable. Less than twenty years ago they were rarities
in many places; now, they have taken almost complete possession of the
The Effects of Overstocking and of Judicious Stocking Compared.
The overstocking- of the paddock on the left has resulted in thistles, and the judicious stocking of the
paddock on the right in a luxuriant growth of native grasses.
pastures. But as the law of the survival of the fittest indicates that present
conditions in many localities are more favourable for these than for the
native grasses it follows that, unless the latter are nursed and encouraged,
the useless introduced grasses and weeds will predominate where at one time
the natural herbage predominated.
Assuming that the grazier is cognisant of the . grasses best adapted for
his conditions, it is to his interest to obtain a pasture of such. Of course,
the surest method would be cultivation and laying dowm to the best; but it
must be admitted that cultivation on a big scale would be impracticable, and
far too expensive.
A good deal can be done by scattering good native grass seed over the area,
just after rain if possible, and trampling it in with sheep or other stock. The
black soil plains are particularly adapted to this primitive method, owing to
the fact that the cracked nature of the soil allows the seed to be buried with


very little difficulty. Native grass seed is capable of remaining dormant in
the soil for a considerable period, but when sufficient rains arrive it is
washed to the surface, and then germinates.
Many graziers employ this method of scattering native grass seed on their
.areas, and often with very beneficial results.
Grasses Worth Propagating.
Many pounds have been spent in the attempt to introduce artificial grasses
on the black soil; but, so far as the writer is aware, entirely without success.
This does not mean that there is in the future no chance of an introduced
grass being suitable for this area, but it is evident that satisfactory pastures
can be obtained with native grasses, and it is these we must seek to per-
petuate. The native grasses previously described are well adapted to the
interior, and may be assured of success under average conditions. Although
the germination of native grass seed is not high, still by sowing a fairly,
large quantity, a good stand should be secured.
In America good results have been obtained by ploughing furrows here
and there; the wind-blown seed is then deposited on the cultivated ridges,
and germination is assured. Many of the wind-swept areas in the interior
of New South Wales might be reclaimed by harrowing or scratching the
surface and laying down to native grass seed.
Division and Resting of Pastures.
It is clear, however, that the main success in checking deterioration will
be ensured by subdividing pastures, and resting them from time to time.
Much of the soil of the interior has, through overstocking, become herbage
country. This is very unsatisfactory, for while it may provide excellent feed
in the winter it is only seasonal in character. During the summer, autumn,
and well into the winter, the stock have to subsist on dried herbage and
seeds, and perhaps on a very small amount of dried grass that has previously
escaped being eaten out. It is possible to obtain a judicious mixture of grass
and herbage that will provide feed right throughout the year.
To restore the grasses to herbage country it is absolutely essential that
resting and very light stocking be done. If a grazier is sceptical about the
result of such treatment let him carry out a small experiment. A small
portion of his estate may be fenced oil and rested for a couple of years; more
certain success is assured by scattering native grass seed. The writer has
seen very beneficial results from this method of treatment, and if the process
is continued at intervals a good stand of grass is secured over a very large
area, and the carrying capacity increased enormously.
Most graziers divide their areas into paddocks, but in many cases these are
far too large. The larger the paddocks the greater the trampling, and the
more the best varieties are picked out, eaten down, and not allowed *to seed.
In an area of 12,000 acres, say, eight paddocks would not be too many. Once
a good stand of grass is obtained in paddocks of limited area the judicious
handling of such paddocks will permit of a maintenance of the pastures for
an indefinite period.
THE MAKING OF BUSH HAY.*
Dry seasons and the absence of feed in many parts of the State have
rather forcibly brought home to stock-owners the importance of conserving
fodders during good seasons as the only safe means of guarding against
losses which must arise when the summer crops fail, as they will do from
• George Marks, Manager, Grafton Experiment Farm.


time to time in the future. There are probably no operations associated with
farm practice of greater importance than the growth of fodder crops. The
peculiar climatic conditions do not allow of too much reliance being placed
upon the supply of natural foods, and with such a vast area devoted to-
pastoral purposes it is not only necessary to make provision for a continu-
ous supply of food, but it is also desirable to study the requirements of the
animal economy, and utilise those crops that will best meet those demands.
Making Bush Hay on Edgeroi Station.
Amongst the varieties useful for stock use there are those adapted to almost
every part of the agricultural area of the State, and in addition, much may
be done in the direction of making use of the natural grasses.
Fodders may be conserved in two principal forms —hay and silage. Hay
may be defined as the conserving in the dry form; silage in the green and
succulent condition. As silage is fully dealt with in another part of this
Handbook, it is unnecessary to again refer to it here.
Hay,
Haymaking admits of many variations, but there are certain principles
which must always be observed to ensure a good product. Some of the
operations may appear to be very simple and unimportant, but their non-
observance frequently leads to deterioration.
Any plants which stock will eat in their natural condition, and which
allow of quick and easy drying, may be converted into hay. Those princi-
pally used for this purpose are wheat, oats, lucerne, millet, and grasses.
Thick-stemmed crops, as maize and sorghum, do not admit of easy drying,
and they are best preserved as silage. To make a good sample of hay,
cutting should take place when the crop is in the best condition, and the
subsequent operations should be carried out with the object of avoiding
unnecessary waste, and preserving a nice, bright colour.
When to Harvest.
Opinions differ as to the proper time to harvest. Some farmers allow the
grain to be fairly well matured; others prefer to cut on the younger side.
One general principle may be laid down for cereals, and that is, to harvest
when the maximum green growth is reached, which is after flowering, and
when the seed is in the doughy or glazed stage. In this condition the
heaviest yield is obtained, and the plants contain their highest proportion
of food nutrients. Many of our grasses make splendid hay, provided they
are not allowed to get too ripe. A number of native species develop a fair
amount of fibre on approaching maturity, which renders them less palat


able, and they contain a considerable proportion of indigestible matter. They
must be cut at the flowering stage. Where there are mixtures, harvest
when the bulk, or the best, are iu flower. In the western districts there
are large tracts of country perfectly level and free from obstructions, where
mowing machines may be used without difficulty. In good seasons immense
quantities of valuable grass-hay could bo saved with no other trouble than
the cutting and carting, while its removal, especially from the vicinity of
"homesteads and farm buildings, would lessen the dangers arising from fires.
Drying.
The time occupied iu drying depends upon the succulence of the crop
.and the weather. Hot, dry weather is naturally the most suitable for hay-
making. Too rapid drying is generally accompanied with crumbling and
loss of leaf, especially with lucerne. Prom one to three or four days are
usually required. Loose hay is raked into windrows when wilting has
commenced, and then forked into cooks, being shaken out well, so as to
allow of free access of air.
For sheaf hay, two types of stocks are in general use, viz., the long stock,
■consisting of two rows of sheaves standing obliquely and meeting at the
top; and the round stock, where the sheaves are arranged in a circle. The
former favours quick drying, and is generally used for hay; the latter is
sometimes employed when the weather is very hot and dry, and the hay is
likely to dry too quickly. When thoroughly dry, it is carted and stacked
■either at the homestead or iu a portion of the paddock. On large holdings
it is advisable to stack near a water supply, so that in dry times, when
.stock may be in low condition, they will not have to travel long distances.
Causes Leading to Deterioration.
Continual wetting after cutting has the effect of causing the more soluble
ingredients, such as sugar, dextrin, and an appreciable quantity of the ash
Ingredients, to be leached and carried away. In such hay, or in any where
the natural juices have not been properly dried off, fungi of various kinds
will develop. Musty or mouldy hay is decidedly obj’ectionable to stock,
while some forms are distinctly harmful.
Another source of waste is due to the crumbling of leaves and the shell-
ing of grain. These constitute some of the most valuable portions of the
plants, and care requires to be exercised in order to avoid such losses, both
at the time of harvesting and during subsequent handlings. For this
reason, it is often advisable to handle the hay, during hot, dry weather, in
the early morning or late evening, and to avoid touching it in the middle
•of the day. There is a certain amount of dampness in the air at such time?
which gives toughness to the leaf and husk, and the losses arising from
handling under these conditions are reduced to a minimum.
The loss of aroma is a point of some importance. While the aromatic
matters are probably essential oils —perhaps of no direct value as food—they
impart flavour, making the hay palatable, and assisting in digestion. Hay
allowed to remain too long in the field, or exposed too much to direct sun-
shine, will lose a large amount of the aroma, and also its colour.
Besides the loss of aroma, fading of colour, and the comparatively insig-
nificant alterations due to excessive light, considerable losses of food
material must necessarily occur whenever hay undergoes fermentation or
active chemical change during the process of curing. During the summer


months it often happens that it is subjected in the field to one or more wet-
tings before it is placed in the stack. Under such conditions it will be
necessary to open out the stocks, or cocks, as soon as the outside surfaces
have become dry.
The warmth developed in the field as soon as fermentation begins, which
is really due to chemical action, must not be confounded with the natural-
heat absorbed during a hot day wdiile drying.
Dryness of Hay when Stored.
To make bright, sweet, and saleable hay it is best to dry no more than is
necessary for its preservation in the stack. It keeps best when it is put in
such a condition of dryness that upon being trodden it will settle down into
a firm, compact mass. In general, when fit for stacking it should not feel
Stacking Bush Hay at Belmont Park.
damp to the hand, nor should it be by any means brittle, so that it would
break easily on being twisted or bent. All hay sweats when it is stacked,
and if fed in this condition has a laxative and weakening effect upon animals.
This is most pronounced in hay made from immature crops. It is for this
reason that many growers prefer to allow their crops to mature fairly well
before harvesting. After a few' w 7 eeks the sweating stage is passed, and the
hay may be fed without any danger.
The real justification of the practice, common in some districts, of using
salt, or of scattering slacked lime on hay w'hen stacking, is undoubtedly
to be found in the power of these substances to check the growth of fungi.
They both tend to arrest fermentation and prevent mouldiness, and the
use of them may be commendable in certain cases when partially-cured hay
has to be, stored in bad weather. Under the average haymaking conditions
of Australia they are unnecessary, though in some inland districts, where
stock do not obtain all the salt they require, salted hay is undoubtedly pre-
ferable.


Brown Hay.
Brown hay is made by stacking it before it is quite dry. In this " fresh
condition there is sufficient moisture to set up a fairly vigorous fermentation,
but not enough for spontaneous combustion. The mass speedily settles, the
air is exhausted, fermentation is checked, and the colour changes to a dark-
brown. This process is specially suitable for plants having rather harsh,
thick stems, as the heat and moisture during fermentation soften the tissues,
rendering them more palatable. At the same time, certain chemical changes
take place in the food constituents, which render them less valuable for
feeding purposes than green hay.
Spontaneous Combustion.
It occasionally happens that heavy losses are incurred through firing. This
is generally brought about in two ways; (1) stacking before it is properly
dried; (2) allowing moisture to gain access to the stack. The fermentation
set up is caused by the action of micro-organisms developed in the presence
of moisture, and is accompanied by iieat, and absorption of oxygen from the
air. Where sufficient moisture is present, and the limited circulation of air
in the stack does not carry away the heat as fast as produced, the tempera-
ture rises. Eventually the heat destroys the organisms, and then direct
oxidation of some substances in the hay commences. Under favourable
conditions, the temperature rises till the ignition point is reached, and the
mass commences to burn. The greatest amount of heat is generally near the
centre of the stack, where the circulation of air is slow and difficult, and it
usually take the form of a smouldering combustion rather than an actual
flame. Spontaneous combustion can be readily detected by the smoke, and
also smell. It is during damp, or unsettled weather, that the farmer who is
anxious to save his hay from damage by rains or heavy dews, is liable to be
a little hasty, and run the risk of firing. With properly dried hay there
need be very little cause for anxiety, but where stacks are built out in the
open care should be taken to see that no rains gain access while building,
and that the covering or thatching is such that strong winds will not uncover
a portion of the stack. The use of coarse salt greatly assists in preventing
firing, and checking fermentation.
Where there are signs of undue heating, it is necessary to act promptly
to prevent trouble and loss. Should it be a stack in the open, excessive
weighting will force out the air and prevent combustion. In case a portion
of a stack in a shed gets very hot, it will be necessary to cart the damaged
portion away as quickly as possible. The use of a ventilation shaft is often
recommended, when through unfavourable weather conditions hay has to
be stacked before it is thoroughly dry. It allows of a fairly free circulation
of air, which carries off any heated vapours, and keeps the temperature
normal.
Arrangement of Stacks.
Hay stored, particularly in grazing districts, should be protected as far
as possible from fire. It is not advisable to place all the hay in one large
stack. By having several placed at convenient distances apart, there is
always a chance if one catches fire of saving the remainder. Moreover,
should heavy rains fall during stacking, it is easier to cover a small stack
than a large one. An area around the stacks should be fenced in, and either
kept bare of grass or in a fallowed condition, or it may be used for growing


green crops. On some stations, where water is plentiful, the area devoted
to the storing of hay may be surrounded by a large open drain which can
be kept full of water. This also assists in keeping vermin away, particularly
field mice.
A Case in Point.
The value of bush, or grass hay, is not universally known, but it is
significant that a number of prominent stock breeders utilise the surplus
grasses produced in good seasons. As an example of what may be done in
this direction, a splendid object-lesson is afforded at the well-known estate
of Major Philip Charley, at Belmont Park. Through the courtesy of
Mr. W. Charley, the following particulars were obtained: —
As a result of the useful rains during the early part of autumn, and the-
phenomenal growth of herbage, it was decided to conduct an experiment in
the direction of testing the value of hay made from these native grasses for
feeding to stud-stock. The area devoted to pasture does not lend itself to-
the economical handling of implements, or the drawing of heavy loads, owing
to the undulating nature of the land, which, in places, consists of rather
steep slopes, and of belts of timber here and there for shelter and shade
purposes. Accordingly, a contract was let in April for the mowing and
raking of 300 acres at 3s. and Is. per acre, respectively. Cutting commenced
on the 3rd of April, four machines being used, and the last of the hay was
harvested on the 26th May. Four two-horse drays were employed in
carting; the loading, stacking, and other detail work were carried out by
men employed upon the estate. From this area 230 tons were obtained,
which runs out at about 15J cwt. per acre. This was placed in one large
stack, and a little coarse salt and brown sugar sprinkled through it. A
heavy fall of rain, when the stack was about half-built, necessitated the
removal of about 15 inches to be dried, but otherwise there -was nothing to
interfere with the harvesting operations. The total cost was £2lB 15s. Bd.,
which works out at about 19s. per ton. A few months later, Mr. Charley
valued this hay at £5 per ton. The cost of insurance, £4 per £IOO, was
considered excessive, and as a safeguarti against fire an area of 5 acres was.
fenced in around the stack, and a crop of oats planted, after the removal
of which the land was kept in a fallowed condition. After the tops and sides
of the stack had been combed down, wire-netting was used on the roof to
prevent winds from loosening portions of it. When being fed to stock this
hay was chaffed with lucerne, using it in the proportion of one-third to one-
half. Mr. Charley was so satisfied with the results that he expressed his
intention to save further quantities when opportunities offered. A con-
siderable saving was effected as compared with purchased fodder, which at.
one time would have cost from £7 to £8 per ton. Sufficient was conserved,
in a few weeks to tide over any ordinary drought.
Other Products.
In addition to the foregoing, such products as straw, cavings, maize husks„
stover, &c., which are too often looked upon as waste, are of inestimable
value in times of drought. While they may not be as valuable or as palatable
as hay or silage, still, either by themselves or when used with a little
molasses or concentrated foods, they will keep stock alive, and in many
instances in good condition. These products are valuable and should be
preserved. They need take up but little room on the farm, and if not
required, they may frequently be disposed of to good advantage, and so add:
to the profitc of the farm.


SECTION XI.
Some Native Fodder Plants.
SALTBUSHES.
Saltbushes were abundant throughout western New South Wales during
the early days of pastoral settlement, and yielded a considerable amount of
nutriment to the flocks. Since that time they have gradually diminished,
which has seriously depreciated the carrying capacity of the area, especially
during periods of drought. Their drought resistance, combined with their
fodder value, has gained for them a well-deserved reputation—one that is
becoming generally recognised. During droughts their sterling qualities are
very much in evidence, and a capacity of a holding to carry its stock through
such seasons is largely dependent upon the quantity of saltbush of which it
The root system ol Saltbush (after Loughridge).
can boast. Nature has admirably adapted the saltbushas for arid conditions,
and it is under such that they prove so valuable. Under favourable con-
ditions they suffer from comparison with many other fodder plants, and
their cultivation would not prove remunerative. Under the conditions
which evolved them it is questionable whether the cultivation of any other
known fodder plant would yield larger profits.


For the improvement of the western lands they arc pre-eminently useful.
Up to the present very little has been done to conserve them, but each
drought teaches us their usefulness, and impresses more indelibly upon us the
desirability of protecting them. People of other countries have recognised
their value, and are utilising them in their arid districts to improve their
pastures. In the United States and India one of our species —Atriplex
semibaccata —has become popular. It is esteemed for its fodder value, and
also on account of its thriving upon and ameliorating alkaline soils. Its
procumbent habit prevents evaporation of moisture from the surface of the
soil, thus checking the rise of the alkali to the surface, where it is most
hurtful. The question of dealing with our alkaline soils is not as important
Old Man Saltbush, Atripleæ nummularia.
as in the above-mentioned countries, and this to some extent accounts for
the little attention we have given to these plants. Even without this con-
sideration, the benefits we would derive from their conservation, dissemina-
tion, and cultivation are considerable. Many persons in the arid districts
are not sufficiently alive to the value of our saltbushes, and others living in
the more favoured districts are inclined to attempt their cultivation under
conditions favourable to better fodder plants. In districts where droughty
conditions are frequent saltbushes are decidedly valuable.
The climatic conditions under which the saltbushes and edible trees have
diminished must always be reckoned with, and it is reasonable to expect
that the droughts of the past will be perpetuated in the future with even
more disastrous results than formerly if suitable provision is not made to
encourage the growths which were the stand-by in former droughts. It is also
encouraging to expect a return of good seasons, or rather seasons of abundant
rainfall similar to those before experienced; although such seasons cannot
be expected to give the results of bygone days when the depreciation of the


pastures is taken into account, but upon this fact lie the possibilities of
providing by conservation, dissemination, and propagation of suitable plants,
for such periods of scarcity as our past experiences have taught us to expect.
Under conditions made up of an equal percentage of droughts and good
seasons, -which unfortunately are not distributed equally or with any degree of
certainty, it will be admitted that upon the drought-resistance of the fodder-
plants the well-being of the pastoral industry depends. If a bad season
were alternated with a good one, and so on, very little attention need be
given to many of them which are essential under the present conditions, and
the grasses would probably suffice. But where there is the probability of
four or five fair seasons alternated with four or five bad ones the case is
different, and the place of trees and saltbushes in the vegetation is apparent.
After a run of favourable seasons grasses would last, say, for twelve months,
saltbushes for two or three years, and edible trees and shrubs much longer.
Bladder Saltbush, Atripleæ vesicaria.
The indiscriminate felling, instead of judicious lopping, of edible trees and
the annihilation of saltbushes reduces the vegetation to a very low state of
drought resistance, whereas their cultivation would materially augment it.
It must also not be forgotten that many of our so-called non-resistant
grasses cannot be considered as such, but are enabled by their quick habit of
growth to make the most of a very limited favourable period, and thus
mature seed to perpetuate themselves upon the return of favourable con-
ditions. Throughout extreme droughts the growdh of the majority of
grasses is nil. Their dry stems remain nutritious on account of the dry
atmosphere much longer than under more humid conditions. There are some
which are enabled, by storing up reserve supplies of food in their root stocks
during favourable seasons, to throw out shoots under most adverse conditions.
The saltbushes also have a limit to their drought-resistance, some varieties


more than others. They are enabled to thrive under more adverse conditions
than grasses, but in periods of prolonged drought are completely dormant,
and cast off all surplus leaves in order to protect themselves against the dry
weather. This also can be claimed for the trees, and in the beginning of
droughts the proportion of fallen leaves is considerable; these are picked up
by the stock, and although such leaves cannot be claimed to be as nutritious as
if browsed direct from the tree, as a proportion of their nutriment has been
appropriated by the trunks or other organs to enable the tree to withstand
the harsh conditions, they certainly must be considered of some value to the
stock in conjunction with other fodders. Naturally, the trees are more
Dwarf Saltbush, Atripleæ halimoides.
drought-resistant than the saltbushes, and, without any artificial aid, supply
a quantity of food in the form of leaves within reach of stock, fallen leaves,
as above referred to, from portions beyond their reach, and fruits, which, of
some varieties, are greedily eaten by sheep.
It will thus be seen that in good seasons edible trees, saltbushes, grasses,
and the various herbs are available to stock, and it is to such an admixture
that the extraordinary quality of the best of our western pastures is
attributable. In adverse seasons the number of plants entering into the
dietary of the flocks is limited; in some cases the many grasses being absent,
and in others only edible trees or saltbushes being available. It has been
proved that the best of the edible trees will keep stock in perfect health for
a considerable period, whereas the inferior ones are detrimental if fed to
them solely. It is difficult to say how far the same applies to the saltbushes,
as it is well known that the best results are obtained when used in
conjunction with other fodders, but it has been demonstrated that sheep
remain in excellent health when saltbushes form by far the greater proportion
of their food. Generally speaking, a ration can hardly be called complete
without a fair percentage of grasses. Nevertheless, positions of the greatest
importance must be claimed for saltbushes amongst the western vegetation,
and there are excellent reasons why some system of conservation, and in
some instances cultivation, should be entered upon to prevent the annihilation
of such valuable fodder-plants. In formulating any scheme in relation to
the western lands, that which is practicable under the prevailing conditions


must be kept prominently in view. In treating areas of which the return
per acre is very small, expensive schemes cannot be entertained. It is not
possible to remuneratively bring hundreds of thousands of acres of the West
under the plough for such a purpose. Such a scheme has not been seriously
thought of, but it does not follow that the plough could
A Stalk of Salt-
bush sultable
for cuttings.
not be used effectively in the improvement of this area.
It is not practicable to raise forests of our edible trees
and shrubs to provide against drought, but it is of great
importance that the trees already existing should be con-
served, and by subdivision and judicious stocking enabled
to reproduce themselves by seedlings, which at present is
not allowed excepting in horse-paddocks or places reserved
from continuous stocking by sh< ep. Throughout the West
it is apparent that when the mature trees have gone no
undergrowth of seed-
How to Prepare Saltbush Cuttings for
Planting Out.
appear; also upon mulga country the same result follows.
Upon areas not protected, and with the seedlings eaten
out, owing to the disastrous effects of droughts and
winds combined with overstocking, the scalded plain
is encroaching remorselessly upon the one-time valuable
pastures.
Such reserves would be profitable in allowing the
saltbushes and other plants to mature seed, thus giving them
a chance to perpetuate and distribute themselves by natural
lings will take their
places unless protected.
And it is a system that
should recommend itself
to the future holders, to
institute reserves on
suitable portions of
their runs for stand-
by in droughts and
shelter belts against the
disastrous effects of
the prevailing wind-
storms. It has been
demonstrated in horse-
paddocks and along the
railway lines that upon
myall country, formerly
eaten out and after-
wards protected, numer-
ous seedlings readily
agencies throughout the surrounding country. Unfor-
tunately, large tracts have been so abused as not to be amenable to such
treatment, and in such cases cultivation of small seedling reserves will be
■essential. It is not practicable to cultivate the edible trees and shrubs, as
the returns would not rapidly come in and must be meagre as compared
•with more profitable growths. In fair seasons it would take them from
seven to ten years to get beyond the reach of stock, and from fifteen to
twenty before they reached their maximum value. It is not so with
saltbushes; some varieties in a good season would get beyond the reach of


sheep within twelve months, and many others would reproduce themselves-
within a few months and thus ensure their establishment if decently treated.
The cultivation of these plants would be most advantageous, comprising, as
they do, herbs and bushes ranging from procumbent annuals to perennials
attaining the height of 10 or 12 feet. Their beneficial effects upon the
physical condition of the soil are incalculable, preventing the many agencies
from baring the surface and robbing it of its important decaying vegetable
matter and seeds, Neither is it proposed to thoroughly cultivate large areas
to accomplish the desired end, for cultivation should be carried on during
favourable seasons, which we reasonably expect, and when the subsoil is
sufficiently moist to allow of germination of the seed, and a fair chance of
establishing the plant. The plough could be used for making furrows in
suitable places, along which seed could be sown, and at any distance apart
the operator wished; this, if extended throughout the run, would produce
plants from which seeds would be distributed over considerable areas, they
producing others, as under natural conditions. It will be admitted that if
such areas are heavily stocked, after such treatment, the labour would be so
much wasted energy, and subdivisions and reserve areas are essential to the
Atripleæ angulata.
carrying out of such a system. For the information of those desirous of
giving it a trial, the experience with the cultivation of saltbushes at Cqola-
bah may be of value. Owing to the droughty conditions which prevailed
there for a few years, it was possible to make reliable observations of a
number of varieties which should prove suitable for this purpose. On many
of the holdings saltbush is a fodder of the past, and of the eighty or ninety
varieties only a limited number can be found on more favourable areas. One
of the principal characteristics of a saltbush for cultivation, is that it produces
a fair quantity of seed, moderately easily gathered, and this is fortunately the
case with many of the best sorts; others produce seed which is difficult to
gather, and the best that can be done for them, in large areas, is by con-
servation wherever possible. There are also others which are not so valuable


.as fodder-plants, having some disadvantage, such as spines and hairy
coverings, but, nevertheless, are essential to the economy of the western
vegetation, as they are able to subsist under conditions unsuitable for better
ones, and also, by their spiny fruits, are enabled to remain on bare land, from
Single Plant of Rhagodia hastata six months after planting the cutting.
■which the seeds of others would be blown. Such saltbushes thus pave the way
for more useful varieties. This question of the character of the fruits has an
important hearing upon the distribution of these plants, some having spongy
envelopes to their seeds, which enable them to be carried by the winds for
miles; others, by their succulent fruits, are disseminated by birds, whilst
others are found nestling close to the parent plant. Of all the saltbushes
perhaps the “ Old Man ” ( Atriplex nummularia) is the most valuable for our
purpose, it often attaining the height of 10 feet, thus placing it beyond
the reach of sheep; it also is very drought-resistant, providing shelter for
animals, an abundance of seed easily gathered, and a large amount of fodder
in a short period. Plants raised from seed during a prolonged dry period of
some years ago, reached the height of 6 feet within twelve months, and pro-
duced seed within eighteen. The best method of propagation for the West is
from seed, which germinates readily under favourable conditions in about
•eight days. Of seeds in a box and thoroughly watered, some ger-
minated within eight days, whilst others came up over an extended period
of six months, having been subjected throughout to favourable conditions
J for germination. This is a happy provision of nature, which prevents


the destruction of all the seeds by sprouting after conditions favourable to
germination but not to the after development of the plant. It is reasonable
to suppose that saltbush seeds retain their vitality in the soil for a consider-
able number of years, especially under the dry conditions prevailing during
droughts. It is wise to sow a fair proportion of seeds to ensure a fair
percentage of plants, for a great number are, apparently, infertile.
The seeds should be covered lightly, no deeper than 1 inch below the
surface, to obtain the best results. Other methods of propagation are by
cuttings and layers, but cannot be recommended for the western conditions.
The best time to sow the seed is during the autumn or spring, or in summer,
if favourable conditions can be relied upon. If cuttings are attempted, the
Half-berried or Creeping Saltbush, Atripleæ semibsccata.
autumn would be the best time to set them out. The system of layering-
w T ould hardly be practicable in large areas, but is a natural means of
enlargement. The procumbent branches put forth roots readily under moist
conditions, resulting, in some instances, in very large spreading bushes.
At Coolabah seeds were sown in drills, from which the seedlings were
transplanted to others, placing the plants 8 feet apart each way, the result-
being very satisfactory.
Bladder Saltbush (Atriplex vesicaria). —This bush is sometimes called
“Plain Saltbush,” on account of its appearing most abundantly upon the
plains. It grows to the height of about 3 feet, and is rather a woody shrub,
producing an abundance of seed, which are small, with a bladder-like
covering, greatly facilitating distribution. It is much relished by stock, and
not growing to any great height is rapidly destroyed by overstocking. Its
binding and protective effects upon the plains are most advantageous, and it
is one of those worthy of considerable attention. The seed is easily
collected, and germinates readily under favourable conditions.
Atriplex halimoides. —This is an annual under-shrub, and is often termed’
“ Dwarf Saltbush,” growing from 1 to 2 feet high. It grows rapidly, and
produces large quantities of seed, in many respects similar to A. vesicaria.
When once established, seedlings spring up the following season in places;


far distant from the parent bushes, in situations capable of retaining the
seeds and favourable to germination. It is relished by stock, but is rapidly
exterminated by continuous overstocking. Its annual habit of growth
discounts its value for lengthened periods of drought, but upon the return
of favourable conditions it affords a considerable amount of succulent
herbage in a short time, and under conditions unfavourable to many other
plants.
Atriplex angulata is a very hardy shrub of an erect habit, growing to the
height of about 2 feet. It produces an abundance of feed, and also seed,
which germinates readily, and does not possess the facilities for widespread
distribution as do many others. It is a very useful plant, but, unfortunately,
shares with many others the liability of being easily eaten out by over-
stocking.
Half-herried Saltbush (Atriplex semihaccata) is a valuable plant with a
procumbent habit, and is sometimes called “ Creeping Saltbush.” It is
one which has been long recognised as of great importance for many
purposes. Its spreading stems and leaves afford valuable protection to the
Barrier Saltbush, Enchylæna tomentosa.
soil and also to itself. It produces an abundance of seed, which germinates
readily if covered very lightly, and under favourable conditions without any
covering.
The seed is somewhat succulent, and care should be taken whilst gathering
to allow of its drying, or otherwise it would spoil, which fact probably
accounts for the low percentage of seeds germinating in many instances.
The same applies to a number of saltbushes.
Atriplex leptocarpa has a somewhat variable habit of growth, in some
situations being prostrate, as A. semihaccata, and in others more ascending.
It produces an abundance of seed under most adverse conditions, but the
foliage is not so abundant as in A. semihaccata.
Of the different genera of saltbushes, Atriplex contributes by far the
most important for purposes of cultivation.


Of the genus Rhagodia there are a few important ones, but generally
speaking their seeds are not easily collected, and care must be exercised in
the thorough drying of the fruits. Rhagodia parabolica shares with Atriplex
nummularia the name of “ Old Man Saltbush,” but the latter is more
generally recognised as the “ Old Man.” It is seldom that a specimen of
Rhagodia parabolica is met with nowadays, and apparently it is well-nigh
extinct in many places. Rhagodia hastata (Hastate-leaved Saltbush) was
cultivated at Ooolabah, but not extensively. It is a very handsome branching
shrub, and attains the height of about 4 feet. It is propagated readily by
cuttings under favourable conditions, and also from seed; is very drought-
resisting, and thrives upon a diversity of soils.
Nodding Saltbush (Rhagodia nutans). —This plant produces an abundance
of small* red or yellow succulent fruits, which allows of its cultivation in
fairly large areas. It is a valuable fodder plant of a prostrate, herbaceous
iabit, and would well repay the trouble of cultivation.
Cotton Bush, Kochia aphylla.
Bluebush (Chenopodium auricomum). —This shrub grows to the height of
-about 4 feet, and produces a large quantity of nutritious fodder. It is most
plentiful upon the heavier soils and around gilgais, where it is enabled at
certain seasons to get a large supply of moisture. When cultivated on drier
lands it produces a limited amount of fodder. This plant, together with
Chenopodium nitrariaceum, would be very suitable for dissemination upon
the heavier soils.
Chenopodium triangulare is a prostrate herbaceous plant, growing pro-
fusely upon the lighter red soils, producing a large amount of fodder, which
is not so valuable as that of many of the other saltbushes.
Barrier Saltbush (Enchylcena tomentosa) is a much branched shrub
attaining the height of about 2 feet, much relished by stock, and producing
an abundance of succulent seeds requiring care in the curing. They
germinate under very adverse conditions; the plant, also, is remarkably
drought-resistant.


Of the family Kochia, perhaps the Cotton-bush ( Kochia aphylla) is the
most widely known. It is very drought-resistant, and in many situations
plentiful, its angular habit of growth being efficacious in preventing its
annihilation by stock. The seeds are not easily collected, and it, therefore,
cannot be considered as very suitable for cultivation. This applies to
other members of the family, comprising excellent fodder-plants, and the
greatest benefit would accrue from their systematic conservation. Kochia
villosa and Kochia pyramidata are two of the most valuable.
There are many other saltbushes of perhaps equal value to many
mentioned, but their cultivation has not been systematically attempted.
Two points are worthy of being borne in mind. A number of saltbushes
appear never to be touched by stock, and have therefore no known value
to the pastoralist. Secondly, the eating of some is an acquired taste, and it
sometimes happens that sheep refuse (at all events, at first) to eat certain,
saltbushes when they arrive in country strange to them.
SOME NATIVE AUSTRALIAN FODDER PLANTS .*
(Other than Grasses and Saltbushes.)
1. CrucifeßjE. —This family includes such plants as cress, cabbage, &c.
There are many Australian representatives, but most of them are very small.
After the spring rains they may, however, be so numerous as to form quite a
carpet of vegetation.
Lepidium ruderale, Linn. Lepidium papillosum, F.v.M. —These plants
grow abundantly after rains, and are first-class fodder. Horses are able to
work hard and keep their condition while subsisting principally on them.
The plants constitute also a valuable stimulating diet for poultry, and the
seeds are good for food. Both these plants are distributed widely throughout
Australia.
2. Capparide.e (Caper Family). Apophyllum anomalum, F.v.M. —A
“Native Currant/’ Usually known as “Warrior Bush” —a corruption of
the aboriginal name “ Wareah.” A useful fodder plant for stock; usually a
bush growing from 6 to 10 feet high. Interior of New South Wales and
Queensland.
3. PittosporEjE (Pittosporum Family), (i.) Pittosporum phillyraides,
D.G., called variously “ Butter Bush,” “ Willow Tree,” and “ Native Willow.”
In times of scarcity this small tree is of great value, as it withstands the
drought, and sheep and cattle browse upon its foliage. Stock are so partial
to it in the interior districts that it is in danger of extermination in some
localities, and it should be conserved. The drier districts of all the States,
except Tasmania.
(ii.) Bursaria spinosa, Oav. “Native Boxthorn.”—This plant is greedily
eaten by sheep, but its thorny character preserves it from extinction upon
sheep runs. It is very variable in bulk. Usually a small shrub, in congenial
* J. H. Maiden, 1.5.0., F.R.S., F.L.S., Government Botanist, and Director of the
Botanic Gardens, Sydney.


localities it develops into a small tree. It is also valuable as a shelter for
native grasses and other small fodder plants, which might otherwise be
eaten out. Throughout Australia.
4. Portulacace.'E (Portulaca Family).—(i.) Claytonia (Calandrinia}
balonnensis, Lindl. Well known as “Periculia” (sometimes spelt “ Para-
kilya”), the aboriginal name in Central Australia. This and allied plants,
smch as Portulaca, go under the name of “ Munyeroo.” The occurrence or
absence of this plant on the ridges often determines the route of mobs of
cattle in the interior. Mr. S. Dixon states that a large mob of cattle,
destined to stock a Northern Territory run, travelled some 200 miles without
a drink, which would have been absolutely impossible in the absence of this
succulent plant. Interior of South Australia, New South Wales, and Queens-
land. This may be taken as typical of a number of allied succulent plants,
some of which are not without horticultural value.
(ii) Portulaca oleracea, Linn. “ Purslane,” or “ Pigweed ”; “ Munyeroo ”
of the aborigines.—This is the plant whose seed forms an article of food for
the aborigines. They grind the seed in their stone mills, and make a coarse
kind of damper therefrom. It is a prostrate succulent plant which stock
devour readily; it is also reputed to be nutritious. It is one of those plants
which are alike food and drink. Not endemic in Australia. Found in all
the States except Tasmania.
5. Malvaceae (Mallow Family).—(i.) Many plants belonging to this family
are readily eaten by stock, and are nutritious, but they have the drawback,
particularly when not young, of containing much fibre, and thus of becoming
indigestible. None of these contain any acrid or poisonous substance.
(ii.) Malvastrum spicatum, A. Gray. —Some squatters have considered this
a valuable sheep feed. —(Bailey.) It has been sent as a fodder plant from the
Wilcannia district. It is not endemic in Australia. South Australia, New-
South Wales, and Queensland.
(iii.) Sida corrugata, Lindl. —Sent as a good forage plant from the Parkes
-district. Other species of Sida (and Abutilon), other than enumerated, are
doubtless of some value as fodder plants. All the States except Tasmania.
(iv.) Sida rhombifolia, Linn. (Syn.: 8. retusa, Linn.). —The well-known
“Paddy Lucerne,” or “Queensland Hemp.” A well-known fodder plant in
warm regions, including Queensland and northern New South Wales, and
having some value in this direction, but a stunted plant in cooler parts,
where it becomes a noxious weed. Queensland and New South Wales.
(v.) Hibiscus heterophyllus, Vent. “Green Kurrajong.”—The leaves
branches, and bark of this tree, and of other species of Hibiscus, are greedily
■eaten by cattle in winter. They are mucilaginous, but especially fibrous.
New South Wales and Queensland.
(vi.) Oossypium Sturtii, F.v.M. “ Sturt’s Desert Rose.”—This plant
affords stock a good summer feed.—(S. Dixon.) Interior of South Australia
and New South Wales.
6. Sterculiace.e (Kurrajong Family).— Sterculia diver sifolia, G. Don.
(Syn.: Brachychiton populneum, R.Br.) The well-known “Kurrajong.”—
■Cattle and sheep are fond of the leaves and branches, and in some dry
seasons have existed for long periods on scarcely anything else. Nor is the


attention of stock confined to these trees during droughts; the leaves are'
always palatable, but it must be borne in mind that no tree is ever preferred
by stock to succulent grass. The kurrajong and quandong trees are exempted
from the operations of all timber licenses and permits in New South Wales,
and cutting them down is prohibited; but, in time of drought, if the leaves
•if the kurrajong tree are required for feed for stock, the lighter branches'
may be lopped. Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland.
T. GeraniaoejE (Geranium Family). —Geranium dissectum, Linn. “ Crow-
foot ” and Erodium cygnorum, Nees. —Both prostrate plants, often found
in grass land and in stony places. They are eaten by stock, and are supposed
to be nutritious. In damp land of fair quality they yield an enormous-
quantity of feed. All States.
S. Eutace.e. — Geijera parviflora , Lindl. “ Wilga.” — This is a small, very
umbrageous tree of excellent shape. Sheep are fond of it, and keep it eaten
off as high as they can reach.
Wilga (Geijera parvifolia, Lindl.),


9. (Cedar Family).—(i.) Flindersia maculosa, F.v.M.
“Spotted Tree,” “Leopard Tree.” —During periods of drought sheep become
exceedingly fond of the leaves of this tree, which they greedily devour, as
well as the twigs up to the size of a goose-quill, and hence the tree is in
danger of extermination, as it has not the recuperative power of some trees.
This tree should only be pollarded. When young it forms a tangled mass,
from which a leader emerges in the centre and forms the stem. This is
a wonderful protective arrangement, guarding the young tree from destruc-
tion by herbivora. Western New South Wales and Queensland.
Leopard Tree (Flindersia maculosa, F.v.M.).
(ii.) Owenia acidula, F.v.M.-. The “Colane” or “Native Nectarine.” —It
has been claimed that this is the handsomest tree in the interior; certainly,
it is a very beautiful, small tree, and one of the best of our fodder-trees.
Found in the interior of South Australia, New South Wales, and Queensland.
10. RHAMNE.E. —(i.) Yentilago viminalis, Hook. “Supple jack.”—The
leaves are eaten by stock. South Australia, New South Wales, and Queens-
land.


An old Kurrajong tree before lopping


(ii.) Pomaderris racemosa, Hook. The leaves of this shrub when chewed
or soaked, are found to be slightly mucilaginous. This explains the fondness
that stock have for this plant. It always seems fresh and green, and stands
stocking well. —(S. Dixon.) It has been reported by other observers in
South Australia as a fodder-plant, being much liked by stock of all kinds.
The leaves of other shrubs belonging to the same genus have some value
for stock feed. All the States, except Western Australia and Queensland.
11. Sapindace.e.—(i.) Atalaya hemiglauca, F.v.M. ‘'Cattle Bush,’"'
“ Whiterwood.” —The leaves of this tree are eaten by stock, the tree being
frequently felled for their use during seasons of drought. South Australia,
New South Wales, and Queensland.
(ii.) Dodoncea lohulata, F.v.M. “ Hop-bush.”—One of the best fodder
shrubs in the Lachlan district of New South Wales. The seed-pods in
particular contain a very pleasant bitter. There is no reason, however, to
suppose that this particular species is preferred by stock to some others of
the genus, which are scattered throughout all the States. Southern and
Western Australia, New South Wales, and Victoria.
(iii.) Heterodendron olewfolium, Desf. “ Rosewood ” or “Lachlan Emu
Bush.” “Berrigan” is an old aboriginal name. —The seeds, which are
covered with a red, fleshj™lrillus, are eaten by emus. Mr. S. Dixon states
that both sheep and cattle feed greedily upon them. It is difficult to kill,
springing from the roofs when cut down, and it is one of the best for sheep
feed. It grows to a girth of 15 inches and more, and up to a height of
20 feet. All the States, except Tasmania (in the interior).
12. Legumixos^e.—Acacias are Wattles, most of them having special
names. Some of these, which include the best fodder species, are given
below.
(i.) Acacia aneura, F.v.M. “ Mulga.”—By some called the “King of
Fodders.” Found in all the drier parts of all the mainland States.
(ii.) Acacia doratoxylon, A. Cunn. “ Spearwood,” or “ Currawang.”—
The leaves are eaten by stock. All the States except Tasmania and Western
Australia.
(iii.) Acacia implexa, Benth. A “Hickory.” — ln southern New South
Wales cattle have been known to eat the leaves of this tree, stripping off all
within reach, although grass in the paddock was abundant. The same
remarks apply to other species, and it is desirable that further observations
be made in regard to the fondness of stock for Acacias. Victoria, New
South Wales, and Queensland.
(iv.) Acacia pendula, A. Cunn. “Weeping,” or “True Myall.” Called
“ Boree ” in south-western districts of New South Wales. —With the excep-
tion of horses, stock, especially sheep, are very fond of the leaves of this
tree, particularly in seasons of drought, and for this reason, and because
they eat down the seedlings, it has almost become exterminated in parts of
the States. New South Wales and Queensland.
(v.) Acacia sdlicma, Lindl. “ Native Willow,” “Cooba,” and “ Mother-
umba.”—The leaves are eaten by stock. This is another tree which is rapidly
becoming scarce, owing to the partiality of stock for it. All the States except
Tasmania.


(vi.) Albizzia basaltica, Benth. (Albizzias are closely allied to Wattles.)
“ Bead Finish." —Cattle like the foliage of this tree. Queensland.
(vii.) Albizzia lophantha, Benth. —Cattle browse on the leaves of this tree.
It is of rapid growth. Western Australia.
(viii.) Cassia eremophUa, A. Cunn. —Mr. S. Dixon states that both the
pods and the leaves of this plant are eaten by stock. All the States except
Tasmania.
(ix.) Daviesia spp. *• Hop-bush."—Some of these shrubs are called “Hop-
bushes ” on account of the pleasant bitter principle which pervades them.
Horses and cattle are fond of browsing on them.
Speaking of a dry time in southern Hew South Wales, Hr. Forester Allan
reported that stock ate one species (D. corymbosa ) ravenously, and it kept
them alive. Chiefly in Western Australia, but also in Hew South Wales and
other States.
(x.) Galactia tenuiflora, Wight et Arn. —Mr. Nicholas Holtze, of Port
Darwin, states that horses are very fond of the foliage.
(xi.) Glycine tabacina, Benth. —A very fine fodder, called “ Purple
Clover,” according to a correspondent in the Parkes district.
(xii.) G. tomentosa, Benth. —Has been similarly commended. Both
species are found in South Australia, Hew South Wales, and Queensland;
the former in Victoria and Western Australia in addition.
(xiii.) Jacksonia scoparia, R.Br.; var. macrocarpa. A Dogwood."—
Cattle and horses relish the foliage of this small tree amazingly.—(Mueller.)
Western Australia.
(xiv.) Psoralea ienax, Lindl. —Considered a good fodder by some. —
(Bailey.) Hew South Wales and Queensland.
(xv.) Swainsona phacoides, Benth. “ Indigo ” or “ Liquorice."—Considered
a most valuable fodder plant in the Wagga district. The leaves of some
species are injurious if eaten in excess; most of them are undoubtedly
nutritious if browsed with grasses and other herbage. All the States except
Tasmania.
(xvi.) Templetonia egen-a, Benth. —For a note of this species as a fodder-
plant, see the Agricultural Gazette for August, 1897. Found in the interior
of all the States except Tasmania.
(xvii.) Trigonella suavissima, Lindl. —From its abundance in the neigh-
bourhood of Menindie it is sometimes called “ Menindie Clover.” It is the
“ Australian Shamrock " of Mitchell. This perennial, fragrant, clover-like
plant is a good pasture herb. Sir Thomas Mitchell ( Three Expeditions)
speaks of it in the highest manner as a forage plant on several occasions.
Interior of Australia, from the Murray River and tributaries to the vicinity
of Shark’s Bay, Western Australia.
13. Myrtace.e. —(i.) Angophora intermedia, D.C. “Harrow-leaved Apple-
tree.” —Victoria, Hew South Wales, and Queensland.
(ii.) Angophora suhvelutina, F.v.M. “Broad-leaved Apple-tree.” Is
sometimes cut down to feed cattle in dry seasons, as the leaves are relished
by them. They are commonly pollarded for the same purpose. New South
Wales and Queensland.


(iii.) Eucalyptus coriacea, A. Cunn. “White Gum/'’ “Cabbage Gum.” —
The leaves of this tree are very thick, and in dry seasons are eaten by cattle. —
(Woods.) Opossums have a predilection for the young foliage, so that they
often kill trees of this species. Tasmania, Victoria, and New South Wales.
(iv.) Eucalyptus corynocalyx, F.v.M. “ Sugar Gum.” —The sweetest
foliage of this tree is browsed upon by cattle and sheep. In this respect this
eucalypt may be classed with one other, E. Ounnii (J. E. Brown). South
Australia.
(v.) Eucalyptus Gunnii, Hook. f. “ White Swamp Gum,” or “ Cider
Gum.” —This tree also bears the name of “ Sugar Gum ” because of the
sweetness of the leaves, "which consequently are browsed upon by stock.
It is a common tree in Tasmania, where it is called “ Cider Gum,” as a so-
called cider is made from the sap taken from it in the springtime. Tasmania,
the extreme south-eastern portion of South Australia, thence to Gippsland,
and into New South Wales.
(vi.) Eucalyptus ochrophloia, F.v.M. “ Napunya.”—This small tree
which grows in the far western portions of New South Wales and Queens-
land, is a valuable fodder-plant, sheep eating it greedily.
14. Ficoide.e. Trianthema crystallina, Vahl. —This is a creeping succulent
annual from 1 to 3 feet long. It forms an excellent fodder-plant. This
family includes “Pig's Pace” {Mesembryanihemum) , New Zealand
“ Spinach” (Tetragonia) , and other useful fodder plants. This plant is not
endemic in Australia. In the interior of all the States except Victoria and
Tasmania.
15. Umbellifeu.i;. Daucus brachiatus, Sieb. “Native Carrot.” — Stock
are very fond of this plant when it is young, and sheep especially thrive
on it when it is abundant. It is a small annual herbaceous plant, growing
plentifully on sandhills and rich soil. The seeds, termed “ Carrot Burrs,”
are very injurious to wool, the hooked spines with which the seeds are armed
attaching themselves to the fleece, rendering portions of it quite stiff and
rigid. The root is astringent, but much relished by sheep. It grows in
immense quantities on the rich black flats of flood deposit. To watch a flock
of sheep feeding on carrot ground, where there is not a vestige of anything
green, would astonish a stranger. A sheep will smell out a root and scrape
away with its hoof until it can grasp the top with its teeth, when it draws
it out. The common carrot belongs, of course, to this genus, and the fact
that it is descended from an apparently worthless, weedy plant, indicates
that the present species is capable of much improvement by cultivation. This
plant is not endemic in Australia. All the States.
16. Boragine.e. Trichodesma eeylanicum, R. Br. —Baron Mueller recom-
mends this plant as a fodder herb, stating that the dromedaries of Giles’s
exploring party (1873-4) were found to be particularly partial to it. It ia
not endemic in Australia. All the States except Victoria and Tasmania.
17. Coxyolvulace.e. (i.) Convolvulus erubescens, Sims. “Pink Con-
volvulus.”-—Esteemed a good fodder plant in places in western New South
Wales. All the States.
(ii.) Ipomma Pes-Caprce, Roth.— Mr. Nicholas Holtze, of the Botanic
Gardens, Port Darwin, states that this plant is used as pig-feed by the
Chinese of the Northern Territory. Found in Western Australia, New
South Wales, and Queensland.


18. Myopokine.e. (i.) J lyoporum plaiycarpum, B. Br. “Dogwood,”
“ Sandalwood.” —The leaves are eaten by stock, but not, so far as can be
learnt, with any evil effects. It is often felled for sheep in time of drought.
All the States except Victoria and Queensland.
(ii.) Eremophila longifolia, F.v.M. “Emu Bush,” “Dogwood” ; “ Berri-
gan ” of the natives. —The leaves are greedily eaten by cattle and sheep.
Observations in regard to the effect on stock on browsing upon plants
belonging to the Myoporinew are much needed, as statements hitherto made
in respect of them are not always reconcilable. Some of the plants of this
family are, in fact, reputed to be poisonous. Allied to this plant is the
“Sandalwood” or “ Budtha ” ( Eremophila M-itchelli), the bark of which is
very appetising to rabbits. Consequently they make for this shrub as soon as
grass fails, and hence twigs of the “ Budtha ” are used (when treated with
strychnine) as bait for rabbits. All the States except Tasmania.
(iii.) Eremophila polyclada, F.v.M. “ Lignum.”—Useful fodder bushes
This and Muehlenbeckia Gunninghamii often grow together and go under
the same name. All the States except Tasmania and Western Australia.
19. VF.RBENACE/E. Avicennia officinalis, Linn, A “Mangrove”' or “ White
Mangrove.”—The leaves of this tree are oaten by cattle and are considered
very nutritious. The mangroves are cut down by the teamsters for their
cattle, and in many parts of the coast the cattle have done much harm to
oyster beds through trampling them down in their efforts to reach the man-
groves. The mangroves protect the banks of tidal rivers, &c., and are, in
consequence, exempt from the operation of woodcutters’ licenses. Around
the greater part of the Australian coast.
20. Polygonace.e. Muehlenbechia Gunninghamii, F.v.M. “Lignum.”—
By some considered a useful fodder bush. All the States except Tasmania.
21. Ptilotus obovatus, F.v.M. “ Silky Heads.” —This
plant grows on rough stony country, and is relished by all stock before it gets
too dry and woolly. On the barren rocks it is frequently the principal food
for stock. The same remark applies more or less to other species of this
genus, which is scattered through much of the drier country. Found in the
interior of all the States except Tasmania.
22. Nyctagine.-e. Boerhaavia diffusa, Linn. Often called “Tar-vine.” —
This is a useful forage plant, which, having a long tap root, can withstand
a considerable amount of drought, whilst it affords a pasture early in the
season, ere the grasses are fully developed. Stock are particularly fond of
this plant; they seem to prefer it to all other kinds of feed available to them.
This plant is not endemic in Australia, and is a troublesome weed in some
warm countries. Mr. N. Holtze states that it is used for pig-feed by the
Chinese of the Northern Territory. All the States except Tasmania.
23. Proteace.e. HaTcea leucoptera, R. Br. “Pin or Needle Bush.”—
Eaten by stock. All the States except Tasmania and Western Australia.
24. Eui'HORBiACE/E. (i.) Baloghia lucida, Endl. “ Brush Bloodwood.” —
At Mount Dromedary this species has the reputation of being greedily eaten
by cattle. A farmer cut the limbs of this tree down for his cattle, and they
would always eat the leaves of it before anything else that was given to
them. Coastal New South Wales and Queensland.
(ii.) Beriya Gunninghamii, Planch. The “ Gooma ” of western New South
Wales. —A fodder shrub which has no chance of making headway where
sheep feed. In spite of the reputedly poisonous family to which it belongs.


there is no record of it having proved deleterious to animals. It has a
pleasant bitter flavour, found in the drier parts of Victoria and New
South Wales.
25. Saktalacea;. (i.) Choretrum Candollei, F.v.M. —Sent as an edible
shrub from the Riverina. New South Wales and Queensland.
(ii.) Fusanus acuminatus, It. Hr. “ Quandong.”—A useful fodder bush,
protected from the operation of timber licenses. See Sterculia diversifolia
(Kurrajong). Found in the interior of all the States except Tasmania.
26. Urticace.e. Ficus macrophylla, Desf. “ Moreton Bay Fig.”—This is an
excellent fodder plant, cattle and horses eating the leaves, young twigs, and
figs with great zest. The small-leaved fig (F. rubiginosa, Desf.), appears to
be of equal value as a fodder plant, and doubtless other of our native figs,
may .be put to similar uses. I have known cows fed all the year round on
the leaves and figs which dropped from the trees.
27. Casuarine.-e. (i.) Casuarina Cunninghamiana, Ait. ‘‘Fresh Water-
Swamp Oak.”
(ii.) Casuarina glauca, Sieb. “ Salt Water Swamp Oak.”—l have seen
cattle leaving fair grass for branches of these trees, and probably they will
feed on the leaves of most Casuarinas. Found in all the States except
Tasmania and Western Australia.
(iii.) Casuarina stricta , A it. “ She-Oak.” —This is a useful fodder tree in
Victoria and southern New South Wales. Mr. S. Dixon states that in Port
Lincoln (S.A.), the fallen catkins (male inflorescence) form the chief
sustenance in winter on much of the overstocked country. He adds that this
tree is too sour to be very useful to ewes rearing lambs; but if sheep had
only enough of it, the “ brake ” or tenderness of fibre would often be
prevented in our fine-wool districts, and much money saved by the increased
value a sound staple always commands. The foliage is eagerly browsed,
upon by stock, and in case of drought these trees are pollarded for the-
cattle. Old bullock-drivers say that cattle prefer the foliage of the female
plant. Casuarina foliage has a pleasant, acidulous taste, but it contains a
very large portion of ligneous matter. All the States except Queensland and
Western Australia.
28. Balanophora fungosa, ' Forst. —Speaking of Mount
Bellenden Ker, Mr. F. M. Bailey records that this root parasite was noticed
to be very abundant in all scrubs, producing usually large heads, some
noticed being over 3 inches in diameter, and varying from nearly white to
dark reddish-brown. Mr, Banning, of Freshwater Creek, says that bullocks
are so eager to obtain a bite of it that it is often difficult to drive them
through a scrub where it abounds. Queensland.
29. Liliace/E. Flagellaria indica, Linn. A “ Lawyer Vine.” —Leichhardt
{Overland Journey to Port Essington, p. 424) speaks of his bullocks feeding
heartily upon this plant, particularly as the country was most wretched, and
the grass scanty and hard. This plant is not endemic in Australia. New
South Wales, Queensland, and North Australia.
30. Mahsieiaceaj. Marsilea quadrifolia, Linn. “ Nardoo,” “ Clover
Fern.” — : This plant is much relished by stock. It grows plentifully in
swamps and shallow pools of water. It is, however, better known as yielding
an unsatisfactory human food in its spore-cases. All the States except
Tasmania.


SECTION XII.
Silos and Silage.*
The term ensilage is applied to the conversion of fodder plants, cultivated
or of natural growth, into silage for the feeding of cattle or sheep. The
crop must be harvested just when it has attained its maximum’ growth, i.e.,
just before the seeds are ripe and while the stalks and foliage still retain all
their juices. The greenstuff is removed from the field immediately on
cutting, and is placed either whole or chopped in a stack or in an under-
ground (or pit) silo, or in an above-ground (or tub) silo. The operation
of harvesting can be carried on regardless of the weather, inasmuch as wet-
ting with rain or dew will not affect the resulting fodder.
The fundamental principles of ensilage are: —
Harvesting the crop in a perfectly succulent condition.
Handling and storing it before the greenstuff can become withered or
dried out.
Storing or stacking it in such a manner as to exclude air to as great a
degree as possible.
When these principles are successfully observed the mass of greenstuff
will undergo fermentation and become converted into a nutritious and
palatable fodder of the utmost value for milch cows and sheep. Indeed, for
both in dry seasons, silage on account of its succulence is the best substitute
for natural pasturage.
What is Silage.
Any fodder crops preserved in a semi-green state by a controlled fermenta-
tion will come under the term silage, and almost any farm crop, except
roots, might be preserved by this method. The usual method for preserving
fodder crops has been to allow these crops to partially dry out in the fields
and then store them in a shed, or in what is known as a rick or stack. A
perfect hay is one that is cut at the proper time —that is, at the time when
the plant contains the most nutriment, together with succulence, and saved
in such a manner that the drying process is just carried far enough to
prevent the bay fermenting to any extent when stacked later on.
There is very little difference in cutting stages for silage and for perfect
haymaking. Both crops should be cut while green and succulent. The
change in the system begins immediately the crop is cut. Instead of allowing
the crop to remain in the field for purposes of drying and preserving, it is
carted at once to the silo or stack, and the process of silage-making begun.
In making hay the idea is to prevent a strong fermentation setting up after
it has been stored, whereas in silage-making the idea is to encourage fer-
mentation for a time at least. The one process preserves by drying, whereas
the other aims at preserving the fodder in a green state by means of a
controlled fermentation.
• Compiled from Farmers’ Bulletin, No. 6, “ Silos and Silage,” and other sources.
1 17299—2 A


It is known that the fermentation of plants is mainly due to the action of
micro-organisms, and the principle of silage is to encourage the action of
these micro-organisms up to a certain stage, and when this stage has been
reached to check or destroy them. When green plants are heaped together
fermentation soon begins, and the temperature increases rapidly. This
increase of temperature causes a very great development in bacterial activity,
and fermentation proceeds very rapidly until this temperature goes some-
what above 125 degrees Fahr. When a temperature of about 140 degrees
Fahr. is reached many of the organisms that have produced fermentation
are destroyed (lactic fermentation now ceases), and hence fermentation
proceeds more slowly until a temperature of (say) 160 degrees is reached,
when all the organisms will have been destroyed, the spores or seeds only
remaining alive. Fermentation then stops, and not until the temperature
decreases considerably and air gains access to the fodder can a secondary
fermentation begin. Thus the food is preserved.
A good deal is heard about sweet silage and sour silage. In reality there
is very little difference between them as a food. The sour silage will contain
more acid and less sugar, and will be more appetising to some animals, while
in the sweet silage less of the sugar has been formed into acid, and hence
the food is slightly more nutritious. The production of either depends
on the character and degree of the fermentation. The organisms that
produce acid cease to do so at a high temperature, and the amount of acidity
produced depends on the length of time at which the silage remains at a
temperature below (say) 130 degrees Fahr. If the fermentation is slow,
and the heat develops slowly, more acid will he formed than if the fermenta-
tion is rapid and a high temperature is quickly reached. Generally speaking,
then, fodder held at temperatures (say) below 130 Fahr. will result in sour
silage being produced.
There is one kind of sour silage which is undesirable, and that is silage
in which, during the process, a considerable amount of butyric acid has been
formed. This imparts to it a very objectionable taste and smell, and makes
the fodder inferior. When lactic fermentation ceases or proceeds but slowly,
butyric fermentation begins, provided the temperature is not too high. It
will be seen that it is much safer to aim at the production of a sweet silage
by filling the silo slowly, thus allowing sufficient oxygen to remain in the
mass to enable the heat-loving organisms to set up a brisk fermentation,
creating considerable heat, and practically checking all fermentation and
decay.
Degree of Fermentation and Pressure.
By filling slowly, so as not to cause great pressure on the bottom layers of
fodder, -we ensure a quick fermentation, and then by adding further fodder
we add more weight, thus shutting out fresh oxygen, and checking and con-
trolling the amount of fermentation and heat. Thus pressure is the main
agent employed for controlling the temperature, and thereby also the fer-
mentation. Silage can be made without pressure; but no silo is complete
without some arrangement for causing and controlling to some extent the
pressure necessary to exclude air.
When the silo is being filled it does not do to complete the filling in one
day; this causes a very slow fermentation in the lower parts, and it also
results in a silo which is, when the food has settled down, perhaps little
more than, half full. The proper method is to partly fill the silo, say to


one-third of its height, packing it well, especially round the sides, in the
meantime, and then allowing it a couple of days before filling again com-
mences. This might be repeated, and the silo filled in three or four stages.
By this means much more fodder can be put into the silo than if it were
filled in only one or two stages.
Then when the silo is filled the question of pressure arises. If the silo
is a good depth, the weight of the fodder is of itself sufficient for the lower
half of the silage, but the upper portions, especially the 5 or 6 feet near the
top, do not receive sufficient pressure to ensure a proper fermentation and
preservation, and as a result this portion may become mouldy, dry, and
practically useless. By covering the top of the silo with some such substance
as wet chaff, the air is excluded, and the top of the silage, even though
unpressed, is improved. Still further improvement can be produced, if, in
addition to covering to a depth of about 1 foot with damp chaff, some pres-
sure is applied, the main thing being that the pressure shall be constant.
Any method of pressure which requires daily attention, such as screwing
up, cannot be constant, and hence is not so effective. Silage pits have been
pressed with very good results by placing planks on the top and weighting
these with large stones; sand-bags have also been used for this purpose with
success. Any simple method of continuous pressure which the farmer may
devise will be of use, and each farmer should use the system of continuous
pressure which is most easily obtainable.
Any bushman can rig a contrivance for protecting a self-registering ther-
mometer, which can be used for ascertaining the temperature of the con-
tents of the pit from time to time. A simple yet practical way of deter-
mining the temperature is to run a fth or 4-inch pointed iron rod into the
contents of the pit; leave it there for a time; if on drawing it out the rod
is too hot to hold in the hands, the temperature is too high; if only fairly
warm, the temperature is too low; whereas if it is just about as hot as one
can bear, the temperature is about right. If the heat is too great it can be
reduced by consolidating the contents and excluding the air. If, on the
other hand, the temperature is too low, the filling of the pit should be tem-
porarily stopped to enable the requisite temperature to develop.
A safer plan would be to screw a point on to a length of inch piping, which
could be thrust deeply into the mass, and in, say, ten minutes a thermometer
could be lowered into the pipe.
Value of Silage for Food.
Silage is eaten eagerly by sheep and cattle; mares also, with foal at foot,
take to it, but, speaking generally, it is not suitable for horses. There is
often considerable loss in ewes near lambing from constipation, and in lambs
after lambing from the ewes going dry—in both eases owing to the dryness
of the natural feed. These losses can be avoided by giving the ewes a small
daily ration of silage, the laxative effect of silage being greater, if anything,
than that of green feed, and the milk-producing quality being equal to that
of green feed.
While there is any dry feed about, a ration of 1 lb. a day will be quite
sufficient for sheep; but as the dry feed disappears, it will be advisable to
gradually increase the ration to 3 lb. a day. At these rates, 1 ton of silage
will give a daily ration of 1 lb. to 2.000 sheep, allowing a fair margin for
possible, but not probable, waste, while 3 tons will give a full daily ration.
When it is remembered that, in drought times, if chaff or hay can be obtained
at £8 per ton it is considered very reasonable, and also that dry feed is
not nearly so suitable either for breeding ewes or milch cows as silage, the


value of silage is much greater than its moderate cost. In fact, once green
feed has disappeared, there is nothing within the reach of the sheep-farmer
which approaches silage as a cheap and satisfactory food for sheep.
Silage is ready for use in about six mouths. It is practically indestruc-
tible, and does not deteriorate by length of time; so that, if not wanted for a
number of years, it is as good when opened up as when first ready for use.
Further, there is no danger of loss from fire, flood, rabbits, mice, &c., the
silage (when not chaffed) being a solid mass that must be cut out with a
strong hay-knife or a broad axe.
Types of Silos.
There are three means of making silage—the pit silo, the overground silo,
and the stack. Of these, the stack system is the cheapest, but is also the
system accountable for most waste, and hence from an economical point of
view it is questionable if it can be really accounted the cheapest. For the
stack system it is unnecessary to chaff the plants, and afterwards when the
silage is being fed the food is easily removed from the stack in the same
way as hay is removed from the hay-rick. Owing, however, to the amount
of waste which occurs at the bottom, top, and sides of the stack, this system
is to be recommended only in cases where a pit or tub silo is out of the
question, or as a means of conserving supplies of fodder that are in excess
of the capacity of such silos.
STACK SILAGE.
Several effective methods can be adopted to make stack silage. These can
.only be determined by local conditions. In all cases provision should be
made to render the stack weather-proof from the top to exclude rain. If a
shed be used, with a good floor and well drained, a space of 16 ft. x 14 ft.
will provide for 100 tons with a stack 22 to 24 feet high. The first con-
sideration, after having determined to select the stack as a means of
conserving the crop, is to secure a site in close proximity to the milking or
feeding sheds. An elevated spot is best, with natural drainage and a firm
dry surface layer of soil to start on, and, if possible, sheltered from prevailing
winds.
In some instances it may be expedient to build stacks in the paddocks
where the crop is grown. Care should be exercised in selecting a well-
drained site. Soil may be used to weight the stack, but in using this
special precautions should be taken to secure a level, evenly-balanced
surface.
Four stout posts at either corner of the stack would assist in keeping it
plumb. The material should not be allowed to jamb at the posts to interfere
with its settling. Stacks of green material very often tilt over to one side
on account of uneven drying. The wind may dry one side more than the
other and prevent its settling uniformly. A stack may fall over if not
watched. A tarpaulin may be hung against the side to protect it from the
wind. Water also could be applied to the drying side.
It is of the utmost importance to build each layer evenly and upwards,
maintaining a regular and unbroken contour, to ensure an equal distribution
of weight, so that the stack will shrink evenly and maintain its shape. The
main principle to observe in all cases is to keep out the air, and to obstruct
its ingress during the curing stage.


Apart from the object of excluding and getting rid of entangled air, a
■danger to obviate is the opening up of the stack through uneven settlement
and shrinkage during the fermentation processes later on.
It is essential to surround the stack with a fence sufficiently substantial to
prevent stock of any kind reaching the fodder. Without this, calves, pigs,
horses, and cattle, are always attracted; they draw out stalks all round to
got at the edible portion, and by this means admit air to the stack, check the
fermentation changes, and spoil it for fodder. The crop should be stacked
immediately after cutting.
Crops best suited for Stack Silage.
For the purposes of the dairy-farmer no crop can excel maize harvested
just as the cobs are glazed.
The approximate estimate of the food value of maize as silage in its best
form is that 3 tons equals 1 ton of oaten hay. Under ordinary circumstances
an acre of maize will produce silage equivalent to 3 to 4 tons of oaten hay.
It has to be remembered that in the stack form of silage there is a good deal
of waste through sides becoming dry and indigestible. Often from 12 to 15
inches all round is thus affected. The larger the stack the less waste will be
found, and the more complete is the fermentative changes on which the
relishable and nutritive qualities of the stock food so much depend.
Next to maize, sorghum has proved most valuable. This crop should be
harvested when the panicle (or seed-head) is full of well-coloured and com-
pletely formed seed.
The first cut of lucerne is very often foul with weeds and inferior grasses,
which render it unfit for hay-making; also the weather may prove to be
unsuitable for hay-making when the crop is ready to cut. Under such
circumstances it can be most advantageously converted into silage. Lucerne
cannot be cut and carted too green and succulent for ensilage.
There are many other crops, such as Skinless barley, wheat, oats, artificial
grasses and clovers, native grasses and herbage, and thistles, which have been
successfully treated.
Cutting the Maize Crop.
A cheap and quick system of cutting the maize is essential, and the corn-
stalks may be harvested by means of a simple device, which can be readily
constructed by any handy man on a farm, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2. A
farm sledge is made 3 ft. 6 in. by 20 in. of 3 in. x 2 in. timbers (on edge)
as a framework, on which is nailed 1 in. hardwood boards. To the right-
hand corner fix the blade of an ordinary scythe by passing a bolt through
its heel. Drill a hole above 6 inches or 8 inches from the point of the scythe
through the blade, through which a bolt is passed and secured to a 3 in. x
1 in. batten. The length of this is regulated to give the blade an angle of
45 degrees from the side of the sledge. The cross batten is transfixed to the
sledge by bolts being (passed through the floor and side battens of the sledge
■on each side. When the three bolts are evenly screwed up, the scythe blade
is rendered quite rigid and firm.


A steady horse accustomed to cultivation between rows of corn should be
harnessed to the sledge. The driver sits on a kerosene case or raised frame-
work. One hand is used to drive and the other guides the fall of the stalks.
These should be cut close to the roots. This plan is simple and rapid in
its work. From sto 8 acres a day can be cut in this way. As the maize
is cut the stalks should be gathered into bundles and carted to the
stack.
Fig. 1.—Scythe-blade Cutter.
Fig. 2.—Scythe-blade Cutter at work.


Fig. 3. — Showing arrangement for building a Stack of Silage


Handling the Greenstuff.
In Fig. 3 one method of handling the greenstuff in building the stack is
depicted. The whip or jib should be made of strong poles, and a wire rope
drawn by a horse may be used for hoisting. In Fig. 4 is shown a pair of
clutching-dogs, which any local blacksmith could make, for gripping the
bundles of greenstuff.
Fig. 4 .—Clutching-dogs for gripping and hoisting bundles of Silage.
THE WHIP-STICK.
A simple and convenient device for lifting fodder crops into stacks is that
known as the whip-stick. Indeed
the idea is one that may be
adapted to various purposes on
the farm, such as lifting water
from streams and dams. It is
used quite extensively on the
South Coast in building silage
stacks. The accompanying illus-
trations show the stick as erected
on one farm at Dapto. In this
case two poles were secured about
35 feet long; the stouter was
sunk in the ground about 3 feet
6 inches, and the other used as
a cross-piece, or “ whip.” In
erecting the whip it is first of all
necessary to find the balance
for successful working, it is better
to have it slightly off the balance
in favour of the thick end, that
is, the load end. In raising the
whip into position, the best plan
is to make use of a block and
tackle. When at the requisite
Fig. 5. —The load ready for lifting.


Fig. 6. —Raising the load.
height a bullock chain is taken once round the whip and looped and
then securely attached to the post, leaving about 1 foot of the chain between
the whip and post slack. This slack chain allows the load to be deposited
anywhere desired, the whip being
simply pulled round the post.
Before adjusting the whip it
is necessary to attach a trace-
chain and length of rope to the
thin end in order to pull this
end down when the load is
attached—the thick end of the
whip being always down when
not in use. On the thick end
—the load end—another trace-
chain will be found very service-
able for attaching the load.
The main point is to get the
right balance of the whip-stick,
and this will be found by ex-
perience, as sticks vary in weight
and length. The stick illus-
trated is 35 feet long—a con-
venient length. The stick, to
be successful, must be straight
and about 6 inches through at
Fig. 7. —Turning the stick to place the load
where desired.


ft.
in.
Average length of stack
27
6
,, width ,,
20
0
Height from ground to eaves ...
11
0
,, ,, „ ridge ...
18
0
Length of ridge
24
0
Computed total volume ..
7,894 cubic feet.
the base. A well-seasoned gum stick suits -well, and a green wattle stick
has also proved very satisfactory. When stacking stuff under an open shed,
the whip may be attached to one of the posts of the building with satis-
factory results. It is a good plan to rig the whip low when starting the
stack, and to raise it as the stack increases in height. As to the weight, a
12-stone man has been hoisted on to a stack, and a school-boy has lifted
1 cwt. of greenstuff.
The method of bringing the greenstuff in on a slide and using the whip-
stick to elevate it, works well. When the slide goes to load up, three ropes
are taken. Before loading, one rope is laid across the bottom of the slide
and the cut crop placed upon it. When the slide is about one-third laden,
the second rope is placed across ; then when two-thirds full, the third rope
is placed across and the slide topped up. When the load is drawn up under
the whip-stick, No. 3 rope is tied over the bundle under which it rests, and
is hauled up, and so on with Nos. 2 and 1. By this means, the slide is
quickly unloaded in three lifts.
For simplicity and convenience in hoisting, the whip-stick has much to
commend it.
Building a Silage Stack.
In the accompanying illustrations, Figs. 8,9, 10, 11, and 12, are depicted
the various stages of the building and curing of a stack of sorghum silage at
Hawkesbury Agricultural College,
In completing this particular stack, the aim was to shape the roof so as to
exclude rain and be kept intact, and resist wind. No thatching was
designed or special material utilised. The sheaves of sorghum were laid
transversely, and when the ridge was reached, the whole was kept firmly in
position by passing fencing-wire across every 4 feet, and secured on each
side to heavy fencing-posts hanging loose. In this way, as shrinkage set
in and the stack fell, the fencing-posts hugged the stack closely, and kept
the wires tight and in close position until the whole mass condensed,
becoming solid and stationary. From this out apprehension as to its
condition ended.
It was estimated that approximately 130 tons of green sorghum were
dealt with.
The following measurements were recorded six weeks after the com-
pletion of the stack: —
A rough estimate of 32 lb. per cubic foot being accepted, the total weight
of the stack would be 113 tons. This estimate of 32 lb. per cubic foot is
arrived at, taking into consideration the shrinkage of the stack to about
two-thirds of its former size, and the actual weight of the cured silage at
47-3 Y lb. per cubic foot. It is thus evident that the original estimate of
130 tons of green crop was somewhat too large.


Fig. 8. —Stack nearly finished.
Fig. 9. —Same stack, finished and weighted down with old fence-posts suspended from wires across the top.


Fig. 10. —The same stack several months later showing settling or shrinkage of silage.
Fig. 11. —Same stack, nine months later, just before being opened up for use.


ft.
in
Average length ...
26
9
width ...
19
6
Height from ground to ...
8
6
„ ,, „ ridge ...
11
6
Length of ridge ...
24
0
Computed total volume ...
5,189 cubic feet.
Length
23'75 feet.
Width
16'o „
Height from ground to eaves
i
„ ,, ridge
Length of ridge
10 „
21
Total volume
3,308 cubic feet.
Eight months later this stack was re-measured when curing was
complete:—
The stack was opened shortly afterwards, and as the centre was approached
measurements were again taken to ascertain approximately the waste.
It was decided to allow for waste —
18 inches all round the stack or the sides.
12 ~ over the top or roof.
6 ~ for the floor or bottom.
This reduced the measurements of available fodder, or good silage, to —
Fig. 12. —Same stack opened up.
The exact weight.per cubic foot was next determined by carefully cutting
out a cube, measuring and weighing it — i.e., the cavity from which the
cube was removed was measured, and the cube weighed. This gave:—
Contents of cube ... ... ... ... 6'925 cubic feet.
Weight of cube ... ~ ... ... 328 Ib.
Weight of 1 cubic foot ... ... ... 47'37 lb.
Using this weight per cubic foot, the total weight of the cured silage
was —
5,189 cubic ft. x 47'37 = 245,803 lb. = 109 J tons nearly.
Deduct the waste on the top, sides, and bottom, and we have—
-3,308 cubic ft. x 47’37 = 156,700 lb. = 70 tons nearly.


An examination of the waste on the bottom of G inches showed that whilst
the fodder was not equal in standard value to the other for milch cows,
yet it is readily eaten by dry stock, and hence 2| tons may be added to the
total edible silage, bringing the total to 72J tons.
The actual loss in food material from waste was thus found to be 37 tons.
The loss of moisture in the curing stage was the difference between 113
tons and 109| tons, or 31 tons.
Ho difficulty was experienced in cutting the silage with the ordinary hay
knife, as the accompanying illustrations show.
At Hawkesbury Agricultural College silage has been fed to cows in full
milk, in combination with lucerne hay and bran, the ration being—
-40 lb. silage ; 15 lb. lucerne bay,
or,—
40 lb. silage ; 12 lucerne hay ; 2 lb. bran.
The cows eat this freely and relish it, and the milk-flow is maintained.
Fig. 13. —View of open cut face of same silage stack, showing benefit of placing material in
position in even layers and having a uniform pressure.
It may be mentioned that in utilising stack silage, in comparison with
chaffed silage conserved in a tub silo, the advantages are much in favour
of the latter; but it often happens that convenience, time, and opportunity
demand that stack silage shall be the means of conserving a crop.
It may also be pointed out that the larger the stack the less the waste
in proportion, and hence a large square stack is more economical.
A saving may also be effected in cartage. A stack silo can bo made in
close proximity to a crop, and, when needed, the stock can be fed direct
from it.
A stack may be made of any size, and so can he built to suit the amount
or weight of the crop. Avoid making the base too big.


PIT SILOS.
As a comparatively inexpensive and quite effective way of conserving
fodder the pit silo is preferred by many farmers, including the managers
of one or two of the experiment farms in the State. The cost of excavating
the pit is not great, and the loss of material is very much less than in the
open stack, provided, of course, that a thoroughly suitable site is chosen
and that the material is properly filled in so as to exclude air. Moreover,
the pit is very easily filled, the teams and drays being drawn through for
the material to be unloaded, and thus eaclf-time trampling down what has
been previously deposited.
Choice of the Site.
The main consideration is that the place selected should have a non-porous
soil. To make sure of this it would be advisable to sink a trial shaft to a
depth of 12 feet. The place should be above flood-level if convenient, but,
provided it is not in a swamp, any place with the requisite subsoil will
answer, as part of the earth taken from the pit can, in country liable to
inundation, be deposited in a bank around the pit, say 40 feet to 50 feet
distant, so as to prevent flood-water entering, and at the same time leave
plenty of room to work drays between the bank and the edge of the pit.
Two instances have come under notice where a white pipeclay underlay
a stiff red-clay subsoil. The excavation was continued into the underlying
shale for some feet, but the soakage from the white clay bands needed
constant attention. This trouble continued after the pits were bricked and
cemented, but was overcome in one instance by placing joists in the bottom
and covering them with flooring boards, and excavating a small well on
one side to. hold the accumulated drippings. A pump was permanently
fixed for the purpose of occasionally pumping the pit out. In the instance
where this was not done, the silage was spoilt.
It might be suggested that farmers who find, after sinking some distance,
that the pit is leaking from any stratum of soil, should cease deepening,
or get the desired depth in the silo by erecting above ground, or else should
make some provision to remove the water when it accumulates. The risk
of w-ater soaking into shallow pits is not so great.
A dairy-farmer should select a site for stack or pit handy to the milking
and feeding yards. It would be better for this class of farmer to grow- crops
for silage as near as possible to the feeding place. Where it is a matter of
feeding silage to stock other than milking cows, the area under forage crops
may be anywhere on the run, and pits may be excavated convenient to the
crop.
Size of the Pit.
A good size for the pit is 108 feet long by 30 feet wide (surface measure-
ment), 60 feet long by 18 feet 6 inches wide (bottom measurement), and
12 feet deep. This gives to each side a batter of 9 inches. One end should
have a grade of 1 in 24, the other a grade of 1 in li. A round post,
6 inches or over in diameter, and about 8 feet in length, should be sunk
4 to 5 feet in the ground about 20 feet from the top end of the 1 in 24
slope-—post to have a cant back from the pit. The sketch (see Tig. 14) will
perhaps give a better idea than the mere measurements. A pit of these
dimensions will hold about 300 tons of silage. Such a pit can be constructed
with plough and scoop, and if a 1-horse scoop is available, the batters of
the sides can be kept clear without difficulty, but if the ordinary three


quarter yard scoop is used there may be a little trouble in removing the
earth near the side batters. It will probably be necessary to dress the sides
to a slight extent with a broad-faced pick, as there must be no plough
marks to hold the silage as it settles.
One farmer excavated a surface area of 60 feet x 12 feet, the earth being
removed to a depth of 7 feet 6 inches for 25 feet. The bottom measurement
of the pit was 25 feet x 12 feet, with a batter at either end of, roughly,
2 in 1 to the surface. Two young men, with two scoops, a single-furrow
plough, and horses, removed the earth from the pit—approximately 140
cubic yards—in four and a half days. The walls were trimmed with spade
and mattock within this time. The horses were yoked tandem to the plough,
with long coupling chains from horse to plough. One man led the horses,
and the other controlled the plough. In this way they excavated the pit
Fig. 14.
so as to leave an almost perpendicular wall. In filling this pit, the fodder
was tipped in from one side until it was possible for a team to haul the
fodder into the pit. On completion, portion of the earth removed was
distributed over the fodder with scoops.
There are farmers who prefer shallow excavations, say 4 feet deep, on
the side of a hill or sloping portion of ground, so that the bottom of the pit
will be opened out on a level with the lower portion of the slope. This
method obviates accumulation of water in w r et weather when portion of
the silage has been removed, and also renders unnecessary the erection of a
roof over the pit. 'Where sufficiently steep slopes occur, the method might
be followed with advantage, but it more resembles the hillside than the pit
silo.
Filling the Pit.
In filling pit silos of the type that permits the teams to pull through, the
ordinary drays in use on the holding should be fitted with frames similar to
those used for carting hay, except —and this is an important exception—
that the frame must not go across the back of the dray, but only in front
and along the sides. The reason for this will appear shortly. A strop
should bo prepared for each dray in the following manner: —Take two
lengths of stout rope (say 2 inches circumference) each 16 feet long,
according to the dray used : splice a loop at the end of each length of a
size to easily slip over the “ summers ” of the dray, and at the other end of
each length splice a small loop round a stout iron ring (see Fig. 1.1).
“Before the dray is loaded the loops are put round the “ summers ” at the tail
of the dray and the rope laid along the bottom of the dray and the end with


the iron ring thrown over the front frame. The load is then forked on to
the dray in the ordinary way and drawn to the pit, where the dray is pulled up
between the post (marked in Fig. 14) and the pit. The ring end of the
;strop is now thrown backwards over the load and attached to a rope of 3-inch
circumference. About 150 feet of this rope will be required. The other
end is then given a turn or two round the post, and the rope paid out as the
dray goes into the pit so as to take the weight of the loading off the horses.
When the dray reaches the bottom the rope is made fast to the post, and
then as the dray moves forward the load is drawn off. The empty dray goes
straight through the pit and is drawn out at the other end, and the strop is
Fig. 15.
released from the rope and thrown back into position in readiness for the
next load. The necessity for the omission of the back of the frame, and the
■ease with which the dray can be unloaded, are now apparent.
As the filling proceeds it may be necessary to have an extra horse at
the pit to assist in pulling the drays over the loads already discharged. A
■certain amount of forking will be necessary to ensure an even distribution
of the green material, but the trampling will be no disadvantage, indeed it
helps materially in compressing the ensilage and excluding the air.
Covering the Pit.
The pit should be immediately covered with some of the soil which was
taken from the pit during its excavation. The soil should be evenly spread
•over the pit to a thickness of about 18 inches, and must be watched, as it
opens from time to time while the settlement of the contents is progressing.
The cracks must be carefully filled as they show up, and more soil put on
until the settling is over. The soil should be kept above the surface level
of the surrounding country so as to run rain-water off. For covering
purposes a scoop will be found very useful and effective.
For the sake of economy it is desirable that two pits should be worked at
the same time, so that if the filling of one has to be discontinued, that of
the other can be proceeded with. The pits should not be close together,
but so situated that each wall be, as far as possible, in the centre of the
ground from which it is supplied.
HILLSIDE SILOS.
When the conformation of the land allows it, the hillside silo possesses
many advantages. Amongst these is the ease with which it can be
filled, the silage being thrown downwards from the carts, and neither lifted
nor elevated.
The silage also is taken out with less labour than from the ordinary pit,
as it is removed from the lower side of the hill. As the silage is below
or level with the surface, weighting material, such as earth, stones, &c.,
is economically applied, and the silage is protected from the sun and
winds.


Cost of Hillside Silo.*
The cost of excavating is estimated at 9d. per cubic yard. It might be-
mentioned that considerable quantities of the gravel taken out were used itt
repairing and making roads.
£
8.
d.
Excavating 9Y0§ cubic yards, at 9d. . .
.. 36
8
0
11 hardwood posts, 18 ft, x 6 in. x 6 in.
. . 8
19
4
5 „ rails, 20 ft. x 4 in. x 3 in.
. . 1
5
2
130 sleepers, 9 ft., for body of silo, at Is.
6
10
0
50 „ 8 ft., for false end, at Is. 3d.
3
2
6
40 „ 8 ft., for wings, at Is. 3d. . .
. . 2
10
0
Cartage from railway, £1 per 100
. . 2
4
0
9 bolts, 6 ft. x | in.
. . 0
18
0
Labour, erecting posts and sleepers
8
0
0
„ digging drain
. . 1
10
0
Total
.. 71
7
0
To take the place of the tub silo at Bathurst Experiment Farm a hillside
one was excavated. As expense is a very serious deterrent to silage-making,,
it was decided to do the work as economically as possible, and it was
carried out during the winter months, when horses and labour could be
spared from the more urgent farm work. The students did most of the
excavating with plough and scoops, as in tank-sinking. The sides were
trimmed with the pick, and the bottom also squared where the plough could
not work. After sinking several feet, the decomposed granite became very
hard, but exposure to the air and rains for a month or so softened it and
allowed of its being ploughed, and intermittent work thus assisted in
reducing the cost.
The excavation was carried 12 feet below the surface, and the earth
taken out was placed 4 feet above, leaving the silo 16 feet deep. Upon this
earth the teams were drawn when filling the silo.
Old railway sleepers were used to timber the sides, to keep the soil and
loose earth in position. It was necessary to timber 11 feet, the granite of
the remaining 5 feet being sufficiently firm not to require it. The sleepers
were kept in position by hardwood uprights, sunk into the floor of the silo,,
and held in position by strong bolts 6 feet long, passing through them within
4 feet of the top and affixed to half-sleepers, sunk as posts in the adjacent
banks. These posts and bolts were covered over by the earth excavated to
raise the walls.
Other sleepers were used to protect the approach of the silo from falling
in. A movable railing, 4 inches by 3 inches, was placed round the top as a-
guard when the silo was empty. The slope of the hillside is such as to allow
of any water running off by means of a drain from the lowest portion.
The dimensions of the silo are 36 by 20 feet (except at one end where it
was contracted to 17 feet 6 inches, to allow the 9-foot sleepers being butted
at the corners to do away with the necessity for posts) and 16 feet deep.
A fall of 1 foot in the 36 was allowed for drainage.
Estimating the weight of silage at 40 lb. per cubic foot, the capacity
would be 198 tons. A temporary end was made of sleepers which could be-
placed so as to enclose but half the capacity as shown, or removed back
according to the amount of fodder available.
* The prices of labour and material have risen since the Bathurst silo was
excavated, but the figures are given in the hope that they will be of some assistance in
making estimates.


Fig. 18. —Filling Hillside Silo, Bathurst Experiment Farm.


No arrangements have been made for any roofing, as in dry climates-
-1 foot or 18 inches of earth would be sufficient to absorb all excepting the
very heavy rainfalls.
Over 80 tons of maize silage have been placed in a section of this silo
with very satisfactory results as regards costs and waste. The cost was
reduced by not chaffing it, as it was decided to test it in this way first.
During next season the silage will be chaffed before going into the pit.
When chaffed there is less waste in feeding, and it is easier to remove from
the silo. Against these advantages is the cost of handling and cutting.
OVERGROUND SILOS.
In the dairying districts of the State the overground silo, in one form or
another, has come to be regarded as a necessary adjunct to the most
economical conduct of the industry. In the more settled districts, where
supplies of materials may be obtained at reasonable cost for carriage, and
where the industry is more firmly established, the concrete silo is gradually
displacing the wooden one; but the wooden silo has still a long future before
it, especially in districts more remote from railways or ports, or where sand
for the making of concrete is not readily obtainable; indeed, considerations
of cost and ease of construction will probably ensure that the wooden silo
will remain with us, in some portions of the State, for all time. For the
present, at any rate, there are large sections of our dairying districts where
the cost of erecting a concrete silo would be so heavy as to make it utterly
impracticable. Moreover, improvements which are continuously being made
in the construction of the wooden silo enable a suitable structure for a small
farm to be erected by the farmer himself at less and less cost, whereas the
cost of a concrete silo remains fairly uniform. Add to this that the risk
of faulty workmanship in concrete, with consequent cracking of the walls,,
which would be beyond repair, is very great, and one can readily see that
the wooden silo will not be displaced until the price of timber becomes
prohibitive.
The cost of an overground silo will vary considerably according to the
nature of the material used in construction, locality, &c. The size also affects
the proportionate cost, the large silo costing considerably less per ton
capacity than the small one. Generally speaking, however, it may be said
that the 100-ton silo is fair value for the outlay. It may be mentioned here
that it is a serious mistake to make the silo too small, for small quantities
of material do not ensile well, and are apt to produce such a proportion
of waste as to make the enterprise disappointing.
Undoubtedly, the silo should be as handy to the bails as circumstances
will allow, so that feeding may be carried on with the least possible amount
of labour. Should the dairy-farmer be building both bails and silos, and
can find a steep bank in a convenient position, he may place the lower part
of the silo into the face of the rising ground, and have bails running out
from it.
Shape of the Silo.
There is no question that the silo should be circular in shape, or as nearly
so as practicable. The stave, or tub silo, of which we are now speaking,-
is circular; but frame silos may be octagonal, or have more than eight sides,
all equal. The, more sides they have the better, as the nearer they approach-


Wood and Iron Silo.
Twin Tub Silos.
Brick Silo.
Ferro-cement.
Types of Silos on the South Coast.


Height—feet.
Diameter—feet.
Capacity—tons.
28
14
78
30
14
83
24
16
86
26
16
95
30
16
108
30
18
138
36
18
166
to the circular form. A circular silo will contain more cubic feet than any
other form built with the same quantity of timber, which is a great
advantage from the point of cost; and moreover, a circular silo of 100 tons
capacity has less wall surface, consequently less risk of “ spoiling ” the
silage, than any other form of the same capacity. Sharp corners are
objectionable, as the pressure tends to be uneven and this adds to the
percentage of waste.
A few Points to Remember.
The silo, if it is to be a good one, must not have too much surface area;
it cannot be too deep; it must be perfectly jointed together, so that it will
exclude the air from all sides; it must be strong; and last, but not least, it
must be convenient.
First, we say, it must not have too much surface area, because the silage
will pack together much closer and exclude the air better. There will be
less exposed surface to spoil if only slow feeding is carried on. It should
not have more than 250 feet surface area.
Then it cannot be too deep; the deeper the better, as there will be
more per cubic foot of first-class stuff to take out in case of any careless
filling.
As to the other points, no doubt need be felt if the directions here given
for the construction be properly carried out.
At least 2 inches deep over the whole surface should be used daily.
Size to Build the Silo.
With regard to the capacity of the circular silo, it is said that the quantity
to be taken out varies very much according to the amount of succulence,
moisture, or water there is in the crop wdien it is put in.
The weight of a cubic foot of good silage in the silo is about 35 lb., and
undoubtedly this will be the case with the exception of, say, 4 feet from
the top, if it is properly trampled down when filling, but if this be
neglected you may get to within 4 feet of the bottom before you get the
85 lb. per foot.
The following table of approximate capacity will afford a good idea of
what size to build:—•
The capacity given represents the number of tons of silage that will be in
the silo after all shrinkage has occurred.
Complete plans, specifications, and directions for the erection of several
types of silo are contained in Farmers’ Bulletin, No. 6, “ Silos and Silage,”
and it is suggested that farmers who contemplate the erection of over-
ground silos should apply to the Department for a copy.


SECTION XIII.
The Feeding of Farm Stock.*
The question of the economic feeding of farm animals depends as much
on scientific principles as does the economic feeding of farm crops.
Farmers all the world over have come to realise that, in order to apply
manure without waste, it is necessary to apply it with some regard to the
nature of the crop, and to the nature of the soil. It is safe to say that with
the farmer who nowadays applies farmyard manure, the object of supplying
plant food is only of secondary consideration. It is added to improve the
nature of the soil, to supply vegetable matter, to loosen the texture and so
forth; but if the farmer wishes to supply plant food, he does so with a less
bulky and more rapidly acting, and consequently more economical fertiliser.
The indiscriminate use of manures like guanos and bone-dust has given way
to a more careful selection of the kinds of fertilisers suitable to the require-
ments of different crops, and a consideration of the readiness with which
the various ingredients are availed of by the plant.
In the same way the feeding of farm animals is quietly undergoing a
revolution, and it behoves the farmer who does not wish to see himself at a
disadvantage to learn something concerning the nature of the substances
which comprise the food of his stock, and of the idiosyncrasies of the
individual animals.
For animals, just as much as plants, require certain definite ingredients in
their food, and require these to be present in definite proportions. There is,
however, this difference, that, whilst with plants the supply of a large amount
of unnecessary food simply means a waste of money, in the case of animals
it may have injurious effects on the health of the animal. The selection of
food by the plant takes place, for the most part, by means of the roots, and
before it enters the plant itself; whereas, with animals, the assimilation
of the nutritive material takes place after the food has been swallowed, and
the indigestible material has to be got rid of, and if this is excessive in
amount, discomfort and even disease results. Indigestion, the “ blowing ”
of cattle, the formation of fibre balls in the stomach, are all instances in
point.
Nature of Food Required.
It is also quite clear that not only do different animals require different
foods, but that the same animal must be fed differently according to the
object in view in feeding. The simplest problem, and the one that forms
the basis of all dietaries, is what is called the maintenance diet, that is to
say, the amount of food necessary to keep the animal in good health, and to
meet daily requirements and repair the waste of tissue. And without going
too much into technicalities, it may be laid down that a food must contain
the following ingredients:—
(1) Water;
(2) Mineral matter;
• F. B. Guthrie.


(3) Fat or oil;
(4) Carbohydrates (substances such as starch and sugar) ;
(5) Flesh-forming material, or albuminoids (substances such as gluten)
which contain nitrogen.
Just as the crop requires all the nourishing constituents to be present for
its proper growth, and fails if one be absent, so the animal will starve on
a diet composed exclusively of carbohydrates (starchy and sugary foods) if
the nitrogenous materials are absent.
The amount of albuminoid material especially is of the highest import-
ance in the feeding of stock, as it is the only source of supply of nitrogenous
material which is essential to the animal, and it has been found that the
amounts of albuminoid and non-nitrogenous material in the food must
bear a definite ratio to one another, and that if a food contain too large a
proportion of carbohydrates or of albuminoids the result is equally disas-
trous. This ratio differs with different animals, and even with the same
animal when used for different purposes. For example, a horse doing
heavy draught work requires a relatively larger proportion of albuminoids
in its food than one doing light work.
How the Food is Supplied by Plants and Fodders.
Let us briefly discuss the ingredients present in plants and fodders, and
see what part they play in providing food for animals. All plants and
fodders contain the following ingredients;—
Water. —The presence of water makes the food more succulent and pala-
table. It also renders it more easy of digestion. It takes the place of
drinking water to some extent, and animals fed on watery food will require
less to drink.
Mineral matter comprises the salts, such as common salt, lime com-
pounds, phosphates, and other mineral saline substances which are essential
for the food of animals. It is from this part of its food that the animal
derives the material to build up its bones, which are largely composed of
phosphate and carbonate of lime. All parts of the animal body contain a
certain proportion of mineral ingredients, and the amounts of these in the
food depend upon the amount of ash. Some of the salts —like common salt
—have a definite physiological action, and, though not properly foodstuffs,
are essential to a proper digestion of foodstuffs. The amount of this
mineral, or saline matter, is not taken into account in estimating the feed-
ing value of a plant, for though small in amount it is always present in
sufficient quantity to supply the requirements of the animal.
Fibre is that part of the plant which is unattacked by acids or alkalies.
It is practically cellulose. It cannot be regarded as digestible, for although
it disappears to some extent in the body of the animal, especially with grass
and herb-eating animals, it is not broken down in the way that the diges-
tible carbohydrates are attacked (see these), but is decomposed in such a
way as not to produce heat, and its assimilation is probably unattended by
much benefit to the animal. It has no feeding-value. Its presence is, how-
ever, essential, as it gives bulk to the food, and mechanically stimulates the
walls of the alimentary canal, promoting healthy digestion. Too much
fibre, however, makes the food too bulky, so that the animal cannot eat
sufficient of it to get the necessary amount of nourishment. It also makes
the food unpalatable. Of these constituents the only one possessing direct
feeding-value is the mineral matter or saline matter, and this, though
always small in amount, is present in sufficient quantity in all fodders, and


in estimating the feeding-value of a plant as food we do not usually take
it into account. Water and fibre, it will be seen, are not direct foods, but
give succulence and bulk, and exercise a physiological action.
The ingredients of direct feeding-value are the following:—
Albuminoids. —These are distinguished from the others by the fact that
they are the substances which contain nitrogen. They are composed of
carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. The flesh and blood of animals is
made up of nitrogenous material, dry blood or meat containing about Iff
per cent, nitrogen as do also substances like hair, wool, horns, hoofs, &c.
It will thus be seen that the amount of albuminoids in the food is a point
of the highest importance since these are the only source of nitrogen avail-
able to the animal. The albuminoids are, therefore, often called “ flesh
formers ” or “ muscle formers.” Their chief function is to produce the
nitrogenous material of the body, and to some extent the fat, and to main-
tain it, replacing the daily waste of the tissues. By their combustion within
the body, heat and mechanical force are also developed.
Carbohydrates. —This is the name given to a large class of organic com-
pounds found in plants, the principal of which are the starches and sugars.
The carbohydrates are composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen only,
without nitrogen. Their consumption, therefore, does not add to the nitro-
genous substances of the body nor repair the waste. Their function is the
production of heat and mechanical energy by their combustion within the
body. They are often called “ heat-producers,” because they maintain the
temperature of the animal. The process of their combustion consists in
combining with oxygen, and being split up into carbonic acid and water,
a process identical with that of the burning of fuel. They also partially
assist in the production of fat, especially when consumed in excess of
immediate requirements.
Fats and Oils. —The function of these substances is much the same as
that of carbohydrates. They also are composed of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen, but contain proportionately much less oxygen, and consequently
much more carbon and hydrogen, than the carbohydrates. They are on
this account a much more concentrated form of fuel, and their combustion
produces a greater amount of heat and energy than does that of starch or
sugar.
The following summarises roughly the part played by each of these
ingredients in the nourishment of the animal:—
Mineral matter supplies bone-material and inorganic salts.
Albuminoids supply flesh and all nitrogenous material, replace waste
of tissue, supply to a lesser degree heat and energy and fat.
Soluble Carbohydrates and Fat supply heat and muscular energy; also
fat when taken in excess. The heat-producing power of fat is very much
greater than that of carbohydrates, being about 21 times that of starch.
Cellulose, even when assimilated, is of little value as a heat-producer, as
it is not split up into carbonic acid and water like starch, sugar, fat, &c.
Nutrient Value of Foods.
In calculating, for the sake of comparison, the nutrient values of different
fodders, the percentages of albuminoids, soluble carbohydrates and fat are
simply added together, the fat being multiplied by 21 to reduce it to its
“ starch equivalent.”
Albuminoid Ratio. —This is a matter of the first importance in the com-
pounding of a properly balanced ration, and is obtained by taking the
percentage of carbohydrates, adding to it 2J times the percentage of fat.


and dividing the sum by the percentage of albuminoids. This ratio of
albuminoid or nitrogenous substance to the non-nitrogenous constituents
in the food differs considerably in different classes of food.
Thus lucerne hay contains one part of nitrogenous material to about
three and a half of non-nitrogenous. This is an example of a relatively
nitrogenous food, and the ratio is said to be a “ narrow ” one. In the case
of straw on the other hand there are twelve to thirteen parts of non-
nitrogenous material to every one part of nitrogenous material. This is an
example of what is known as a “ wide ” ratio, and represents a food poor in
nitrogenous constituents. Foods such as oil cakes, &c., have a still higher
nitrogen content (a much narrower albuminoid ratio) than lucerne hay.
Thus decorticated cotton cake contains about one part of nitrogenous matter
to one and a half non-nitrogenous, or has an albuminoid ratio of one to
one and a half.
This albuminoid ratio is of the greatest importance in the choice of
rations for different animals, for the ratio which gives the best results
varies considerably with different animals, and also with the same anilnal
at different stages of its growth and according to the purpose for which it
is fed. Thus, for dairy-cattle a more nitrogenous food is required than
for cattle fed for fattening purposes, a narrow ratio being found to increase
the yield of milk, though feeding appears to have little influence on the
nature of the milk.
Horses doing heavy work also require a greater proportion of nitrogenous
material than those doing only light work.
Growing animals require, as a rule, a larger proportion of nitrogenous
material and a larger total quantity of nutritive material than do mature
animals, though they require less bulk in their food.
It is, therefore, evident that the selection of a properly balanced food, a
food containing the correct proportions of nitrogenous to non-nitrogenous
constituents, is a matter of the first importance, and depends upon the
nature and age of the animal and the work which it is to do.
Digestibility.
A question of even greater importance than the selection of a properly
balanced food, is the question of its digestibility. The digestibility of a
food depends upon three principal factors —( a ) the nature of the food
itself; (6) the kind of food with which it is mixed; and (c) the nature of
the animal. The variability of all these factors, and the difficulty of deter-
mining accurately the digestibility of different foods, makes this a rather
intricate problem.
An enormous amount of experimental work has been done in Europe
and the United States in determining the digestibility of the different
constituents in mixed foods fed to different animals. Some idea of the
differences shown may be judged from the fact that, for example, when
bullocks and sheep are fed on clover-hay, only about half the total amount
of nitrogenous matter present is digested by the animal, whereas 80 per
cent, is digested from brewer’s grains.
Again only about 20 per cent, of the fatty matter in hay is digested by
the animals, whereas practically the whole of the fatty matter in brewer’s
grains is digestible.
Ruminants, again, are able to digest and make use of quite half the
woody fibre contained in their food, owing to the more complete preparation
the food undergoes in their system, whereas animals such as the horse and


the sheep are only able to digest a very small proportion of cellulose. Then,,
again, the degree of maturity of plants affects their digestibility. Accord-
ing to European experiments, when clover-hay is fed to oxen before flowering,
71 per cent, of the nitrogenous matter was found to be digestible, when fed
in full bloom the amount digested diminished to 65 per cent., and when
the blooming was over the percentage of nitrogenous matter digested by
oxen was only 59 per cent.
It will be seen from these examples that the important question of the
digestibility of foods becomes a very intricate one. The process of diges-
tion varies considerably with different animals, rendering necessary a
difference in their food. Briefly, it is as follows; —In all animals the food
during mastication is mixed thoroughly with saliva before being swallowed.
The flow of saliva is pretty considerable in most farm stock; the horse and
the ox secrete about 100 lb. in the course of the day.
Besides mixing the food mechanically into a bolus suitable for swallowing,
the saliva contains a ferment which changes the starch into sugar, this
action continuing in the stomach. Passing into the stomach the food
receives the gastric juice, which is poured upon it. The gastric juice is
an acid liquid containing hydrochloric acid, rennet, and pepsin, and other
soluble ferments. The special function of the pepsin in this acid solution
is to convert the albuminoids into soluble substances easy of digestion.
The stomachs of different animals vary considerably in size and function.
Ruminants have four distinct stomachs or compartments, the stomach of
the ox holding about 230 to 260 quarts, whilst the single stomach of the pig
holds only about 7 to 9 quarts, and that of the horse 17 to 19 quarts.
In ruminants the action of the first three stomachs is preparatory to the
fourth, in which digestion occurs. The single stomach of non-ruminants
corresponds with the fourth stomach of ruminants.
Passing into the small intestines, the food now receives three other fluid
secretions, the bile, which is secreted by the liver; the pancreatic juice,
secreted by the pancreas or sweetbread; and the so-called intestinal
secretion.
The bile is an alkaline fluid, and its principal function is to render the fats
and oils soluble, converting them into glycerine and soaps.
The pancreatic juice contains a number of ferments which continue the
conversion of starch into sugar, and of fats and albuminoids into digestible
substances. It also contains rennet, the substance which curdles milk.
In the larger intestine, the process of digestion is continued and completed;
fermentation take place, producing a partial digestion of the woody fibre of
the food.
Digestion is a very slow process in animals and takes from three to four
days at least. In the case of sheep it has been found that digestion was not
completed till seven or eight days after the food has been taken.
Bulk and Flavour.
The bulk of the food supplied is also a matter of considerable importance
in selecting a ration. All animals require a certain bulk in their ration, and
feeding with concentrated foods alone does not give satisfactory results.
This is especially the case with ruminants, which require in their food a
large proportion of ingredients that are innutritions and that have only a
mechanical action.
The ingredients which give bulk to the food are water and woody-fibre.
Natural herbage, hay, straw, &c., provide these in the proper proportion, but
when cake and more concentrated foods are resorted to, it is necessary to


avoid the extremes of over-bulkiness or coarseness on the one hand, and of
over-concentration on the other. If the food is too bulky the animal is
unable to eat enough to provide itself with the proper nourishment; thus,
rations containing an excessive amount of fibre are unpalatable, and those
containing excessive quantities of water are laxative.
If, on the other hand, the ration given is too concentrated, it does not exert
the necessary mechanical action upon the stomach, and the digestive juices
do not act properly.
Palatability of the food supplied is another point which has to be con-
sidered in devising a ration.
An animal fed on the same ration continually loses appetite, and does not
derive the full benefit from its food. A highly nutritious ration persisted
in without change may be of less economic value than a succession of less
nutritious foods properly alternated.
Palatability is largely influenced by variety, and by the amount of water,
which gives succulence.
The value of the excreta as manure is also a point that has to be taken into
consideration in selecting the most economical kind of food.
The actual manurial value of the different foods varies enormously, rang-
ing from 4s. per ton in the case of turnips to £5 13s. per ton in the case of
cotton-seed cake.
In the selection of an economical food, this point requires careful con-
sideration, since the value of the excreted matter varies, not only in the
foods themselves, but according to the proportions digested by different
animals.
Classification of Feeding Stuffs.
It will be convenient to classify the different fodders that are on the
market according to the particular ingredient in which they are especially
rich, or which gives them their character as a food.
None of them are suitable for feeding without admixture for any length
of time, and the feeder’s art consists in so combining them as to provide a
cheap and palatable food approaching in composition one or other of the
rations which experience has shown to be the most suitable for the particular
animal and the particular object in view. Feeding-stuffs can be divided
into six classes, according to their richness in the different ingredients.
Class I, Foods rich in Albuminoids. —First in order of nitrogen-content
come the different oil-cakes, decorticated cotton-seed cake being the richest,
with over 40 per cent, albuminoids, followed by linseed and coco-nut cake,
with about 30 and 20 per cent, respectively. The leguminous seeds come
next, peas and beans containing from 20 to 22 per cent, albuminoids.
Another fairly nitrogenous feed is dried brewers’ grains, the dried malt
residues after the sugar has been extracted by the brewer; both these and
malt sprouts (the dried shootlets of the germinating barley) are used
extensively for feeding cattle in other countries.
Dried brewers’ grains contain about the same amount of nitrogenous matter
as beans and peas. Bran comes next with about 12 per cent., and then the
■cereals, oats, rice, wheat, barley, maize, with from 10 to 12 per cent,
albuminoids. The best clover hay contains about the same quantity, hay
from the grasses being somewhat lower in nitrogen. Good lucerne hay
contains as much as 14 per cent, nitrogenous matter.
Class 11, Foods rich in Fat or Oil. —Amongst the fatty foods, some of the
oily seeds, such as linseed, sunflower seed, &c., come easily first, linseed
itself containing over 34 per cent, of oil. Such seeds in the shape of ground


meal may be occasionally fed, but both on account of their cost and their
-extreme richness in oil need not be considered as ordinary stock foods,
■except under special circumstances. The crushed cakes of these seeds from
which the oil has been pressed are waste-products of the highest economical
value as a food. They are extremely rich, as we have already seen, in nitro-
genous material, and contain a considerable proportion of oil, varying accord-
ing to the nature of the original substance and the process by which the
•oil has been extracted. Of these, linseed, cotton seed, rape seed, and coco-nut
cake are the richest in oil, running from 8 per cent, in the case of rape cake
up to 11 or 12 in the case of linseed or coco-nut.
Dried brewers’ grains are also fairly rich in fat, containing as much as
•8 per cent. Of the cereals, oats and maize are the richest in fats, with
■5 to 6 per cent., whilst bran contains about 4 per cent.
Class 111, Foods rich in Carbohydrates. —ln this class are found the cereal
grains, wheat and maize heading the list with over 70 per cent, carbohydrates
(principally starch), bran containing about 50 per cent., and the pulses, peas
and beans, about the same quantity. Brewers’ grains and meadow-hay come'
next with from 40 to 45 per cent., and these are followed by the straws of
the different cereals, with an average content of 35 to 37 per cent., and the
oil-cakes, which contain from 30 to 35 per cent, carbohydrates.
Class IV, Foods rich in Mineral Matter. —Of the foods rich in mineral
matter, the oil-cakes are all'fairly high, with an average of 6 to 8 per cent.,
bran and hay (clover and grass) being a little lower. The cereal straws are
also fairly rich in mineral matter, containing between 4 and 5 per cent.
The cereal grains are not particularly rich in salts, except rice, rice-meal
being sometimes exceptionally high, and containing as much as 8 per cent.,
■of which phosphates form a considerable part. Phosphates are also well
represented in the ash of the oil-cakes and of bran, the ash of the cereal
straws, on the other hand, being low in phosphates.
The above comprise the foods in which one or other of the nutritive
ingredients predominate, grouped into classes according to their richness in
these essentials. A few of them, such as the oil-cakes, brewers’ grains, &c.,
we see are rich in more than one such constituent.
These are all concentrated foods, the percentage of water present in any
-of them never rising above 16 per cent., and the amount of fibre, or indi-
gestible matter, never exceeding 10 to 11 per cent., except in the case of
the hays and straws.
We have already seen that both succulence and bulk of food are factors
of the first importance in the making up of rations; it is, therefore, necessary,
in order to complete the list, to add the classes of bulky food characterised
by succulence and by the amount of indigestible matter.
Class V, Succulent Foods. —The most watery of the ordinary farm foods
is the turnip, which contains over 92 per cent, of water; the swede, mangel,
carrot, and similar roots follow next, with cabbage and the green tops of
roots and vegetables, their water content ranging from 89 to 85 per cent.
'Clover (growing) contains about 83 per cent., and pasture-grass and potatoes
about 75. Green fodder —that is, cereal crops cut for green feed —vary
from 70 to 79 per cent, water. Of these foods, several of the roots may be
■characterised as sugar-crops, notably turnip, swede, mangel, and beet, whereas
the potato contains 16 per cent, or so of starch.
Class VI, Foods rich in Fibre. —The cereal straws and hay, both of clover
and pasture-grass, are included in this class; the straws containing from
■6B to 75 per cent, indigestible fibre, clover and meadow hay, on the other
hand, 25 to 26 per cent.


The Proportions Digested.
All the above figures require to be considered in the light of the different
digestibility of the various ingredients. This varies, as we have seen, not
only in the different kinds of food, but with different animals. Thus
ruminants are able to digest 81 per cent, of the nitrogenous matter in lucerne-
hay, as against 73 per cent, digested by horses; 72 per cent, of the carbo-
hydrates in lucerne hay and 45 per cent, of the fat are digestible by
ruminants, whereas horses digest only 70 per cent, of the carbohydrates and'
not more than 14 per cent, of the fat. Pigs, again, are able to utilise 84 per
cent, of the protein and 98 per cent, of the starch in potatoes, whereas
ruminants can only assimilate 45 and 90i per cent, respectively of these
ingredients. Ruminants, again, can always digest a larger proportion of the
fibrous material than can horses or pigs. They digest, for example, about
one-half of the fibre in wbeaten straw, whereas horses only assimilate about
18 per cent.
The digestibility of any one food also varies very considerably, according
to the nature of the other feeds with which it is mixed. On account of the-
great difficulty attending the accurate carrying out of digestion experiments,,
no very large number of such experiments are available, and the science
of the economical feeding of farm stock can only be said to be in its infancy.
At the same time, we have sufficient data to enable any stock-feeder to com-
pound for his stock rations" which shall be not only suitable for the purpose
but economical, as opposed to the wasteful rule-of-thumb methods at present
too largely adopted.
Dietary Standards.
The composition of the ration will vary according to the animal to which
it is fed, its age, and the purpose to which it is put.
We have to distinguish between a maintenance diet —the diet required
for the animal when kept at rest or doing very light work —and that required
by an animal doing more severe work.
Special rations are required for fattening animals, for dairy cows, for
young growing animals, and so forth, and the requirements of animals under
these different circumstances vary very considerably.
It will readily be seen that the subject is a very wide one. It is one that,
will amply repay a little careful study on the part of the farmer. In dairy-
farming, more particularly, feeding on rational lines is an essential to the
attainment of the best results.
These few notes are not intended to do anything more than to draw
attention to the general principles of the subject, and to the different points
which have to be considered in devising a suitable ration for different classes
of farm stock.
These points may be summed up as follows:
Kind of animal.
Age.
Purpose of feeding.
Composition of fodders of which the ration is composed.
Proportions of digestible nutriment in the ration.
Cost of the different fodders of which the ration is composed.
Manurial value of excreta.
Palatability, variety, bulk, &c.
Rations to meet all these different requirements will be found in the-
recognised text-books on this subject.


Water.
Ash.
Albuminoids.
Crude Fibre.
Nitrogen-free
extract.
j Ether Extract
i
Albuminoid
Ratio.
1 Nutritive
| Value.
Xuceme
3reen
73-5
Fodders.
2-3 0-6
6-2
11-0
0-4
1:
1-8
18-5
Barley (Cape)
65-4
1-6
3-9
7-4
21-4
0-3
;
5-7
26-0
„ (Skinless)
70-9
2-2
4-1
7-8
14-6
0-4
1:
3-8
19-6
■Wheat (Bunyip)
68-4
1-9
4-4
30-3
14-5
0-5
1 ;
3-6
20-0
,, (Cleveland)
63-0
2-2
4-8
11-6
17-8
0-6
1:
4-0
24-0
„ all varieties ...
72-0
2-0
2-6
9-5
13-2
0-7
1:
5-7
17-4
‘Oats (Algerian)
69-1
1-8
3-9
8-6
16-3
0-3
1 :
4-4
20-9
Sorghum ( Sorghum vulqare, Pers., var.
sac-
74-9
1-2
2-2
5-4
16-7
0-6
; 1:
7-5
18-7
charatum).
Black line Kafir corn ( Sorghum vulgare, Pers.)
75-0
1-2
1-9
6-6
14-8
0-5
1 :
8-4
17-3
Jndian cane ( Saccharum officimrum)
69-6
11-0
2-3
6-8
10-1
0-2
1 :
4-8
13-3
Broom millet ...
75-0
1-6
3-1
9-8
10-2
0-3
1 :
3-5
140
Millet China white
75-0
1-0
2-2
5-8
15-5
0-6
, 1 :
7-8
18-S
„ ,, yellow
75-0
0-8
3-3
6-9
13-3
0-7
: 1 :
4-5
15-2
Rice (dry land Paddy)
75-0
2-2
5-1
6-2
11-0
0-5
! 1 :
2-4
17-2
Rape fodder
79*1
1-9
2-0
4-0
12-3
0-7
1 :
6-9
15-9
Mangold fodder
86-2
0-9
1-9
M
9-5
0-4
1 ;
5-5
12-3
Cabbage „
86-3
1-1
1-2
1-8
9-1
05
1 :
8-5
11-4
Pea „
81-8
1-2
3-1
7-9
5-2
0-8
1 :
2-3
io-i
Oat „
80*1
1-7
2-6
6-7
7-7
1-2
1 :
4-0
13-0
Eye „
75-0
1-7
2-2
9-1
11-5
0-5
1 :
5-7
14-3
Tares
86-9
1-2
3-2
3-2
6-0
0-6
1 :
1-9
9-3
White lupins
81-9
1-8
3-8
3-6
8'4
0-5
I :
2-5
13-3
•Clover (crimson, Trifolium incarnatum)
78-7
2-9
4-6
3-9
9-3
0-6
1
: 2-3
15-3
,, (ball, Trifolium sp.) ...
75-0
1*6
4-0
8-1
11-1
0-2
! 1 :
2-9
15*6
Teosinte ( Euchlcena luxurians)
75-0
1-2
2-6
6-9
14-0
0-4
1 =
6-0
17-4
N»
Medic (burr) {Medicago denticulata)
70-0
1-0
2-1
1-5
24-9
0-5
1 :
12-4
28-1
„ (cut-leaved) ( Medicago laciniata)
70*0
1-2
2-7
2-5
22-9
0-7
:
9-0
27-2
ANALYSES OF FODDERS.*
The following table has been prepared in order to provide a handy reference to the
composition of the more common fodders obtainable on the local markets, and of a
number of plants that furnish fodder in times of scarcity, especially in pastoral districts.
It must be understood, however, that the inclusion of any plant or substance in this
list does not necessarily mean a recommendation for its use as a fodder. The figures
given represent as nearly as possible the compositions of the various substances, but it
must be remembered that in some cases, particularly in green fodders, hay, grass, straw,
&c., the composition is liable to variation, because differences due to the treatment or
making are added to differences induced by the soil and the season.
The variations in composition between oat straw from different fields or different
varieties is greater than the differences between oat straw and barley or wheat straw,
-and the same would apply to other products.
The analyses were made in the Chemical Laboratory, Department of Agriculture.
• Compiled by A. A. Ramsay, Chemist’s Branch, Department of Agriculture.


Analyses of Fodders-
— continue /.
*5
«
V
rt
-c
O
a
*
&
c
> .
c
SJ
M aS
ha
U
£ £
A
J5
JS
£
s
-Is <6
<
k *
rC
**
Green Fodders — continued.
Mfdic (black) (Medimgo lupulimi)
70-0
34
7*7
4-7
13-7
0-8
1 ;
2-0
23-2
Tagosa°tc (Tree lucerne) (Cytisus proliferus)..
75*0
2-4
7-4
6-0
9-2
0-1 ■
1 :
1-3
17*0
Guinea grass
70-0
2-5
31
10-3
13-8
0-3 ,
1 :
4-7
17-6
Mallow, small flowered (Malva parriflorn) ...
70-0
0-8
3-3
1-2
24-4
0-3
1 :
7-6
28-4
Barley grass {Hordeam murinum)
70-0
2-6
3-6
10-0
13-5
0-3 ;
1 :
3-9
17*8
Gut grass
70-0
F4
2-2
13-1
13-0
0-3
1 :
6-2
15-9
Pospalum stolonifemm
74-2
3-6
4-4
7-3
9-4
1-1
1 :
2-7
’ 16*3
.. rirgaturn
70-0
1-7
2-5
11-0
14-3
0-5 ,
1 :
6-2
17-9
dilaiatum ...
70-0
2-2
2-G
n-i
13-6
0-5
1 :
5*7
17-3
Rhodes grass (Chloris gayana)
70-0
2-2
3-fl
8-1
16-1
0-6 :
1 :
5*9
20-5
Italian rye (Lolium italicurn)
70-0
2-1
2-7
8-3
16-2
0-7
1 :
6-6
20-5
Sheep's Burnet (Poterium sanguisorha)
70-0
2-6
3-3
«-8
15-8
1-5
1 :
5*8
22-5
Cocksfoot (Dactylis glomerata)
70-0
2-1
2-7
9-3
15-2
0-7
1 :
6-2
19-5
Perennial rye {Lolium perenne)
70-0
2-1
2-3
7-6
17-4
0-6 i
1:
8-2
21-1
Rib grass (Plantago varia )
70-0
2-9
4-0
5-1
17-4
0-6 j
1 :
4-7
22-8
Texas blue grass (Poa arachnifera )
70*0
2-2
2-9
10-1
14-2
0*6
1 :
5-4
18*5
Fat-hen (Ckenopodium album)
81-6
3-1
6-5
2-2
5-9
0-7
1 :
1-2
14-0
Broad bean (stalks)
84-3
1-7
4-2
4-3
5-3
0*2
1 :
1-4
10-0
Phalaris bulbosa ( P. comrnutata)
70-0
2-6
2-5
8-6
15-4
0-9
1 :
7*0
19'9
Hooker’s fescue grass {Schedonorus hooker -
70-0
1-9
2-2
9-8
15-5
0-6
1 ■
7*7
19*1
ianus).
Danthonia penicillata ...
70-0
3-1
2-0
8*6
15-7
0-6 1
1 :
8*5
19-1
Coolah grass (Panicurn prolulurn )
70-0
2-0
2-4
7-6
17-3
0-7 '
1 :
7*9
21-3
Festuca bromoides
70-8
7-3
4-1
5-7
10-9
1-2
1 :
3-3
17*7
Cape weed (Cryptostemrna calendulaeeum) ...
91-0
1-8
1*0
1-7
4-1
0*4 j
1 :
5-0
6-0-
Pig face (Mesembryanthemum cnguilaierale)...
90-2
2-1
1-8
1-3
4-5
0-1
1:
2-6
6-5
Elephant grass or Napier’s fodder grass {Pen-
65-8
2-7
3-6
13-2
14-2
0*5
1 ;
4-3
18*9
nisetum purpureum).
Dry Fodders.
Hay, wheaten (Typical)
11-0
74
9-4
23-1
46-7
2-7 [
1 :
5-6
62-2
,, „
10*8
5-5
6-6
22-4
53*0
1-7 |
1 :
8-6
63-4
„ „ (Bobs)
104
5-3
8-S
33-2
41-7
0-9 '
1 :
5-0
52-5
„ (Firbank)
10-7
5*1
8-8
29-7
45-0
0*7 !
1 :
5-3
55*4
„ ,, (Huguenot)
10-3
4-9
5-6
31-5
46-8
0-9
1 ;
8-7
54-4
,, (Zealand)
10-8
5*7
7-6
31 7
43-0
!-2
1 :
6-0
53-3
,, ,, (Bayah) ...
10-4
5-8
6-8
32-5
44-0
0-5 '
1 :
6-6
51-9
,, „ (Marshall’s Xo. 3)
14-5
4-8
0-3
26-6
46-8
1-0
1 :
7-8
55*4
('Federation) ...
11-8
5-2
6-3
28-1
47-8
0-8
1:
7-9
55*9


Analyses of Fodders
O
"eC *7
i is **
— continued.
to . C
S £
S a Sfi 3
S "O £ £
= 2
■ r -J w
*
o
!
Albuminoid
iiatio.
Nutritive
Value.
Dry Fodders — continued.
Hay, oaten
11*8
0-2
8-4
32-4
39-6
1*6 j
i 1: 5-J
51-6
Chaff, wheaten (average)
13-1
5-8
4-8
31-0
44-0
1-3 1
1 ; 9-8
51-3
oaten
12-5
.,>• 1
4-3
33-2
40-0
0-9
J : 11-2
52-3
,, rye
10-1
40
0-0
42-7
33-9
2-1
1: 5-9
45-2
‘ ’ Cocky ”
10-8
0-2
7-2
24-3
49-9
1-0
1 : 7-4
00-7
Straw, wheaten
11-5
5-0
3*8
29-2
49-0
0-9
1 : 13-4
54-8
., barley
10-1
5*0
4-0
33-1
40-7
1-1
1 : 12-3
53-2
Hay ( Pasp'dti.-n (Hlatatuni) ...
10-0
0-4
10-3
43-4
1*3
1 : 4-5
56-6
,, Hungarian millet
12-9
0-7
10-7
31-4
36-G
1*7
I : 3-8
511
Pith of maize cob
13*6
1*6
4-j
35-3
44-4
0-6
1 : 10-2
50-3
Pigeon-pea hulls
11*8
3-7
8-8
31-7
43-3
0-7
1 : 5-1
53-7
Brewers' combings or malt combings
12-3
5-9
23-5
13-6
44-1
0-6
1 : 1-1
69-0
Corn chaff (maize)
15-6
4-2
10-3
17-0
51-3
1-0 ■
1 : 5-2
63-9
Lucerne hay
10-0
8-9
1G-0
24-6
37-7
2-8
1 ; 2-8
00-0
Lucerne dust ...
8*6
15-1
19-1
11*2
42-0
4-0
1: 2-7
70-1
Ensilage.
Mixture, composition unknown
00-9
4-7
4-2
13-7
15-3
1-2
1; 4-3
22-2
.,
60-2
1-9
4-8
11-7
20-7
0-7
1 : 4-0
31-1
..
68-3
3-1
6-7
12-8
6-6
2-5
1 : 1-8
18*9
55-0
5-1
8-4
8-9
21-2
1*4
1 : 2-9
82-8
„
52-8
3-4
S-4
13-7
20-0
!-7 '
1 : 2-8
32-2
Self-sown malting barley and other plants ...
60-5
5-3
4-1
8-6
19-4
2-1
1:10-3
40-5
Wheat and wild oats
35-2
4-8
5-0
15-4
37-7
1*9
1: 8-4
47-0
Maize stalk and leaf
64-0
2-2
3-1
11*0
19-3
0-4
1 : 6-5
23-3
Drv maize stalks with lucerne and molasses
68*4
1*1
5*1
6-0
18-2
0-6
1 : 3-8
24-7
added.
Prickly-peai ensilage ...
85-1
2-3
1-8
1-9
8-7
0-2
1 : 5-1
11*0
Roots, Tubers, Bulbs.
Canna bulbs
77-1
0-9
2*1
0-6 :
19-1
0-2
1 ; 9-3
21-7
Chufa or earth almond
39-2
1*8
4-0
0-8
39-7
8-5
1 : 14-7
62-8
Giant lily bulb
75*1
0-8
4-0
2-0
17-4
0-1
1 : 3-8
22-2
Potato
78-3
1-1
21
0-4
18-0
0-1
1 : 8*7
20-3
Rornulea rosea leaves (dangerous weed)
51*5
2-3
2-7
3-1
39-1
1*3
1 : 15-6
44-7
Taro I
62-7
1-2
3-5
0-5
31*5
0-6
1: 9*4
36-4
t 17299 —2 B


Analyses
of Fodders
— continued.
o
"S
c3
T3
Water.
A
cc
<
<
Fibre.
Nitrogen-
extract.
y.
(->
09
js
K
O
1=
.. ¥
Nutritive
Value.
Grains and
other
Seeds
Barley
i 12-3
; 2-4
11-6
4-1
’ 67-7
1-9
■ 1 : 6-2
83-6
Beans
13-3
2-2
26-5
5-5
; 5i-2
1-3
1 ; 2-1
80-6
Bean, Sword
12-3
2-9
28-9
6-9
46-3
2-7
; 1 : 1-8
81-3
,, French ...
13-1
1 3-4
26-3
3-6
! 52-0
1-6
1 : 2-1
81-9
,, Lima
| 12-4
3-7
22-4
3-4
56-8
1-3
1 ; 2-7
82-1
Cowpca, black-eyed
11-9
1 2-8
21-3
3-2
i 59-3
1-5
1 2-9
84-0
Dhourra meal
12-3
1-2
10-9
3-9
: 69-1
2-6
1 : 6-9
- 85-9
Lentils
12-0
2-1
23-1
2-7
59-5
0-6
1 : 2-6
84-0
Millet (seed)
12-8
2-0
14-2
3-6
• 65-4
2-0
| 1 : 4-9
84-1
Maize, white
12-7
1-4
11-0
1-6
69-8
3-5
1 : 7-1
88-7
,, yellow ...
X2-8
1-3
11-4
1-5
: 68-4
4-6
I 1 ; 6-9
90-2
,, Northern River, yellow
11-4
1*3
10-1
1-5
71-1
4-6
i 1 ; 8-1
91-6
„ black
12-0
1-1
7* 7
1-2
73-9
4-1
1 1 : 10-8
90-8
Oats (Algerian)
10-9
3-3
8-5
11-8
60-6
4-9
| 1: 8-4
80-1
Pea, marrowfat
11-9
2-5
25-0
5-5
53-4
1-7
1 : 2*3
82-2
„ blue
12-5
2-1
18-4
4-5
61-3
1-2
1 ; 3-5
82-4
„ grey
14-1
2-0
19-3
4-8
58-3
1-5
1 ; 3-7
81-0
Wheat (aver age quality)
13-7
1-5
8-7
2-4
72-8
0-9
1 : 8-6
83-5
Mill Products.
Bran, wheaten, from hard wheat
13-4
6-8
18-6
7-9
50-8
2-5
1 1 : 3-0
75-0
,, „ ,, medium wheat
15-2
3-9
20-4
6-6
52-1
1-8
. I : 2-7
76-3
,, ,, ,, soft wheat
14-7
4-5
13-4
7-5
58-0
1-9
i 1 : 4-6
ro‘7
,, ,, ,, macaroni wheat
13-1
4-Q
16-9
5-9
56-1
4-0
1 : 3-9
82-0
,, ,, (average quality)
12-5
3-8
16-9
6-8
57-8
2-2
1 : 3-7
79-7
,, oaten ... ... ...
7-7
4-3
14-0
21-8
46-3
5-9
1 : 4-3
73-6
Pollard from hard w'heat
11-7
4-3
19-5
3-7
56-7
4-1
1 : 3-4
85-4
,, ,, medium wheat
136
2 4
19-4
3*5
58-8
23
1 : 33
83-4
„ „ soft wheat
11-3
2-5
is-? ;
3-6
66-3
2-6
1 : 5-5
85-9
,, ,, macaroni wheat
11-6
3-7
17-4
4-5
59-1 :
3-7
1 : 3-9
84-8
,, (average quality)
12-3
2-5
i7-2,
3-0
61-2 ,
3-8
1 : 4-1
87-0
Whole meal (wheaten)
12-1
o-s :
14-3
0-8
70-7
1-3
1: 5-1
87-9
Oat hulls
8-4
4-4 1
4-3
27-8
53-5 :
1-6
1; 11-0
60-4
„ bran
7-7
4-3 I
14-0
21-8
46-3 ;
5-9
1 : 4-3
73-6
,, pollard
8-1
2-4 ■
15-8 j
2-1
66-7
4-9
1 : 4-9
93-5
,, screenings
9-2
3-3 ;
9-2 |
13-7
57-3 |
7-3
1 : 8-0
82-9
Rice meal or rice bran
10-9
8-3 :
14-4
5-3
45-1
16-0
1 : 5-6
95-5
Maize meal
13-3
1*7 '
12-7 :
1-4
67-4 i
3-5
1 : 5-9
88-0


■■
’ - -
Analyses; of Fodders-
-c ouVinutd.
1
tj
£
T3
£
I
|
Nitrogen
e xtract
£
Albumir
Ratio.
in »
P
Oil Cakes, &c.
Bran cake ... ... ... ... ... 1 i-~,
5-2 1
42-3
4-0
25-3
8-7
1 ; 1-1
S7-2
Castor cake ... ... ... ls-8
7-1 :
2o-y
20-6
13-7
12-9
1 : In
G9-6
Coconut-oil cake (type) ... ... ... lo-n
5-3
2O-0
s-3
47-0
9-0
1 : 3-4
87-3
Linseed 11-:;
.VI
30-S
b‘3
40-7
3-8
1 : 1-G
80-1
Pea cake ... 1G-1
4-C
4.3-3
4-4
17-2
12-4
1: 1-0
90-4
Miscellaneous
•
Biscuit sweepings 9-2
1-1
0-4
0-1 ;
GO-8
22-4 i
J :17-4
117-6
,, meal ... ... ... ... ,.J 0-G
1-0 ,
8-0
0-1
72-4
11-9
1 : 12-4
107-2
Babbit meal ... 10-7
13-6
(52-3
0-3
10-2
2-9 ■■
1 : 0-3
79-0
Blood 13-G
0-0
78-4
1-7
o-3 ;
1 : 0-03
80-8
Green bone ... ... ... ... ... G-2 '
03-4
1S-7
2-0
8-5
1-2 1
1 : 0-6
29-9
Cattle food (Munn’s) ... 10-2
0-8 ;
35-1
4-3
62-7
(5-9
1 : 5-0
93-3
Marshmallow, seeds 9-0
5-2 j
1S-1
34-7
32-8
0-2 ;
1 : 1-8
51-4
,, fresh leaves, etc. ... 78-4
4-7
6-3
3-1
7-1
0-0
1 : 1-4
14-6
Molasses and inogass ... 26-0
6-0
4-9
5-3
5G-8
0-4
1 : 11-3
62-6
Molascdt (molasses and hay) ... ... 17-7
8-6
2-9
41
66-6
0-1 !
1 : 23-0
09-7
Dry molasses fodder ... ... ... 18-4
8-8
8-4
9-3
54-7
0-4 .
1 : 6-G
G4-0
Molasses ... ... ... ... ... ! 24-0
10-5 i
4-G
GO-9
1 :13-2
05*5
Milk 87-3
0-7 i
3-3
4-6
3-9 ;
1 : 3-8
16-9
Saltbush.
Alri/j’u'X mmrnula'ii'i (c uitivated) ... ... 73-0
3-9
i-0
3-3
in-6
O-G
1 ; 2-0
10-6
,, (uncultivated) ... 7o-0
9-4 :
4-3
2-3
8-6
0-4
1 : 2-2
13-8
halitnoides ... ... ... ... 7 5 • n
7-7
3-9
3-4
9-3
0-5
1 : 2-7
14-5
augulata ... ... ... ... ! 75-0
12-2
2-9
5-5
3-0
0-8
1 : 1-9
8-3
'pnraholica ... ... ... .... 75-0
7-6
4-1
4-7
8*1
0-5
1 : 2-2
13-3
hillordkri ... ... ... ... : 73-0
8-6 '
3-7
2-8
7-4
0-5
1: 1-5
14-2
., hastaia ... ... ... ... 75-0
4-° ■
9-1
2-1
8-3
1-0
1 : 1-2
lo-fi
Cuidentified 75-0
8-4 :
3-]
3-1
9-9
0-5
1 ; 3-G
U-l
Prickly-pear.
Opuntia ficus-indica ... ... ... ... 93-8
i-2 :
0-5
0-6
3-5
0-4
1 : 8-8
4-9
,, elntior ... ... ... ... 89-8
1-9 ;
0-7
1-4
5-8
0-4
1 ; 9-6
7-4
., orasiliensis ... ... ... .... 80-2
1 2-4 ;
0-9
1-5
8-5
0-5
1 : 10-7
10-5
„ coccinellifera ... i 87-9
1-7 !
0-8
1-0
8-3
0-3
1 : 11-2
9-8
Leaves ol Common Scrub Plants.
Booligal {Eucalyptus largiflorens, F.v.M.) ... 1(5-1
r.l
6-8
9-1
56-7
7-2
1 : 10-7
' 79- 7
Ajiple-trce ( Eucalyptus stv.ariiana, F.v.M.) ... 34*6
3-3 i
G-4
9-7
42-8
3-2
1 : 7-7
55-4
Stringvbark ( Eucalyptus macrorrhyncha, : 39-5
F.v.M.).
5-G
6-4
40'8
5-1
1 : 9-3
57-9


Analyses of Fodders-
—continued.
!
c
O)
u.
A
u
ti
rs
O
X
§
4)
s
bC S
S.2
vs 6
"«S
£
<
3 i
£
<
i Fibrt
1
£ M
,
o>
£
H
53-g
: ,
Leaves of Common Sc
rub Plants—
continued
River oak ( Casuarina cunningkamiana, Miq.)
42-3
3-0 i
6-8 1
20-9
25-3 i
1-7 1
1 ; 4-3
35-9
Cattle gum { Eucalyptus coriacea, A. Cunn.)...
36-8
2-9
8-B
8-6
36-9
6-0 |
1 : 5-7
59-2
Currajong ( Sterculia diversifolia, G, Don) ...
35-0
5-0
10-4
14-5
32-8 :
1-7 j
1 ; 3-5
47-0
Rosewood or blue or apple bush ( Heteroden -
23-7
4-0
12-8
16-5
40-2 :
2-8 |
1 : 3-6 j
59-3
dron olecefolium, DesfO
37-0
30-1 :
3-1
j
Belar {Casuarina sp.)
15-6
4-8 i
9-4
1 : 8-9 ;
46-5
Dogwood (Myoporum sp.)
28-6
3-5 |
9-3
10-9
45-4
2-3
1 : 5-4 |
■59-9
Warriah
11-3
5-1
n-9:
35-9
32-0
3-8
1 ; 3-4 ;
52-5
Wllga (Geijera parHflora, Lindl.)
49-3
5-2 i
13-3 |
7-8
22-0
2-4 '
1 : 2-1 i
40-7
WMtewood ( Atalaya hemiglauca, F.v.M.) ...
36*7
6-3
13-1 |
20-8
21-6
1-5
1 : 1*9 ;
38-1
Currawong (Acacia sp.)
13-5
2-9
12-9 '
30-6
38-1
2-0
1 ; 3-3
55-5
Bunbutt
23-6
7-7
13-5
16-7
34-5
4-0
1 ; 3-2 ,
57-0
Kcedle bush (Hakea leucoptera, R.Br.)
12-6
4-8
6-4
39-1
36-4
•7
1 : 5-9 i
i
44-4
Bcefwood (Orevillea striata, R.Br.)
37-1
2-9
5-6 |
26-6
26-9
■9
1 : 5-2 1
i
34-5
Mulga (Acacia aneura, F.v.M.)
39-1
3-6
9-1
29-9
15-7
2-6
1 ; 2-4 i
30-7
Emu bush (Eremophila longifolia, F.v.M.) ..
51-6
3-7
8-9
5-4
29-6
■8
1 : 3-5 :
41-3
Bupple Jack
33-2
6-6
11-0
15-0
33-0
1-2
1 : 3-2 .
46-7
Leopard wood (Flindersia maculosa F.v.M.)
41-7
3-4
9-3
11-4
30-3
3-9
l: 4-2
48-4
Gidgea (Acacia homalophylla, Cunn.)
' 41-0
8-7
7-3
22-6
18-3
2-1
1 : 3-2
30-3
Sandalwood (Eremophila sp.)
41-8
5-6
8-6
8-8
33-5
1-7
1 : 4-3
45-9
Quinine (Alstonia constricta, F.v.M.)
51-7
3-7
9-0
9-2
24-5
1-9
1 ; 3-2
37-8
Broom bush (Apophyllum anomalum, R.Br.
19-8
13-2
9-9
44-8
10-7
1-6
1 : 1-4
24-2
Currant bush ((?) Leptomeria aphylla, R.B .)
13-0
5-0
5-6
33-1
33-8
4-5
1 : 7-8
49-5
Wild fuchsia (Dlyoporum acuminatum , R.Br.)
33-3
3-9
9-1
5-1
47-1
1-5
1 : 5-5
59-6
Colone (Owenia acidula , F.v.M.)
49-0
6-9
9-2
12-5
21-3
1-1
, 1 : 2-6
33-0
Myall (Acacia pendula, Cunn.)
; 48-5
4-5
9-6
19-6
16-6
1-2
: 1 : 2-0
28-9
Bramble or wild orange (Capparis mitchelli
28-0
8-1
13-1
19-0
30-5
1-3
l: 2-6
46-5
Bastard myall (Acacia cunninghamii)
: 26-5
4-3
11-2
25-7
j 29-5
2-8
| 1 : 3-2
47-0
Tea-tree (Leptospermum attenuatum)
1 10-3
; 2-7
7-9
12-5
63-0
3-6
| 1 : 9-0
79-0
Coral-tree (Erythrina sp.)
74-8
1-7
3-5
1-9
17-8
■3
!j 1 ; 5-3
22-0
Lyonsia eucalyptifolia
31-5
5-8
10-4
16-2
29-0
7*1
. 1 : 4-3
55-4
“ Napunyah ” or Yellow Jacket (Eucalypti
7-0
-8
7-6
9-7
66-2
8-7
j 1: 11-3
93-4
ochrophloia, F.v.M.).
Wattle (Acacia decurrens)
! 10-4
3-3
13-1
20-5
1 49-2
1
3-5
| 1 : 4-4
70-2
Zamia Palm ( Macrozamia spiralis,) Kernel..
81-8
1-1
4-7
| 12-2
■2
12-7
,, „ ,, leaves .
76-7
1-0
2-6
6-2
: 13-3
•2
1 : 5-3
16-3


SECTION XIV.
Seeds and Seed Testing for Farmers.*
The necessity for using good seed was never more pronounced than at
the present time.
The farmer should take the following matters into consideration with
respect to seed when arranging for seeding operations;—
1. Suitability for district —as to kind and variety.
2. Freedom from, and resistance to, disease.
3. Quality.
4. Purity.
5. Capacity for germination.
Probably numbers 1 and 3 are attended to by the majority of growers,
hut it is almost certain that to numbers 2, 4 and 5 but little attention
is given.
It is proposed herein to deal with this subject from various points of
view, and finally give details as to how seed may be tested at home.
Whilst the modern farmer finds no difficulty in obtaining good seed,
and seedsmen do their utmost to supply the very best article, we have
seen during the last few years samples of various seeds purchased for
seeding purposes that were bad and even useless, or contained weed
seed impurities in much greater proportion than should have been the
case. There is a growing interest in the testing of seed in this country,
but it is not by any means so keen as it should be.
The farmer of all men should be intensely keen in this matter, as good
seed is so essential to success, and he can keep his eye on the quality of
his seed with very little trouble.
There is clear proof that since testing has come into operation, and
publicity has been given to the matter, the general average quality of
farm seeds has improved. This is distinctly encouraging and should
induce all those interested —the farmer most of all—to prove his farm
and vegetable seed in every possible way. The whole of the work in this
line is entirely in the interests of the grower.
Profitable farming largely depends on the use of good seed and the
non-introduction of undesirable plants through weed seeds planted with
the crop.
The selection of seed has naturally a most important influence on crops.
Oood seed implies a reasonable proportion of mature seed, true to kind
and variety, with only a small proportion (or none) of impurities or
adulterants, with good capacity for germination and freedom from insect
pests and disease, of at least average size and not old.
•Condensed from Farmers’Bulletin, No. 73, “ Seeds and Seed Testing for Farmers,”
by C. T. Musson, Hawkesbury Agricultural College.


The chief causes of seed being poor are careless handling during harvest
and afterwards, want of proper cleaning, seasonal circumstances prevent-
ing proper ripening, becoming damp from various causes, drying out,
sprouting, dirty crops, mixture of old with fresh seed. All these causes
should be borne clearly in mind.
The farmer’s interest in seed testing should be a very real one; he would
save considerably in the long run by purchasing good seed. Many admit
this,, but in large seedings money considerations often stand in the way.
Such seed would give larger returns, the resulting product would be superior,
all the ground would be utilised, blank spots would not occur, so there
would be nr patches of bare earth to give weeds their opportunity. Un-
doubtedly, year in year out, a close attention to this question would save
us money and prevent loss in crops; whilst it would be a potent factor
in that important work of selection towards the best ends that all growers,
consciously or unconsciously, are aiming at.
In selecting seed, appearance, size, colour, plumpness, brightness and'
smell are good general guides; but appearances are not always reliable.
It is not always easy to judge by eye; something more is needed. A little
trouble in the matter is amply repaid. By carrying out a few simple
tests we may save considerable expense and loss of time if the seed should
not turn out all it claims to be.
Seed is obtained from one of three sources: we may grow, buy, or
exchange for it. We either get it on our own place, or obtain it from
outside; mostly the latter plan is adopted.
The farmer, to protect himself, should certainly be in a position to
know the seed he uses. He can, by the exercise of a few simple methods,
examine all seed, and decide for himself as to its value for use. There
is no excuse for any man sowing bad seed, for he has the opportunity
to get it examined by sending it to the Department for the purpose; or he
might do it himself with sufficient accuracy for all practical purposes.
Of course, it need not be supposed that tests for purity and germina-
tion always prove the actual value of the seed. In the ease of some
seeds, pedigree of the plant may be of greater importance than the
germinating power of the seed; for example, a mangold seed with high
germinating power might run principally to top, whilst one of less ger-
minating power might grow a better root. Or, again, good seed as to
germinating power may in some districts “ bolt,” or fail to form a root,
while the same seed, sown in other districts, will, under favourable
circumstances, produce a good crop. Freaks of nature are not prevent-
able; nor can unfavourable conditions always be overcome. W T e must
not forget that good seed may not have the opportunities necessary for
good development* Moreover, it is not always certain that seeds giving
a certain test under indoor conditions will germinate equally well when
planted in the field. We cannot, therefore, always blame the seedsman
for failure of seed.
But for all grass seeds, and, indeed, seeds in general, purity with high
germinating power and good w T eight, will give a pretty safe indication
of their actual value. To be enabled to get at these matters accurately,
it is absolutely necessary to make a test, accompanied by an examination
of the samples, in a certain definite way, to be hereafter described.
* Board of Agriculture, England. “ Report on conditions under which agricultural
■ds are at present sold.”


| Age of Seed. +|
1 1 S3
u ; 7
$2 I SS
" • C ■ o
* 1 JC
<& 5 •
o 2 a 2
O i 0
JO |
c5 _• 3 _•
<a 2 1 2
o 1 c
O 40
7 years
old.
8 years
1 old.
9 years
old.
10 years
old.
Average per cent,
-of twenty kinds of
seed.
1 1.
Per cent.
! germinated. ! t
73 78
'
65 ’ 60
!
45 42
35
33
30
19
The following
Wheat...
table has been given as a guide in this matter
(Do not use seed older than stated.)
2 years. Turnip ... 3-4 years. Kohl Rabi ..
3-
4 years.
Oats ...
2 ,, Swede
... 3-
Closers
• 2-3 „
Barley
1-2 ,, Mustard
... 3-4 ,,
Sanfoin
1-
2 „
1-2 ,, Mangold
... 3
,,
Lucerne
3-4 „
Maize ...
1-2 ,, Carrot
... 3
Grasses
. 2-3 ,
Peas
4-0 ,, Cabbage
... 3-4
Flowers
1
year.
Beans
4-5 ,, Kale
... 3-4 „
Vegetables ..
1
,,
Buckwheat ...
2 „
Quality in Seeds is influenced by Age, Size, Weight, Smell.
Age.
Old seed is less likely to germinate than new. Loss of vitality is gradual,
though more rapid in unripe than in well-ripened seed. With the excep-
tion of cucurbit seed (melon, pumpkin, cucumber, gourd), it is safe to
say that new seed is better than old; in fact, it is a mistake at any
time to use seed more than two years old, and mostly it should not be
more than one. The melon type of seed is better for use at two years
than one, as new seed of this plant-group will give more vine than is
needed and not so much fruit as in cases where second-year seed is used.
Old seed can generally be judged as such by reason of its becoming
dull and shrivelled, losing both colour and brightness.
As the result of a long series of experiments relating to the germinating
capacity of old seeds, made in America, the average of twenty kinds of
seed under vitality tests came out as under, conclusively proving that
new seed is better than old: —
We have successfully germinated lucerne seven years old, and other seed
that has also passed the number of years stated. We have also failed
to germinate seed presumably fresh and good. Such cases are, however,
not common, and can usually be explained as due to exceptional causes.
It may be taken as a fairly correct guide, that seed depreciates rapidly
in value the older it becomes.
The tendency for seeds generally is to become weaker in vegetative
powers as they age; as weakness rather tends to fruitfulness, while
strength gives vegetative growth, the reason why melon seeds of two
or three years old are preferred by gardeners is explained. In most
plants we require strength.
It is remarkable that seeds of the common garden stock will, if sown at
once after becoming ripe, produce a large percentage of single-flowered
plants; if this seed is kept a few years, a weaker plant is produced with
double flowers.


Large seed.
Medium seed.
Small seed.
Grade— Seed planted.
per cent.
per cent.
per cent.
3'25 largest...
18'6
13'9
12'4
3-00
34'4
38'7
27'7
2-75
32"2
31'6
38-1
2-50
12-7
12-6
17'0
2'25
1-5
2'3
3-7
2'00 smallest
•3
■6 .
■9
Tailings
•2
■2
•3
Nor does small seed
germinate so well as
large. The failures in 200
seeds, planted with an average of twenty-eight
varieties tested, showed —
Large
seed. Medium seed.
Small seed.
6'2 9'3
17
Beet and carrots grown from two-year old seed are said to form better
roots; the plant does not “ run.”
In chicory and cabbage, grown from three-year old seed, the plants
are short and ripen better.
Spinach, lettuce and radish grown from two-year old seed will run
to seed.
Size.
There are great advantages from the use of large plump seed; hence
all small seeds should be graded out and should not be used for planting
purposes.
“ Large, plump seed is likely to be more healthy than small, and more
likely to produce healthy plants. It can be sown more evenly because
of its uniform size (if graded such). It has a larger percentage of
growth and fewer failures. Plants from such seeds are larger and thriftier,
and more resistant to disease, drought and starvation. Crops from such
seed have a more even growth, and are more economical to harvest and
thresh. The yield per plant, both of grain and straw, is greater from
such seed. The crop of grain grown from such seed has a higher market
value, because (a) it contains more large grains and fewer small grains;
( b ) it is plumper and better looking; ( c ) it weighs more per bushel.
The continuous use of such seed tends towards a general improvement
in the quality of wheat.”
Grain crops derived from small seed give not only a lower yield of grain
but a decided inferiority in quality, as the following results, obtained with
White Velvet, will show:—
Taking size of seed from another point of view, it has been showm
“ that if large seed of radish is used, about 90 per cent, of the crop
reaches marketable size; if mixed seed is used, or seed as it usually
comes to market, only about 45 to 50 per cent, matures.”*
We may certainly conclude, then, that large heavy seeds usually produce
more perfect plants than small light seeds, and consequently larger crops.
The variation in seeds is considerable, as is well known.
A plan has recently been put forward (Y. A. Clark in New York Expt..
Stn. Bull., 256), whereby seed can be selected by use of salt solutions.
Admitting that heavy seed is best, and that seeds in any lot vary very
much in size with a considerable range in specific gravity, the heavy can
be separated from the light by using salt solutions of different strengths.
The method is ingenious, but is hardly practicable for the farmer.
• Proc. Am. Assn. Ad, Bc. 1895, p. 285.


Weight.
Large seed is usually weighty, though not always so. Weight is an
important factor in the selection of seed for planting. The standard per
bushel for any seed should be known and should be acted up to. Judging
the weight by hand is not at all satisfactory, although the practice is
•commonly followed.
Seed giving light weight per bushel is poor, either in itself or from the
large number of blanks therein. The matter of weight should, therefore,
have careful attention in all seed selection.
Smell.
This is a good guide for the presence of mould or bunt. Musty seed
is to be avoided at all times.
Relation between seed quality and amount to sow per acre.
There is a distinct relation between quality of seed and the amount to
•sow per acre. The amount required for seeding, as generally stated,
refers to good quality seed; and if the seed used is below the standard,
then the resulting stand will not be up to requirements. For example,
take Prairie grass seed, with a standard weight of 15 lb. per bushel giving
a germination test of 80. Now, suppose it germinates only 50; in every
10 seeds there will only be 5 plants develop out of every 8 there should
be. This will mean the stand has but little more than half the plants it
-should have.
Or take a carrot field; the seed should germinate 85 per cent., but
seeing that it is seldom this quality of seed is attained, take 70 as a
reasonable value; if the seed only gives 40, as is often the case, the
•crop will carry barely more than half the requirements.
It will be seen, therefore, that a test is really necessary in all cases
in order to find out the quantity of seed required to be added to the
standard sowing in order to make up for such as does not possess the
power to germinate. The standard sowing supposes seed of standard
-quality; anything below that requires that the amount sown should be
increased.
An example will best illustrate the point it is desired to make: —
■2O acres are to be laid down to lucerne; 12 lb. per acre is to be the sowing.
According to the appended table of standards, this seed should give a
germination per cent, of 85, with purity per cent, of 98. The standard
value is thus —that is, 83. Seed should therefore show 83 as the
actual value for weight as given. Seed, as tested here, has shown 64
per cent, germination test, 96 per cent, purity test; the value in use
-of this seed would be therefore —that is, 61. In this case, only
61 seeds would germinate in every 100, instead of 83. Now, the whole
point of this is in the fact that if the grower wants his crop to come up
with a certain definite covering of the ground, based on the supposition
that 83 in every 100 seeds would germinate, if he uses the 61 per cent,
seed he must add to the 240 lb. required 60 lb. extra to make up for
the proportion that is actually no use. The loss is about one-fourth.
He must therefore buy 300 lb. at least of the inferior seed in order
to secure the stand required. Of course, if the price is reduced in pro-
portion it will not matter; Bd. a pound would have to be reduced to


6Jd. to make things even. A farmer should know all about it, however,
before the seed is sown, or he is not able to make up the deficiency
shown to exist when the test is made.
Seedlings.
In raising seedlings, wherever there is any danger of insect trouble,
as in the case of cabbage and cauliflower being attacked by the charac-
teristic moth grub, the seed-beds may be protected by mosquito netting
with advantage.
Smooth seeds to be hand-sown will bear soaking in water before being
planted; the thicker and harder the seed coats, the hotter can the water
be. Wattle seed, for instance, will stand being put in boiling water. Seed
generally, however, should not be soaked in anything above 135 degrees
Fah.; rough seed like carrot cannot be properly handled when wet.
Seedlings are raised under coloured glass at times, and with success.
Red is the best colour to use; it allows of the useful heat rays passing
to the soil beneath, whilst the rays having a chemical effect, the blue
end of the spectrum, are shut out, the red glass acting as a screen to
prevent them passing through. Sugar-cane and other seed difficult to
germinate may be treated in this way with greater prospect of success.
Fertilisers should not be in contact with Seeds.
In sowing, care should be taken that fertilisers do not come too much
into contact with the seed, as in such case germination is poor or entirely
prevented. We know one case where a pumpkin patch died out because
the seeds were placed directly upon a handful of some chemical fertiliser,
the whole being then covered with soil. Naturally enough, the young
plants burnt off almost as soon as they appeared above ground. To
give the young plants every chance, and prevent possible damage, fertilisers
should not be placed near the seed or in drills in too great quantity, except
it is well mixed with the soil. In the process of drilling-in manure with
seed there is sufficient mixture of the former with the soil to prevent
damage to seed.
Notwithstanding this, under some circumstances it may be advisable
to bring seed into close relation with a small quantity of artificial fertiliser;
for instance, to prevent birds eating it, as is mentioned elsewhere.
Saving own Seed for planting.
If it is intended to carry this out, certain points should be carefully
attended to in the growing of the crops from which seed is to be taken.
They should be grown where there will be little chance of crossing detri-
mentally. Cereals are, with the exception of maize, self fertilised; conse-
quently this remark only applies to the latter amongst them. Plants likely
to cross should be grown as far apart as possible. Seed should be selected
from the healthiest plants giving the best return, and not merely be taken
from the largest heads of a crop; though grading away all small seed
will undoubtedly assist in keeping up the average size.
Seed should be ripe, clean, free from impurities, and dry, and should
be properly stored. The proper amount of moisture that seeds can
safely lose, and still retain their germinating power, is an important matter,
consideration os to which must be left to the expert seedsman. Seed
should not be saved from crops infested with disease. Early seed can


be selected for early varieties from the middle of the ear, as that is the part
that ripens first; it may even be taken before it is quite ripe. For late varieties
select after the seed is quite ripe, if possible from stalks not dead ripe.
Early varieties may be expected to give light returns, as there must be long
growth for a heavy crop. If a farmer has used seed of his own saving for
several years it is wise to exchange it with someone else having suitable
varieties.
Adopting a regular habit of seed-testing brings the operator into touch
with the importance of harvesting seed in first-class condition, so far as is
possible to ensure its being ripe, clean and pure. Such a frame of mind
must be distinctly beneficial; the seed-tester proves for himself the benefits
that follow use of good seed, and this must necessarily cause him to exercise
the greatest care in any harvesting operations he may carry out.
This aspect of the seed question is well worthy of attention. Speaking
.generally, seed-saving should not be entered into except methodically.
It is better to leave it, with the necessary cleaning and other operations,
to those who are equipped for the purpose, and have the experience.
Ripe and unripe Seed.
Mature seed is always best for seeding purposes; it is fully ripe, and,
under favourable conditions, is capable of properly carrying out the
-functions of germination—a most important matter in the rearing of
young healthy plants. Immature seed is such as has not fully developed
■or ripened before it has been harvested; consequently the germs are not
fully formed, whilst the food supply which is to support the germ on its
commencing to develop is but poor—the young plants arising from such will
lack vigour.
The use of unripe seed in tomatoes, for instance, encourages the
production of fruit instead of stem and leaf, and also encourages early
production. The resulting fruits and seed are smaller, though there is
an increase in their number, but a loss of vigour is also seen in the small
percentage of seed that germinates, in the weakness of the seedlings, and in
the fact that many die before maturity. Full vigour of the plants is never
shown, though they produce an abundant harvest, and more rapid develop-
ment occurs.
As showing the germinating powers of seed at different periods of
ripeness, the following is an example, rye being the plant experimented
with:—
Per cent, seeds
germinated.
June 26 —Plant green, seed watery ... ... ... ...
July 3 —Plant green, seeds large, milky ... ... ... ... ... 5
~ 10—Straw begins to be yellow, seeds full of starch, green and soft 94
~ 18—Straw yellow and dry, seed hard, not juicy ... ... ... 36
~ 30—Straw and grain dry, dead ripe ... ... ... ... ... 84
There is something to be done with unripe seed in the matter of raising
early varieties.
Protecting Seeds against Birds.
T?irds frequently take a considerable amount of certain seeds during the
first week or ten days after planting. To prevent this, soak the seed in
tar water (1 lb. to 100 gallons).


Another method has been given as follows:—"Hirst wet the seed by-
dipping a bushel or two at a time, contained in a bag, in a tub of water.
Allow the grain to remain in the water for a few minutes, so as to get
thoroughly wet, then lift the grain and spread it on a clean floor. When
the required quantity of grain is thus prepared, dry it with superphos-
phate. Seed thus treated when sown will not be pulled up or eaten by
birds.”
Seeds and their Insect Pests.
Stored seeds are often attacked by insect pests. The cereals find their
chief insect enemies in the grain weevil and the grain moth.
These, whilst feeding in the grub state within the seed, do not prevent
the seed from germinating unless the germ is destroyed; but the using
up by the insect of the plant food store in the seed is distinctly detrimental
to the young plant; for, on germinating, it is thrown upon outside sources
for its food supply too early in life, consequent upon its own supply,
failing; hence we may expect what really happens—a weakening of the
young seedling at a time when it requires all the strength it can get.
Further, the opening up of holes in seeds, with accumulation of filth
consequent on the insect residing therein, will pave the way for disease
germs, such as moulds, soil-residing fungi, amongst them bacteria, to
make good a footing, and thus endanger the young plant at a critical stage
of life. Efforts should be made to keep insects out of the store by use of
wire gauze over all ventilators, windows, and doors. Fumigation will kill
such as find their way in; but this process must be carried out with great
care.
Other prominent insects in seeds are the weevils, found in peas and
beans. This pest has been giving a large amount of trouble in Canada
and parts of the United States, where the cultivation of these crops have
even had to be abandoned for a time. The insect deposits its eggs on the
young pods of growing plants; the grubs, burrowing into the seed and
remaining there, are harvested with the seed, only to spread the pest further
on the perfect beetles coming out to reproduce their kind when the seeds
are sown.
We have seen seed exposed for sale in the local stores showing the
small circular depressions in the skin which indicate the presence of this
insect.
All pulse should be carefully examined for this pest, and, if necessary,
exposed to the fumes of some poisonous gas in a closed box. Bisulphide
of carbon is the simplest remedy.* The vapour is explosive, therefore care
should be exercised in using it. A teaspoonful for every cubic foot of space
may be placed in a saucer at the top of the box, in which the seeds to be
fumigated have been arranged on shelves, or in some other convenient
manner. The vapour sinks, being heavier than air, and envelops the seed.
If this is done at night the seeds are ready for use next morning. Steeping
in water at 140-150 degrees Fahr. will also kill the insects.
To keep weevils and mice away from seed, pour a little kerosene on it and
stir it up well, so that all seeds come in contact with it. This method is
useful where beetles are likely to get at seed in the ground. For moderate
quantities this is not expensive, and it is certainly successful.
* Fuller particulars regarding this method of treating seed are given in connection
with weevil infestation of maize in an earlier portion of this Handbook.


Seeds and the introduction of Fungus Parasites to the Crop.
Many seeds are liable to convey to the ground, thence possibly to the
seedling- or growing crop, the germs of certain fungus diseases, such as
smut and bunt.
For cereals it is advised to steep all wheat and oat seed* in water in which
sulphate of copper (bluestone) has been dissolved (1J lb. to 10 gallons water)
for three minutes, thoroughly shaking the bag so that every grain is wetted;
it should be dried by spreading on cloths, or it cannot be handled properly.
Some workers sprinkle a little lime (after slaking) over the seed whilst it
is wet, but the Department recommends that it be steeped in lime water
for a few minutes. With ordinary care the loss of seed is of no practical
importance. Both the hot water and the formalin treatments have been
given up for bluestone.
Whilst some cereals are liable to the attack of smut when well above
ground (barley and maize), in others attack comes to the seedling before
it has appeared above ground. It may he concluded that although
steeping the seed will not render all cereals absolutely free from smut, it is
a safeguard to steep them all. The cost in cash and time is but light.
By doing it the trouble is certainly kept down, and we are doing all we
can, so far as present knowledge goes, to minimise this widespread disease.
Steeping, if properly carried out, will kill all the germs that are attached to
the seed, some of which would almost certainly inoculate the young seed-
ling, if planted with their germinating power unimpaired.
Determining the Actual Value of Seed.
In order to find out the actual value of seed, the purchaser can do a good
deal for himself if he will give the matter a little time and attention. The
points requiring investigation are: —■
(1) Genuineness.
(2) Place of origin.
(3) Condition —
(a) Purity.
(b) Vitality.
After having looked into the various points, and made tests as to purity
and vitality, it is easy to calculate the actual value of the seed under
review.
The method of procedure is as follows: —
Genuineness.
By “ genuineness ” is meant that the seed is of the stock or pedigree
that it purports to come from.
The specific name of any seed may, as a rule, he readily known on examina-
tion, hut it is not often possible to tell the exact variety.
It is not until the seedlings come up that closely related species, such as
swede turnip and charlock, can positively be distinguished, although there
are differences in the seed coats which the microscope reveals. For all
practical purposes, it must be taken for granted that the seed is as named.
Should there be any doubt about it, a sample must be submitted to some
competent authority. Only where a reference collection of seeds is kept
for the purpose can the true name be positively determined, and then, in
• This is a decided safeguard against bunt in wheat and loose smut in oats.


many cases, the specific name alone can be given, varietal differences being
so light as to be mostly indistinguishable until at quite a late stage in
the plant’s life.
It is an important matter that seed should be true to name. All ordinary
crop seeds every farmer knows; but in the cases of grasses, clovers, and
uncommon kinds it is just as well to get expert advice.
In this matter of genuineness it will mostly be found necessary to rely
upon the vendor. Where seed is purchased in the ordinary way from seeds-
men, and the requirements have been fully stated, the purchaser can com-
monly rely upon the seed being as stated. There is hardly likely to be any
trouble in this matter in relation to ordinary crop seeds if purchases are
made to samples, and under ordinary business circumstances.
Place of Origin.
A little consideration soon shows us that this matter is one of no little
importance.
In the first place, we know that some districts produce better class crops
than others—that no two districts, especially where climatic conditions
vary, produce the same varieties in cereals, fruit-trees, or other crops; in
other words, that certain varieties are most suited for certain districts. Hence
we conclude that every grower has to find out the kinds most suited for his
own place, taking into consideration trade requirements, and his own local
circumstances. Here comes in the selection of suitable seed; and a most
important factor, more frequently overlooked than otherwise, is that of place
of origin. Seed may have been grown under circumstances rendering it
entirely unfitted for the purchaser; and he should certainly know all neces-
sary particulars in this direction. Seedsmen encourage purchasers to state
their local conditions in order that requirements may be satisfactorily
adjusted; therefore, buyers should carefully attend to this point when pur-
chasing.
In this connection, the first matter requiring attention at the hands of
growers is seeing they get acclimatised seed. Better results are obtained from
seeds grown as to climate under somewhat similar conditions to those
holding where it is to be used. More particularly should we expect this to
apply where cropping is on a large scale, as under such circumstances the
ground and plants cannot receive that attention which can be given, for
instance, to the flower garden, where foreign-grown seed is largely used.
According to trials here with lucerne and other plants, best results were
obtained from seed grown in New South Wales as against seed obtained
from Hungary and America.
Seed should come from somewhat similar climate and soil, if we are to
take advantage of all circumstances, and if we can so obtain it.
Some consideration should therefore be given to the place of origin of any
seed, and for another perhaps more important reason than the above: in
the matter of resistance to, and keeping out of, disease; if possible we should
obtain seed from districts free, or comparatively so, from disease —in cereals,
for example, from smut, rust, or other pests—in order to give our own
district every chance.
Conditions.
Select a sample from the bulk seed, taking a little from top, middle, and
bottom of a single bag (small seed always works to the bottom if mixed with
seed larger than itself) —from every other bag in case of there being more


than two or three. Jlix it well, and of this take a few ounces and spread
it out on a sheet of paper or a plate. With a penknife or a spoon separate
all impurities and weed-seeds. The sample should be of a given weight.
The impurities should be separated and weighed; the percentage of the
latter can then easily be calculated.
The weed-seeds should be specially attended to, and an effort made to
determine their names. It is quite possible to make up a named set of
the seeds of our common weeds for reference. They can be kept in small
bottles. The smallest size homoeopathic phials cost, including corks, about
10s. a gross. Another method is to gum them in shallow box lids, or store
them in some other way.
Our own reference collection of weed-seeds is kept in the following
manner: Twenty-five trays (5 inches x 61 inches) fit in a small cardboard
box. A square tea or biscuit tin could be used for the purpose. Circles are
cut in sheets of thick cardboard with a gun-wad punch, and a sheet of white
cardboard is pasted beneath. This method enables a large number of seeds
to be passed rapidly under review, seeds being arranged according to con-
venience, a few of the groups being legumes, grasses, black seeds, composites,
shrubs. This gives very little trouble, and any farmer could manage some-
thing of the sort with the help of his children, who take naturally to this
sort of thing. Of course, many men prefer turning this work over to the
Agricultural College or some other authority. Some would like to do it for
themselves; —for such these notes are written.
Impurities.
Impurities in seed wfill mean sand, dust, weed-seed, chaff, diseased seed,
and the like. Weed-seed is the worst impurity to deal with, as the resulting
plants take up space and cause a reduction in the crop, whilst there will
follow the difficulty and expense of eradicating weeds that establish them-
selves.
If possible, only real seed should be left in the sample in order to find
out the actual purity percentage.
It need hardly be explained that one of the chief causes of weeds spreading
is in the sowing of their seed with that of farm crops.
Some weeds are of little account, and are sufficiently kept down in the
ordinary course of cultivation; others may become a constant source of
trouble, expense, and loss in reduced crops. The loss from weeds being
plentifully present has been estimated at from 10 to 35 per cent., varying
with different crops. In order to try and prevent this, we should see that
our seed is free, or comparatively so, from noxious weed-seeds. Some weeds,
when in food crops, result in the flour containing a poisonous substance,
as darnel and corn cockle —a most important matter. Other impurities, such
as chaff, stalks, dirt, small stones, and the like, are of consequence, in that
by their presence the weight of actual seed is reduced. If seed contains
more impurities than might reasonably be expected, it should be treated by
sifting, or other means, for the purpose of removing the obnoxious matter.
If the contained impurities are excessive in amount, the seed should be
refused. As to where to draw the line it is not possible to lay down a
hard-and-fast rule. The percentage of weed-seeds should certainly not be
allowed to increase beyond a reasonable limit.


In the illustration given below an idea is given as to the quantity of
impurities that may be present—nearly 13 per cent, in this case, which is far
more than there should be; the standard gives only 1 per cent, for cereals.
In dealing with standards later, a table is given showing the margins
of deviation as used in the seed-control stations of Europe.
Sample of Wheat submitted to Hawkesbury College for report
some years ago.
To the miller the broken grain was not loss.


Testing for Vitality.
Take 100 large seeds or 200 small seeds, counting them carefully, from
an average sample of the bulk. Do not select only good seeds, but take them
as they come —large, small and unbroken. It is important that the test should
be made with a fair average sample of the lot. Then take two plates. In
one, as it stands on the table, place a double thickness of blotting-paper,
folded so that the corners just project beyond the covering plate. Wet this
blotting-paper thoroughly and drain all superfluous water away. On this
place the seed to be tested, with a paper giving (in pencil) name and other
details about the seed. Cover the seed with another double sheet of wet
blotting paper, from which all water that will run off has been drained away,
and cover the whole with another slightly smaller plate, turned upside down.
The apparatus should then be placed where it can receive a moderate amount
of warmth. From 70 to 80 degrees Fahrenheit will give the best
results; the higher the temperature the quicker will the seeds germinate.
In two days examine the seeds, and add water sufficient to keep the
absorbent paper moist, but not wet. On the third day—when, in the case
of all ordinary farm seeds, half at least should have germinated—count
out all that have germinated and record the result in some suitable way
in some book kept for the purpose. Every day thereafter this must be done,
up to the time specified in the table given below. A little extra time may
be given if thought well, but the test may safely end on the day set out
against the particular kind of seed. The book in which the records are
kept should be ruled so as to provide for notes of the daily examinations
being made methodically.
Fresh blotting paper should be provided if that in use becomes badly
stained with moulds, as is often the case. White flannel or asbestos sheets
may be substituted for the blotting-paper, but in such cases the substance
must be well boiled before being used again. If this ip carried out, the
same flannel can be used over and over again. We find here that fresh
blotting-paper answers the purpose admirably. Some people prefer ger-
minating large seeds, such as bean and pea, in damp sawdust or sand.
In case there should be more than one lot of seed to test, some suitable
arrangement can be devised without much trouble. For example, a sheet


of zinc or galvanized iron can be bent up at the edges, and used as the
common receptacle; on the bottom, strips of thick twine, or straw stems, or
thin bits split away from the cane in an old bamboo blind, can be laid
across, and wet blotting-paper spread over them, commencing at one end, so
as to form a series of troughs, half or one inch wide, in which the seeds are
placed. The seeds must in this case also be covered with damp blotting-
paper or flannel, whichever is being used, the whole being covered by a
board or another sheet of zinc.
There are numerous other methods adopted for the purpose, such as the
use of a porous saucer or plate similar to those used for flower-pot stands.
The seeds are placed therein, and the saucer placed in a shallow tin partly
filled with water; the water soaks through the saucer and thus reaches the
seeds.
Another plan, suitable where a number of varieties are to be tested, is
illustrated here. An ordinary flat tin dish (the one photographed is a common
dish used for baking meat) has two narrow strips of iron fitted to carry


a sheet of glass about ito 1 inch above the dish bottom. A sheet of blotting-
paper is spread over it, the ends resting in water with which the dish is
filled to a depth of half an inch. It acts as a syphon, and keeps the seeds
moist without water having to be supplied, except to make good any evapora-
tion from the main supply, which it is better to pour away every third or
fourth day, to be replaced by fresh water. The seeds to be tested are placed
on the blotting-paper, each lot covered by its own small piece of blotting-
paper. In the illustration the six small sheets are of buff paper, the rest red
in order to show up the arrangement better. The dish should be covered
with a sheet of zinc or a board. It is a good plan to rule off small squares
on the bottom sheet of blotting-paper. If 100 seeds are being treated one
seed is placed in each square; this ensures equality of conditions and facili-
tates rapid examination and counting.
Using any of the methods here described, any careful man can get results
sufficiently accurate for all practical purposes. Where an incubator can be
used, and the temperature kept at from 75 degrees to 80 degrees Fahr.,,
■quicker results can be obtained, though it is not necessary; nor is any
artificial heat required beyond that of the ordinary living room or office,
except where the climate is cold, or when the test must be made during the
winter, and time is of importance.
When opening the apparatus, care must be taken that seeds adhering
to the covering material shall not be removed from their proper places.
It should be noted that in order for seeds to germinate well, they must
be supplied with moisture, heat and air. Seeds germinate best in the dark.
The apparatus must, therefore, be such as will allow of these different
requirements being supplied as is most suitable for the seeds to be operated
on.
There should be enough moisture supplied regularly, but the seeds should
not swim in water; superfluous water must be poured off.
A temperature of 70 to 80 degrees Fahr. will give the best results; at
lower temperatures germination is slower. Some seed —grass, for example—
.germinates better if the temperature is raised 20 degrees for six hours during
the day, and then allowed to resume the normal. For this purpose an
incubator is necessary, unless it can be arranged for the apparatus to be
placed in such relation to some fire as will bring about the desired result.
Plenty of air finds its way in between the two plates, which are
kept slightly apart by the corners of the blotting-paper, whilst the regular
openings for examination of any apparatus used will aerate the seeds
freely.
Darkness is secured by the covering plate. If, however, any other
apparatus is used, this matter must receive attention. All seeds to be tested
may conveniently be put in a dark place, though the act of covering the
plate with another, or a dish with a board, secures sufficient darkness for
the purpose.
Speed of germination is important; most farm seeds should start in from
two to seven days.


The time allowed in making any test varies with the kind of seed, Most
varieties of ordinary crop seeds germinate freely. The test may be stopped
at the end of the periods stated below.
10 days—For most cereals, legumes, vegetables, rape, turnip.
14 days—Beet, sorghum, rye-grass.
21 days—Grasses in general.
28 days—Tree seeds in general.
42 days—Pine-tree seeds.
When results are unsatisfactory, a second test should be made before
a final decision is arrived at. It is better at all times to make duplicate
tests, as a check upon the results; and, naturally, the larger the number
of seeds tested the more accurately will the results work out.
All apparatus, dishes, trays, flannel, pliers, and other articles used should
be thoroughly cleansed after use in boiling water containing a little washing
soda. This will minimise the trouble experienced from common mould.
Moreover, tinned dishes are liable to rust. It is better, when possible, to use
receptacles that will not rust.
Certain Seeds require Special Treatment.
Paspalum.
Ordinary tests are of little use with this grass. The best method to
adopt is to spread a little on a board, a sheet of glass, or some other
hard surface, and with a knife-blade press lightly on the seed; if it
collapses, the seed-case is empty, but if the knife meets with some resistance,
and eventually cuts through the kernel—a fact easily detected —we have
proof positive of a real seed being “ formed.” The number of formed seeds
should be counted per hundred. Three or four counts of a hundred each
will give an average for good or “ formed ” seed in the sample. To germi-
nate these is difficult. Warmth and plentiful moisture will usually bring it
on, but the process is a slow one. We get our best results when the seeds
are kept moist in an incubator, and maintained for about six hours during
the day at a temperature of 100 to 110 degrees, the heat being cut off
for the night. The proportion of “ formed ” seed will depend on the method
of harvesting. A bushel should weigh at least 28 lb., all under this being
poor; the variation may be from 17 up to 35 lb.
In the case of tobacco, maize, pumpkin, melon, and similar summer-crop
plants, the seeds require more heat to start them than is the case in the
common cereals and other farm crops from temperate climates. These seeds
should not, therefore, be put in the ground too early; otherwise, the soil
being cold, they will not start, and consequently they lie at risk of damage
from excessive w r et, insects, and other troubles.
Lucerne and Clovers.
In the case of these fodder plants the utmost care should be taken to see
that no seed of “Dodder,” “Devil’s Twine,” or “Ringworm” is present;
from lucerne and the larger clover seeds it can be screened away, but this
is not so easy to carry out when it is present in small seed.


Beet and Mangel Seed-halls.
These so-called seeds are really grouped fruits; each ‘'ball” should give
more than one young plant, often four, or even five; 100 balls should yield
at least 150 young plants. In testing these seed-balls, therefore, the young
plants should be allowed to develop well, and should then be carefully pulled
out of the containing coverings; no part of the young plant should be left
therein. This is best done by means of a pair of fine pliers, the records
being entered up at each operation.
Experiments are now in progress in the United States to produce a strain,
of one-seeded beet-balls.
Hard Seeds.
In the clovers especially, after testing, certain “ hard ” seeds remain,
mostly of a pale colour, which for the time being have not absorbed water,
and consequently will not germinate. They frequently make up even 10-
per cent, of a sample.
Under natural conditions in the field these remain dormant, but may come
on after a time; in such cases they would probably only result in small
weak plants, consequent upon the earlier plants having got so much ahead,
and keeping the others back by shading and crowding.
In some cases, under treatment with warm water, and given time, these
may be made to germinate.
In taking tests, where such seeds remain, two courses are open to us —
(1) To take no account of the hard seeds, merely noting their presence;
or (2) to consider them good, and add some proportion of their number
to those germinating within a reasonable time—one-third is the usual thing.
Authorities differ as to which is the better plan; perhaps it is safer to leave
them out of our calculations altogether.
It has been pointed out (W. M. Came in Agricultural Gazette, Vol. XXVI,
p. 313) that strawberry clover seed is very refractory in germinating; the
hard seed reaching 90 per cent, and over. The germination was brought up
to 60-80 per cent, by spreading the seed on a large stone, and passing over
it several times, with pressure, a piece of flat sandstone. The seed was
then gathered up, again treated, and operated on as before.
Hard-shelled Seeds.
All seeds with hard coverings, such as lentils, wattle, and many others,
should be put into boiling water and allowed to stand for twelve hours
before being planted; they will germinate all the better. Many would
require drying before being planted. Peas, beans, onion, and such like seeds
may be steeped in hot w T ater, but it should not be above 140 degrees Fnhr.;
the skin is tender and the germ is liable to damage if the water used is
too hot. Wheat, for instance, will not stand a water temperature of more
than 135 degrees with safety. Dry heat at much more than 140 degrees
does not affect the germ.
The difficulty with regard to steeping is that wet seed cannot be used
in a seed-drill, consequently the seed must be dried after being steeped
or the process must be omitted. Flax is a seed that cannot be steeped, as
soaking in water causes the production of a gum all over the seed coats,
under which circumstances it could not be handled.


Diseased Seed.
A special look-out should be kept for diseased seed. This trouble usually
shows itself in the presence of mould, lumps, or discoloured spots or wrinkles
on the skin.
Lucerne seed was recently submitted to us in which the seed surface
was covered with irregular lumps, two fungus parasites being responsible
for the trouble, the sample failing altogether to germinate.
Dead germs.
In cereals the appearance of the germ naturally receives much attention.
Discoloration and an abnormal shrivelled appearance will be the common
indications of trouble. Dead germs may be overlooked, however, as is seen
by the fact that we recently had submitted a sample of rye which had
failed to germinate—the paddock being actually re-sown with some of the
same seed. Examination showed at once that all the germs were dead.
Probably the seed had sweated in the stack before being threshed, but the
appearance of the seed under a naked eye examination unmistakably
pointed to the germs being dead; it was extraordinary how the fact escaped
observation.
Grass Seed.
Grass seed will not germinate readily indoors. Some varieties will
do so at ordinary room temperatures, but it is found advisable to raise the
temperature for such seed to 85 degrees Fahr., or thereabouts, for about six
hours each day by placing it in an incubator, or near a fire. Some grass
seed germinates more readily on damp sand than between blotting-papers.
Much of the supposed grass seed does not contain a kernel; to test such,
spread some thinly on a sheet of glass, and place another sheet over it, hold
this up to the light, when such chaff as does not contain seed will be clear;
where a seed is present it looks much darker.
The Real Value of Seed as found by Testing,
To determine the real value in use (utility value) in any seed, find
the purity and the germination capacity in percentages, multiply these
together, and divide by 100. For example:—lf a given sample contains
95 per cent, true seed which germinates 54 per cent., the actual value
for use is 95 X 54 -s- 100 =5l and a little over. This will mean that
taking the actual cost at, say, Is. per lb. for 100 lb., we pay £5 for what is
only worth £2 11s., taking the basis of our calculation as perfection; but
if we take the cost of Is. a pound as representing average expectations, the
standard for comparison with the real value ought to be 97 X 88 -f- 100 =
854 roughly, or in money £4 55., because it should have a purity per
cent, of 97, and a germinating capacity of 88. Necessarily a certain margin
of variation below expectations should be allowed.
Germination and Purity Standards.
The accompanying table of standards, based on fresh seed, carefully saved,
will give a fair idea what to expect in the directions of germinating
capacity and purity. The table is offered provisionally, and whilst having
been largely compiled, has been cheeked off by personal observations.


Vitality.
Whilst it need not be expected that all seeds will test up to the standards
set for germinating purposes, a test should show results coming somewhere
near the figures given. Attached to the standards are tabulated results of
the tests carried out here; this will give a very good idea as to what
results may be expected when testing. For general use it may be taken
that cereals should germinate always above 90 per cent.; if below this,
there is something wrong and the matter should be looked into. Oats,
it must be remembered, especially black varieties, are particularly refrac-
tory. All other seeds should come within the deviation margin of the
standard, which is reasonably liberal. Any seed worse than this should
be reported to the dealer, and steps taken to secure better results in the
future.
If seed is bought on a guarantee test, which very seldom is the case,
purchasers have their remedy, supposing the seed fails to test up to its
certificate. In most cases, at the present time, seedsmen supply the best
seed that can be obtained, and the purchaser takes it with all risks, unless it
be absolutely useless. For in purchasing seed the presumption is that it
has a reasonable percentage of good seed in it, changing hands on that
understanding. It must not be supposed, however, that because a seed
fails to give good results on being tested, that it is bad seed, for many seeds
are very refractory; in general, however, the test is ample for its purpose
in proving quality in the matter of vitality.
Purity.
All large seed should be free from weed-seed and other impurities, but
other seed almost always carries weed-seed in some proportion; therefore
it should not be expected that seed can be obtained perfectly free from
weeds. Many weed-seeds are very difficult to separate; in some cases to do so
is impossible. As to the latitude that should be allowed in the matter of
purity, it may be said at once that this should not exceed 3 per cent.; it is
quite a different matter to that of vitality. The presence of some weed-seeds
should debar the sale of seed containing them —dodder in clover, for
instance—for in this case the smaller dodder seed can be separated. Pur-
chasers should obtain a guarantee that lucerne seed is free from this
pest.
Growers can, of course, do something to help themselves in this matter.
Cheap seed can hardly be expected to be as good or as clean as a higher
priced article; the dearer seed may often prove cheapest in the long run.
Therefore we should not expect the best from cheap seed. Pay a fair price
and get a good article. Then, again, a little sifting will often get rid of
undesirable seeds; grading will get rid of small-sized seed and tailings.
These processes may be necessary, for growers frequently come into posses-
sion of seed otherwise than by purchase from seedsmen, by exchange or by
growing their own.
•
If we apply the general rule attaching to the production of a good
clean sample of seed to orrr own operations in seed-raising, we are “ doing
as we would be done by.” Most growers are not possessed of the elaborate
outfit and cleaning machinery necessary to the “ up-to-date ” seed merchant,
consequently we stand the best chance of obtaining the best and cleanest
seed from those who have the means for properly treating and cleaning.


Seed Standards.
(With results obtained at Hawkesbury Agricultural College.)
Percentage
of Germi-
1
C
Percentage
of Germi-
£
& a
a -a
S3
nation
obtained at
Hawkes-
|
‘3 6
«3 eS
T3
■£* «3
u-S
nation
obtained at
Hawkes-
S ci
bury Agri-
i
£ -S
ft. 5
burv Agri-
© oo
cultural
1
32
cultural
o
College.
College.
Barley...
95
99
34-99
Onion
1
85
99
9-94
Beet ...
150
98
63-114
Oats — White
...I
95
99
0-100
Beans ..
95
100
59-100
Black
90
99
10-85
Buckwheat ...
92
99
38-44
Parslev
76
98
Cabbage
95
99
54-87
Parsnip
75
97
30-37
Carrot...
85
95
19-72
Peas
...i
98
99
64-100
Cauliflower
85
99
54-87
Pumpkin ...
90
99
62-67
Celery...
65
99
Radish
95
99
62-90
Chicory
85
99
21-48
Rape
...1
95
99
90-99
Clover — White
85
95
70-81
Rye
95
99
0-96
Red
90
98
70-97
Sainfoin
...
85
98
65-87
Crimson
90
95
73-98
Sheep’s Barnet
90
97
88-92
Cotton
90
98
1
Sorghum ...
90
98
0-98
Cowpea
90
100
67-100
Squash
...|
90
100
Cucumber
90
100
Sunflower ...
90
100
46-98
Hemp
80
99
24-65
Tares
...i
95
99
69-99
Kale
90
99
66-96
Tobacco
88
98
77-80
Kohlrabi
90
99
70-99
Tomato
90
99
Lentils
98
99
73-
Turnip
i
95
99
38-97
Lettuce
90
99
84-90
Vetch
95
99
74-86
Linseed
90
95
89-95
Wheat
95
99
38-100
Lotus tetrayonoholus.,.
90
99
50-93
Lucerne
Lupins
M aize
85
90
98
99
0-75
72-98
Grasses, very
variable, according to
90
100
6-98
Mangel
150
98
34-180
Paspalxtm <Hlatatum — First-class seed
Melon
90
100
16-91
should contain over
70 per cent, formed
Millet
85
99
81-95
grain ; second-class,
between 40 and 50
Mustard
95
99
93-94
per cent, formed
grai
n.
How to obtain good Seed.
The following points require special attention:—
1. Buy from reliable seedsmen on tested sample, or obtain samples and
get them tested —this means buying to sample. Some firms will
give percentage statement as to vitality and purity; this is valuable
even without guarantee.
2. Avoid cheap seed. Seed firms will give good reliable seed for good
prices.
3. Ask for a statement of quality. If this is regularly carried out, seedsmen
will be obliged to provide it, and thus put before customers details
as to the germination capacity of the seeds they sell. ,
4. Ask for place of origin. This is important in relation to smut on
cereals; for some districts are more free from smut than others, and
seed should come from clean districts. Moreover, foreign seed often
contains many weed-seeds.
6. Never fail to carry out home tests in order to keep in touch with the
matter, and prove all seed used.


Purchasing Seed.
It must be clearly understood that seedsmen have advised in the past,
and do at present, the use of good seed; they prefer selling seed that can
be recommended as good, but they can hardly be expected to guarantee
the crop. Seeds may fail to germinate from a variety of causes, even though
exposed to all necessary favourable conditions; this may be owing to faults
in the seed, or to circumstances over which the seedsman has no control.
A buyer has, however, a very reasonable claim in wanting to know what
he is buying, in respect to two points:—
1. How much of what he is buying is real seed, true to name.
2. What proportion is likely to germinate.
Prominent seedsmen insert in their catalogue some sort of non-warranty
clause. The following is one .taken from a leading Sydney catalogue:—
“ We recognise the great responsibility that devolves upon us to supply our
customers with the best seeds obtainable, and while we are proud of the
confidence reposed in us for so many years, it must be clearly understood
that we give no guarantee as to the correctness of name, description, or
product of the seeds we sell, and any purchaser who does not accept our
seeds on these conditions is at liberty to return them at our cost, within
seven days from date of purchase. Our business system is as perfect as we
can make it, but still we are not infallible. The best guarantee our
customers can have is the fact that our large business has been built up by
selling good seeds, and it would very soon be ruined if we sold inferior
stock.”
It should be remarked that in Europe many experiment stations hold
control contracts with seed merchants for testing purposes, and a certificate
of test is then put before buyers along with the samples of seed for sale
Dealers are themselves often ignorant of the quality of the seed they offer.
A demand by the buyer for information as to the article would cause
seedsmen to be prepared with particulars as to purity and vitality per-
centages, which would be all a buyer needs to enable him to judge the article
correctly.
Adulteration, meaning a substitution of cheaper seed in part for that of
a more valuable kind, is not practised here so far as is known to the writer.
Making up for Market.
Beyond the suitable preparation required in order to render seed fit for
use, by the elimination, so far as is possible, of all useless matter, there may
be cases where seed is “ prepared ” by being “ dressed ” to show a good
appearance. This, too, may be passed over as practically non-existent here.
It is well, however, to pay attention to the matter of “ get-up ” in seeds;
any exceptional appearance should make us suspicious.
Seeds exposed to sunlight may be liable to lose in germinating capacity
to some extent. If seeds are open to the air whilst awaiting sale
numerous insects, and possibly fungus parasites, which are always round
about, will commonly seize hold of the opportunity to settle thereon. Seeds
should, therefore, not be left exposed, but should be carefully protected
from possible attack, and from too free an exposure to light and air. It
would be well for buyers to avoid purchasing from such stock, where there is
any danger from weevils or other stored seed pest.


Beware of highly-coloured Advertisements.
One very interesting point for purchasers to consider is in relation to
marvellous forage and other plants advertised in highly-coloured language
hy enterprising firms. It is safe to beware of all such extravagant promises
as one sees in certain catalogues, chiefly foreign. These wonderful things,
it is safe to say, find no place in the catalogues of our leading seedsmen;
no reputable firm would lend itself to what is, in plain terms, nothing but
deception.
Two examples are called to mind in relation to this subject. Some
years ago there appeared extravagant notices as to the value of a
new and hardy fodder plant called “World’s Wonder Forage Plant” ;
“ Pencilare,” “ Mand’s Wonder Forage Plant,” and the like, emanating from
the States. This article was soon brought to our notice, laudatory accounts
-of it being published in many papers throughout Australia. Finally it was
run down as being merely the well-known Pearl Millet, revived and boomed
under another name. “ Billion Dollar Grass (Prairie) ” is another such
case. Yet another is that of the “ Italian Consolidated Grass,” brought
under our notice by a resident of this State as a great fodder producer;
it turned out to be Prickly Comfrey, which was boomed here many years
ago as likely to revolutionise the sheep-growing industry of Australia, and
has long since passed into oblivion.
These examples, though many similar cases might be mentioned, are
sufficient to show that purchasers would do well to let alone any plants that
are being advertised in highly coloured and glowing language, or at least
submit a question in relation to the matter to some competent authority
before purchasing.
A consideration of this subject only emphasises the importance of extreme
care, not only in the matter of quality in seed, but in relation to the intro-
duction of undesirable varieties. There is absolutely no need for a pur-
chaser to pay fancy prices for useless or common seed, boomed under a
fancy name, and offered at extravagant prices. High prices are not always
proof of the article being good, or even desirable.
Buyers having decided upon their requirements might very reasonably,
in writing to seedsmen, ask for samples of seed, and for a statement as
to what vitality and purity the seed may be expected to give. If this were
done, the purchaser would know his position clearly; he could afterwards,
if he wished, proceed to test the seeds for himself. An answer to the above
question would, however, give the real quality of the seed on the points
mentioned.
Tests of Seed Samples.
Samples of seeds forwarded to the Director, Botanic Gardens, Sydney, or
to the Principal, Hawkesbury Agricultural College, Eichmond, will be
tested for farmers free of charge. Hot less than 1 ounce of small seeds
such as lucerne, or 2 ounces of large seeds like peas, should be sent. Larger
quantities are to be preferred. Seeds should be accompanied by any infor-
mation available as to origin, where purchased, age, &c.
If a purity report only is desired, it should be so stated, to secure a prompt
reply. Germination tests take from six to twenty days, according to the
seed.


Number of—
Weeds. >
Munici-
palities.
Shires.
Total.
Sequence.
Xanthium spinosum (Bathurst Burr) ... ... ...i
93
99
192
i
JiubasJrutirosus (Blackberry) ... ... ...
42
46
88
2
Centaurea calcitrapa (Star Thistle or Chinese Burr) .. i
33
50
83
3
Xanthium strumarium (Noogoora Burr) ...
24
47
71
4
Rosa rubiglnosa (Sweet Briar) ... ... ... ...;
27
41
68
5
Cardnus lanceolatus (Black Thistle, or False Scotch
Thistle, or Spear Thistle) ... ... I
Echium plantagineum (Paterson’s Curse, or Purplei
Bugloss, or Blue Weed)
46
7
53
6
11
34
45
1
Carthamus lanatus (Saffron Thistle, or False Star:
Thistle) ...
10
28
38
8
Cryptostemma calendulacea (Cape Weed) ... ....
22
15
37
9
Lantana Camara (Lantana)...
18
17
35
10
Argemone mexicana (Mexican Poppy or Binneguy
Thistle or White Thistle or Prickly Poppy orl
Yellow Poppy) ... ... ... ... I
7
18
25
11
Eichhornia crassipes (Water Hyacinth) ... ...
7
17
24
12
Datura stramonium (False Castor Uil Fiant or Thorn;
Apple or Green Stem or Purple Stem) ... ...!
15
9
24
13
Inula qraveolens (Stinkwort)
7
13
20
!4
Sieotiana glauca (Tree Tobacco or Tobacco Bush) ...;
5
14
19
15
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s Wort) ... ...|
6
11
17
16
Phytolacca octandra (Red Ink Plant or Dye Berry or!
Ink Plant) ... ■■■
13
i
14
17
Solanum cinereum (Narrawa Burr)... ... ... ...j
5
t
12
1 18
Ricinvs communis (Castor Oil Plant) .., ... ...1
9
3
12
19
rea melitensis (Cockspur)
5
5
10
1 20
SECTION XV.
Farmers' Weeds.
Some references have been made to the worst weed pests of various crops in
the preceding pages, and in one or two cases the best methods of eradication
have been indicated, but the number of those that really do harm on farm
lands is considerable. Control must be directed to some extent by the
special characteristic that makes the plant noxious, but to a much larger
extent by a knowledge of the life history, and therefore of the time and
nature of the attack to which each most readily yields.
These important points of view are dealt with at some length in articles
illustrated by coloured plates and drawings now appearing in the Agricul-
tural Gazette. Farmers should acquaint themselves with the advice con-
tained therein if they wish to rid their lands of plant pests.
As some indication of the most prevalent weeds, and therefore of what
should be watched most carefully on the farm, the following list is of
interest; it shows by how many municipal and shire councils the weeds
mentioned have been proclaimed to be noxious weeds within their boundaries.
Weeds proclaimed Noxious within Municipalities and Shires in the State of
New South Wales up to May, 1917.


SECTION XVI.
The Handy Man on the Farm.
HARNESS, HARNESS FITTING, AND REPAIRING.*
Much depends upon the tractive power of the horse, and its effective utilisa-
tion necessitates the adoption of harness which will not in any degree tend
to depreciate the value of his strength. The price of all horses, whether
used for light or heavy draught, is extremely high, and, even apart from
considerations of comfort, it does not pay owners to have their horses laid
by through injuries contracted in the course of their work. The harness is
necessary to enable the animal to exert his strength efficiently, and in
selecting the harness it must be remembered that, while securing this, it
must not cause more than the unavoidable minimum of discomfort. Eo
horse put in harness should suffer any inconvenience except that arising
from fatigue. Unfortunately, however, through lack of knowledge of the
proper adjustment of harness, many horses do suffer considerable pain whilst
at work. This gradually leads up to temporary incapacity, and in some
cases to permanent injuries such as fistulous withers, &e.
Many vices—for example, jibbing and bolting—have their origin in badly-
fitting harness. When the horse is compelled to work in an unsuitable
collar, the undue pressure on any part of the shoulder causes chafing and
soreness, and the horse naturally recoils from what causes him agony.
Ultimately the best-tempered beast becomes vicious and uncontrollable,
through nothing but culpable ignorance on the part of his driver.
Every horse differs in size and shape, and, to fit him properly, it is neces-
sary to use much care. It is not sufficient to depend upon the saddler to fit
horses with their harness. The owner should know the use and proper
adjustment of every part. Wrung shoulders frequently occur through
leaving the selection to the saddler, who, rather than go to the trouble of
obtaining a proper collar for a horse that is difficult to suit, may choose
the nearest fit in his ready-made stock, and justifies his choice by the con-
tention that the collar will soon adjust itself to the shape of the shoulder.
If it is not a good fit in the first instance, it will never become so, and in
the so-called self-adjustment it is quite possible that the horse will be
permanently injured.
Plough Harness.
This is the simplest form of harness, and consists merely of winkers,
collar, and hames, backhand, and chains.
Winkers are almost exclusively used as the headgear for horses doing
heavy draught work. Open bridles are seldom used, as with them the horse,
unless he is particularly willing, develops a cunning habit of shirking his
work.
* Condensed from Farmers’ Bulletin. No. 45. by A. H. E, McDonald, Manager,
Trangie Experiment Farm, formerly of Hawkesburv Agricultural College, who was
assisted by G. Cobb and H. Collins, also formerly of the College staff.


The eye-pieces of the winkers should project outwards from the eyes at
the front, but must fit closely behind. The bit should be sufficiently strong
to stand the work required of it, but should not be cumbersome. An ordi-
nary snaffle-bit is suitable for most work. It should be fitted to the winkers
so that it lies within a quarter of an inch of the bars of the lips—that is,
the junction of the upper and lower lips. If drawn up tightly, the bit pro-
duces chapped lips, and is responsible for much pain; while if it is too low,
it is also likely to cause inconvenience, and may be pushed out of the
mouth.
On the winkers for draught horses it is an advantage to have the bit
attached on one side with a short, light strap, so that it can be easily and
quickly slipped out of the mouth if desired, without removing the winkers.
Bearing-reins are required to prevent the horse cropping at the grass as
he moves along. When at work they are buckled over the tops of the hames,
just sufficiently tight to allow of the free carriage of the head. Where a
pair are used with a pole, the bearing-reins prevent the horses lowering
their heads and so catching their headgear on the pole.
The collar is the most important part, as it is upon that the horse exerts
his strength. For heavy horses they are either simply curved or rounded at
the lower part, or are piped to allow of freer action of the windpipe. The
latter are the more satisfactory, especially on horses with prominent wind-
pipes.
Scrupulous care should be exercised in the selection of the collar. It
should not fit too tightly on the whole or any one part of the shoulder, and
it should not be too large. Chafing is caused principally by large fittings
rubbing over a part, just as large boots chafe the feet.
The chief seat of injury is the point of the shoulder. This is the most
prominent part, and when the collar fits badly most of the pressure is taken
by it instead of being distributed over the full surface.
Injuries frequently occur at the withers. Such usually happen when the
collars fit badly, or when the horses have to carry weight upon their necks,
as they have in pole work. It is a form of injury which is particularly
dangerous, as it may lead to an incurable fistula. The necks of some horses
are very thick at the top, and the ordinary collars are not wide enough. It
is necessary to get collars specially made for such horses.
The shape of the shoulder changes considerably when the horse is put to
fast work, and the fit of the collar then must be noticed. It can be seen by
examining the collar and surface of the shoulder immediately he is taken
out after work.
Nothing is so liable to cause injury to the shoulders and to prevent the
horse exerting his full strength as a flat collar. A well-fitting collar, when
new, is roundly stuffed, and fits closely over the shoulder. It possesses a
springiness which makes it comfortable, but after a little use .the stuffing is
compressed, and the inner surface becomes flat. All collars, after they have
been used for a time, should be restuffed.
Collars are lined with serge or leather. The latter material is cooler and
-easier to keep clean, but is liable to crack. This is a discouragement to its
use in all but light harness. Sweat and dirt accumulate on the surface, and
should he regularly removed. If allowed to remain, a hard condition is
produced, which causes chafing.


Young or fat horses have tender shoulders, and are liable to chafe,
especially in ihe summer, and they should be carefully used until accustomed
to work. Whilst a horse is in work a careful watch must be kept for indica-
tions of soreness. Immediately he is taken from his work, the harness
should be removed and a careful examination made for undue heating in,
any particular part. Bathing the shoulders with salt and water hardens the
skin and renders it less susceptible to injury.
Where galls already exist on the shoulders, it is often a difficult matter
to adjust the collar so that the horse can continue his work. The best
method of surmounting the difficulty is to select a collar which fits perfectly,
and then make a depression in the lining immediately over the gall,
sufficiently deep and wide to prevent the collar coming in contact with it.
The depression is made by removing some of the stuffing and drawing in
the lining with a few stitches. This is called “ chambering ” the collar.
Another method is to have small pads stitched to the collar above and’
below the seat of injury, to remove the pressure. Some horse-owners, in.
the absence of a saddler, use stockings stuffed with horse-hair as a substitute
for the pads. By adopting means such as these, the horse can be worked
while the injury is healing.
For heavy work the hames are usually made of steel, either single or
double plated. The latter are more expensive, but more durable, and less-
likely to suddenly snap when the horse throws himself into the collar.
Hames for drays are made with short tug-chains attached, but. on the
farm it is more convenient to have them fitted with hooks, so that they can
be used with separate short tugs for dray-work, or with chains for ploughing.
They should fit perfectly in the groove of the collar. A chain connects
them at the bottom, and this can be lengthened or shortened to enable the
hames to be adjusted to the size of the collar. This coupling must not be
made too long, or in buckling the hames at the top they will be drawn in
too closely and pinch the neck; if, on the other hand, the connecting chain
is too short, they do not fit well round the collar.
The hook for attaching the tug or plough chains must be placed in such a
position that the draught is not thrown on to the movable shoulder-joint.
If the point of attachment is too low, the upper end of the collar is drawn
slightly forward.
In some horses the body swells outwards considerably beyond the shoul-
ders, and the chains chafe the sides. This can be prevented in most cases
by putting a thick leather pad beneath the hame-hooks, to throw them out-
wards. If this fails, the chains must be covered with leather or strong
cloth.
In plough-harness the backhand is very simple, and serves merely to carry
the reins and to prevent the chains falling too low and getting under the
feet in turning. It should be of such a length that when the chains are
tightened it rests comfortably on the back, and is not thrown up above it.
When it is in the proper position the flaps should be about 9 inches behind
the elbow-joint.
The chains vary in weight according to the class of work. They should
be strong but fairly light, except where leading horses are used, when
heavier chains are required. The length should be sufficient to allow the
swingle-bars to clear the heels -when turning the horses. If too long they


interfere to some extent with the draught, and may get under the feet in
turning; while if too short, the swingle-bars catch against the heels. In
hard, uneven ground, plough-chains should be fairly long. The swivels
must be kept in good order to prevent twisting of the chains, with conse-
quent risk of breakage.
The reins or lines are usually of rope in plough harness. A clasp at one
end is a convenience in attaching them to the bit. Heavy lines should not
be used, as they cause a drag on the horse’s mouth, especially when wet.
Hope of Ti inches circumference is the most suitable for ordinary work.
Fig. 1,—Plough Harness.
Showing the correct position of the hame hook, the position of the backhand, and the method of
attaching the lines.
They are passed through the terrets or rings on the backhand, hut not
'through those on the hames. If they are passed through the latter the
horse’s head is pulled upwards rather than outwards, and he does not
'answer to the rein well. They should not be too long, and if they must be
taken up in length, it can be done most conveniently at the hit by tying a
bowline knot; the spare rope can be tied up to the hames out of the way.
<Pig. 1.)
Leading Harness.
This differs from plough harness principally in that a heavier backhand
■and more complicated fittings are required to support the chains. The
winkers, collar, and hames are essentially the same. A broad band of
leather, divided into two straps at the fore end, passes through a loop in the
backhand, along the back to the tail, where it ends in a crupper. Two
meeter straps are attached with a loop and keeper to the hames, or are
-stitched to the collar itself about 5 inches below the top of the collar, and
the straps attached to the backhand are buckled to these to keep it in
position.


The chains pass through two rings on each side of the backhand, and are
held up behind by hip-straps. These straps should be of such a length that
they prevent the chains and spreader dropping too low (Fig. 2). The chains
must not be held too high by them, or the horse will pull down against his
own back; neither should they be too 1ow t .
Fig. 2.—Leading Harness.
Showing the correct points of attachment of backhand, hip-straps, and spreader to the chains.
The right point for the attachment of the hip-straps to the chains is
about 6 or 8 links in front of the spreader. A carrier-strap is frequently
brought down over the hips and attached to the spreader. This should be
buckled round the spreader about 6 inches in from the chain.
The spreader keeps the chains apart and prevents them from coming in
contact with the horse’s sides. It should be attached to the chains imme-
diately behind the horse, but leaving sufficient space for the free movement
of the legs. When the chains are tight the spreader should be just a shade
behind a perpendicular line through the hocks.
Dray Harness.
The winkers, collar, and hames may be those used in plough harness, but
they are often more elaborately mounted. This, however, does not add to-
their utility. The hames may have tug-chains attached, or may be fitted
with hooks for the attachment of separate tugs. A saddle is used to carry
the shafts, and attached to this is the breeching, designed to hold the saddle
in position, and to enable the dray to be held back by the breeching-chains.
The saddle consists essentially of pads to protect the back, and a groove to
carry the back-chain. It must be well stuffed and properly adjusted to
prevent injury to the back. Galls are almost as frequently caused by ill-
fitting saddles as by collars.
The shafts are supported by the back-chain, which passes over the saddle
and is attached to hooks on the runners or travelling bars on the shafts.
The runners should have their centres directly perpendicular with the
groove on the saddle when the tug-chains are tight. They are sometimes
placed in the w T rong position, and must be shifted.
The back-chain should not be too long nor too short. When the shafts are
hooked up the points should be about 3 inches below where the tug-chains
leave the hames. If hooked up too short the horse actually pulls against
himself.


The tug-chains arc hooked up so that the back-chain is kept in the centre
of the runners under normal conditions, with freedom to move backwards
or forwards in sympathy with the movements of the horse (see Tig. 3).
The breeching-chains should be just slack enough to allow free action of
the hind legs, it is not infrequently noticed that the tug-chains are too
long, and, instead of the load being drawn by them, it is drawn by the back-
chain. The breeching-chains, also, are often too long, and when the horse
attempts to hold the load the breeching cannot perform its function, and
the load is held back by the back-chain. This pushes the saddle forward
against the withers, causing pinching, and probably setting up the con-
ditions which lead to fistula.
Fig. 3. —Dray Harness.
Showing the correct length of the hack-chain, tug, and breeching-chains ; and also the right position
of the travelling-bar on the shaft.
Light Harness.
In the choice of light harness, whether it be sulky, buggy, van, or any other
type, the same scrupulous discrimination must he exercised as in the selection
of heavy harness. Too frequently the same set is used for whatever horse is
driven, but, while this is quite permissible with certain parts when the horses
are of average size, each must at least have his own collar, and preferably
his own winkers also. Most of the other parts are adjustable to the size of
the horse, and it is only necessary to make the required changes by taking
up or letting out straps.
The parts are more elaborately mounted than in farm harness ; but the
principles underlying the fitting are essentially the same. Leather is used
almost entirely, except in some van harness, in which chains are sometimes
used for traces. The weight depends chiefly upon the type of vehicle used.
It is a matter of controversy whether winkers or bridles should be used.
The arguments advanced against the use of winkers are that the eyes are
enclosed, and become hot and irritated, and that the horse is more likely to
117290—2 c


be frightened by anything coming fr in behind. Horse*, especially those
used in crowded t o-oughfares, are certainly less likely to boit when «o ked
in bridles. A full vision of everything b. fore and behind is obtained, and
tbe bo se is not so easily frightene t by any thing rushing by sudd' nly. All
drivers know that a horse is less frighten- d by an object coming towards him,
than by one a pearing unexpectedly. A further a'Vantage is that if the
head-gear happens to be rubbed off, the h -rse accustoms-1 to the restricted
vision afforded by winkers, becomes frightened and pro ably bolts, while the
one u*ed 10 a bridle is nnpertui bed. One of the main obstacles to the use of
open bridles is tbe patience which is req ired in accustoming young horses
to them The winkers have a subduing effect immediately they are put on,
which the bridle does not possess
With good going horses, it matters little whether bridles or winkers are
adopte i ; but where teams >.re used, and the driver has - ot the horse directly
under his eye, wink-is are necessary to prevent the horse seeing behind him.
A lazy horse which can s-e behind i- cons antly watering his driver, rath-r
than sticking closely to business a d minding wh-re tie is g"ing. He works
well when his driver is watching ; but acquires the habit of loafing ween he
is not. When the winkers are us- ri, a steady pace is usually maintained.
The h at and irritation caused by close-fitting eye-pieces can '-e prevented
by using winkers with the eye-pieces thrown well outwards at the trout.
The collar must fit perfectly ; otherwise it causes discomfort, and frequently
creates the, habit of jibbing. Few horses are naturally vicious or obstinate,
and in most cases the stupidity of drivers is the prime factor in the formation
in them of habits alien to their nature. Jibbing can frequently be cured by
the removal of the cause and by kindly tr atim-nt. especially if the handling
is done by some person who has not been responsible for die trouble.
In light harness the hames buckle at the 'op and bottom, but it is more
convenient to use the lower buckle The best traces have buckles near the
hames, by which they can be leng hened to suir the h rse. Tbe point of
attachment to the h mes should be just above the point of die shoulder, so
that the movable joint between -he shoulder-blade ano t o humetus doi s n- t
receive the pressure of tbe draught.
If the traces are too long, the vehicle is not drawn bv them, but by the
backhand. On the other hand, if they are too s or , the shaft* push the
sa-ldle-pad forward against the withers, and also draw the crupper up tightly
under ihe tail, causing chafing.
Breast-plates are used to som- extent instead of the collar, but whil*t little
exception can be taken to th- m for very light wok, t 1 ey cannot be recom-
mended where th- draught is at all heavy. When they are used the traces
interfere with the free movement ot t' e shoulder-j dnt, and cause discomfort
to the horse. With the ordinary collar, provided the ban es are properly
adjusted, the force exerted by the horse >s against the portion of the collar
lying against the immov ble sho Ider-blade, and consequ ntly the free
movement of the joint is not interfered with
The shafts are supported by shafr-t igs at ached to the saddle-pad. These
should be long enough to su pend the shafts level wilt the swell of the
flaps. T e pad is kept in pnsi i n by a band running alone the back and
terminating in a cropper, a.d by the hell .’-ban- 1 The crupper should be fairly
thick to avoid chafing. The bree -hing is also atiacl ed to this band.
The correct position for the pad is ju*t where the withers swell upwards.
If kept further back it has a tendency to slip forwai d, drawing the crupper
too tight.


The right position for the breeching is about 3 or 4 inches below the hip
join s Here it does not interfere with the action of the horse, and he is
able to throw his whole weight into it if in ces-ary. If allowed to drop down
t o low' it cau-es irritation, and may lead to kicking.
Tue treeching-straps should not be buckled too tightly, or the breeching
will interfere with the free action of the hindquarters and also cause kicking.
It should be just so light that when the horse is fully exiended it dues not
tighten on the legs.
Kicking-straps are required on some horses doing vehicle work. A kicking
strap is a strong leather band which is passed O'er the rump, and attached
to the shafts just behind the breeching staples. The further it can be kept
hack towards the tail the more effective it is. It is kept in position by
attaching it 10 the crupper.
The reins sometimes c nsist of black leather throughout, but for the sake of
clean 1i ess some stain'd leather is frequently used tor he grip. They should
be sufficiently long to leave a margin of about 3 feet when the horse is
trotting. If too long, the louse ends are trouble-ome.
It is a controvc sial point whether bearing-reins should be tolerated. If
misu-ed, they are an instrumen of torture, but on some horses are very
useful when carefully adjusted. Some are such inveterate pullers that,
without the bear!tig-reins, they pull heavily on the hands of the driver,
to his exceeding discomfort. When us< d, the bearing-reins are brought up
and hung over a hook placed in the saddle-pad. They should be long enough
to allow the ordinary free carriage of the head.
Care of Harness.
Harness perishes very quickly if neglected, but if reasonable care is
ex rcised it will last for y> ars. Plated harness should nor be kept in the
s allies, as t e gases arising fr m the decomposition of ti e excreta tarnish
the fittings. imm diafely the harm ss is brought in the dust should be
carerul y wiped off with a soft cloth Or leather, and mud or sweat removed
l y washing with water, but on no accoen should too much be used The bits
should be well was-ed in dean water, iborons:hly dried, and rubbed over
with a little m atstbot i 11. Tie leather should be kept soft arid pliable by
using some dressing. Any one, of the proved commercial compositions is
suitable .ml civ ap.
H'avy ha’ness docs not require the same attention, but it must be kept
pliable and t ugh by oiling a reguar intervals. leather which is not
treated soon becom s hard under our dry conditions, and cracks, while the
sti clung decays A very suitable dressing is pure neatsfo t oil. Some
very effective and cheap mixtures are on the market for dressing heavy
ha,' ness.
The Line of Draught.
B> the line of draught is meant the direction in which a force acts in
moving a load. In prac ice t.h-■ line of draught in p'oughinc lies for part of
it- el' ance i the eh ins. The di ection may he correct or incorrect ;if the
latter, it means that a por ion of the horse’s energy is b> ing expended
useles-dy. T< o 'tarn the fullest advantage from his strength, it is i e>-essary
that tire line of draught be so placed that nothing obstructs its direct action
on the load.


The force i xerted bv the horse in traction consists of pushing. The term
“ pulling," although customary, is incorrect, inasmuch as u horse can only
pull when he is attached ui a load by the tali. The foi ce is obtained by
the propulsion of bis own weight, the forward movement being due to
the contraction or expansion of the muscles attached to the tarious bones.
These bones form a system of levers, acted upon by the muscles. Propulsion
can only take place when one extremity of the lever is fixed while the other
is movable. This is the case with the horse. The fixed point is the foot,
which is against the ground, while the movable point is the surface of the
shoulder carrying the collar, in practice it is found that this force can he
exerted most efficiently when the traces are attached to the haiiies just above
the point of the shoulder (Fig. 1), provided, of course, that the proper line
of draught between this point and the load is maintained.
The weight of the horse, which is very important when considering his
power, becomes effective only when the body is thrown forward beyond the
centre of gravity. In the horse tins lies about the seventh rib, in the middle
of the girth. It is evident that the heavier the shoulders, neck, and head of
the horse, the greater is the force which he can exert.
This is appreciated and taken advantage of by draymen, who load their
drays “ heavy on ” —that is, in such a way that a portion of the weight is
thrown on to the horse’s back. This increases the weight which can be
thrown into the collar : but in loading in this way, care must be taken that
the horse is not overweighted. A considerable strain is thrown upon the
front feet, which rapidly causes fatigue, and may lead to injury. The weight
thrown on to the horse should nor be mote than can be fairly comfortably
lifted by raising the point of the shafts.
In light vehicles no weight should be thrown on to the back, especially on
slippery roads, as the horse is more likely to stumble.
The weight can only be exerted efficiently against the collar when the line
of draught is right. The feet act as a fulcrum, and the system of bones,
Fig. 4. —An incorrect method of attaching leading
chains to those of the rear horse.
embracing the legs, haunch, spinal
column, etc., acts as the lever. The
weight is most effective when it acts
downwards on this lever against the
fulcrum. If the horse were attached
to the load in such a manner that
the line of draught lay above his
back, the effect would be to lift him
from his feet, and consequently
render Ids weight ineffective. This
occurs when a dray is loaded so
“ light on ” that the shafts are lifted,
and are only prevented from rising
into the air by the, belly-band.
Tins takes a part of the horse’s
weight off' the fulcrum (the feet), and renders it useless.
By lowering the line of draught to the horizontal, greater effectiveness
would be secured, but the horse would still be unable to exert his full
power.
The actual efficient angle of the correct line of draught varies according
to the height of the horse, and also his length, but generally it should form
an angle of about '2O degrees with a horizontal line taken through the


point where (he ton;., act.- on the load. In ordinary plough harness, with
the chains tight and long enough to prevent the swingle-bar catching the
heels, this angle places the swingle-bar just a shade lower than the hocks.
When attached to the back-chain, the shafts must not be brought up too
high. <>r thov "ill be pulled downwards by the tugs, and portion of the
horse’s strength will be expended against his own back. The back-chain,
Fig. 5. —Six-horse Plough Team.
when of the proper length, allows the points off shafts to lie about
3 inches below the hame hooks (Fig. 3).
In team work, where horses are
harnessed in tandem, inattention to the
importance of securing a direct line of
draught may lead to a serious loss of
power. In some cases the chains of the
leading horse are hooked to those of the
horse immediately behind, close up to
the hames (Fig. 4), with the result that
the leading horse draws downwards on
the chains. This means that the strength
of the rear horse, instead of acting directly
on the load, acts partly against the power
exerted by the leader, and is thus to some
extent rendered ineffective.
A direct line of draught can be se-
cured by adopting some simple arrange-
ment. A good appliance is shown in
Fig. 6. This is a simple half-inch iron
bar, 12 inches in length, with a ring at
each end and one at the centre. The
rear chains are attached to the ring in
the centre, while the upper ring is
attached to the hame hook, and the
Fig. 6. —An appliance for obtaining a
correct line of draught when leading
harness is used in ploughing.
lower ring receives the chains of the leader (Fig. 5).
Another simple and very effective arrangement, which can be fitted by
anyone, is obtained by the attachment of short auxiliary chains to the rear
chains to receive the leading chains. These auxiliaries are attached to the
rear chains about 18 inches or 2 feet from the large end links, and are held
up by short drop chains. They take the leading chains, and preserve the
direct line of draught, preventing the downward pull on the rear chains.


Repair of Harness.
Although this is commonly considered to be within the province of the
saddler, and consequently is neglected by the farmer, there is no reason
why the latter should not make many of his own repairs. Those required
are often very simple, and the following details are given, so that those who
are not in a position to obtain training may be able, by studying them
carefully, to acquire a knowledge of the work.
It is necessary to bear in mind that, although the process may appear
complicated, it is not really so, and can easily be mastered. Time is always
available for doing odd jobs, and by following the instructions no difficulty
will be encountered in making ordinary repairs, and the harness will be kept
in good order at little expense.
It is not proposed to deal with the more complicated work, such as the-
restuffing of collars, <fec.—this must be left to the trained man—but merely
to show how many simple repairs can be neatly and strongly made.
The following list comprises a fairly complete outfit for effecting repairs.
Whilst with these almost any class of work can be done, the possession of
them all is not essential; for instance, much useful work can be accomplished
with an awl, needle, and thread. Costs are given, but are only approximate.*
s. d. s. d.
1 pair clams ... ... ... 3 6 2 tongue punches, Nos. 35and 37,
1 ~ pliers, No. 3 ... ... 16 at Is. 6d, ... ... 3 0
1 dozen awls, assorted ... ... 0 6 4 round punches, Nos. 3, 4, 5,
1 ~ awl-handles ... ... 1 0 and 6, at 6d ... ... 2 0
1 ~ collar needles, assorted 2 0 1 fine saddler’s shoulder-crease... 2 0
2 packets needles, Nos. 2 and 4 0 8 1 single hand-crease ... ... 1 0
1 saddler’s compass ... ... 1 6 1 saddler’s palm ... ... ... 1 0
1 round knife ... ... ... 5 0
1 saddler’s hammer ... ... 2 0 Total ... ...£1 7 8
1 edge tool, No. 2 ... ... 1 0
A saddler’s plough, which costs about 155., facilitates the cutting of leather,
but is not essential.
The different materials which are required in renovating harness, with the
approximate costs (in March, 1916) are* :
s. d. s. d.
Pitch, per lb. ... 0 4 Tacks, per packet ... 4d. to 0 7
Resin ~ ... ... ... 0 4 Bridle leather, per side ... ... 27 6
Beeswax ~ ... 2 0 Harness leather, per lb.. . ... I 10
BlaoK wax ~ ... 1 0 Collar-check, per yard 3 6
Best brown hemp, No. 2, per lb. 4 0 Brown serge ... ... ... 4 6
A small leather apron, about 12 inches by 4 inches, is required. This is
suspended from the waist and hangs over the right thigh. A small g hook,
for holding the hemp whilst making the thread, is also needed. A suitable
bench is shown in Fig. 11.
Use of the Tools.
The Plough is somewhat expensive, and its work can be done by other
tools, such as the round knife. The chief parts are a cutting Hade and
gauge. By setting it to the right width a strip of leather can be rapidly and
accurately cut (Fig. 7.)
* Under the stress of war conditions these prices are subject to variation, and are only
quoted in the hope that they will be useful in a general way.


The Round Knife is almost indispensable. It is the most suitable tool for
shaving or levelling leather, and is also used for cutth g leather into straps
or any o her form. The line of cutting is marked with the compasses, and
the round knif- entered and steadily pu-hed forward along the line, keeping
the left hand in front to hold the leather firm. The cutting is done on
wood in the direction of the grain, and the surface must be free from nails.
(Fig. 8.)
Compasses are required for marking the lines for cutting, and for marking
■distances.
The Edge Tool is used for taking the sharp edges off the leather after it
has been cut. If these edges are left, the leather readily frays or cracks.
The tool is run along the edge with the right hand, and the work steadied by
keeping the left hand in front. (Fig. 9.)
Punches are used for making the different holes required in leather working.
The mund form is used for making the holes in straps for receiving the tongue
■of the buckle. Tne tongue punches are used for cutting the hole for the heel
of the tongue.
The Creases are used for making ornamental lines on the leather (Fig. 10).
These lines do not increase the strength of the leather, but add much to its
appearance. The crease is heated over a candle, and after wiping off the
candle-b'ack the crease is pushed along the leather until a sufficiently marked
depression is made.
Awls and Awl-handles. — The awl-blades are attached to the handles by first
pushing the heel of the blade into the handle as far as possible with the hand.
The handle and blade are carefully examined to see that they are fitted truly,
and then the blade is securely held in the vice, while the handle is driven
■down on to it with a light hammer.
Three kinds of awls are used :
(1) A curved awl, slightly flattened at the point, but otherwise round.
This is used when the work cannot be stitched right through, but
from one side only.
(2) A round straight awl, tapering gradually from the handle to the
point. This makes a round hole, the size of which depends upon the
distance the awl is pushed through. It is used where single holes
are required, and in beginning and ending long stitching.
(3) A diamond awl, used in ordinary stitching. Several of these to suit
the different sized threads used, are required.
Confidence is the chief requirement in handling the tools, ana a little
practice soon makes the learner familiar with their use.
The Thread.
A good thread is the first essential in making strong, lasting repairs. Good
hemp must be selected, and considerable care exercised in the making.
For convenience the hemp is kept in a small tin, with the end passed
through a hole in the lid. The end is caught between the second and
third lingers of the left hand, passed round the S hook, which should be about
3 feet away, and brought back and caught by the thumb and first finger of
the same hand. Break the hemp by gently pulling with the left hand, while
unravelling by rolling it downwards and away on the apron v/ith the right
hand. The breaking must be carefully done to obiain a fine tapering point.


Fig. 7.—Cutting leather with the Saddler’s Plough.
Fig. 9.—Trimming a strap with the Edge Tool.
Fig. 8.-Gutting with the Round Knife.
Fig. 10.—Creasing a strap.


This process of parsing the hemp nmnu :!m hook i- repi -a led mi til sufficient
strands are brought: together to give a thread of the required strength. This
is determined by the class of work to lie done. In light work two strands
are used, while live or six are usually required for heavy stitching.
When sufficient -a lands have been brought, together, the end is taken
between the thumb and first finger of the left hand, and the thread twisted
by rolling with the right band on the apron. The twist is kept in by
catching the thread up bv the finger and thumb of the left hand. The
amount of twist determines its fineness, strength, and evenness. When well
Fig. 11. —A convenient bench for leather-working, showing arrangement of tools.
twisted, wax freely but quickly by rubbing the wax briskly up and down
right to the tips. A little more wax is applied to the tips than to the
remainder, so that the needle can be more easily and securely attached.
It must be remembered that the threads are not doubled before twisting.
A fine tapering tip is required at each end for the attachment of a needle,
and this can only be obtained by twisting the thread from end to end without
doubling.
Wax.
Wax is applied to retain the twist, to give strength and smoothness, and to
preserve the thread. Two kinds are used, beeswax where black threads are
not desirable, and cohbler’s-wax.
The latter is most suitable for heavy stitching, and is composed of—
-1 lb. Pitch, I oz. Resin.
The pitch and resin are heated until thoroughly liquefied and intermingled,
when the composition is poured into cold water, in which it can be
conveniently preserved. When required for use, a piece about as big as the
top of the thumb is cut off with a wet knife, and held whilst being used in a
piece of soft leather to prevent it sticking to the fingers.
These proportions of pitch and resin make a suitable wax for use in warm
weather, but in winter it becomes hard and brittle. This can be overcome
by making a mixture of—
-1 lb. Pitch, 3 oz. Resin, 3 oz. Mutton fat.
The thread sometimes becomes hard or sticky' when cold, and will not run
well. This can he remedied by smearing the fingers with raw beef or mutton
fat and passing them up and down the thread a few times.


Threading the Needle.
In saddlers’ work stitching is not done with a needle and thread
such as is used in stitching
cloth. A single thread is
used, and a needle attached to
each end. The needles must
be threailed securely, and in
such a way that, the thread
where it leaves the eye, is not
thicker than the needle. If
it is larger, either the thread
or the needle will be broken
in s'i'ching.
To thread the needle, pass
about 1| to 2 inches of the
tip through the eye (see A,
Fig. 12) ; pass the needle
through the thread (B); draw
the thread through as far as
it will go. and twist the loose
end which is shown, well round
the thread (C) ; draw the
needle through the thread two
or three times at a place near
to the point where the end of
the tip has reached, but be-
tween i hat point and the eye
of the needle (D). By draw-
ing the needle and thread
through itself in this way, the
tip is woven to the thread and
kept from unravelling. The
finished thread, after smooth-
ing down with the finger and
thumb, is shown at E.
Fig. 12. —Threading the Needle.
The Requirements of Good Stitching.
To obtain good stitching, it is necessary that—
1. Thread of a kind and
strength suited to the
nature of the work be
selected.
2. Thethreadbesmooth, well
twisted, and well waxed.
3. The stitches be all drawn
equally tight, and made
as firm as possible with-
out cutting the leather.
4. The needles be used in the
right way.
5. The right kinds of awls be
selected and correctly
used.
Fig. 13. —Marks left by the Wheel-pricker
as a guide to stitching.


6. The stitches bo made towards the operator.
7. The work be closely and firmly held in the clams.
8. The stitches be of equal length.
9. The holes be of equal size and angle.
Preparing for Stitching.
When neat work is required, wheel-prickers are used to mark the line of
stitching. These can be fitted with wheels to mark for any number of
stitches per inch. The points on the wheel cut into the leather and make a
distinct mark where the holes are to be made with the awl (Fig. 13).
It is necessary to have
the work securely fastened
so that it wdl not move
whilst being stitched. Cut
tacks are used for this pur
po*e, and are drawn when
the work is finished.
The sharp edges of the
leather must be removed.
This is done with the edge
tool. Edge tools are made
in various sizes to suit the
class of leather.
The ends of the leather
must frequently be bevelled
before stitching, to obtain
an even thickness and
smooth surface ; as, for
Fig. 14.—Shaving leather with the Round Knife.
instance, in stitching on a
buckle. This is done by shaving the ends down with a round knife (Fig. 14).
Stitching.
The work, whilst being stitched, is held by the clams. These are held
between the knees, and
are kept in position by
resting the end on the
floor, passing the clams
under the right leg, and
resting them on the left.
By their use the hands
are left free for stitching.
The operator must sit
with his thighs horizontal,
or the clams will tend to
slip away.
The awl is pushed
through the leather from
the upper side at a slight
angle. This, besides pre-
venting the holes tearing
Fig. 15.—Using the awl


into each other, allows the thread to le drawn tighter. To facilitate the use of
the awl, saddlers usually cut a flat place on the handle, and by always keeping
the thumb on this, the right angle is secured without dilliculty. {Fig. 15.)
M ben the first hide lias been made the needle is passed upfront below, and
the thread drawn through until an equal length is on cadi side. The next hole
is then made with the awl and the lower needle brought upwards through
this, and when the thread has been drawn through about 3 inches, the
upper needle is passed down-
wards through the same
hole. : Fig. Hi.) The awl
makes a diamond-shaped hole,
and the thread brought up
from below must be kept in
the angle nearest the stitching
already done—the lowin'end —
while the thread taken down-
wards must bo kept in the
upper angle. This can be
done by pulling downwards
a little with the upper hand,
while the lower hand is drawn
slightly towards the operator.
Each thread must be firmly
drawn when pulled through.
Fig. 16. —Stitching.
This is continued until the required amount of stitching has been done,
when the thread is secured by turning back a stitch, using a round aw] for
making the hole. The thread when passed through is cut off flush with the
surface of the leather.
By following the above directions, much useful repairing may be done by
the farmer in his spare hours, and besides being profitable the work will be
found interesting.
Broken winkers can be repaired, lost buckles replaced, and backhands
and belly-bands, which are damaged, made strong again Traces can he made
safe, and the unsightly, dangerous knots, often seen in reins and other part*
of the harness, replaced by strong, neatly-stitched repairs. It will be
found that neat, strong work can be easily done, and that the details are
soon mastered. Much of the work is merely cutting-out and stitching,
and by close examination of the harness and imitation of h, nearly all
repairs can be accomplished. Many articles, such as bridles, straps, belly-
bands, &c., can also be made without difficulty. These can be cheaply
bought, but provided good leather and hemp are obtained, the home-made
article will probably have the merit of greater strength and durability.
Horse Rugs.
Some difficulty is often experienced in securing a rug to the horse so that
it fits him comfortably without slipping off. The best method of accom-
plishing this is to attach flank straps, instead of the crupper that is often
used, and to have the usual girth and chest straps. When flank straps are
adopted it is not necessary to buckle any of the straps as tightly as when a
crupper is used.


Although rugs can he hough! cheaply, they aie often home-maclc, am! the
following instructions will be useful : The rug consists of a canvas covering
and an inside lining of some warm ma'cnal such as serge. For ordinary
horses the covering is math' G feet sijuaro. and when the strips of canvas have
been stitched together, a curved piece is cut out over the withers, I'his piece
is cut out 10 inches deep in the centre, and is 1 feet wide at the base.
The edges of the canvas are doubled up t wice to give a good firm hem
about half an inch wide. The inside lining is 4 feet wide, leaving 1 foot
on each side of the canvas covering unlined.
The buckles for the Hank straps are put just in front of the back hem.
1 foot in from the edges on the outside, and the straps taken through a sht
near the hem of the canvas. A 14 'is stitched on the inside of the rug
about 20 inches forward from the hack hem, and 1 foot in from the side, for
the attachment of the flank straps by clips. The straps are made about
Fig. 17. —Horse-rug, showing the position of the straps, buckles, &c.
6 feet long so that they can be adjusted to the size of the horse. The girth,
which is 2 feet 6 inches long, is stitched on the inside, 22 inches back from
the front hem, and 1 foot in from the side.
The girth strap is 18 inches long, and is attached in the same relative
position as the girth on the opposite side. The chest strap and buckle are
placed on the front hem on the outside, 1 foot from the side. To make the
rug stronger, a strip of leather about 2 j inches wide, may be stitched down
the centre on the outside.
In attaching all buckles and straps, care should be taken to have them
stitched on to the inside lining as well as the canvas covering, and not placed
where the stitches will pass through the canvas only.
Fig. 17 illustrates a horse-rug and the positions of the buckles and straps.


BLACKSMITHING FOR FARMERS.*
The farmer is perhaps called upon more than anyone else to exercise his
ingenuity and to meet emergencies, and in the present time of keen com-
petition he must be in a position to help himself. He is called upon in turn
to be carpenter, saddler, blacksmith, &c., and it must be admitted that far-
mers generally have adapted themselves well to circumstances. At the same
time, it is noticeable that blacksmithing work is not taken up in the same
way as, for instance, carpentry, although in the matter of time, and also of
money, it would mean a great saving. When the ironwork of some machine
Fig. 1. —A Portable Fan-blast Forge.
breaks, it often means a long journey to the blacksmith, and in many cases
if a forge were on the farm this work could be done by the farmer himself.
Another aspect of the question is worthy of consideration. The forge has
a peculiar fascination for boys, and placing the facilities at their disposal
provides them with a source of amusement, and with an occupation that,
with a litfle skill, can he turned to profitable account, and at the same
time will tend to make farm life more interesting.
Forges,
These can be roughly divided into two classes—fan-blast, and the bellows
forges. Fan-blast forges are either self-contained,—that is, the hearth and
blast are in the one forge; or the forge merely consists of a hearth, and the
* Condensed from banners’ Bulletin No. 4(i, by A. H E McDonald, Manager,
Trangie Experiment Farm, formerly of Hawkesbury Agricultural College, who was
assisted by D, H. Reay, blacksmith at the College.


blast is taken from a pipe connected with a blower. The blower may deliver
air to several forges, each being equipped with a valve to regulate the flow.
Such forges are only used in the large machine shops.
The portable fan-blast forges, an illustration of which is seen in Fig. 1,
are very suitable for farm work. They are made in different sizes, but as the
farmer does not usually have to take in hand very heavy work, a medium
size will be satisfactory. At the same time a larger forge gives more room
for working, and metal can be heated more rapidly. It is doubtful whether
it is economy to purchase one of small size, when the outlay of a little
more money results in a much superior forge being obtained.
Bellows forges are the kind generally used by blacksmiths. Like the blast
forges, they are )n d in different sizes.
Probably the portable fan-blast forge is the most suitable for farmers’
purposes. The fan action produces a very even blast, and the forge has the
additional advantage that, being made of iron throughout, it can be exposed to
the weather without danger of serious deterioration. When bellows are used
the forge must always be housed in a proper shed, or the leather soon perishes.
It is a convenience, especially to those who work on large areas, to have a
forge which can be moved easily from place to place. For instance, when
tanks are being excavated, or distant paddocks ploughed, it is an advantage to
have the forge on the spot. Unless it is portable it cannot easily be moved about.
The prices of fan-blast forges vary from £3 to £B.* One with a hearth of
about 22 or 24 inches square is a good size for most purposes, and costs about £5.
Smithy.
A good building is required to house the tools and protect the workman
from inclement weather. If the tools are not kept together in a definite
place they soon become scattered, especially when only occasionally used,
and are not at hand when required. Many odd jobs for the smithy accu-
mulate on the farm, and not being matters of urgency are, in the rush of work,
left over to a more convenient season. Wet days can be profitably filled in
doing work of this class, and necessarily some shelter must be provided as
a protection from the rain. Such a building should be located in a high
and dry spot, as dampness causes rusting of the tools.
A suitable size is about 12 feet square and 8 or 9 feet high. The roof
may be of iron or any other waterproof covering, and the sides of slabs.
An opening must be made in the roof to allow fumes to escape readily.
Large numbers of tools of various descriptions accumulate in a shop after
a time, and racks should be made for these so that they can be kept in a
place where they can be found without difficulty.
The Tools.
The Anvil. —A solid anvil is required. A light one, or a heavy piece of
iron, such as is sometimes used, lacks solidity and gives too freely under
the hammer. The price charged for anvils is about 40s. per owt., and one
weighing at least 2 cwt. is required. A second-hand anvil, quite suitable
for amateurs, can often be obtained cheaply from a local blacksmith.
Vices. —A good strong vice is a necessity. Small vices are very well for
light work, but they are practically useless for much of the work a fanner
has to do. The ordinary blacksmith’s vice, known as a “tail ” vice, is
very good. These are generally sold by weight. One with a 5-inch jaw,
• These prices are subject to considerable variation under war conditions, but are
quoted in the hope that they will be useful in a general way.


and weighing between W and lb,, is a good workable size. Parallel
vices cost slightly more than tail vices, but they possess the advantage
that a full-faced grip is obtained, regardless of the extent to which the
jaws are opened.
Hammers. --Different sizes and shapes arc used by smiths, but for farmers'
work, a hammer weighing
about, 2 lb., with a ball end,
is all that is required.
(Fig. 2.) The ball end, or
“ pene, : ’ as it is called, is used
in riveting, scarfing, and other
work. In some hammers
straight or cross penes take
the place of the ball end. A
Fig. 2.—-A Smith’s Hammer,
straight peue is tapered, somewhat like a blunt chisel, and runs
longitudinally with the handle, while a cross pone is at right-angles.
Sledges are not urgently required by an amateur, but nevertheless a
sledge-hammer is very useful on a farm for many purposes. A 10 or 121 b.
sledge is a good size.
The hammers, sledges, and other tools must be firmly attached to their
handles. Well-seasoned wood should be used; it is an advantage to have
the wood in the shop for some time before making the handles, so that it will
be well dried out. Unless it is well-seasoned the heat of the forge shrinks
the wood, and the hammer head becomes loose.
The Flatter. —This tool has a broad, flat face, and is used, as its name
implies, to flatten or smoothen surfaces after the hammer. The hammer
leaves the surface somewhat rough, and a better finish can be obtained
with the flatter. Farmers, however, scarcely require this tool, as for all
practical purposes sufficient finish can be obtained with the hammer.
Swages are small tools with the faces grooved in different sizes to fit over
bars. Some have semicircular grooves, while others have angular ones.
What are called top and bottom swages are used. They are ranged in pairs,
Fig. 3.—A—Top Swage.
B. — Fuller.
one for the top and the other for the bottom. The top swage is fitted with
a handle (Fig. 3a), while the bottom one has a stem for fitting into the
hole in the anvil. These tools, like the flatter, are generally used for
giving a finish, and can well be dispensed with.
Instead of the single swages a swage block is occasionally used. This is
a large iron block, bearing on its outside surface a series of grooves of varying
kinds and sizes, and having its centre pierced with holes. A swage block is
of little use on the farm.


Fuller, -This tool has a eonwx far-. It is ehietly used for lormmg semi-
circular grooves or depressions in bars, and sometimes for finishing up corners
where a hammer cannot be used. The rounded face does not cut the fibres
of iron, but merely alters their direction. The fuller, therefore, when used
to make a groove, does not lessen the strength of the iron.
They are made in different sizes. The face forms half of a circle, and the
size is taken at the base of the semicircle, or what would be the diameter
of a complete circle. Fullers are spoken of as i-inch. 2-inch, &c. (Fig. 3b.)
The Hardie is a tool with a sharp edge, adapted for cutting hot or cold
iron or mild steel. It is fitted with a stern, so that it can be held in the anvil.
When a bar of iron is to be cut, it is laid on the sharp edge of the hardie, a
smart blow- is struck with the hammer, and the bar is then moved round a
little for the next blow, and so on until the bar is nicked all round. 1*
is then easily broken by striking a sharp blow on the end, after laying
the bar on the anvil with the nicked place just over the edge.
Hot and cold sets or chisels are steel tools used for cutting either hoi or
cold metal. They are fitted with handles and are forced into the metal
with the hammer or sledge. Hot sets are kept thinner in tlm blade than
Fig. 4.—Cold Set.
Fig. 5. —Set Hammer.
■cold sets. Cold sets must be kept thicker on account of the risk of breakage.
These are tempered, but it is little use tempering the hot sets, as the heat
of the metal cut by them soon withdraws the temper. (Fig. 4.)
Set Hammer. —This is somewhat similar to the flatter, but is made smaller
in the face. (Fig. 5.) It is chiefly used for reaching those places where
ordinary hammering cannot be done, as in angles. It is placed on the
spot which requires working and struck with the sledge.
Punches are made circular, oval, oblong, and square in different sizes, and
are fitted with handles for use.
Mandrels are slightly tapered tools used for finishing up holes after punching,
shaping rings, &c. They are made in different sizes.
Bolster. —This is a steel or iron bar or block, containing holes or cavities
for forming up different classes of work. The holes are round, square, and
slotted, according to the class of work for which they are intended. If a


head is required on a bar or bolt it is upset a little to thicken the end so that
it will not slip right through the bolster; the bar is then heated and dropped
as far as it will go through the selected hole, and driven with the hammer.
The effect of the hammer is to form a head on the bar from the metal.
The tongs vary hi size and construction according to the nature of the work,
and each blacksmith makes them to his own liking. The illustrations show
some forms which have been found very handy where the work consists,
chiefly of repairs to farm tools or implements.
Fig. 6. —a— Tongs for holding Links.
B-General purpose Tongs.
Fig. 6a shows a pair of tongs adapted for holding small links whilst welding.
The jaws should only be about I inch wide, and have a small groove near
the points to enable a firm grip of the link to be obtained.
Fig. 6b shows a pair suitable for general purposes.
Fig. 7.—A—Tongs for holding Bolts.
B—Tongs for bolding Round Stocks.


Fig. 7a illustrates tongs for holding bolts. The rounded jaws leave room
for the head, and enable the points to take a firm hold of the bolt.
The tongs in Fig. 7b are designed for holding hoops and flat rings, such as
the round stocks of dray wheels, &c. This form gives such a grip that, when
hammering, the work can be brought into the required position by merely
turning the wrist. This is an important point, as iron cools quickly, and
everything must be arranged so that no time whatever is wasted.
Fig. 8a shows a pair of tongs for holding a ploughshare. The lower two-
pointed curved jaw is obtained by making an ordinary flat jaw about inches
longer than the upper one. This jaw is split down the centre, and each section
curved as shown, and the tips turned in at right-angles to prevent the share
from moving from side to side. Similar tongs, smaller in size, are used for
holding coulters.
Fig. 8.—A— Tongs for holding Ploughshares.
B—Tongs for holding a Pick.
Fig. 8b is an illustration of tongs for holding a pick. The jaws are curved
round as shown, and are helped by a ring, an end of which holds the two parts
of the tongs together instead of the usual rivet.
The Fire.
The best coal must be selected. Coal which crumbles up when firmly
pressed in the hand, and has a bright glassy face on the fractures, as a rule
gives the best fire. Hard dull-coloured coal, or bright splintery coal, does
not make a good fire. Some of the dull hard coal is very unsuitable. It
often contains a good deal of gas, bums away rapidly to white ash, does not
bind when heated, and instead of forming a close-textured coke, falls to
pieces. In a fire of this class a high heat cannot be obtained, and the fire
does not last long.
Coal is generally used by smiths for firing, but in some of the bigger shops
coke is used. As a matter of fact, it is coke which produces the heat in the
small smith’s fire also, the only difference being that the coke is produced from
the coal by the smith on his own hearth.


When' coal is not obtainable, charcoal is a good substitute. In the pioneer-
ing days of the State, when transportation was difficult, charcoal was much
used, but during recent years coal has almost altogether taken its place.
Ihe place for that hie is linin ' (stately m front oi tin 1 tue pipe, or, m those
forges where the tue opening is in the centre, immediately above it. The
tue pipe is the pipe which leads the blast to the tiro.
The cinders, ashes, &c., of the last fire should be scraped away to leave a
depression exposing the mouth of the tue pipe. All the coal, cinders, &c.
on the top of the forge must not be removed, as these are required to keep
the heat in the lire. The actual space on the hearth occupied by the fire is
comparatively small, and the remainder of the surface, with its coal. &c..
acts, so to speak, as an insulator.
Shavings, small chips, &0., are placed in the bed of the depression and
lighted. When they are well ablaze, coke from the previous fire is put on,
and the fire forced with the blast. Green coal, i.e., fresh coal moistened
with water, is final!} 7 added.
The actual heating material in the fire is coke, which is produced on the
hearth by the action of the fire. In its formation from coal the volatile com-
ponents, such as gases, &c., are driven off, and practically little left but carbon
and ash. The special value of coke lies in its difficulty of combustion, which
enables it to be brought to a high temperature under blast, and its freedom
from flame and smoke.
In practice, green coal is backed up behind the fire. The heat converts it
into coke gradually, and when the fire begins to get low, some of this coke
is drawn down. At the same time the coal forces the fire forw aid and prevents
it coming in contact with the tue pipe.
The coke, in addition to acting as fuel, serves as a coat to keep the heat in
the centre of the fire. If the fire breaks through this coat, the heat passes out
into the air, and it is difficult to secure a good welding heat.
The fire is not ready for use until a good supply of coke has formed. It
must be cleaned regularly, as the coke burns away, by throwing out the
clinkers, and fresh coke drawn in from the back or sides. The character
of the fire has a most important influence upon the nature of the work turned
out. It is, in fact, practically impossible to produce good work with a bad
fire. This applies particularly to welds.
Effect of Heat upon Iron.
To appreciate the importance of the fire, its effect upon iron and steel
must be understood. These metals, when cold, are hard, and cannot be
changed in form without in some way injuring their strength. When, how-
ever, they are properly heated they can be worked at will without in any
way impairing the strength. Heat causes marked changes in the metal.
It becomes easily flexible, and if heated still further, plastic, and finally
passes into a molten condition. A homely illustration of the behaviour of
iron is seen in the change which takes place in wax when heated. It gradually
passes from a hard state into a pliable, then into a plastic, and finally into
a molten condition. The changes in iron are not quite the same, but are;
near enough for illustration.


It is owing to the properties of iron when in the heated condition that it
is so valuable. Thick bars can be made thinner, thin bars can be thickened,
it can be twisted into all conceivable shapes without impairing its strength,
and, finally, separate pieces can be welded into one so firmly that where the
joint is made the iron is as strong as in any other part.
When iron is being heated, one point must be borne in mind: —The right
heated condition can only be obtained in a fire where there is little or
no excess of air. A certain amount of air must be forced into the fire. If
insufficient is fore: d in, heating takes place slowly, whilst on the other
hand, if the blast is made too strong, burning takes place rapidly, but still the
fire cannot use up all the air. The iron becomes very hot on the surface,
while the inner part is still comparatively cool. Now when its temperature
becomes very high in the presence of air, iron hums. It is probably difficult
to realise that practically the same burning that takes place in -wood can
occur in iron. It is, however, the case, that when iron is heated to a very
high temperature and air is present burning does occur.
This can be p oved by placing a piece of iron in a fire and forcing in a
heavy blast. In a short time brilliant sparks begin to fly off, and in a little
while the iron is all burnt away. When such burning iron is removed from
the fire, shooting sparks continue to fly off until it cools.
If the substance composing the sparks is collected and examined after
cooling, it will be found very different from iron. It has a dull, slaty or
bluish appearance, and is very brittle. It is iron changed into oxide of
iron; that is, the iron has combined with oxygen and ;ormed a material
which has not the properties of the original metal. This oxide is soon in the
scale found on and around the blacksmith’s anvil.
The burning of iron is one of the first difficulties with which the amateur
has to contend. So long as the fire cannot be so controlled that burning is
prevented, good work is almost impossible.
From what has been said it will be seen that burning is due to iron at
an intense heat coining in contact with air. The burning, therefore, can be
largely prevented by blowing in only just as much air as can be used by
the fire. If much over this is blown in, the iron commences to burn. The
degrees of burning vary considerably; in the hands of a raw beginner a con-
siderable portion of the iron may be burnt away, and even experienced work-
men cannot altogether prevent the formation of some scale. This is objec-
tionable in any class of work; proper welding is interfered with, and in
ordinary forging the iron is pitted and roughened.
Fluxes are used to aid in preventing the formation of scale. Those
generally used arc sand or borax, cither singly or mixed in the proportion of
3of sand to lof borax. The flux should be sprinkled on the iron when it
has reached a yellow heat, using sufficient to cover the whole of the surface,
especially the parts to bo welded. It melts under the heat, flows over the
surface of the iron, and forms a protective covering or coat. This covering
prevents the air corning in contact with the iron, and burning does not
take place, or at least not nearly so easily. Besides this, the molten flux
causes any scale which has already formed to melt, and when a weld is being
made this fluid scale is forced from between the parts. The objectionable
features of scale are its hardness and brittleness, and that when it covers
the surface of iron, and an attempt is made to weld, it prevents perfect union.


Welding.
Tills is often looked upon as a most difficult operation, and one which can
only be satisfactorily performed by an experienced smith. Whilst most
men are ready to do many of the rougher kinds of forge work, few care to
attempt welding. In many cases this is due to failure in attempts made
when the underlying principles have not been understood. If the why and
wherefore are not known, attempts at welding are gropings in the dark,
and the rare successes due merely to chance.
To obtain a good weld, the first requirement is to secure the right heat in
both pieces. Where iron is to be welded to iron or mild steel, this is compara-
tively easy. Other kinds of metal are more difficult to weld and require
some skill. If the pieces of iron are of unequal size, care must be taken
that the smaller is not overheated. This can be done by starting one before
the other, or, if one shows greater heat than the other, by taking the hotter
•out to cool a little.
When iron and mild steel are heated they gradually change from a hard
condition into a softer state. When a certain temperature is reached they
become pasty, and if two pieces in a like condition are brought into contact
a certain stickiness is noticeable. This is the right welding heat. .It is only
metals like iron and steel, which become slowly softer before passing into a
molten condition, that can be welded. Some cannot be. Lead, as an example,
passes suddenly from a hard condition into a molten state without any
perceptible intermediate stage.
A further essential to a good weld is that the iron is thoroughly heated
right through, and not merely superficially. A comparatively slow fire is
required to obtain this. If heating is done too rapidly, only the outer surface
is heated, and when the iron is taken from the fire it rapidly cools, so that
the time required to form the weld is not available. Perhaps the best rule
to follow is to heat slowly and notice when the metal comes into the sticky
condition shown when the two pieces touch each o her. If the iron is too
cold welding of course cannot be done, while if the temperature is taken too
high, burning will occur and the iron become crumbly.
A clean fire is required. In a dirty fire pieces of clinker, cinder, Ac.,
adhere to the metal and, getting in between the two pieces, cause flaws in
the weld. As mentioned before, the fire must also consist of compact burning
coke, fed with the right amount of air.
Everything must be in readiness to proceed at once when the iron is
sufficiently heated. Wh ait is taken from the fire it cools rap'dly, and no
time must he lost. The anvil should be clean, and all tools at hand, so that
they can be pick'd up without even looking for them.
Diffrent forms of welds are used according to the nature cf the work.
Each differs in some respect, and different methods of preparing for the
weld are adopted. The main preparation consists of upsetting and scarfing.
The hammering when welding tends to reduce the thickness of the iron at
that particular point, and to compensate for this both pieces of the weld
must be upset as described a few pages further on.
Scarfing is the thinning down, with the hammer, of the tips of the parts to
be welded, so that they will fit tog. ther and weld without much hammering.
A more perfect weld is obtained, and less drawing down will be required to
finish up the work after welding.


Scarfing is done usually with the pene of the hammer. Generally it can be
done fiy the smiih, but, to secure exactitude. i‘ is necessary m some cases for
the smith to hold 'he pene in position while the helper strikes with the sledge.
I' is done whilst the iron is just at a yGlow heat, and bef re the i ieces are
ret'ime 1 to the fire for the final welding heat, they shout! he carefully fitted
so that they are in close contact with each other. If this is not d me, welding
cannot he proceeded with at once, and the lost time results in defective
work.
Fig. 9 —Lap Weld.
Different kinds of Welds.
Fig, 9 shows one of the best methods of scarfing when simple straight-
bars are to be welded. A weld scarfed thus, is made by hammering directly
downwards as shown by the arrows, and there is no danger of the two
Fig. 10.—Link or Ring Weld.


parts being forced away from c.uh other by the pressure
of the blows. Other kinds of welds are recommended
for this class of work, but in most of them the blows
cannot be directed at right angles to the work and the
anvil, and consequently it is more difficult to obtain a
satisfactory wold.
Fig. 10 shows the scarfing for a link or ring. It is a
simple form, and requires little explanation. As shown
in the illustration, not much scarfing is required. After
scarfing, the two ends are brought round and overlapped.
In welding, and indeed in any work, it is most impor-
tant that a firm hold be obtained with the tongs. Those
shown in Fig. 6a, which have slight grooves in the jaw, are
very good for holding links and rings.
Fig. 11.—Angle Weld.
A method of scarfing
for angle welding is
illustrated in Fig. 11.
By using this scarf, any
required angle on the
inner or outer side can
be obtained. As in other
welds, the ends must
be slightly upset before
scarfing.
Scarfing for either
round or rectangular
iron is shown in Fig. 12.
The upper bar, A, is
upset at the point of
scarfing by heating and
cooling off in water
except where the
upsetting is done, to localise the
heat. The bar is then held verti-
cally on the anvil and hammered
on the end. After every two
or three blows it bends, and this
must be corrected on the face of
the anvil, and the upsetting
proceeded with until a sufficient
thickness is obtained. The scarf-
ing of H is done by the smith
holding the bar with the pene in
position on it while the striker
uses the sledge.
Fig. 13 illustrates a good
method of welding for certain
classes of work. The bar Ais
heated, and with a pene and
sledge, a cavity is made as showm.
Fig. 12.—T Weld.


Fig. 13.
Butt Weld.
The bar to be welded is upiset somewhat, and a head formed
by driving it down into a bolster. The upset end of the bar
prevents it going right through, and a head is formed which
is given a conical shape with the hammer. Spikes and small
bolts tan be made in the same way.
To form the weld, the bar A is laid on the anvil and the
scarfed end of B put into the cavity and struck a couple of
blows on the other end. The work is then turned to have
the bar A upwards, and B dropped into the bolster. The
head prevents it going right through and welding is done by
hammering down on A.
These methods of scarfing and welding arc given only as
a guide and to illustrate the principles. Many other forms
are used, but the smith who grasps the idea of what is re-
quired can adapt himself readily to circumstances and devise
methods for himself.
In. welding, the length of the material decreases somewhat. A rough
rule followed by many practical smiths is to allow a length equal to the
thickness of the bars for shrinkage.
In the actual process of welding the scarfed points must be stuck together
as soon as possible, as these, being thin, cool out quickly.
Drawing Down.
This means the reduction of the size of a bar of iron by hammering whilst
it is at a high temperature. By proper direction of the blows the iron can be
drawn down into any shape without injuring the strength. This can only
be done at a high temperature and even then, the process is a slow one,
and only advisable when it means a saving of labour in other ways, or better-
work being turned out. Where an article varies considerably in size at
different points, as, for instance, a pair of tongs, less labour will be involved
if a bar large enough to form the jaws is taken, and (after the jaws have
have, been formed) is drawn down, than if a thinner bar is taken and
upset to give size for the thick section. In the case of tong-making, the
necessity of drawing down a thick bar sufficiently to form the handle is
avoided by drawing down a little and welding on a sufficient length of a
thinner bar.
A blacksmith at work may draw down, upset, or weld his iron as it suits
his purpose. As his whole object is to turn out work with the least amount
of labour, it is difficult to set definite limits to the place of each.
The manner in which drawing down is done is determined by the kind of
work. If it is merely a matter of tapering off to form a point, as when
making a hook, the procedure is different from that followed when the size
is suddenly reduced as in Fig. 14.


The first essential is a good heat. What is called a good welding heat
gives the best results. If not heated sufficiently the bar will almost certaiidy
split during the process.
When it is required to reduce the thickness of a bar from A to the thickness
B, the first step is to fuller the bar, as in Fig. 14a. The fullering reduces the
thickness abruptly at the right point, and it is an easy matter to get the
thickness in 14b.
When the rounded fuller is used, no injury is done to the iron. A bar if
broken shows a fibrous structure like the grain in wood, and it is this property
which enables it to be bent at the will of the smith. It is absolutely essential
Fig. 14. —DRAWING DOWN.
A —Bar fullered. B —Bar drawn down.
that the fibre of the iron should be maintained. If iron is nicked with a sharp
tool the fibre is destroyed, and it can easily be broken. A peculiarity of iron
is that if a bar is cut round with a chisel it can be snapped off readily, and
the fractured structure shows a crystalline nature instead of the fibrous con-
dition seen when it is broken without nicking. When the fuller is used to
make a depression, it merely changes the direction of the fibre without causing
any break.
To draw the bar down after fullering, it is taken up to welding heat, laid
upon the anvil and hammering commenced about 1 \ inches from the end
farthest from the smith. The bar must be worked down in square section
without regard to its ultimate shape. For distance, if a | inch round bar
is to be reduced to | inch round, it must be wor . d down to about | inch
square before commencing to round it. If an att rp" is made to draw it
down in a round form, splitting is sure to occur. When the bar is laid on
the anvil and struck with the hammer, the effect is to make it spread side-
ways as well as to increase in length. The side-spread must be prevented
by turning the bar a quarter round quickly so that it is hammered on every
side.


The cooling of the bar prevents it being drawn down very much after each
heating. The thickness of the bar, the quality of the metal, and the skill of
the smith determine the amount. As a rule, with ordinary sized work, about
1| to 2 inches are all that can be drawn down at each heating with safety.
When the size has been reduced sufficiently in square form, finishing off is
commenced. The corners of each side are hammered flat, forming an eight-
sided section. The corners are again flattened, until finally the round form
is obtained. This procedure must be carefully followed, otherwise the iron
will split.
When a bar is to be merely drawn down to a point, fullering is not done,
but the procedure is otherwise the same.
Upsetting, or Jumping Up.
This is a process followed by smiths to increase the bulk of metal at a certain
point, and is the reverse of drawing down. It takes more time and care
than the latter. A high temperature is required, and the heat must be
localised—that is, confined to the spot where the upsetting is to be done. It
follows therefore that a bar can be upset either at the ends or at any point
along its length.
Different methods are followed. The bar may be taken in the hands and
jumped down vertically on the anvil; it may be laid on the anvil and upset
with the sledge; it may be held in the vice and upset with the hammer; or
it may be held vertically on the anvil and upset in the same way.
When upsetting, it is necessary to see that the spread of the metal is in the
right direction. If the blows are not carefully delivered, and the work
straightened as required, the thickening may be in the wrong direction.
During upsetting the fibres in the iron are forced apart, and hammering must
be done after upsetting to restore the close texture.
Punching.
Different methods of punching are followed. Where it is not desired to
expand the size of the section, a punch only a little smaller than the hole
required is used. The metal is held over a bolster, or the hole in the anvil,
and punched half-way through, then turned over and punched from the
opposite side. A piece of the iron is punched out, leaving a hole nearly the
right size. It is finished up to the correct dimensions by tapping in a
mandrel and working on this. By this method a good deal of the metal is
taken out, but the size of the section is not increased.
Another method is to punch out a small hole and gradually expand this
hole with tapered tools until it is sufficiently large. When the holes are thus
punched, very little metal is cut out, but the iron is swelled outwards a good
deal. The eyes in hooks are often made in this way.
Tempering.
The temper of steel means the degree of hardness and the condition of the-
grain. Temper in rough tools is generally obtained by heating the steel and
then cooling in cold water. If the temperature is too low the steel will be
left soft, wdth a coarse grain, while if it is heated too much the steel will be
brittle, and will probably have a coarse grain. The cooling also plays an
important part. If it is too rapid the steel will be very hard, while if it is too


slow it will be soft. To get a good temper, therefore, the temperature must
be right, and the cooling must be done properly. This is a matter of some
difficulty, and a little practice is required. It is better not to cool off too
rapidly, because if the temper does happen to be a bit soft, it is a simple
matter to temper again, but if the tool is made too hard and used, it will
probably break at once.
The following method is generally adopted in tempering picks, mattocks,
cold chisels, &c.: —A dull red heat is obtained, and the tool is chi lt d by
immersing about | to 1 inch of the point in cold water for three or four seconds.
It should be kept moving in the water. It is then withdrawn, and in a moment
a pale straw colour should come into the point. After this a dark blue comes,
and finally this turns into a pale blue. This pale blue colour must be waited
for. Each colour is quite distinct. If the pale blue does not come the tool
will bo too hard, while if it passes off quickly the tool will be too soft. After
the pale blue comes the tool is dipped in water and cooled right out. After
tempering in this way the tool should be so hard that the file just grips it.
Examples.
A description of the methods followed in actual practice will indicate in
the best way the different operations. In a short article of this kind it is
impossible to deal with the more complicated work; and indeed it is not
necessary, as the amateur can only expect to do simple work.
Laying a pick is a class of work that farmers sometime- require to do.
Blister steel is used for the work. A convenient sized bar to take is 1 in.
Fig. 15. —Laying a Pick.
The steel lay is shown stuck on to the pick.
x J in., about 2 inches long.
It is drawn down in wedge
form to about 3 inches, and
left slightly wider than the
blade of the pick. After
drawing down, the lay and
the pick are put into the fire
and brought to a welding
heat. Then with a few sharp
blows the steel lay is stuck to the point of the pick, keeping the thick end
of the lay at the point (Fig. 15). It is sufficient if the two are stuck
together at the first heat; the welding is completed at the next.
If the pick has worn back into a very stumpy state, the steel point is stuck
on as above but not completely welded, and a piece of tapered iron is stuck
to the upper side of the lay, extending back with the thin end almost at the
eye of the pick. The work is then returned to the fire, a fresh welding heat
obtained, and the iron and steel lays welded to the pick together. About
3 inches can be welded at each heat, and about three heats will be required
to complete the wielding. The object of laying with the iron is to increase
the length of the pick blade. The steel lay is inserted between the iron and
pick, but the subsequent hammering, when drawing the pick into shape,
brings it out to form the hard cutting point.
In some oases the laying is done by splitting the point of the pick and
inserting the lay. Welding then proceeds as usual.
After the welding has been done, the pick is drawn down into shape and
tempered.


Laying a Ploughshare.
The laying consists of welding a piece of iron on the point and wing to
replace the loss by wear. The size and length of iron used for the lay is
determined by the size of the share. For a large share, 1 in. x \ in. iron,
long enough to extend from about 2 inches in front of the worn point to
the rear point of the wing, with a little over, is used. This is prepared in
the form shown in Fig. ] 6a, and bevelled on the lower side, leaving the upper
side nearly level. Bevelling increases the width of the lay.
The share is prepared for laying as shown in Fig. 16b. The curving is done
by heating the share and hammering it down while held in the vice. The
object of the curving is to allow for the bending backwards that takes place
Fig. 16.-A —Lay for a Ploughshare.
B-Share prepared for laying.
when welding. The result is that when welding is finished, the share is prac-
tically straight, while if the bending were not done the hammering during
welding would leave the share bent back, and some difficulty would be
experienced in getting it straight again.
The share is scarfed for welding by heating the wing and hammering it
down, so that when the lay is put on, the two fit together well. When both
are ready they are brought to a welding heat, and the share is held bottom
up on the anvil by the smith with one hand, while with the other the point of
the lay is laid on the point of the share and struck with the sledge by the
striker. The point is finished up by the smith with the hammer. With the
two attached in this way it is a
simple matter to bring the lay
down to the shape of the wing.
It should project about £ inch
out along the side of the wing.
Fig. 17 shows the lay attached
to the point and hammered into
shape ready for welding. It is
got into place by first knocking
the lay into the right position
on the rear point of the wing,
Fig. 17. —The lay ready for welding.
and it is then grasped there with the tongs and held while it is hammered
in the centre and along the wing until it projects the same distance right
along.


So prepared, the share is ready for the welding, which is done from the point
backwards. The depression forming the frog of the share makes welding
somewhat difficult at that point. This difficulty can be overcome by using
the set hammer shown in Fig. 5. This is placed on the lay in the frog and
struck with the sledge.
Fig. 18. —The finished Share.
About four or five heats are usually required in welding a share such as
that shown. The w r elding of 3or 4 inches at a time is fairly good work..
Fig. 18 shows the share after laying has been finished.
Laying the Point of a Share.
This consists of w'elding a piece of iron to the point of the share. Bar
iron 14 in. x | in. and 3 inches long is takeh and scarfed as shown in Fig. 19,
The lay is welded to the underside of the point, and when scarfing the lay,
the hammering should be done on the opposite side from that which is to
be in contact with the share, so that the projection shown in the lay will fit
down well on to the share. The welding is similar to that adopted when
laying a pick.
It will be noticed that iron is used in laying both the point and wing of a
share. This is so soft that in its natural state it wears away rapidly. The
wearing can be prevented by what is called “ casting.” After the share is
laid, it is brought up to a
welding heat, and at the
same time a thin piece of
cast-iron is heated to a dull
red. While the welding
heat is on the share, the
red hot cast-iron is rubbed
over it in the fire. The
heat of the iron melts the
cast-iron, and a liquid coat
is obtained. When suffi-
Fig. 19. —Laying the point of a Ploughshare.
cient of the cast-iron has been melted, the share is taken from the fire, and
with an old file or rasp the molten coating is spread eveidy over the point of
the share. The effect is to give a coating of intense hardness, which makes
the share last very much longer. Any cast-iron, such as a broken saucepan,
kettle, &c., can be used. The thinner it is the better, as it melts more
easily.


SOLDERING AND BRAZING.*
Solder is the name given to several different alloys used for the purpose of
making joints between different metals, whict, if properly done, do not
consist merely of sticking the metals together, but form a real weld or a
fresh alloy.
The composition varies very much. Every solder should, and must, be
more fusible than the metal to be united or joined together ; therefore, hard
solders can only be used on metals that will stand a high temperature
without melting. Soft solders melt at a low temperature, and may be more
generally used.
In preparing to solder, the surfaces to be united must be perfectly clean
and lie close together, and the surfaces so cleaned must be protected from
the air by a coating of a suitable flux. The usual flux for iron and tin is
muriatic acid, more commonly called “spirits of salts,” winch is weakened or
killed by adding water or zinc.
The Tools.
The necessary tools required are a soldering iron, about 1 lb. weight; a
block of sal ammoniac ; a small brush, usually made of horse-tail hair, bound
in a piece of tin as a handle ; a glass or earthenware pot to hold the spirits
of salts ;an old flat file ;an old pocket kni'e ; and a fire-pot. The la-t named
is an oil-drum with a few holes in the bottom, and, say, three holes about
.2 inches square in the sides, near the bottom, through which to pass the
irons while heating. Where much work is to be done, it is as well to have
at least two irons, so that one is jn the fire while the other is in use.
Wood and coke are the best fuels to use.
The iron should be drawn out to a point (not sharp), about a quarter of an
inch, and slightly rounded off. To prepare it for use, it must first be
heated to a dull red heat, and the point for about 1 inch back fihd clean
while h“t; then ru 1 ' it on all sides on the sal ammoniac, lay a little solder on
it, and dip it in'o the killed spirits. This will tin the point of the iron, and
unless it is overheated in the fire when reheating, it should keep the tinning
for some time. The use of the sal ammoniac is sometimes dispensed with ;
but the tinning is not so good a job. Each time it is heated inot a red heat,
but just enough to melt 'be solder ea-ily) it must be wiped off on a piece
of bag, or similar material, and the point dipped into the spirits. It is then
applied to the joint in such a way as to heat the metal, and the strap of
■solder, placed against the point of the inn, runs into the joint and forma
the weld. Never use the iron if not hot enough to melt the solder easily.
Solder.
To make your own solder is the surest way to have the right sort. Melt
■down, in an iron pot, 2 parts lead and 1 part block tin; and when melted,
the pot being red hot, skim oil the ro f use that floats on top. Then with a
ladle, first slightly heated, pour the solder into the holh'ws of a sheet of small
■corrugated iron, making long or short sticks as required. This mixture will
do for ordinary work on galvanized iron or heavy tinware, such as dairy
■cans.
* A. Brooks, Works Overseer, Department of Agriculture.


Material*.
Solder*.
..... _...
Purposes.
Fluxes.
I
Tin.
• Lead.
Zinc.
<Oppoj.
Brazing spelter, soft
i
i
For brass-work..
]
to 6
For copper, iron,
and steel.
V Borax.
Do hard ...j
o
Plumber’s solder, tiue .. ;
i
H
For ordinary
!
Do ordinary:
i
O
i f
work.
'j Muriatifc
... )
acid or
Do coarse.. j
2
1
...
For tinman's
work.
| spirits of
J salts.
A Farmer’s Kit of Tools.*
s. d.
Planes (Mathieson) ...
1J in. German Jack Plane
3 9
... 2J in. Jack Plane ...
5 9
5 J 5 5
in. Trying Plane
6 9
5 > !<
... in. Smoothing Plane
4 9
... in. Rebate Plane
2 9
Saws (Disstou's)
No, 4 Rip Saw
7 0
No 4 7-Hand Saw ...
6 0
14 in. Tenon Saw ...
6 3
,,
Set of 3 Compass Saws
2 9
Saw Set (Morrill’s) ...
... 1
2 9
Files ...
h doz. 3J in. to 6 in. Saw Files ...
r> e
Screwdriver ...
... 1 10 in
1 9
Oilstone
1 Washita ...
1 f.
Adze ...
... 1 No. 3
4 9
Bits (Aimer)...
... 7 Boring Bits, J in. to 1 in.
7 6
,, {Cobra) ...
2 doz. Assorted, (a) 2s. 9d. doz.
5 6
Brace ...
1 10 in. Rachet
6 0
Chisels
9 Socket Firmer, | in. to in. ...
7 3
,,
5 Socket Mortise, £ in. to 1 in. ..
7 6
Ganges
1 Single Marking ...
0 t>
,,
1 Mortise Marking...
2 6
Brazing.
Brazing is done with granulated spelter and hot ax, spread over the surface
of the joint, and exposed to a clean open fire. The joint to be made must
be well cleaned and otherwise prepared previous to heating.
The following table shows mixtures for different solders and brazings to
be used for the purposes mentioned :
CARPENTRY.
In his day every farmer has to become more or less of a carpenter, just as
he may require to become something of a saddler or a blacksmith. On a
farm the requirements and application of Carpentry are very different from
those of the other trades mentioned, and it is not considered necessary to
deal with the subject so fully here, but it is thought that a list of tools that
should be found in every well-equipped workshop may be useful. The prices
set against each item are somewhat approximate, and no doubt subject to
slight fluctuations, but they will nevertheless act as a guide.
* The prices quoted in this list are subject to considerable variation under war
conditions, and they are only given in the hope that they will be useful in a general way-


t 17299—2 D


Claw-hammer
A Farmer’s Kit of Tools— continued.
1 No. 5
S.
2
d.
6
Spirit Level ...
1 24 in
3
9
Mallet ..
1
1
6
Chalk Line ...
1
0
4
Pencils
1 doz. Carpenter’s ...
0
9
Pincers
1 pair...
0
11
Pliers ...
1 pair 7 in. Cutting
2
3
Plumb Bob ...
1 4 oz.
i
3
Glue Pot
I 2-pint
4
0
Rule ...
1 Fourfold 2 ft.
1
0
Spokeshave ...
1 3 in.
0
10
Draw Knife ...
1 10 in
2
6
Nail Punches
2
0
8
Tomahawk ...
1
2
3
Compasses ...
1 pair 8 in. ...
1
4
G Cramp
1 10 in
2
3
Awl Pad
1
1
3
Squares
Shifting Bevel
1 12 in
o
9
1 6 in.
i
4
1 9 in
2
0
,, Spanner
1 10 in
i
6
Oil-can
1
0
9
Tool Basket ...
1 No. 4
I
7
Total
... £6 18
0
THE USE AND CARE OF ROPE.
A large assortment of fibres, either pure or in mixtures, are made into
cordage. In a rapid survey of all these rope-making materials, none stands
out with such pre-eminence as Manila hemp. The fibre is produced from the
AbactL ( Musa iextilis), a plant closely related to the banana. Its cultivation
is almost exclusive to the Philippines, where it forms three-quarters of the
total export. The fibre is 6 to 12 feet long, and is wonderfully resistant,
forming one of the strongest and most satisfactory ropes for farm work now
manufactured. It is moderately pliable, nice to handle, and will stand the
wet so successfully that it is rarely if ever tarred.
Manila hemp is one of the few fibres that can.be used with success in
self-binding machinery. kSisal is also used quite extensively for binder twine
either pure or mixed with New Zealand and Manila hemp, and, with the
rapid development of self-binding machinery, its use will probably become
more and more extensive where Manila cannot be procured. A trial of
sisal in the reapers and binders was conducted at Hawkesbury Agricultural
College three or four years ago, but it was found too stiff and liable to kink,
while the tie did not hold with the tenacity of Manila, It is estimated
that sisal has only about two-thirds the working strength of the best Manila.
The maximum strain could be resisted by a rope if the fibres were laid
parallel. This being impracticable, the fibres are first twisted into yarns ;
these are laid up into strands ; and finally three strands go to make the
rope. The object of twisting is to make the rope portable, and to ensure
that, by mutual friction, the fibre, yarns, and strands may hold together
when the strain is applied. Laying up or twisting a rope decreases the
strength, but increases its durability. The tarring of rope results similarly in
excluding the wet, and preserving the rope at the expense of the breaking
strain.


Table showing Approximate Weights
for given Lengths
of .Manila Rope.
Coils.
Size. i
Weight. I' 1
Coils.
Size.
i Weight
feet.
inches.
cwt.
qr. lb. [
feet.
inches.
cwt.
qr.
lb.
soo
i
0
0 14 i
100
34
0
i
16
800
i
0
1 0 .1
100
4
0
2
0
800
1 2
0
2 10 I
100
0
0
3
4
800
o
1
0 5 i
100
6
i
0
14
SOO
■2i
1
1 22 ]
800
3 ;
!
2
0 12 1
'i
Rope is measured by its circumference, and sold by weight. The following
table will give an idea of the approximate weights of convenient lengths of
Manila :
To prevent rope, and more especially binder twine, from kinking, it is
necessary when commencing to use it from the centre of the coil, to make it
unwind in the opposite way to that in which the hands of a clock revolve. ■
The end is usually protruding from the correct side of a ball of binder
twine, but before threading it, or tying it to the upper ball in the twine box,
this point should be looked to, and if necessary the end pushed through to
the other side.
Splicing.
In studying splicing, it is essential to have a clear understanding of the
analysis of a rope. The yarns
are formed by twisting the,
fibres to the right, i.e., clock-
wise. Several yarns twisted
anti-clook-wise form a strand,
while three strands laid clock-
wise, like the yarns, go to form
the ordinary three-strand
rope, (Fig. 1.)
Before continuing further,
the fact should be emphasised
that this article will prove
practically valueless unless
the reader takes a three-
strand rope into his hand,and
endeavours to follow out the
instructions given with the
aid of the illustrations. It
should not take more than an
hour to learn the elementary
principles, and it will be
found surprising how often a
knowledge of splicing can be
applied in everyday work.
There are two common
splices, the short and the
long. For average work
Fig. 1.—Analysis of a Rope.
a. Strands. b. Yarns. c. Yarns unravelled to show fibres.
on the farm, where the rope is not to be used in block and tackle, a short
splice is all that is necessary. But where a uniform thickness is required


throughout, the long splice is essential. There, is little difference in the
relative strength of ropes spliced by these two methods; the quality of
the work is a far more influential factor in determining which should be
used. A well-made splice will reduce the strength of a rope by about
one-eighth.
The Short Splice.
In a short splice the strands are laid back a distance which will depend
Fig. 2.—Short Splice. The two ropes laid back and brought
end to end, ready for splicing.
upon the thickness of
the rope. A little prac-
tice will soon enable one
to gauge how far, but
as a guide to start with,
it may be mentioned that
9 inches will amply suf-
fice to splice ordinary
plough reins of inches
circumference. Such
rope is the best to prac-
tise on, and it should
preferably be moderately
new, as old worn rope
unravels too easily and
makes the work doubly
hard.
The ropes are then
brought end to end, as
hard up as possible, with each strand of No. 1 rope between two strands of
the opposite rope, No. 2
(Fig. 2). No. 1 rope and
the strands of No. 2 rope
are held very firmly in
the left hand, and to
commence with may be
temporarily lashed in
position. The strands
of rope 1 are then inter-
woven with those of rope
2, by taking each one
separately, jumping over
the strand immediately
the other side of it, and
under the next one fur-
ther on. (Fig. 3.)
To do this without
loosening the strands
held tightly in the left
hand, it is necessary to
twist rope 2 with the
right hand, and place
Fig. 3. —Short Splice. The position of the hands, placing the
first strand of Rope 1 under Rope 2.
the first finger of the left hand underneath the strand to keep it open.


The strand that is to be interwoven is then pushed through with
the thumb of the left hand. Twisting thus to make room for the
strands loosens the rope, and it should be twisted back again every
time to its original position before starting with the next strand.
Continuing, the other two strands of rope 1 follow suit, going over the
strand immediately the other side, and under the next. To make it con-
venient, the rope is gradually turned over, taking the greatest care not
to loosen the grip in the left hand. When one side is completed,
Fig. 4.—Short Splice, Each of the six strands woven once and hauled taut.
the rope is turned so that the strands of rope 2 can be woven into
rope 1 with the right hand. The six strands are then hauled taut
(Fig. 4), the durability of the splice largely depending on whether
this is done thoroughly. The weaving continues in the same way,
working at each end alternately, hauling the strands taut, and
twisting the rope back into its original position to prevent its
.getting slack.
Fig. 5 .—Short Splice finished. For comparison, one end has been tapered, and the
other ended abruptly.
For thick rope, especially when new, a sharpened piece of iron or hardwood
•called a marlinspike has to be used for levering up the strands, as the rope is
too stiff and rough for the fingers.
To taper a short splice at each end, and thus enable it to pass over
obstacles with less likelihood of jamming, one or more yarns, according to the


size of the rope, are cut oft'the strands every time the latter are interwoven,
till, at the end of the splice, only one or two strands are passed under, and
thus the thickness increases gradually to the centre (Fig. 5).
It is always a good plan, before cutting off the ends, to roll the spliced
portion under foot; the ends can then be cut off close, but if this is done
before rolling, they soon work their way from under the last strand
where they were placed. In old rope the fibres are broken to such an extent
that this method of tapering will not succeed, and the best way is to flay out
the strands with a knife. The resulting splice is never so neat, nor perhaps
quite so durable, but it is the best that can he done under the circumstances.
The Long Splice.
Where the thickness of a short splice will interfere with the convenient
handling of a rope, or where any rope above 2 inches in circumference is to
be spliced, the best method is to use what is termed the “ long splice.” It
Fig. 6. —Long Splice. The strands laid up into position,
ready for finishing off.
Strands A, B, and C belong to Rope 1.
Strands D, E, and F belong to Rope 2.
entails the use of more
rope, and is harder to
make, but the resulting
splice is much neater,,
and its advantages will
usually justify the extra
trouble.
Somewhere about
three times the amount
of rope used in the short,
splice (i.e., about 2 feet
in a rope) is laid
back, and the ropes are
brought together in the
same way. One of the
strands of rope 2 is then
further laid back, and
its place taken by the
corresponding opposite
strand of rope 1. A
strand of rope 2 then
takes the place of the
opposite and correspond-
ing strand of rope 1.
They should be laid up so
far that there remains
sufticientlength to weave
into the main rope in finishing off. Each pair of strands should now he
equidistant from the pair that remain in the centre, though the ends, except
in the centre, will naturally be of unequal length (Fig. 6).
There are a number of ways of finishing off. The most general is to take
half or three-quarters of each strand, and tie with each pair an overhand
knot, being careful that when finished each end still lies in the direction it
did before. These six ends are then interwoven several times with the main


rope, tapering them gradually off. The quarter or half strand that remains
may also be interwoven with the rope, or else out off, and the ends just
tucked away. (Fig. 7.)
The splice must be very carefully made when it is to be used for rope
belting, and every care taken to prevent the slightest “ belly.”
Fig. 7.—Finishing off Long Splice.
a. Two centre strands, woven and finished off. 6. The overhand knot tied, ready for weaving.
c. The two strands not yet touched, after laying up.
The Eye Splice.
The eye splice is easy to make, once the short splice has been mastered,
and is very useful for leg-ropes, or wherever a running noose is used. It
may be also made around a post or some similar object, but requires very
careful manipulation to make it tight.
The strands are laid back as in the short splice, and the rope doubled to
make the necessary sized loop. This loop is held in the left hand, while the
strands, commencing with the middle one, are interwoven with the right.
.(Figs. 8 and 9.)
Two precautions must be taken in weaving—first, that the middle strand
of the three comes over from the top of the doubled back portion; and
secondly, that each of the strands is woven across and not with the twist of
the rope. Special care must be taken of the latter when weaving the strand
that is nearest the operator, as there is every likelihood of making a mistake
at this point,
The Turk’s Cap and Crown.
The ends of ropes will unravel very quickly if not prevented by some
means. A common method is to lash the end with twine. This takes time,
and necessitates the wherewithal to lash it. For certain work it may be an


Fig. 8. —Commencing the Eye Splice. The middle strand turned under.
Fig. 9.—The Eye Splice finished. Not tapered.
Fig. 10.—The Wall Knot, showing the position of the three strands before hauling taut.


advantage to have a knob on the end of the rope, when a Turk’s cap or wali
knot is the most satisfac ■
tory. If, on the other
hand, only a moderate
thickness is wanted, the
“ crown ” is made, and
the strands spliced back
two or three times,
tapering if necessary.
The Turk’s cap or wall
knot is shown in Fig. 10.
The strands are laid
back, and each takes a
turn around its neigh-
bour. The third strand,
after taking a turn
around the second, is
inserted upwards
through the loop made
by the first strand, and
all three are pulled taut.
The ends can be cut off,
but half an inch or
more should always be
left to flay out, and thus
Fig. 11. — The Wall Knot below and the crown above, showing
position of the three strands before hauling taut.
materially assist in preventing the knot from becoming undone.
For general purposes this is sufficient, but to make it more secure a crown
is placed on the top by crossing the strands one over another as in Fig, 11,
and hauling taut. The three strands are now all pointing downwards, and
to make one of the most efficacious ends to a rope, these can be spliced back.
The result is a large knob on the end, and to avoid this an excellent plan is
to make only the crown, as shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 12. —The crown made by itself, and the strands spliced back a short distance down the rope
(not tapered).
By itself, the crown will not last, and the strands must be spliced back.
{Fig. 12.) For convenience they should be tapered while being spliced, as
this precaution will be found of very material assistance when drawing the
end out of tight loops in undoing knots. All plough reins and halters
should either be lashed, or finished off in this way.


Fig. 13.—The Granny. The worst knot to use when Joining ropes.
Fig. 14. —The Reef Knot.
Fig. 15.—The Fisherman's Knot.


Fig. 16.—The Fisherman’s Knot hauled taut.
Fig, 17 (a). —The Sheet Bend.
Fig. 17 (b). —Joining two ropes of uneven size with the Sheet Bend.


Knots.
There is such an array of knots that it is a difficult task to select just those
that the farmer will find most useful. A few stand out prominently by
virtue of their utility, but for the rest an endeavour will be made to describe
types, and there should be little difficulty experienced in modifying or
elaborating them according to requirements.
First and foremost are the methods of joining of two ropes together. The
commonest and most inefficient knot to use is undoubtedly the “Granny”
(Fig. 13). If not tied tightly it will slip; and when once it catches it jams so
tightly, and is so difficult to undo, that it is often a cause of grave danger.
The “ Reef ” knot (Fig. 14), which should always be made in its place, is
very similar, and may be confused with it. The first tie is the same in both
cases, the difference in the knots being that, in the “Reef ” knot, the end that
comes over from on top, remains on top when crossed for the second tie,,
while in the “ Granny ” it is crossed below for the second tie.
It may be worth noting here that a “ Reef ” knot is easily undone, by taking
either end and giving it a sharp pull over in the opposite direction to which
it is pointing. This will straighten it out if the material is pliable, and the
end can then be easily drawn out. This is a good method to adopt with
bandages or string, and when there is no knob on the end, but if there is a
knob, or the material is fairly stiff, the easiest plan is to push one end back.
The “ Reef” is easy to undo, and under ordinary conditions should never slip;
but where a thin rope is to be tied to a thick one, the “ Reef ” will slip, and it is
best then to use the “ Sheet Bend ” (Fig. 17a and b). The latter can be used
when a small rope is heaved, say, over a limb of a tree, and a thicker rope
pulled up after it. The “ Sheet Bend ”is not permanent, and will soon come
undone if the rope gets slack or the strain is intermittent.
The safest way of tying two ropes together, whether of the same thickness
or not, is by what is termed
the “Fisherman’s” knot (Fig.
15). It will take some
practice to make this suc-
cessfully, and the overhand
knots should be made in such
a way that they fit over one
another when drawn tight as
shown in Fig. 16. So sure
is this knot, that the Alpine
Club have recommended its
exclusive use where ropes
are to be tied together in
mountain climbing.
The “ Figure-of-eight” knot
(Fig. 18) is hardly suitable for
working in rope, but it is so
readily made with wire, and
holds so strongly, that it is
very widely used for tying
Fig. 18. —The Figure-of-eight Knot.
fencing wire. Its disadvantage lies in the two ends, which stand out
at right-angles and prevent its passing through auger holes when


straining up the wires. Probably two or three trials will be necessary
before this knot can be tied correctly. The illustration should be examined
and carefully followed.
Both on sea and land, the “Bowline’’ (Fig. 19) is probably more in requisition
by those who know it than any other knot. The heavier the strain the
tighter the knot holds, while its most marked characteristic is the ease with
whicn it is undone. This knot should invariably be made when horses are
Fig. 19.—The Bowline.
tied up. If they pull back, it will not jam, a fault to which many knots are
liable, frequently necessitating the rope being cut. Plough reins should be
attached by the “ Bowline,” since once learnt, it is easily and rapidly made, and
as easily undone. To
make it, first place
the rope around the
post, holding the
short end in the left
hand. Make a loop
with the right, taking
care that the long
portion of the rope
forms the bottom
portion of the loop.
The short end in
the left hand is then
passed up through
this loop, over and
around the main
rope, and back again
downwards through
the loop (Fig. 20),
Fig. 20. —Making the Bowline.
X\O / '
so that the two ropes passing through will lie parallel. The rope in the
right hand is then pulled tight to finish the knot.


Fig. 21.—Overhand Knot ready to be made into a Bowline on a Bight.
Fig. 22.—Showing the position of the loop in making the Bowline on a Bight,
while it is being held down with the left hand.
Fig. 24.—The Bowline on a Bight
used for throwing a horse.


A variation of the “ Bowline,” the “Bowline on a Bight,” is best made by
first tying an overhand knot in the doubled rope (Fig. 21). The loop is then
placed above and held there with the left hand, while the right draws it
down into position as shown in Fig. 22.
It makes an excellent cradle to sit in when drawing oneself up any height.
As such it is called the “ Bosun’s Chair” (Fig. 23), and is useful in painting
and other work when a ladder is not procurable or is inconvenient. The
same knot is advocated by many for making the collar when throwing
horses (Fig. 24). It makes a flat knot against the horse’s chest, is doubled
around the neck, and can readily be undone when a change in size is desired.
The “ Timber Hitch ” and the “ Clove Hitch ” are both well known
(Figs. 25 and 26). The former is the safer, while the latter is quicker
and easier to make. A slight alteration made in the “ Clove Hitch,” as
shown in the lower part of Fig. 27, makes it surer and not so ready to slip.
Fig. 25. —The Hitch.
Fig. 26.—The Clove Hitch,
Fig. 27.—A Hitch adapted for lifting timber.
One of the safest of hitches is that shown in Fig. 28. The construction of
such a hitch, or any other like it, prevents it from slipping sideways, making
it extremely useful in tying horses to picket ropes, and in lifting and lower-
ing round timber. One rope can also he attached to another by this means—
as, for example, the guide rope of tackle used in lifting material for stacking.
To draw the lashing ropes of a load down tight, use is often made of the
mechanical advantage derived from such a knot; as that illustrated in Fig.
29. Make a loop in the rope as high as can conveniently be reached.


Double up a portion of the loose end in the right hand and pass a few inches
of it through the loop (Fig. 30). To draw the knot tight, pull evenly on
the lower loop and the loose end. This loose end is then passed round the
guard irons of the dray and up through the lower of the two loops. Where
the “Hay” knot, as it is often called,is to be made more or less permanent
Fig. 28.—The Rolling Hitch. The safest hitch, which will not
slip in either direction.
Fig. 80. —Making the Hay Knot.
Fig. 29. —The Hay Knot.


as in the case of railway trucks, tfec., the top loop should take a half-
hitch around the taut rope (Fig. 31). If this precaution is not observed,
anyone stepping on the upper loop will cause it to slip. The knot will, of
course, only hold while the rope is taut.
It is often necessary to temporarily shorten a rope, and for this purpose
nothing is more satisfactory than the “Sheep-shank” (Fig. 32). If the
.strain slackens off, or becomes intermittent, there is danger of the knot
Fig. 31.—The Hay Knot made so as to
prevent any chance of slipping.
Fig. 32. —The Sheep-shank.
Fig. 33.—Making the Military Tie.


slipping, especially if the rope is thin. The top of the <l Sheep-shank ”is the
same as the “ Hay ” knot, and is therefore liable to the same danger of
becoming undone. There are several ways of making it more permanent,,
one of the handiest being the same as is adopted in the “ Hay ” knot, but
in this case taking a half-hitch with the loops both top and bottom.
The “Military Tie”
(Figs. 33 and 34) is a
handy and neat way of
doing up a leading rope.
The rope is placed around
the horse’s neck, with
the loose end on the near
side where the operator is
standing. This loose end
is doubled up, and the
three ropes held in the
left hand. The right hand
then winds the loose end
around the three held in
left hand, working
downwards, till, when it
is all used up, the end is
passed through the small
loop remaining, which is
drawn tight to hold it in
Fig. 34. —The Military Tie finished.
position. To facilitate undoing the knot, the end is best lashed, as its great
disadvantage is the difficulty of drawing out the end, especially after it
has become wet.


SECTION XVII.
Book-keeping for Farmers.*
Though there are many text-books on general book-keeping, the fact
that so far there is no particular work which can be recommended to our
College students and to the farmers of the Winter Schools may be some
justification for this slight sketch of the subject as adapted to agricultural
conditions. English methods are somewhat too elaborate, and the farms
being usually leased, involve many transfers of rights in growing crops,
manures, &c., which become confusing to those unacquainted with their
systems of tenure. American treatises, whilst much simpler and better
adapted to Australian conditions, become difficult to grasp owing to the
difference in currency and to several slight alterations in detail.
Book-keeping on the Farm—its Importance.
Every farmer is impressed with the paramount necessity of keeping correct
accounts, but the difficulty lies in the choice of a suitable method, easily
grasped and capable of being carried out with a minimum of attention and
of preliminary training. One’s sympathies must always be extended to the
man who, after a long day’s work in the field, sits down to figure out some
calculation, difficult to him under any circumstances, but doubly so owing
to the methods employed.
Its Difficulty.
Though many people apparently think otherwise, it must be admitted
that farm accounts, to be really useful, are by no means easy to keep, inasmuch
as many of the entries must necessarily be estimates rather than statements
of actual transactions. The operations of each branch are so dovetailed into
the others that it is a matter requiring keen discrimination to ascertain the
percentage of profit or loss to be allocated to them.
But however difficult they may appear to be, it should be remembered
that an actual knowledge of his financial standing is as important an object
to the farmer as the state of his crops. The conditions of agriculture have
changed, things are cut much finer, competition is keener, and details of
leakages must be watched far more closely than was necessary in the so-called
“ good old days.” It is an age when brain must supplement, if it does not
replace, brawn, and success is far more likely to attend the steps of the
farmer who does not neglect this vital accompaniment of his operations.
Reasons for Keeping Accounts
The following summarises the reasons for keeping accounts in business-
like fashion:—
1. Because it is our only way of knowing whether the farm is being run
at a good profit, at a small profit, or at a loss.
From Farmers’ Bulletin, No. 43, by P. G. Gilder.


2. It enables us to trace the profit or loss to a certain department of thfr
business— e.g., the expenses may be too high, the live stock may
not be paying for their keep, a certain crop may be grown at a loss,
or perhaps one is paying well and another is not, but the whole
balances, and we have no knowledge where the leakage or the
profit is located; all these things will be told by a set of books
such as every farmer can and should keep.
3. It tends towards economy of expenditure by keeping one’s expense
account continually in view, and may reveal to the farmer who is
discouraged because his “ farm doesn’t pay,” the fact that it is
paying well, but the profits are all consumed by extravagant manage-
ment or living expenses.
4. It enables us to eliminate the sources of loss by abandoning or improv-
ing those branches of agriculture which for us are conducted without
profit, and to throw all our energies into those branches that show
the greatest margin of profit.
5. It makes a handy compendium of particulars —a diary, a memoran-
dum, a reference as to dates and crops, profits and transactions—
which will be a source of much satisfaction and may become
important evidence in case of litigation, or may even prevent it by
furnishing indisputable proofs.
In addition, attention is directed to excessive expenses or to possible
economies. Small items often amount to a considerable total and this
attracts attention in a way that individual items would fail to do. In this
connection it may be doubted whether many farmers, except those who
keep regular books, have any definite knowledge in regard to the amount of
their private expenses or cost of living. Their business and private moneys
are rarely kept separate, and in many cases what is left over after the
business and private expenses have been met is looked upon as representing
the whole of the profits from farming. Undoubtedly many farmers are
securing larger profits than they themselves realise, owing to their private-
expenses being in excess of what they estimate.
Preliminary Considerations.
It is first necessary to lay down a few definite rules before going into-
details. Many systems premise a clear line of demarcation between the farm
proper and the house, practically on the basis that to ascertain the actual
profits of a farmer as compared with those of a merchant or a professional
man, the two must be kept very distinct. Though this is only the logical
outcome of any correct system, the constant analysis of all accounts makes
it undesirable for at least the first few years of a beginner’s career in book-
keeping.
Again, one of two aspects of the profit assessment may be chosen. The-
first is to charge the business with the owner’s estimated salary and treat
the total net return as a direct interest on the capital invested— e.g., if, after
paying all expenses (including salary of say £200), a profit of £l6O is made
on a capital of £1,600, 10 per cent, per annum has been earned.
The second method is to charge the market rates of interest on the capital:
invested (i.e., treat the owner’s interest in the farm in exactly the same way
as if it were a loan) and take the balance as net income for the year. Using


the same figures as before in this case, 5 per cent, per annum on £1,600
would be £BO, and the net profit is, therefore, £360 less £BO interest, or
£2BO, which is the farmer’s payment for time, trouble, and experience.
In each case the total income is the same; but inasmuch as he would have
received the 5 per cent, on his capital as a mere investment without labour,
and as any allocation for salary can only be assumption, the second of the
two systems is perhaps the more desirable.
In the case of a partnership, where the two or more parties are of unequal
experience, or where one is not taking an active part in the business, the
question assumes a different aspect and must be decided on its merits.
A popular suggestion for treating farm accounts is to take each of the
paddocks separately, debit its proportion of rent, labour, seed, manure, &c.,
and credit the net returns. This, though possible to a skilled accountant,
and perhaps comparatively easy where the crop occupies the ground the
major part of the year, should rather be discouraged, especially when dealing
with mixed farming, as it involves so many mere approximations and esti-
mates. Probably the only instances where it is directly beneficial are either
in conjunction with experiment plots, when accuracy in the seed and
manure used and in the yield obtained is imperative, or where a farm of only
three or four paddocks is confined to one crop and each is dealt with at
one time.
Simplifying the Work.
The following suggestions may assist in simplifying the work at the out-
SOU I—
1. The house, farm, buildings, &c., may be treated as one property,
whether rented or owned by the farmer, unless the house (as in a
few cases) is detached from the farm and forms a separate property.
2. No salary is drawn by the owner or his family for services rendered.
All farm products used by the household need not be charged, but
all definite expenses incurred debited to a house account.
3. Interest charged at 5 per cent, per annum on capital invested, and
any further profit is his net return.
4. Inasmuch as few farmers have many cash or bank transactions, the
cash book may be dispensed with to reduce the number of books
required, All entries may then be made through the journal.
The First Essential —an Inventory.
The man who starts a system of book-keeping with his capital in cash,
and then purchases the farm, stock, &c., has a much simpler task than the
one who for years perhaps has been engaged on the land. The latter must,
as a preliminary, “ take stock,” — i.e., discover what he is worth at any par-
ticular time. The season of the year for inaugurating the system needs some
judgment. Other things being equal, January Ist or July Ist would be the
best; but with certain classes of farming, this might be inconvenient. For
instance, the end of March might be most suitable for a wheat-grower, as in
December he would have wheat unsold, or even unharvested. The end of
September might be best adapted for a summer fruit and citrus orchardist,
inasmuch as that would probably be the only time when there was no fruit
for sale. A tenant farmer would probably find it better to take his inventory
on the anniversary of the day he entered into occupation, and the holders


of conditional purchases and homestead selections on one of the dates on
which their payments became due. Low stocks and slackness of work may
govern other cases.
In making this valuation, much judgment must be exercised, and this in
turn will tend to develop the business faculty. The memory will be called
upon, old receipts and pass books looked up, and current values considered,
to ensure some amount of accuracy. Over-sanguine estimates may in some
cases be made, but a wide-awake farmer usually gathers from the prices
obtained at local auction sales, &c., a very fair idea of values.
Numberless instances might be given of the problems which confront the
farmer at such a time. For instance, with the financial year closing on June
30th, he has several tons of seed potatoes intended for his own planting next
season. To buy them would cost £6 per ton; whereas if sold they would
realise but £4 or £4 10s. per ton. At what should they be valued? As an
enhancement of the value in the “ growing ” year means a lowering of profit
in the “ sowing ” year, the middle course would be wisest, with a strong
leaning towards a low estimate.
The list must then be classified under separate headings, of which the
following are the most important:—
1. Land (either with or without house, buildings, &c., which, with fences,
dams, clearing, &c., may be placed under the heading of “ improve-
ments ”). If the place has been bought as a going concern, with
the house built and fences erected, the one account will suffice;
but if unimproved land is obtained, and the additions made sub-
sequently, two or even more divisions would be preferable.
2. Live stock, including horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, and fowls, placed in
separate accounts or together, according to importance. It is usually
desirable to keep the horses separate, as, unless breeding is carried on,
depreciation must be allowed for and loss incurred.
3. Plant, Fixed and Movable. —Where much heavy fixed plant is in
use, the two classes may be kept distinct, as differing allowances
for depreciation have to be made.
4. Farm products on hand (ready for sale or use).
5. Farm products growing.—lf the inventory is made at the slackest
period of the year, these may not be very extensive, and may even
be neglected. To prevent an over-estimate, any such crops should
only be priced at the cost of labour, seed, and manure, the benefit
of any profit being carried to the year in which the harvesting is
done.
6. Furniture and domestic effects.
This must be supplemented by a statement showing the cash in hand
or in bank, debts owing to or by the farmer, promissory notes, mortgages, &c.
Possibly the most difficult task is the assigning of a value to the farm and
buildings, and the tendency would be to overestimate it. Due consideration
must be given to the original cost, and to the subsequent improvements,
whether made by the farmer in the ordinary course, or carried out by trades-
men for a definite amount. In the case of a tenancy, an estimate must be
made of the present worth of any additions or improvements, based upon
the fact that the value of such must be spread over the term of the lease
and will be considered as of no value at the end.


Specimen Balance-sheet.
£
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
Dr. (or Liabilities).
Cr. (or Assets).
To Stores
25
0
0
By Land, Buildings, &o.
850
0
0
„ Interest unpaid
20
0
0
„ Stock
320
0
0
„ Loan from Bank .
... 400
0
0
„ Plant
96
0
0
„ Capital
... 1,010
0
0
„ Crops
84
0
0
„ Sundry Debtors ...
105
0
0
£1.455
0
0
£1,455
0
0
A Balance Sheet.
This will constitute his balance-sheet, showing his assets, or what he owns,
on the one side, and his liabilities, or what he owes, on the other side, and
the difference between these two will be his capital—provided, of course,
that the assets exceed the liabilities.
All such balance-sheets inevitably include approximations to value, and
not actual values (which can only be ascertained when a sale is eSected),
and, therefore, the merit of any system of book-keeping must depend, first
and foremost, on the nearness to accuracy of the various valuations.
It will be seen from tbis example that four out of the five divisions into
which the assets are divided, must of necessity be valuations on the part
of the owner, and if in any way inflated will, when realisation takes place,
reduce the stated capital to its correct figure.
The next Essential—a Diary.
The inventory, especially if taken on January Ist, might well be copied
on the opening pages of a diary. These are cheap enough, and the foolscap
sizes, with two or three days to a page, and sufficient space at the end for a
financial summary, are eminently suitable. (If preferred, a well-bound
book, ruling columns for several years for the insertion of values, may be
used. An example of this is given later.)
All the transactions should be recorded in the diary as they occur; and,
in addition, it is wise to note the doings of every labourer (in a special book,
it necessary), the date of service of the farm breeding stock, the plantings
and harvestings, the rainfall, frosts, unusual winds, &c. Many an otherwise
unaccountable variation in the yield of two similar crops sown at almost the
same time may be understood by reference to some such record, and many
of the innumerable problems which incessantly confront the agriculturist may
by this means be solved.
At the end of each month a summary should be made of the receipts and
expenditure, and in this some discrimination is needed. It is not enough
to pay the storekeeper’s bill of, say, 90s. Of this 555. may be for groceries,
20s. for seed, ss. for plough-lines, harness oil, &c., 7s. 6d. for a new plough-
share, and 2s. 6d. for an odd ball of binder twine. Similarly, the blacksmith’s
bill may include shoeing, to be charged to horses, repairs to ploughs, new
tires, &c., to the implement account, and new gate-hinges to buildings and
fences. In just the same way, the receipts must be classified, and credited
to crops, cattle, sheep, pigs, fruit, &c.


From this summary of the month’s transactions, the Journal (to be after-
wards explained) may be made up. All receipts should be kept and
numbered, all payments made by cheque as far as possible, and all account
sales of produce, stock, &c.. carefully preserved for future reference.
It may not be out of place to suggest here that a page of the diary might
well be used for a few particulars regarding the fire and life policies (giving
No., amount of premium, when due, and where the policy is kept), details
■of any mortgages on the farm, and rough details (if actual copies are not
on hand) of any agreements with labourers, clearers, &c. Such information
may be required at a moment’s notice, and. may be of paramount importance
when the owner is, through sickness or other cause, absent at the time when
payments are due.
These are good grounds for the opinion that an accurately made inventory
and a regularly kept diary conduce as much to a chore ugh knowledge of
one’s affairs as a journal or a ledger.
The Principles of Double-entry Book-keeping.
Having thus laid down the broad outlines upon which any system of
book-keeping must be carried into effect, it is now necessary to briefly
describe “ Double Entry ” as the most suitable for the farmer. It may
entail a few more figures, but the ease with which its correctness may be
proved, and the balance-sheet compiled, makes it the system least open to
criticism.
It is based upon the general principle that every transaction, whatever
its nature, concerns two accounts, or has two aspects —that of a receiver
and that of a giver. If money is paid into the bank as the result of a sale
of stock, the bank account receives, while the stock account gives. If 100
corn bags are bought at 6d. each, and these are used to market the crops,
the crop account receives, and the bank (or cash) account gives.
If, then, this principle is carried out in its entirety, and the same figures
(though in different accounts) appear on both sides of whatever books are
kept, a failure of the totals to correspond would certainly indicate an error,
which must at once be looked for.
The two books which are needed to supplement the diary, or whatever
means are used to make a rough record of daily happenings and transactions,
are the Journal and the Ledger. The former is written up in order of date,
and the latter according to the account to which the entry belongs.
Simple Rules.
The following rules epitomise the fundamental principles of correct book-
keeping :
1. Debit the receiver, or that which is received; credit the giver, or
that which is given.
2. Debit losses; credit gains.
3. Every debit must have a corresponding credit.
4. The sum of the debits must equal the sum of the credits.
If the first two rules are clearly grasped, the others may be neglected,
as they are merely the logical outcome.
Custom has led to the placing of the debits on the left-hand side of the
page and the credits on the right.


Date.
1 Dr. Cr.
Ledger
Folio.
Dr
Or
191,0.
1
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
1 Jan.
Crops, Dr.
To T. Brown
17
10
0
17
10
0
n „
T. Brown, Dr
To Bank
...j
i
17
10
0
17
10
0
Classification of Accounts.
Some classification of the various accounts simplifies matters, and though
two sections are occasionally advised, viz., real and personal, a more extended
division into four classes has obvious merits. These classes are :
Personal, or accounts with persons.
Property, or dealings in goods, live stock, &c.
Money, or records of receipts and expenditure.
Convenience, or nominal, such as expenses, interest, discount, wages, &c.
The following diagram may serve to illustrate the method of journalising
the first three divisions: —
The Journal.
The Journal is ruled'with the following columns: —“Date,” “Name of
account debited,” “ Name of account credited,” “ Ledger folio (or page on
which the corresponding entry is posted in the Ledger),” “ Amount of cash
(or value) debited,” “ Amount of cash (or value) credited.”
The method of writing up the Journal may be thus illustrated; —
Diary entries: —Jan. 1, 1910—Bought 700 corn bags at 6d. each, from
T. Brown. Jan. 17, 1910—Paid for bags by cheque.
Being for crops, they are charged to that account.
In actual practice, as payment is made before the end of the month, the
transaction can be treated as a cash one, and the entry would then be stated,
as “ Crops Dr. to Bank," without involving the use of Brown's name.


Date.
Dr.
Or.
Ledger;
Folio.
Dr.
Cr.
£
s.
d.
£
S.
d.
Bank, Dr.
2
1,000
0
0
To Capital
i
1,000
0
0
Horses, Dr.
3
150
0
0
To Bank
2
150
0
0
Stock, Dr.
4
400
0
0
To Bank
2
400
0
0
Plant, Dr.
5
50
0
0
To Sydney Plough Co.
9
50
0
0
James, Dr.
8
300
0
0
To Stock
4
300
0
0
Bank, Dr.
2
100
0
0
To Crops
6
100
0
0
.Bank, Dr.
2
10
0
0
To Dairy
7 1
10
0
0
Wages, Dr.
10
120
0
0
To Bank
2
120
0
0
Rent, Dr.
11 i
80
0
0
To Bank
2 1
80
0
0
Interest, Dr.
12
50
0
0
To Capital
1
50
0
0
£2,260
0
0
£2,260
0
0
Additional value may be given to the Journal by briefly describing the
transaction:—
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Crops, Dr. 17 10 0
To T. Brown ... ... 17 10 0
700 corn bags at 6d.
Where the journal is compiled from rough memoranda, and not from a
regularly-kept diary, this is distinctly advantageous.
Reference has already been made (see page 855) to the necessity for analys-
ing the various receipts and expenses, to ascertain the accounts to which the
amounts should be charged. The storekeeper’s bill, if paid as soon as due,
could be journalised thus: —
De. Ce.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Household (groceries) ... 2 15 0
Crops (seed and twine) 12 6
Implement (shares, &c.), Dr 0 12 6
To Bank ... 4 10 0
An elementary example of a year’s business dealings is here given to
explain the foregoing principles. The transactions are really a summary
of a diary, and thus no dates are mentioned.
J. Bull starts with a capital of £l,OOO, which is banked. He buys horses
for £l5O, and stock for £4OO cash, together with implements from the Sydney
Plough Co., for £5O (not paid). He sells stock to James for £5OO (not paid),
crops for £lOO cash, and butter for £lO cash. £l2O is paid as wages, and
£BO as rent. Valuations at the end of the year are; —Stock, £300; crops,
£6O; plant, £4O; and horses, £l4O. Interest charged on capital at 5 per
cent, per annum.
Entries need not be made of the valuations.


Dr.
Cr.
yx , [Name of correspondin'. 1,1 Journal 1
t c ' ( Or. entry. | folio. ! j £ s
. d.
•n .Name of corresponding' Journal
Uate *1 Dr. entry. folio. ' £
i
a. d.
i
i ;
i ;i
| n
1
i. Capital.
£
d.
1
£
s.
d.
To Balance
. 1,150
0
0
By Bank
1,000
0
0
„ Interest
50
0
0
„ Profit & Loss a/c. ...
100
0
0
LI,150
0
0
£1.150
0
0
2.
Bank.
To Capital
. 1,000
0
0
By Horse
150
0
0
„ Oops
100
0
0
,, Stock
400
0
0
„ Dairy
10
0
0
„ Wages
120
0
0
„ Bent
80
0
0
„ Balance
360
0
0
£1,110
0
0
£1,110
0
0
3.
Horse.
To Bank
. 150
0
0
By Balance (Valuation )
140
0
0
„ Profit & Loss a/c ...
10
0
0
£150
0
0
£150
0
0
4.
Stock.
To Bank
. 400
0
0
By James
300
0
0
„ Profit & Loss a/c ..
. 200
0
0
„ Balance
( Valuation )
300
0
0
£600
0
0
;
£600
0
0
5.
Plant.
To Sydney Plough Co.
50
0
0
By Balance
( Valuation)
40
0
0
„ Profit & Loss a/c ...
10
0
0
£50
0
0
|
£30
0
0
The Ledger.
This, in itself, is the most important of the books of reference, as it
contains an abstract of every transaction recorded in business. It is ruled
with columns for “Date,” “Name of corresponding Or. entry,” “Journal
folio” and “ Amount ” on the Dr. side, and a similar number of columns on
the Or. side.
Every account mentioned in the Journal requires a Ledger account under
its own heading. In actual practice, these would appear on various pages,'
allocating say ten to the bank, twenty to stock, ten to horse, and so on,
according to the number of likely transactions. An index is required, and
it is desirable to classify them as already stated.
In the following, the accounts only are numbered, and dates and Journal
folio columns are omitted to facilitate working:—


To Profit & Loss a/c .
£
.. 160
.
0
6. Crops.
d, |
0 i By Bank
„ Balance ( Valuation)
£
100
60
a.
0
0
d.
0
0
£160
0
0
£160
0
0
To Profit <b Loss a/c .
10
0
7. Dairy.
0 By Bank
10
0
0
£10
0
0
£10
0
0
To Stock
.. 300
0
8. James.
0 , By Balance
300
0
0
£300
0
0
£300
0
0
To Balance
9. Sydney Plough Co.
50 0 0 By Plant
50
0
0
£50
0
0
£50
0
0
To Bank
.. 120
10. Wages.
0 0 By Profit cfc Loss a/c ...
120
0
0
£120
0
0
£120
0
0
To Bank
80
0
11. Rent.
0 By Profit & Loss a/c ...
80
0
0
£80
0
0
£80
0
0
To Capital ,
50
12. Interest.
0 0 By Profit & Loss a/c ...
50
0
0
£50
0
0 ;
£50
0
0
Dr.
£
S.
d.
Trial Balance.
v Name of Account.
£
Cr.
s. d.
Capital
... 1,050
0
0
1,110
0
0
Bank ...
750
0
0
150
0
0
Horse
400
0
0
Stock
300
0
0
50
0
0
Plant ...
Crops
100
0
0
Hairy
10
0
0
300
0
0
James
Sydney Plough Co. ...
50
0
0
120
0
0
Wages
80
0
0
Rent
50
0
0
Interest
£2,260
0
0
£2,260
0.
0
Neglecting the entries in italics, which will be explained later, it is now
possible to verify the correctness of the posting [i.e., entering into the
Ledger) by means of a trial balance. The totals of each side of every account
are added, and the results should be equal to the totals of the Journal, and
of course, to one another.


Trial Balance by Difference.
Dr.
£
s.
d.
Cr
£
s.
d.
Capital
... 1,050
0
0
360
0
0
Bank
150
0
0
Horse
100
0
0
Stock
50
0
0
Plant
Crops
100
0
0
Dairy
10
0
0
300
0
0
James
Sydney Plough Co. ...
50
0
0
120
0
0
Wages
80
0
0
Bent ...
50
0
0
Interest
£1.210
0
0
£1,210
0
0
Balance-sheet.
L)r. (or Inabilities).
£ s. d.
Gr. (or Assets),
£
a.
d.
To Sydney Plough Co.
50 0 0
By Horse (as per valuation)
140
0
0
„ Capital
. 1,050 0 0
„ Stock „
300
0
0
,, Difference, being profit .
100 0 0
„ Plant „
40
0
0
„ Crops
60
0
0
„ Bank (as per Ledger) ...
360
0
0
„ James (book debt)
300
0
0
£1,200 0 0
£1,200
0
0
It does not necessarily follow that, the Dr. and Cr. columns being equal,
the postings must be correct, inasmuch as it does not disclose when there
is an entry on the right side, but posted to the wrong account, or a posting
to the wrong side, with its corresponding entry also on the wrong side.
The making up of a trial balance has so many distinct advantages, that
it must never be dispensed with. Any error must be at once looked for,
because, if allowed to remain, the balancing entry will also be wrong, and
it will be practically impossible to compile a correct balance-sheet and
profit and loss account. It is convenient to remember that if one side is
■deficient by the same amount as the other side is in excess of the Journal
total, an entry of that amount has usually been posted to the wrong side.
The trial balance is of great assistance in detecting mistakes in posting,
such as taking 6 for 0, 7 for 1, 3 for 5, and vice versa. Another common
error is to place the figures in the wrong money column, making ss. 7d.
appear as £5 7s.
In actual practice the Journal is not totalled, and the trial balance is made
up by stating only the differences between the various accounts. This
would then appear as follows, and the method can be recommended when a
ia r amount of proficiency has been gained.
In the above example, very little time is saved, owing to its extreme
simplicity, but where numerous accounts, many of which have been balanced
■off, are concerned, the economy in labour is considerable.
From the trial balance we can without difficulty make up our balance-
sheet, provided an estimate has been made of the value of the stock, plant,
&c., on hand.
The balance-sheet from the above trial balance will appear as follows; —
If the assets are worth less than the liabilities, a loss has been incurred,
•and the capital diminished by that amount.


corresponding credit): —
Profit
AS
D
Loss
Account.
Dr, {Losses).
£
S.
d.
t
Ct. (Gains).
£
s.
d.
To Horse
10
0
0
i By
Stock
... 200
0
0
,, Plant
10
0
0
! »
Crops
... 160
0
0
„ Wages
120
0
0
>»
Dairy
10
0
0
„ Rent...
80
0
0
„ Interest
50
0
0
„ Capital % (net gain)
100
0
0
£370
0
0
£370
0
0
Capital Account.
1909 To Balance o/d ... 1,150 0 0
By Bank 1,000
0
O
(carried down).
„ Interest 50
0
0
„ Profit & Loss % 100
0
0
£1,150 0 0
£1,150
0
0
1910.
By Balance b/d (brought 1,150
0
0
down).
It will be noticed that the actual return has been £5O for the use of the
£l,OOO capital and £lOO as a general profit.
Though this method indicates the total increase or decrease in capital,
it does not disclose how the profit or loss has been made. In order to do
this, each account will have to be properly balanced.
Leaving the Capital Account, we find from our trial balance that £l,llO
has been received by the Bank Account, and £750 paid out, leaving a Or.
balance of £360. This is inserted, bothsides totalled and ruled off, as seen
from the entries in italics.
In the Horse Account, the valuation £l4O, or our estimate of what they are
worth at the end of the year, is entered as a Cr. balance, and the difference
between their original price and present value (£10) is carried to a Profit
and Loss Account, as being the cost of using the horses throughout the year.
The Stock Account shows that £4OO was paid for them. £3OO worth has-
been sold, and £3OO worth remains on hand; consequently a profit of £2OO
has been made, and to balance the account this is debited.
The other entries are treated in similar fashion, all cash, stock, crops, &c.j
on hand, and all amounts owing to or by the owner being carried to a
Balance Account, and any differences to a Profit and Loss Account. In the
case of wages, rent, and interest, it is clearly seen that they are losses in
themselves, although contributing to the net gain. The Profit and Loss
Account thus stands as under, the items being transferred to the side opposite
to that on which they appear in the ordinary Ledger account (thus adhering
to the essential principle of double entry, that every debit must have a
It will be noticed that this carries out the second important rule referred
to —“ Debit losses; credit gains.”
The Americans, following the order in which these items appear, are
slightly more accurate, and usually call this a loss and profit account.
The way in which the profits have been made is thus disclosed. If
the horse-hire, wages, rent, &c., were charged to the crops, and the book-
keeping carried out in further detail, the statement would have a different
aspect, though the result would be the same.
This difference of £lOO is credited to the Capital Account (or, if necessary,
to a private drawing account), which is now ruled off.
In continuing each account for the following year, the amount of the balance
is carried forward on the opposite side, thus; —■


By transferring all the balances to the respective opposite sides the Balance
Account may be made up ; but as this only amounts to the balance-sheet
with the sides reversed, the Drs. of the balance-sheet becoming the Crs.
of the Balance Account, this has no particular value, provided the balance-
sheet has already been made up.
In the more formal systems of book-keeping, the items of the Profit and
Loss Account and Balance Account are journalised, but this is not by any
means essential.
The system described herein furnishes the actual profit or loss on the
whole of the farming operations for the year, and it will probably be best
for the beginner to become thoroughly accustomed to this before attempting
the more difficult process of analysing the gains or losses from the various
branches.
This involves a careful dissection of —
1. The proportion of rent to be charged to each.
2. A strict appropriation of the labour, both of the farmer and his
family, and the wages men.
3. A close estimate, first of the cost of the upkeep of the horses, and
then of the amount to charge per hour to the crops for teams,
implements, &c.
4. An approximation of the value of the feed of the horses, stock, &c.,
to be credited to the Crop Account.
This involves such an amount of calculation, and so many transfers and
adjustments, that it is likely to deter the beginner from continuing with his
books, but to the man thoroughly interested in his work they present no
difficulty. The principle is the same throughout, the object aimed at being
to charge each branch of the business, for which an account is kept, with
the whole of the direct and indirect expenses which it involves, or from
which it benefits, and to credit it with its due proportion of the receipts,
in order to ascertain the real profit or loss on that particular branch.
Valuations of Stock,
There is a decided difference of opinion as to whether the ordinary live
stock on the farm should be valued in accordance with the fluctuations of
the market or at a uniform figure consistent with age and quality. The
former method shows the value that would be realised if the stock were sold;
but even in a time of inflated prices they cannot be disposed of, as they are
required for carrying on the farm operations. In such cases, the method
may show profits which are not actually secured, while during a period of
low prices, it may indicate losses that are not really sustained. Valuation
at a regular, conservative price per head is on this account to be preferred,
and on definite disposal the true loss or gain can be ascertained.
Repayments of Principal with Interest.
When land is obtained as a conditional purchase or a homestead selection
where repayments are being made under a loan from the Advances to Settlers’
Board, and in fact whenever payments include interest with the principal,
it should be noted that the principal is reduced by the total amount of the
payment, less the interest.


Dr.
£
6.
d.
Cr.
£
s.
d.
1901 To Purchase of Land ...i
329
0
0
By Sale of Timber
23
0
0
„ Clearing
54
0
0
,, Balance old (net cost
„ Fencing
64
0
0
to date)
505
6
0
„ Wire-netting
12
0
0
„ Ploughing
27
0
0
„ Trees
37
16
0
„ Wages Planting
4
10
0
£528
6
0
£528
6
0
1902 To Balance b/d
505
6
0
By Sale of Timber
21
0
0
„ Clearing, &c.
100
0
0
,, Balance c/d (net cost
„ Trees and Wages ...
34
0
0
to date)
618
6
0
£639
6
0
£639
6
0
1903 To Balance b/d
618
6
0
By Sale of Timber
14
0
0
„ Clearing
63
0
0
„ Balance o/d (net cost
„ Fencing, &o.
45
10
0
to date)
767
1
d
„ Trees and Wages ...
54
5
0
i
£781
1
0
£781
1
d
For instance the 18th payment of £l5 on a C.P. of £4OO consists of £0
principal and £6 interest, and should be journalised thus,
£ s. d. £ 8. d.
Land % (or Loan %) 9 0 0
Interest %, Dr 6 0 0
To Bank 15 0 0
The former reduces the total liability, whereas the latter is an expense for
the current year.
Capital Cost.
Where a property is being constantly improved, a distinction should be
made between permanent additions and current expenses. The former
appear in the balance-sheet as assets, while the latter become part of the
Profit and Loss Account. For instance, an orchardist who purchases un-
improved land and gradually clears, fences, and plants the ground as circum-
stances permit, would probably utilise the space between the trees for the
first few years for general crops and thus support himself. Under such
conditions he might only charge to a Land or Orchard Account the actual
outside costs.
Assuming the purchase in 1901 of 47 acres at £7 per acre, clearing 12 acres
at £4 10s., fencing for £64, wire-netting £l2, ploughing and subsoiling (by
contract) 455. per acre, trees 70s. per 100 (22 feet apart), wages for planting,
three weeks at 305., and selling timber for £23;
In 1902, clearing 10 acres at £4 155., fencing at £26, wire-netting £4, first
ploughing, &c., 455. per acre, trees £3O, wages £4, selling timber for £2l;
In 1903 clearing 14 acres at 905., fencing £l2, wire-netting £2, first
ploughing, &c., 455., trees £47 55., planting £7, and selling timber £l4 ;
The net cost to date of the orchard would then be as follows; —
Specimen Orchard Account.


Name of
Implement
(and if necessary
where procured).
Date of
Purchase.
! Cost,
i
Probable
Rife.
Amount of
Depreciation.
Value Value
at end of at end of
1910. 1911.
Value Value
at end of at end of
1912. 1913.
£
Years.
£ s.
d J £ s
d.
£ s. d. : £ s. d.
4-furrow plough ..
18-1-10
20
4
25 Y or £5
15 0
0 10 0
0
5 0 0 !
Horse gear ..
20-2-’10
16
20
5 % or 16s.
15 4
0 ; 14 8
0
13 12 O' 12 16 0
Spring cart..
28-2-10
18
10
10 ? or 36s.
16 4
0 ; 14 8
0
12 12 0 10 16 0
Reaper and binder..
23-3- ! 10
: 40
5
20 % or
32 0
0 1 24 0
0
(Sold, £20)
i
It will thus be seen that such an account gives a brief history of the
owner’s expenses in laying out his orchard; and on the start of the fourth
year, capita] outlay will probably cease and a return be forthcoming. This,
however, is best credited to a Fruit Account, and becomes one of the gross
profits for the year. The question of making some small allowance for
depreciation on such an orchard can only be left to the owner’s judgment
and knowledge of local conditions. Renewals and a gradual replacement
of trees when needed can be charged as current expenses.
The Plant Book.
Where the implements in use are of a mixed character and have varying
lengths of effective life, making a fixed depreciation on the whole undesirable,
a special plant book may be used with decided benefit. This may be ruled
according to circumstances and the insertion of other particulars may add
to its value.
The addition of all these items will give the valuation of the plant for the
current year. Any period longer than six months may be taken as a year
and all under that time neglected.
The plough may possibly have a nominal value at the end of the fourth
year, and this can be put down in the column, if desired. The price, £2O,
for the binder will be credited to the Plant Account in the usual way, and it
thus drops out of the valuations for the year.
Consignments Outwards.
In nearly all text-books this phrase is used to express the forwarding of
goods to be sold by an agent at a distance, and separate accounts for each
consignment are opened. Unless, however, considerable delay elapses be-
tween the sending and disposal, such transactions are best treated as ordinary
sales, dealing only with the net return. If, however, time is likely to elapse
before the sale, as when stock are sent to another district for disposal at a
favourable opportunity, a Consignment Account may be opened. Under such
circumstances, a value should be assigned to the stock, and this should be
debited to the Consignment Account, together with all charges paid by the
owner or consignor. The net return, as shown by the account sales, should
be credited to the same account, which will now indicate whether a loss or a
gain has been made on the deal. Any over-estimate at the outset will be
rectified by the account sales. The use of such an account becomes of con-
siderable importance when stock happens to be away at the time of making
up a balance-sheet.
+ 17299 -2 E


Conclusion,
Enough has been said to indicate a few of the salient points connected with
book-keeping on the farm. Other books for recording the receipts of cash,
the doings of the labourers, transactions in bills, &c., may be used where
the operations are extensive, or where further details are desired; but
their use involves little difficulty after the elementary stages have been
passed and they can be ruled to suit varying conditions.
The treatment of the subject on the broadest possible lines, consistent
with accuracy, has been strongly recommended to the beginner throughout,
and as advancement is made in the work much greater detail may be
entered upon. The whole system is thoroughly progressive and educa-
tional, and when undertaken with sincerity and thoroughness, and with the
expenditure of a little mental effort, cannot fail to help the farmer in his
work, broaden his ideas, increase his knowledge of the business, and make
him happier and more satisfied with the life he has chosen.


SECTION XVIII.
Farmers' Calendar,
The aim of the Department of Agriculture in issuing this calendar is to
provide farmers, and more especially newcomers in respective districts, with
guidance as to seasonable operations.
The experience of every successful agriculturist goes to prove that no
matter what the climatic and general conditions of a district may be, it is
only by timely and thorough preparation of the soil that satisfactory results
can be achieved. To provide in any handy form specific details applicable to'
every district is manifestly impossible. The best that can be done, at this
stage at any rate, is to indicate in a general way what practices have proved
successful over a prolonged series of seasons in certain distinct localities. By
comparison of the altitude, average annual and monthly rainfall, and other
conditions of their own districts with those for which specific details are now
given, it is thought agriculturists will be able to strike the happy medium.
Each officer of the Department who has contributed matter for this
Calendar has set forth a list of the districts of which he is of opinion the
conditions of his district are typical. But in a country of such widely different
conditions as those of this State, it is quite possible that quite a large number
of districts are entirely unrepresented. In such cases growers are requested
to communicate with the Department in order that reliable advice for their
guidance may be obtained and published.
Ho doubt in some districts omitted from the Calendar there are branches
of the Agricultural Bureau, and members might, with advantage to them-
selves, and to other farmers working under similar conditions, devote more
than one evening to the subject. Crops, varieties, times of sowing or
planting, methods of preparing the land, manures, harvesting, and so forth,
are all issues that turn upon experience, and furnish grounds for useful
discussions. The means by which the various branches of the organisation
might add to their usefulness would thus be increased, and valuable
information would be collected, that could be incorporated in future issues of
this Handbook.
The various districts in the Calendar are :
North Coast— Riehmond-Tweed Section.
Directions for the Rich mend-Tweed section apply to practically all the districts
embraced by the Big Scrub and as far as Lismore and a little beyond Murwillumbah.
With slight modifications, the particulars will also apply, in the case of main crops for
dairy fodder, to the districts surrounding Casino and Kyogle.
North Coast —Glarence-Maeleay Section.
Directions for the Clarence-Maeleay section apply to practically all districts between
these two rivers with the exception of Dorrigo and other elevated plateaux, which, on
account of cold nights, are more akin to the Tablelands in respect to cultural matters.


Hawkesbury-Nepean.
Directions for the Hawkesbury-Nepean district apply to Camden, Campbelltown,
Liverpool, Penrith, Picton, Richmond, Sackville, St. Mary’s, Windsor, Wiseman’s Ferry.
South Coast.
These directions apply to Araluen, Bateman’s Bay, Bega, Berry, Bodalla, Bull!,
Candelo, Cobargo, Colombo, Eden, Gerringong, Kiama, Merimbula, Milton, Moruya,
Nelligen, Nowra, Pambula, Picton, Shellharbour, UUadulla, Wollongong, Wolumla.
Tablelands—N orthern.
Directions for Northern Tableland apply to districts adjacent to the Great Northern
Railway from Armidale to Tenterfield, and to such elevated districts further south as
Uralla and Walcha. Tenterfield is an earlier district than Glen Innes, but the directions
generally apply, and also in the case of Inverell to a large degree.
Tablelands—Bathurst Section.
These directions, with slight modifications, are applicable to Bathurst, Blayney,
Braidwood, Goulburn, Queanbeyan, Yass, and other fairly elevated districts adjoining.
Central-Western Slope.
These directions, with slight modifications to meet differences in altitude and
other natural conditions, apply to the following districts ; —Canowindra, Cargo, Cowra,
Dubbo, Eugowra, Forbes, Grenfell, Molong, Murrumburrah, Parkes, Temora, Wellington,
Young.
The reminders would also apply, in a very large degree, to the slightly earlier districts
of Condobolin, Narromine, and Trangie.
Riverina.
Directions for Riverina apply to the majority of districts along the Southern line and
branches from Junee to Albury, Junee to Jerilderie and Deniliquin ; also Corowa and
Berrigan.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas.
Directions apply to the areas watered by the Murrumbidgee irrigation works.
North-Western Plains.
Directions for the North-western Plains apply more especially to the black-soil plains
of the north-west, where irrigation by means of artesian bore water is practised. The
Inverell and Delungra districts are particularly mentioned in connection with maize.


JANUARY.
North Coast — Richmond-Tweed Section.
Crops to sow—
Maize—for green fodder; for grain early
varieties may be sown, but good
yields cannot be expected.
Sorghum—for green fodder; may also
provide grain for poultry and pigs.
Millet—for green fodder, out before seeds
ripen for hay for horse-feed; provides
grain fairly useful for poultry.
Sweet potatoes—small planting.
Pumpkins—sow on small scale.
Marrows—sow on small scale.
Grass—after scrub fires paspalum grass-
seed may be sown this month.
Vegetables —sow French beans, swede and
white turnips, red and silver beet,
cabbage, lettuce, peas (a few), radish.
Get land ready for oats, barley, and rye
for green feed.
Ensilage making commences.
Sugar-cane keep down weeds by
chipping and scuffling.
North Coast — Clarence-Macleay Section.
Crops to sow—
Maize—for green fodder and silage.
Early varieties may still be sown for
grain to mature before frost, but good
yields can never bo expected from
the late sowing of early varieties.
Similar remarks apply to the Hunter-
Manning section of the coast.
Sorghum—for green fodder and silage.
Millet (Manchurian and Hungarian)—for
green fodder useful as a cleaning
crop for foul land.
Pumpkins, grammas, and marrows—sow
on small scale.
Sweet potato—plant on small scale.
Cowpeas—sow largely for seed, fodder, or
green manuring. For grain, sow 8 to
9 lb. seed in drills 30 inches apart.
Broadcast for green manuring, using
20 to 30 lb. seed.
Vegetables —sow French beans, swedes,
lettuce, cabbages, cauliflowers, silver
beet, peas (light sowing), cucumber,
squashes, and marrows.
Potatoes —plant tubers, preferably uncut,
and of medium size, so as to provide
seed sufficiently shot to plant in July.
Get land ready for autumn cropping. It
will generally prove profitable in this
district to put a catch crop of (say)
millet in land intended for autumn
cropping- This will serve to clear it
of weeds, as well as to provide some
useful fodder.
Hawkesbury-Nepean.
Crops to sow—
Maize—for green fodder and silage. In
sheltered situations a quick-maturing
variety might mature grain, but risky,
and areas should be small.
Sorghum—for green fodder and silage.
Millet—when hay is scarce, the rapid
growth of millet affords a ready means
of replenishing the supply. Hungarian
is best for this purpose, while White
French can be depended upon to
return an abundant yield of grain for
poultry.
Vegetables —sow French and butter beans,
silver beet, cauliflower, cabbage, leeks
and green bush marrows for late crop;
plant out celery and tomatoes.
Get land ready for autumn sowings of
cereals, legumes, rape, lucerne, and for
autumn crop of potatoes. The land
should be left open to catch any
rain, and cultivated whenever a crust
forms in order to conserve soil-
moisture.
South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Maize—for green fodder and silage, latest
safe sowing.
Sorghum—for green fodder and silage,
latest safe sowing.
Millet—for green fodder. Hungarian a
good variety; makes good hay and
chaff.
Potatoes—small planting of quick ma-
turing variety.
Vegetables —sow all kinds of kidney and
French beans, kale, cabbage, cauli-
flower, cucumber, celery, onions, radish,
spinach, and sweet maize.
Get land ready for autumn cropping by
breaking up and leaving rough so as
to catch any rain. After rains go
over area with harrows to check
evaporation.
FARMERS’ CALENDAR.


Northern Tableland.
Crops to sow—
Maize, sorghum, millet—can still be
sown for autumn green feed or for
silage. An early sowing of barley
could also be made for cutting, and
then be allowed to make a second
growth.
If potatoes are put in, they should be
only very quick maturing varieties,
such as Early Rose.
Harvesting of the grain crops will be
proceeding, as there are generally late
crops in this district. As the paddocks
are cleared of crop, sheep should be
turned in to clean up all weeds, &c.
During the busy harvest, the summer
crops, such aa maize, potatoes, &c..
are apt to be neglected ; but all
available time should be given to
them in the way of cultivation, stirring
up the soil after rain to conserve the
moisture and to keep down the weeds.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
Maize—early varieties for green fodder
for autumn use.
Sorghum—early varieties for green
fodder tor autumn use.
Millet—for green fodder for autumn use.
Swedes —main crop may be sown.
Barley \ small sowings of any of these
Bye f crops may be made towards end
Wheat i. of month for early winter green
Oafs ) fodder.
Vegetables —sow swedes, French and butter
beans. Peas for late crop. Sow in
seed-beds cabbage, Brussels sprouts,
broccoli, leeks. Transplant cabbage,
cauliflower, and celery.
Get land ready for autumn cropping. All
land from which cereal crops have been
harvested should be ploughed lightly,
or cultivated as early in this month
as possible; moisture is thereby
conserved, weeds destroyed, and shed
grain given a chance to germinate.
Central- western Slope.
Crops to sew—
Maize—early maturing varieties for green -
stuff and silage.
Sorghum and millet—early maturing
varieties for greenstuff and silage.
Potatoes—the second, or autumn crop,
for household vise, should be planted
in well-worked, fallowed land. For
this crop use small whole tubers rather
than pieces of large ones. When
planted at this season cut sets rot
quickly.
Vegetables —sow French beaus, marrows,
squashes, and pumpkins.
Get land ready for autumn crops. Keep
the fallowed land clean by feeding off
and cultivation.
Riverina.
Crops to sow—
There are few, if any, crops which can
be safely sown this month. All the
attention possible should be devoted to
keeping soil in a condition to conserve
moisture.
Get land ready for early sowings of rape
and swedes for sheep, and break up
or scarify land intended for cereals in
autumn.
Murrumhidgee Irrigation Areas.
Crops to sow—
Maize—for green feed only; for grain
small areas may still be chanced, but
very risky.
Millet—for green feed only.
Paspalum and Rhodes grasp.
Rye grass among maize for winter feed,
if able to cultivate.
Vegetables —sow carrots, turnips (white),
cabbages, cauliflowers, peas, beet-
roots, French beans, radishes, lettuce,
potatoes (end of month).
Get land ready for next cereal crops. Even
a short fallow is better than none.
The same applies to land intended
for lucerne.
North-western Plains.
Crops to sow—
Conditions are generally unfavourable
this month for sowing any main crops.
Special attention in the way of culti-
vation should be paid to all growing
crops to destroy weeds and conserve
soil moisture.
FEBRUARY.
North Coast — Riehmond-Tweed Section.
Crops to sow—
Japanese millet—sow for green fodder
(on high ground).
Maize—sow for green fodder and ensilage-
Rye— dp do
Planter’s Friend do do
To balance these, add a leguminous crop,
(say) oowpeas.
Swede turnips —for winter food for dry
cows and milkers; also for pigs.
Mangels— do
Carrots— do
Field cabbage— do
Thousand-headed kale— do


Vegetables—sow seed and plant out cab-
bage, cauliflower, lettuce, celery. Sow
beans, peas (a few).
Get land ready for lucerne; choose good
spot where soil is deep and drainage
is good.
After fires, paapalum seed may be
planted. Rye and prairie grass seed
may be sown.
Ensilage-making continues.
North Coast — Clarenee-Madeay Section.
Crops to sow—
Oats, barley, and rye—sow for green
fodder, combine either peas or vetches.
Rape—sow for green fodder.
Swede turnips—for winter food for pigs
and cows.
Sorghum—for green feed.
Thousand-headed kale and field cabbage
(in drills) —for winter food for pigs and
cows.
Hungarian and Manchurian millet—for
green feed or hay.
Paapalum—the best month for sowing
seed.
Potatoes—plant, but not on a large
scale, uncut sets.
Vegetables—sow swedes, white turnips,
French and butter beans, peas.
Hawkesbury-N epean.
Crops to sow—
Maize—for green feed and silage.
Sorghum—for green feed and silage.
Millet—for green feed, hay, and silage.
Barley—latter end of month sow cither
Cape or Skinless for green fodder,
preferably with vetches or grey field
peas for complete ration. Rape and
barley forms an excellent mixture for
sheep and pigs.
Potatoes—plant autumn crop for market
and home use, and to provide seed
for spring sowing.
Rape—sow largely for pig feed and
green manure.
Turnips and swedes —sow towards end
of month for market and stock pur-
poses.
Cabbage and kale—sow for field culture.
Vegetables—sow French and butter beans,
beet, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, leeks,
lettuce, onions, radish, carrots, and
parsnips (end of month). Plant out
cabbage and celery if weather is
favourable.
Get land ready for main cereals, lucerne,
and autumn sowings of grass seeds;
also break up ground where shade or
shelter trees are to be planted.
South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Oats—sow early for green fodder; mix
30 lb. vetches or tares with the seed
per acre.
Barley—sow for green fodder with
30 lb. per acre of vetches.
Rye—sow for green fodder Black Winter,
good variety, resists drought.
Rape—sow for green fodder.
Field peas and vetches sown with
above produce a better balanced
ration for stock.
Turnips—sow for milch cows and dry
stock.
Mangels—sow for milch cows and dry
stock.
Field cabbage and kale—sow for milch
cows and dry stock.
Vegetables—
Sow a little seed of cabbage, cauli-
flower, lettuce, celery, radish.
Beans—all kinds except broad.
Beet—sow a few rows.
Cabbage—plant out.
Celery—plant out.
Leek—plant out a few to keep up supply.
Lettuce—plant out a few to keep up
supply.
Onions—sow to keep up supply.
Potatoes—plant a few rows.
Spinach—plant a little seed.
Get land ready for further sowings of
above crops; also for lucerne.
Northern Tableland.
Crops to sow—
Barley—a sowing of either Cape or
Skinless barley for green feed should
be made; the latter should be sown
more thickly than the former, as it
does not stool well.
Rape, tares (or vetches) —for winter feed.
Rye—this may be sown for green feed.
Turnips—a sowing of swedes and white
turnips may be made for a general
crop this month.
Vegetables—if any seedlings of cabbage or
cauliflower have been raised they
should now be planted out in rich,
well-worked land. Onion'seed may be
sown on carefully-prepared land.
Sow thinly in drills; keep free from
weeds, and thin out later.
Get land ready for grasses and lucerne.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
As the main winter green fodder sow
barley, rye, wheat, or oats, the first
two for preference.


Rape should be sown largely. A mix-
ture of rape and barley, rape and oats,
or rape and rye in alternate drills is
preferable to rape alone.
Swedes may still be sown.
Sow kale, lucerne, and black tares in
well prepared land towards end of
month.
Vegetables —sow in seed-beds onions for
main crop. Sow cabbage, Brussels
sprouts, broccoli, leeks, and celery.
Transplant cabbage, broccoli, leeks,
celery, and eschalots. Make a small
sowing of carrots.
Central-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
Rape—for early grazing and greenstuff.
Mustard— do
Barley— do
Bye— do
Taree (or vetches) — do
Early sown crops of rape are likely to be
attacked by aphis; to keep the pest
in check the crop should be kept fed
off until cool weather sets in. Barley
or mustard, sown with rape, tends to
reduce the danger of ‘ ‘ bloating ”
when stock are first put upon the
crop.
Vegetables —sow French beans, peas, tur-
nips, and swedes. Sow cabbage and
cauliflower seed in pots or boxes for
transplanting later on.
Get land ready for autumn crops by
breaking up stubble or new land, and
by working the fallows to check
weeds and evaporation.
Biverina.
Crops to sow—
It is rather early for sowing any of the
main crops yet. All the time possible
should be devoted to preparing land
for—
Rape—for green feed, which may be
sown in fallowed land or after showers.
Oats—for green feed.
Wheat—for green feed.
Swedes and turnips—sow if weather be
favourable.
Vegetables —sow cabbages and cauliflower
in seed-beds for transplanting later on.
If soil is sufficiently moist, sow white
turnips and swedes. Growing crops
will need especial attention, and if
weather is dry, an occasional watering.
In applying the water, stir up the soil
beforehand, and then cover the moist
ground with a mulch of old straw,
leaves, or anything that will help to
conserve the moisture.
] Murrumhidgee Irrigation A rear.
■ Crops to sow—
; This is a bad time to sow crops, though
towards the end of the month Cape
or Skinless barley may be sown for
green feed.
Vegetables —sow carrots, beetroot, parsnips,
turnips, swedes, cabbages, lettuce,
potatoes.
Get land ready for all classes of autumn
sown crops.
j
North-western Plains.
Crops to sow—
Not a favourable month for sowing any
I main crops suitable to this district.
j Vegetables— cabbage and cauliflower seed ■
may be sown to provide young planta
j for setting out towards the end of
! March.
i Other work —should the weather permit,
ploughing may still be done for crops
that are to be put in late in May or
in June, but this is usually a very wet
month, and work on the land is
impossible. Now is a good time to
, do any repairs and painting of imple-
ments, sheds, and outbuildings, prepar-
ing for dipping seed for the prevention
of smut, and the hundred and one
little jobs that have been left until a
{ slack time.
| MARCH.
1 North Coast — Bichmond-Tweed Section.
Crops to sow—
Sorghum—sow a little for green fodder.
Oats—sow as much as desired for green
fodder.
Barley—sow as much as desired for green
fodder.
I Maiz e— sow for green fodder.
Rye—sow for green fodder.
, Rape—sow for green fodder for pigs and
j dry cows.
I sow alone, or in combine-
I Field peas ' tion with oats, rye, or
Vetches 1 barley, as winter food
j f for milch cows.
I Potatoes—plant largely as desired.
Grasses —sow cocksfoot, rye grasses, and
! prairie.
j Clover —sow white or Dutch, and red.
Vegetables —cabbage, cauliflower, onions
{ (sow seed and transplant any seedlings
j available), peas, globe artichokes.
i Get land ready for lucerne. (See February.)
Plant evergreen trees for shade.


North Coast — Clarence-21 acleay Section.
Crops to sow—
Oats—sow for green fodder.
Barley— do
Wheat— do
Rye—sow a small area for green feed.
Field peas—sow to raise seed supply for
future combination cereal crops for
fodder.
Vetches and Field peas should also be
sown in combination with cereals.
Rape—for pigs.
Potatoes may still be planted, but on
very small scale.
Lucerne.
Grasses—The best month to sow grasses
of all kinds.
Vegetables—cabbage, cauliflower, onions,
peas, globe artichokes.
Hawkesbury-Nepean.
Crops to sow—
Hungarian millet may be sown for green
feed or silage early in the month.
Wheat—sow for green forage.
Oats—sow for green feed, in conjunction
with vetches or field peas.
Barley—sow for green feed alone or with
rape.
Rye—on poorer soils where other cereals
fail to flourish rye may be grown for
stock feed, provided it is cut before
the seed is ripe.
Lucerne —may be sown this month.
Rape—sow largely for pig feed and
green manure.
Turnips, swedes, kohlrabi, tree-kale,
and thousand-headed kale may be
sown.
Vegetables—sow French beans (sparingly),
broad beans, beet, cabbage, cauli-
flower, celery, lettuce, leeks, peas, &c.
•Get land ready for sowing grasses and
make final preparations of land for
lucerne, and for planting out shelter
trees.
South Coast.
Crops to sow—
f (or Field peas) for
Oats and vetches green fodder. It
Barley and vetches is advisable to
■; sow a large area
Wheat and vetches | with these crops
Rye and vetches | for winter fodder
L for dairy cattle.
Thew wheat —for hay.
Rape—for pigs and dry cattle.
Turnips, swedes, and kohlrabi—for
winter use.
Lucerne—sow extensively, as this is the
best time of the year if weather is
favourable; if land is dirty, sow in
April.
Grasses —sow cocksfoot, rye grasses,
Prairie, Rhodes, Paspalum dilatatum,
Phalaris bullosa, meadow fescue,
Kentucky blue grass, and Texas blue
grass.
Clovers—sow white Dutch, red, New
Zealand red clover, and New Zealand
cow grass.
Vegetables—
Sow broad beans towards end of the
month.
Beans, French or kidney—risky to sow;
a few drills may be tried.
Beet, red—sow a little seed to keep up
supply.
Borecole or kale—sow extensively.
Cabbage, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, and
cauliflowers—sow extensively.
Celery, cress, and mustard, also endive
—sow a little seed.
Leek—sow extensively.
Peas may be sown.
Eschalots, potato-onion, tree-onion, and
garlic—plant a few sets.
Get land ready for a further sowing oi
above crops.
Northern Tableland.
Crops to sow —
Rape may be sown for feeding stock in
winter.
Barley may be sown for green feed.
Cape or Skinless, two of the best, may
be sown with tares or vetches if
required.
Rye may also be sown with tares for
green food or for hay, if cut early.
Clovers for feed or hay may be planted
end of the month.
Field peas may be sown alone, or in
conjunction with barley or rye.
Lucerne—the latter part of March is a
good time to sow lucerne to enable
roots to establish themselves well in
the soil before cold weather sets in.
Get land ready for early sowing of wheata.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
Wheat—the earliest sowing of this
cereal for the main crop may be made
about the end of the month, if it ia
intended to graze sheep upon it during
winter. The lighter portions of the
farm should be chosen for this purpose.
Late maturing varieties should be used.
Barley, oats, rye, and rape should still
be sown early in the month for green
fodder.
Sow kale, white mustard, clovers, blade
tares, Field peas, grasses, and sheep’s
bumet.
The main crop of lucerne may be sown
this month upon well prepared land.
Sow onions for main crop.


Vegetables —sow onions, leeks, eschalots,
Savoy cabbage, broccoli, and white
turnips. Make a small sowing of
carrots and lettuce. Transplant Savoy
cabbage, broccoli, onions, leeks, and
eschalots.
Central-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
Rape—for grazing and greenstuff.
Kale— do
Mustard— do
Barley} are 3 or vetches.
Crimson clover—for grazing and green-
stuff.
Wheat—for green fodder and silage.
The first sowings of wheat for grain
can be made towards the middle of
this month, but unless particularly
late varieties are sown, the crops
planted now will become winter proud,
and will require to be eaten off.
Rape—early in Match is the most
favourable time for the main crops of
rape.
Kale does not grow so quickly as rape,
and is rather more difficult and ex-
pensive to grow, but it has the advan-
tage of providing grazing for a month
later.
Vegetables —sow cabbages, cauliflowers,
onions, carrots, parsnips, turnips,
swedes, and peas.
Get land ready for lucerne, and finish the
preparation of the land intended for
wheat, oats, and barley.
Biverina.
Crops to sow—
Clover, trefoil, and prairie grass.
Rape—sow as largely as desired.
Oats—for greenstuff, hay, and grain.
Barley—for green fodder, with or without
peas or vetches.
Sow late maturing wheats after the first
week in the month.
Sow lucerne on land which has been
fallowed and kept free from weeds.
Vegetables —sow cabbage, cauliflower, car-
rots, parsnips, beet, turnips, swedes,
onions, and a few rows of peas.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas.
Crops to sow—
Barley—for green feed.
Barley—for malting purposes, at the
end of the month.
Oats—for green feed, hay and grain.
Clovers, cocksfoot, prairie, rye grasses.
Wheat —at the end of the month. Both
oats and wheat are best sown at this
period where the land is under irri-
gation.
Lucerne —may be sown if the season
is favourable.
Turnips—broadcast for a field crop.
Rape can still be sown.
Vegetables—sow carrots, parsnips, beet-
root, broad beans, turnips, swedes,
lettuce, cabbage. Plant eschalots,
tree onions, garlic.
North-western Plains.
Crops to sow—
Barley, oats, and wheat for winter feed,
grass, lucerne, rye, and Field peas.
Vegetables —cabbage and cauliflowers sown
last month may be planted out if the
weather is not too hot, otherwise they
had better be left in the seed-bed where
they can be shaded until the weather
begins to cool off; sow seeds for
succession.
Get land ready for sowing wheat, oats,
barley, rye, and lucerne. By fallowing
and working the surface at this stage,
the soil will be got into good condition
by April, and weeds which at this
stage commence to grow luxuriantly
will be checked, and the majority got
rid of by scarifying.
APRIL.
North Coast — Bichmond-Tweed Section.
Crops to sow—
Wheat, Oats, and Barley—sow for green-
stuff and also wheat and oats for hay.
Rye—sow for greenstuff.
Lucerne—make main sowing.
Rape—sow for winter feed for pigs.
Fie id peas—sow for cattle feed, and seed
for pigs.
Vegetables—plant out rhubarb, cabbage,
lettuce; sow broad beans, peas, onions,
turnips.
North Coast — Clarence-Macleay Section.
Crops to sow —
Wheat and Oats—for greenstuff, and also
for hay.
Barley and Bye—for greenstuff.
Wheat—for grain (poultry feed only),
sow Huguenor, Thew, and Warren.
Vetches and Field peas should be sown
in combination with cereals for green-
stuff.
Field peas—sow for pig feed.
Lucerne—sow largely. This is the best
month for this crop.
Rape—sow for winter feed for pigs.
Thousand-headed kale and cattle cab-
bage—in drills 3 feet apart, for pig
and cow feed.
Swedes—sow for market and stock.
Grasses and clovers may be sown.
Vegetables —sow French beans, cabbage or
cauliflower, carrot, onions, peas, and
herbs.


Hawkesbury-Nepean.
Crops to sow—
Wheat—sow late varieties for green feed
and hay.
Oats—so v largely for hav, and with peas
and vetches for green feed. Too early
for river flats.
Barley—for grain for pigs and poultry,
and for green feed, either alone or
with rape.
Rye—for green feed and grain.
Turnips, swedes, rape, and kale—may
still be sown.
Mangolds may be sown on rich ground
for stock feeding.
Lucerne —make main sowing in well
prepared soil.
English grasses and clovers—sow either
in well cultivated laud or in roughly
scratched-over pasture, if weather be
favourable.
Field peas and vetches —may be sown
for pig feed or green manure.
Tree planting—for shade, shelter, and
ornament—should receive attention
this month. Non-deciduous trees,
such as peppers (very early in month),
pines (various), kurrajong, silky oak,
camphor laurel, river oak, juniper,
carob beau and bunya bunya may be
planted out. Hedges should also be
planted out. The seeds of such trees
as pines, cedars, oaks, walnuts and
chestnuts should be sown as soon as
possible after ripening, but not later
than April.
Vegetables—sow broad beans, carrots,
parsnips, leeks, onions, lettuce, parsley,
peas, eschalots, and herbs; winter
rhubarb may be planted out.
South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Wheat —for hay or green feed.
Oats— do do
Fodder crops—a further sowing of all
fodder crops should be made, as
described in March.
Lucerne —when weeds are numerous,
April sowing should be preferred to
March sowing for main crop.
Grasses —sow extensively all grasses
except paspalum, as this seed requires
moisture and heat to germinate.
Clovers—sow largely all clovers.
Get land ready for main crops of oats and
late crop of wheat, also late crop of
green fodder.
Vegetables—
Broad beans—sow as required, 3 feet
apart and 5 inches in drills.
Beet red—sow a row or two.
Kale, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauli-
flower, carrots, celery, endive, leek,
onions, eschalots—should be sown.
Get land ready tor planting shade trees.
This is a matter of great necessity on
many farms where cattle have no
protection from the summer sun and
bleak winter winds.
Northern Tableland.
Crops to sow—
Wheat —the end of the mouth is a good
time to sow wheat here, especially
sorts that take a long time to mature.
Barley, rye, or oats may be sown for
green fodder.
Lucerne may also be sown, although it is
getting late.
Tares, vetches, &0., may be sown in
combination with rye or barley. The
former are good for ploughing in in
orchards during the winter months.
Vegetables—sow onions towards the end
of the month, also cabbages and
cauliflower.
Get land ready for main crops of cereals
and hay.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
Wheat—as much as possible of the main
crops should be sown. Sow the late
maturing varieties first upon the
poorer portions of the farm.
Barleys can be advantageously sown
towards the end of the month for the
main crops.
Oats can be sown freely this month;
comparatively early sowing frequently
ensures good plump grain.
Rye may be sown for the main crop; it
thrives upon very light soils.
Lucerne may be sown for the main crop.
Kale, scarlet clover, black tares, Field
peas and grasses may be so wn.
Vegetables—transplant onions, Savoy cab-
bage, broccoli and eschalots. Sow
white turnips. Savoy cabbage and
herbs. Make small sowings of spinach
and lettuce.
Central-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
Lucerne —in a well-prepared seed-bed.
Wheat—for hay and grain.
Oats— do
Barley—for greenstuff, hay and grain.
Rye— do do
Rape—for grazing.
Tares or vetches—for grazing.
Crimson clover— do


Vegetables —sow peas, onions, carrots,
parsnips, turnips, swedes, cabbages,
and cauliflowers, and transplant any
seedlings available.
Get land ready for the final sowings of
wheat. Keep the ground between the
drills of rape and other growing crop?
loose to conserve moisture, kill weeds,
and stimulate growth of crop.
Riverina.
Crops to sow—
Wheat —for hay and grain.
Rape may still be sown on a small
scale.
Barley—for grain, and in combination
with tares and greenstuff for silage.
Lucerne—sow as much as laud is well
prepared for.
Clover and trefoil can be sown this
month.
Vegetables —sow a moderate area of peas
and broad beans, also cabbages and
cauliflowers for future transplanting.
Transplant cabbages and cauliflowers
as they become fit. Sow onions, car-
rots, parsnips, and white turnips.
Get land ready , for the further sowing of
wheat, which it is desirable should be
completed during next month.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas.
Crops to sow—
Barley—for malting grain and green
feed.
Oats—for green feed and grain.
Wheat— do
Lucerne —the best month for autumn
sowing.
Field peas—for pig feed or green manu-
ring.
Either Field peas or tares in combina-
tion with cereals for green feed.
Rape.
Cocksfoot, rye, and prairie grasses, pro-
vided the season is favourable.
Vegetables —sow turnips, carrots, beetroot,
parsnips, radishes, lettuce, broad
beans, onions.
North-western Plains.
Crops to sow—
Wheat, oate, barley, lucerne, grass,
rye, in fact any of the hardy winter
crops.
Vegetables —plant out cabbages and cauli-
flowers and sow seed for later plantings;
sow broad beaus.
MAY.
North Coast — Richmond-Tweed Section.
Crops to sow—
Barley—sow for green feed, also some
for poultry and pig grain.
Oats —sow for hay and with Field peas
or vetches for green feed.
Bye—sow for green feed, also some for
poultry grain.
Grasses and clover—sow, but it is getting
late.
Vetches and Field peas.
Vegetables —sow broad beans, peas, lettuce,
cabbage, cauliflower, turnips, and car-
rots and plant out a few rhubarb roots.
Get a small plot trenched and well pre-
pared for asparagus.
North Coast — Clarence-hladeay Section.
Crops to sow—
Wheat —for hay and green feed.
Oats—sow for hay and green feed.
Barley—for green feed.
Bye—for green feed.
Vetches and Field Peas—sow in combin-
ation with cereals for green feed.
Rape—for green feed for pigs and sheep.
Lucerne—if weather is favourable.
Vegetables—plant out rhubarb roots, top
dress asparagus beds with stable
manure; peas, sow a full crop; cab-
bage, cauliflower, turnips, lettuce,
carrots.
Hawkesbury- Nepean.
Crops to sow—
Wheat—sow quick-maturing varieties for
green feed, hay, and grain.
Oats—main crop for hay.
I Barley—green feed, and for pig and
poultry grain.
Rape—when weather conditions have
been unfavourable for previous sowing,
this may be done now. Somewhat too
i late for turnips and swedes, as they
go to head in August before making
much growth.
Vegetables —sow broad beans, carrots, leeks,
lettuce, onions (for pricking out), pars-
ley, herbs, peas, and eschalots. Plant
out asparagus roots, though June is
preferable.
! Get land ready for late sowings of wheat
and rye for winter green feed. Do not
have any idle paddocks or patches to
grow weeds. Break up the soil and
pop in any of the above-mentioned
crops for a little green feed at a
time when the grass paddocks in this
district get very bare.


South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Oats —main crop.
Wheat—late crop.
Barley—small sowing of Cape barley and
Field peas for green feed.
Rye—small sowing.
Turnips and swedes—late sowing.
Rape—further small sowing.
Lucerne—may still be sown.
Grasses—late sowing of pasture grasses
and clovers.
Vegetables—broad beans, sow largely; broc-
coli , cabbage, cauliflower, lettuce, leek,
parsley, small sowing; peas and turnip,
sow largely.
Get any idle land ploughed roughly and
exposed to the action of frost for
potatoes and other crops in spring.
Shade Trees, Shrubs and Hedges—if not on
hand, send early order to nursery to
be delivered in June or July. See
that the soil, where trees are to be
planted, is deeply and roughly broken
up, so as to get a chance to sweeten
before the young trees are set out.
Northern Tableland.
Crops to sow—
Wheat—late maturing varieties may be
sown early in month.
Barley—for green fodder.
Rye— do
[See directions for April.]
In view of the severity of the winter in
this district, no effort should be spared to
provide abundance of winter fodder, and
especially in the form of silage, as the
most nutritious and succulent substitute
for grass.
Get land ready for the main sowings of
cereal crops next month.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
Wheat—the sowing, if possible, should be
completed this month.
Barleys—the main crops lor grain for
malting and other purposes should be
sown.
Gate and ryes may be sown to advan-
tage.
Lucerne may still be sown, preferably
early in the month.
Clovers, tares, Field peas, sheep’s
burnet, and many grasses may be sown.
Vegetables—transplant onions, Savoy cab-
bage, broccoli, and eschalots. Plant
tree onions, potato onions and garlic.
Make a small sowing of broad beans.
Central-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
Lucerne—in a well-prepared seed-bed.
Wheat—for hay and grain.
Oats— do do
Barley—for greenstuff, hay, and grain.
Rye—for greenstuff and grain.
Rape—for grazing.
Tares— do
Crimson clover—for grazing.
This is onetof the busiest and most favour.
able planting months. Operations should
be pushed forward with vigour as the
weather permits.
Vegetables—sow peas, onions, parsnips,
carrots, swedes, cabbages, and cauli-
flowers; and plant out any seedlings
available.
Get land ready for final sowings of wheat.
Keep the soil between the drills of
rape and other growing crops loose to
conserve moisture, kill weeds, and
stimulate growth.
Riverina.
Crops to sow—
Wheat—this is the best month for main
sowings of grain crops.
Barley—for grain.
Field peas —for green feed or seed.
Vetches or tares—for green feed.
Rape—for green feed.
Vegetables—plant tree onions, potato onions
and eschalots. Make a final trans-
planting of cabbages and cauliflowers.
Sow peas and broad beans as largely
as required.
Murrumhidgee Irrigation Areas.
Crops to sow—
Wheat—early varieties for grain and
green feed.
Oats—main crop.
Tares and Field peas may be sown with
the cereals for green feed.
Rape—for green feed and green manuring.
Vegetables—sow carrots, beetroot, lettuce,
peas, tomatoes, onions.
North-western Plainr
Crops to sow—
Wheat and oats—for hay and grain.
Barley—for green feed or grain.
Vegetables—plant out and sow seed for a
succession of cabbages and cauliflower;
sow broad beaus.
Get land ready for spring sowing ol maize,
sorghum, and other green fodder and
silage crops. At this stage the area
should be ploughed and left rough, so
that the weather may effect its fullest
influence in mellowing it during the
winter months.


JUNE.
North Coast — Bichmond-T weed Section.
Crops to sow—
Oats—sow for green fodder; not too
late for a hay crop.
Rye—sow for green fodder.
Vegetables —sow broad beans; peas; a
few cauliflowers, cabbages, endive, let-
tuce, radish; plant ohokos, asparagus,
and winter rhubarb.
Get land ready for potatoes and for arti-
chokes for domestic use and fodder.
The latter crop is a useful one to be
harvested by pigs.
North Coast — Clarenoe-Madeay Section.
Crops to sow —
Oats—sow for hay and green feed.
Rye—for green feed.
Wheat—for green feed and grain,
Vegetables —sow peas, beans, cabbage, broc-
coli, leeks, lettuce, onions, and herbs.
Get land ready for main crop of potatoes and
early maize.
Paspalum paddocks should be broken up
now, if showing signs of deterioration.
Hawkesbury-N epean.
Crops to sow—
Wheat—sow only quick-maturing varie-
ties.
Oats—for hay and green feed. It is usual
in this district to reserve the sowing of
oats till after the wheat is all in;
thus June is the usual month for the
main crop.
Barley—for greenstuff may still be sown
for succession.
Rye —late crops are worth a trial on the
poorer classes of soil.
Onions should be transplanted.
Artichokes may be planted from now on.
Vegetables sow broad beans, cabbage,
leeks, parsnips, peas, and herbs.
Get land ready for potato (main crop) and
maize. Spread all available farmyard
manure on the ground and plough in to
mellow.
South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Oats—continue sowing main crop.
Wheat—small sowing for late crop.
Barley— do do
Rye —small sowing of Black Winter.
Vetches and peas—small sowing.
Vegetables —beans (broad), cabbage, cauli
flower, leek, lettuce, onions, parsnip,
peas, radish, plant a few rows of each.
Get land ready for use in spring for potatoes,
maize, and other crops,
Northern Tableland.
Crops to sow -
Wheat—main sowings may be made
this month.
Oats may be sown towards end of month
for hay or grain.
(See July notes.)
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
Wheat may still be sown, although
somewhat late to give best results.
Oats, barleys, and ryes may be sown.
All laud for summer crops should be
ploughed as soon as possible.
Vegetables —sow peas and broad beans for
main crop. Sow cabbage in seed-beds.
Transplant cabbage and herbs. Plant
out tree onions, potato onions, garlic,
eschalots, and rhubarb.
Central-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
Wheat —late plantings of early maturing
wheats may be made on well-pre-
pared land up to the end of the mouth
with a prospect of getting profitable,
though not maximum, returns.
Vegetables sow cabbages, cauliflower;-,
carrots, parsnips, turnips, and peas.
Transplant cabbages, cauliflowers, and
onions.
Get land ready for planting out shade and
shelter trees where necessary.
Biverina.
Crops to sow—
Wheat —it is now late for wheat, and
sowing of ordinary varieties cannot be
safely extended beyond first week of
this month except in favourable
localities. Where delay has occurred
early varieties only should be sown.
Barley may still be sown on a small scale
for green fodder.
Vegetables —sow carrots, parsnips, lettuce,
broad beans, white turnips, peas, and
onions in limited quantities only where
water will be available.
Get land ready for sweet potatoes, lucerne,
sheep’s bumet, and for final sowing of
barley for fodder.
Fallowing should commence this month.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas.
Crops to sow—
Wheat —season is getting too late, but
quickly maturing varieties may be
sown if conditions favourable.
. Oats—may yet be sown for green teed.
Vegetables —sow beetroot, carrots, peas,
lettuce, tomatoes (in shelter). Plant
out asparagus and rhubarb.


North-western Plains.
Crops to sow—
Wheat and oats—for hay.
Vegetables —plant cabbage and sow carrots,
broad beans, lettuce, and spinach.
Other work —continue to plough land that
is to be sown in the spring; the frost
will kill most of the couch grass that
is ploughed up now.
JULY.
North Coast — Richmond-Tweed Section.
Crops to sow—
Rape may be sown on small scale.
Potatoes—sow main crop towards end of
month.
Onions—sow on small scale.
Vegetables —sow broad beans, beet; peas ;
plant out cabbage, cauliflower, endive,
lettuce; tomatoes for early planting.
Get land ready for early spring sowing of
maize, sorghum, and millet.
North Coast — Clarence- Macleay Section.
Crops to sow—
Potatoes—sow main crop towards the
end of this month; earlier in shel-
tered situations free from frost.
Vegetables sow silver beet, tomatoes.
Plant out cabbage and cauliflower.
Canadian Wonder beans may be sown
about the middle of month to catch
early market.
Get land ready for spring cropping. Turn
in any stable manure or other coarse
manure, so that by the time the crops
are planted, it may be incorporated
with the soil.
Hawkesbury—Nepean.
Crops to sow—
Limited areas only of oats and rye, for
green feed.
Onions—as a field crop, if sown where
they are to grow, should be sown this
month on ground brought to an ex-
tremely fine tilth. If transplanted,
they should be sown much earlier
(May or June).
Vegetables —sow tomatoes, cucumbers, and
melons under good shelter, and set out
sweet potato tubers under frames or
glass to secure stocks of rooted cuttings
for early planting. Sow a few carrots,
lettuce, radishes, onions, and peas.
Plant out Jerusalem artichoke 3,
asparagus, and summer rhubarb.
Tree planting of deciduous kinds for shade
should be completed.
Get land ready for potatoes. Plough in any
fresh stable manure so that it will be
mellowed before planting time. It
will be well to break up and expose
to atmospheric influence land intended
for early maize crops.
Prepare new ground for cropping by deep
ploughing so that frosts may act
beneficially upon the soil, and couch
and other tenacious perennial growths
may be destroyed.
South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Oats—late sowing for hay.
Earley—late sowing for fodder.
Vegetables—
Sow a little seed of cauliflowers, leek,
lettuce, onions, parsnips, carrots.
Peas—sow largely.
Swedes—sow a little seed.
Tomato—sow a little seed in boxes.
Shelter trees and hedges —plant out largely.
Collect stable manure and cart straight
out to paddocks and spread on land
I to be ploughed in for spring crops.
Northern Tableland.
< Crops to sow—
Oats may be sown this month either for
grain or hay; they do well on the
heavier moister land of the district,
which is not so good for wheat and
1 barley.
Wheat —this is a late district, so wheat
may still be sown, but sow more
thickly than earlier in the season.
Bye—this may still be sown for green
i fodder or grain.
Vegetables —cabbage, peas, cauliflowers may
be sown.
j Get land ready for spring crops by giving
it a good deep ploughing at this stage.
Tableland —Bathurst Section.
! Crops to sow—
Oats and ryes—may be sown, but,
generally speaking, they should be in.
Vegetables —sow peas and broad beans.
Sow in seed-beds cabbage and early
cauliflower; transplant cabbage, herbs,
rhubarb, eschalots.
i Get land ready for spring cropping. Plough
1 deeply and work in any available
crude farmyard or stable manure.
Central-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
This is a risky month for sowing any
farm crops.


Vegetables —transplant cabbages and cauli-
flowers ; sow tomato seed and plant
sweet potatoes in cold frames or under
cover.
Get land ploughed in autumn ready for
spring crops of lucerne and potatoes.
For potatoes an application of stable
manure will be of great benefit to
enable this crop to withstand drought.
Commence to break up the stubble land
for summer and autumn crops.
Siverina.
Crops to sow—
Sheep’s burnet —sow in cultivated pad-
docks or bare patches.
Barley—sow for green fodder only.
Vegetables —transplant cabbage and cauli-
flower, and sow seed for later use.
Sow tomato seed and plant sweet
potatoes under cover for early plants.
Get land ready for lucerne, permanent
grasses, and for potatoes. Plough
land to lie fallow for wheat, barley,
oats, &c., to be sown in autumn.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas.
Crops to sow—
Oats— bow late varieties for green fodder
only.
Vegetables —sow peas, lettuce, tomatoes,
herbs. Plant out asparagus and
rhubarb.
North-western Plains.
Vegetables —sow and plant cabbage, broad
beans, carrots, and spinach.
Other work —finish ploughing land that 18
to be sown in the spring.
AUGUST.
North Coast — Richmondr-Tweed Section.
Crops to sow—
Potatoes—plant out on small scale.
Mangolds—sow in deeply-worked soil.
Maize large areas should not be
attempted this month, but small
sowings of early varieties may be
risked. Planting should not be too
thick, nor the depth of sowing more
than sufficient to avoid the grain
drying out before the primary root
takes hold. Usually 2 inches at most
is ample depth.
Grass-seed—sow all kinds except prairie,
which does better in autumn.
Sweet potatoes—rooted cuttings may be
set out.
Artichokes—tubers may be set out.
Vegetables— sow cabbage, cauliflower, en-
dive, kohlrabi, lettuce, parsley, garden
swedes, turnips, red beets, carrots.
Where situation is warm and sheltered,
tomatoes may be set out; also French
beans. Cucumber seedlings should be
raised under shelter for setting out
at first opportunity. Chokos may be
planted near a fence or other support.
: Get land ready for maize, sorghum, broom
millet, cucumbers, pumpkins.
North Coast — Clarence-Mackay Section.
Crops to sow—
Early maize-sow towards end of month
under conditions similar to Richmond-
Tweed section.
Lucerne—sow in well-prepared laud, but
April is the best month for conditions
of this district.
Grasses—sow al! grasses with the ex-
ception of prairie and paspalum, which
do better in February.
Sweet potatoes—shoots may be planted
out in drills 3 feet apart. Use small
tubers if conditions are dry.
Artichokes—plant tubers in drills 4 feet
apart; the white variety is the most
prolific.
Canadian Wonder beans—sow largely
for market and seed.
Vegetables —sow cabbage, cauliflower, en-
dive, kohlrabi, lettuce,parsley, swedes,
turnips, red beets, carrots, parsnips;
and tomatoes may be set out.
Get land ready for potatoes. Plough deeply,
and as soon as weeds show up culti-
vate to destroy them. The same
applies to land intended for maize,
millet, sorghum, pumpkins, and other
spring crops. It is better to work
any available stable manure into the
soil now than put it in at time of
seeding.
Hawkesbwry—Nepean.
Crops to sow—
Potatoes—main crop latter end of month.
Mangolds and Sugar beets—where frosts
are not likely to be severe.
Vegetables —sow French beaus, beet, car-
rots, lettuce; and under shelter, toma-
toes, bush marrows, and cucumbers.
Set out tomatoes in warm situations;
plant out Jerusalem artichokes and
summer rhubarb.
Get land ready for maize, sorghum, pump-
kins, &o.; land intended for laying
down in lucerne should receive a final
ploughing and be left rough till end of
month.


South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Lucerne may be planted at end o£ month.
Vegetables —asparagus, artichokes, beans
(French and kidney), beet, all cabbage
family, celery, turnips (rooted), car-
rots, lettuce, leek, onions (extensively),
parsnips, peas, potatoes, radish, rhu-
barb and turnips.
-Get land ready for sowing grasses, potatoes,
maize, sorghum, millet, pumpkins, and
melons.
Northern TaUdand.
■Crops to sow—
Barley—may be sown for green feed.
Rye—-may be sown for green fodder.
Wheat—may still be grown here for hay.
Sow thickly. Very late for grain, but
in this late district a fair crop is still
possible.
Oats may be sown on the New England
tableland with advantage this month
or even later; but, as with other
cereals, sow thicker as the season
advances.
Vegetables— peas may be sown with advan-
tage this month. Onions may be sown
and any young plants transplanted.
■Get land ready for all spring crops such as
maize, sorghum, millet,, cowpeas,
pumpkins, melons, cucumbers, &0., and
other spring vegetables.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
Oats, rye, Field peas, tares, kale, and
grasses may be sown.
Lucerne —may be sown upon well-pre-
pared land if moisture has been con-
served. Upon soil not properly fitted
spring sowing of lucerne is risky. It
is preferable to sow during the autumn.
Stock should be taken off all lucerne
paddocks. The surface should be
loosened by spiked roller or other
implement.
Tobacco—sow at end of month in seed-
beds which can be covered from
frosts.
Vegetables —sow carrots, parsnips, turnips,
broad beans, peas, lettuce, beet, and
radish. Sow in seed-beds cabbage,
Brussels sprouts, early cauliflower,
tomatoes, capsicums, Cape gooseberries
and egg plants. Transplant asparagus,
rhubarb, cabbage, lettuce, early cauli-
flower. and eschalots.
Central-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
Lucerne—sow early on well-prepared
land.
Potatoes—plant after the middle o.
the month, and cover lightly with
straw if possible.
Vegetables —transplant cabbage and cauli-
flowers; plant tomatoes in seed boxes
or beds.
Cultivation —continue the preparation of
land for summer crops and for fallow-
ing. Get land ready for maize.
Hirerina.
Crops to sow—
Lucerne—sow early in month in well-
prepared land.
Potatoes—commence planting.
Vegetables —sow peas on small scale, and
tomato seed; cucumbers.
Get land ready for millets, sorghum, maize,
sweet potatoes, pumpkins, melons,
sugar beets, mangolds, and other small
patches of spring crops for pig, sheep,
or cattle fodder. Plough land to lie
fallow for wheat, barley, oats, &c., to
be sown in the autumn.
Murriimbidijee Irrigation Areas.
Crops to sow—
Lucerne—if the season is favourable.
Oat—may still be sown.
Paspalum and Rhodes grass may be
sown, but risky as frosts may kill off
the young shoots.
Vegetables —sow tomatoes, cucumbers,
melons, vegetable marrows, celery,
leeks, potatoes, sweet potatoes (in hot
beds), French and Lima beans, pump-
kins and squashes.
Get land ready for maize, sorghum, millet,
beet, mangolds.
North-western Plains.
Crops to sow— nil.
Vegetables —sow broad beans, carrots, and
spinach; also, tomatoes, marrows,
squash, cucumbers, pumpkins, and
Cape gooseberries if they can be
sheltered at night from the frost.
Get land ready for planting next month by
harrowing to reduce soil to fine tilth.
SEPTEMBER.
North Coast — Bichmond-Tweed Section.
Crops to sow—
Maize for grain—further sowings of early
varieties may be made. Do not sow
large areas or late varieties yet.
Sorghum—for green fodder and grain.
Millet—for green fodder, hay, and grain,
for pig and poultry feed.


Broom millet—may be sown th's month.
Mangolds—for summer feed for dairy
cattle.
Pumpkins, squashes, grammas, pie
melons —sow in odd comers and in
special plots.
Peanuts—for pig and poultry food.
Cowpeas—for fodder and pigs (grazing),
also for mixing with maize in silage,
and for hay. Useful to renovate soil
of worn-out maize paddocks.
Buckwheat —for green fodder, and for
grain for poultry and pigs.
Sunflowers —sow in odd comers and
around sunny edges of maize crops, &0.,
for poultry feed and for mixing with
cattle rations.
Vegetables —sow all kinds of beans, beets,
lettuce, tomatoes, cucumbers, and
melons.
Get land ready for further sowings of maize,
sorghum, millet, and cowpeas.
North Coast — Clarence-Macleay Section.
Crops to sow—
Maize —further small sowings of early
varieties may be made. Do not sow
large areas or late varieties yet.
Sorghum—for green fodder and grain.
Millet —for green fodder, hay, brooms,
and grain, for pig and poultry feed.
Mangolds—for pig feed.
Pumpkins, squashes, grammas, and pie
melons—sow apart in special plots.
Cowpeas—sow for fodder, pig feed and
grain.
Buckwheat —sow for grain for poultry
and pigs.
Sunflowers—sow for grain for poultry
and pigs.
Grain Sorghums—for pig and poultry
feed.
Lucerne may be sown if season be
favourable.
Vegetables —sow French and butter beans,
leek, spinach, cucumber, egg plant,
celery, capsicum, rhubarb, melons, and
tomatoes; small sowing of peas, tur-
nips, beet, lettuce, radish, carrot,
parsnip, swedes, and rook melon may
be made now.
Hawkeshury-Nepean.
Crops to sow—
Maize—small areas of late varieties may
be sown on river flats towards the end
of the month.
Sorghum—sow for green fodder and seed
for poultry or pigs. Early Amber cane
and Planter’s Friend are good varieties,
the former is earlier and gives two and
even three cuts per season.
Broom millet —White Italian is the best.
Millet—for green fodder, hay, and grain,
for pig and poultry feed.
Pumpkins, squashes, grammas, water and
pie melons—main crops may be sown.
Peanuts—sow for pig and poultry feed
in light friable soil.
Cowpeas—sow for green feed either alone
or in conjunction with maize, sorghum,
or millet.
Lama beans are also worth a trial.
Buckwheat—sow for green feed and for
grain for pigs and poultry.
Sunflowers—the Giant Russian is suit-
able for poultry feed and mixes well
with other crops for ensilage.
Lucerne —main spring sowing can be
made.
Potatoes may still be planted, especially
early in month for main sowing.
Jerusalem artichokes —for domestic use
and pig feed may be planted in odd
rich comers; they are difficult to
eradicate, and should not be planted
where it is not possible to get the land
thoroughly cleaned by pigs or by
hand.
Shade trees and hedges —if not planted out
in autumn may be put in now.
Vegetables plant out sweet potatoes,
chokos, and tomatoes; sow French,
and other beans, red and silver beet,
carrot (main summer crop), cucumbers,
vegetable marrows, squashes, water
and rook melons, leeks, lettuce, and
capsicums.
South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Maize —early varieties may be sown
towards the end of the month for both
grain and green fodder. Avoid deep
planting in cold soil.
Sorghum —sow a little for green fodder.
Millet —French and Hungarian, former
for hay, latter for green fodder.
Mangolds and Sugar beet—for summer
feed for dairy cattle.
Potatoes and artichokes may be planted
largely.
Pumpkins, cattle—if danger of frost is
over, sow early, if not, keep back until
end of the month.
Grammas — do ao
Melons, Pie— do do
Squashes — do do
Cowpeas— do do
Buckwheat —sow for grain for pigs and
fowls.


Sunflowers —may be sown. The heads
enrich silage if added to maize or
sorghum.
Lucerne —sow early in well-prepared land.
Grasses —sow all kinds of pasture grasses.
Vegetables —asparagus, arrowroot, beaus,
(kidney or French), Lima beaus, beet,
cabbage, cauliflower, celery, cucumber,
endive, leek, lettuce, melons (rook and
water), onions, parsnips, peas, pepper,
pumpkins, rhubarb, tomato, turnips,
vegetable marrow, and squashes may
be planted as largely as desired this
month.
■Get land ready for maize and sorghum main
crop.
Northern Tableland.
•Crops to sow—
Oats—although late in most districts,
oats may still be sown in New Eng-
land for hay. When sowing late
always sow more thickly; so late
as this month, sow about 2J bushels
to the acre for hay, as heavy seeding
prevents too much stooling, and the
plants mature earlier.
Maize—a small area may be sown at the
end of the mouth. Plant shallow, as
the ground is still cold a few inches
down.
Vegetables— Potatoes—make small sowings
of early varieties. Sow cabbages,
cauliflower, peas, beans, white turnips,
&c., and get ready' for pumpkins,
melons, &o.
Get land ready for planting maize in the
beginning of October. Also get ready
for sorghum, millet, &c. A small
sowing of these might be made to the
end of the month; also sugar beets
and mangolds.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
Potatoes—for early crop may be planted
about the middle of the mouth. These
should appear above ground early in
October, when danger from frost is
slight. Upon the lower lands plant-
ing should be delayed from one week
to a fortnight.
Maize—near the end of the month may
be sown on the uplands, but not yet on
the river flats. Avoid deep planting.
Jerusalem artichokes may be planted
about the middle of the mouth.
Sow mangolds, lucerne, kale, grasses,
and sheep’s burnet.
■Cereal crops under 1 foot in height,
could be harrowed to advantage.
Vegetables —Asparagus roots should be set
out early in the month. Sow
asparagus seed. Sow earn its, parsnips,
turnips, kohlrabi, beet, cabbage,
lettuce, early cauliflower, Brussels
sprouts, tomatoes, capsicum, egg plant,
radish, mustard, and cress. Transplant
upon highlands a few tomatoes, Cape
gooseberries, capsicums, and egg plants.
! Small sowings of pumpkins, squashes,
sweet corn may be made upon the
highlands at end of month.
Central-western Slope.
i Crops to sow—
\ Potatoes—plant early in month.
Maize—towards the end of month for
i green feed, silage and grain; small
areas only',
i Millet— do do
Sorghum— do do
I Cowpeas—for green feed and gra zing.
\ Vegetables transplant tomatoes and
shelter from frost at night.
Cultivation —continue fallowing the land for
autumn crops.
j Riverina.
Crops to sow—
Potatoes—planting should be completed.
Pumpkins and squashes—sow and pro-
tect seedlings from frost.
Melons and cucumbers—sow and protect
j seedlings from frost.
\ Sorghum—sow for green feed and silage.
Millet— do do
Maize—sow for green feed and "ilage.
This is also a better time to sow for
grain than a month later, in order to
avoid hot summer winds during
tassolling.
Vegetables —in localities not very subject
to frost and later hot winds sow beans
of all kinds (except broad). Trans-
plant tomatoes, and shelter from frosts
with a few twigs of pine.
Get land ready for main sowings of sorghum,
maize, and millet, including broom
millet for heads and seed. Finish
ploughing land to lie fallow for autumn
sowing of cereals.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas.
Crops to sow—
Sorghum—for green feed and seed.
Maize—early varieties may be sown this
month, so as to flower before hot,
drying winds of midsummer.
Millet—for green feed and seed. These
may also be grazed off, and then
allowed to shoot up for seed for next
year’s planting.


Mangolds, beets, cowpeas, Sudan grass,
paspalum, Rhodes grass, may all be
sown.
Vegetables sow tomatoes, cucumbers,
melons, vegetable marrows, French,
runner, and Lima beans, pumpkins,
and artichokes.
North-western Plains.
Crops to sow—
Lucerne, grass, millet, pumpkins, sor-
ghum, cowpeas, potatoes.
In Inverell district a little maize may be
sown towards the end of the month.
Shallow planting should be the rule.
Get land ready for cropping in December
with maize, sorghum, cowpeas, for
silage and green fodder.
OCTOBER.
North Coast — Richmond—Tweed Section.
Crops to sow—
Maize—late varieties may be sown
towards the end of the month, but it
is getting too late for good yields from
early varieties.
Sorghum and millet —for green fodder,
silage, or grain.
Sugar-cane—set out for fodder and
milling.
Cowpeas —sow for seed.
Pumpkins—sow extensively for cattle
and pigs.
Sweet potato—set out cuttings.
Plant out sets of Queensland cattle cane.
Vegetables —sow French beans, scarlet
runners, snake beans, Lima, butter, and
any other beans; plant out leeks and
tomatoes, and sow seeds of squashes,
marrows, and melons of all kinds.
Get land ready for later sowings of maize
and sorghum for silage.
North Coast — Glarence-Macleay Section.
Crops to sow—
Maize—medium early and mid-season
varieties may still be sown, but late
varieties not until near the end of the
month for best average yields.
Sorghum—for fodder and grain.
Millet— do
Mauritius bean and Florida Velvet bean—
for green manuring and fodder.
Indian cane—plant cuttings 5 feet apart
for fodder.
Cowpeas—for fodder, grain, or green
manuring.
Sunflower —for poultry.
Pumpkins—sow largely for cattle and
pig feed.
Sweet potatoes—plant out shoote.
Vegetables —sow all kinds (beans, cucumber,,
water and rook melons, celery); plant,
out tomatoes and leeks; make small
sowings peas, cabbage, radish, lettuce,
carrot, parsnip, spinach, beet (red and
silver), and onions.
Hawkesbury-Nepean.
Crops to sow—
Maize —larger areas of late varieties may
now be sown on the flats. In many
localities the October sown crops will,
do better than September sown ones,
owing to growth being unchecked by
cold weather.
Sorghum—continue sowing for green,
fodder and ensilage.
Broom millet —sow without delay.'
Cowpeas—main sowings may be made.
Pumpkins, melons—sow as largely as
desired.
Sweet potatoes—set out cutting! or
“ rooted plants ” in rows 3 feet apart-
and 2 feet in rows. Pink and White
Maltese are both satisfactory; warm,,
sandy situations suit these best.
Lucerne—final sowings may be mads
early in the month.
Vegetables —sow French and all other kinds
of beans (except broad), red and silver
beet, carrot, cucumbers, marrows,
melons, leeks, onions, lettuce; plant,
out tomatoes.
Sovih Coast.
Crops to sow—
Maize —sow extensively for grain, more
especially with late varieties. The
early part of the month is usually best.
Maize and cowpeas—sow for green fodder
and silage; also for pigs.
Sorghum and cowpeas —sow for green
foddler and silage; also for pigs.
Millet, Hungarian—sow for green fodder
and silage; also for pigs.
Pumpkins, cattle—for stock and pigs.
Melons, rock and water —for market and
domestic use.
Mangolds and Sugar beets—for pigs and
cattle.
Sweet potato—for home use and pigs.
Lucerne —late sowing may be made if
season favourable.
Cowpeas and Field peas—extensively for
green fodder, and to renovate worn
soils.
Grasses — Paspalum dilatatum, Rhodes
grass.
Vegetables —sow a few seeds of all kinds as-
advised for September to keep up
supply.


et land ready for further sowings for
fodder. Every opportunity should be
taken to provide winter fodder by
means of ensilage of maize, sorghum
and other crops that can be grown at
this time of the year.
Northern Tableland.
Crops to sow—
Maize—may now be planted, this being
the best month generally for New Eng-
land. Only early-maturing varieties
have much chance of ripening properly
in the short season. If sown after the
plough in land inclined to be wet, plant
seed half-way up the furrow slice
instead of at the very bottom of the
furrow; if heavy rain occurs after
planting, much seed is rotted lying in
the bottom, especially in stiff clay
land. The young plant can root more
easily and go downwards, if it has
some loose earth underneath it.
Millet—for hay.
Sorghum—Amber Cane and Planter’s
Friend, two excellent sorts for green
feed and ensilage.
Cowpeas—Black cowpea does the best in
this district.
Field peas—Partridge and Suntop are
two good varieties.
Potatoes—whole potatoes for planting
are generally advised in preference to
out sets.
Vegetables—
Frosts should now be over, therefore a
number of vegetables may be planted
—such as melons, pumpkins, squashes,
beans, cucumbers, &c.
Preserving melons—Triamble and Citron
are amongst the best, and are good
keepers, especially the latter.
Squashes—the Hubbard squash for keep-
ing through the winter and for genuine
eating qualities is hard to beat, and
does well in this district. Other
squashes that are much fancied here
are the Long Pish and Custard varie-
ties. Both grow well under favourable
weather conditions.
Pumpkins—Crown, Silver, Nugget, and
Ironbark are all eating sorts and good
keepers: Crown and Ironbark espe-
cially so.
Cabbages may still be planted, also
carrots and parsnips.
Asparagus—raising from seed is very
slow, and it is recommended putting
in plants 1 or 2 years old.
Celery and White turnips may also be
planted. French beans and all varieties
susceptible to frosts may be sown.
Tdbldand—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
This is one of the busiest months, and is
the best for planting maize, sorghums,
millets, cowpeas, pumpkins, melons,
sunflowers, and buckwheat.
Sow mangolds, beet, carrots, Jerusalem
artichokes, kale, and kohlrabi, and
transplant tobacco into field about
middle of month upon lowlands ; it
may be set out somewhat earlier upon
the highlands.
Towards the end of the month the first
out of lucerne will be ready to make
into silage, if so desired. Residues
of winter-grazing crops should be
ploughed under.
Vegetables —plant early potatoes. Sow for
main crop pumpkins, melons, cucum-
bers, squashes, sweet com, French,
butter, and Lima beaus. Sow in seed
beds, cabbage, lettuce, and kohlrabi.
Transplant cabbage, Brussels sprouts,
lettuce, tomatoes, capsicum, egg plant,
and Cape gooseberries. Make a small
sowing of cauliflowers.
Central-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
Sorghum, maize, cowpeas, and millet—
main sowings for greenstuff and silage.
Maize for grain is very risky crop in
this district, except on well prepared
river flats, or under irrigation.
Vegetables —plant French beans and melons.
Transplant sweet-potato “ plants ”
from cold frame or seed-bed.
Make provision to safeguard the standing
crops to be left for grain against fire
by cutting strips for hay around and
through them.
Biverina.
Crops to sow—
Rhodes and Mitchell grass—in prepared
land.
Sorghum—sow without delay.
Maize—for green fodder and ensilage;
also for grain under irrigation.
Cowpeas—for green fodder, hay, ensilage,
or green manure.
Millet—for greenstuff and hay.
Pumpkins and squashes—sow without
delay.
Melons and cucumbers sow without
delay.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas.
Crops to sow—
Maize —for green feed. Not a safe
mniiUi for sowing for grain crops,
owing to hot summer winds prevailing
during tasselling period.


Sorghum and miilet—for green feed and
grain.
Cow peas—for green feed.
Mangolds, beets.
Sudan grass, Rhodes grass, paspalum.
Vegetables— sow French beans, artichokes,
cucumbers, melons, vegetable marrows,
tomatoes. Plant out sweet potatoes.
North-western Plains.
Crops to sow—
Maize, millet, sorghum, cowpeas, and
pumpkins. In Invcrell and Delungra
districts this is the best planting
month for maize, particularly the
latter half of the month.
Vegetables —same as September.
NOVEMBER.
North Coast — weed Section.
Crops to sow—
Sorghum, mixed with cowpeas —sow on
any land that is not required for other
purposes.
Broom millet—sow a small patch so as to
have the crop ripening in succession,
which wall permit of more time for
harvesting.
Maize for grain—best month to plant
late varieties. '
Maize, mixed with cowpeas—sow for
green fodder and ensilage.
Cowpeas—sow for seed or green feed.
Pumpkins and melons —sow a good patch
for storage.
Grammas—sow for storage.
Sugar-cane—plant for milling or fodder.
Vegetables —sow full crop French, butter,
and Lima beans ; small sowing of
cucumbers, squashes, and tomatoes.
Get land ready for late maize and sorghum.
Paspalum ground broken up will allow
of grass dying, thus making the land
more easily prepared for cultivation.
North Coast — Clarence-Macleay Section.
Crops to sow—
Sorghum —for fodder and grain.
Maize—sow main crops of late varieties
for grain, fodder, and ensilage.
Pumpkins, grammas, and melons—sow
largely for storage.
Indian Cane —for fodder.
Mauritius bean—for fodder, green manur-
ing, and pulse.
Florida Velvet bean—for fodder, green
manuring, and pulse.
Cowpeas—sow largely for fodder and
green manure.
Vegetables —transplant cabbage and toma-
toes ; French, butter, and Lima
beans, cucumbers, and melons.
Hawkesbury-N epean.
Crops to sow—
Maize—sow main crops.
Sorghum and millet —for fodder anti
ensilage.
Cowpeas may be sown on land used for
cereals, out as green feed or hay.
Vegetables —sow all kinds of bean; (except
broad), red and silver beet, pumpkins,
vegetable marrows; set out further
cuttings of sweet potatoes and toma-
toes ; sow lettuce seed in permanent
bed and thin out.
South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Maize —early varieties may still be sown
for grain; late varieties are risky.
Maize and cowpeas—for fodder and'silage.
Sorghum and cowpeas— do
Millet —Hungarian for fodder.
Pumpkins and melons—for market and
fodder.
Artichokes—for pigs.
Potatoes—for domestic use.
Sweet potatoes—for domestic use and
pigs.
Cowpeas—largely for green fodder and
silage.
Mangolds and Sugar beet—for fodder.
Get land ready for further sowing green
fodder in order to keep up supply.
Vegetables —beans (French, Lima, butter,
snake, and scarlet runners); beet (red
and silver); cabbage, cauliflower, car-
rots, cucumber, leek, lettuce, melons,
okra, onions, parsnips, peas, potatoes,
pumpkins, rhubarb, tomatoes, turnip,
vegetable marrow, and squash.
Northern Tableland.
Crops to sow—
Potatoes—main crop.
Maize for grain—early-maturing varie-
ties only may be planted up to the
middle of this month. Maize for silage
may also be sown.
Sorghum—Amber Cane and Planter’s
Friend may be sown for cutting for
cattle or for ensilage; both are much
relished by stock.
Millet —all kinds may be sown.
Vegetables Pumpkins, cowpeas, beans,
and squashes may be sown still; but
it is getting late.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow—
Sow early maize, sorghum, millet, cow-
peas, pumpkins, melons, potatoes,
sunflowers, and buckwheat.
The residues from rape and other crops
should be turned under as quickly as
possible.


Vegetables —sow pumpkins, melons, cucum-
bers, squashes, sweet com, potatoes,
beet, and French, Lima, and butter
beans. Sow in seed-beds cauliflowers
for main crop, cabbage, and Brussels
sprouts. Transplant cabbage, lettuce,
kohlrabi, Brussels sprouts, and
tomatoes.
Centred-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
Maize for grain—early varieties may
stili be sown.
Maize —for greenstuff and ensilage.
Sorghum— do
Cowpeas—for grazing and greenstuff.
Vegetables —plant French beans, marrows,
squashes, and pumpkins; transplant
sweet potatoes.
Cultivation —as opportunity occurs culti-
vate the growing crops shat are in
drills; feed off and harrow the tallows.
Biverina.
Crops to sow —
There are few crops, except sorghum,
maize, and millet for green feed, that
can be safely sown this month, and
these only where irrigation is possible.
All drilled crops should receive attention
in the way of cultivation of the soil to
retain moisture.
31 urrumhidgee Irrigation Area*.
Crops to sow—
Maize—for grain, medium early varieties
may be sown towards the end of the
month.
Sorghum, millet, cowpeas, Sudan grass,
Rhodes grass, and paspalum.
Vegetables —further sowings of tomatoes
may be made.
North-western District.
Crops to sow—
Maize, pumpkins, and sorghum—if they
can be irrigated. Early varieties of
maize may still be sown in Inverell
district.
DECEMBER. '
North Coast — Richmond-Tweed Section.
Crops to sow —
Maize for grain—late varieties may be
sown.
Maize and cowpeas—sow for green
fodder and ensilage.
Sorghum and cowpeas—sow for green
fodder and ensilage.
Broom millet—sow for broom and seed.
Sweet potatoes—set out as large an area
as possible for domestic use and stock,
fodder in winter.
Paspalum—sow seed and plant out root-
lings.
Vegetables —French bean is about the
only vegetable that can be safely sown
this month.
Get land ready for further sowings of
autumn fodder crops such as maize,,
or sorghum, with cowpeas.
Cultivation of crops should be continued..
Sugar-cane requires particular atten-
tion, ploughing between drills and
chipping weeds.
North Coast — Clarence-Mdcleay Section,
Crops to sow—
Maize for grain —large areas may safely
be sown up to themiddleof the month.
Sorghum—sow largely for grain, fodder,
and silage.
Broom millet—sow for fibre and seed.
Sweet potatoes—plant largely for winter
pig feed.
Indian Cane—sets may still be planted,
Cowpeas—for fodder and grain.
Vegetables —sow French beans, cucumber,
squashes, and marrows.
Hawkesbury-N epean.
Crops to sow—
Maize for grain —late varieties may be
sown during first week of this month;
it is getting iate for early varieties.
Maize, sorghum, millet—for green fod-
der and ensilage.
Cowpeas may be sown for pig feed or
green manure, but may not mature
seed where early frosts are common.
Vegetables —sow beans of all kinds (except
broad), celery (under shade), pump-
kins, cucumbers, bush marrows, &c.;
set out in seed-bed cabbage and cauli-
flower.
Get land ready for autumn crops of potato,
turnips, rape, and lucerne.
South Coast.
Crops to sow—
Maize for grain—early varieties may still
be sown.
Maize and cowpeas, sorghum and cow-
peas—for green fodder and silage.
Millet—for green fodder.
Cowpeas—for green fodder and pigs.
Sweet potatoes—for pigs.
Mangolds and turnips—for fodder.
Rape—for grazing.
Get land ready for lats servings of fodder.
Vegetables —sow a few seeds to keep up
supply. Cabbage, cauliflower, celery,
egg-plant, sugar or sweet maize, onions,
parsley, radish, spinach.


Northern Tableland.
Crops to sow—
Sorghum —may be sown for green fodder
and for silage. The two best varieties
for this district are Early Amber Cane
and Planter’s Friend.
Millet —for hay and for green fodder.
Potatoes —may still be planted for the
main crop.
Oats—may be fit to harvest this month.
Pumpkins—may still be sown in Xew
England, though it is getting late.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
Crops to sow —
Plant potatoes for main late crop. Sow
maize and sorghums for green fodder.
Pumpkins and melons may still be
sown at the beginning of month.
Make a small sowing of swedes towards
end of month.
If practicable, land from which hay was
gathered could be ploughed. This
may be fitted in during damp weather.
Vegetables —Sow French and butter beans.
Sow cabbage, swedes, Brussels sprouts,
celery, squashes, cucumbers, and
sweet com. Transplant cauliflowers
and cabbages.
Central-western Slope.
Crops to sow—
Maize (early varieties) and sorghum—tor
greenstuff and silage. Maize for
grain risky.
Cowpeas—for grazing and greenstuff.
Vegetables —plant French beans, marrows
squashes, pumpkins.
Riverina District.
Crops to sow—
Maize, sorghum, millet—sow for ensilage
and green fodder only where irrigation
is possible.
Vegetables—
Stake tomatoes, and mulch after water-
ing.
Get land ready, if at all in suitable condition,
for early autumn sowing.
Jlvrr’i.mbidgee Irrigation Area*.
Crops to sow —
Maize—for green feed. If sown for
grain it must be early in the month.
After Christmas is generally too late.
Millet and sorghum.
Vegetables —sow peas, French beans, white
turnips, cabbage, cauliflower, celery,
tomatoes, sweet com.
North-western Plains.
Crops to sow—
Maize and pumpkins—only if they can
be irrigated.
Vegetables— nil.
Other work —commence to plough land for
autumn sowing, plough in all the
stubble, especially on the black soil.
A Seed Table.
For convenience the quantities of seed of each crop that should he sown in
a number of the most important districts in this State are presented in
tabular form in the following pages. How great are the variations between
different districts, and the different purposes for which crops are grown,
perusal will show. Hence the importance of using the correct amount of
seed, and the value of a reliable seed table.


Seed Table fob, Farm Crops.
Drilled.
Broadcast.
Period of
Crop.
Purpose for
growth
Notes.
which grown. Distance
: Quantity
Quantity
of crop
drills
seed per
seed per
(approx.).
1
apart.
; acre.
acre.
1
months.
1
North Coast— Richmond-Tweed.
Artichokes
. Pig and cattle; 3 ft. 6 in ..
food. 1
6 cwt. tubers
4-6
Gowpeae
Fodder ... 2 ft. 6 in. ..
Green manure.. ....
9 1b.
40 lb. " ..
1 3J-4
4-6
Field peas. (See “Oats. ’)
' Grain .. ..; 4 to 5 ft. ..
8-12 lb. ..
4-6
For grain—small early varies
ties 4 feet between
and 8 to 12 inches between
Maize .. .. -<
1
plants; late varieties4feet
Cinches to 5 feet between
drills and 12 to 16 inches
between plants.
Ensilage or 3 ft.
20-25 lb. ..
1-1J bus.
3-44
v green fodder.;
Millet
': Green fodder ..;
8-10 lb. ..
2 .,
Hay .. .,:
8-10,, ..
24 bushels
3 ..
Oats
Green fodder. 1 ....
3 ..
i Hav .. ....
2J
54 ..
Oats and ..
Green fodder ..: ....
U „
Field peas
4 bushel..
|2J-3
Rye
. Green fodder..
l|-2 bus.
3 ..
Sorghum ..
Ensilage or 2$ to 3 ft. ..
6-8 lb.
20 lb.
3-44
4 ..
green fodder.
Seed .. .. 3 ft.
6 lb.
Sugar-cane
: Cattle food .., 44 to 54 ft.
Sets 15 in.
8 ..
Sweet potatoes ..
apart.
Pig and cattle 3 ft.
food.
Sets or tu-
bers.
4 ..
North Coast—Clarence-Macleay.
Artichokes
, Pig feed .. | 4 ft.
6 cwt. tu-
bers.
7 .. ..
Bariev and
Green fodder .. ....
14 bushels
}s-4 ..
Earley (Skinless)
Green fodder .. ....
2 bushels
3 ..
Beans (Florida Velvet) ■■
Fodder .. 4 ft.
Pulse ., .. 4 ,,
15-20 lb. ..
15-20,, ..
..
,, (Mauritius) -
Fodder .. 4 ,,
Seed .. .. 4 ,,
15-20 „
15-20 „ ..
6 ..
Broom millet
Broomheads ,3 ,,
5 lb.
4 ..
Cowpeas ..
K
Green fodder .. | 2 ft. 6 in. ,.
9 1b.
30 lb.
Seed .. . 3 ft.
Green manure..,
9 „
201b." ..
44 . .
4 ..
Kale (Thousand-headed)
Fodder .., 4 ft.
14 lb.
9 ,,
4 .
Lucerne
Hay and green; ....
fodder.
15-20 3b. ..
4-6 (first
cut).
(
Grain .. .. 4 to 5 ft. ..
8-12 lb. ..
4-6..
See above remarks on dii-
Maize
(
tances for sowing.
Fodder or en-; 3 ft.
silage.
20-25 „ ..
1-14 bus.
41
Millet (Hungarian)
Green fodder..
20 lb.
Oats
Hay ..
2-3 bushels
5 ..
Oats and ,.
Fodder ....
14 bushels
|3-4
Peas
I bushel..
Paspalum .,
Pasture
8 1b.
6 (to estab-
lish).
Potatoes ..
Market .. 2 ft. 6 in. ..
8-10 cwt...
..
Pumpkins ..
. Pig feed .. 10 ft.
31b.
5 ..
Rape (Essex)
Green fodder.. i 2 ft. 6 in. ..
2 „
6-8 lb. ..
6-8 „
1,700 sets..
6-8 lb. .;
Sorghum ..
„ .. i 24 to 3 ft...
Seed .. .. 3 ft.
15-20 lb. ..
15-20 ,, ..
3-
4-
Sugar-cane
Fodder .. 5 ,,
8
Swedes
Pig feed .. 3 ,,
3 1b.
4 ..
Sweet potatoes ..
Domestic uses : 3 ,,
14,500shoots.
7 ..
and fodder. -
Wheat
Fodder .. ;
bus.
34-4


Seed Table for
Farm Crops— continued.
Drilled.
Broadcast.
Period of
Crop.
Purpose for
which grown.
Distance
drills
apart.
Quantity
seed per
acre.
Quantity
seed per
acre.
growth
of crop
(approx.).
Notes.
months.
Hunter River-
-West Maitland and adjoining districts.
Broom millet
Broom-making.
' 3 ft. 6 in...
71b.
3-4
Lucerne ..
Hay and green
fodder.
15 lb.
After crop is established
cuts are obtained
every 5 weeks, in fair
seasons) during two.
thirds of year.
Potatoes ..
Domestic uses.
•2 ft. 9 in...
9 cwt.
4
Maize
Grain ..
4 to 5 fl. ..
8-12 lb. ..
6-7
See previous remarks on dig-
tances for sowing.
Onions
Domestic uses.
1ft.
21b.
2 lb.
7 ..
Water Melons
Domestic uses.
16 ft. 6 in.
6 oz.
6 ..
Pumpkins
Domestic uses
28 ft.
8 oz.
7
and cattle
Wheat
Oats
Barley ...
food.
}
Green feed for
cattle.
11 bushels
3-4
■Sorghum ..
Cattle food ..
2|- to 3 ft.
6-8 lb.
15-20 lb. ..
6 ..
Hawkesbury-Nepean.
Barley
Greenstuff
7 in.
1$ bushels |
2 bushels ..
3-4..
Generally sown with peas.
Broom millet
Broomheads ..
3 or 3| ft.
5-6 lb. ..I
6-7..
Cabbages ..
Market
3 x 2 ft. ..
7,260 plants
4-6..
Cowpeas ..
Greenstuff, en-
2ft. 6 in. ..
7-10 lb. ..
20-30 lb. ..
4-6..
silage, or hay.
Field peas..
Greenstuff, with; Drilled with, * bus. peas,
Same as
4-5..
barley, oats,
or wheat.
cereal.
1 bushel;
cereal.
drilled.
Lucerne ..
Greenstuff and 1
12-15 lb. ..
5 (first cut]
Permanent (3-6 cuttings per
hav.
annum).
f
Greenstuff or
3to Si ft...
20-25 lb. ..
1-11 hush-
3-4..
Keep cultivators going.
Maize
ensilage.
els.
See above remarks on dis-
tances for sowing.
Grain ..
4 to 5 ft. ..
6-10 lb. ..
4-7..
Mangolds ..
Stock feed
2 ft, 6 in.
7 1b.
7-8..
Keep cultivated until run-
Melons
Hills 6x8
2-3 lb. ..
4-6..
to 6x10 ft.
ners cover ground.
Millet
Greenstuff, en-
7 in.
6-10 lb. ..
10-15 lb. ..
2J-*
silage, and
Oats
{
Greenstuff
Hay
7 in.
2j’to 3 ft.
In row, 14
bushels
4 ..
2 bushels..
2
4 ..
5 ..
Potatoes ..
7-10 cwt...
5-6..
in. apart.
Keep cultivated until run-
Pumpkins ..
10 x 10 ft.
2 1b.
5-7..
to 12 x
12 ft. hills.
ners cover ground.
Rape
Greenstuff
7 in. or 2 ft.
10 lb. or 3 lb.
10-15 lb. ..
2-3 (2 or 3 Pigs or sheep may be turned
6 in.
cuttings).
into crop when 12 inches
high. The wider sowing
petmits of cultivation.
Ry«
r
Greenstuff
7 in.
11-2 bus.
2 bushels..
4 ..
1
Grain ..
7 ,,
4-2
2
15-20 lb. ..
6 ..
Sorghum ..
Greenstuff, en-
2 b to 3 ft.
6-8 lb. ..
4-6 (2 cut-
silage, and
tings).
hay.
2 ft. 6 in. ..
2-3 „
6 1b.
i ..
2 cwt. seed needed to pro-
Sweet potatoes .
3 x 2 ft. ..
7,260 rooted
6-8..
cuttings.
duce the cuttings.
Tares. (See “Vetches.”'
Tomatoes ..
4 x 4 ft. to,2,745 to 1,210
4-6.. ..
6x6 ft.
plants.
Turnips ..
2 ft. 6 in. ..
2-3 lb. ..
6 1b.
4
„


Seed Table for Farm Chops— continued.
Drilled.
Broadcast.
Crop.
Purpose for
which grown.
Distance
drills
apart.
Quantity
seed per
acre.
Quantity
seed per
acre.
growth
of crop
(approx.).
Notes.
months.
Hawkesbury-Nepean— continued.
Vetches (or tares)
Greenstuff with
barley, oats,
or wheat.
Drilled with
cereal.
1 bus. tares,
1 bushel
cereal.
Same as
drilled.
4-5..
Wheat
r
Greenstuff
7 in.
1 bushel ..
li bushels
4 ..
Hav ..
7 ,,
1 ,,
li „
5
(
Grain ..
7 „
|-1 bushel
1
6-7..
South Coast.
Barley
Green fodder..
6 in.
bushels
2 bushels,,
5 ..
Beans
Domestic
2 ft.
45 1b.
3 ,, ..
Cultivate lightlv.
Beet and mangel wurzels
Fodder
3 „
6 ,,
6 ..
Clover
Pasture
12 1b.
5 ..
Cowpeas ..
Fodder
2 ft.
20 lb.
40 ,.
4-5..
Cultivate until they run.
Grasses
Pasture
2 bushels.,
5 (to estab-
Lucerne
Greenstuff or
fi in.
8-12 lb. ..
16 1b.
lish).
6 (first cut).
hav.
f
i
Grain ..
to 4% ft.
9-12 ,, ..
4j-6 ..
For grain — early sowings of
earlv varieties, 3£ feet be-
Maize
1
tween drills and 8 to 12
i
!
inches between plants ;
late sowings 4 to 4£ feet
between drills and 12 to
Millet
1
Fodder
2£ to 3ft../
20-26 lb. ..
1-2 bushels
3-4..
16 Inches between plants.
Hay .. ::
6 in.
10 lb.
20 lb.
2J-3
Oats
6 ,,
l£ bushels
bushels
5 ..
Harrow until plants are 5
Onions
inches high.
Market and
domestic.
2 ft.
4 1b.
6 ..
Cultivate freely; keep weeds
in check.
Peas (Field)
Fodder
9
40 „
bushels
3-4..
Cultivate between rows.
Potatoes ..
Market and
domestic.
3 „
7-10 cwt. ..
3-4..
Pumpkins
Domestic
6 x 6 ft. or
2 1b.
5-6..
Cultivate between rows un-
8 x 8 ft.
til they run.
Pumpkins (cattle)
Fodder
6 x 6 ft. or
8 x 8 ft.
2 „
5-6..
Rape
,,
6 in.
6-10 lb.
15 lb.
4 ..
Fit to graze in 6 to 8 weeks.
Rye
Pasture
6 ,,
1 bushel ..
1| bushels
4 ..
Rye grass ..
2
5
Sorghum ..
Fodder
2£ to 3 ft. ..
6-8 lb. ..
15-20 lb. .
5-6..
Tares or vetches ..
Cattle or pig!
fodder. ,
2 ft.
40 lb.
1£ bushels
4-5..
Cultivate.
Turnips (Swede) ..
2 „
2 ,,
6 ..
Cultivate, and thin out iiv
rows.
Wheat
Grain or hay ..
6 in.
1 bushel ..
2 bushels ..
5 ..
Northern Tableland.
Barley
S'-
( ■
Grain .. .. !
Green fodder .. i
7 in. .. ;
40 lb.
65 1b. ..
100 „
.. ••
4 ..
Grasses
Pasture
7 „ ..i
15 lb.
25 „
Lucerne ..
Green fodder
and hav. 1
7 „ ..i
8 ,,
15 ,,
2} .. ..
r
Grain ., .. !
3J to 4 ft. .
8-10 lb. ..
5
Distance between plants i»
Majze
rows, 12 to 15 inches.
1
Ensilage .. 1
3ft.
30 lb
1 bushel..
3 ..
Oats
f i
Grain .. .. 1
7 in.
40 „
60 lb. ..
a ..
t
Hay ..
7 „ ..1
60 ,,
7-10 cwt. ..
80 „
8} ..
Potatoes ..
Market
3 ft. ..:
4 ..
Gather early potatoes when
of marketable size; for
storing through winter,
wait until haulms are
quite dead, tuber firm,
skin set.


Seed Table for Farm Crops— continued.
Drilled.
Broadcast.
Period of
Crop.
Purpose for
which grown.
Distance
drills
apart.
i Quantity
i seed per
acre.
Quantitv
seed per
acre.
growth
of crop,
(approx.).
Notes
I
months.
Northern Tableland
— continued.
Rye {
Grain ..
7 in.
. f 50 lb. .. |
751b. ..
7 ..
Green fodder ..
100 „
4 ..
..
Green fodder
•2i to 3 ft..
.! 81b. ..|
14 „
5-e..
and silage.
Wheat .. .. |
Grain
Hay
7 in.
7 ,,
. 50 ,,
70 ,,
Tamworth
75 ,,
115 „
6 y. y.
Barley
Malting
7 to 8 in. .
: 40-45 lb. .. i
60 lb.
6-7..
Excellent quality grown in
1
district.
Barley (Skinless)
Greenstuff and
7 to 8 .
1 40-50 ,, ..
70 ,,
5
Can be fed off two or three
grain.
times, and then produces
good grain crop.
Lucerne
Hay
! ....
12 to 20 lb.
4 ..
Slow-growing until estab-
| !
lished ; then can be cut
up to six times a year.
Seed
1 i
! |
12 to 20 „
In most cases only one crop
in the summer is allowed
to ripen seed. Unless
pods develop well, cut for
hay.
Maize .. .. |
Fodder..
3 to 4 ft. .
. i 15-20 lb. ..
4-5..
Grain ..
3£ to 4 ft. .
.! 8-10 ,, ..]
5-6..
Potatoes
Market ..
3 ft.
. j 7-10 cwt. . ■'
6-7..
Many parts of district not
adapted to this crop.
Pumpkins
Domestic use
8 to 10 ft. .
14 to 2 lb..
5-6..
and fodder.
'
;Sorghum
Fodder
2£ to 3 ft. .
. ! 6-8 lb. ..
15-20 lb. ..
5 ..
Wheat
Grain ..
7-8 in. .
. | 40-45 lb. ...
60 lb.
7 ..
Central-western Slope,
Barley
Grazing, green-
stuff, silage,
6 to 8 in.
4-J bushel I
|-1 bushel
4-6..
Fit to graze for greenstuff 6
to 10 weeks after planting.
grain.
1
Will continue to grow
:
after being cut or grazed.
•Oowpeas
Grazing, green-
2J to 3 ft. .
. 8-12 lb. .. 1
Not recom-
3-6..
After being cut or grazed
stuff and pulse.
mended.
cowpeas will continue
growing until frosts set
“Crimson clover ..
Grazing, green-
stuff, or hay.
1 .... |
10-12 lb. ..
5-6. .
Continues growing untU
October.
Kale
Grazing or
greenstuff.
2J to 3 ft. .
.,14-3 11). .. !
Not recom-
mended.
4-6..
Available until October.
Lucerne
Greenstuff or
.... 1
8-10 lb.; 15
Perennial. .
First cut 3 to 4 months
hay.
lb. on river
from planting.
flats.
Greenstuff or
3 to 3£ ft. .
. 12-15 lb. ..|
Not recom-
3-4..
For grain, average distance
ensilage.
mended.
j between plants in rows
j
should be 18 to 24 inches.
Maize .. .. ■{
1
; '
> If birds are troublesome
I and destructive, dip seed
J in coal tar and dry with
Grain ..
4| to 5 ft. .
. 6-8 lb.
10-12 lb. !!
4-6..
) ashes.
Millet
Greenstuff or
ensilage.
2} to 3 ,, .
.; 3-4 ,,
24-4
Makes a rough class of hay
for standby purposes.
Mustard
Grazing
2$ to 3 ,, .
.j 3-5 ,,
. ! 8-10 cwt. .. !
5-6
3-6..
Generally mixed with rape.
Potatoes
Domestic
2Jto 3 ,, .
3-4..
Fit for grazing 6 to 8 weeks
Rape
Grazing or
14in. to 3 ft.: 2-4 lb.
5-6 lb. ..
3-6..
greenstuff.
; j
after planting, and con-
i
tinues growing untH
September.
Eye
Grazing, green-
401b. ..!
4-| bushel
4-6..
Fit for grazing 6 to 8 weeks
stuff, hay,
straw, or
i
after planting and until
spring, when, if allowed,
grain.
it will run up and pro-
j !
ducc a crop of hay or
grain.


Seed Table for Farm Crops— continued.
Drilled.
Broadcast.
Crop.
Purpose for
which grown.
Distance
drills
apart.
Quantity
seed per
acre.
Quantity
seed per
acre.
growth
of crop
(approx.).
Notes.
months.
Central-western Slope— continued.
orghum
Greenstuff, en
2J to 3 ft. ..
6-8 lb. ..
Not recom-
5 ..
silage, or
mended.
coarse hav.
Tares (or vetches)
Grazing or 24 to 3 ,, ..
12-20 lb. ..
30-60 lb. ..
5-6..
greenstuff.
(To prevent smut treat the
Wheat .. .. -|
Grain ..
6 to 8 in.. ..
40-60 ib. ..
60-80 ,, ..
6-7,.
j seed with bluestone and
1 afterwards with lime.
Greenstuff, en
6 to 8 ,, ..
40-60 „ ..
60-80 „ ..
5-6..
< Quantities of seed per
silage, or hay
J acre will vary with
j variety, time of sowing,
&c. See page 277.
Tableland—Bathurst Section.
.Artichokes (Jerusalem)..
Tubers
2 ft. 6 in. .
5 cwt.
' 7 ..
Plant like potatoes.
r
Malting
7 to 8 m. ..
•50 lb.
60 lb.
6 ..
Barley J.
Green winter 7 to 8 ,, ..
40 ,,
50 ,,
5 (second
1
fodder.
1
growth,
August
till De-
cember).
Canary grass
Bird seed
20 ,,
6 ..
Cowpeas .. .. £
Grain ..
Fodder
; 4 ft.
: 2 „
6 lb.
20 „
6 ..
6 ..
Lucerne
Hay
I 7 to 8 in.
j
6-8 ib. ..
10-is lb. ..
Perennial
summer
r
Grain ..
: 4 to 5 ft. . .
6-8 lb. ..
6 ..
On uplands drills should be
Maize .. .. J
Fodder anc
3 ft.
5 feet apart, and plants
8-12 ,, ..
Not recom-
6 ..
about 18 to 24 inches apart
(
Ensilage.
!
mended.
5 (Decem-
ber til]
in rows. On irrigated
flats distances can be re-
May).
duced to 4 feet and 12 to
16 inches respectively.
Melons
Market..
10 x 10 ft. ..
i-ii „ ..
5 ..
Millet .. .. j
Grain ..
18 to 30in. ..
8-12 „ ..
7 ..
Fodder
18 to 30,, ..
8-12 ,, ..
6
■Oats .. .. |
Grain ..
7 or 8 ,, ..
40 lb.
50 lb.
8 ..
Hay
7 or 8,, ..
40 ,,
50,,
7
Onions (from seed)
Main crop
15 x 6 ,, ..
10-12 oz. ..
11 ..
Seeds sown in beds to be
Potato onions (from
transplanted.
Domestic
15 x 6 ,, ..
3-5 cwt. ..
6 ..
Bulbs are planted.
bulbs).
Tree onions
Main crop
15 x 6 ,, ..
3-1 „ ■■
7 ..
Bulbils from tops are planted.
Potatoes .. .. |
3 ft.
6-8 „
6 ..
) Plant 15 inches apart in
Early crop
3 ,,
6-8 ,, ..
4i ..
j - drills.
Pumpkins
(
10x10 ft.
1-1£ lb
Fodder (to be
2 ft. 6 in. ..
2-3“ ,, ..
8 ..
Rape .. .. •<
cut).
Pasture
2 ,, 6 „ ..
3-5 ,, ..
4-8 lb. ..
) The wider sowing permits
(
Grain ..
7 or 8 in. ..
4-5 „ ..
7-8,,
50 lb.
8 ..
/ of cultivation.
Rye .. .. |
7 „ 8 ,, ..
40 lb.
7
Green winter
fodder.
7 „ 8 „ ..
40 ,,
50 ,,
5 (second
growth
till De-
cember).
:Scarlet clover
Pasture
8-10 lb. ..
7 ..
Sheep’s burnet .. .. I
Grain ..
Fodder
20 1b.
Perennial..
Sorghum .. .. |:
3-4 ft
24-3
6 lb.
6-8 Ib. ..
7 ..
6 ..
Tares .. .. . ■
».
2 ft.
20 „ ..
30-60 Ib. ..
7
Turnips (Swede) ..
3 ,,
2 Ib.
6 ..
(
Grain
7 cr 8 in. .. I
25-30 lb.!
35-40 lb.
8 ..
Wheat .. .. < \
!
early, 35-
early, 45-
Hay ..
7 ,, 8 ,, . i
40-lb late.
50 lb. late.
7


(Seed Table for Farm Crops— continued.
Drilled.
Broadcast.
Period of
Crop.
Purpose for
which grown.
Distan ce
drills
apart.
Quantity
seed per
acre.
Quantity
seed per
acre.
growth
of crop
( approx.).
Nous.
1
Riverina
months.
Barley
f
Grain ..
Tin.
25-30 lb. ..
60 lb.
5-6..
i
Green fodder or
7 ,,
35-40 „ ..
60 „
3-5..
silage.
Barley and
I
7 „
30 lb.
90 „
Peas
s
Broomheads ..
7
30 ,,
90 „
Broom Millet
3 ft. 6 in...
8 „
4-5..
Cowpeas ..
Green fodder or
3 ft.
8-10 lb. ..
3-6..
silage.
Field peas..
(
Green fodder..
7 in.
60 1b.
60 lb.
4-7..
i
Green manure..
7 ,,
60 „
60 „
20-40 lb. ..
4-5..
Grasses
Lucerne ..
(
\
Pasture
Hay ..
7 in.
7 „
3 ft.
4 lb.
6 „
10 1b.
12-15 lb. ..
> Perennial.
Maize
Green fodder ..
16-20 lb ..
Not recom-
mended
4-5..
Millet
Fodder
7 in.
8 lb.
101b.
3-4..
Oats
J
t
Grain ..
7 in.
25 ,,
30-40 lb. ..
40 ,,
5-7..
Hay
7 ,,
50 „
5-6..
Oats and ..
)
Green fodder or
7 „
25 lb.
65 „
Peas
)
silage.
7 „
30 „
65 „
Onions
Domestic
3 ft.
2 „
Potatoes ..
>>
3ft. x 15 in.
5-7 cwt...
4-5..
Pumpkins
Fodder..
10 ft.
2 lb.
5-6..
Rape
Green fodder..
7 in.
3 „
31b.
Eye
7
45 ,
60 „
3-4
Sheep’s burnet ..
Pasture
7 ,,
2* to 3 ft.
10 „
6-8 lb. ..
20 ,,
Perennial..
Sorghum ..
Green fodder ..
15-20 lb. ..
4-5..
Swedes
Fodder..
3 ft.
2 1b.
Tomatoes ..
Domestic
5 x 5 ft. ..
1 oz.
Turnips
Fodder and
3 ft.
21b.
table.
Vetches
■j
Green manure..
7 in.
30-40 lb. ..
601b. ..[
4-5..
i
Green fodder ..
7 „
30-40 ,, ..
69 „ ..t
4-6..
Wheat
s
i
Grain
Hay
7 „
30-40 „ ..
45 1b.
60 ,, ..i
60 „ ..J
6 ..
5 ..
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas.
Barley ..
(
. Grain ..
; 7 in.
40-45 lb. ..
60-70 lb. ..
5-6..
' ■ '<
I Green feed
7 „
50-60 ,,
70-80 ,, ..
i 8-5..
Barley and Peas or
Taresi ..
7 „
50-60 „ ..
70-80 „ ..
3-5..
Advisable to sow half and
half.
Broom millet
j Broomheads ..
3* ft.
8 1b.
4-5..
Field peas ..
r
■ Green feed
Green manure
7 in.
50-60 lb. ..
70-80,, ..
4-5..
4-5..
Lucerne
»
10 lb.
Not advis-
Perennial.
Sown broadcast from grass;
1
Hay
12-14 lb.
able.
seed attachment to box
drill.
4 ft.
8-10 ,, ..
4-6..
Plants should not be closer
Maize
rows.
(
Green feed
3 ,,
20-25 „ ..
35 lb.
3-5..
Millet
Hay” ..
Green feed
7 in.
8-10,, ..
12-15 lb. ..
2J-4
Oats
(
1
7 „
7 „
40-50,, ..
50-60,, ..
60-70 „ ..
70-80 „ ..
4-6..
3-5..
Advisable to sow half and
Oats and Peas or Tares..
7 „
50-60 „ ..
70-80 „ ..
3-5..
half.
Rape
Rye
Green fodder..
7 „
4-5 lb. ..
5-6 lb.
3-6..
(
7 „
45-50 lb. ..
60-70 lb. ..
3-4*
t
Straw ..
7 ,,
40-45 „ ..
50-60 ,, ..
5-6..
Sorghum ..
Green fodder ..
3 ft.
10 1b.
20-25 „ ..
3£-6
Best sown with a cereal*
Vetches
Wheat
y
7 in.
50-60 lb. .
65-75 lb. ..
4-6..
i
Hav ..
45-50 „ ..
60-70 „ ..
5-7..
Sow with cover crop Such a&
Grasses -Paspalum
Pasture
10-12,, ..
millet through seed drill,
using the manure box.
Cocksfoot
40-50 ,
,, ,,
Rhodes
6-8 „ ..
,, ,,
Prairie.,
40-50 „ ..
Sudan ..
I
Grazing, or
hay, or seed.
2 to 2$ ft...
4-8 „
Sow alone.


INDEX.
SUBJECT INDEX.
PAGE.
A
Albuminoid Ratio 761,767
Alsike ... ... 573
Analyses—
Analyses of soils of K.S.W. ... ... 32
Analyses of fodders ... 767
Forwarding samples of soils, manures,
&c 109
[<See also Soils : names of crops.]
Artichoke, Jerusalem ... 534, 878,889
Ash Concrete ... 225
Asparagus ... 675, 876
Attractive Rural Home ... ... ... 216
B
Barbed-wire Winder ... ... ... 182
Barley 406, 869, 889
Area in N.S.W., 1914 ... ... ... 406
Manuring ... 86,410
Pests and diseases ... ... ... 424
Production of malting barley 410, 415, 422
Suitable climate and soil ... 86, 408
Varieties ... 407, 412,418,422
Beans and Peas 637, 869, 889
Analyses ... ... 88, 768, 770
Fertilisers ... ... 122
Fungus diseases ... 642
Insect pests ... ... 646
Beet 684,869, 891
Soil requirements ... 87
Black Oats 264,267
Blacksmithing for Farmers ... ... 814
Blights. [See Fungus Diseases.]
“ Bloat ” 286, 548, 599
Blue grasses (native) ... 698
“ Bluestoning ” wheat, &o. ... 364,395
Book-keeping for Farmers ... ... 851
Bordeaux Mixture ... ... ... 504
Brazing and Soldering ... 831
Broccoli ... ... ... 623
Brome grass, Hungarian ... ... 697
Broom Millet 578, 880, 890
Manuring 589
Trade requirements 581, 593
Brown Top grass 707
Buildings. [See Farm Buildings.]
Burgundy Mixture ... ... ... 506
Burr Medic or Trefoil ... ... ... 576
Burrless or Hookless Medics ... ... 576
Bush hay, Making ... ... ... 711
PAGE*
c
Cabbages. [See also Caulifloweis.] 616,624,
869, 890
Calendar, Farmers’ ... 869
Carpentry ... ... ... ... 832
Carrots ... ... ... ... 682, 870
Cauliflowers ... ... ... 616, 869
Fungus diseases ... ... ... 625
Fertilisers ... ... ... 126, 622
Insect pests ... ... ... ... 628
Varieties ... ... ... 623, 624
Chaff and Chaff-cutting ... ... ... 327
Feeding value of chaff ... 329, 769
Chopping Roller ... ... ... ... 428
Chou Moellier ... ... ... ... 602
Clearing ... 138
Clearing coastal lands for pasture ... 157
for cultivation ... ... 138,243
with explosives ... ... ... 145
Destroying stumps with acids ... 157
Killing green timber with arsenic ... 155
Ringbarking in the West ... ... 163
Spring-board, use of ... ... ... 160
Yankee grubbing ... ... ... 243
Clovers 572, 872, 891
Composition of clover 87, 572, 767
Fertilisers ... ... ... ... 122
Varieties ... ... ... ... 573
Cocksfoot ... ... ... 692
Compost Heap, The ... ... 72, 103
Concrete —
Ash concrete ... ... 225
Concrete fencing posts ... ... 191
Concrete floors ... ... ... 232
Forms or moulds for concrete ... 228
Lime concrete for floors 233
Conservation of Fodder —
Bush hay ... ... 711
Hay r -making ... 323,404,467,544
Silos and silage ... ... ... 737
Couch grass ... ... ... ... 705
“ Cow Cane ” ... ... 608,884,889
Cowpeas ... ... ... 552, 869, 889
Cowpeas as green manure ... 74, 556
Fertilisers for legumes ... 122,555
Varieties ... ... ... ... 555
Cucumbers ... ... ... 671, 869
Fertilisers ... ... ... ... 126
Pests and diseases ... ... ... 672


PAGE,
Cultivation—
Cultivation methods ... ... ... 244
Depth of the mulch ... ... ... 254
Does fallowing pay? ... ... ... 256
Neglected surfaces ... ... ... 250
Working the fallow ... ... ... 248
[Ste also names of crops.]
D
Dams. [.See also Tanks.) ... ... 198
Danthonia grasses ... 706
Dodder 550
Drains and Drainage ... ... ... 210
Dry Farming 246
[See also Cultivation.]
E
Eelworms (or Gallworms) ... 495, 513
Elephant Grass ... ... ... ... 612
Explosives—
Clearing with explosives ... ... 145
Storage on the farm ... ... ... 152
F
Fallowing—
Does fallowing pay? ... ... ... 256
Fallowing ... ... ... ... 246
and nitrification ... 84
[See also Cultivation; names of
crops.]
Farm Buildings ... ... ... ... 211
Ash concrete ... ... ... ... 225
Attractive rural home... ... ... 216
Concrete floors ... ... ... 232
Farmers’ residence—design ... ... 212
Farm buildings at Glen Innes Experi-
ment Farm 218
Hayshed, Specification of ... ... 222
How to lay timbers for flooring ... 197
Implement shed and store-room,
Specification for ... ... ... 221
Lime wash ... ... ... ... 237
Painting ... ... ... ... 235
Stables block, Specification for ... 219
Timbers, Practical use of ... ... 194
Farmers’ Calendar ... ... ... 869
Feeding Farm Stock ... ... ... 759
Analyses of fodders ... ... ... 767
Fences and Fencing ... ... ... 166
Barbed-wire winder ... ... ... 182
Concrete fencing-posts ... ... 191
Gates and gateways ... ... ... 183
Hints on fencing ... ... ... 179
Rail fences ... ... ... ... 173
Sheep and cattle fence, cheap ... 177
Specification for wire fence, netted ... 168
Timbers, Practical use of ... ... 194
Fertilisers. [See Manures.]
Fescue, Tall 700
PAGE.
Field Peas ... ... 563, 871, 889
Combined with cereals 570
Varieties ... ... ... ... 565
Flinders’grass ... ... ... ... 708
Fodder Plants, some Native ... 717, 727
Analyses 771
Fungus Diseases—
American maize smut ... ... 455
Anthracnose of beans ... ... 642
Bacterial blight of tomatoes ... ... 6P2
Black leg of cabbages... ... ... 627
of potatoes ... ... ... 510'
Black rot of cabbages... ... ... 626
speck scab of potatoes ... ... 512
spot of tomatoes ... 660
Blight of wheat ... ... ... 380
Blights of tomatoes ... ... ... 661
Brown fleck of potatoes ... , ... 510
rot of cabbages ... ... ... 625
• —— rot of potatoes 509
rust of potatoes ... ... ... 512
Bunt (wheat) ... ... 358
Club root of cabbages ... ... 625
“ Contortion ” of wheat ... ... 382
Curly top of sweet potatoes ... ... 533
Damping-off mildew of beans and peas 644
Downy mildew of beans and peas ... 644
of cabbages ... ... ... 627
of lucerne... ... ... ... 552
Dry rot of cabbages ... ... ... 625
of potatoes ... ... ... 508
Ear-rot of maize ... 454
Early blight ... 5C7, 661
Ergot ... ... ... ... ... 380
Flag smut of wheat ... ... 366,404
Head smut of maize ... 455
“Irish” blight of potatoes ... ... 496
Late or “ Irish ” blight ... 496, 661
Leaf blight of tomatoes ... ... 662
——spot of beans ... 645
spot of lucerne ... ... ... 561
spot or “ Early blight ” of
potatoes ... 607
• —■ — stripe of maize 457
Loose smut of oats 395, 406
of wheat ... ... ... ... 366
Maize leaf stripe 457
rust ... ... ... ... 456
smut ... ... ... ... 455
Mildew of beans and peas ... ... 644
■ of wheat ... ... ... ... 377
Moulds of maize ... ... ... 457
Onion smut ... 636
Pea spot ... ... 645
Pod spot of beans ... ... ... 642
Powdery mildew of beans and peas... 644
Rhizoctonia cf potatoes ... ... 512
Ripe rot of tomatoes ... ... 664
Rusts of beans and peas ... ... 643
of lucerne... ... ... ... 651
of maize ... ... ... ... 456
of oats ... ... ... ... 406
of wheat ... ... ... ... 372


PAGE.
Fungus Diseases— continued.
Scab of potatoes ... ... ... 510
Solerotium disease of beans and peas 646
Smut of barley 424
of maize ... ... ... ... 455
of oats ... ... ... ... 395
of onion ... ... ... ... 636
of wheat ... ... ... ... 358
Squash blossom disease 674
Stinking smut of wheat ... ... 358
Sunburn of tomatoes ... ... ... 664
Take-all 378,404
Wheat blight ... ... ... ... 380
mildew ... ... 377
rusts ... ... ... ... 372
White rust of turnip, &c. ... 517,627
Wilt of tomatoes ... ... ... 664
G
Gallwonns (or Eelworms) ... 495, 513
Garlic ... ... ... ... ... 636
Gates and Gateways ... ... ... 183
Concrete posts ... ... ... ... 191
Squaring a gate-post ... ... ... 186
Grammas ... ... ... ... 665
Grasses, Introduced and Native ... 686
Analyses of fodders ... ... ... 768
Manures 86, 124
[See also names of grasses.]
H
Harness; Fitting and Repairing ... 796
Harvesting—
Harvesting wheat for grain ... ...291
• —- A. with reaper and binder ... 292
B. with stripper ... ... 306
C. with combined harvester ... 313
D. with reaper-thresher ... 314
—r— E. for the mill 316
Harvesting wheat for hay and chaff .. 323
[For other crops see names thereof.]
Hay and Haymaking—
Bush-hay, Making ... ... ... 711
Chaffing wheaten hay ... ... 327
Feeding value of chaff ... 329,769
Harvesting wheat for hay and chaff... 323
Lucerne haymaking ... ... ... 544
Oaten hay and chaff ... ... ... 404
Sorghum hay ... ... 467
Varieties of wheat for hay ... 274,323
When to cut oats for hay ... ... 403
[See also names of other crops.]
Hayshed, Specifications of ... ... 222
Hoven ... ... ... 286, 548, 599
Humus 43, 44, 70, 101, 263, 556
Hydraulic Ram ... ... ... ... 205
I
Implement Shed, Specification for ... 221
Indian Cane ... ... 607, 884, 889
Inoculation of Soil ... ... 101, 537
17299—2 F
PAGE.
Insects, Injurious—
Angoumois moth ... ... ... 459
Aphis (beans and peas) 648
(cabbage) 632
(turnip) 517
• —— (wheat) 388
Army worm moth 387
Bean and tomato bug 649
Black lamellioom beetle ... ... 458
Bugongmoth 385
Cabbage moth 628
Cutworms ... ... ... ... 385
Diamond-backed cabbage moth ... 628
French bean fly ... ... ... 646
Grain weevil 459
Grasshoppers 388
Green bug ... ... ... ... 648
Hawk moth (attacking sweet potatoes) 533
Locusts 388
Lucerne seed wasp ... ... ... 551
web moth 551
Onion maggot 636
Potato moth ... ... ... ... 491
Pseudo-looper moth 649
Pumpkin beetle ... ... ... 672
Rutherglen bug 388,494
Silvery Plusia moth ... ... ... 649
Slender black corn oarab ... ... 458
Spotted ladybird ... ... ... 674
Tomato and bean bug ... ... 649
Turnip aphis ... ... 517
Weevil (grain) ... ... ... ... 459
• (beans, peas, oowpeas) 651
White grubs ... ... ... ... 384
Wireworms ... ... ... ... 384
K
Kale . ... 600, 869, 889
Kangaroo grass ... ... ... ... 708
Kentucky Blue grass ... 694
L
Land Board Districts of N.S.W. ... 1
Landsborough grass . ... ... ... 708
Leguminous Crops 74, 77, 88, 101, 122, 536
Autumn-sown legumes combined with
cereals 569, 870, 889
Beans and peas (vegetables) 637, 869, 889
Clovers 572, 872, 891
Cowpeas 552, 869, 889
Field peas 563, 570, 871, 889
Lucerne 537, 869, 889
Peanuts ... ... ... 562, 882
Soy beans ... ... ... ... 560
Vetches and tares 565, 569, 871, 890
Lime —
Action of lime ... ... 90
Defects due to want of lime ... 34, 35
Lime wash ... ... ... ... 237
Liming wheat land ... ... ... 262
Manures containing lime ... 89,92
Linseed 614


PAGE.
Lucerne ... ... ... 537, 869, 889
Analyses of lucerne ... ... ... 707
Diseases and pests ... ... ... 550
Dodder ... ... ... ... 55,', 788
Fertilisers for legumes ... ... 122
Soils suitable for lucerne ... ... 47
Varieties ... 540
M
Maize ... ... ... 426, 869, 889
Analyses of Grain ... ... ... 770
Fertilisers ... 117,446
Fungus diseases ... ... ... 434
Insect pests ... ... ... ... 458
Maize and sorghum cutter ... ... 742
Selection of seed maize ... ... 441
Soil requirements ... ... ... 86
Varieties recommended ... ... 431
Mangolds, or Mangel-wurzels 518, 870, 890
Feeding value ... ... ... 522,769
Soil requirements ... ... 87,518
Fertilisers ... 125, 620
Varieties vSt, 521
Manures and Feral^jsers —
Composition amwaotion ... ... 89
Compost heap, The ... ... 72, 103
Detection of adulteration ... ... 105
Farmyard manure 72, 108
Formulae for preparing fertilisers ... 110
Green manuring ... 73, 556, 568
List of fertilisers in New South Wales 129
Manures containing lime ... 89,92
containing nitrogen ... 99,112
containing phosphoric acid 92,113
containing potash ... 101,114
Principles of manuring ... ... 80
Samples for analysis 109
[See also Lime; Plants; Soil;
names of crops.]
Marrows ... ... ■ ... ... 665, 869
Fertilisers ... ... ... ... 126
Pests and diseases ... 672
Medics (Clovers and Trefoils) ... ... 576
Melons 667, 879, 890
Fertilisers ... ... 126
Pests and diseases ... 672
Meteorology—
Rainfall and temperature table ... 29
Mildews. [See Fungus Diseases.]
Millet 470, 869, 889
Fodder value ... ... ... 475,767
Varieties ... ... ... ... 471
\See also Broom Millet.]
Mitchell grasses ... ... 706
N
Native Fodder Plants, Some ... 717,727
Analyses ... ... 771
Nitrogen and Nitrification—
Nitrification ... ... ... 67, 84
Nitrogen and green manuring ... 74
from the air ... ... 77,78
■ plant's supply of 75
Nitrogenous manures 99, 112
PAGE.
Nitrogenous Foods 761, 764
Nutritive Value of Foods ... 701, 707
0
Oats 391, 869, 889
Analyse 767, 769, 770
Fertilisers ... ... ... 117, 403
Pests and diseases ... ... ... 406
Soil requirements ... ... ... 86
Treatment of seed for smut 395
Varieties ... ... ... ... 395
Onion, The ... ... 633, 869, 890
Diseases and pests ... ... ... 636
Fertilisers ... ... ... ... 127
Varieties ... ... ... ... 634
Overstocked Pastures ... ... ... 709
P
Painting ... ... ... ... ... 235
Panic grasses ... ... ... ... 709
Parsnips ... ... ... ... ... 683
Paspalum dilatatum ... 687, 870, 889
Pastures, Grasses for ... ... ... 686
Overstocking ... ... 709
Peanuts ... ... ... ... 502, 882
Fertilisers ... ... 123
Fodder value ... ... ... ... 562
Peas 639,869, 889
Diseases and pests ... ... ... 642
Varieties ... ... ... ... 641
Phalaris hulbosa ... ... ... ...696
Phosphoric Acid—
Phosphatio manures ... 92,113,258
Various sources ... ... ... 95
Plants —
Chemical composition ... ... 80
Samples for analysis ... 109
Potash—
Potash manures ... ... 101,114
Wood-ashes ... ’ ... 102
Potato, The 477, 869, 889
Analysis 769
Fertilisers 87, 124,488
Fungus diseases ... ... ... 496
Insect pests ... ... ... ... 491
Rotation ... ... ... 87,479
Second growth ... ... ... 488
Spraying ... ... ... ... 504
Varieties ... ... ... ... 483
Prairie grass ... ... ... ... 694
Pumpkins ... ... 665,869,889
Fertilisers ... ... ... ... 126
Pests and diseases ... ... ... 672
R
Ram, The Hydraulic ... ... ... 205
Rape 285, 596, 767, 869, 889
Feeding-off ... ... ... 286, 599
Rape on the wheat farm ... ... 285
Rhodes grass ... ... ... ... 692
Rhubarb ... ... ... ... 681, 875
Ringbarking. [<See also Clearing.] 138, 163


PAGE,
-Root Knot or Root Ga 11... ... ... 512
Rope, Use and Care of ... ... ... 834
Rotation ... ... ... ... ••• 263
Rotation for barley ... ... ... 408
broom millet ... 554
oats ... 404
potatoes ... ... 479
wheat ... ... ... ... 263
Rusts. [See. Fungus Diseases.]
Bye 424, 870, 889
Soil requirements ... ... ... 86
Rye grass, Perennial ... ... ... 640
s
Saltbushes ... ... ... 717
Analyses ... ... ... ... 771
Scythe-blade Cutter ... ... ... 742
Seed Samples for Teats 794
Seed table for farm crops ... ... 889
Seeds and Seed Testing 773
Shade, Trees for ... ... ... ... 238
Share-farming 289
Sheep—■
Feeding-off growing wheat ... ... 286
Sheep on the wheat farm ... ...283
Silky heads (grass) 704, 709
Silos and Silage ... ... 737
Feeding value ... 739, 769
Hillside silos 753
Overground silos ... ... ... 756
Pit silos ... ... ... ... 751
Stack silage ... ... ... ... 740
Smuts. [See Fungus Diseases.]
Soil Moisture ... ... 46,69,241,250
Soil Mulches ... ... ... 248,254
Soil-
Chemistry of the soil ... ... ... 61
Classification of soils ... ... ... 62
Fertility, Factors which determine ... 66
Formation of soils ... ... ... 63
Injurious substances in soils ... ... 52
Samples for analysis ... ... ... 109
Soil drainage ... ... ... 69,210
Soils of Black Soil Plains ... ... 38
County Camden ... ... ... 36
—■ —• County Cumberland ... ... 33
Flood Deposits ... ... ... 49
New South Wales ... ... 32
—•—Richmond River... ... ... 37
Semi-arid Region ... ... 41
Weathering of soils ... ... ... 51
[See also Cultivation ; Manures and
Fertilisers; Xitrogen ; Rotation.]
Soldering and Brazing ... ... ... 831
Sorghum ... ... ... 460, 809, 889
Feeding value ... ... ... ... 467
Manuring ... ... ... ... 462
Sorghum and maize cutter ... ... 742
poisoning ... ... ... 468
under irrigation ... ... ... 469
Varieties ... ... ... 464, 468
Soy Beans ... ... ... ... 560
Springboard, for Felling Timber ... 160
PAGE.
Squashes ... ... ... ... 665, 869
Peats and diseases ... ... ... 672
Stables, Specification for ... ... 219
Stack-building ... ... ... 299, 714
Star grasses ... ... ... ... 709
Steaming Hay ... ... ... ... 328
Stumps, Destroying with Acids ... 157
Sudan grass ... ... 701
Sugar beet ... ... ... ... 522
Sugar-cane ... ... 604, 809, 889
Sugar grass ... ... ... ... 707
Superphosphate ... ... 95, 114, 258
Sweet Corn ... ... ... ... 452
Sweet Potato, The 523,869,889
Diseases and pests ... » ... ... 533
Food value ... ... ... ... 530
Manures 524
Varieties ... ... ... ... 539
Swedes. [See also Turnips,] £l3
T
Tanks and Dams ... ... ... 198
Rule for measuring tanks ... ... 201
Tall Oat grass ... ... ... ... 708
Tares and Vetches 565, 669, 767, 871, 890
Texas Blue grass ... ... ... ... 698
Timbers—
Flooring, How to lay ... ... ... 197
Killing green timber with arsenic ... 155
Timbers, Practical use of ... 194
Timothy grass 699
Tobacco—
Fertilisers ... ... ... ... 128
Suitable soils ... ... ... ... 48
Tomato, The, 651,878,890
Diseases ... ... ... 660
Fertilisers ... ... ... ... 126
Varieties ... ... ... ... 664
Transplanting Machine 621
Trees and Timbers —
Practical use of timbers ... ... 194
Shade and shelter ... ... 238,875
Trefoils (Clovers) ... ... ... 672
Turnips and Swedes ... 513, 869, 889
Diseases and pests ... ... ... 516
Manuring 87,125,515
Value as stock food ... ... ... 515
Varieties ... ... ... ... 516
V
Vegetable Crops ... ... ... ... 616
Vetches and Tares 565, £69, 871, 890
w
Wallaby grass ... ... 706
Water —
Hydraulic ram ... ... ... 205
Samples for analysis ... ... ... 109
Water conservation and distribution 198
Water Couch ... ... ... ... 705
Weeds, Farmers’ ... ... ... ... 795


PAGE.
Wheat 241, 869, 889
Analyses 767,768, 770
Area under wheat in New South Wales 241,
406
Barley and wheat compared 417
ChaS-cutting ... ... 327
Cost of wheat production 280
Cultivation methods ... 244
Fertilisers 83, 115,258
Fungus diseases ... ... ••• 358
Harvesting wheat for grain ... ...291
for hay and ohali ... ... 323
Insect peats ... ••• 384
Milling qualities ... 275,316,354
“ Pickling” seed wheat ... ... 364
Rotation ... ... ... ... 263
PAG*.
A
ALFORD, J.—
Early Tomatoes at Hawkesbury Agri-
cultural College ... ... ... 656
B
BREAKWELL, E.—
Introduced and Native grasses ... 686
BROOKS, A.—
Ash Concrete ... ... ... ... 225
Carpenter’s Tool Cupboard 832
Concrete Floors ... ... ... 232
Design for a Farmer’s Cottage Resi-
dence ... 212
Farm Buildings at Glen Innes Experi-
ment Farm ... ... ... ... 218
Painting ... ... ... ... 235
Soldering and Brazing ... ... 831
BROWN, J.—
Rock Melon Culture ... ... ... 671
BURROWS, C. W.—
Killing Green Timber with Arsenic ... 155
BUTLER, E. D.—
Onion, The ... ... 633
Potato Moth ... ... ... ... 491
c
CHAPMAN, J. W.—
Harvesting with the stripper ... 306
Squaring a Gate-post ... ... ... 186
D
DARNELL-SMITH, G. P.—
Fungus Diseases of Maize ... ... 454
DARNELL-SMITH, G. P., and MAC-
KINNON, E.—
Fungus Diseases of Beans and Peas... 642
of Cabbage and Cauliflower ... 625
of the Potato ... ... ... 496
of Tomatoes ... ... ... 660
of Wheat ... ... ... 358
PAGE,
W’heat— continued.
Share-farming 289
Sheep on the wheat farm 283
Sewing wheat 254, 276
Suitable soils 47
Treatment for bunt 364
Varieties recommended ... ... 272
described ... 330
Whip-stick ... ... ... ... 744
White Top or Wallaby grasses 706
Winch Grubbers ... ... ... ... 140
Windmill grasses ... ... ... 709
Wood-ashes for Potash 102
Y
Yankee Grubbing ... ... ... 243
PAGE.
DAVIDSON, J. R.—
Malting Barley, Production of ... 416
DOUGLAS, W. B.—
Growing Tomatoes for the Sauce Trade 654
F
FROGGATT, W. W.—
Banded Pumpkin Beetle 672
Insect Pests of Lucerne 561
FROGGATT, W. W., and GURNEY,
W. B.—
Insect Pests of Beans and Peas ... 646
of Cabbage and Cauliflower ... 628
PULLER, A. F.—
Stacking ... ... ... ... 299
G
GENNYS, R. H.—
Conservation and Distribution of
Water ... 198
Parm Gate, A Cheap ... ... ... 185
Hints on Pencing for Settlers ... 179
GILDER, P. G.—
Book-keeping for Farmers 851
GOLLAN, A. A.—
Trees for Shade and Shelter ... ... 238
GURNEY, W. B.—
Insect Pests of Maize ... 458
of the Potato ... ... ... 494
of Wheat ... ... ... 384
GURNEY, W. B„ and PROGGATT.
W. W.—
Insect Pests of Beans and Peas ... 646
of Cabbage and Cauliflower ... 628
GUTHRIE, P. B.—
Chemistry of the Soil ... ... ... 61
Parm Lands of New South Wales ... 1
Feeding of Parm Stock ... ... 759
Formulae for Preparing Fertilisers ... 110
Harvesting Wheat for the Mill ... 316
Injurious Substances in the Soil ... 52
Manures and Manuring 80
Milling Values of Wheats ... ... 354
Soils of New South Wales, The ... 32.
AUTHOR INDEX.


PAGE.
K
KELLY, H. J.—
Cowpeas in the West ... ... ... 559
M
MAIDEN, J. H.—
Some Native Australian Fodder Plants 727
MARKS, G.—
Broom Millet ... ... ... ... 578
Bash-hay, Making of 711
Hydraulic Ram on the Farm ... 205
Indian Cane ... ... ... ... 607
McDonald, a. h. e.—
Blacksmithdng for Farmers 814
Control of Black Oats ... ... 267
Harness, Harness Fitting, and Re-
pairing 796
Harvesting Wheat for Hay and Chaff 323
Mangolds or Mangel Wurzels ... 518
Sorghum ... ... ... ... 460
MACKINNON, E„ and DARNELL-
SMITH, G. P.—
Fungus Diseases of Beans and Peas... 642
of Cabbage and Cauliflower ... 625
of Tomatoes ... 660
of Wheat ... ... ... 358
MUBSON, C. T.—
Seeds and Seed Testing for Farmers .. 773
P
PETRIE, R. M., and RAMSAY, A. A.
List of fertilisers in New South
Wales, 1918 129
FINN, A. J.—
Asparagus 675
Chou Moellier ... ... ... ... 602
Potato, The 477
Vegetable Crops ...616
PRIDHAM, j. t.—
Barley ... ... ... ... ... 406
Smut of Barley 424
PAGE,
R
RAMSAY, A. A.—
Analyses of Fodders 76T
RAMSAY, A. A., and PETRIE, R. M.—
List of Fertilisers in New South Wales,
1918 129
REYNOLDS, M. H.—
Eradication of Black Oats 271
ROGERS, H.—
Storage of Explosives on the Farm ... 152
ROSS, H.—
Sheep and Cattle Proof Fence ... 177
Soil Drainage ... 210'
Wheat Culture ... 241
S
SHAW. J. W.—
Feeding-off Growing Wheat 286
Harvesting with the Reaper-Thresher 314
Oats 391
STENING, H. C.—
Discing Stubble Land before Plough*
ing 25T
V
VALDER, G.—
Change of Seed ... 279 :
w
WEBB, W. H.—
Thousand-headed Kale ... ... 600
WENHOLZ, H.—
Maize 426
Sweet Corn ... ... ... ... 462
WOOLLETT, C. J.—
Practical use of Timbers ... ... 194
Ringbarking in the West ... ... 163
Tank-sinking in Western New South
Wales 202-
Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—l9lB.
t 17299—2 «
