

1 S
1 f
I THE DIGGINGS, THE BUSH, I
I AND MELBOURNE; |
II |
II | : 1
i ®
* REMINISCENCES OF THREE YEARS’ WANDERINGS ®
I IN VICTORIA. S
f 1
1 II
i i $ i|~
f ®
v : h ■ * 'V» Tv •*..«. w * ii.'
i ®
I i
i m
1 ii
i i
m GLASGOW < HU
W ■ HV
Q-. D. MAOKELLAR, 18 Street. ||
® PRICE NINEPENCE. ®
i 86 - ®




THE DIGGINGS, THE BUSH,
AND MELBOURNE;
REMINISCENCES OP THREE YEARS’ WANDERINGS
IN VICTORIA.
GLASGOW:
G-. 33. IVCAOKEXjILjAH, 18 E/enfield. Street.
PRICE NINEPENCE.
1864




PBEPAOE.
The following short narrative was written specially for a small circle of intimate
acquaintances, who varied the dulness of village life by meeting once a week to
read manuscript essays and selections from favourite authors. The time allowed
for reading being limited, and the audience being partly composed of young people,
I confined myself mainly to personal experience. As many of the company had
previously heard me relate in an off-hand way, the leading incidents, detection
would have been sure to follow any attempt at spicing my story with fiction.
The incidents are selections merely from three years’ recollections of the Colony.
Some who have never been further from home than in their annual visit to a
watering place, have been pleased to call them adventures. The term may ap-
pear too strong to those who like the writer have reclined by a hush fire, listening
to the stories of old hands, but as there may be much serious living without
broken bones, I submit this brief history to those who think so.
|aims
Gateshead, April, 1864.




THREE YEARS IN VICTORIA.
Chapter I.
MARCH TO BENDIGO.
Early in the month of September, 1852, I landed at Cole’s Wharf in Mel-
bourne, one of four hundred passengers newly arrived from Liverpool by the
<£ Lady Head ” sailing ship. While yet at sea I had agreed to join a party
of young men who intended starting for the diggings without delay. We
found the lodging-houses overcrowded, with table-tops, chests, and chairs
in use for bedsteads, and we were made acquainted with a considerable por-
tion of the town before we found accommodation. Our capital being small
we grudged the price asked, hut were disposed to he thankful on witnessing
next morning the shifts that numbers of our shipmates had been put to in
getting shelter for the night. Some were lying among the barrels and hales
of goods that lay lumbering the wharf. Some two dozen had made free
with some piles of planks and built off-hand houses for themselves, hut the
night had been rainy, the roofs had leaked, and they looked anything but
refreshed. Among these latter I observed a mother with a family of young
children. A shawl hung across the opening that faced the road, but it was
too scanty to screen her as she sat with a looking-glass before her setting
her hair in order. The husband was absent, and the children sat with
comfortless wonder in their young eyes, gazing at the rude throng that was
beginning the bustle of the day.
I heard my name called, and turning to look, I recognised a late mess-
mate perched on the top of an old waggon-shaped boiler, that stood, as it
were, stabled, amidst the piles of wood. At first I thought he was but taking
a birds-eye view of the situation, until another well-known figure struggled
up from within, through the man-hole by his side, then a third, a fourth, a
fifth, a sixth, and a seventh, and all so brown with rust from the hair to the
boots that it was evident they were not far from where they had been sleep-
ing. Awakened by the rumbling din they make in clambering out, an eighth


figure is added to the group, but he comes from beneath, and is in a more
singular condition than the others, for the lowness of the fire arch not
allowing him to lie otherwise than on his back, his face has got sooted, and
the handkerchief with which he wipes it spreads the marks all over, in various
shades of black. They tried to console themselves with the thought that all
this was but right and proper training for the diggings, but he who had lain
in the chill fire-hole seemed to have some doubt upon the matter by the haste
he made to a hot-coffee-stand that stood close by. One who had lain within
proposed that they should further inure themselves to roughing it, by retain-
ing possession of the boiler for the few days they would be in town, but
the suggestion fell to the ground for want of support. The ground about
was littered with the wet chests and the softer baggage of the houseless, and
before we returned to town the first of the new day’s arrivals from the Bay,
by lighter and by steamer, had begun to add to the confusion and the mud,
to the evident distress of the wives and others who had been left in charge
meantime.
Our preparations for the road were soon made. Dressed in blouses blue and
red, with the creases of the shop folds bearing witness to the newness of our
purchase, and in bright new leather leggings, and each carrying a couple of
blankets and a change of clothes, with a quantity of bread and other neces-
saries in a pack slung across his shoulder, and each provided with a toma-
hawk stuck in his belt, and a tin pot, we joined company with a large party
about to start from Flag-Staff Hill in the afternoon, having been advised
to do so on account of the unsafeness of the roads. We were about forty in
number at starting, but the packs, or as we were taught to call them,
“ swags,” began to sit heavy on many of our unaccustomed shoulders,
obliging us to halt so often for re-adjustment, that I found myself at sun-
down one of six far in the rear.
On reaching Keilor plains, about ten miles from Melbourne, it began to
rain, and as it was now useless to think of overtaking the main party we
looked about for some place to camp in for the night. Much previous rain
had drenched the ground, but we found a spot, with a dwarfish tree stand-
ing in the middle, and with perhaps a little less water than elsewhere
standing about the grass roots. With difficulty we got a fire lit. We
took no thought of those who would be coming after us, but carried and
dragged from far and near the old mouldering wood that lay thinly scat-
tered in our neighbourhood, and piled log upon log, until we raised a blaze
that reddened the clouds overhead. We were drenched to tire skin, our
blankets were wet, and our bread and tea in a miserable condition. Fixing
our loaves on long forked sticks, we would have toasted them, but the rain
kept pouring down, and only made them softer, until the crust could be


distinguished only by its colour. The steam from our fire-heated clothes
enveloped us like smoke; we began to feel drowsy, and yet unwilling to
lie down, for where were we to lie? Onr feet had swollen in our rain-
soaked boots, but for fear we might not be able to get them on again if
taken off, the boots were allowed to go with us to bed. Breaking some
branches from the tree above us, we made a rain shed of them, and spread-
ing a few upon the floor, crept underneath the dripping bower, leaving one
on guard to see to the fire and our general security while we slumbered.
One of the company, when the fire had begun to throw out heat, had
called the situation “jolly,” and in the exuberance of his delight, had
commenced to sing,
“ In the days when we went gipsying,”
and sacrificing both poetry and music to his desire to bring the thing home
to our hearts, he improvised, and made the diggings and bags of gold the
burden of his lay ; but finding he was having the singing all to do him -
self, he soon gave over, and now here he was lying next to me, close
huddled up, and shivering I thought even worse than myself.
In the middle of the night, those lying down had almost succeeded in
falling asleep, when splashing footsteps were heard approaching. The
watch called out, and we scrambled to our feet, our wits all flying loose in
vain attempt to gather what the calling was about, or even where we
were ; and before we were thoroughly aware, a man with his face streaked
with blood, and his clothes muddy and torn, ran in amongst us. Grazing
on us for a moment, with eyes swollen and red, he inquired whereabouts
the nearest police station lay. Truly we were sorry we did not know, for
the question made us suddenly apprehensive that the knowledge might be
useful to ourselves before morning ; and not knowing but that this appa-
rent distress of his was merely a device to throw us off our guard, while he
spied our quality and means of defence, we felt glad when the owner of the
only gun in our possession came forward with it in his hand. Willing
however to propitiate the powers of evil, we spoke him softly, in our
ignorance of how many confederates he might have close by to come up at
his signal. Making known to him that we were strangers, he looked round
on us, and in a tone that was anything but complimentary, and that
sounded strangely from one seeking help, he answered. “ Ha, I might ha’
seen’t afore.—A lot o’ new chums, d ’em.” An awkward pause fol-
lowed, in which we were beginning to regard him with increased suspicion,
and to connect him with numberless shadows that we had not noticed till
now outlying in the gloom, and to which the unsteady flame of our fire
gave the appearance of motion. After sitting a few moments with his
head between his knees, he abruptly rose, and started off in the direction


of a light that appeared away on the border of the plain, and we saw him
no more, though we thought we did several times, which led us, when the
fire burnt low, to he content with a seat closer to it rather than venture
out for more fuel.
At daybreak we tried to dry our blankets and spare clothes, but growing
impatient to reach the bush, we rolled them up as they were, and started.
The sun rose, and by midday we were making good progress. Finding
the dray track wound much about, we decided upon guiding ourselves with
the aid of a pocket compass, and the occasional sights we got of Mount
Macedon, close by the foot of which the road to the Bendigo diggings lay,
and setting out, we made what we thought were short cuts through the
bush, but as we frequently lost ourselves, these were often the occasion of
warm discussion and a change of leaders. The creeks were swollen by
many days' rain, and we had several times to strip in fording them. The
scenery improved as we advanced. In the morning we might be crossing
lightly wooded ranges, and at midday winding our way through what
seemed ancient forest, in which at intervals stood groups of huge blackened
trunks, the relics of bush-fires long before the white man had appeared
upon the scene, the ground around being strewn with the old charred
limbs, half-buried by the mould of byegone vegetation, and the rank
luxuriance of the present. On the evening of the same day we have come
upon wide-spreading grazing ground, and at times on scenes where nature?
simple and unhelped, surpassed in beauty the finest parks we had ever seen
in the old country, the indented margin of the forest that surrounded them,
being as positively marked as if the hand of man had been there to clear
away, and strike the lines with fence and ditch; while fancifully shaped
clumps, with rich green underwood, relieved the lawn-like surface with so
much appearance of art and method in the general arrangement, that our
eyes have involuntarily looked about for signs of human habitation.
Again, our way lay sometimes alongside of what at this season of the year
were full watered creeks—great trees overshadowing the pools, and the
banks on either hand spreading away with easy undulation, and looking so
pleasant, with the sun shining on their soft carpeting of grass, waved gently
by a fresh-smelling summer breeze, as to beguile completely the weariness
of the way. One of our small company, becoming thoughtful as he looked
abroad one morning on such a scene, said that if he had not been going to
get gold he might have been tempted to remain and try what he could do
at kitchen gardening j but recollecting that we had seen neither man nor
habitation in the last twenty miles we had come, save one solitary shepherd,
and his small bark hut in the distance, our friend’s thoughtfulness took a
turn, and brought him the first to his feet to resume the march.


Towards sundown of the seventh day of our journey, wearied in feet and
shoulders, we found ourselves limping along in melancholy scattered train
the songs of the morning exchanged for sighs and useless, because unheard,
murmurings against the two stronger men of the party, who would keep
going on and on though passing places that seemed in every way suited to
our wants for the night. The wearied ones being the majority would have
halted and obliged the two to come back to seek them, but as darkness
might have prevented reunion in this way, and as the two were carrying
the beef can, there seemed no help for it but to continue following. At
last, when the head and tail of the company were about a mile apart, a halt
was made in front among some grey moss-grown rocks by the side of a
small running stream. Oh what relief to throw our swags off, and to bathe
our distressed feet in the cool clear water. Bendigo, where all the gold lay,
was distant now only some ten miles; we hoped to be there by midday on
the morrow. The stragglers as they came toiling in singly and in pairs
with sullen moodiness louring in their faces, were made quickly to forget they
had an explanation to demand, and soon all were merry as a wedding party,
s ome gathering fire logs, one out with the gun, and the others preparing
supper. One of the latter beckons from the water side that there is some-
thing to be seen there. We go to him, get down upon our knees, and
can hardly think it real, but the sandy bottom is glittering with small gold-
like atoms. We try to lift some with our fingers, but—it may be from our
clumsiness —we are unable to raise anything but pinches of pure sand.
We have learnt how the diggers wash their bottom stuff, and hurry up for
some of our tin dishes, and are busy with them, when the man with the
gun returns, and learning from us what we are hoping to be true, urges the
advisability of getting under cover with our operations, in case we may be
seen from the road by passing travellers, who might claim a share ; we see
the wisdom of the advice, scramble behind a bushy knoll, and speedily
forget everything but our new discovery. We wash and try again, but
we seem awkward hands at it, for we never can retain in the dishes any-
thing the least like metal. Darkness is fast coming on, and we begin to
fear we shall have to give over for the night, when a bigger bit than we have
yet noticed is seen in the failing light, faintly glistening in the bottom of
a shallow pool: three pair of legs on the instant wade in for it, and there
might be more, but a certain pearly lustre, too like the moon, for the first
time brings misgivings as to the nature of the chase. We have seen gold
grains exposed in shop windows in Melbourne, and are anxious to attribute
the difference in colour, as it now appears, to the presence of the water, but,
a finger and thumb bring the truth sadly to our notice—we have been
fishing powdered mica. We now find that we have been incredulous from


the first as to its being anything hut something of the mica kind, and the
man with the gun claims credit for having saved us from making fools of
ourselves openly, by getting us to go where we were not likely to be seen
before wisdom came. We had lost time by the occurrence, and had to do
without our usual brushwood shelter from the cold night wind ; but making
a large fire, we lay down to windward, with our feet to it, and slept soundly,
with our heads covered by the blankets. One however allowed, his crown
to escape from under its mantle : hoar-frost had whitened the ground like
snow, and had glued the blankets to his uncovered locks. We found him
first hard to waken, and then slow to rise, but beyond that he seemed but
little the worse.
We now kept upon the dray track; it was sadly cut up by the winter
traffic, and the numerous carcases of bullocks and of horses, that lay in some
places at short intervals where they had fallen in their yokes, told a tale of
road hardship and adventure, that made us better satisfied with our simpler
though toilsome mode of travelling. Half an hour before coming on the
diggings, we passed a bullock dray that had started from Melbourne, a
hundred miles distant, the day before we sailed from the Mersey. The men
looked sullen and toil-worn, and the cattle seemed scarce able to pull their
feet out of the mud in which they sank half way to the knees at every step.
We reached the diggings about an hour before sundown, and were rather
disconcerted at the appearance of a company of diggers, whom we met, and
who called out that there was “ still some left for us to getthey wore
wet to the knees, had evidently been sitting among water, and their
shoulders looked as though they had been dragged through a clay bed.
Our mica business had but little prepared us for this sort of work, and—
hum—a newly open clay field in wet weather, before the bricks have begun
to be made, is clean and comfortable walking compared to this that now
comes in view, as we near the creek that lies between us and the tents ;
and what water ! yea, what a place to look for gold in.
Not wishing to be out of the fashion in the mode of living as practised
by those who were now to be our neighbours, we without delay set about
making for ourselves a house, but where was the stuff to make it of ? One
said that he had “ some needles and three pirns o’ thread,” got for casualties
among the buttons; but that seemed small help until another who had brought
some fine bed linen with his blankets, pulled it from his swag, and remark-
ing that it would be “ nane the waur o’ the bleachin’,” offered it to make
the roof; a third gave a tartan plaid, and a fourth a blanket; a fifth, in
the enthusiasm of the moment, tore a striped shirt open, and throwing it
with two towels among the other offerings, said these would make a gable.
While some were fixing forked sticks in the ground to bear the ridge pole


and attending to the fire and supper, the rest were busy, without thimbles,
at the needlework. “Be it ever so humble, there’s no place like home.”
We were happy and contented, nay more, we were thankful when at last,
by the aid of firelight, we got all finished, the floor strewn thick with
rosin-smelling leaves, and our blankets disposed in order. Though not so
grand looking as many of the neighbouring edifices it was our own, and
the occupiers of those others might not be able to say more.
Chapter 11.
THE DIGGINGS.
In the morning, having provided ourselves with tools, we made a begin-
ning in a small gulley near our camping place. There did not seem to be
much business doing in it, but it was nice and dry and quiet, and we had
been informed that great bits were occasionally made in very unlikely
spots. We had agreed to work in pairs, my lot falling in company with a
decent man, a hand-loom weaver to trade, from the North of Scotland. We
took spell about at the digging, short spells being in favour, as my mate
argued that “ the chance o’ goold bein’ below, was’na like to be ony greater
for oor hurtin’ oorsels, ye ken.” We agreed very well, but a large stone
that we came on about four feet from the surface, sorely troubled us.
When sitting on the top looking ruefully down upon it, and inclined to
shift to some other place, a stranger with pick and shovel on his shoulder
came sauntering up, joined us in looking down, asked what we intended
doing, and remarked that we ought at least to see what was beneath, that
many a digger would give gold to have such a boulder in his ground, they
were found to have been such grand catchers of the nuggets when they
came “ scouring down in the flood.” As he seemed to have been longer
acquainted with the diggings than we, we thought it might be true what
he was saying, and that we might at least try till dinner time. The weaver
dropping down, commenced afresh to pick away the clay at one side, but
our friend said <£ No, the stone will drop on you if you go below it: you
must break it up, and bring it to the surface.” u Break it up, break it
up,” I heard him in the hole say, “ man ye’re shurely thinkin’ its a muckle
cheese ye’re speakin’ aboot,” on which the man left us to engineer as Aye
had a mind.
Evening came, but we had not made the progress we expected, for as
my esteemed mate said, “ the hannels o’ the picks were aye in our road,
there was sae little room to work in.” The holes were only about eight or
ten feet deep, bottoming on the usual pipe clay, imbedded in the surface of


which, and in the gravelly stuff immediately overlying it, the gold was
found. Sometimes it was got in gutter-like depressions, in which numerous
pockets occurred, full of grain gold and nuggets; sometimes it lay in
patches, and often lay like seed grain in a new-sown field. In the case of
gutters, only the holes that struck upon the line was generally so uncertain
and took such unexpected turns, that those who in the morning might
despond at being so far to a side, might in the evening he harassed with
fear of the encroachments of their neighbours.
The common crowd confined its operations to the ground already opened,
but kept itself ever ready for a rush to new discoveries. Numerous small
parties, possessed of more than average enterprise, were ever on the move
amongst the outlying ranges, sinking shafts on speculation. Did they light
on gold, they passed the word quietly to their friends to occupy the ground
immediately adjoining them, that the common harpies, who went spying
about, too indolent to seek for themselves, might be outsided. Not long
could the matter remain hidden; a rumour would get upon the wind, a few
would be seen to leave their old claims hastily, with their tools upon their
shoulders, and steal off through the scrub; friendly signals would be
passed about, men would be seen tumbling up out of their holes, and
and in little more time than it takes to tell it, the bulk of the multitude
were away upon the run to overtake those who were before, leaving the
place that before had swarmed with life, with only a mere gleaning,
which often seemed in doubt whither it was doing the best thing for itself
by remaining. In one such rush we joined, but arrived too late for anything
better than an uphill claim, which we bottomed at about one third of the
depth that gold might be expected at, A few yards below us, two men
had come up panting among the first of the runners, and on the instant
marked off twelve feet by twenty four for their united claim, but thinking
the ground too much on the slope, they shifted just twelve feet lower down.
Another party immediately took possession of the vacated ground, and
within four hours, the sinking being shallow, broke through into a bed of
nuggets, worth, as was afterwards affirmed, four thousand pounds. The
original claimants bottomed theirs on a few pennyweights only. There was
feverish excitement in all this, and the fortunate, when wise, kept their own
counsel, at least until their findings had been placed safe under the charge
of the Commissioner, for conveyance down to town.
With various small fortune, my mate and I continued our labours, with
bankruptcy at length ominously near. We tried surface washing, but got
only sore backs by it, and returned to the sinking, there patiently to await
the approaching crisis in our circumstances. One day, a little before sun-
down, we took our way homeward, rather downcast, and with some mis-


givings about supper. Happily our friends had been more fortunate than we,
and the sight of half a sheep hanging from the tent pole, and of a well-
known face bending over a frying pan, quickened our dull weary gait,
while my companion, evidently touched with thankfulness for the visible
mercies, said half to himself, “ I kent the puir ravens would be fed,” adding
for my encouragement, —“ We’re no jist at the wab en’ yet, my man.”
The night was cloudy and dark, but calm. We had drawn a large log
to the fire for want of chairs. Wo were in no lack of topics for conversation,
and there, spread out before us was a singular panorama of tents illuminated
from within, log fires among the trees in height and hollow, and
groups of big-bearded men, squatted around them. The Grovernment being
at that time weak for want of policemen, all went armed, and for the pro-
tection of the tents and what was in them during the absence of the owners,
dogs abounded. The firearms, partly with a view to intimidate the ill-
disposed, and partly because of damp, were fired off nightly, which occa-
sioned a protracted fusilade far and near before bed time, the dogs not being
idle the while, and the uproar being increased in interest, by the uncertainty
about the bullets. Putting fresh logs on the fire we go to bed, six of us
in a row, with no room to spare upon the floor when we are down. In
the middle of the night we are awakened by the rushing of the wind
among the trees, a few drops come pattering on the roof, and we feel
thankful it is cloth that covers us, but Ave soon hear a sound that is dif-
ferent from the noise of the wind as it SAvays the branches ; nearer and
louder it comes, and avc hold our breath in fear; our fire outside roars in
the blast, and the lighter brands are whirled down the slope. We see it
all, for there is no door to our dwelling. With a fury, the like of which we
never before knew, the storm breaks on us, in a moment all is confusion and
dismay, and an unbroken deluge of rain droAvns our voices by its drum-
ming on our roof, Avhich reels as if it Avould forsake us. The seAving gives
Avay, and the water comes spouting through the openings ; Ave try to stop
the leaks with our caps and stockings, but Ave only mate the breaches
bigger ; what matter this hoAvever, AAdien a torrent begins to dam up behind
our uphill Avail, xdtimately breaks through, and Avashes across the floor.
Helpless and beaten now, we gather our blankets hastily together, roll
them into balls, and sit on them. We have no help but to continue sitting
till daybreak, for our fire has been Avashed out, and cannot be renewed till
morning ; with its last simmering sob expires our hope of coffee or even a
light to our much desired pipes. The storm in its great violence soon
spent itself, but the morning shoAved a Avreck around of limbs of trees torn
from their living trunks, Avhile the face of the hill was furrowed deep Avith


torrent beds. A clump of bushes to windward had alone saved our habita-
tion from being blown away.
On reaching our hole early in the forenoon, we found it filled to the brim
with water. Some of our neighbours, in like predicament, had already
begun with pails to bale theirs out. Want of a pail, and the urgency of
our necessities, caused us to betake ourselves to some of the deserted work-
ings, in the hope of gleaning something there. The ground was shallow,
and so much honey-combed that our search was accompanied with some
little risk, when we had to use our picks upon the thin partitions. But
half a sheep among six men was not likely to last long, so, providing our-
selves with candles, we descended each into a separate hole, making this
agreement before disappearing from each other’s sight, that any change
made by either of us must be reported to the other in case of accident.
Late in the afternoon I heard my name called from above, and crawled to
the daylight at the bottom to answer and learn progress. In reply to his
inquiries about how I was, I cried up merrily, “ Pretty weel, I thank ye,
in ma health, but I hae got nae goold.” “Ah weel,” he says, “ never
mind that, my man, we’ll speak about goold the morn, come yer wa’s up
ti the* tap, and bring yer tools wi’ ye, there’s been awfu’ wark gan on here
I’m thinkin’.” A fight or something equally interesting immediately
occurred to my mind as the occasion of his seriousness, and I lost no time
in getting to the surface. I could see no crowd, and turned to him for
explanation. He had come upon some yellow specks in a corner of the roof
he was examining, and had used his pick in following up the clue : the
hollow sound made by his blows startled him a little, and he moderated his
first zeal. He began soon to be more and more sensibly aware of a smell
of a particularly disagreeable nature, and which increased so much as he
made the opening bigger that he was seized with nauseau, in which his
mind became troubled with strange apprehension unaccountable to him.
He could hear no sound but what he made himself, his tallow candle but
feebly lighted up the face of the wall before him, and left the pillared chamber
with its crumbling drifts behind in solemn darkness. Making an attempt
to shake off his depression of spirits, he made his pick fall vigorously into
the hollow he had already made, and wrenched away a clod that left a
cavity beyond. Seizing the candle, he held it to the breach, and to his
dismay, there lay “ glowerin’ oot at him, the wasted face o’ a deed man.”
We made known the circumstance to a party of men whom we met on
our way back to the tent; but they seemed not sufficiently interested to go
out of their way to see the place. We made it known to some of our neigh-
bours on the hill, and learnt that wood for coffins being scarce, and church-


yards scarcer, it had been found convenient in the earlier days of the
diggings simply to pass the bodies down a deserted hole, and fill it up with
top stuff.
About a week after, we found ourselves reduced to dependence on the
others of the company for the bread we ate; they were willing that it
should be so, while they continued able, but I prepared to go in search of
daily work, washed my spare shirt, baked a small loaf to take with me, and
bade them all good bye. My mate having some prospect of joining another
party, whose finances were in a better state than ours, remained in hope, but
accompanied me on my way for about a mile. Having no particular occupa-
tion in view, all roads were alike to me. At starting, however, we set our
faces in a direction somewhere between south and west, but when we stopped
to part, we discovered we had gradually turned, and were going somewhere
between north and east, judging by the sun. This specimen of our art in
bush travelling caused my friend evident concern about how I would get
on when left to myself, and he wished mo to return and make a new effort
to better our circumstances, but as my doing so would have prevented his
acceptance of the offer that had been made to him, I declined, but felt my
heart moved strangely when my hand loosened from his parting grasp.
All day I travelled, but towards evening, when looking out for water by
which to camp for the night, I came upon an old square hole, that seemed
familiar to me. My mind at first was inclined to disown acquaintance with
it, but the surrounding evidence was too strong, and I sat down for some
minutes, overpowered by thoughts on the circumstance. I must have
been travelling in a circle, for this hole lay scarce half a mile from the tent
I had left in the morning, in fact, now that my attention was awakened, I
could hear the barking of the dogs belonging to my late neighbours. Was
it providence that was thus overruling my movements ? I thought of
Whittington. Or was it merely a case of inattention to the course of the sun ?
My whole heart went in favour of the Whittington interpretation, but there
was one from whom I feared the remark, that “ A bad shilling was ill to
get quit of,” were I to appear among my late companions again ; so I rose
and walked about two miles further off, and camped in a bushy hollow. I
made my bed close in among the matted undergrowth of a clump of thick
growing bushes, but was awakened in the middle of the night by certain
rustlings underneath and round about me, that made me a wiser man before
daylight came. In all my subsequent wanderings I chose open level ground,
with a shelter of my own making. Distrust of the creeping things I had
heard, and thought I felt, caused me to sit up the last few hours of darkness,
but one end of a decayed log I sat on being near the fire, its tinder-like


substance became heated and began to smoulder. With my head resting on
my band, I was in a musing way watching the thin wreaths of smoke spue-
ing from the cracks, a few of which extended to near my seat, when I was
rather startled by the sight of a large beetle running wildly about among
the crevices, but I rose quickly to my feet when a centipede about as long
and as broad as my forefinger, came crawling from the under side within a
few inches of my hand. There seemed nothing left me now but to stand,
until it suddenly occurred to me that mistaking ray motionless legs for
stumps, the creatures might be crawling up for concealment under my loose
bark-like trousers, but I had not well begun to walk about to deprive them
of the chance, when a new fear took hold of me, that of possibly treading
on their tails. This was the first sincere misery I had met with in the
country • it was the first, but not the last by many of my lonely nights in
the bush. I had nmde an ill choice of my resting place, a small green spot
s uTOunded close at hand by piles of mouldering wood, in which small
animal life was swarming, and set astir by the heat of the huge fire I had
made before lying down. Next night I camped by the side of a small
marsh in an open forest scene, being very tired and retaining unimpaired
the serious impressions of last night’s lesson. I looked upon a certain
dampness of the ground as an assurance that I would not be similarly dis-
turbed, but in the morning as I sat at breakfast, from time to time taking
a perplexed look at my swollen hands, and passing them over my evidently
ill-ti cated face, I began to fear that I had no longer personal appearance to
rely upon in finding an employer. The musquitos had hived about me
from the going down of the sun till the chilly hour before daybreak : in vain
I had wrapped my head in a blanket, the knobs disfiguring my nose and
brow told that the pests had found their way to me. Wearied and gore with
the two day’s travelling, I had hoped to get a little sleep when I found their
numbers thinning as the morning advanced, but a damp white fog hung low
above the ground, and the cold from the wet turf beneath had reached
me through the few- twigs I had made my bed on. I became cramped in all
my limbs, and was glad to rise with the first flush of the rapid dawn.
Chapter 111.
BULLOCK CREEK
After walking about a mile, I came upon a sheep station at Bullock
creek, and got engaged to assist in sheep shearing. The station being only


about ten miles from Bendigo where I had been digging, it was plain I had
not come as the crow flies, nor by the beaten road. A portion of the
building was in use as a tavern called “ The Albert,” appropriately fronting
which, at a distance of two or three hundred yards, was a small police
station, where the few who would not suffer the many to get drunk quietly
were taken care of—a great convenience to the landlord. The few shearers
who had been collected meeting with old friends in one another, and in
certain of the general company, seemed fast making themselves eligible for
the lock-up, when I first made their acquaintance. Till they sobered, I
was employed in a generally useful way in the garden and the horse pad-
dock. The first of my service, however, was with a wheelbarrow, in the
removal of broken bottles from the open space in front of the tap room door,
thrown there by the frequenters of the place, in brick-bat practice at the
trees, the skill thus learnt to be exercised when occasion came upon the
constables. Before I left, a mounted trooper in attempting to lay hold of a
suspected horse-stealer, had his head cut open by a heavy champaign
bottle thrown by the thief, who was enabled thereby to remount the stolen
animal and get »away. The circumstance for a time put me off the notion
of becoming a policeman, having an impression, the result of certain small
casualties, that my skull Avas rather delicate, and hardly round enough for
maximum resistance to flying bodies.
The shearers being quartered in a hut by the side of the creek, about a
stone throw from the main buildings, I took up my abode there Avith them.
The hut Avas roomy ; the Avails Avere formed of hard-Avood slabs, split like
huge laths from logs, and having been framed together AAdien yet green,
they had shrunk so much that the hand might have been passed edge-
Avays betAveen any lavo of them. The roof Avas composed of great sheets
of bark, and happily Avas rain-proof; there Avas no need of a Avindow, and
no shutting of the door could keep the draught out. Along the Avails Avas
a sparred bench of rude construction, on which the first comers had made
their beds, the later arrivals having to be content Avith sheep skins on the
floor. The fire-place Avas big enough to accommodate a sitter on each side
within when the fire Avas low. There Avas a man to cook, and to attend to
the house wants of the company.
Being among strange people, whose manner of living I had yet to get
acquainted with, I sat up later than Avas agreeable to me waiting and
Avearying for my felloAV-lodgers to come home, that I might see lioav they
did about the sleeping. About midnight they came—a noisy multitude,
full of brandy and “ Old Tom.” Their coming freed me from a tedious
and apparently endless recital of rheumatic and other ailments, under which
13
THE HUT.


the old cook—toothless, and bald, and bowed, was suffering : the poor man’s
eyes water/ and dim with age, seemed to brighten at the sympathy that
notwithstanding a certain dulness in the subject, I could not help feeling
for him. He had no home, and had wandered here like a thing driven by
the wind, to die some day, and be reproached for the trouble he would give
to those in whose hands he left his wasted body. About an hour or so
after their arrival, the men prepared their beds, and I did mine on a hare
place near the door, but was kept long awake on account of a few who
restlessly kept staggering out and in, their heavy-booted limbs not
always careful about where my legs were. I Avas too tired hoAvever to keep
awake until the danger was quite past, and awakened in the morning with
a great beef bone lying across my neck, thrown there by him avlio had been
last gnawing it. These were the grosser inconveniences, there was another
that I did not quite understand at tire time I Avas first feeling it; hoAvever,
on spreading my blankets in the morning on the fence, I got to know the
secret—fleas. There Avas no use trying to catch them, even had I been
inclined, so I contented myself Avith quietly looking on as they scoured
away through the Avoolly fibres on being exposed to the light and the cool
air, and I wondered whether instinct Avould guide them hack to their kindred
inside among the sheepskins and the dust.
On the morning of the third day the sheep shearing commenced, and the
packing of the wool in bales became my Avork. The press consisted of a
large box set on end, and without either top or bottom; the sides Avere
detachable, and were merely clamped together when the pressing Avas being
done. A strong coarse canvas bag, exactly fitting the inside of the box,
was placed in it; the flaps that Avere to enclose the top end of the bale
were turned over the sides and secured there, so that the bottom barely
rested on the ground within. Throwing a few fleeces in and armed with a
spade, I kept stuffing the avool that lay along the sides down between the
bagging and the mass I stood on, until I made it somewhat solid, then more
fleeces, and more stuffing, till I reached the top, which, on the flaps being
seAvn together, Avas packed by means of a short staff. I did feel proud
when I managed to turn out a bale that had no soft spots in it, but my
specimens on this first day were few, the shearers were out of condition,
then: Avrists grew feeble, and their backs grew sore, and they adjourned to
the tap-room for “a stiffener,” and I saw them no more till late at night,
Avhen they came down in a body to the hut bringing disorder and two
strangers Avith them, also some liquor, which however, lasting hut a short
time, and their fierce humour inclining them to make “ a night of it,” a
select few were despatched to procure, if at all possible, no matter by what


means, a five gallon keg of rum, as they could no longer satisfy themselves
with drops in bottles; hut the proprietor having an eye to his flocks,
which before the public-house was started, had been his main stay, gave
them instead a certain warning of police proceedings were the shearing any
longer delayed on their account. Shearers were scarce, and consequently
were disposed to stand upon their dignity, hut these having been made
debtors for 11 slop” goods, and for liquor supplied to them at the rate of
twenty shillings a bottle, felt themselves on the wrong side of the law for
showing airs, having no money to pay off the score, besides present thirst
making them like very Esaus, they gladly for the sake of two bottles more
agreed to the terms he now imposed on them. These bottles were soon
drained dry as the others, on which the yet unsatisfied began to quarrel
among themselves. One sang while the dispute was going on, and
another, too drunk to stand, sat on the floor reciting doggrel verse, which
he appeared to make as he went on, every now and again stopping to say
that he was Fraser of Kilharchan, and that everybody knew him.
I sat for about an hour by the side of the singer, his hands clasping
mine, and his drunken breath blowing full in my face. I was delivered
from him ultimately by a commotion taking place in the far end of the hut.
During my distress, I had observed one of the shearers paying much atten-
tion to the elder of the two strangers, who were both becoming stupid with
the liquor that had been given them, and had noticed him lead the man
into a little place partitioned off from the main room, and containing bed
benches. In a few minutes the shearer came gliding out, and passed through
the open doorway into the outer darkness. The other followed with only
his shirt on, and loudly muttering to himself, but in a few minutes
returned, and, apparently more sober than before, commenced to gather
his boots and clothes together. While so engaged he said something that
appeared to touch the honour of the company, and raised a clamour of indig-
nation at himself, an Edinburgh man called Jack, being so much over-
come by it that he staggered out, and made his way to the police to
complain of unjust accusation. I had gone outside, and stood leaning
against the fence gratefully enjoying the cool night air, and the solemn
quiet of the forest scene, when I heard a rustling of feet among the dry
grass of the enclosure, and saw two figures stealthily approaching. I
moved away, they came on then at a run, and leaped the fence, and were
up with me before I reached the door—two constables. Shoving me roughly
to one side, they entered with pistols cocked and ready in their hands, and
asked for the man who had the complaint to make. The wrangling din
was on the instant hushed to a dead stillness ; the man was sitting by the


fire with his face hidden in his hands. Some one pointed to him on the
question being repeated, hut as all he could he got to say, was simply u ho
knew,” the constables angrily turned him out of doors and left us. I then
gathered from the hints that were dropped that his pocket had been picked
of £4O. The ill-looking rascal who had shown him so much attention,
and who went by the name of “ Brummie,” had returned during my ab-
sence at the fence, and was now standing with his back to the lire, but with
his outer blue shirt off, no doubt with a view to prevent his victim recog-
nising him. From the talk that followed I learnt that nearly all the com-
pany had been “ Government men,” as convicts style themselves, and that
the stranger in declining to inform the police of his loss, had but shown
himself to be a good man and true, according to the notions of trueness
held in common by his class—-to regard the police as the common enemy,
and to settle all private differences according to the unwritten law of the
fraternity. Jack was blamed for having brought the enemy upon them
but Brummie afforded him an opportunity of redeeming his character in
this respect some few weeks after, by eloping with £6 belonging to him.
He was very angry, called Brummie a mean sneak, declared he would never
speak to him again, and then let the matter rest. Jack being a fellow
countryman of mine, I made free to speak to him about what I had observed
of Brummie, but got for reply a discreet hint to see as little as I could of
what happened, and to keep my own counsel when I did see, as being a
“ square head,” that is one outside of their community, I would readily be
suspected were tales told out of school.
During one of their drinking days I had found one of them, a Yorkshire
man, asleep on the banks of the creek, close to the water’s edge, and had
gathered him up, and taken him home to bed, and in the act of doing so
I seemed to have roused him sufficiently to recognise me, and know what
I was doing with him. After that, to the end of my stay among them, he
never got warm with liquor but he retold the story to his mates, and hugged
me in his arms, with vows that he would make a man of me after shearing
was done, by taking me with him to the diggings ; but “ Philip drunk and
Philip sober” appearing each to forget what the other had been doing, I
formed my own plans for the future, and left him out. Philip drunk said
that his wife Nancy—an old “ government lady” I had every reason to
believe—would be as good as a mother to me. I felt quite safe in agreein g
to become her son, for I knew that Philip sober would put the matter right
for me again next morning.
When I had been about three weeks at the shed, the men learnt from
some passing travellers that shearers were in great demand at neighbouring


stations—stations that had no public house attached to them—and that the
rates of pay offered were far beyond what they were now receiving. Making
application and being refused a rise on present rates, they left off working
and adjourned to the tap-room, there to enjoy themselves and await the
consequences. They were paid at so much the hundred fleeces, whereas
my pay Avas fixed, thirty shillings a week with rations, much work or little.
I did not think myself directly interested in the strike till J ack on coming
doAvn in the eA r ening to the hut, rather unsteady on his legs, began to
question me about what I meant to do. Recollecting I was a square head,
I replied “ Nothing.” He rose, called me a cur and nob, and said
it was me and the like of me Avho Avere ruining the country, by playing into
the hands of the masters; then seizing an empty bottle by the neck, ho
raised it and advanced a step to strike. A pang of fear shot through me,
my heart beat quick, for I had seen the effects of a bloiv made with such
a Aveapon, and I had just nerve enough and no more to retain my hands
behind me, my back being to the fire, and fix my eye steadily on his. For
a few moments Ave stood thus balanced. I could not have borne the sus-
pense long, but held to it when I observed his arm relax a little. He could
not hit me thus, the arm dropped by his side, and throwing the bottle from
him with a muttered curse he staggered out of doors, and I heard no more
of it. It AA r as the only instance of personal violence offered to me, during
the whole of my mixed wanderings in the colony, and the sorry impressions
left upon my mind, became lost in gratitude some feAV months later, Avhen
seeking shelter from a storm, at an out station Avhere the same man
happened to be cook and hut keeper.
Changes Avere frequently occurring in the working party. The high
Wages earned by the better classes induced many who had never shorn a
sheep to offer their services, hoping that their unskilfulness would be Avinked
at in the dearth of high-class hands. A hundred and tAVenty fleeces a day
Was reckoned good work for one pair of shears. We had several Avho shore
sixty, a feAV eighty, and one or two a hundred, but the latter Avere often
brought to task for “ tomahaAvking,” or leaving ridge-and-furroAV shear-
marks. The learners—old government men like the others—seldom reached
higher in the count than from fifteen to tAVenty, and let the poor animals
go spotted sometimes from neck to tail with shear wounds. The superin-
tendent Avas a humane man, but the flocks Avere sorely afflicted with the
scab, and humanity had to choose betAveen allowing the animals to linger
with disease, or letting them smart for a short time Avith tarred holes in
their pelts. The accidents of unskilfulness were overlooked, but AAdien the
bad workers, vexed Avith their oavu unhandiness, and the jeers of their abler


comrades, began to let loose tlieir passion on the wretched, restless animals
by furtively digging the shear-points into their sides, and knocking their
horns loose, it was thought high time to part with them. Thus dismissed,
they might go no farther than the next station, get a little more practice
there, and perhaps have learnt sufficiently before the season ended to make
a fair start in the next. The talk in the shed and hut ran much in boasting
about what each had been able to do in shearing before the diggings put
their hands out of practice. It was good to see their pride honestly inte-
rested in this direction, but I fear there were many great lies told. After
the shearing had been fairly commenced, I was much attracted by the
appearance of two new-comers, who, during the rudely animated discussion
in the hut, sat quietly smoking their pipes, seldom joining in with more
than a chance comment, or a brief reply when asked to verify any assertion,
more than usually extraordinary. The undisguised and avowed rascality of
many of the others required but little study to understand, but those silent
ones —hard-featured, sullen, with eyes ever stealing searching glances at the
speakers —seemed undefinable. In the others, a kindly trait would now
and again flash out in their outspoken lawlessness, but in these there seemed
ever a dark spirit of evil brooding, all the more terrible because unknown.
Of the tales of old-hand doings that they told, I may briefly mention tw r o.
One was related as a piece of confidence from an absent comrade, the cir-
cumstance happening on “ the Sydney side.” He had been for a year
serving as shepherd at an out-station in the interior, and as such, was held
responsible for the full number of sheep committed to his care. When the
pay-day at the year’s end came, his employer deducted the value of two or
three sheep ho could give no account of except that they must have
been killed and eaten by wild dogs. Muttering vengeance, he took his
leave and stole by night to a fold in a distant station, where the
sheep were under treatment fox' catarrh, killed one, cut its head off
and, under cover of darkness, returned to his late master’s, and threw it
into the midst of the flock he had recently been tending. The sheep,
after their first alarm was over, gathered about it with down-stretched
necks to sniff and feel it with their noses. The disease was contagious,
and the savage design took full effect, but before the discovery was made,
the miscreant had taken himself out of reach. I could not detect any par-
ticular impression the stoxy made upon the hearers, except in the case of
one who appeared to have some old grudge festering in his heart, and who
jerked out that “ it would serve them bloody right if a lot more could have
sheep s heads thrown at them.” The other stoxy, however, was the occasion
of much laughter, being given by one of the actoi’s in it. He Avas travelling


with a comrade from Bendigo to Tarrangovver. They were beginning to be
foot-sore, when they overtook a “ new chum” with a cart laden with
stores for Bendigo. He had missed his way, and was going in the wrong
direction. O’Brien, for so the man who told the tale was named, see-
ing his advantage at once on the youth making inquiries about the road,
informed him that he also was bound for Bendigo, and would guide him
there to the very spot he wanted, if he would give himself and comrade a
lift for a few miles inside the cart. The offer was readily accepted. O’Brien
had a bottle of strong brandy with him, and the young man was plied with
it so well that when three hams that formed part of the lading were
pitched out one by one down a bushy bank he neither saw nor heard. The
two got out when about a mile from Tarrangower, pointed to some tents
at a distance as his destination, then struck off through the bush, and
towards dark, with the hams wrapped in the blankets at their backs, arrived
among their comrades at the other end of the diggings from that the cart
would reach. The story was well and circumstantially told. The youth’s
simplicity, and the art used in ensnaring his attention when the hams were
being thrown out, were declared by the company to be 11 as good as a play.”
The transaction was looked upon not as a robbery, but as a first-rate prac-
tical joke, marred only by the two jokers having to absent themselves from
the locality for a few weeks, on account of “ the noise ” the victim had
made about it to the police.
Chapter IY,
AVOCA.
Having earned a few pounds, I left Bullock creek, and returned to Ben-
digo, but found my old comrades gone. Meeting however with an
acquaintance whose mate was about to leave for town, we agreed to go
together, and hearing Tarrangower well spoken of, we proceeded thither.
We met with varying success, that barely covered our expenditure. My
companion became anxious, his wife, left behind in Melbourne, being in
great measure dependent on what he might send from time to time. One
day, in speaking grudgingly of the cost of a quarter of mutton, it suddenly
occurs to him that selling mutton is more profitable than buying it; he
puts it to me, and I cannot see but that he is right, and make no opposi-
tion to his proposal to try the selling business. The arrangements neces-
sary were of the simplest nature. We purchased a small frame tent, a dead
19
AVOCA


bargain, from a butcher leaving for other diggings. Being already furnished
with window hoard, table, block, and hooks, the place required only
a few yards of chintz to make it in our eyes quite a trap for customers. A
red and yellow pocket handkerchief nailed to the top of a light pole, would
enable folks to find their way to us. We purchase half-a-dozen sheep
from a passing dealer, and for want of another place pen them in a corner
of the shop, and nervously prepare for our first job with them. He does
the knife work while I hold the feet; but never having examined the neck
of a sheep unboiled, he misses his way, and only ultimately gets the vital
spark to take its leave. We hang the body to the branch of the tree, and he
proceeds to flay it, my attention being wholly taken up with the leakage of
the animal’s late dinner from its neck. Much water is needed, and when we
hang the carcase up inside, we confess it has rather a washed appearance,
and fear we may have the eating of it to do ourselves. We were busy
with the second when a digger on his way home drew near and stopped to
look. We thought we were doing rather better than last time ; not quite
so much water needed. Hopes of a customer made us wink at his presence
till he asked leave to try. The victim’s groans lay heavy on my con-
science, and I humbly hinted to my mate that there was murder enough
upon our hands for one day, we had better give him the doing of the third,
but for my answer I got a foot to hold straight out, and after the man’s
departure, his services having been civilly declined, I was brought to task
for compromising the business by my unbutcherlike compliance with his
offer, I was not sure but that my frequent application of the wet clout
was a confession of weakness to the stranger quite as much as my acknow-
ledged willingness to be instructed, but as logic failed somehow to acquit
me, I ceased to argue and hardened my heart for the third demonstration
of our doubted skill. Before we turned into bed, we had transacted busi-
ness to the extent of sixpence, for a paunch, which a lean dog that accom-
panied the purchaser by the eager interest he exhibited informed us was
for him.
Early rising profited us nothing. Dull sales all day begat in us a doubt
whether mutton was so much an article of food as formerly. To induce
trade we patronised a home-brewed beer business that was carried on close
by and got the woman to promise us her custom. My partner happened
to be absent on the first visit that she made. The legs and head and tail
of a sheep I knew, but whereabouts the piece she asked for lay I could not
think, but making an attempt at sharpening a knife, I smilingly asked
her to point out precisely where she would like the cuts made, and as this
shift to save myself had occurred like a new idea, I thought it well
20
BUTCHERING.


to acquaint my partner with it, that the one idea might serve us both.
Custom continuing shy, and fly blows appearing on the increase, we hold
much private consultation, and reflecting on the weary sameness of mutton,
roast and boiled, we resolve to try the effect of mincing it, and purchas-
ing mint and spices, set to work within the hour—for we find there is no
time to be lost. A new-killed sheep supplies us with skins, which we wash
and dress to the best of our ability, and with a tin bottle filler to assist us,
we have soon some ten or twelve yards of sausages, all nicely coiled in a
large tin dish that has recently been washing bottom stuff. Certain
inequalities in the filling detract from their appearance—corpulent bits,
and spindly bits, with occasionally a windy looking vacancy—but we think
the people will not be too fastidious about appearances, so far from town,
and as they seem slow to come to us, we think it well to go in search of
them, taking the sausages along with us, But here a difficulty arises, as
to which of us should undertake the mission. I talk him over, and prevail
on him to go, he being the elder, and the better able of the two to give an
account of himself if asked. In less than an hour he returns in great glee
with empty dish, having sold all the stock. Great hopes now arise;
mincing with the knife too sloav a process, and filling with the bottle
funnel sore upon the thumbs after the first few yards have been rammed.
Wish we had a machine. We sit up till far in the morning preparing a
supply for customers’ breakfast. Wonder if we could not add pies to our
stock in trade ; think they would sell well, with nice crimped edges, and
a paste button or something neatly clipped out of dough upon the top;
think people would not grudge sixpence for them. Put lots of seasoning
into the sausage meat, lest any change should happen to it while we slept.
In the morning, after an absence of less than an half an hour, he returned
perspiring and excited, without his cap, and with the dish full as when he left
with it. He never told the tale of what had happened to him, but having
heard a great clamour among the dogs in the direction he had come from,
and seeing him put his nose to the dish as if in the act of smelling, I for
the present forbore to question him, and made haste to cook a supply for
our own use before it would be too late. We gave up business and separated
after disposing of our effects for a mere trifle. He returned to Melbourne,
and I, lonely and with only a shilling in my pocket, set out again in search
of work upon some sheep station. Late in the afternoon of the third day
I got from a drayman the direction to a station, known as M‘Gregor’s.
Feeling far from well, and looking forward rather anxiously to the expected
shelter, I reached the neighbourhood just as the sun was setting. The
buildings were in sight for some time before I reached them, and I won-


dcred at the broken condition of the fences, and the silence: not a living
thing was to be seen. Twilight was deeping into darkness in the surround-
ing wood when I drew near, and found the place deserted and in ruins,
the doors and windows hanging loose, and rank weeds in masses overgrow-
ing what had been the public yard. My heart sank at the sight, I shivered
as if struck with sudden chill, and felt for the moment as if the blankets
across my shoulders were bearing me to the ground. Sitting down on a
heap of moss-grown stones, I tried to think, but there came to me only
thoughts of home, of changes there, of deaths, of the young ones whom I
had left crying on the door steps when I came away, and of all the expres-
sions of affection that had been sent after me in the few letters that had
reached my hand. For the first time for many a day I found myself
dying, for it seemed as if I had been sent here to die, and that no word
would ever reach home of the when and where. A white mist began to
gather along the marshy hat, making me very cold, yet my head was burn-
ing hot. I rose and with weary effort, regained the road near where some
grass grown water troughs were, and, seeing some draymen encamped,
went forward and asked leave to sit down by them. Their tea billy was
simmering by the fire, and they were busy kneading damper for their
supper. I felt like one drunk and may have so appeared to them for they
answered me that there was room enough in the bush for those who wished,
I was not wanting in resignation, and moved away a few hundred yards,
and managed to get a fire kindled, but had not strength to gather wood to
keep it burning. Drawing a few withered branches together to save me
from contact with the ground, I lay down upon them with my blankets.
The morning dawned, but I could not rise, and could hardly turn
my head to look at the draymen as they yoked and slowly drove away.
My lowly bed was at too great a distance from the road to be seen by
passers by. Twice I heard the jolt of passing carts, but the sounds fell on
a listless ear, for there was no hope of any one caring to be burdened with
a sick man. As the sun got higher hoAvever, I began to take better heart.
Having eaten but little since leaving Tarrangower, three days before, there
was therefore but little grossness for the fever to work on, and it was
sensibly abating. I rose to my feet, giddy and tottering, gathered my
things together anyhow they would come, and after walking doggedly for
a while broke out into a sweat, which made me feel quite clever on my legs
but more supple than strong. In about an hour I came upon a man reclin-
ing wearily on the limb of a fallen tree, weary looking and rather meditative.
Hailing me to come to him, he handed me a bottle of brandy from his
pocket, saying as his eye wandered over me “ have a glass old fellow, you


look as if you would be none flic worse of it.” Feeling rather in want of
a tonic, I was not slow in accepting, but gaped somewhat after the draught
like a fish brought to the air, and for a reason somewhat similar, want of
water, but recovered sufficiently bye and bye to recollect something about
half a loaf which ought by rights to be somewhere among my blankets—
my stomach had resumed its work again. My friend had that morning
left the “Barn Bank” public house, where in a week he had squan-
dered fifty pounds, his earnings for the previous six months at rail
splitting. The bottle that he carried had been presented to him by the
landlady on leaving, and was all that he had left to show for the money
which he had sacrificed to a thirst for popularity amongst the idlers about
the place, who on getting wind of him, had crowded to his levees, till on
his resources failing, he had unfortunately gone a borrowing among them.
Though I had inadvertently lain on the loaf all night, and it looked as if
something of the kind had happened, he gladly accepted half of it, and
went his way.
At sundown I camped about four miles from the Avoca diggings, and
in the morning entered on them With the intention of passing through for
the bush on the other side, should no friendly face meet me on the way.
I had barely reached the inner circle of tents, when I observed a little man
apparently eyeing me with rather more than ordinary interest. My break-
fast had been anything but stimulating, and my gait in consequence was
perhaps a little pensive, but I quickly mended that on drawing near him.
His face somehow did not invite me to seek close acquaintance with
him, yet I was glad when he asked if I wanted work, and soon
engaged myself to serve him with stones and mortar in the building of an
oven, for fourteen shillings a day and my rations. Taking me to his tent,
he introduced me to his wife and child. The place looked clean and
tidy, and wore an air of comfort I had long been a stranger to. My
employer told me his name was Watty Scott, and that I would find
him a good man and true if dealt fairly with. After much talk
about the perfidy of former mates, he said that on the completion of the
oven, he would take me for a partner and go digging ; that meantime he
thought he had read me sufficiently well to know me ; I might consider the
partnership already entered into, and might look upon all he possessed as
half my own, all except—here be drew his wife tenderly to his side, and
looked prayerfully in my face. I knew not what to say to this, and was
perplexed about what might be coming next, so rapidly had events
developed within two hours, but as he sat between me and the door I could
only ask how he could think it of me, and look reproaches at him.


Meanwhile the wife never spoke, but disengaging herself from him, went
outside. He laughed, and, laying his hand upon my shoulder, said, “ its
all right, Jamie” —he had already familiarised my name—“ l Avas only try-
ing you, come let’s take a walk.” He does not care about beginning Avork
that day, but next, meantime I can take a look about me.
Evening comes, and Watty is not sober. I try to guess his age, but
fail to satisfy myself; he has no Avhiskers, seems never to have needed
shaving, and has a crop of jet black curly hair. He seems to be between
thirty and forty-five. His wife seldom speaks, seldom looks at either of
us, and appears very sad. Watty regrets that I have no tent Avith me, but
thinks an arrangement can be made for my accommodation. The night
being too chilly and damp for camping outside under a bush cover, I Avas
only too glad at the offer of a strip of bark upon the floor of their tent to
make my bed on. The Avife made up a pilloAV for me, spread a spare
quilt upon the bare holloAV of the bark, and then my oavu blankets
over all, in so quiet and kindly a manner, that 1 felt moved with respect-
ful gratitude, while someAvhat ashamed of my intrusion on her privacy. On
making some remarks to that effect, Watty poohed and bade me never
mention it. I Avas to consider myself one of the family noAV. When bed
time came, he and I discreetly AVent outside to the fire. A drunk man’s
talk is none of the most edifying, and I had become weary of his during the
long evening, but had borne with it So patiently, and so followed up his
humours as at least to delay his very evident desire to quarrel Avith his
wife. To this fact lin part attributed her motherly interest in the comfort
of my bed. The little Avhile we remained outside, he talked more rationally,
but as the topic Avas mainly of the Aveather, with which the passions have
but small concern, little positive conclusion could be drawn from the cir-
cumstance regarding the man.
On re-entering, we found as we expected the wife and child in bed.
They lay upon a rude bench raised some eighteen inches from the ground,
and Avhich occupied at least one-half of the tent floor, which measured only
about ten feet by eight; a narroAV space of some tAvelve inches wide sepa-
rated my humbler couch from theirs. 1 could not get to sleep for Watty’s
talking to or rather at his Avife, who maintained a singular silence, save once
or tAvice Avhen she ventured on a brief meekly-spoken ans Aver; some-
hoAv this meekness did not suit him, but only excited him the more, until
about three o’clock in the morning, his delirious abuse became
outrageous. Sense and reason, judgment and humanity forsook him in the
paroxysm he had Avrought himself into, and I could only hear the ravings
of a madman. I tremble for the wife and child—hy the sounds he


seems to be gathering himself together, and while I am still holding my
breath in doubt about what he means to do, they are pushed bodily out of
bed and fall heavily on me. The case was beyond my help, so I lay still;
the cries of the child made it a hard task to do so. The madman’s delirium
seemed to calm considerably on getting the whole bed to himself, and it
might be towards four o’clock he muttered himself to sleep ; the wife then
taking courage rose from the floor, and ventured in again beside him. On
awaking at break of day, I found him up and dressed ; hearing me move
he bade me good morning more heartily than I could answer him just then.
A habit he had of raising his eyebrows, and which seemed to say “ look
within who may, there is nothing to conceal,” lent a certain air of candour
to his face, that at first shook my faith in what had passed being more than
a troubled dream. lie got the fire lit, and the kettle boiled, and addressed
his wife Eliza in accents so subdued, that I Avas almost inclined to doubt
the evidence against him.
We commenced the building of the oven. I was not a weak man, but
he proved so good a workman, that my back was never off the bend keep-
ing him supplied. In an hour or so however, greatly to my relief, he
became thirsty, crossed the road to a grog tent for a drink, and came back
no more till dinner time. After dinner he said that this being now a
broken day, he would wait till next day, and then begin work in earnest,
I fetched water and firewood from a distance for the wife and began to talk
with her, and keep the infant in amusement, and when Watty came home
in the evening, continued to keep him in at least peaceable humour. His
prodigious self-esteem made this comparatively easy so long as I continued
feeding it, but I found it at times disposed to froth up into arrogance, and,
at intervals, my ready consent to all he said and did, seemed likely to take
a wrong direction. Taking my hand in his, and falling away into a whin-
ing m >od, he said he had been an unfortunate and ill-used man all his days,
that he ought to have been, and would have been an independent gentleman
long before now, had be not been deceived, and robbed, and kept down
among the dust by—here his eye glanced over to his wife, as she bent her
head over some piece of sewing for the baby, and I felt uneasy at the glare
of malice that reddened in his face. At haphazard I broke in upon him
with as lively a sally as I could muster at the sudden call; for a moment
he hung in the balance, I prepared myself for some extremity, but happily
the fell grimness of his look relaxed, his overweening pride was recovering
its seat. I had touched him rightly, and to my intense relief he broke out
into a laugh, and for the present contented himself with merely blowing out
the candle she was working by. I felt it dreary work, but for the woman’s


sake I persevered, and so passed our second night together. I thought the
drink that he had taken would surely overpower him when he went to bed,
hut the warmth seemed only to make him worse, and the frightful words
that poured from him made it like a night in a cell of hell. He appeared
to have lost all recollection of my presence, so that what I suffered I feared
was hut a little of what the poor wife would call her daily life with him.
It had been taking place before I came to them ; it could not go on so for
ever, but the end I never knew.
The oven was not progressing, and on the fourth day I found him in the
company of two slouching fellows in a beer shop. He introduced me with
due form, for he liked to do things respectably, then taking me to one side,
begged the loan of half-a-crown, but I could only promise him the loan of
one when I received the wages due to me, and took the opportunity of
calling his attention to the condition of my boots, the soles of which had
quite loosened from the uppers, requiring some little management when
walking to keep my toes within. My appeal was ill-timed, and he seemed
for the moment ashamed of my dilapidated appearance, the eyes of his
friends being at the time directed towards us. Having respect for my feelings,
however, he said no more there, but led me out to the road, and reminded
me of our partnership agreement, and that talking about wages was as good
as mistrusting him. The oven he said would be soon finished, and then
boots and whatever else was needed I would receive to my heart's content.
Late in the afternoon I returned to the tent, and found the wife sitting
pale and trembling, her eyes fixed with evidently unobservant gaze, and
her lips twitching nervously apart. As I stood for a moment in the door-
way, looking in at her, there fled once and for ever from my mind all doubt
of the reality of broken hearts. For such distress I had no consolation
adequate, but mute though I was at first and disconcerted, it seemed as if
my coming had broken the rigour of her grief. I was sad with very pity
for her, and my manner may have revealed that much as I quietly seated
myself inside the door. I made an attempt to speak about something I
had seen on my way back, but was stopped short by an indescribable work-
ing of her features, and while I was yet looking—my half-told story fast
dropping out of mind—the tears started to her eyes, and for a few minutes
I heard nothing but sobs, the like of which I had never before known.
When her grief had somewhat spent itself, she told me I had better leave,
or I would be getting into trouble, as Watty was after no good with the
men I had seen him with, one of them she knew to be a common thief.
After a fresh outburst of crying over her poor infant, she told me further
with many an outbreak of shame and sorrow between, that he had brought


this man to the tent for her specially to entertain, and had menaced
her with his eye, because she would not, and that she looked for nothing
short of death on his return. Her arms encircled her young child, and her
eyes were at times bent sadly on its small upturned face as it lay innocently
asleep upon her breast.
The day was already near its close, there was barely time to seek out and
prepare some sleeping place in the bush, even did I start at once, and the
weather was too wintry for an unsheltered bed upon the ground. I had
not yet determined what to do, when there came to the door one of five
rough looking men who had erected a couple of blankets for a tent early in
the day a few hundred yards from Watty’s. Being acquaintances of
Watty’s this was a friendly visit. After a little talk, making known to
him my intention of leaving, he kindly invited me to pass the night with
him and his mate. I gladly accepted, and left with him shortly after. On
getting among my new acquantances, I found that one of them called Bill,
had only the day before returned, the victor in a prize fight at Tarrangower.
He was a short but strong and heavy-bodied man, with a dark stolid-
looking eye, and very deaf. He no sooner learnt that the little mason
was illusing his wife than he swore he would have her from him in tho
morning. He appeared to have no thought of her objecting to the change ;
his faith had very likely grown to this assurance by considerable practice
in similar disinterested knight-errantry among the distressed wives of
the society he moved in. By their conversation I learnt that they were
all old convicts, that Watty was one also, and that they were mostly natives
of the town of Paisley. One of them had only half served his sentence of
seven years in Van Diemen’s Land, and had stolen away in a passenger
ship bound for Melbourne. On this account he was living as quietly as
circumstances would permit. There seemed no lack of money, for liquor
was in plenty,’and they appeared fond of it. I was luckily in time to hear
how Bill had fought and won his battle, in which he had received but little
damage. His opponent, a “ new chum” fresh from England and conceited
with excess of science, had looked on him as an unlearned bumpkin upon
whom his subtleties of art would be almost wasted. In part this estimate
was right, Bill was brute enough not to see the beauty of the other’s fence
and being of the old barbaric school had at once rushed to blows and butt-
ocking; feints and manoeuvres he snuffed at, and going in straight ait his man
was ever quickly bringing him to grief. His knuckles were his pride, he
had before now driven nails up to the head in pine boards with them, and
cushioning one blow upon the new chum’s stomach quickly brought to light
what he had been eating last and all but broke his back, a feat that he glee-
fully styled “ doubling him up.”


It was my general habit to be civil and conciliatory in strange company
and I felt no inclination to be otherwise now—whichever way my “ fur’
was rubbed, I made that the right way, and so succeeded that when bed time
came there were two who claimed me to lie next them. Our sleeping place
was the floor on a litter of brushwood ; each rolled his blanket round about
him, but the space was so limited, that one had scarce room to turn with-
out jostling his neighbours. On the one hand I had to fend my face from
the long greasy uncombed hair of the Yandiemonian, and on the other from
the sour beery breath of Bill’s brother.
Breakfast was scarcely over, when Watty came tumbling in amongst us
with an air of muddled defiance, and yet with an evident desire to put him-
self on the best of terms with us. Slapping as many shoulders as he could
well get at, and one head of hair, by way of provoking the owner
to say something pleasant, and failing in his object, the situation was becom-
ing awkward for us all, when the dish of beef and bread from which we
had been eating caught his eye. With a “hie Joe reach that dish here,
the very thing I wanted,” he took it on his knee, and without uncovering
commenced with his knife upon the victuals. Regardless of the coolness
apparent in his hosts, he called on one of them for mustard, saying “ that
beef was nothing without a relish,” then nudged another with his elbow to
see if there was any tea left in the billy. Wiping his lips when he had at
length taken his fill—and that was not a little—he replenished his pipe
with borrowed tobacco, and set himself to talk. He had a perfect command
of words, and a pointed manner of expressing himself that readily attracted
attention in his more earnest moods, so that the discussion he now entered
on soon found interested listeners. He began by drawing a picture of their
defenceless condition were misfortune or sickness to come upon them.
Pointing to the disordered brushwood of the beds, and the damp dirty look-
ing piles of blankets huddled together at the far end, he painted them ly-
ing there through days and nights of sickness, dependent on chance friend-
ships for all those little attentions that a sick man needs, and when he had
apparently sobered them to think how it might be thus, he shifted ground,
and asked them to look at the men of Manchester and Liverpool, placed
in like circumstances with them, but banded together in a common cause
against bad times—relieving their needy, and from their mutual sympathy
and support, never knowing want, while they of Paisley went their ways
in solitary pairs or single tentfuls, stretching no helping hand to save a
brother in distress, but with close-fisted narrow meanness, with a single
eye to self, leaving fellow townsmen, old schoolmates even, to fight with
their troubles as they best could, and drift away on their necessities if they


could do no better. His heart, he said, was pained at the estrangements
and cold-shoulderings of those whom a long life of misfortune such as theirs
should rather have drawn together in the fellow-feeling of fellow-sufferers—
it led him at times, through very shame, to disown being a native of the
town that had raised men possessed of so little generosity. The times in
short Avere so grievously hard upon the working man, that with the counsel
of a friend he advised the establishing of a fund, from which relief might be
given as need required, and contributions from the more successful among the
brethren might for this purpose be deposited in the hands of some well known
party. As his subject greAV upon him, his manner became more earnest, till
at the close he bore the look of one ready to sacrifice himself to any extent
in the good enterprise; his pipe had gone out in his enthusiasm, his eyes
sought to gather the feeling of the company, but a more stolid lot of faces
I never before saw grouped together. Vexed by their apathetic treatment
of the scheme, he stretched out his hand to them saying “ Well xioav merq
how is it to be, for tbe honour of our town how is it to be,” on which the
Vandiemonian broke the spell by crying “ to blazes with the town, much
reason have we to mind its honour.” The others fell back in a roar of
laughter. Watty in a fury dashed his pipe into fragments in the beef dish,
and cursing their stupidity hurried from the tent in the direction of his
OAvn, the cries that shortly afterwards arose from which made known to us
that his gentle partner was expiating our indifference, on which Bill, recol-
lecting his voav of the previous night, to see to her relief, abruptly rote
and catching Watty as he Avas coming out of his oavh door with the air of
a conqueror, thrashed him well, but only Avith his open hand, for “ he never
made his hand a fist,” he said, “ but when he had to do Avith men.” The
Avife cried bitterly when she saAv it. It was not likely to help her any, and
I could not help thinking that the sight of his suffering under the chastise-
ment reanimated her old abused affection for him into throbs of tender but
timid compassion. The weather Avas stormy and wet, Avhich made me glad
to accept my friends’ hospitality for at least tAventy-four hours longer. I
repaid their kindness by becoming heAver of wood and drawer of water to
them.
ToAvards sundoAAm the Vandiemonian and another avlio was a barber to
trade quarrelled about some trifle. They were both the Avorse of liquor,
but the barber having apparently a little more mind than the other for the
liquor to work upon, Avas the more demonstrative of the tAvo. The others
soon interfered to see justice done, but so managed that the disputants saw
no other way to get their rights, than fighting for them. They set them-
selves and footed the ground unsteadily for awhile watching for Avhat was


called an opening, but the Vandiemonian being evidently deficient in
strategy, went straight to business at once, by lowering his head and
rushing with it full tilt upon the barber’s stomach, lifting him off
his feet, and, as it so happened, sending him sprawling with his back
across the great log fire that was blazing opposite the door. He was quickly
laid hold of and lifted off, loudly protesting against that manner of fighting,
hut one of his hands being apparently necessary now for the rubbing of his
back parts, he was content with argument for the rest of the battle, and
became quite companionable again, on the Vandiemonian informing him
that on account of a rupture he could fight no other way.
About two hours after sundown we were all inside, playing at cards by
the light of a slim candle, when Watty appeared at the door in company
with a tall, robust, rough-bearded and unwashed man, rather past the prime
of life, whom he introduced in rather a stiff manner as his friend “ Scottie
Stratton.” They seemed both the worse of liquor, but as regards that, the
others were fairly on equal terms with them. My impression was that the
mental habits of the company tended little to reflection, and that the things
of the passing moment were generally sufficient for their attention, but I
detected an air of wariness in Bill, attributing it to his small transac-
tion with Watty in the morning, and to his deafness, which called for the
more active use of his eyes. However that may be, room was made for the
now comers, and the cards were reshuffled that a new game might be begun
to include them. All went well enough for a while, and the bottle passed
freely from hand to hand, the absence of a glass obliging them to measure
their takings in their mouths. At length a hitch occurred, Watty declared
that Stratton was being imposed upon, on which Stratton knocked the
candle out, and in the darkness all struggled to their feet. I was farthest
from the door, and for a moment thought from the shaking of the tent pole
that a fight had commenced upon the spot, and was glad on hearing Bill in
the midst of the stumbling and confusion say with steady voice u O if
that’s your little game I’m ready for you, come, get outside.” A couple
of candles were got and lighted. The two men, Bill and Stratton stripped,
Bill shorter by a head than the other. The candles glared in the damp
breeze, as they were held high above the level of our eyes. The places were
taken, the word u all ready” was given, and I heard a rush and the dull
sound of blows upon a face, then a lumbering fall upon the ground. Again
and again was this repeated, till I began to wonder how much beating it
took to kill a man. Stratton’s height and length of arm were of no avail
against the determined energy of his opponent, I saw the bustling and the
rushing leaps ; I heard the deep muttered curses of the losing man, and the


shouts and imprecations of the others, and felt as if accessory to a mad revel
of damned spirits. Could I have got my blankets out unseen, the dark
bush that night would have been my bed. When becoming faint with
compassion for the man whose flesh was being so bruised, I heard another
fall, followed by a third, and an “ ugh” exclamation, that plainly told me
the uppermost man had fallen with his knees upon the body of the other,
but before I had time to think, there came a succession of mashing sounds
that needed no interpretation. Stratton was being beaten on the ground,
Bill’s blood was up, and had not his fellows rushed in and taken him off,
there would have been murder done. Bill was forced into the tent, Watty
with difficulty getting his man raised to his feet, staggered off with him,
and I saw him no more.
When, after a time, I ventured in among them, the bottle had resumed
its work. Bill was singing ballads, and the others were so elated with his
fighting merits, that daylight was close at hand before they went to bed—
possibly they would not have lain down at all had the liquor lasted. In
the morning, after breakfast, I bade them good-bye, and wandered forth,
not caring whither. I had now tasted of both frying-pan and fire, and felt
truly thankful on finding myself once more breathing the air of solitude
among the ranges. The low-toned sighing of the breeze among the branches
overhead had a peculiar tranquillizing effect upon my mind, and set me
adreaming of things old and new, of home and gold, of my ill-clad feet, and
the number of days I could do without food, in the event of falling in with
none. I was in the gold country, on the lower ranges of the Pyrenees,
from the heights of which it was thought by many the gold found on the
flats had been washed down. I had often heard the unlucky joke with one
another about the pots of precious stuff yet to be discovered up there on
the mountains, their jest savouring of just so much sincerity that I thought
want of means alone prevented them from venturing up to seek for those
real pots of the molten stuff, of which that found in the valleys was but
the boilings over, the mere tricklings from the lips. But what about the
quarrying of such blocks ? I had no tools ; and what about the carrying
when thus quarried ? While yet discussing these matters, I had almost
without knowing it begun the ascent. The extreme summits appeared so
near that I thought to reach them in time to return to the plain, if necessary,
before sundown. I was charmed with the scenery. The romantic glens
and shady recesses among wood and rock, with floor of bright green grass,
made me at times linger on the way with what would have been a feeling
of true enjoyment had I been less eager about what might be found further
on. Now and again I got sight of the plain spread out below, with tents


peeping l out among the trees in the neighbourhood of the diggings, and
with light blue smoke curling up in many places from fires that, judging
by the position of the sun, would soon be engaged with pots and frying pans
for dinner. My heart softened at the sight. I felt myself in for a little
hardship, but tightening my belt, I resumed my toil, and arguing with
as much philosophy as the circumstances allowed, saw no reason to suppose
that hunger was different on the hills from what it was on the flats. Up-
ward and onward I sped, not neglectful the while to eye the ground in
hopes of seeing something to my advantage. Much rain had fallen
previously, and the surface stones and broken quartz were clean and bright,
as would also be the case with the projecting knobs of the surface
nuggets when I came upon them. After some hours’ fatigue, the upper
summits appeared but little nearer than at first. I had still hope enough
and to spare, however, until brought to a pause on the spur of a high ridge
by finding myself separated from them by a deep valley about a mile in
width ; and I abandoned the attempt on observing that between that valley
and the summits lay many another hollow, whose extent I could guess at only
from the hazy atmosphere that filled them. I felt as a very atom in the scene.
When the sun went down, I made a fire and prepared to pass the night,
impressed with a notion that it would be well for me to retrace my steps
at daybreak. When I rose with the first light of the dawn, I felt like
one who has been in a night-mare, and is unable at first to assure himself
it has been all a dream. Recollection coming, I got up and started to
regain the beaten road, and falling in with an “ old hand” also in search
of work, gladly put myself under his guidance, He appeared like one just
recovering from a fit of drunkenness, out of patience with himself and
everything else. He was very clean, however, and his chin looked as if
newly shaved with a dull razor, his nose as if he had been blowing it
overmuch, though I could see no handkerchief that he used and his eyes
as if he had been recklessly smoking a pipe too short to cany the smoke
clear of them. Hunger and fatigue were beginning to distress me, and I
felt quite of his humour to talk none but to make the best use of our legs
in the hope of reaching the next station before dark. I was the more
content to remain silent from observing the irritation the slightest hin-
drances raised in his mind, on which my air of composure had by no means
a soothing effect. I was glad when we reached “ The Amphitheatre”
sheep station, so called on account of its situation among surrounding
hills. A hut-keeper and cook being wanted for a new slaughter-yard at
the Avoca diggings, which lay about twelve miles off, I was engaged,
and, passing the night in the men’s hut, started in the morning to make
my appearance on old ground in a new character.


to tell how the thing had happened with me, and to promise better work
next time. A few of the older men grumbled a good deal, and asked what
I was good for to do no better’ than that, but Tom, the young man who
had first spoken, rubbed the edge off their comments, and going with me
to inspect the oven, found a small crack in the bottom had let the fat out.
But hardly had the discovery been made, when a faint crash was heard ;
the cutter of the loaf had sent his knee through its arched top in setting
it bottom up upon his lap. On clearing away the broken shell there
appeared a substance u that might be either cheese or grindstone,” the
man said, “ which ever you please, it’s heavy enough for the one, and
blue enough for the other.” Tom laughed as I never saw man laugh
before, and said I would be the death of him, if he looked much longer at
me. Though very grateful to him for standing between me and harm,
I could not see the occasion of his mirth, and for once felt it was not con-
tagious. There being nothing else to eat than the two things I have
named, the men did the best they could with them, but Tom, as he was
leaving to return to work, told me he was afraid after the “tuck
out” that I had given him he would hardly be ready for the next meal,
and asked if I had such a thing as a pill or two about me. Before
they came back at sundown, I had baked a large flat loaf about
the size of an arm-chair cushion, among the hot ashes of the large
wood fire—very eatable—but the dough having been rather soft when I
slid it from the sheet of bark that served for kneading-board, it had doubled
up in places, and had absorbed too many cinders in its bottom crust. I
had besides made ready a pile of pancakes, fried in fat, with which Tom
fell so much in love that I spared not the frying-pan in maintaining the
supply at all the three meals of the day. About the end of a week how-
ever, on perceiving he was not eating so freely of them as at first, and was
evidently transferring his affections to the loaf, and on finding that they
were not altogether agreeing with myself, I made no more.
When I had been about a fortnight thus engaged, the cartman left sud-
denly, and I was told that I would have to take his place for a day or so.
When the information was brought to me, I was busy making ready a
dinner that I assured myself would atone for all past deficiences. All my
ingenuity had been expended upon a potful of beef and mutton stew, which
was slowly simmering at the fire; the fluid portion had assumed the con-
sistency of jelly, and I flattered myself that great though the quantity
was, there would be but little of it left for supper. The cart was got
ready with a load for the diggings, and I was hailed to come and take
charge of it. A strong breeze was making free with the lighter ashes of
PANCAKES AND STEW.


CHAPTER V.
COOK AND HUTKEEPER.
I never had given much of my attention to the art of cooking, and was
rather alarmed on finding I would have some seven or eight experienced
hushmen to deal with. The first day’s bread we had brought with us in
the cart, the frying-pan and kettle were to do the rest. The men seemed
satisfied with plain things, and the superintendent appearing favourably
disposed towards me, I felt less anxious than I had expected on com-
mencing breadmaking on the second morning. I had never baked any-
thing bigger than a three or four pound loaf before, but the process being
all the same, I ventured on a stone of flour for this my first professional
attempt, and not seeing well how to lay so great a cake of dough in the
usual manner among the ashes, a happy idea came to me of cooking it in
a large circular camp oven. I got it in very nicely, set the vessel on
a bed of red-hot cinders, and heaped plenty of the same upon the lid. In
about half-an-hour, I looked within to see how the work was going on,
and was glad to see the top hoven up, and as brown as Avell-baked pie
crust, quite tempting to look at. I gave it a few minutes more, to make
sure that the heart was reached, and when all was done turned out upon
the grass as pretty a loaf as I had ever seen, with a top like a flat dome,
and sides as crisp-like as butter buscuit. Setting it upon a stump to cool,
I again placed the oven on the fire to bake a leg of mutton, being careful
to lay some small lumps of suet on the bottom to prevent burning. Burn
it did however; turning it appeared but to present a new face to be
charred. I put more suet in, and still no gravy. Dinner time drew near,
and I became excited at the thought of the seven hungry men. I sighed,
but got no relief thereby, in the certain prospect of being sent about my
business for incompetency. The dinner party stopped their work upon the
stock-yard fencing and approached. The wind was from me to them, and
I noticed one or two looking curiously forward directly after I had lifted
the oven lid to get the meat out, and feared the smell was telling tales on
me. My hope now rested solely on the loaf. With a subdued air, silent
and foreboding, I handed it to one to cut, Avhile I served the tea out. I
heard a sound as of some one at the dish that held the dry roast, and a
query put, 11 What’s this a piece of,” and then a great guffaw of a laugh
Avith “ Well done Scottie, will we have to skin you or it I Avonder.” I
turned my head to look and kneAV not lioav to shape my excuse, but
there was so little sign of anger in the speaker’s face that I was encouraged


the fire, and the pot had no lid. I was hurried, and a little anxious about
how a horse was managed, so that my mind was not altogether with my
work. The hail was repeated, this time by the superintendent; the frying
pan stood on end against a stump; seizing it I made a lid of it and ran.
Shortly after returning, I looked to see how my last production had been
relished. The pot stood away from the fire, full as when I left it, cold ;
and the meat hidden beneath a thick brittle layer of what unmistakeably
was mutton dripping. The phenomenon was unaccountable until, to my
confusion, I recollected the make-shift lid. I had been using it at break-
fast time, and in my haste had forgotten to clean it out. There was
very little said to me about it, but on the following morning, on returning
from a second journey to the diggings, I found an old man, a stranger,
had superseded me. I tried to think that the change from cook to
cartman was promotion; but for a time every fresh meal the old man set
before us, humbled me into sincere thankfulness for having been spared
from going on the tramp again.
A few days after the change took place, a drove of fat cattle, about
twenty in number, and the first of our killing stock, arrived under charge
of two horsemen from some distant station. Calved and reared at large
in the open bush, they were just wild enough to fly either from or at a
man on foot, but at the same time so innocently stupid, that a man on
horseback might ride in and out amongst them if he but kept quiet, their
distinction between friend and foe being apparently ruled by the number
of his legs. The animals were too tired to make the first yarding of them
difficult. On the following morning, however, when assisting to enclose
a few of them in the slaughtering pen, I was made to fear that here might
lie the end of my strange pilgrimage. The main yard was about thirty
yards square; the twenty bullocks gathered close together about the
centre, snorting and pawing the ground as we mounted the high rails and
dropped inside. Refreshed by their night’s rest, and nimble with hunger,
they rushed about seeking some way of escape, now and again crowding
into the railed passage leading to the slaughtering floor, which served as
an intermediate yard, with slip rails for barring it from the main enclosure,
when we had got the animals we wanted in. A rush was made to these
slip rails as often as this happened, but as often, for close upon two hours
were they hurled from our hands in the act of placing them. The courage
and temper of the superintendent were much tried; once I saw him fight
his way singly from behind through the angry herd, to help the men who
were trying, but again in vain, to close the passage. As the now infuriated
beasts ran at us with lowered heads, I was too busy making my own escape


to see liow liis was made, but I heard some cracks given on a dull sounding
body, and seeing him from my perch on the top rail a few minutes after
still on the ground, with a light stake in his hand, I felt encouraged next
time not to run so readily, and by a little careful observation was bye and
bye enabled to distinguish signs of mischief in the animals from those
merely ol alarm. By what rule I judged I could not say, but believe the
process was much the same as when interpreting the expression of a human-
face. Once, however, I presumed a little too much on my discernment,
and had only time to get upon the top rail with one leg over, when the
animal sprang up, and it and rail and I were thrown sprawling on the
ground outside. As it did not on the instant run away, I did, as well as
a stunned leg would let me.
The weight of the bodies when killed and dressed ranged from eight to
eleven hundred weight, and it fell to me as cartman to carry the quarters
as they were cut, from the sling bar to the cart, no light task to one who
had yet to learn the art of balancing a yielding mass upon my shoulders,
and who trusted only in the stiffness of his back. I only dropped one
quarter the whole time I was employed in carrying, about six months, but
that one was the first I attempted, and unfortunately it fell in the mud.
On the second morning after breakfast, the superintendent desired me to
make ready to ride the cattle out for a few hours’ feeding. It was not for
me to say No, but I told him I had not practised any other riding than
in a cart, and that I was doubtful he would lose his stock. He poohed at
my scruples, saddled a small brown horse that had a character for sobriety
and slowness, and mounting it himself, rode after the uncaged animals in
their first rush to the water. When they had quenched their thirst, he
headed them round to where I stood waiting under cover of a bush, but
before I could take his place, they had gone off at a run, and there was
nothing for it but to beat them in the race. Never, I thought, had horse
flown as mine now did, over holes and stumps with flying leaps, his head
erect, and his ears laid back, as if he knew his work, and expected I knew
mine. After galloping thus about a mile, we got in front, but could not
stop the herd ; half a mile more, but still they ran. I was beginning to be
alarmed, for they minded me no more than they would one of themselves.
At the end of the third mile, however, their pace began to slacken, and
shortly after, on reaching a fine grassy bottom, they commenced to feed.
It had taken us but a short time to come this distance, but I doubted the
like expedition in the return, and consequently got into the saddle again
shortly after mid-day to begin it. I had a stock whip with me, the lash
of which was about fifteen feet in length, attached to a handle shorter and


smaller than a policeman’s baton. I had felt quite unable to use it in
the morning’s run, but now made bold to try. Throwing the lash out from
me, and describing a large oval in the air with the handle end, finishing
with a jerk as I had seen the drovers do, I thought to make some of
the brown hides smart, but a swing of the tail round to the part touched,
was for a while the only answer the phlegmatic brutes would give me, and
having to stop the horse at every such attempt, thereby losing much
more than was gained, I broke a branch from a tree and rode at them with it
determined to bring the matter to an issue one way or another, but on
raising it to strike, the horse mistook my intention and shied, nearly throw-
ing me to the ground. I durst not repeat the experiment, but as some-
thing had to be done, resumed the whip, and now swinging it round my
head, produced after many trials a soft twiney crack, that made my heart
leap for very joy, seeing it made the creatures prick their ears, and snuff
the wind. The horse stood quiet while I practised, meekly winking his
eyes, and appearing to take no offence even when, as often happened, I got
the lash entangled about his legs. At last I made a crack that rang like a
gun-shot through the woods, and then another. The herd came walking
as to a centre ; I pricked the horse forward, shouted, and while they were
yet on the move, got them headed for home, and giving them no rest, we
reached a ridge about half a mile from the yard, with the sun yet a good
hour high. But here the superintendent met me mounted on a tall grey
horse without saddle. He was out in search of another of the horses that
had gone amissing. Seeing me so near home, and all going well, he set
me on the bare back of the old horse he had come on, and rode away upon
the other. My new seat had a projecting back bone running down the
middle, I made the best use I could of my knees to bear my weight, and
might thus have saved myself from damage, but just as the yard came into
view tAvo diggers on foot appeared. Foreboding mischief I shouted and
Avaved to them to keep away, but they did not understand or would not.
The herd caught sight of them, and ran off at a swinging trot across the
creek and away up into hilly ground. My knees could no longer support
my Aveight, which at every leap the horse took, came doAvn Avith cruel
effect upon the ridge board I sat astride of. The men jeered and laughed,
whistled, and called “ Joe, Joe,’ - after me until I Avas lost to hearing.
Darkness Avas fast approaching, and I Avas beginning to despair about my
work, Avhen the superintendent came riding up, and Avith a few cracks of
the whip, quickly made the animals close their ranks, the rearmost crowd-
ing to reach the front, and all at the top of their speed to get out of
reach of his anger. I had a tale to tell on reaching the hut, but did not


tell it, though Tom next day let me know in confidence that a plaister
of pipe clay was the finest substitute he knew for lost skin.
Next morning at daybreak I was sent with a saddle on my shoulders to
bring home the missing horse from the stock yard of an out station about
four miles higher up the creek, and in due time was mounted and making
my way slowly back along the road. Becoming a little more confident in
my seat when about half way home, I applied my single spur with the
lightest of touches, and received in return a whisk of the tail across my
back. The reply made me hold some little consultation with myself. The
animal had turned his head slightly round as if to see Avhat the matter was ;
his ears seemed fidgetty, and I wondered what that signified, but the pace
becoming slower and slower until it came to a dead stop, there was no alter-
native but to use my armed heel as before. The hinder parts rose on the
instant and I was nearly thrown. I was glad to make peace on any terms,
and u woed” him quiet. We could not remain standing still however;
I geehupped and chirked with my mouth in the style of my predecessor
the cartman, but all in vain, until by slapping him with the end of the
bridle on the neck, I got him urged forward to where a tree dropped its
branches within my reach. I was becoming angry, and might have to
ride him often yet before leaving the neighbourhood. Having heard it
said, that according as the will of the man or of the horse ruled at the first
acquaintance, so was it likely to be afterwards, a now-or-never impulse
overrode my fear, and armed me for the battle. He stood peaceably look-
ing back at me as I wrenched a branch off. Giving him one hearty whack
with it behind, he winced and shook my feet out of the stirrups, and went
off at a hard gallop which was never slackened till I drew him up at the hut
door. My face felt rather flushed, and the horse was blowing. The
superintendent came out and asked if I had not more sense than to ride a
grass-fed horse at that rate. Feeling that sense had very little to do with
the matter, I would have justified myself had not Tom at the moment
clapped me on the back, and said with a singular grin upon his honest
face that I had a very devil in me, if I but knew it. The character sug-
gested in the remark being likely to be more serviceable under exist-
ing circumstances than the other that would have been assumed in telling the
plain story, I held my peace, but shortly afterwards ascertained from Tom
that a horse that has been accustomed only to a riding switch, is apt to
misunderstand the meaning of a spur. The adventure seemed to have rid
me of my fear. Duty became a pleasure to me when I could perform it in
the saddle. The ranges were no longer hills of difficulty when other legs
than my own were bearing the fatigue. The risk of losing the direction


in which the hut lay ceased to he a matter of anxiety, when I had the un-
failing instinct of my dumb companion to rely on, though once that
instinct played me false, by bearing me to the home station at the Amphi-
theatre, when I meant returning to the slaughter-yard. Night came on
shortly after I had slacked the rein to him, and in the darkness I failed to
recognise the road that we had struck on until too late. Much hard work
previously at the slaughter-yard had, no doubt, much to do with this visit
on which he took me to the place where he had been foaled and reared.
Our old cook left, and in his room there came a young man newly
arrived from Scotland, whose Christian name was David. It took but
little time for us to discover in each other kindred sympathies and
habits. It was like finding a green place in the desert. Had we been
Frenchmen, we might have kissed, and sworn life-long brotherhood, but
being creatures of less impulse we merely u hung our harps upon the
willows” and mourned over departed joys, and the small prospect at pre-
sent of meeting new ones. He had been at college, with a view to becom-
ing a minister, but something which he could not well explain had
unsettled him, and sent him—here. He talked of books, and was yet so
full of the school, that he was often on the floor reciting passages from the
classic authors; Greek and Latin seemed to be the languages that best
suited him, when the pots and pans did not require his attention. Very
companionable, and with an expression of face, that looked somewhat like
a sly laugh taking a rest, he had unfortunately become possessed of the
idea, that there was no securing personal independence but by keeping
strict guard upon the personal dignities. He quickly made himself
acquainted with the duties proper of a cook and hut keeper, but beyond
these he would not go when the superintendent himself was not con-
cerned. This was soon made plain to his fellow-servants, who thereupon
took in hand to correct the evident errors of his education. David was in
their mouths at every turn of their leisure in and about the hut. Not a
draught of water or light to a pipe was wanted but he was called upon,
and as for face washing, there was more of it in a week now than I had
seen in a whole month before, for David was the water carrier, and they
could not think to see him idle. When there was a sheep to kill no hand
but mine interfered to help, for who but David had any business with it.
He at length lost heart; I tried to counsel him, but he could not bend, nor
could he leave, for he had engaged himself to serve twelvemonths upon the
station. The superintendent at last got him removed to a bush hut, to
cook and shift the hurdles for two shepherds. In this isolated and lonely
situation, without books, and with, in all likelihood, the rudest of society


in the men he shared the hut with, the yet fresh memories he had related
to me of his early homes and haunts and his hopeful studies, would begin
to burn within him, run in his dreams by night, and waste the vigour of
his mind in vain imaginations by day, until the dull routine of his duties
saddened him down to passive acquiescence. A few weeks after he left
us, I received intelligence from Melbourne that called for my presence
there, and never saw him again.
I had not heard from home for about twelve months, and it was by mere
chance that a note to me addressed “ Post Office, Avoca,” came to hand.
It spoke of letters and of the arrival of an old friend from Glasgow. I left
the slaughter yard on the second morning after receiving the information,
and, carrying only a pair of blankets, and a hook pot, with a little bread
and tea, started for Ballarat, there to take the coach for Geelong, thence to
Melbourne by the steamer, being much too impatient to think of waiting
all the way, though my pay of thirty shillings a week with rations, could
ill afford the expense. My mind running so much on home during my
journey down, I looked with somewhat modified impressions on the scenes
traversed ; they had no longer novelty to recommend them, and I found
myself contrasting them with those of the old country. I thought of the
old hawthorn hedges there, of the quiet little villages, where, to the passer
by, peace and contentment seemed to find a home, and where perhaps,
when the children were at school, few were to be seen—an ivy-covered
spire, rearing its modest head above the thatched roofs near, with a little
graveyard, hallowed to the villagers as the resting place of their dead
every nook and corner associated with some story of the past, almost every
house intimately connected with the memories of preceding generations
green lanes and shady walks, where the aged in their feeble rambles find
the young following in their early footprints with just such blushing tales
of confidence and love, and just such simple-hearted hopefulness, as they
can remember of themselves : whereas here, everything in which man has
a hand seems new, and hardly finished, the smell of paint and fresh split
timber predominant through all, with occasionally a scent upon the air of
green-wood fires. Little for the old world superstition yet to fix upon
outside of the mind ; the few hillocks that have begun to dot a corner of
the township must be multiplied—familiar voices must first be’missed, and
memory dwell upon the bygone years in which they were accustomed to
be heard—the living must feel themselves walking near the dead before
those old home impressions about things unseen, that make men grave and
uneasy, they know not exactly how, can renew their troubling influence in
dreams and times of loneliness. Without local tradition to establish mental


sympathy with the place, and with people of strange dialects and tongues
gathering around, the heart may miss much of its accustomed comfort, hut
there is work to he done, and good reward for it, and while that is being
realised, old habits modify, friendships and local interests arise, so that
gradually the place becomes to all intents a lasting home.
Chapter VI.
M ELBOURNE.
Melbourne consists of two portions, older and newer. The former, which
grew much slower than the latter, lies between two low, irregular, broad-
browed ridges. These are of no great length, and flatten out their south
ends on the Yarra-Yarra river which here flows westward in front of them.
Elizabeth Street, the main thoroughfare of Melbourne, runs along the
bottom of the valley between these ridges, and in line with it is now the
highway to the Diggings in the north. The streets, unlike those of
the cities in the hot countries of the East, are wide and straight,
and run at right angles. This, while affording scope for traffic, is attended
with a sacrifice of comfort, as the rays of the sun, reflected from the white
plastered walls, and smiting direct upon the surface of the roads, make the
feet sweat and burn, while eyes unused to it and perhaps fresh from the
green shade of the forest, are oppressed by the constant glare, and in vain
seek relief in umbrellas and broad-brimmed hats. The town lies two miles
from the shipping direct, or four by the river. The latter has its
source in a diminutive spring in the Snowy mountains, about a hundred
miles to the eastward of Melbourne. The banks are in general abrupt,
and in many places high, and well wooded, with here and there flats and
gentle slopes of limited extent occurring. The scenery is picturesque, the
foliage diversified. Every short distance presents new combinations of
beauty in tree-clad height and hollow, with birds of bright plumage, and
schools of chattering parrots on the wing. At Heidelberg, about seven
miles above Melbourne, and at intervals along the river side between,
small farmers, market-gardeners, and vine-growers have taken posses-
sion of the slopes and alluvial bottoms, and brought them under
cultivation. In times of drought, when hot winds and clouds of dust
come sweeping from the plains, these settlers may congratulate them-
selves on their situation. They are exposed, however, to danger of


another kind, for the river, slow of descent, winding much, and confined in
basin, occasionally fails to carry off the waters poured down during the
heavy rains. The bottom lands and lower slopes are then laid fathoms deep
under a turbid flood. On reaching Melbourne, an elbow in the course at
Richmond, and abrupt projecting banks, a little lower down, in the
neighbourhood of the Botanic Gardens on the one side, with trees ranked
close along the margin of the other, retard and heap back the waters upon
the lower portions of the townships of Richmond and Low Collingwood.
Should this occur by night, and the condition of the weather at the time
allow it to be heard, the rippling of the current against the angles of the
houses which stand nearest to the swelling tide-way, may give early warn-
ing to sleepers not too dull to unusual sound, but in places more remote
the water surrounds the habitations silently, progressing from fence to door
step, from doorstep to hearth, ami steals upward on the lighter furniture,
and at last with slow oscillating motion, floats it gently off the floor. Were
an ear awake to listen, it might now and again hear sounds like half-hushed
lisping whispers, when the surface of the deepening pool reaches the lips of
empty vessels, and begins to trickle into them ; but the slumbering sense
is inwardly engaged with the incoherent details of dreams, the filling is
accomplished, and the silence that lias scarce been broken is resumed.
Before the mattresses on which the sleeping inmates lie are reached, some
one, more sensitive to cold, or more lightly covered than the others may
aAvaken, and struck bjr the singular raw-smelling freshness of the confined
air, and the strange blackness where before lie has been accustomed to see
only the varying shadow of the floor, puts his foot or his hand out, in an
effort to get up to learn the reason, and so discovers it. Wading may still
save them ; there is little time for hesitation when life may depend on a
few inches more or less of depth on the uneven ground that has to be
crossed in the dark to a place of safety.
The flood is released only after passing under and around Prince’s Bridge,
abreast of Melbourne. It there finds room to spread, upon the wharves
and the streets adjoining, on the one hand, and the low- marshy ground
between Emerald Hill and the town on the other. River and roads, all
are alike swallowed up in the wide deluge. A few tree tops and roofs, a
frothy swirl above submerged clumps of scrub and tea-tree, with a drifting
wreck of wooden houses and furniture, proclaim the extent of the yet un-
completed disaster to the anxious, interested crowds on the heights around.
During the heavy rains, all unmacadamized or unpaved roads are reduced
to an almost impassable puddle. Elizabeth Street, from its low situation,
receives nearly the whole of the surface drainage of the valley slopes, and,


during rain-storms, becomes impassable on foot. One morning during a
flood of only ordinary magnitude, I found myself with many others at the
crossing of Great Collin Street, cut off from communication with the
opposite side, by a torrent that ran leg deep close in by the foot path,
while two men were ferrying people across in carts. I never till then
had known a man in danger of being swept away and drowned at his
very door. This was immediately after a rather heavy and protracted
fall of rain, but the capacious causewayed side-channels, and the
elevation of the footpath above the level of the road, showed that
emergencies of this kind were not unlooked for. It is good to turn from
these accidents of situation, to the contemplation of the climate, with its
generous salubrity, as exhibited in the fields and strips of garden ground.
Vines flourish, and when trained on rods round doors and windows, serve
at once for ornament and shelter from the sun.
The scarcity of houses that followed the sudden increase of the popula-
tion, led the Government to apportion a piece of Reserve ground, near the
south end of the bridge, whereon tents might he erected. At the time of
my arrival, about twenty families were so housed, some of them looking as
if they thought they had left home truly, and were in the wilderness.
Their firewood was scarce, and their hearth on the hill side, their
couch a brush bed on the ground, and the candle after nightfall revealing
unpleasantly their every movement by the shadows on the cloth Avails, In
the course of a Avalk through, I came upon a feAV loose branches, and a
blanket thrown over them as if to dry. I heard a mumbling of voices, but
was at a loss to knoAV from what quarter, till something round dimpled the
blanket from underneath. There was life there—l Avas looking on the roof
of a house. A laugh, and more dimpling as if by elboAvs and hands, then
a merry commotion, during Avhich the roof fell in, and disclosed the inmates
—tAVO beardless youths—reminded me as I walked away, while they Avere
disentangling themselves from the ruins, that happiness is not dependent on
outAvard circumstances, else these tAAX>, without a pillow or a dish, save one
ship hook-pot, and with the rain sapping its Avay under them down hill }
and gathering in the liolloavs of their knee-high ceiling, to bo dislodged by
an upAvard punch of tire hand Avhcn found to drip too fast, Avould have been
too serious for such exercise of limb, as revealed their state to me.
On the northern or Melbourne side of the river, a vacant piece of ground
fronting the end of Elizabeth Street, came somehoAV into use as a ready off-
hand market place, where the needy might dispose of their spare clothes,
and such things as guns and pistols, razors, watches, trinkets, books, chests,
&c. Symptoms of feeling and of sadness Avere observable now and then in


those who were thus engaged, but in no instance so very plainly as in that
of a man well up in years, decently but humbly dressed, who was offering
for sale a fishing-rod, a fiddle, and two walking sticks. When I approached
he was seated on the shafts of a loose cart; he had perhaps grown weary
waiting, and had taken the fiddle up, and was softly playing a sweet simple
air. His eyes were bent upon the ground, and his body drooped like one
whose thoughts were elsewhere than with the scene around him. A very
little girl, who had no doubt grown weary too, was standing by his knee,
just old enough to know, on being told, that the things were to be sold, if
any one would buy them, but too young to have any memories associated
with the instrument that was deepening the father’s melancholy reverie.
Eagerly she eyed those loitering past, in the hope of some one stopping to
look at the slender stock ; her young simple face expressive of wonder and
disappointment, and, I thought, of hungry wistfulness, as she saw her
father’s neighbours getting money and he none. I never think of him but
my heart reproaches me for leaving without speaking, but I was then too
poor to help him much, and more than likely the story of the past that
seemed revisiting his mind was incommunicable to a stranger, while such
words as he might have spoken, failing to embody the dejection visible,
might possibly have weakened the impressions already made by making his
case seem only common after all.
The market increased in importance. The articles at first had been
exposed on boxes and chest lids, and in umbrellas opened and inverted, or
on the ground, but as trade grew brisker, tables and light stalls were
brought by those who, on making a good beginning, had commenced to
buy the stocks of others, and adopt the business regularly. Jews were very
numerous in the town, their faces began to appear among the throng, the
trade was quite in their way of life, and they soon expanded it to such an
extent, that a removal to more roomy quarters became necessary. Two
unoccupied building-sites, one in Great Bourke Street, East, and the other
in Great Collin Street, West, received them. Open-fronted frame tents,
and light temporary wooden shops were raised, and the character of the
business so changed from its recent humble original, that a poor dealer
with a box, or a yard of bare ground only, for the exhibition of his
wares, must have felt like a vagrant on forbidden ground.
The community of tents at the bridge end, which latterly was known by
the name of Canvas Town, met eventually with a somewhat different fate.
In Melbourne, house rents were high, and the place being of easy access
from the town, many workmen were induced to make their homes there;
and, stretching calico on light spar frames, with a calico door framed on


hinges, a turf fireplace and chimney at the end, they were enabled to live
comfortably enough in mild weather. Men with small means—Guilders in
the first stage of development— erected such places, and let ’them by the
week. Small shops were opened; hand-printed cards, announcing that
tailoring or cobbling was done within, began to appear, pasted' to the sides
of doorways, with perhaps a pair of newly-mended boots, or a small sheet
of square cloth patterns. Before long, jobbing carpenters and coopers
found they need not cross the river, or go to the adjoining townships in
search of work, when the want of benches and stools and water-barrels
increased with the growing inclination of their neighbours to settle perma-
nently. Habitations that in the beginning of the week had stood alone,
would before the close have become hemmed in all round by a crowd of
new erections. The buzz of life grew louder, and the hillside began to be
trodden bare by the increasing multitude of feet. Tents where, on a
stall before the door, a modest trade in harmless effervescing drinks had
been established, began, as the neighbourhood became more populous, to
outgrow their early humility, and aspire to stronger liquor; the painted
sign-board was set up, the wings of the establishment spread out, and
nightly from underneath came sounds of clamour and reeling men, who,
jostling and rubbing their way home along the frail cotton walls, indenting
the thin fabrics with staggering thrusts of their numb elbows, made the
place no longer habitable for the timid or the weak. Lying beyond the
city limits, the police had hitherto left the inhabitants to their own care
and keeping. This suited well the tastes and habits of many about town,
who, for reasons understood by the police, but better known to themselves,
gladly took the opportunity to escape from observation, and came and
settled down on the hill-side amongst the unsuspecting tent-dwellers. Cries
of distress, however, began to he too common in the neighbourhood of the
bridge after dark, for this their retreat long to escape public notice. Every
morning came fresh reports of robberies and personal ill-usage, blows struck
from behind putting it past the power of the victims to say or know more
than that the thing was done. Policemen were set to patrol the district, but
they only shifted the crime from a centre to outlying roads and pathways.
The ground the tents stood on formed part of a Government Reserve. The
people had been allowed to settle on it only to meet a temporary want of
more regular accommodation, but, as they increased in number, the oppor-
tunity for trade had induced many from choice to set up business among
them in the hope of Government yielding to the claims of vested rights
and occupation, and allowing them to buy the ground for the permanent
formation of a township. It was agreed that were this done, substantial


buildings would quickly take the place of the existing motley and camp-
like assemblage of canvas coverings, but the authorities appeared to think
that lawlessness had struck too deep root to be so easily eradicated, and
shortly before my return to town, gave orders for the whole to be cleared
away. The Brighton road now sweeps over the silent site.
Chapter VII.
COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE.
I had not been long in town before I experienced the feverish discomfort
of a sand-storm, known by the familiar name of “ a brickli elder,” and
happily not more frequent than great storms in England. The weather had
been extremely hot for two or three days, with a thirsty breeze coming
from the parched plains of the interior, the sky became of a dirty light
drab colour, and the dust, heat-dried and light, began to be whirled about
in columns taller than the house tops. Woe to the wayfarer when the road
proves to narrow to admit of an escape. Let all who can, seek shelter, for
the columns begin to take the form of clouds; close doors and windows,
stuff chink and crevice, cover beef, bread, butter, everything that will not
bear the duster, for we begin to have it thick and fast. The air is darkened
by the multitude of atoms borne along in it, to a height above the steeple
tops. All traffic in the streets has ceased, no sound from without is
heard but the rushing wind and the hailing of the larger particles upon the
panes, while the liner grains come spueing through the seams like thin grey
smoke. From the highways on the windward side, dust, sand, and leaves,
drifting in thick volume come pouring like a torrent injupon the devoted city,
burying it in a cloud so dense that the thickest mid-day fog of England
does not produce a greater darkness within doors. The closed houses
become like heated ovens, the butter that has been covered up loses its
form and begins to spread itself along the bottom of the dish, the shirt that
in the morning was stiff with starch, now hangs wet and clinging to the
shoulders of its owner, while the head that has to wear a hat heavier than
the lightest straw, escapes delirium only by such perspiration as puts the
covering out of shape, and brings it slipping down about the brows. Those
unhappy ones whom necessity has compelled to be outside have their
sweated faces so begrimed, that -without the aid of the voice it were diffi-
cult to recognise them, eyes, nose, and mouth being caked with the grit, and


their clothes of one even dusty hue, with every lurk and fold laden so that
the cloth itself is hidden. In the streets not a stone or wall hut the dust
has gathered in wreaths round its leeward angles, ready for a new flight on
a change of wind. Before that could happen on the occasion that I speak
of, a copious shower of rain fell, and transformed it into mud. The gale as
usual, lasted only a few hours, and ceased shortly before sunset. Several
of my new acquaintances, about the time it reached its height, had crept
underneath the bedsteads, in the hope of the floor there being less heated
than that in the full light of the windows. This being their last resource,
and it failing them, they began to curse the country for being nothing
better than a dust-bin, and were answered by a holloAV groan from the
fire place, from a youth who, for coolness (which he was not finding) sat
in it with his head a full foot up the chimney. After sundown, however,
the fierceness of the heat abated, the rain clouds came, the dust was laid,
and the clear air made soft and pleasant, and, as we stood grouped under
the verandah a little before bed time, we were led to confess that either our
'N
senses were very grateful for relief, or there was something in an Australian
summer night that was peculiarly enjoyable now that the rain had gone and
a light wind was coming sighing from the forest, smelling fresh and sweet,
as if earth and leaf were yielding their fragrance to its healing breath.
The acquaintances I have mentioned had but newly arrived from Ballarat,
each with about fifteen hundred pounds’ worth of gold. Immediately
previous to bottoming their claim, their prospects had looked desperate.
They had spent their all in the sinking of the shaft, which was 150 feet
deep, and slabbed from the surface to the bottom. The gutter in which
the gold lay appeared, by the signs of business above ground along a wavy
line of claims, to be taking a course outside of theirs, but, on bottoming
within one or two feet of the given depth, they had driven downward on
the slope of the bottom bed, with anxious, hopeful haste, and found the
gutter had taken one of its uncertain turns and traversed one side of their
claim for a length of twenty feet. It was but little sleep they got until
they had all removed and washed, and safe in the hands of the commis-
sioner. They were all of them seamen, and all single men. Happening
to live under the same roof with them, it was occasionally my fortune to
hear them discuss their adventures of the past night, in places and with
people regarding whom Solomon has left us much solemn warning. After
a time, their pleasure palled on them, they wanted change, and went to Gee-
long, leaving the house quiet and orderly as it had been before. On the third
day, however, two of them returned for a further supply of money, and,
observing mysterious but evidently deeply conscious silence regarding their


intentions, quickly disappeared again. Four days later, on entering the
house in the early evening, I found these two sitting with two well-dressed
strangers in serious consultation with the landlady. The strangers were
their wives, for a double marriage had taking place during their brief
absence. The conversation was somehow far from brisk; the new husbands
were beginning to get sober and reflective, which they had never fairly
been since they struck the gold four weeks before. One of the wives I
would say was aged, but the other was very young, with a simple-hearted
cheerful look about her, that seemed likely to make her sailor husband
Peter, take kindly to the fireside when he got one for her to sit down by ;
but so busy had he been in getting married, the idea of a house being
needed to put her into had not until now come under his consideration. He
had never been very fastidious about a bed, or who shared the room with
him, if they kept quiet when he wanted sleep, and he seemed willing
to wink at trifles now, but the house being a bachelor’s home, he was over-
ruled, and was glad of my company in his search for other quarters down
about Low Collingwood. His comrade, whom he had led almost against his
will into this nice dilemma, appeared with mysterious suddenness to have
fallen into meek subjection to his late spinster’s wishes. He prepared to go
along with us, she did the same and at the first turning, making some
slight excuse about there being a double chance if we separated in the
search, she led him off, he looking much like one who has been asked to
accompany a policeman to the station, when he would rather not. Peter
was at a loss what to make of her proposal; he was hardly prepared to be
thus thrown upon his own resources in the new and untried life, and as she
nodded back to him across her shoulder as they walked away, he quietly
confessed himself “ done brown,” and scratching his head with an outwitted
air said “ he had never been left with so much slack in his hand before.”
We wandered up and down through many streets, finding plenty of lodgings
for single men, but none for wives. At last in one of a detached row of
newly erected wooden houses, we found a family who made no positive
objections. Tired with repeated failures, Peter thought to overrule any
little scruple they might have, by saying that the price was no object with
him, but this, together with the absence of anything very husband-like in
his air or manner, awakened suspicion that caused the young housewife to
send for her father to have some talk with us, but the addition of three
shillings to the twelve that had been at first named for the week removed
the difficulty. We were then asked to look at the accommodation. Peter
replied that it was no matter, he supposed it was all right, but followed me
as far as the room door, and turning his head right and left, said it would


do as well as the very best. For floor there was the bare earth, with a few
tufts of withered and foot-trodden grass, and with a plentiful sprinkling of
wood shavings, chips and sawdust, which of course would be broomed out
before Peter with his wife returned to take possession ; the bedstead was
made of wood with the bark still on it, if what was seen of the low post
feet told a true tale ; there was a small table made of an old chest lid, with
four slim new legs; a broken looking glass, one chair, a long stool, and
nothing more. The family seemed personally decent, and Peter’s money
would no doubt help them to complete their furnishing, but he remained
with them only a few days.
He had no notion of the use his money might be put to. He saw no
call for distressing himself with work when he had so much in the bank,
but to occupy some of the time that would otherwise have hung heavy on
his hand, he bought a horse and dray, always drawing upon his capital
when his earnings were deficient, until at last, but not till after I had left
the colony, his capital became so small that he banked it in his pocket
His married comrade not having been so left to his own guidance, is now
living in comparative independence, and having had to forsake the company
of his old associates, his manner towards them so betrayed obedience to a
resolution that was not his own, that out of consideration for him, they gave
over troubling him, but not before one of them was treated by the wife to
an unsolicited opinion of him and his confederates, too near the truth for
repetition to be desirable. Previous to the visit to Geelong, Peter and the
young woman whom he married were perfect strangers to each other, but
discovering they were from the same small town in the north-east of Scot-
land, they appeared to think it recommendation enough, and quickly came
to their agreement. The other two had been slightly acquainted years
before; a good idea of the value of money on the one side, and the excite-
ment of drink on the other, brought them to conclusions with Peter’s help,
Peter disliking to get married alone.
About the time of the marriages, another seaman, a fellow townsman of
the bridegroom’s, came to town for a few weeks to recruit from the fatigue
of twelve months' constant labour at the diggings. He told no one what
success he had met with, but from his manner on being questioned, it was
judged he had got enough to satisfy him for the present. He was known
by the name of “ Roddie. ” He was bald, but liked not to be told so, and
when his age was spoken of had ever the same answer, that he could lead
some of us young men a dance we durst not follow him in, he was not so old
but he could do that—in fact he was not old at all. The case of his friends
causing marriage to be talked of, we affected to think he would greatly


consult his own interest and comfort by marrying some one to take care of
him in his declining years, but, winking slyly, he said he knew a great
deal too much for that, he had not been born with a fool’s hood on his
head. It so happened however that a young woman in service in the
neighbourhood, came on a visit to the landlady, one evening when Roddie
was at home. She was about half his own age, stout, not very good-look-
ing, and rather grey in the skin, but with no airs about her, and, as far as
we could see, not likely to object to become “ Mrs Roddie.” We did our
best to raise a flame, but Roddie would not burn, though as he seemed not
to fret under our very plain attempts, we persevered from time to time,
but ever got the same sly wink and the remark that “ he knew too much
for that.” At length, however, the landlady, in confidence, showed us
some manuscript poetry, the production of her friend, whom she familiarly
called “ Peggy.” The rhyme was very middling, and not well measured;
the sentiment was of love, and was very serious and simple. In due time,
Roddie was given the luxury of a reading in our absence. On our return
we found him spelling his way through it for the third time. Our opinion
being asked, we proved more amiable critics than young poets generally
meet with, but w r cre careful not to say too much, and lest we might, we
shortly began to talk of something else. Before bed time the landlady
asked him for the paper, but he seemed reluctant. She begged it of him, and
put out her hand to take it, on which he put it in his pocket. She implored
him to return it to her, as she was afraid if Peggy knew she had been
showing it, she would never visit her house again, but Roddie was not to
be moved, and ended the matter for the present by telling her to let Peggy
know that he -wanted to get the verses off by heart. Our help was but
little needed after this, the poetry had done the business. He began to
visit her, and was every now and again bringing some new verses to delight
us with. Sitting down by another young man and me, his heart swelling
with feeling to big for him to hold it all, the act of letting loose the excess
threw him into raptures that were sometimes too plainly honest for amuse-
ment to be diawn from them. Not an expression of hers the least uncom-
mon, but was repeated to us, not a trait observable, but was made the
subject of a long warm discourse. Her life however being rather common-
place, there were visits made in which nothing really novel or out of the
ordinary course came to the surface, however much they helped to confirm
their growing sympathy. He maundered considerably after these seasons
of level happiness, and made us at times wish he had her and was done
with it, but, though inclined enough to talk, he had not quite yet reached
the marrying emotion. It took him some weeks to do that, and a lot of


new poetry descriptive of the married state had to be written before he did.
I happened to be at a distance when the wedding took place, so was not
there to see, but learnt that it had been a grand affair. Neither of them
having any friends, at whose house to celebrate the event, he hired a
tavern in Little Bourke Street, and kept open house to all comers. All
went well until near midnight, when the general public, who were being
treated so handsomely withal in the lower rooms, moved by a very natural
desire to see their benefactor, went in a crowd up stairs, and unceremoniously
ushering themselves in among the marriage guests, had all quickly in an
uproar. Roddie was not sure about this behaviour being quite proper, but
feeling powerless to command the storm, and much too happy at heart for
outside disturbance to disquiet him greatly, he calmed the commotion in
Peggy’s breast, by telling her the men meant no harm, it was just a way they
had, it would all come right enough. Distrusting them, however, he saw
reason to retire with Peggy shortly after the irruption, but being quickly
missed, and followed, their bedroom door was forced, and the old and
unseemly custom of “ bedding” was observed, with just such ruthless bar-
barity as might have been expected of drunken men. They thronged the
room—they crowded upon the bed. Roddie besought and prayed they
would “ give over,” but his bald head had no reverence in their eyes, and
got many a slap as he was told to hide it beneath the clothes, and not till
Peggy cried and wailed as if her heart would break, could the room be
cleared.
I heard of them afterwards living on the diggings, he so proud of her
that he had committed to her care the management of all his movements
and concerns, and was thriving none the worse for having done so. He had
before been only a single unit in the crowd, herding and shifting with it
undistinguished, but now he had got both name and habitation. Friends
came to visit him, and, under his hospitable roof, enjoyed cheerful home-
like hours, that my own experience taught me must have been precious to
humble unmated wanderers, laying on their minds impressions then little
heeded, but destined to exercise, it might be, unmeasured influence, when
time and circumstances, and the heart unsatisfied, would cause them to lean
their heads upon their hands, and run back among the memories and shift-
ing homeless scenes that seemed to be repeating themselves without end.
There were too many seeking clean-handed occupation for one to be
readily successful, and I was thankful at last on getting employment as
yard-hand in a small brewery, at two pounds a-week, out of which went
about sixteen shillings for provisions, which I had to buy and cook myself.
For the better protection of the property, I required to sleep upon the pre-


mises at one end of a low wooden shed, lumbered with bags of corks and bottle
racks. The situation, close to the depot for Government emigrants at the
west end of Little Collin Street, was lonely. The time was winter, so
that, as my work was limited to daylight, I had long nights of leisure;
and being very content with books for my companions, I read much, and I
look back upon the quiet enjoyment so derived under the peculiar circum-
stances with subdued but not sorroAving remembrance. The Avind whistled
and wailed about the frail erection, and Avhirled the rustling straw about
the yard, as I sat Avith my feet to a small pan of glowing wood—the feeble
rays of the small yellow candle barely lightening the box-like darkness
round about, and bringing a dreary feeling creeping over me, that occa-
sionally, before I had got quite accustomed to the singular distinctness of
sounds heard by night, caused me to see shapes in shadoAvs, and hear
fingers as it were feeling for the latch.
There were many places of amusement in toAvn at this time, though not
so many as now. The one that most attracted me was at the head of G-reat
Bourke Street, East, an old circus transformed into a promenade concert
room, Avhere, though the assembled company might not be strictly select,
the music was. My visits there, however, seemed but to make my loneli-
ness at home more dull. To save me from rats, and to serve in some Avay
for a companion, a dog was given me, a melancholy-looking animal, short-
haired, with brown spots on a white ground, and with a tail about the
length of my fore-finger. He cowered and trembled, and seemed ever so
ready to run out of the way into a corner, when I moved or rose from my
seat after a short stillness, that, apart from the effect of strangness in me
and in the place, I saw he had been unkindly treated in his youth. The
place SAvarmed Avith rats; they clambered up and doAvn the Avails, and,
gnawing their way into boxes, made sorry work with my provisions, and
when my blankets happened to hang down from the u stretcher” on Avhich
I slept, they over-ran myself as if not satisfied with the provisions only.
One night I Avas aAvakened by one Avith its fore-feet in my whiskers, and
its nose dotting cold points upon my cheek. The dog lay alongside Avithin
reach of my arm, sound asleep and snoring. I called him while the enemy
was yet audibly scampering under cover, but he did not understand, and
only licked my hand as if in humble appeal to me not to beat him, he had
not been guilty of anything he knew of. I felt angry, and, by a cuff, Avas
about to let him knoAV it, Avhen my uplifted hand Avas rendered powerless
by the recollection of something that happened on the previous day, in
which, had cuffs been a meet reward for neglect of duty, I Avould have had
one; the tongue gave another lick, and followed the retreating hand with


more. The poor animal whimpered and rose with his fore-feet on the bed,
and licking my face, as good as asked me what I wanted with him. I would
rather he had remained dull and stupid on the ground, for I was troubled
at the contrast between his conduct and my own, and lost some sleep by
thinking over it.
My wot k, consisting mainly of bottle and brew-cask washing, lay outside
in the cold wintry weather. There was too little bodily exercise in it to
keep one warm. Much rain fell, the unpaved yard was miry, my feet and legs
became wet and clogged with clay, and the loose bag on my shoulders failed
to keep my body dry. My thoughts began to turn upon the better life I
had forsaken in the old country —began, upon reflection, to fancy myself a
worse man than then, not so God-fearing, ruder in feeling, and unable to
see harm where before harm was plainly visible. Old attachments that I
thought forgotten began to win their way back to my heart. Recollections
of old office-mates, and of my race with them for preferment mingled with
the rest, and made me restless. After losing close upon three years, was it
possible to overtake them now ? I felt the spirit moving that would try,
but for some time hesitated at the thought that, once returned, I might
find my chances marred, without the easy alternative of such humble occu-
pation as this with the brewer. Balancing the arguments in my mind,
while picking my steps through the thinnest of the mud, I observed my
poor dog following me wistfully about, his tail down, his legs bent under
him, his body arched, and plainly shivering with cold. I stood and looked.
Drooping his head he crept closer to me, looked pitifully up, and, wiping
his nose with his ever-ready tongue, gave a low trembling whine that
seemed the nearest thing to a cry I had ever heard from a dog. He tried
to reach my hand, and, forgetting for the moment where he stood, dipped
his tail into the mud in an offer to sit for a more upright look at my sym-
pathizing face. I felt it was good for neither of us to be there. In his
unhappiness, I saw as it were my own reflected. He tipped the balance in
favour of old home, but, poor fellow, in doing so he lost a friend.


APPEITDIX
As some may be interested in a fuller account of gold-digging than the limited
scope of the presonal narrative allowed, the following particulars are added.
In the Bendigo district, the shafts are generally 10 to 15 feet deep, through loose
gravel, and ometimes through sandy earth that requires only the spade in digging.
For raising the stuff from the bottom, rudely constructed winches are employed in
the deeper holes, and, for the shallower, simple swing bars, which are merely one
stout pole balanced horizontally on the forked end of another set upright, a coun-
terbalance, rather in excess of the weight to be raised, making the operation of
lifting both quick and easy. At Tarrangower, the usual depth was much the same
as at Bendigo : there was, in the parts wrought when 1 was there, a thick crust of
hard pebbly concrete to go through, at which unskilled workmen hammered in
vain. At the neighbouring diggings of Maryborough, Burnt Creek, and Victoria
Hill, there was a stratum similar, hut mornjormidable, and bearing marks of fire and
partial fusion, so that even heavy hammer-picks made no impression on them.
Steel gads were, used, struck by heavj r malls, hut weeks of patient toil were required
to pierce a thickness of a few feet. Gunpowder was sometimes employed, hut it
shook the ground too much, and was generally condemned. At “ Hard Hill,” in
Burnt Creek, I was one afternoon crossing the line of holes, when a man as white
as any miller came out of one for a breath of fresh air. We spoke. He had been a
month already in sinking ten feet, three of which were crust, and he expected to he
another month in bottoming on the pipe clay. I looked down and could hardly dis-
tinguish the present bottom through the floating grit that hung smoke-like within.
The ground down in the flat, where the sinking was easier, was not yielding even bare
bread to the few still lingering about it, and discouraging reports—common on the
diggings even in the best of times —coming from Tarrangower and Maryborough at
the time, those thus labouring on the !> Hill” not knowing but that they might
remove only to fare worse, were for the time resting satisfied with their hard pick-
ings so long as they could live by them. In the first days of the diggings, men
would not work ground if the gold was not plentiful enough to be seen and picked
out with the fingers, hut latterly they became, and now are, very well pleased if they
can but keep themselves decently, the generally long-deferred hope of finding a
nugget, or a pocket of grains, making them hear with discomforts that would be
felt as more than irksome under ordinary wage service.
In Bendigo, at first only the pipe-clay surface, and a few inches of the earthy
gravel overlying it, were considered worthy of notice. After a long interval the
ground was re-opened, and a foot more of the earthy gravel removed and washed


and found to pay very well—as things thin went. Later on, as men’s views further
modified, it was considered that there was gold enough in the whole mass of earth
above the pipe clay to remunerate, if adequate means were employed to separate it.
Parties with small capital combined, made dams and water sluices, and washing
the earth wholesale, reaped a profit. Where the gold lay mixed with clay however,
a process termed “puddling” required to precede the sluicing and the cradle-wash-
ing. In the case of individual diggers with small means, the puddling is done with a
spade in an ordinary tub. under three feet in diameter, the stuff being swilled and
stirred until the clay is all dissolved and washed away, but when the quantities
are considerable, as in workings belonging to a company, the tub used might be
ten or twelve feet in diameter, and five or six feet deep, sunk in the ground, with
an upright shaft in the centre, fitted with projecting blades as in an ordinary pug
mill, and made to revolve by one or two horses yoked to arms projecting from the
top of the shaft. If the gold is very fine, it is necessary to renew the water fre-.
quently to allow of the fine grains settling to the bottom.
The cradle in ordinary use for washing is in shape much the same as the piece
of homely furniture it takes its name from. It is furnished with rockers, and when
at work has its head raised a few inches higher than the foot, for the due escape of
the water used. A quantity of stuff from the puddling tub is placed in a hopper
at the cradle head, and a stream of water turned to flow quietly and regularly upon
it, at the same time that the rocking is commenced, the smaller particles and
with them the gold, thus set in motion, are washed down between the bars, into
a compartment beneath, and from it into a second, and thence down to the dis-
charge opening along the bottom of the box, across which at short intervals are
check bars about an inch deep, which intercept the gold as it is rocked along close
on the bottom, but which allow the lighter sand and the water to flow over. A
careless or inexperienced hand, by pouring water in too freely, and neglecting to
keep up the rocking motion, would let the gold away with the gush.
The final process is performed in a shallow, circular tin dish, about four
inches deep, two feet diameter at top, and about eighteen inches at bottom.
Into it is put the mixture of sand and gold, removed at intervals from behind
the check bars in the cradles, then the washer balancing it in his hands by means
of ear handles under the rim outside, dips it in a pool and lifts in it as much
water as sets the stuff aswimming when swilled and shaken, then allows the gold
to sink through the sand to the bottom by reason of its greater weight. The surface
stuff is then laved out, and the process of swilling, shaking, and laving repeated
until only the gold remains.
For ease and convenience the drifts and chambers underground are made in the
pipe clay below the gold level, a thickness of an inch or less being left, coating the
gravel of the roof, in which when sufficient breadth has been bared, examination is
made with knife and candle for gold, which is found in greatest quantity on the
surface of and immediately above the clay.
I was once asked down into a hole belonging to an acquaintance to see what
was termed a “ middling rich patch,” just then uncovered. There was no need of
the near application of the candle to discover the richness, for the glittering specks
spangled the roof as thickly as stars in a clear moonless winter sky. It was the


first and only sight of the kind I ever saw, and for a while it infused great zeal
into me.
The sinking at Ballarat requires capital, the shafts being from 120 to 180 feet
deep. For the Quartz reefs, crushing mills with steam power are necessary. Many
of the workings are held by companies, who hire men at a daily wage to do the
labouring work. For an ordinary shaft aiming at the gutter, eight men form a
common complement. Of these, two may be occupied in cutting and preparing
slabs for the lining of the shaft, two below, two at the windlass, and the other two
pumping the water out, and acting as reliefs, but sometimes the eighth man is em-
ployed as cook and hutkeeper for the party. These numbers vary according to
the capacity of the men for work, and the greater or less hurry to get to the bottom,
or, when there, to get the gold they may have come upon cleared out.
The price of provisions in the older diggings, before the railway connecting them
with town was made, varied according to the weather and the state of the roads.
When we first arrived at Bendigo, flour was selling at £lOO per ton wholesale, and
what came nearer our mark, 1/3 per pound retail, equal to nearly £lBO per ton .
salt and sugar alike 2/ per pound ; tea 3/6 ; mutton 4/ and 5/ a quarter. In the
remote diggings at the present day, similar high prices rule the market in rainy
seasons, and will continue to do so, till either railways are made to them, or the
highways are macadamised.
ERR AT U M.
In a portion of the impression, page 8, line 4, read: —“ In the case of gutters
only the holes that struck upon the line were profitable, but the line was generally
so uncertain,” &c.
56


3 1508 9


