

SIR WALTER
RALEIGH
THE AUTHOR OF SHAKSPERE’S PLAYS
AND SONNETS ?
GE O . S. CALD WEL L.
MELBOURNE ;
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, 78 COLLINS STREET I|AST
1577- I
[All rights reserved.]
PRICE ONE SHILLING.




SIR WALTER
RALEIGH
THE AUTHOR OF SHAKSPERE’S PLAYS
AND SONNETS ?
GEO. S. CALDWELL.
MELBOURNE:
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, 78 COLLINS STREET EAST.
[All rights reserved .]


2


PREFACE.
The following pages are composed almost wholly of extracts
from Tytler, the latest biographer of Sir Walter Raleigh,
and from Knight, the biographer of William Shakspere.
It would have proved tiresome and inconvenient to the
reader if Tytler’s or Knight’s name had been inserted on
each occasion when their words were used. This only has
been done when it has been necessary to identify one or
the other with the fact or Opinion put forth.
The compiler of this pamphlet wishes to state that the
materials which he has collated, all tending to prove that
Sir Walter Raleigh wrote Shakspere’s Plays, would occupy
several volumes. He is, however, eager to attract attention
to the subject, without delay, and believes that the argu-
ments here put forward will induce further investigation
to be made, of the result of which he does not entertain
a doubt.
If doubts had not previously been thrown upon the
authorship of Shakspere’s Plays, it would have been a
first essential to make the endeavour to establish a negative
with regard to William Shakspere, before advancing a
positive proposition in favour of any other person. So
much has, however, already appeared in print bearing on
this subject, that it has not been considered necessary to
repeat in these pages the arguments that have been put
forward antagonistic to the view that W T m. Shakspere wrote
the works which appeared under his name.
The writer of this pamphlet believes that throughout the
world the conviction is gaining ground that the authorship
of Shakspere’s Plays is very far from being a settled
question.
3
S,
f




SIR WALTER RALEIGH
THE AUTHOR OF
SHAKSPERE’S PLAYS AND SONNETS.
Part I.
EXCERPTS OF THE LIFE OF SIR WALTER RALEIGH.
Few subjects of biography present greater attractions than the
life of Sir Walter Raleigh. As a statesman, a soldier, a navigator,
and a winter of original and varied genius, he is connected with
all that is interesting in perhaps the most interesting period of
English history, the reign of Elizabeth; and so much was he the
child of enterprize and the sport of vicissitude, that he who sits
down to write his life, finds himself, without departing from the
severe simplicity of truth, surrounded with lights almost as
glowing as romance. ( Tytler .)
Probably no man ever existed, who, possessing abilities above
the common, and the force of character necessary to bring those
abilities into play, did not exemplify in his career what history
teaches us, that remarkable features in any man’s character always
produce correspondingly remarkable events in his life.
Is it reasonable to suppose that the genius which produced
Shakspere’s plays permitted its possessor to pass through life
totally unrecognised for any qualities out of the common range of
humanity 1
Raleigh was born in 1552, at Hayes, near the sea coast in
Devonshire. When still very young he was sent to Oriel College,
Oxford, where his ready wit and precocity of genius were such,
that they have been deemed worthy of commemoration by bis
illustrious contemporary, Lord Bacon. ( Apothegm , No. 66.)
He early exhibited a restless ambition, which prompted him to
seek distinction rather in the stirring scenes of the world than
the cloistered solitude of a college, and this natural inclination to
adventure was fostered by the study of books relating to the
conquests of the Spaniards in the New World ; a species of reading
which was the delight of his early years, and undoubtedly gave a
colour to the whole tenor of his life. His stay at Oxford, there-
fore, was short. In 1569, at the age of 17 years, he seized the
opportunity afforded by the Civil Wars in France to visit that
''.ordom, and commence his military education.


The details of his life from 1570 to 1576 have not been pre-
served. He is supposed to have spent a considerable portion of
that time in France, also travelling on the Continent and occasionally
visiting England.
During 1576, or soon afterwards, he repaired to the Netherlands,
where he served as a volunteer under the Prince of Orange against
the Spaniards.
Two years afterwards Queen Elizabeth despatched a force to
assist the States of Holland, in which Raleigh enlisted as a
volunteer.
About 1579 he eagerly embraced an opportunity of embarking
with his step-brother, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, in an adventure
which had for its object the colonisation of parts of North
America. The squadron met with disaster, was dispersed and
disabled by a Spanish fleet; the ships that escaped returned to
England, and the project was abandoned. A new scene of activity
Avas now presented to his enterprising spirit by the rebellion in
Ireland, where his services led to his rapid promotion to positions
of trust and responsibility. The variety of his exploits, and
the apparently contradictory qualities which he exhibited, were
remarkable. He united the daring courage of the old knight of
chivalry Avith the calm judgment and the love of stratagem Avhich
distinguished a later or more refined age.
Upon the suppression of the rebellion, he returned to England.
His introduction to Elizabeth is ascribed to a circumstance
which is well known, viz., that Raleigh divested himself of a rich
mantle and cast it before the Queen’s feet, in order that she might
pass dry shod over some wet ground. From this time he made
gieat progress in the favour of the Queen. He was appointed
Captain of the Guard, and waited on his royal mistress during
those visits to the houses of her nobility, known by the name of
Progresses.
Sir Robt. Naunton, who had no predilection for Raleigh, de-
scribes him as possessing a mind of uncommon vigour, with a person
and manners A\ r liich attracted all who saw him. His countenance
Avas somewhat spoiled by the unusual height of his forehead, but
his expression was animated ; his conversation varied and brilliant,
and in speaking on matters of state he possessed a ready and
convincing eloquence. Naunton further says, “The Queen takes
Raleigh for a kind of oracle.”
Referring to Raleigh, Essex wrote, “ And then I did let her
(the Queen) see whether I had cause to disdain his competition of
love, or whether I could have comfort to give myself over to the
service of a mistress who was in aAve of such a man.”
In 1589 Raleigh, either from necessity or convenience, repaired
to Ireland. A contemporary letter affirms, “My Lord of Essex
had chased Raleigh from Court.”
Raleigh visited Spenser at Kilcolman, where the poet then
resided. Of this meeting, Spenser in his pastoral entitled “ Colin


Clout’s come home again,” has left an account, disguised indeed by
the colouring of a poetical imagination, but agreeing, he informs
us, “ with the truth in circumstance and manner.”
He represents himself as suddenly addressed by a stanger who
calls himself the “ Shepherd of the Ocean,” describing Raleigh
under this fanciful appellation.
One day (qnoth he) I sat, as was my trade,
Under the foot of Mole, that mountain hore,
Keeping my sheep amongst the cooly shade
Of the green alders, by the Mulla’s shore.
There, a strange shepherd chanced to find me out.
Whether allured with my pipe’s delight,
Whose pleasing sound yshrilled far about,
Or thither led by chance, I know not right;
Whom, when I asked from what place he came,
And how he bight ? himself he did ycleep,
The “ Shepherd of the Ocean ” by name,
And said he came far from the main sea deep.
He sitting me beside in that same shade,
Provoked me to play some pleasant fit,
And when he heard the music which I made,
He found himself full greatly pleased at it.
The stranger soon after borrows the pastoral reed of Colin
Clout, and in tuneful rivalry displays his cunning in the art.
Yet semuling my pipe, he took in bond
My pipe, before that asmuled of many,
And play’d thereon (for well that skill he conn’d),
Himself as skilful in that art as any.
He piped, I sung ; and when he sung, I piped ;
By change of turns, each making other merry,
Neither envying other nor envied,
So piped we until we both were weary.
Thestylis, one of the “ swains that did about him play,”
inquires what was the ditty sung, by Raleigh ; and Spenser’s
answer, making allowance for its poetical drapery, corroborates
the idea that Raleigh was suffering under the temporary dis-
pleasure of Elizabeth, whom he styles “ Cynthia, the Lady of the
Sea.”
That shall I eke (quoth he) to you declare.
His song was all a lamentable lay
Of great unkindness and of usage hard
Of Cynthia, the Lady of the Sea,
Which from her presence faultless him debarr’d
And ever and anon, with singulfs rife,
He cried out to make his undersong—
Ah, my love’s queen and goddess of my life,
Who shall me pity, when thou dost me wrong ?
With regard to the merits of Spenser’s poetry, Raleigh anti-
cipated the judgment of Milton and Dry den, and the sentence
pronounced by every succeeding age. Raleigh wrote—
Of me no lines are loved, nor letters are of price,
Of all that speak our English tongue, but those of thy device.


In a beautiful sonnet he assigns to Spenser a higher rank than
Petrarch’s, and asserts that even Homer would have cause for
jealousy, Methought I saw the grave where Laura lay,
Within that temple where the vestal flame
Was wont to burn ! and passing by that way,
To see that buried dust of living fame,
Whose tomb fair love and fairer virtue kept.
All suddenly I saw the Fairy Queen,
At whose approach the soul of Petrarch wept,
And from thenceforth those graces were not seen,
For they this Queen attended ! in whose stead
Oblivion laid him down on Laura’s hearse.
Hereat the hardest stones were seen to bleed,
And groans of buried ghosts the heavens did pierce,
Where Homer’s spright did tremble all for griefe,
And cursed th’ access of that celestial thiefe.
To Raleigh, on the other hand, Spenser addressed a sonnet, which
is prefixed to “ The Fairy Queen.”
To thee that art the summer’s nightingale,
Thy sovereign goddess’s most dear delight;
Why do I send this rustick madrigale,
That may thy tuneful ear unseason quite,
Thou only fit this argument to write ;
In whose high thoughts pleasure hath built her boure,
And dainty love learn’d sweetly to indite.
My rhimes I know unsav’ry are and soure
To taste the streames which like a golden shoure
Flow from the fruitful head of thy love’s praise,
Fitter perhaps to thunder martial stoure,
When so thee list thy lofty muse to raise.
Yet, till that thou thy poem wilt make knowne,
Let thy fair Cynthia’s praises be thus rudely showne.
In two stanzas of the introduction to the third book of “ Tho
Fairy Queen,” allusion is again made to the poem of Raleigh.
But if in living colours and right hue,
Thyself thou covet to see pictured,
Who can it do more lively or more true,
Than that sweet verse with nectar sprinkeled,
In which a gracious servant pictured
His Cynthia, his heaven’s fairest light ?
That with his melting sweetness ravished,
And with the wonder of her beames bright,
My senses lulled are in slumber of delight.
But let that same delicious poet lend
A little leave unto a rustick muse,
To sing his mistress’ praise, and let him mend
If aught amiss her liking may abuse.
Another allusion to Raleigh will be found in the fourth book of
“ The Fairy Queen,” canto 7, stanza 36.
The work thus highly praised by Spenser has perished, yet
enough of Raleigh’s poetry remains to justify the encomium of
Colin Clout. ( Tytler.)
The lines just quoted recall without an effort those in which
Spenser is believed to have apostrophised Shakspere.
“ But that same gentle spirit, from whose pen
Large streames of honey and sweet nectar flow.”


In 1592 Raleigh projected an expedition against Panama, com-
bined with a second scheme for intercepting the Plate fleet. After
his departure the Queen was made acquainted with his secret
marriage with one of her maids of honour, Elizabeth Throgmorton,
a lady of great beauty and accomplishments. The Queen was
highly incensed both at the frailty of her female attendant, and the
temerity of her favourite, Raleigh, in presuming to fall in love and
marry without her consent. The moment Sir Walter set his foot
on shore, he and his mistress were committed to the Tower.
Raleigh, however, knew the Queen’s weakness. He had always
addressed her not only as his sovereign, but as the mistress of his
heart, the beautiful arbitress of his affections. By the exercise of
a great deal of ingenuity, he contrived to impress her with the
belief that his sentiments of adoration towards her were still
unchanged. He also wrote an extraordinary letter to Cecil, which
was intended to be brought under the notice of the Queen.
This elegant but Quixotic piece of extravagance had the desired
effect. The cup of flattery was neither too full nor too luscious
for the palate of the Queen, and the impassioned grief of
Raleigh was rewarded by his enlargement.
Notwithstanding this partial eclipse to his fortunes, he was
returned to Parliament, and made himself conspicuous as a speaker
in the session which terminated in April 1593.
His partial restoration to the Royal favour is evident from his
obtaining at this time a grant of the Manor of Sherborne, in
Dorsetshire, which he embellished magnificently. The improve-
ments when still fresh were seen by Coker, author of the survey of
that county. The place was beautified he declares “ with orchards,
gardens, and groves of much variety and delight; so that whether
you consider the pleasantness of the seat, the goodness of the soil,
or the other delicacies belonging to it, Sherborne rests unparalleled
by any in these parts.” Sir Walter was a rural improver and
horticulturist, and a tradition is mentioned by Fuller that the first
orange trees that ever grew in England were planted by him.
Raleigh now projected the conquest of Guiana, and took the
command of a fleet which sailed from England in February 1595.
On his return he published a history of the voyage, entitled
“ The Discovery of Guiana.” During his absence his enemies had
influenced the Queen’s mind against him, and instead of being
welcomed as a discoverer, his descriptions were received with
coldness and suspicion.
In 1596 he embarked in an expedition having for its object the
burning of the Spanish fleet. In a naval engagement which took
place he was hurt in the leg by a splinter, and became lame for
the rest of his life. That previous to this he was slightly lame
seems certain from a remark made by the Governor of the Tower
in 1593, in a letter written with reference to Raleigh, “that all
lameness was forgotten.”


In 1597 Raleigh once more officiated as Captain of the Guard.
In the same year he sailed on what was called the Island Yoyage.
On his return he retired to his seat at Sherborne, where he
found many resources in the useful, learned, or elegant studies to
which he devoted these intervals of leisure. With ordinary minds,
universality of pursuit is generally the grave of excellence, but the
case was different with this remarkable man, whose genius was as
varied and discursive as it was powerful. He could turn himself
with surprising facility from mathematics to poetry; from cosmo-
graphical speculations or metaphysical disquisitions on the nature
of the soul to the lighter subjects of music, ornamental gardening,
or painting, to historical or antiquarian research ; and all the
while, instead of sinking as others similarly occupied would have
done into a dreaming philosopher, or a mere literary recluse, he
kept up his intercourse with the world, maintained his connexions
with the Court, had a vigilant eye upon the politics of England
and the Continent, and was ready to avail himself of any new
avenue which opened to his ambition or his love of glorv
{Tytler.) 8
Up to the time when Tytler showed that the facts which
occurred were capable of an entirely different construction, it was
a generally accepted theory that Raleigh conspired with Cecil not
only to ruin Essex in the estimation of the Queen, but also to
deprive him of life. This view, so far as Raleigh is concerned, has
now been entirely disproved.
During Essex’s confinement, Raleigh again retired for some
months to Sherborne. We may be assured that in thus secluding
himself from scenes in which he had up to this time found a fitting
and congenial sphere for the indulgence of his natural tastes, he
must have been influenced by powerful motives. The temper of
the Queen was exceedingly capricious, and she had lost a great
deal of that calm judgment by which she had previously been
distinguished. Considerations also in regard to Essex and Cecil
no doubt weighed with Raleigh in the course he adopted of retiring
from the Court for a time.
After the death of Esssx there was a dangerous opposition
between Raleigh and Cecil. Both were too powerful to continue
long together in the management of affairs; both too proud to
give way. (Tytler.)
The Queen died in March 1603, and in June of the same year
Raleigh, through the machinations of Cecil, was involved with
Lords Cobham and Grey in a charge of high treason, and confined
in the Tower. The term was held in November at Winchester, on
account of the plague raging in London.
At the trial, says Sir Dudley Carleton, Sir lYalter Raleigh
served for a whole Act, and played all the parts himself. Another
witness avers that never any man spoke so well in times past, nor
would in the world to come.


After his condemnation, Raleigh was kept nearly a month at
Winchester in the constant expectation of death • but the King,
who thought highly of his own acuteness, had privately resolved
on a scheme, by means of which he hoped to discover the more
minute details of the supposed conspiracy. The prisoners were
informed that their executions would take place on a fixed date,
but the King had secretly resolved to step in at the last moment
and save their lives.
On the 15th December, Raleigh was remanded to the Tower,
where he commenced life as a prisoner for a long term of years.
He did not, until after the lapse of a considerable time, bear his
misfortunes with equanimity. It seems to be a well-established
fact, that he wounded himself with suicidal intent.
Raleigh’s wife was exceedingly devoted to her husband, and
shared his imprisonment in the Tower, their second son being bom
within its walls. The evidence is indisputable, that Raleigh was
only prevented from putting an end to his existence by considera-
tion for his wife and child. His feelings are represented in
Shakspere’s 66th Sonnet—
Tir’d with all these, from these would I he gone ;
Save, that to die, I leave my love alone.
In the Tower he was able to devote his whole time to those
pursuits which had such attraction for him, even when his
attention was principally occupied by schemes of worldly ambition.
Politics, philosophy, history, chemistry, poetry, all shared his
thoughts. He had already read more than most students. His
books had been carried with him on his campaigns and voyages,
they were his companions in the tent and in the cabin. It is
asserted that even during his busiest time, he contrived to devote
four hours a day to his studies. Cecil remarked of Raleigh—“He
could toil terribly when he was busy.”
Prince Henry, the eldest son of the King, wo,s much interested
in Raleigh’s talents and misfortunes, and is said to have observed,
“ Sure no one but my father would keep such a bird in a cage.”'
The Prince corresponded with Raleigh, and expressed a desire to
profit by his experience in civil and military policy. In return
for his friendship, Raleigh was deeply interested in the Prince’s
welfare. At the request of the Prince, and for his instruction, he
engaged in that great work “ The History of the World,” which
Tytler describes to be “ An extraordinary monument of human
labour and genius, which in the vastness of its subject, its research
and learning, the wisdom of its political reflections, and the
beauties of its style, has not been equalled by any writer of
this, or perhaps of any other country. This will appear the more
wonderful if we recollect the circumstances under which it was
completed.”
This history embraces the annals of the world from the Creation
to the termination of the Second Macedonian War, giving “ the


flower of recorded story” through the three first great monarchies,
and concluding with Rome triumphant in the fourth, about a
century and a half before the birth of our Saviour, comprehending
a period of nearly 4000 years. Its narrative is clear and spirited,
and the matter collected from the most authentic sources which
were then accessible. The opinions given on state policy, on the
causes of great events, on the different forms of government, on
naval or military tactics, on agriculture, commerce, manufactures,
and other sources of national greatness, are not the mere echo of
other minds, they are results drawn from the experience of a long
life spent in constant action and vicissitudes in various climates
and countries, and from personal observation in offices of high
trust and responsibility.
In 1611 Prince Henry died. His loss was a severe blow to
Raleigh, who had contemplated writing a second and third part of
“ The History of the World,” but abandoned this intention on the
death of the Prince.
In 1615 Raleigh was released in order that he might embark for
Guiana and work a gold mine, of which in his former voyage he
had ascertained the existence. As the expense came out of the
private • fortune of Raleigh and those who embarked in the
speculation, whilst His Majesty was to receive a fifth part of the
bullion imported, no stretch of generosity was required for the
Royal assent to an undertaking by which the King could lose
nothing, and might be a gainer to a high amount.
Raleigh’s preparations, with the knowledge of his destination,
roused the jealousy of the Spanish Court, and as they proceeded
Count Gondomar, the Spanish Ambassador, violently remonstrated.
Raleigh, however, was allowed to sail on his expedition ; but
owing to the opposition met with from the Spaniards, to whom
King James had communicated the minutest details of Raleigh’s
plans, he was obliged to return to England unsuccessful. The
moment at which he arrived was especially inauspicious to any one
unfriendly to Phillip ; the mind of James being blindly bent on an
alliance between Charles, Prince of Wales, and the Infanta. We
know from himself that the English King appreciated the great
abilities of Raleigh, and felt that his condemnation would be
peculiarly unpopular and odious, yet he meanly determined to
bring him to the scaffold, not as a victim to public justice, but as
a sacrifice to the offended Majesty of Spain !
Raleigh was beheaded on the 29th October, 1618.
Tytler says, “If required to describe in a few words the most
prominent features of his mind, I would say they were his
universality and originality. Where do we find such a combination
as in him 1 ”
His conversation and social qualities were eminently attractive,
and whether he sat smoking his long silver pipe amongst his
literary friends at the Mermaid, or talked with his Royal Mistress
vhen she admitted him to the Privy Chamber, or assisted with


his advice and experience at the Council table, he swayed and
delighted the intellects of all who came in contact with him.
In all the qualifications which fitted him to judge of a masque,
or to take part in its performance, Raleigh yielded to no one at
Court. A scholar, a poet, a universal reader, possessing a noble
person, rich in his attire, an eloquent speaker, far travelled both
by land and sea, having an imagination fraught with the wonders
of the New World and the wisdom of the Old ; scarcely any
subject, character, or sentiment could be introduced which, if he
was a spectator, he could not illustrate by his powers of conversa-
tion, or to which he could not impart new life, strength, and spirit
as an actor. We read that when a dramatic performance was
taking place at Court, “ Raleigh’s head is ever and anon inclined
to the ear of Elizabeth. He is as good as a chorus, and he can
tell more of the play than the induction penned by Nicholas
Trotte, gentleman.” (Aubrey.)
As he advanced in life he became an indefatigable student. Not
content with his reading on shore, he carried with him a collection
of books on his voyages, and strictly economised his time. His
love of science and experiment was so ardent, that his chemical
pursuits and his study of natural history were pursued at sea.
Whatever comer of the world he sought, his curiosity was active
and his observation unremitting.
He was fond of music, and it seems to have been an hereditary
taste in his family.
Part 11.
CITATIONS AND ARGUMENT SHOWING SIR WALTER
RALEIGH TO BE THE AUTHOR OF
SHAKSPERE’S PLAYS.
The question of the authorship of Shakspere’s Plays has within
the last few years become more and more an open one. It will
scarcely be argued that William' Shakspere’s claim to the owner-
ship of the wand of the Great Magician rests upon any better
foundation than is warranted by the maxim, “ Possession is nine
points of the law.” Fortunately in this case there is no limit to
the time during which an adverse claim can be made. Judging
by what has already been brought to light, there are very strong
grounds for the belief that, even without the presence of a rival
in the field, it is only a question of time when the man William
Shakspere will be divested of the reverence which is now so
largely given to his memory. The plays and sonnets have been
and still are subjected to criticism of the keenest character, and a
mass of evidence has thus been adduced which has compelled the
latest biographers of Wm. Shakspere to abandon as necessarily


untrue a great portion of the historical and traditionary particulars
of his life, because they are seen to be totally inconsistent with the
internal evidence of the plays. Unless Shakspere is to become a
myth, the expedient adopted of treating as fictitious all the
information we possess regarding him which conflicts with what it
is necessary to premise the author of the plays to have been,
has now been carried to its utmost limit. William Shakspere’s
adherents seem to be open to a charge of inconsistency. They
object to his claims being disputed because such impugnment
involves a disregard of historic facts connected with the plays,
while at the same time, in order to maintain their own position,
they are compelled to ignore the historic facts connected with
William Shakspere’s life.
Those very circumstances which should enable us with unerring
certainty to identify the author of the plays, have tended in no
small degree to stifle inquiry and discussion. Leaving out of
view the knowledge which could be theoretically acquired dis-
played by the author, there yet remain indications, and in many
cases positive proofs, that he had possessed opportunities of acquiring
practical experience on subjects so numerous and diversified, such
as it has not been considered possible should ever fall to the lot of
one man. This consideration has led to the conclusion that
“ Shakspere ” will ever remain an enigma, and that his genius
was such as enabled him to imbibe theoretically, and even to
display intuitively, what other mortals could only attain by
observation and practice. So numerous and diversified are the
characteristics, both natural and acquired, which we must suppose
the author of the plays to have possessed, that only one man can
be pointed to in the world’s history who combined in himself
these varied accomplishments. That man was Sir Walter
Raleigh.
Let us sum up in brief what Shaksperian critics have claimed
to be attributes of their author : —Great philosopher; accomplished
jurist; statesman ; acquainted with “the perfumed air of courts;”
a great traveller, both by land and sea ; an extensive classical
scholar; a linguist, showing unmistakably knowledge of Greek,
Latin, French, Italian, and Spanish ; displays a profound know-
ledge of natural and medical science ; a horticulturist (a writer in
a technical work seriously maintains that Shakspere must have
been a professional gardener); a musician ; intimately acquainted
with very many portions of English scenery ; shows an intimate
knowledge of Italian life and manners ; believed to have spent
some years in France, and must have visited Scotland. This, list
could be further extended ; but there is one item which I must
add, and that is—the author of the plays was primarily a Sailor.
The “Tempest” alone proves the fact; but in addition, through-
out the greater number of the plays, expressions are very frequently
used which would not suggest themselves to any one except a
sailor, or an habitual traveller by sea. The sea itself, and vessels


are introduced times without number. The following are a few
specimens of references to sea life :
“ He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, as a sailor breaks a biscuit.
“Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit after a voyage.”
“ He will divorce you,
Or put upon you what restraint and grievance
The law, with all his might to enforce it on,
Will give him cable.”
“ Such a noise arose as the shrouds make at sea
In a stiff tempest.”
“ Thus hulling in
The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer
Toward this remedy.”
“ A load would sink a navy.”
‘i And I must be belee’d and calm’d.”
“ Let it be call’d the wild and wandering flood ;
Ourself the merchant; and this sailing pander
Our doubtful hope, our convoy, and our bark.”
“ I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.”
“ Mark how he bears his course.”
“Cabin’d, cribb’d, confined,” is probably suggested by experience of
confinement in a small cabin on board ship.
These instances could be multiplied indefinitely. The plays
teem with similes drawn from a seafarer’s existence.
There is good reason to suppose that some of the plays were
written years before William Shakspere arrived in London.
Shaksperian critics, in fixing upon the period of the production of
the earlier plays, have been guided to a very great extent by the
testimony regarding their supposed authorship. Knight says that
probably Shakspere wrote plays as early as 1585, the year in
which tradition says he held horses at the door of the theatre.
An investigator, unbiassed by any considerations in regard to the
author, would be led to the conclusion that some of the plays
were written at an earlier period than has been assigned to them.
A play with the leading incidents of “ The Merchant of Venice”
was performed previous to 1578. William Shakspere being then
under 15 years of age, it has necessarily been assumed that
Shakspere’s “ Merchant of Venice ” is a distinct production to the
older play. “ The Taming of a Shrew ” appeared before “ The
Taming of the Shrew,” and Tieck conjectures that they were both
Shakspere’s productions, the former a very youthful performance.
It seems more reasonable to conclude that the author of the
plays improved upon many of them some years after they were
first written (as we know that he did in the case of several dramas
whose history is undoubted), than to imagine that he seized upon
the plots and incidents of plays which had recently appeared, and
used them for his own purposes. It is difficult to suppose that a
mind of such resources would take up materials so recently used


by other writers, and we can only escape from the dilemma which
this consideration places us in by supposing that the play which
was performed previous to 1579, containing the leading incidents
of “ The Merchant of Venice,” was written by the same hand
which afterwards produced the play of “ The Merchant of Venice ”
as we now possess it.
A play called the “ Historic of Error” was enacted before Queen
Elizabeth in 1576.
Knight remarks, “ Shakspere could not have attained the
perfection displayed in the ‘Venus and Adonis ’ without a long and
habitual practice, which could alone have bestowed the mechanical
faculty.” The “ Venus and Adonis ” was published when William
Shakspere was 28 years of age, and it is certainly very remarkable
that we possess no trace of any of his productions while his
powers were being unfolded, but we are obliged to assume that
“ his poetical capacity was suddenly developed very nearly in its
perfection.”
A study of the earlier plays and poems leads to the conclusion
that they were the work of a man some years older than William
Shakspere, a man who had previously by constant practice
developed the poetical faculty which he naturally possessed. On
this score Raleigh’s age tallies with every requirement. He was
Wm. Shakspere’s senior by twelve years.
The evidence regarding the inception and development of
Raleigh’s poetical powers does not need to be raked up from
oblivion. His brilliant reputation, however, as a statesman,
soldier, courtier, &c., has quite eclipsed in succeeding times the
reputation as a poet which he acquired during his life. His
wonderful achievements during an active existence have shut out
all grounds for surprise that a poet of such capacity should have
produced nothing more than fugitive pieces.
Assuming Raleigh to be the author of the plays, in them we
find what we might expect Raleigh to have written ; and in his
earlier and fugitive pieces we are supplied with what we might
expect the author of the plays to have written, in addition to the
productions published as those of Wm. Shakspere.
Geo. Puttenham, author of the “ Arte of English Poesie,”
writing in 1579, says, “For ditty and amorous ode I find Sir
Walter Raleigh’s vein most lofty, insolent and passionate.”
A review of the plays, in the order of their appearance, will show
in what a remarkable degree they coincide with Raleigh’s history.
The earlier plays reflect life and manners of countries in which he
had recently passed the greater portion of his life, after leaving
college, the plot of these plays being derived from Italian and
Spanish romances, which he was able to read in the original
languages. The English historical plays were produced after
Raleigh had accompanied Queen Elizabeth on her Progresses, by
which means principally he acquired that intimate knowledge of
many parts of English scenery so strikingly shown in the plays,


and which knowledge there is no evidence to lead us to believe
Wm. Shakspere ever possessed the opportunity to acquire.
The production of “ Romeo and Juliet ” was coincident with
Raleigh’s epoch as a lover, his marriage with Elizabeth Throgmorton
taking place soon after the time at which the play is supposed to
have been written. About the year 1600 “As You Like It” was
penned, which reflects Raleigh’s state of mind when he retired for
some months to Sherborne. Mr. Hallam says, “ There seems to
have been a period in Shakspere’s life when his heart was ill at
ease, and ill content with the world or his own conscience. The
memory of hours mis-spent; the pang of affection misplaced or
unrequited; the experience of man’s worser nature, which inter-
course with ill-chosen associates by choice or circumstance peculiarly
teaches ; these, as they sank down into the depths of his great
mind, seem not only to have inspired into it the conception of
Lear and Timon, but that of one primary character, the censurer
of mankind.”
The type, Mr. Hallam proceeds to say, is first seen in Jaques,
then in the exiled duke of the same play, and in the duke of
“ Measure for Measure,” but in these in the shape of “ merely
contemplative philosophy.”
Knight says, “In ‘As You Like It’ Shakspere leads us to
scenes of surpassing loveliness, where we may forget the painful
lessons of the world, and introduces us to characters whose
generosity and faithfulness and affection and simplicity may
obliterate the sorrows of our experience of man’s worser nature.”
The scenery of Sherborne and the surrounding neighbourhood
was of “ surpassing loveliness,” and we can imagine two opposing
principles in Raleigh’s own mind thus discoursing :
Jaques. Will you sit down with me ?
And we two will rail against
Our mistress, the world, and all our misery !
Orlando. I will chide no breather in the world
But myself, against whom I know most faults.
In 1604, the enlarged “ Hamlet” was published. Speaking of
it in its altered form, Mr. Hallam says, “ this play shows the
impulses of a perturbed heart, under the pressure of extraordinary
circumstances.” If Raleigh was the author, then cei’tainly the
circumstances of his life during the year 1603 were just such as
would evoke what Mr. Hallam terms “ that primary character, the
censurer of mankind.” We have seen that at this period Raleigh
not only contemplated suicide, but did actually stab himself with
suicidal intent. Knight says of Shakspeare, “It would be difficult
to affirm that he ever wrote a line which had strict reference to
his own feelings and circumstances.” If this were true, it would
indeed of all things be most extraordinary and opposed to our
experience with regard to every great poet that has existed;
and it would be more extraordinary still, if what Shakspere


wrote from first to last had strict reference to the feelings and
circumstances of another and distinct individual.
One of the innumerable coincidences which identifies Raleigh
with the works of Shakspere, is to be found in the fact that at the
very moment when “To be, or not be ” was written, Raleigh
was then entertaining those reflections to which Hamlet gives
utterance. And if at that period of passionate misery, when he
was first immured in that wretched cell in the Tower, the mere
sight of which arouses feelings of intense sympathy for Raleigh
and abhorrence of King James’ cruelty, Raleigh was restrained
from suicide because he believed that
“ The Everlasting had fix’d
His canon ’gainst self-slaughter,”
he continued his reflections on the subject until he arrived at a
somewhat different conclusion. Sir Thomas Wilson, the Governor
of the Tower, thus wrote : “ Raleigh commended the magnanimity
of the Romans, who would rather have their death by their own
hands than endure any that was base or reproachful.” To which
I answered that “ they were such as knew not God, nor the
danger of their souls to be damned to perpetual torment of hell
for destroying their bodies.” To which he said, “It is a
disputable question ; for divers did hold opinion that a man may
do it and yet not desperately despair of God’s mercy, but die in
God’s favour.”
“ Measure for Measure ” was acted before King James, at
Whitehall, in 1604. This play has been described as a satire on
the evils of weak governments, which oscillate between the
extremes of undue severity and too great leniency.
Knight says, “ Throughout this very extraordinary drama, in which
the whole world is represented as one great prison-house, full of
passion and ignorance and sorrow, we have glimpses every now
and then of something beyond, where there shall be no alternations
of mildness and severity, but a condition of equal justice serene as
the valley under ‘ the unfolding star,’ and about to rejoice in the
day spring.”
The Duke is described by Hazlett as a very imposing and
mysterious stage character, absorbed in his own plots and gravity.
This is said depreciatingly; but it is precisely this sort of character
that Shakspere meant to put in action. (Knight.)
Chalmers says, “ The commentators seem not to have remarked
that the character of the Duke is a very accurate delineation of
King James.” The Duke says—
“I love the people,
But do not like to stage me to their eyes.”
James 1., according to Malone, is the model of this dislike of
popular applause, and the passage refers to his proclamation of
1603, forbidding the people to resort to him.
In the play, the Duke pardons all the offenders, with the


exception of Lucio, who had slandered him. The following
passage from Tytler still further develops the many points of
resemblance between King James and the Duke of the play :
“ The King called the lords before him, and told them how much he had
troubled to resolve in this business ; for to execute Grey, who was a noble,
young-spirited fellow, and save Cobham, who was as base and unworthy,
were a manner of injustice. To save Grey, who was of a proud, insolent
nature, and execute Cobham, who had shown great tokens of humility and
repentance, were as great a solecism ; and so went on with Plutarch’s
comparisons in the rest, still travelling in contrarieties, but holding the
conclusion in so different a balance, that the lords knew not what to look for
till the end came, ‘ And therefore I have saved them alL’ ”
Sir Walter Raleigh was one of the three who were thus
respited.
*■ It can scarcely be supposed that a man in the position of
William Shakspere would deliberately incur the displeasure of
the King by exemplifying his character in a manner which could
not be regarded as flattering. On the contrary, Sir Walter
Raleigh was perhaps the only man then living in England who
would venture to do so. He had little to hope for or fear from
King, as, at that time, he was more anxious for death than for life.
“ King Lear ” was acted before the King, at Whitehall, in
1607, and published piratically in 1608, This play conveyed a
distinct warning to King J ames of the return he might expect for
delegating so much of his power, and showering so much of his
favour, on the unprincipled persons by whom he was surrounded.
If “ Lear ” was tolerated by the King himself, it is probable that
the courtiers, whom James had enriched, were alive to the satire,
and recognised the moral of the play. Believing it to have been
written by Raleigh, I think the author’s object was also to warn
Prince Henry against flattering sycophants. The immediate and
immense popularity of this play when it was published, was
probably due, not so much to appreciation of its artistic beauties,
as to an opinion generally prevailing that it bore an immediate
significance to current events.
“ Troilus and Cressida” was printed in 161)9, having previously
been acted at Court. At the conclusion of the play, Shakspere
puts these words into the mouth of Pandarus :
“ A goodly medicine for mine aching bones. 0 world I world ! world !
thus is the poor agent despis’d. 0, traitors and bawds, how earnestly are
you set a-work, and how ill requited. Why should our endeavour be so
desir’d, and the performance so loathed ? What verse for it ? what instance
for it ?—Let me see :
Full merrily the humble bee doth sing,
’Till he hath lost his honey and his sting;
And being once subdued iu armed tail
Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail.
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted cloths.
As many as he here of Pandar’s hall,
Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandar’s fall;
c 2


Or, if yon cannot weep, yet give some groans,
Though not for me, yet for your aching bones.
Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade,
Some two months hence my will shall here be made.
It should be now, hut that my fear is this—
Some galled goose of Winchester would hies.
Till then I’ll sweat, and seek about for eases ;
And at that time bequeath you my diseases.”
These words are in a great measure appropriate to the character
of Pandarus, yet there are allusions which have no possible
significance as coming from either Pandarus or William Shakspere;
but when we understand Paleigh himself as speaking under a
thin disguise, the whole purport of what he says through Pandarus
becomes clear.
“ Why should our endeavour be so desired, and the performance so loathed? ”
Tieck says, “ King James, weak as he was, contemptible as he
sometimes showed himself, and pedantic as his wisdom and short-
sighted as his politics were, yet must have had a certain fine sense
of poetry, wit, and talent, beyond what his historians ascribed to
him.” We can therefore imagine King James desiring the
representation of plays, the “ poetry, wit, and talent ” of which
afforded him delight; and as easily understand that the “ Measure
for Measure ” would be loathed by him. “ King Lear ” would
also probably be included amongst the performances which were
loathed.
The applicability to Raleigh of the simile of the bee that has
lost its sting cannot be questioned.
“ Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade.’ 1
The only meaning I can attach to this, is to suppose that it refers
to the gaolers, those whose business it was to keep their prisoners
fast and secure.
“ Some two months hence my will shall here be made,”
plainly points to the writer’s intention to terminate his existence.
When Raleigh was in immediate expectation of death, a letter he
wrote to his wife contained the following expression : “I would
not by my ‘ Will ’ present you with sorrows, dear Bess.”
The evidence has already been given which proves that Raleigh
contemplated suicide.
What meaning can be attached to the expression,
“ Some galled goose of Winchester,”
unless we suppose it to have been written by Raleigh 1 The King
resided at Winchester Castle during the existence of the plague in
London, and also at other times ; and at Winchester it is quite
possible the play was first produced.
“ Till then I’ll sweat and seek about for eases,”
is also strictly applicable to Raleigh, who. during the whole period
of his confinement, took medicines almost constantly for the relief


of ailments with which he was afflicted. He invariably prescribed
for himself. His profound knowledge of medicine was recognised
by his contemporaries.
In 1611 “The Tempest” was played before King James, at
Whitehall. Raleigh’s spirit had then become subdued by ill-
health and confinement. He had seemingly abandoned all inten-
tion of self-destruction; but he began to hope that, with the
aid of Prince Henry, he would succeed in obtaining a release
from imprisonment. At the conclusion of the Play, we find
Prospero about to sail from his Island, and promising his com-
panions calm seas, and auspicious gales, to bear them all to Naples.
Prospero delivers an epilogue, in which, in contradiction to what
has gone before, he assumes that he cannot escape from his cell
without external aid. There is a peculiar earnestness in this
epilogue which, I think, can only be explained by the assumption
that it was an appeal from Sir Walter Raleigh to the King :
“ Now my charms are all o’erthrown,
And what strength I have’s mine own,
Which is most faint: now, ’tis true,
I must be here confined by you,
Or sent to Naples. Let me not,
Since I have my dukedom got,
And pardon’d the deceiver, dwell
In this hare island, by your spell;
But release me from my bands,
With the help of your good hands.
Gentle breath of yours my sails
Must fill, or else my project fails,
Which was to please. Now I want
Spirits to enforce. Art to enchant,
And my ending is despair,
Unless I be relieved by prayer ;
Which pierces so that it assaults
Mercy itself, and frees all faults.
As you from crimes would pardon'd be,
Let your indulgence set me free.”
The consideration of the peculiar circumstances under which
“ Troilus and Cressida ” was published opens up the wide question
of the reasons which can be conjectured for the stoppage of the
publication of Shakspere’s plays after 1603, the year in which Sir
Walter Raleigh commenced life as a prisoner under the ban of
King James.
With the exception of “ Lear ” and “ Troilus and Cressida,”
no play was published between 1603 and Shakspere’s death.
(Knight.) Many reprints were, however, made of plays which
appeared before 1603.
“ Troilus and Cressida” was originally printed in 1609. The
preface to the first edition is an extraordinary one. It commences:
“ Eternal reader, you have here a new play, never staled with the
stage, never clapper-clawed with the palms of the vulgar.
Speaking of the author, it says : —“ So much and such favoured
salt of wit is in his comedies, that they seem (for their height of


pleasure) to be born in that sea that brought forth Venus. And
believe this, that when lie is gone and his comedies out of sale,
you will scramble for them and set up a new English Inquisition!
Take this for a warning, and at the peril of your pleasure’s loss
an , judgment refuse not, nor like this the less for not bein'*
sullied with the smoky breath of the multitude, but thank fortune
for the ’scape it hath made amongst you since, by the grand
possessor s wills, I believe you should have prayed for them rather
than been prayed.” Tieck says : “In the palace of some great
personage, for whom it was probably expressly written, it was
first represented; according to my belief, for the King himself.
But whether the King, or some one else of whom we have not
received the name, it is sufficient to know that for this person,
and not for the public, Shakspere wrote this wonderful comedy.”
This wonderful comedy ” was probably wi’itten specially for
Prince Henry, if fur any individual. The great friendship which
existed between Raleigh and the Prince is mentioned by all
historians, and when we consider that Raleigh was induced, at
“®* >nn p es re d write a work involving such labour as
. T ie History of the World,” we may well believe that Tieck’s
inferences are not very far wide of the truth. The remarkable
cannot be overlooked that subsequent to the death of
the Prince in 1611, no later plays of Shakspere were produced at
Court. The facts on record lead to no other conclusion than that
the plays written after 1611 were not seen by any one until after
the death of the author.
Before entering upon the wider question, which these particulars
open up, we will first adduce what information we possess
regarding the publication of “ Lear.”
The first edition of “King Lear” was published in 1608.
The title declares this play to have been performed before the
Kings Majesty, at Whitehall, upon St. Stephen’s night in
Chustmas holidays, 1606, by His Majesty’s servants playing
usually at the Globe, upon the Bank side. Two other editions
were published in the same year; but it is remarkable that a play,
of which three editions were demanded in one year, should not
have been afterwards re-printed till it was collected in the folio
of 1623. Other of the plays, which were originally published in
a separate form during the poet’s lifetime, were frequently
re-printed before the folio edition. "Whether “ Lear ” was
piratical, or whether a limited publication was allowed, it is clear,
we think, that by some interference the continued publication was
stopped (KnightJ. In the edition of 1608 the metrical arrange-
ment is one mass of confusion. This circumstance is conclusive
that it was not printed from the author’s manuscript; but,
probabiy, from a player’s copy ; and it was not until the folio of
1623 was published, that the genuine metrical arrangement of the
play was given to the world.
Knight says, “ Is it not in the highest degree remarkable that.


of the plays which were written by Shakspere after 1603, only
two, viz., ‘ Lear and ‘ Troilus and Cressida/ were published
dunng his lifetime; while of all the undoubted plays written before
1603, only three were not published. Could this be accident ?
“ The large and continued demand for the plays already printed,
affoided abundant encouragement to publish the more important
plays which were written after 1603—the master-pieces of the
great author. Why, then, were they not published?”
Knight continues: “Is it not clear that all this was the effect
of anangement : that up to 1603, the consent to publish was
given : that .after 1603, till 1623, it was withheld effectually,
except in three arbitrary instances, two of which were undoubted
piracies? What are we to infer? Our belief is that the poet
derived a profit from the publication of his works previous to
1603, but that he then made an arrangement with the grand
possessors (see preface to ‘ Troilus and Cresida’), the proprietors of
the Globe Theatre (of which he himself was one of the chief
propiietors), by which he relinquished this profit, to give them an
absolute monopoly in his later and most important productions.”
Of the three arbitrary instances mentioned by Knight, of which
two were acknowledged piracies, the third was “ Othello,” which
was not published till 1622. The fact is of great significance,
that of ten plays which were undoubtedly written after 1603,
only two were printed, and those two were piratical. I have
quoted what, so far as I know, is the only theory which has been
framed to explain the mystery, and this theory I believe will fall
to the ground at a touch. In the first place, the term “ grand
possessois, is not a likely one to have been applied in those times
to a company of players. The evidence also leads to the belief
that the expression did actually refer to the King, or some persons
of high rank acting immediately under him. The question might
also be raised, whether the profits to the Globe Company, arising
from the right to the exclusive production of Shakspere’s plays,
would amount to more than the profit likely to be derived from
their publication ? But there is no need to argue this point, as a
more formidable objection has to be disposed of first, viz., that
not only is there no evidence to show that the plays written after
1603 were systematically produced at the Globe Theatre, but the
evidence, so far as it goes, tends to show that very few of the
plays in question were produced at that theatre at all, much less
that the proprietors had a monopoly of their production.
Of “ Troilus and Cressida,” Steevens says, “ This play appears
to have been unknown to Hennings and Condell, Shakspere’s
associates, till after the first folio was almost printed off.”
“Timon,” “ Coriolanus,” “ Cymbeline,” “Julius Caesar,” and
“Antony and Cleopatra,” were first published in 1623, and there
is no trace of these plays having previously been performed.
“ Troilus ” and “ Lear ” were performed at the Globe after, but
not before, they were piratically published.


The evidence is undeniable that “ Measure for Measure,”
“ The Winter’s Tale,” and “ The Tempest,” were performed at
Court before the King, but there is no evidence, so far as I am
aware, to show that they were acted at the Globe Theatre prior
to the year of the general publication of Shakspere’s plays in
1623.
There is another play, “ Henry YIII,” which makes up eleven
plays mentioned by Knight as having been written after 1603.
This play was performed at the Globe in 1613, and this single fact
constitutes the sole ground on which Mr, Knight’s theory can
be based.
Of ten plays to which Mr. Knight’s theory, if it had any
foundation, would apply, we find that five were not performed
at all; two were not performed at the Globe until after they had
been piratically published ; and of the remaining three no
evidence has been brought forward to show that they were
performed, except before King James, and, as in the case of
“ Lear ” and “ Troilus,” probably the copies so used were
furnished to the players who represented these dramas by the
officers of the King’s household.
I do not pretend to furnish anything more than conjecture to
supply the place of Mr. Knight’s theory, but it seems probable
that the publication of those plays, which the King knew to be
the work of Sir Walter Raleigh, was interdicted by the King
himself.
A few brief references will now be made to the internal
evidence which connects the plays with Sir Walter Raleigh. In
some cases the coincidences are remarkable. Other instances
which will be cited cannot be considered, taken singly, as
rendering any support to the opinion which it is the aim of these
pages to establish, but the object held in view is to show that
whatever portion of Shakspere’s writings we may, either by
chance or design, alight upon for examination, we will find
reflected therein the results of Raleigh’s knowledge, acquired
either by experience or study. When we ascribe the authorship
to Raleigh, all cause for wonder ceases.
Knight remarks ; “ The marvellous accuracy, the real sub-
stantial learning of the three Roman plays, present the most
complete evidence, to our minds, that they were the result of a
profound study of the whole range of Roman history, including
the nicer details of Roman manners, not in those days to be
acquired in a compendious form, but to be brought out by diligent
reading alone. It is pleasant to believe that the last years of
Shakspere’s life were those of an earnest student.” That Raleigh
studied Roman history, as Knight supposes William Shakspere to
have studied it, is clearly shown in “ The History of the World.”
It is a well recognised fact that authors frequently repeat
themselves, using the same expression in different works. As
might have been expected, instances can be found in the prose of


The “ History of the World ” of ideas rendered in the highest
forms of poetical expression in the plays. Our limits will not
permit of more than one example being cited—
THE SEVEN AGES OF MAN.
Our infancy is compared to the Moon, in which we seem only to
live and grow as plants; the second age to Mercury, wherein we
are taught and instructed ; the third age to Venus, the days of
love, desire, and vanity ; the fourth to the Sun, the strong,
flourishing, and beautiful age of man’s life ; the fifth to Mars, in
which we seek honour and victory, and in which our thoughts
travel to ambitious ends ; the sixth age is ascribed to Jupiter, in
which we begin to take account of our tunes, judge of ourselves,
and grow to the perfection of our understanding; the last and
seventh to Saturn, wherein our days are sad and overcast, and in
which we find by dear and lamentable experience, and by the loss
which can never be repaired, that of all our vain passions and
affections past, the sorrow only abideth.
For this tide of man’s life, after it once tumeth and declineth,
ever runneth with a perpetual ebb and falling stream, but never
floweth again; our leaf once fallen, springeth no more; neither
doth the sun or the summer adorn us again with the garments of
new leaves and flowers.
Tytler says of “The History of the World “ Perhaps its
most striking feature is the sweet tone of philosophic melancholy
which pervades the whole. Written in prison, during the quiet
evening of a tempestuous life, we feel in its perusal that we are
the companions of a superior mind, nursed in contemplation, and
chastened and improved by sorrow, in which the bitter recollection
of injurv and the asperity of resentment have passed away.
Knight remarks :—“ The later plays of fehakspere were written
when the ‘ bitter remembrance,’ whatever it was which brought
forth ‘ Hamlet,’ was obliterated by a more expansive philosophy,
when the intellect had triumphed over the passions.
In “ Othello ” we have —
“ The Anthropophagi and men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders.”
mention of which was first made in Ealeigh’s “Discovery of
Guiana.” ~ . „ T . , „
In the original edition of the “ Merry Wives of Windsor,
the following passage does not appear
“ She is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty.”
This was added after Ealeigh’s return from Guiana.
Of this play (“ The Merry Wives of Windsor ”), Knight says:
“ Its allusions, contrary to the wont of the author, are all local,
the poet shows that he has made himself familiar with the scenes
where the Queen delighted to dwell.” William Shakspere would
have had to go out of his way to become familiar with these


scenes. Raleigh was necessarily, from the position he occupied in
attendance on the Queen, thoroughly familiar with localities and
persons.
Theobald makes Sir Toby’s expression in “ Twelfth Night,”
“ If thou thou’st him some thrice, it shall not be amiss,”
a manifestation of respect for Sir Walter Raleigh, and a detestation
of Coke’s brutal thouing of him at his tidal in 1603.
In “ Love’s Labours Lost ” occurs the expression :
“ ’Tis won, as towns, with fire; so won, so lost; ”
one of innumerable instances throughout the plays which leads us
to infer that the author had had experience of war.
It is never questioned that the “ Midsummer Night’s Dream ”
was suggested by the great entertainment provided by Leicester
when Queen Elizabeth was his guest at Kenilworth, in 1575.
The author of the play has reproduced so many incidents which
occurred at Kenilworth as to compel the belief that he was actually
present on that occasion. So conclusive are the facts which
support this view, that Percy and Tieck are led to make it appear
that it was not at all impossible for the boy Win. Shakspere, at
the age of eleven years, to have been present at Kenilworth, an
interested observer of all that took place.
At the period in question, the Earl of Leicester was a friend and
patron of Raleigh, as we find by letters which passed between
them ; it is therefore most probable that Raleigh would be one of
the first to receive an invitation to be present at Kenilworth on
such an important occasion. Leicester is believed to have devised
the entertainment to afford him a means of endeavouring to obtain
the hand of Queen Elizabeth. In the play, the following words
are spoken by Oberon ;
“ That very time I saw, (but thou could’st not,)
Flying between the cold moon and the earth,
Cupid all arm’d : A certain aim he took
At a fair vestal, throned by the West;
And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow,
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts;
But I might see young Cupid’s fiery shaft
Quench’d in the chaste beams of the wat’ry moon,
And the imperial vot’ress passed on
In maiden meditation, fancy free.”
It is never doubted that this passage refers to Leicester and Queen
Elizabeth.
Whenever any of Shakspere’s characters speak of having wit-
nessed any occurrence, in every case it is possible to say that
Raleigh certainly, or in all probability, personally witnessed such
an event as is described.
Gibbon compares Helena’s speech, “ 0, and is all forgot,” with
some lines of a poem of Gregory Nazianzen on his own life,
Nazianzen was one of Raleigh’s favourite authors.


In “Much Ado About Nothing,” the following passage occurs:—
“ I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace ”
In this passage a peculiar rose, the common dog rose, of the
hedges, is meant. Mr. Richardson says, in his dictionary, that in
Devonshire the dog rose is called the canker rose. ( Knight.)
Raleigh was born in Devonshire.
This item is not put forward as possessing any weight, but is
only mentioned in order to show that in the most minute particulars
the evidence is all consistent with the view that Raleigh was the
author of the plays.
Two or three items not directly connected will now be disposed
of before the Sonnets are brought under consideration.
First, with regard to Shakspere’s knowledge of law. Knight
sa y S : —“ Malone cites a number of passages exemplifying Shak-
jspere’s knowledge and application of legal terms. The frequency
of their occurrence, and the accuracy of their use, are, however, no
proof to us that Shakspere was professionally a lawyer. There is
every reason to believe that the principles of law, especially the
law of real property, were much more generally understood in
those days than in ours. Educated men, especially those who
possessed property, looked upon law as a science instead of a
mystery, and its terms were used in familiar speech, instead of
being regarded as a technical jargon. Dekker, who is himself a
dramatic poet, has put together in a few lines as many technical
terms as we may find in Shakspere.”
Sir Walter Raleigh, who embraced in his studies such an
immense variety of subjects, was induced, after his imprisonment,
to pay especial attention to the law of real property. King James
took advantage of a flaw in the title which secured Sherborne to
Raleigh’s family, and dispossessed them of the estate in order that
he might bestow it upon Carr. Raleigh was apparently as much
affected by this event as by any other which occurred during his
life. There was scarcely any provision for his wife and children
after Sherborne was gone. He therefore pondered long and deeply
upon the subject, not content until he had satisfied himself that
there was no mode of escape from the spoliation which the King;
had determined upon.
The position which Raleigh held as leader of the House of
Commons would also bring his mind into that groove which would
lead to the acquirement of legal knowledge. A mind of such
capacity would not be satisfied with a mere perfunctory acquaint-
ance with anything which came within its jurisdiction.
With regard to the fate of Raleigh’s manuscripts after his,
death, Tytler says; “The dispersion and subsequent disappear-
ance of Raleigh’s manuscripts, which were very voluminous, is to.
be attributed to Sir Thomas Wilson either pretending to act, or in
reality acting, under the King’s directions. As Wilson was at


that time keeper of the State Paper Office, there is still a hope
that the manuscripts of Raleigh may he found amongst some of
the yet unexplored treasures of that great national collection.”
If the view propounded in this pamphlet be founded on truth,
then it is probable that the voluminous manuscripts of which all
trace has been lost consisted, principally, of Shakspere’s plays.
We know that the author of the plays left the whole of them in
manuscript, that he had watched over them with fatherly care.
Knight says : “ The evidences, in several instances, is most
decided that the author's posthumous copies in manuscript were
distinguished from the printed copies by verbal alterations, by
additions, by omissions not arbitrarily made, by a more correct
metrical arrangement. We see in numerous cases the minute, but
most effective, touches of the skilful artist; and a careful examina-
tion of the matter in the plays where the alterations are most
numerous, is quite sufficient to satisfy us of the jealous care with
which Shakspere watched over the more important of these
productions, so as to leave with his ‘ fellows ’ more complete
and accurate copies than had been preserved by the press.”
Raleigh’s manuscripts fell into the hands of a man who bore
him inveterate enmity. A man who would, probably with the
knowledge and approval of the King, either burke Raleigh’s
productions altogether, or give them to the world under a false
name. In the case of the plays this was especially easy to do,
as so many of them had previously been ascribed to William
Shakspere.
Lloyd* in his observations on the life of Raleigh, says:—
“ Master Hampden, a little before the wars, was at the charge of
transcribing 3452 sheets of his (Raleigh’s) manuscripts, as the
amanuensis himself told me, who had his close chamber, his fire
and candle, with an attendant to deliver him the originals and
take his copies as fast as he could write them.”
Though all trace of a copy of Raleigh’s manuscripts in the
archives of the Hampden family is lost, it is not impossible that
tidings of a copy of Shakspere’s plays, in manuscript, may yet
be found.
Knight says of Shakspere : “In his impersonations of feeling,
he has looked at death, under every aspect with which the human
mind views the last great change.”
Of Raleigh, Tytler remarks : “To him death seemed to be
divested of all that was gloomy and terrific. He had never been
pardoned ; he was liable during the long period of his confine-
ment to be called away any day, or any hour, to execution ; and
it is probable that this circumstance had rendered the contem-
plation of sudden dissolution, an idea so appalling to an
ordinary mind, to him the subject of quiet, natural, and frequent
thought.”


Frederick Schlegel said of Shakspere : “ The feeling by which
he seems to have been most connected with ordinary men, is that
of nationality.”
How applicable this remark is to Raleigh, every student of his
life will recognise.
THE SONNETS.
We may well believe that the Sonnets were published in 1609,
without the consent of their author. ( Knight.)
The first series of sonnets, as published, are an exhortation to a
male friend to marry. Chalmers argues that it was Queen
Elizabeth whom the author addressed under a transparent disguise.
The Sonnets 71, 72, 73, and 74, to my mind, afford proof than
which nothing could be stronger of the identification of Raleigh as
the author. With most unwavering confidence I advance the
proposition that these sonnets were addressed by Raleigh to his
wife when he was lying under sentence of death in 1603. Especial
attention is invited to the beginning of the 71st and the conclusion
of the 74th.
71st. y
No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell.
Nay, if yon read this line, remember not
The hand that writ it: for I love you so,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot.
If thinking on me, then, should make you woe.
Oh, if (I say) you look upon this verse,
When I, perhaps, compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse,
But let your love even with my life decay :
Lest the wise world should look into your moan
And mock you with me alter I am gone.
72nd.
Oh, lest the world should task you to recite
What merit liv’d in me that you should love
After my death : dear love forget me quite.
For you in me can nothing worthy prove,
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie
To do more for me than mine own desert.
And hang more praise upon deceased I
Than niggard truth would willingly impart. _
Oh, lest your true love may seem false in this,
That you, for love, speak well of me untrue.
My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you :
For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
And so should you to love things nothing worth.


That time of year thou may’st in me behold,
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruin’d choirs where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou see’st the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the West,
Which, by-and-by, black night doth take away—
Death’s second self, that seals up all in rest.
In me thou see’st the glowing of such fire
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie ;
As the death-bed whereon it must expire,
Consum’d with that which it was nourish’d by, ■
This, thou perceiv’st, which makes thy love more strong,
To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
74th.
But be contented when that fell arrest,
Without all bail, shall carry me away.
My life hath in this line some interest,
Which, for memorial, still with thee shall stay;
When thou reviewest this, thou doth review
The very part was consecrate to thee.
The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
My spirit is thine, the better part of me :
So, then, thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
The prey of worms, my body being dead, *
The coward conquest of a wretch’s knife,
Too base of thee to be remembered.
The worth of that is that which it contains,
And that is this ; and this with thee remains.
Who else than a man who stood in the immediate anticipation
of death would write in such terms'? It needs not to be suggested
that the “ surly sullen bell,” which tolls at the execution of
criminals, indicates the circumstances under which he was to die.
Equally plain is the allusion to the axe and the executioner:—
“ My body being dead,
The coward conquest of a wretch’s knife.”
The 37th and 89th sonnets have caused the question to be
debated whether “ Shakspere ” was lame—
“ So I, made lame by fortune’s dearest spite.”
“ Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt.”
“ So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised.”
Can be understood in a purely figurative sense, but many critics
entertain the view that the author had a slight physical defect,
which suggested the use of the simile. Previous to 1596 Sir
Walter Raleigh had a slight limp or halt. In the year named he
was wounded in the leg by a splinter, and became lame for the
rest of his life.
No explanation of the genesis of the Sonnets has ever yet been
afforded, and no attempt has been made to alter the confused
arrangement under which they were first published. This want
will, I think, be supplied when they are recognised as the pro-


ductions of Sir Walter Raleigh. A large number of the Sonnets
will be found to be addressed to Queen Elizabeth, amongst which
some allusions to Spenser occur. The following sonnet I regard
as having been written by Raleigh in tribute to Prince Henry ;
“ As a decrepit father takes delight
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by fortune’s dearest spite,
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or-wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more
Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,
I make my love engrafted to this store ;
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give,
That I in thy abundance am sufficed,
And by a part of all thy glory live.
Look what is best, that best I wish in thee :
This wish I have : then ten times happy me !”
The “ Passionate Pilgrim ” was originally published in 1599,
by William Jaggard, with the name of William Shakspere on the
title page. An edition of the same work was published in 1612,
in which the title page was cancelled, and the name of William
Shakspere removed.
In 1598 a volume, bearing the name, as author, of Richard
Barnfield, graduate of Oxford, was published, which contained
a sonnet addi’essed to his master R. L. Beginning —
“ If music and sweet poetry agree.”
This sonnet was in the year following printed in the “ Passionate
Pilgrim,” under the name of William Shakspere. Barnfield s
volume contained another poem —
“ As it fell upon a day,”
which was also subsequently printed amongst the sonnets to
sundry notes of music in the “ Passionate Pilgrim.” After the
publication of Barnfield’s volume in 1598, and the “Passionate
Pilgrim” in 1599, “As it fell upon a day” was published in
England’s “ Helicon,” under the signature of “ Ignoto.”
Another poem of the “ Passionate Pilgrim”—
“ Come live with me and be my love,”
was also afterwards printed in England’s “ Helicon,” with the
signature of Christopher Marlow. This poem is
Passionate Shepherd to his Love,” and is succeeded in the
“ Helicon ” by another poem, “ The Nymph’s Reply to the
Shepherd,” which bears the signature of “ Ignoto.” The first verse
only of “The Nymph’s Reply to the Shepherd” had previously
been given in the “ Passionate Pilgrim.” Sir Walter Raleigh is
recognised without dispute as the author of “The Nymph’s Reply to
the Shepherd,” and consequently Raleigh was “ Ignoto.” Barnfield
31


also claimed the authorship of a poem entitled “ Cynthia,” which
is probably identical with Raleigh’s “ Cynthia,” so much esteemed
by Spenser, and which Tytler bemoans as lost. The sonnet, “If
music and sweet poetry agree,” was, as we have seen, addressed to
R. L., which letters may possibly represent Robert Dudley, Earl
of Leicester, who, in Raleigh’s youth, was his friend and patron.
I think the evidence establishes a strong presumption that all the
poems which were published under the name of Richard Barnfield
were written by “ Ignoto.” It also shows that some of Sir Walter
Raleigh’s writings were published in a volume with the name of
Wm, Shakspere on the title-page, and also shows how little
importance can be attached to the fact of Wm. Shakspere’s name
appearing on the title-page of any work. Knight quite abandons
Wm. Shakspere’s claim to the authorship of a considerable portion
of the “ Passionate Pilgrim,” yet the whole collection is still
published under Shakspere’s name.
“ Raleigh had a most remarkable aspect, an exceedingly high
forehead.”—f Aubrey.)
“ Raleigh exercised in perfection incompatible talents, and his
character connects the opposite extremes of our nature.”—
(Disraeli's Curiosities of Literature.)
Shakspere is recognised as “ not one, but all mankind’s epitome.”
Every admirer of Shakspere’s Plays has formed in his mind an
ideal of their author quite independent of any impressions derived
from history or tradition. That ideal cannot, I think, be more
happily described than in the following words, which Tytler uses
in relation to Sir Walter Raleigh ;
“ In his best time there was a dignity and command about him
—‘ an awfulness and ascendancy ,’ as it is expressed by Aubrey,
‘ above other mortals ’ —which was displeasing to many, and
particularly to the King ; yet, by his sailors and ships’ crews, he
was wonderfully beloved.”
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.




