

■PMUTfrV »g 11


*
,


RULES
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN JOCKEY CLUB.




RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN
JOCKEY CLUB,
frc., SjX., frc.
ESTABLISHED 1840.
r/'rf'rrrrrrrrrrr/'r/'/'r/'S'ss-y n /'S'/'S'/'/'/~.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BI WILLIAM JOHN ROW, KING-ST. EAST.


MEMBERS OF THE AUSTRALIAN
JOCKEY CLUB.
PATRON;
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR CHARLES FITZ BOY.
STEWARDS, ( CAPTAIN FITZ K 0T ’ R ' A - A ' D ‘ c ’
J ARTHUR T. HOLROYD, ESQ.
1850—1, J H ON. Ei D E AS THOMSON.
Robert J. Barton, Esq.
E. Beckham, Esq.
P. Bogne, Esq.
George Bransby, Esq.
T. W. Campbell, Esq.
J. B. Darvall, Esq.
Robert Fitzgerald, Esq.
Captain A, C. L. Fitz Roy.
George Fitz Roy, Esq,
W, Foster, Esq.
J. R. Holden, Esq,
Arthur T. Holroyd, Esq.
A. C. Hood, Esq.
John Jardine, Esq.
A. S. Leathes, Esq,
IV. McLeay, Esq.
C. Newton, Esq.
Hon. J. H. Plunkett.
Samuel Raymond, Esq.
G. Rowe, Esq.
Rowley, Esq.
William Russell, Esq.
L. Samuel, Esq.
Captain I). C. F. Scott.
Francis Smith, Esq,
Hon. E. Deas Thomson.
Richard Underwood, Esq,
W. C. Wentworth, Esq.


RULES & REGULATIONS
OF TIIE
AUSTRALIAN JOCKEY CLUB.
With a view to the prevention and more
satisfactory arrangement of any disputes
which may arise, and for the better govern-
ment of the Australian Turf, the Australian
Jockey Club declare to run under and take
for their guidance the Rules and Regula-
tions of the Newmarket Jockey Club, so far
as such Rules' and Regulations are applica-
ble to the Australian Turf, and they publish
the following leading Rules and Regula-
tions for general information.
The Australian Jockey Club will not


adjudicate in any matter relating to the
Turf, which may be referred from any
other Race Meeting in the Colony, unless
the Stewards of such Race Meeting have
previously declared, through the press, their
intention of strictly adhering to the Rules
and Regulations of the Australian Jockey
Club.


STEWARDS.
1. The three Members of the Australian
Jockey Club now acting as Stewards shall
he continued in their office till the next annua]
meeting of the Jockey Club, when the Senior
Steward (the one who has been the longest
in office) shall quit his situation immediately
after settling the accounts at that meeting,
and shall then name a Member of the Aus-
tralian Jockey Club to succeed him, subject
to the approbation of the remaining Stew-
ards and of the Members of the Jockey Club
then present; and at every subsequent annu -
al meeting the then Senior Steward shall in
like manner retire and name his successor.
2. If any difference of opinion shall arise
on such nomination, it shall be decided by
a majority of the Members present ; which
3
STEWARDS


majority must include one (at least) of the
continuing Stewards ; if both the continuing
Stewards are in the minority, then there
shall be a fresh nomination.
3 If any of the Stewards shall die or re-
sign between the periods of the annual
meetings, the surviving or continuing
Stewards may appoint a Member of the
Club to succeed the deceased or declining
Steward, and to stand in his place in point
of seniority ; but such nomination shall be
notified to the Club, at their next annual, or
at any special meeting to be called for the
purpose, and shall then be subject to the
like approbation as in the case of a Senior
Steward retiring at the expiration of his
Stewardship.
4. When only one Steward is present, and
neither of the absent Stewards shall have
appointed a substitute, the Member of the
Australian Jockey Club present who has
last served the office shall act ex officio.
4
STEWARDS


5. All disputes relating to racing, if any
of the parties interested should request the
interference of the Stewards, shall be deter-
mined by three Stewards and two referees
(who shall he Members of the Club) one to
be chosen by each of the parties concerned, if
either of them shall desire to have referees.
If only two Stewards he present, they shall
fix upon a third person, being a Member of
the Club, in lieu of the absent Steward; but
the Stewards, if they think fit, may call in
any other Members of the Australian Jockey
Club to their assistance, or may refer the case
to a general meeting ofthe Australian Jockey
Club, if the importance or difficulty of the
matter in dispute shall appear to them to
require it.
6 The Stewards or any two of them have
full power to make, alter, or amend rules
relating to the arrangements of the Course;
and all persons running or training horses,
occupying booths &e. tliereon, shall consider
STEWARDS,


themselves amenable to the foregoing or any
rules that may hereafter be made, altered, or
amended by them.
7. The Stewards shall fix the hour of
starting for each race by nine o’clock in the
evening preceding the day of running at the
latest, and notice of the time of starting is to
be published in the cards of the races, and in
the Sydney Morning Herald, or some other
daily paper.
8. The Stewards shall have power, in
case of urgent necessity, to put off the Races
under their management from day to day.
9. All decisions of the Stewards shall be
final.
10. Tire Annual Meeting of the Australian
Jockey Club, shall be held in the month of
June, in each and every year.
11. The Treasurer shall produce an account
of the funds and disbursements of the Austra-
6
STEWARDS.


liaa Jockey Club at the annual meeting in
each year.
12. Candidates for admission as members
of the Australian Jockey Club shall be pro-
posed at one meeting ofthe Club and ballotted
for at the next, five Members (at the least)
shall ballot, and one black ball in every five
shall exclude.
7
STEWARDS,


Three
2 „
Four
• 9 „
2 j,
Five
10 „
o„
THE QUEEN’S PLATE ARTICLES.
I. Every horse, mare, or gelding, that
runneth for this Plate, shall carry the follow-
ing weights subject to the allowances here-
after next mentioned.
Two-year-olds to carry sst. 12lbs.
Six and aged 10 „ 4 „
Mares and Geldings allowed 3lbs,
Distance Three Miles.
11. Every person that putteth in a horse,
mare, or gelding, for this Plate, shall enter
the same with the name of the owner, and
8
queen’s plate articles.


the age, name, pedigree, or sufficient descrip-
tion of the horse, according to the rules of the
Australian Jockey Club regarding nomina-
tions, at the time and place appointed by
the Steward or Stewards of the Races at
which such Plate is to he run for.
111. Horses that run for the Queen’s
Plate shall start at the time appointed by the
Steward or Stewards of the Races at the
place where such Plate is run for.
IV. Each horse’s, mare's, or gelding’s place
as he, she, or they come by the winning-post,
shall be determined by the Judge appointed
by the Steward or Stewards of the Races at
the place where the said Plate is run for.
V. Every rider shall, immediately after
the race be run, be obliged to come to the
usual place of weighing, with his horse,
mare, or gelding, then and there to alight,
and not before, and there to weigh to the
satisfaction of the person appointed for that
purpose.
queen’s plate articles.


YI. And in case of neglect or refusal
thereof, such owners and riders shall he im-
mediately declared incapable of running or
riding hereafter for the Queen’s Plate.
VIL Every horse, mare, or gelding that
runneth on the wrong side of the post or
flags, shall have no share of the said Plate.
VIII. When the age or qualification of
a horse entered for the Queen’s Plate shall
be objected to, either before or after run-
ning, the Stewards of the races at which
such Plate is run for shall have the power to
order an examination of the horse’s mouth
by competent persons, and to call for all
such evidence as they may require, and
their decision shall be final. A Certificate
shall not be granted to any horse objected to
until the question of his qualification shall be
decided in the manner herein prescribed.
IX. Every horse, marc, or gelding enter-
ing for the Queen’s Plate, shall pay Two
Sovereigns.
10
queen’s plate abticles.


X. And in case any difference shall arise
in running, or respecting any matters not
hereinbefore provided for, or as to the inter-
pretation of these orders, the same shall he
determined by his Excellency the Governor,
or by such person or persons as he shall
appoint.
queen’s plate articles.


FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF
HAVING WON A QUEEN’S PLATE
These are to certify that the Queen’s
Plate of One Hundred Sovereigns was
won at New South
Wales, the day of
185 by ’i
horse called
A. B.
C. D. > Stewards.
E. F.)
G. H, Clerk of the Course,
To The Colonial Secretary,
New South Wales.
N. B. The Certificate when properly signed
must be presented to the Colonial Secretary,
who will obtain His Excellency the Gover-
nor’s warrant for the payment thereof.
12
FORM OF CERTIFICATE.


RULES OF HORSE RACING.
1. Horses foaled after the Ist of August,
shall take their ages from the following Jan-
uary, and horses foaled prior to the Ist of
August, shall take their ages from the Ist
of January past.
2. In catch and feather weights any per-
son may ride without going to scale.
3. Horses shall not be entitled to start
without producing a certificate of age, &c., if
required, except where aged horses are
included, in which case a younger horse may
be entered without such certificate, provided
he carry the same weight as the aged horse.
13
RULES OF HORSE RACING.


4. A Maiden horse or mare is one that
has never won, (matches excepted) at the
time of entrance.
5. An untried stallion or mare, is one
whose produce has never run in public.
6. Where two horses run a dead heat and
their owners agree to divide, both are liable
to carry extra weights as winners.
7. A horse walking over or receiving for-
feit, except for a match, shall he deemed a
winner.
8. Any person may enter and run more
than one horse for any plate or stakes, pro-
vided the race be not for heats.
9. A horse which wins one heat in three
is entitled to the second money, and to the
first claim on the winner if it he a selling
plate or stakes, (except when to be sold by
public auction).
10. Where a plate is won in two heats the
14
RULES OP HORSE RACING.


preference of the horses is determined by
the second heat.
11. "Where a plate or subscription is given
to the winner of the best of three heats, a
horse to win a prize must he the actual win-
ner of two heats, even though no horse
appear against him for both or cither of the
heats.
12. When three horses have each won a
heat, they only must start for a fourth, and
the preference amongst them will be determi-
ned by it, there being no difference amongst
them.
13. In running of heats, if it cannot be
decided which horse is first the heat goes
for nothing, and they may all start again
except it be between two horses that have
each won a heat.
14. If a rider fall from his horse, and the
horse be rode in from the place where the
rider fell by a person of sufficient weight,
RULES OF HORSE RACING,


he may take his place the same as if the
rider had not fallen.
15. Jockeys must ride their horses to the
usual place of weighing, and he that dis-
mounts before or wants weight is distanced,
unless he be disabled by an accident which
would render him incapable of riding hack,
in which case he may he led or carried to
the scale.
16. Horses’plates or shoes shall not he
allowed in the weight.
17. Horses running on the wrong side of
a post and not turning hack are distanc-
ed.
18. Horses drawn before the plate is won
are distanced.
19. Horses are distanced if their riders cross
or jostle.
20. There shall he no distance in a fourth
heat.
RULES OF HORSE RACING.


21. WEIGHTS for AGE:—
Two-year-olds 7 st. 0 Ills
• Three „ „ 8 „ 0 „
Four „ 9 „ 0 „
Five „ „ 9 „ 8 „
Six and aged 9 „ 12 „
Mares and Geldings allowed 3lhs., and a
further allowance of slhs. to Maidens in races
for horses of all ages, except in races where
the weights are different from the above, and
specified with the prize.
22. WELTER WEIGHTS :
Two-year-olds 9 st. 0 Ihs.
Three „ „ 10 „ 0 „
Four „ „ 10 „ 12 „
Five ~ ~ .... 11 „ 7 ~
Six and aged .... 12 „ 0 „
Mares and Geldings allowed 3lhs., and a
further allowance of lOlhs., to Maiden
Welter horses.
23. Every groom shall have his horse at the
post ready to start within five minutes of
17
It TILES OF HORSE RACING.


the time appointed by the Stewards ; and
every Jockey is to be there ready to start
within the same time, and every Groom and
Jockey making default herein shall, if requi-
red by the Stewards, pay a fine of Two
Sovereigns to the Race Fund.
24. Every Jockey shall be allowed 2lbs.
above the weight specified for his horse; but
should any horse carry more than2lbs. above
his weight, without declaration having been
made by the Jockey or the Owner of the
horse or by his servant, to the Clerk of the
Course, at least a clear half hour before the
race is run, he will be considered distanced
although he came in first.
25. Jockeys are required to ride then - horses
at a walk, as nearly as possible in a line to
the starting post. Any Jockey starting with-
out orders from the Starter appointed, or
neglecting to return and walk his horse up
with the others so often as the Starter may
18
RULES OF HORSE RACING.


require, shall pay a fine not exceeding Five
Sovereigns to the Race Fund.
26. A Jockey who receives from any person
any article however trifling, after he pulls
up, although he may have dropped the same,
previous to being weighed, shall he disquali-
fied from riding at Homebush,or on any course
on which the Australian Jockey Club may
in future hold their meetings, for such period
as the Stewards shall think fit, and the horse
shall be adjudged distanced in that Race,
27. If a horse he led away from the scales
before the rider shall be declared weight, no
article (bridle or saddle) shall be taken off
such horse for the purpose of being weighed
with the rider, although the rider shall not
be the proper weight without it.
28. If in running for any race one horse
shall cross or jostle another, such horse and
every horse belonging to the same owner, or
in which he shall have a share running in
19
RULES OP HORSE RACING.


the same race shall be disqualified for win-
ning the race, whether such cross or jostle
happened by the swerving of the horse, or
by the foul and careless riding of the jockey.
And if such cross or jostle shall be proved
to have happened through the foul riding
of the Jockey, he shall be disqualified from
again riding at Homebush, or on any course
where the Australian Jockey Club may in
future hold their meetings, or shall be punish-
ed by fine or suspension for such time as
the Stewards shall think fit; it being abso-
lutely necessary as well for the safety of
the Jockeys themselves, as for the satis-
faction of the public, that foul riding should
be punished by the severest penalties:
complaints of foul riding must be made
before or at the time the Jockey com-
plaining is weighed, and it may be made
either by the Owner, Jockey, or Groom
of the horse to one of the Stewards, to
the Judge, or to the Clerk of the Course.
20
BOTES OF HOESE BACINQ


29. Any J ockey refusing to pay any fine
■which may have been imposed upon Min, or
misconducting himself in any way, shall be
disqualified from riding at Homebush, or on
any Course on which the Australian Jockey
Club may in future hold their meetings,
for any period the Stewards shall think fit.
SO. No person shall be permitted to enter
the weighing yard, except the Owners of
horses desirous of seeing their Jockeys
weighed, or Jockeys requiring to be weighed
31. Any person (the Clerk of the Course
excepted) riding in with the leading horses,
in a race shall pay a fine not exceeding Five
Sovereigns to the Race Fund.
32. No person shall be allowed to enter
the Stewards’ Stand, or Judge’s Box,during
the time the horses are running, except the
time-keeper.
33. Persons desirous of running matches
21
KDLE9 OF HOUSE RACING.


during the Race meetings, are required to
apply to the Stewards for permission, for
which a fee of One Sovereign must be paid
by the owner of each horse, to the Race
Fund before starting, unless the owners are
each of them subscribers to that amount.
34. The Stewards shall have power to dis-
qualify, for any period they may think fit,
any person or persons from entering a horse
either in his or then' own name or names, or
the name of any other person who may he
guilty of dishonest practices, or improper be-
haviour towards the Stewards, or any other
officer ofthe Course: and all horses which such
pei’.-:on or persons may have entered for
any race to be run at Homcbush, or on
any Course on which the Australian Jockey
Club may in future hold their meetings, at the
time of such dishonest practices being found
out, or of such improper behaviour, shall he
disqualified for that meeting, and the en-
trance money, together with the sweepstakes,
22
RULES OF HOME RACING.


forfeited: the former for the benefit of the
Race Fund, the latter for the benefit of the
race or races in which such horse or horses
may be engaged.
33. In all races where not less than three
horses start, the second horse shall receive
back his sweepstakes, unless otherwise
specified.
36. Colours worn by the riders are required
to be named at the time of entrance. Any
jockey changing his colours, shall pay a fine
of Two Sovereigns to the Race Fund.
37. No horse shall be deemed the winner of
any race which shall be proved to have run
under a false description; the disqualification
to remain in force until his pedigree be ascer-
tained and recorded. No objection can be
made after the lapse of twelve months from
the time of running.
38. When any person enters a horse, or
subscribes to a stake under a fictitious name,
23
RULES OF HORSE RACING.


or in the name of a person not fully identi-
fied at the time, he will be considered in all
respects as the owner of the horse, and as
the subscriber to the stake. The Stewards
of the Australian Jockey Club have the
power to call upon a nominator to pro-
duce testimony that the horse named is not
the property, either wholly or in part, of
any person whose name appears in the list
of defaulters ; and if he fail to do so, they
may cause the nomination to be erased.
39. In any race which may contain particu-
lar conditions as to qualification, it is suffi-
cient if the horse be qualified at the time of
naming or entering.
40. When the Qualification of any horse is
objected to before starting, the Owner must
produce a certificate, or other proper docu-
ment or evidence to the Stewards or Clerk
of the Course before the race is run to prove
the Qualification of the horse; and if he shall
start his horse without so doing, the prize
RULES OF HORSE RACING


shall be withheld for a period to be fixed
upon by the Stewards, at the expiration of
which time, if the Qualification be not prov-
ed to the satisfaction of the Stewards, he
shall not be entitled to the prize, though his
horse shall have come in first, but it shall be
given to the owner of the second horse.
When the Qualification of a horse is objected
to after that time, the person making the
objection must prove the Disqualification.
41. When the age or qualification of a horse
is objected to, either before or after running,
the Stewards shall, if they think fit, order an
examination of the horse’s mouth, by compe-
tent persons, and call for all such evidence
as they may require, and their decision shall
be final.
42. In all cases of fraud punishable by law
the Australian Jockey Club shall, if they
think fit, with the consent of the party
aggrieved, prosecute the offenders.
25
RULES OF HORSE RACING,


43. If a horse shall run, or he brought to
run, for any race at Homebush, or on any
course on which the Australian Jockey
Club may in future hold their Meetings,
and shall he proved not to he of the age
represented, the Australian Jockey Club
shall if they think fit disqualify for ever
tire owner, or part owner, trainer, groom, or
person having the care of such horse at the
time, from running or training any horse
at Homebush, or on any Course on which
the Australian Jockey Club may in future
hold their Meetings, and from being employ-
by any Member of the Club.
44. When a person has a horse engaged in
the name of another party who may be on
the list of defaulters, he may, if he pay this
forfeit, start his horse, leaving the forfeit on
the list, and substituting his own name for
that of the person to whom it was previously
due. lie may take the same course in re-
spect of forfeits not on the list.
26
RULES OF HORSE RACING.


45. When a person takes a nomination for
a stake, in which the forfeit is to be declared
by a particular time, and does not declare
forfeit by the time fixed, he takes the en-
gagement on himself, and his name will be
substituted for that of the original subscriber.
46. To prevent disputes the words “nomi-
nation” and “entrance,” shall he regarded
as synonymous terms.
47. All confederacies are strictly prohibit-
ed ; and in any race where a confederacy
is proved, the horses belonging to such par-
ties shall be adjudged distanced in that race
48. All stakesmust be made before starting;
in default thereof, the nominator becomes
liable as a loser, whether his horse comes in
first or not, unless he shall have previously
obtained the consent of the party or parties
with whom he is engaged to his not staking.
When the riders of any horses brought out
to run are called upon by the starter to take
their places for starting, the owner for every
RULES OF HORSE RACING.


horse that goes to the post is liable to pay
his whole stake.
49. No person in arrears for stakes, forfeits,
or fines, can enter or run in his own name
or in that of any other person, any horse
of which he is wholly or in part owner.
And to prevent any evasion of this rule,
the Stewards have power to call upon the
nominator to produce satisfactory testimony
that such is not the case, and on failure of
such proof, may cause the nomination to be
erased, and the nominator will be held liable
for the stakes or forfeits thereon. And no
horse trained by any groom or other person
thus in default, or in- any way under the care
of any person in default will be permitted to
start. Should any horse coming under the
above regulations be mistakenly permitted to
start ho will not be considered a winner though
he should come in first, and the subscriber will
have to pay the whole stake, as for a beaten
horsc-
28
RULES OP HORSE RACING.


30. The public having experienced incon -
venience and disappointment in consequence
of persons not publicly announcing their
intention to withdraw horses that are enter-
ed; in future, all persons intending to
withdraw horses are required to lodge a
written notice to that effect with the Clerk
of the Course, on or before the hour of
11 a.m., on the day of running, in which
such horses arc engaged. Any person neg-
lecting or refusing to comply with this
rule, shall pay a fine, to be imposed by the
Stewards, not exceeding Two Sovereigns to
the Race Fund.
51. Doubts having arisen as to the true
definition of the word “ plate ,” the Aus-
tralian Jockey Club have decided that
where a sum of money is given to be run
for, without any stake being made by
the owners of the horses (tho entrance
money, whether given to the owner of
the second horse or applied to the Race
RULES OF HORSE RACING*


Fund, net being considered a stake) such
prize shall he construed to be a “plate.” But
where a stake is deposited by the owners of
the horses, which is to go to the winner, and
an additional sum of money, a cup, piece
of plate, of other reward is offered as a prize
to the winner, even though such addition
shall be denominated a plate by the donor,
such race shall be deemed and taken to be
a “ sweepstakes and not a “plate.”
52. When a sum of money given from the
Race Fund, (whether added to a sweep-
stakes or not), be walked over for at Home-
bush, or on any course on which the Austra-
lian Jockey Club may in future hold then-
meetings, only half the amount shall bo
paid.
53. The owner of each winner shall pay £5
per cent, on the gross amount of his win-
nings towards the Race Fund, unless other-
wise specified.
Rt’LES OF HOUSE RACING.


54. All dogs found on the Course shall be
destroyed.
55. All disputes referred to the Australian
Jockey Club will be adjudged according to
the published rules, where any of them are
applicable to the case submitted to them ;
and where not according to the established
rules of racing.
56. Entrances for the Races under the ma-
nagement of the Australian Jockey Club
shall be made according to Printed Forms,
and the Honorary Secretary will from time
to time advertise from whom they may
be obtained, and the days on which entrances
may under cover be addressed to him.
Addendum.
At a meeting of the Jockey Club held at
Newmarket on Tuesday October 15th, 1850,
it was resolved, “ That in future any beaten
horse in a selling plate or stake may be
claimed by the owner of any other horse
running in the race, for the amount of the
stake or plate added to the selling price.”
31
RULES OF HORSE RACING.


BETS.
The Australian Jockey Club
and the Stewards thereof, will hence-
forth take no cognizance of any dis-
putes or claims in respect of bets.
They recommend all persons having
disputed bets to decide the same by
referees, one to be chosen by each
of the parties, and the two referees to
select a third. They publish, however,
the following English Rules of betting
for the guidance of the public.
I. A confirmed bet cannot be off but by
mutual consent, except in cases hereinafter
mentioned.
32
BETTING.


11. Either of the Bettors may demand
stakes to be made, and on refusal declare
the bet to be void.
111. If a Bettor be absent on the day of
running, a public declaration of the bet may
be made on the course, and a demand
whether any person will make stakes for
the absent party ; and if no person consent
to do so, the bet may be declared void.
IV. Bets agreed to be paid or received at
any particular place, cannot be declared off
on the course.
V. If a match or sweepstakes be made for
any particular day in any race week, and
the parties agree to change the day to any
other in the same week, all bets must stand ;
but if the parties agree to run the race in a
different week, all bets made before the
alteration shall be void.
VI, The person who lays the odds has a
right to choose a horse or the field ; when
a person has chosen a horse, the field is what
33
BETTING.


starts against him, but there is no field
without one horse starts against him.
VII. Bets and stakes made in guineas are
paid in pounds stexding.
VIII. If odds are laid without mentioning
the horse before the race is over, the bet
must be determined by the state of the odds
at the time of making it.
IX. Bets made in running are not deter-
mined till the plate is won, if that heat be
not mentioned at the time of running.
X. A bet made after the heat is over, if
the horse betted on does not start, is void.
XI. Bets are determined though the horse
does not start, when the word ‘ absolutely
run or pay ’ or 1 play-or-pay,’ are made use
of in betting.
XII. Where horses run a dead heat for a
sweepstakes or plate, and the parties agree
to divide the stakes, such horses shall be
BETTING


liable to carry extra weight as winners;
and all bets between such horses, or between
either of them and the field, must be settled
by the money betted being put together
and divided between the parties, in the
same proportion as the stakes shall have
been divided. If a bet be made on one of
the horses that ran the dead heat against
a horse that was beaten in the race, he who
backed the horse that ran the dead heat
wins half his bet. If the dead heat be the
first event of a double bet, the bet shall be
void.
XIII, Bets made on horses winning any
number of races within the year shall be
understood, however the expression may be
varied, as meaning the year of our Lord.
XIV. All bets depending between any
two horses shall be void, if those horses
become the property of the same person, or
of his avowed confederate, subsequently to
the bets being made.
35
BETTING


XV. All bets between particular horses
shall be void if neither of them happen to
be the winner, unless agreed by the parties
to the contrary.
XVI. If any bet shall be made from signal
or indication —telegraph for instance—after
the race has been determined,such bet shall
be considered as fraudulent and void, and
shall not be paid-
XVII. All bets in a match, which termi-
nate in a dead heat, are void ; and if the
match be run over again instanter, it must
be considered in every respect as a fresh
engagement.
XVIII. All double bets shall be con-
sidered as play-or-pay bets.
XIX. Bets on plates, matches, and small
sweepstakes are not p. p. unless specifically
mentioned.
XX. Money given to have a bet laid shall
36
BETTING


not be returned, though the race be not
run.
XXI. Matches and bets are void on the
decease of either party before the match or
bet is determined.
XXII. When the riders of any horse
brought out to run for any race, are called
upon by the person appointed to start them
to take their places for that purpose, the
owner of every horse which comes up to the
post shall be considered as liable to pay his
whole stake, and all bets respecting such
horses shall be considered as play-or-pay
bets.
XXIII. If a person bets the odds p. p.
against a horse named in a race which was
dead or legally struck out, or had been
declared by the owner not to start, the bet
is void ; but if the said horse be dying, and
his owner had not made a declaration of
paying forfeit, although it amounted to a
certainty that the horse would not start, the
37
BETTING


bet would stand good, because there would
be a possibility of the horse living and
winning the race.
XXIV. If upon backing a certain number
of horses against the field, one or more of
these horses named should be disqualified
in any way, or should have been declared
not to start, or should not even have been
named in the plate or sweepstakes alluded
to, the bet stands good, provided there be
one horse in the lot qualified at the time the
bet was made to start. No person has the
power to alter one of his nominations, after
the bet is closed; but if all the horses
named in the list should have been dis-
qualified when the bet was made, it is null
and void, on the principle that ‘ you cannot
lose when you cannot win.’
XXV, Finally, with respect to defaulters
on the Turf, they are considered in the
situation of outlaws; all bets made with
them may be declared off, and they are not
38
BETTING.


BETTING.
entitled to receive their winning bets at
any time, unless they settle their accounts
within two years from the date of their
Insolvency.


The Australian Jcckey Club publish
the following “ Duties of Racing
Officials,” from the Honorable Captain
Rous’s excellent work on the Laws
and Practice of Horse Racing, as a
Guide to Officials at Provincial
Meetings,
The Country Steward.
It would be prudent in every gentleman
who undertakes the office of Steward to
ascertain whether the funds are sufficient to
cover the amount of the plates and prizes
advertised to be run for, as in the event of a
defalcation he is bound by law to make good
the deficiency. It is the first duty of a
DUTIES OP RACING OFFICIALS.


Steward to see the offices of judge and starter
efficiently filled ; for if the judge gives a
wrong verdict, or if the starter allows an
improper start, there is no power in the
United Kingdom to upset their decisions.
When cups are run for hy subscription
there is a frequent complaint that the £lOO
cup is not worth £5O, owing to a peculiar
understanding between the clerk of the
course and the silversmith. As forty-nine
men out of fifty who run for cups prefer
specie, it is always a desideratum to give
the winner the option to be paid in hard
money.
Where plates are contested for the best of
heats, no horse can he distanced unless a
person is officially stationed at the distance-
post with a flag to answer the corresponding
signal from the winning-post.
The Steward’s decision is final on all points
of racing ; hut his authority does not extend
to disputes on bets.
41
DUTIES OF RACING OFFICIALS.


The Clerk of the Course.
The most important duties of the Clerk of
the Course arc to get subscriptions to the
stakes, to keep his race-course in good order,
and to collect the amount of the plates or
prizes before starting, that there may be no
delay in paying them to the respective win-
ners ; and in the event of any forfeits being
due for stakes, he must use every exertion for
the recover}' thereof.
In all sweepstakes closing on a certain day,
which may fail for the want of a stated
number of subscribers, if the said sweepstakes
be re-opened, none of the names of the
original subscribers can be left, without their
renewed consent ; and after the terms of a
s weepstakes have been published, and a sub-
scriber’s name admitted, the engagement
would become void by any alterations of
weights, distance, &c. without the concurrence
of every person who had subscribed.
Before a sweepstakes closes, a subscriber
DUTIES OP RACING OFFICIALS.


may change a horse already named ; but this
rule does not hold good in naming for a
plate. A horse named for a plate pays his
entrance money, and no change can be
allowed ; although any number of horses
may be added before the expiration of the
stated time.
The Clerk of the Course should be very
rigid in not allowing a horse to be entered
for any sweepstakes or public money after
the specified time has elapsed, without the
expressed permission of the owner of every
horse which may have been previously entered
otherwise the horse so entered ought not to
be allowed to start, and would be disqualified
from winning the stakes if he came in first.
The Clerk of the Course ought not to
accept the nomination to a sweepstakes from
an unknown man, unless he can bring for-
ward a respectable referee ; it sometimes
happens that neither the horse nor the
stranger re-appears ; or, what is more to the
purpose, the forfeit is not to be found.
43
DUTIES OF RACING OFFICIALS.


When the Clerk of the Course sends a
public return of the races to the official
register, lie should name the exact weights
every horse carried, and not leave to surmise
what extra weight and what allowances of
weight were made to the respective horses.
The Judge
Is generally placed in a species of sentry-box,
from whence he can rarely see the horses
until they are upon him ; and it is by no
means an uncommon occurrence for him to
overlook the horse which runs in next to the
rails under his box, when there is a large
field of horses close together. Place the
Judge’s seat five feet above the ground, and
about the same distance from the nearest
post, in the shape of a cab-driver’s box behind
a Hansom’s patent, and it would be next to
an impossibility for the Judge to make a
mistake.
The Judge should make alist of the horses
44
DUTIES OF RACING OFFICIALS.


weighed, and note down the colours of the
riders ; he should not allow any person or
moving object to be near enough to the
opposite winning-post to touch it.
When the heat is over he should write
down the colour of the rider who wins the
race, and the second, third, and fourth ac-
cording to circumstances ; then show the
corresponding number, if furnished with a
telegraph ; or in default thereof inform the
public what colour has won.
The decision of the Judge is final.
The Starter.
The Starter should he allowed an assistant,
stationed about a furlong from the starting-
post, with a flag, which he is instructed to
drop by signal, or : to keep elevated in the
event of the Starlet* signalising to him that it
is a false start. If there should be a large
field of horses, or any anticipated difficulty
DUTIES OP RACING OFFICIALS.


in getting' the horses well off, the Starter
should form his line about one hundred yards
behind the starting-post and walk them up,
which will facilitate a start on fair terms.
If any jockey should attempt to take an
unfair advantage , it is the duty of the Starter
to report the same to the Steward, and not
to allow a start to take place until the said
jockey keeps his proper place in the line.
If any dispute arises between the jockeys
for choice of place in a match, it must be
decided by a toss ; but if between three or
more jockeys, their places are chosen by
drawing lots.
The decision of the Starter is final; and his
testimony against a jockey on a charge of
attempting to take an unfair advantage at
starting is not allowed to be discredited.
W. J. ROW, PRINTER, SYDNEY.
DUTIES OF EACINb OFFICIALS.




"Saaaafflsesa!
