

0 hT
3/o r
~vQ
& O I
FORTY-FIVE YEARS’ EXPERIENCES
IN NORTH QUEENSLAND.
NOTICES FROM THE LEADING
NEWSPAPERS IN THE STATE.
W. R. O. HILL
(formerly police magistrate and gold warden.)




Government House, Brisbane,
7th July. 1907.
My Dear Sir, —
I did not have an opportunity of reading your book,
which you so kindly sent me, before my tour in North
Queensland. But I really think I appreciate it all the
more now that I have visited many of the localities
mentioned in it. I must thank yon very much for your
kindness in presenting me with a copy, which 1 have read
with great interest.
Believe me, sincerely yours,
CHELMSFORD.


Archbishop’s House,
‘ ll Dara, ’ ’ Brisbane,
22nd July, 1915.
Hear Mr. Hill, —
My time has been so crowded of late that your book,
“Forty-five Years’ Experiences in North Queensland,”
which I was so delighted to receive from yourself, has
remained unacknowledged. Kindly pardon me for this
seeming want of courtesy and gratitude, and believe that I
very much appreciate your reminiscences, for I have been
over most of the ground myself, though, of course, at a later
period. I only wish that others would imitate your industry
and help to preserve valuable information and records that
are dying with our old colonists.
Again thanking you for the book and for your original
verses on the war,
I remain, dear Mr. Hill, with much esteem,
Yours faithfully,
JAMBS DUHIG,
Coadjutor Archbishop of Brisbane.
W. K. 0. Hill, Esq


Brisbane,
sth March, 1907.
My Dear Hill, —
You already know how much I appreciate your' kindly
and, I fear, all too eulogistic mention of myself in the
preface of your book, which latter reached me in due
course. I have delayed acknowledging the book until time
permitted of my doing justice to its contents. Now that I
have done this, let me say how very much I have enjoyed
revelling in your reminiscences, which took me back to my
own boyhood and led me on through the happiest days of
my life.
At the Tooley street fire we may perchance have been
close together. I saw the glare in the afternoon from
Primrose Hill, went into London, and spent the greater
pari of the night up on an omnibus blocked on the London
Bridge.
Your description of your early Australian life and its
incidents, and the many names introduced of old identities
long since “gone aloft,” the majority of them with a record
as good as that of Torn Bowling of nautical fame —these
have all been most interesting to me. And I congratulate
you upon having been instrumental in rescuing from
threatened oblivion many a name which was, in the life of
its owner, familiar to the lips as household words.
All old hands will enjoy your book, and will join me
in commending your enterprise in putting upon record so
much interesting details of your colonial official life.
We must have a long yarn about the book the first time
you are in town.
With regards to Mrs. Hill,
Yours sincerely,
R. A. RANKING.


24th February, 1921.
Dear Mr. Hill, —
I hasten to thank you for your kindness in sending me
an autographed copy of your reminiscences. I assure you
I will treasure this up as a souvenir of a pioneer of our
great Australian nation.
If we had novelists “racy of the soil” who wanted a
theme, your book would give them a splendid foundation.
I am going to mention the matter to a novelist friend of
mine.
You must have a pile of reminiscences which are not
touched upon in your small hook. If 1 might assume the
role of an appreciative critic, I would say that you seem to
have the knack of selecting the dramatic parts of your
experiences for writing down.
I knew Jack Hamilton in his later days, about twenty
years ago. You have sketched in, or suggested, his
character so well in your account of the Morinish murder
episode that I think you could do a very fascinating book
on the character of the pioneers of the early days, as well
as a narrative of their exploits and adventures.
I hope you have good health and many years of life to
enjoy.
Yours faithfully,
JOHN D. FITZGERALD.


Forty-five Years’ Experiences in North Queensland.
A short time ago Mr. W. B. 0. Hill, formerly Police
Magistrate and Gold Warden of Queensland, published a
small volume giving his experiences in North Queensland
over a period extending from 1861 to 1905. Having read
the book, we find it very interesting, inasmuch as it gives a
lot of details of events, many of them very tragic, which
happened in the North during the period indicated. The
writer was also for some time in the Native Mounted Police,
a force which was also used on the Clarence for a number
of years. Mr. Hill makes mention of Lieutenants J.
O’Connell, Bligh, and A. Morrissett, of the force, who each
saw service in New South Wales. Mr. Hill’s experiences
Avere, of course, largely connected witli the gold diggings,
and it stirs one to read of a man while looking for his horses
picking up in three hours nuggets Aveighing 179 oz. A
horse had turned over a stone which disclosed a golden
stone and led to the discovery of others. Queensland has
been more fortunate than our State in getting the reminis-
cences of men like Archer, Petrie, Mulligan, Johnson, Hill,
and others. These published records, interesting as they
are to-day, will be infinitely more so in future.
In Queensland to-day is a well-knoAvn retired veteran
Police Magistrate, W. B. 0. Hill, who has published an
interesting volume entitled “ Forty-five Years in North
Queensland.” When he first entered the Public Service,
Sir Arthur Palmer AA r as Premier, and Hill applied to him
for the position of C.P.S. Occasionally he had an impedi-
ment in his speech, like the late C. H. Buzacptt, and it


chanced to be a little clearly marked on the day he called
to see Palmer, and the gruff but kindly old warrior said to
him, in slightly lurid language, “What (etc.) is the nse of
giving you that position when you might not be able to put
the question about the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth ?’ ’ And the genial Hill promptly replied, ‘‘ I
could sing it! ’ ’ Being challenged to sing it, he at once,
without a hitch, sang the whole thing, and Palmer was so
pleased and amused that he at once gave him the appoint-
ment !
It is well known that the hitch in the voice does not
extend to singing. Hill did one of the bravest acts recorded
in the Civil Service by going down into a dark shaft after
a very powerful German who had murdered a woman and
capturing him. The German had a big knife, and Hill had
a revolver, which he found afterwards was not loaded!
PUBLI CAT!ONS RECEIVED.
A PIONEER’S REMINISCENCES.
“Pottydive Years’ Experiences in North Queensland,
1861 to 1905; with a Few Incidents in England, 1844 to
1861,” by W. R. 0. Hill, ex-P.M. and Gold Warden (H.
Pole, Brisbane). —A very well-turned-out volume in deep
scarlet with gold lettering. In North Queensland, at any
rate amongst the older generation, there is no name held in
warmer respect and affection than that of “Willy” Hill,
one of the pioneer officials of the Cape River, Ravenswood.
Georgetown, the Palmer—all through the old historic places,
if we can claim our few short years as history—and well


known as a merry, athletic, artistic, and good Christian soul.
To look at Mr. Hill to-day, smart, spare, well set up, and
full of vigour, the singer of good songs, a wonderful pianist,
without a pain or ache, one would scarcely think that lie
was horn as far back as 1844, and was in the Queensland
Native Police in 1863. It all comes of sound forbears and
an athletic training, the author of the “Experiences’"
would, no doubt, say, and one can well understand the
correctness of the explanation. To have conic through the
old blazing days of the North —Through many a time of
semi-starvation and flood, through all the risks of a plucky
officer, and with a record of a few serious accidents, and yet
remain clear-eyed and athletic, bespeaks a splendid natural
inheritance. These “Experiences’’ are deeply interesting
to Northerners, to men where names of _ Hodgkinson,
Clohesy, Charters, Harvey Fitzgerald* Macrossan, E. H.
Plant, Drs. Frost and Ahearn, Urqnhart, Ned Cunningham,
Finch, Dave Scott, J. G. McDonald, and others of that good
old type are household words - but there is more than the
personal element in the volume. Indeed, one would like to
have had a few chapters on the Ravenswood riots, the riots
which the late revered Bishop Quinn did so much towards
quelling; and Mr. Hill could be trusted to give longer and
more detailed historical accounts of the early days of the
Northern goldfields. We want historical work of the kind
very much, and Mr. Hill evidently appreciates that in his
preface, where he says; ‘ ‘ Had a hundred other pioneers left
on record even as much as this imperfect fragment for
myself, the historian could have drawn on the general store-
house for such selected material as would have made two
or three historical volumes, that would have given the future
9


some reliable pictures of the past, which is disappearing in
the gloom of vanished years. ’ ’ The writer well remembers
"Willy’' Hill in the North, though strangely enough their
paths did not cross until later on in Brisbane.
A volume which is likely to prove most interesting in
its perusal is published by a Brisbane firm for Mr. W. R. 0.
Hill, recently Police Magistrate at Clermont, but now living-
in retirement in Brisbane on his well-earned pension. Mr.
Hill has had forty-five years’ experience as an officer of
Native Police, Stipendiary Magistrate, and Gold Warden
in this State. He was born in 1844 in St. Hellers, his birth-
place conferring upon him the soubriquet of “Jersey
crapeau, ’ ’ shared by the writer of this notice, who first saw
the light in St. Heliers when Mr. Hill was a little boy of 2.
He came to Queensland in 1861, and at once obtained an
appointment as lieutenant in the Native Police. His adven-
tures during the time he held this appointment must be
well worth reading, although we may as well acknowledge
that we have not yet seen them in print, our information
being derived from a review in the “Bulletin.” That
journal mentions that Mr. Hill was appointed Police Magis-
trate in 1868, but there must be some mistake in this date,
as his Worship would have been only 24 years old in that
year. Mr. Hill met many people, distinguished and other-
wise, during his long residence in the Northern and Central
districts, and he chats about them in most delightful fashion
throughout his reminiscences. Mr. Hill is the possessor of
many social qualities, and can sing a capital song and
delight a room full of his friends with the humour of his
numberless anecdotes. Mr. Hill dedicates his book to his
highly-valued dear old friend, R. A. Ranking, senior Police
Magistrate, one of the truest and whitest men who ever-
entered the Queensland Civil Service.


•■WILLY" HILL’S BOOK.
A new and cheaper edition is out of W. R. 0. Hill’s
'‘Forty-five Years’ Experiences in North Queensland. It
is well hound and printed, and contains much that is of
value concerning the early days of the North, the Native
Police, and so on. Mr. Hill tells a story well, and introduces
people whose names are well known in Australia. Many of
the personal sketches are very acceptable. The “Experi-
ences” are too good to be missed.
“FORTY-FIVE YEARS’ EXPERIENCES IN NORTH
QUEENSLAND.”
The early history of Queensland affords good material
for the facile writer. North Queensland, especially, is rich
in events of stirring adventure. Mr. W. R. 0. Hill, ex-
police Magistrate and Gold Warden, has made good use of
his material in his recently published book, “Forty-five
Years’ Experiences in North Queensland. The expe-
riences referred to cover the period from 1861 to 190;).
When Mr. Hill arrived as a lad in Brisbane bullock teams
were the principal means of conveyance in the streets of
that town. Mr. Hill was attached to the Native Police
Force in the early days, and spent some years as a station
manager in North Queensland. Since then he has been
Clerk of Petty Sessions, Gold Warden, Police Magistrate,
&c., in various centres all over the State. His life has been
crowned with incidents, the record of which is well worth
preserving in book form. Ipswichians will be interested in
his relation of an exciting pedestrian event at Ravenswood,
in which the late Mr. Dave Scott (a son of Mr. John Scott,
of Milford street) put down a showy professional named
Green. Who had appeared on the Northern goldfield. Mix


Hill is a musician, and pays a pretty compliment to the
Misses Spenceley, daughters of Mr. T. Spenceley, head
teacher of the State school at Newtown. Pioneer colonists
will find the book particularly interesting.
Ex-P.M. “Willy” Hill, in his recently published
interesting book of reminiscences, tells how he went down a
mining shaft in Ravenswood in pursuit of a murderer
named Mutter, some thirty odd years ago. He thought
nobody followed him, but when moving along the level at
the bottom found that a constable named Murphy had come
after him to lend a hand. That plucky constable named
Murphy is now the Hon. Peter, M.L.C.
A NEW BOOK.
“Truth" is in receipt of “Forty-five Years' Expe-
riences in North Queensland, ” by W. R. 0. Hill, until lately
Police Magistrate and Gold Warden all over Queensland.
The volume is intensely interesting, and is written in the
hope of reviving many of the scenes and incidents of early
life in Queensland from the limbo of oblivion. As Mr. Hill
says, “Queensland’s unwritten history is drifting rapidly
to the rear. . . . Had a hundred other pioneers left on
record everr as much as this imperfect fragment from
myself, the historian coidd have drawn on that general
storehouse for such selected material as would have made
two of three historical volumes.” The truth of which is
obvious, and pity ’tis that more of the grand old men
pioneers of Queensland have not left records of their
experiences. Mr. Hill’s volume of 153 pages deals with
Queensland life from 1861 to 1905, first of all in the Native
Mounted Police in the far North, and then as 0.P.5., Police
Magistrate, and Gold Warden on the Cape River Goldfield,


Ravens wood, the Etheridge, the Palmer, at Cairns, Spring-
sure, Charleville, Gayndah, Clermont, and Maekay. Many
interesting, half-forgotten incidents are recorded, including
the murders of Power, Cahill, and Halligan, and the volume
closes with the “Times” account of the Sayers-Heenan
tight on 18th April, 1860, just before Mr. Hill left England
for Australia. Many capitally reproduced illustrations
brighten the book, in which there is not a dry page from
cover to cover, and which is “dedicated fraternally to my
highly valued dear old friend P.M. Ranking, now Senior
Police Magistrate, one of the truest and whitest men who
ever entered the Queensland Civil Service.” In his preface
the author acknowledges his indebtedness to his old friend
Archibald Meston. The volume is neatly got up and well
printed by IT. Pole and Co., printers, Elizabeth street.
We have to acknowledge the receipt for review from
Messrs. IT. Pole and Co., printers, Brisbane, of “Forty-five
Years’ Experiences in North Queensland, ” by Mr. W. R. 0.
Hill, ex-Police Magistrate and Gold Warden. The volume,
which is nicely bound and printed, is exceedingly interest-
ing, the experiences extending from 1861 to 1905, and
constitute to some extent a history of Queensland, all the
more interesting because, written in an unpretentious style,
it throws valuable sidelights on early days in the colony.
The book also contains a number of photographs of old
identities mostly, alas, of the past, these including' the late
Mr. W. 0. Hodgkin son, Charters (of Charters Towers),
Tom Clohesy, W. Carr-Boyd, &c.; and also of notable
criminals, including Griffin (the murderer of the Rock-
hampton gold escort) and Palmer (the murderer of Halli-
gan). We heartily recommend the book to those who like
a plain, unvarnished story of the days gone by, while as a
record of past history it is well worthy of a place in the
library shelves.


A PIONEER’S REMINISCENCES.
Prom H. Pole and Co., Brisbane, we have received the
copy of a book written by Mr. W. R. 0. Hill, an old Police
Magistrate in Queensland, lately retired. The author deals
with forty-five years’ experience in a breezy manner, and
furnishes incidents which will be read with avidity by
young and old colonists, more especially those dealing with
station life, and life on the goldfields in the early days.
There are several illustrations through the book.
BOOKS.
FRESH FROM PUBLISHERS.
‘‘Forty-five Years’ Experiences in Queensland. ’ ’ This
is a volume written by Mr. W. R. 0. Hill, ex-P.M. and Gold
Warden of Queensland. The contents are in the nature of
biography, but the author has modestly kept himself in the
background, his aim evidently being to give in bold relief
the stirring events which he describes. For their fidelity
and simple yet effective tone, the descriptive parts of the
book are particularly good. In fact, the volume will pass
from the realm of ordinary biography into that of history.
In years to come it will be consulted for information on the
early history of Queensland, and as such it will be an
invaluable reference. Therefore, it should have a place in
every library of reference. The book is neatly produced,
and contains some rare and interesting plates of old and
stirring scenes.


FORTY-FIVE YEARS IN QUEENSLAND.
A nicely printed and got up little volume of 150 pages
Las just been published by the Brisbane firm of H. Pole and
Co., recording some of the more notable and interesting
incidents in the long career as a public servant of W. R. 0.
Hill. Than “Willy” Hill no man in the State service was
better known, and in variety of experience few have beaten
him. From Brisbane to the Palmer he has held office in
almost every district as Police Officer, Magistrate, and
Mining Warden, and though the material used is, in the
author’s own words, an “imperfect fragment” of what
might have been, it is of high value to the “old timer,” as
well as to the younger generation interested in Queensland
history. Detailed accounts are given of the Brisbane riots
in 1868, the Griffin double murder and execution in 1867,
and the Steffan murder at Ravenswood in the late seventies.
A dozen or so well-printed illustrations are interspersed
through the volume, which is issued at a cheap price, and
should command a large sale, particularly in the North.
A. J. Gumming, Govt. Printer.


