

Thus the scene ended in hearty laugh-
ing. The Major observes, ?That
he was at length convinced, that no
kindness had the slightest effect in
altering the savage desire of the na-
tives to kill white men, on their first
coming among them. That Austral
lia can never be explored with safety,
except by very powerful parties, will
probably be proved by the treacherous
murder of many brave white men.?
On October the 17th, they reached
the Murray. No one could have mis-
taken the access; for the vast extent
of verdant margin, with its lofty trees
and still lakes, could have belonged to
no other Australian river which they
had met. After reaching this power-
ful stream, they began to look for the
marks of cattle, having heard that the
herds of the settlers had already ex-
tended themselves even in this remote
direction. They at last found tracks
of the wheels of a gig drawn by one
horse, and accompanied by others, but
they were some months old. Such are
the minute remarks and trivial objects
which excite the interest of men in
those solitudes. The full and flow-
ing river, always a source of anima-
tion, gave an unusual appearance of
life and motion to the desert, where
all around was so still. Serpents
seem to have been the only tenants of
the wilderness, and some were seen of
a species apparently peculiar to the
river. They invariably take to it,
and one beautiful reptile in particular,
of a gold colour, with red streaks,
sprung from under the Major?s horse?s
feet, and ? rode upon the strong cur-
rent of the boiling stream, keeping
abreast of us, and holding his head
erect, as if in defiance, and without
once attempting to make his escape,
until he died in his glory by a shot.?
As their route turned homewards,
they appear to have been in some fear
of the failure of their provisions, and
it became a matter of primary impor-
tance to fall in with some of the cattle
of the out stations. At length they
found the tracks not only of cattle but
of welhshod horses ! The Major now
hastened back with the good tidings to
the party, brought the carts into the
valley, and pushed onward, cheered
by finding additional marks, even the
print of young calves? feet. ? And at
length,? as he pleasantly tells, ? the
welcome sight of the cattle themselves
delighted dur longing eyes, not to
mention our stomachs, which were
then in the best possible state to assist
our perceptions of the beauty of a
foreground of fat cattle.? But the
view was destined to end in disappoint-
ment. ?We were soon surrounded
by a staring herd of at least 800 wild
animals, and I took a shot at one: but
my ball only made him jump ; upon
which the whole body, apparently very
wild, made off to the mountains.
Symptoms of famine began now to show
themselves in the sullenness of some of
the men ; and I most reluctantly con-
sented to kill one of our poor working-
animals, which was accordingly shot,
as soon as we encamped, and divided
among the party.?
Still advancing, they at length came
in sight of the Murrumbidgee, and in
sight of a landscape uniting the wild
beauty of nature with some of the as-
pects of civilisation. Before them
spread the ? dark umbrageous trees,
overshadowing that noble river, and
the rich open flats, with tame cattle
browzing on them, or reclining in lux-
urious ease, very unlike the wild herd.
Now, we could trace the marks of
horsemen on the plain; and as we
travelled up the river, horses and cattle
appeared on both banks. At length
they came to the first fact of civiliza-
tion. They discovered a small house
and a stack-yard. An old settler there
came out to meet them, named Bill
Buckley, with the characteristic wel-
come of a huge loaf in his hand. All
was now coideur de rose ; some drays
just then arrived, coming on the road
from Sydney, and containing provi-
sions. Piper, too, had his share of
exultation. His joy was great on
emerging from the land of savages,
and coming among blacks, who no
longer threatened to kill him : * Civil
black fellows,? as he called them, ? not
Myalls.? He fully exhibited the su-
periority of a traveller, and enjoyed
his lionship prodigiously. Little
Ballandella, too, the widow?s infant,
had been taken good care of by Mrs
Piper, and was now feasted with milk,
and seemed quite happy.?
VOL. XLV. NO. CCLXXIX.


OUR POCKET COMPANIONS.
No weather more pleasant than
that of a mild winter day. So gra-
cious the season, that Hyems is like
Ver Januarius like Christopher
North. Art thou the Sun of whom
Milton said.
? Looks through the horizontal misty air,
Shorn of his beams,?
an image of disconsolate obscuration ?
Bright art thou as at meridian on a
June Sabbath; buteffusing a more tem-
perate lustre not unfelt by the sleeping,
not insensate earth. She stirs in her
sleep and murmurs?the mighty mo-
ther; and quiet as herself, though
broad awake, her old ally the ship-
bearing sea. What though the woods
be leafless?they look as alive as when
laden with umbrage; and who can
tell what is going on now within the
hearts of that calm oak grove ? The
fields laugh not now?but here and
there they smile! If we see no
flowers we think of them?and less of
the perished than of the unborn ; for
regret is vain, and hope is blest; in
peace there is the promise of joy?and
therefore in the silent pastures a per-
fect beauty how restorative to man?s
troubled heart!
The Shortest Day in all the year, yet
lovelier than the Longest. Can that
be the voice of birds ? With the lave-
rock?s lyric our fancy filled the sky?
with the throstle?s roundelay it awoke
the wood. In the air life is audible?
circling unseen. Such serenity must
be inhabited by happiness. Ha! there
thou art, our Familiar?the self-same
Robin red-breast that pecked at our
nursery window, and used to warble
from the gable of the school-house his
sweet winter song!
In company we are silent?in soli-
tude we soliloquize. So dearly do we
love our own voice that we cannot bear
to hear it mixed with that of others?
perhaps, drowned ; and then our bash-
fulness tongue-ties us in the hush, ex-
pectant of our ? golden opinions,?
when all eyes are turned to the speech-
less ? old man eloquent,? and you
might hear a tangle dishevelling itself
in Nesera?s hair. But all alone, by
ourselves, in the country, among trees,
standing still among untrodden leaves
as now?how we do speak! All
thoughts?all feelings?desire utter-
ance ; left to themselves they are not
happy till they have evolved into
words?winged words?that sometimes
settle on the ground, like moths on
flowers?sometimes seek the sky, like
eagles above the clouds.
No such soliloquies in written poetry
as these of ours?the act of composition
is fatal as frost to their flow ; yet com-
position there is at such solitary times
going on among the moods of the mind,
as among the clouds on a still but not
airless sky, perpetual but impercepti-
ble transformations of the beautiful,
obedient to the bidding of the spirit of
beauty ;
? But those are heavenly, these an empty
dream.??
Who but Him who made it know-
eth aught of the Laws of Spirit ? All
of us may know much of what is
? wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best,?
in obedience to them ; but leaving the
open day we enter at once into thick-
est night. Why at this moment do
we see a spot?once only visited by
us, and unremembered for ever so
many flights of black or bright winged
years?see it in fancy as it then was
in nature, with the same dew-drops
on that wondrous myrtle beheld but on
that morning?such a myrtle as no
other eyes beheld ever on this earth,
but ours, and the eyes of one now in
heaven ?
Another year is about to die?and
how wags the world? ?What great
events are on the gale ?? Go ask our
statesmen. But their rule their
guidance is but over the outer world,
and almost powerless their folly or
their wisdom over the inner region in
which we mortals live, and move, and
have our being, where the fall of a
throne makes no more noise than that
of a leaf!
And what tiny volume is this we
have in our hand ? Collins, Gray, and
Beattie! Were they among the num-
ber of those of whom Wordsworth
thought, when he spoke
? Of mighty poets in their misery dead !
We poets in our youth begin in gladness,
But thereof comes in the end despon-
dency and madness ??
