

REFERENDUMS TO BE TAKEN ON
THE PROPSED LAWS
1946
AUSTRALIA-COMMONWEALTH ELECTORAL OFFICE




COMM ONWE A L TH OF AUSTRA LIA
Ibe Referendum (Constitution Alteration) Act
JIL Jmm&M (LfiJ JL A: 'W JIL ifcp«(JP
t® Ib© taken sa tli© Proposed Laws
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (SOCIAL SERVICES) 1946
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (ORGANIZED MARKETING OF
PRIMARY PRODUCTS) IMS
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT) 1946
The CASE
FOR and AGAINST
Pamphlet containing —
ARGUMENTS m FAVOUR OF the Proposed Laws
authorized by a majority of the Members of both Houses
of the Parliament who voted tor the Proposed Laws ;
ARGUMENTS AGAIMST the Proposed Laws authorized
hy a majority of the Members of both blouses of the
Parliament who voted agamst the Proposed Laws,
The Arguments FOR .. * > Pages 4l© 18*
Tlie Arguments AGAINST .. .. Pages 19 I® 31*
V, Ft TURNER,
Ck&4 Ehsziet&l Ooi<xt fW the Cmrnmu&alih
Canberra, 20 th July, 1946
C,77St/46


IffATEMEirT showing 1 Section SI of the Constitution,
with the proposed additions inserted in block tppe.
SI. The Parliament shall, to this Coxistitutima, have
?cw«f to make laws for the peace, order, and good govorument
of the Commonwealth with respect to;
(L) Trade sad commerce with other countries, and among
the States-.
(i.A.) Organised maxketiag of primary products:
(ii.) Taxation; hut so as not to discriminate between States
or parts of States;
(iii.) Bounties oh the production or export of goods, but so
that such boxinties shall be tmifonxi throughout the
Commonwealth:
(iv.) Borrowing money on the public credit of the Common-
wealth :
(t.) Postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and other like services;
{vi.j The naval and military defence of the Commonwealth
sad of the several States, and the control of the
forces to execute and maintain the laws of the
Commonwealth:
(vii.) Lighthouses, lightships, beacons and buoys;
(vi.ii.) Astronomical and meteorological observations;
(lx,) Quarantine;
(x.) Fisheries-in Australian waters beyond territorial limits;
(xi.) Census and statistics;
(xii.) Cnrroney, coinage, and legal tender;
(>;:iik) Banking, other than State banking; also State banking
extending beyond the limits of'the State concerned’
the incorporation of banks, and the issue of paper
money;
(xiv.) Insurance, other than State insurance.; also State in-
surance extending beyond the limits of the State
concerned;
(xv.) Weights and measures:
(xvl.) Bills of exchange and promissory notes;
(:s vii.) Bankruptcy and insolvency;
(xviiL) Copyrights, patents of inventions and designs, and trade
marks:
(xix<) Naturalization and aliens:
(xx.) Foreign corporations, and trading or financial corpora-
tions formed within the limits of the Commonwealth;
(xxi.) Marriage:
(xxii) Divorce ami matrimonial causes; and in relation there-
to, parental rights, and the custody and guardian-
ship of infants:
(xxm.) Invalid and old-age pensions;
godllA,) The provision of maternity allowances, widows* pen-
sions, child endowment, unemployment, pharma-
ceutical, sickness and hospital beaeits, medical, and
dental services (but sot so as to authorise any form
of civil conscription), benefits to students and
family allowances:
&i lh&
Prteosws
ssss«rketl«g e?
protested
Servtew.)


C-xxiv,) The service aad execution throughout the
wealth of the civil and criminal precede and ths
judgments of the courts of the States;
(xxv.) The recognition throughout the Commoawe&ith of t&s
laws ; the public Acts and records, and the judleml
proceedings of the States:
(xxvi.) The people of a ny race, other thaa the aboriginal tm#
in any Stain, for whom it is deemed necessary t#
make special laws:
(xxyii.) Immigration and emigration;
(xxviii.) The influx of eriminais:
(xxis.) External affairs:
{xxx.) The relations of the Commonwealth with the islands of
the Ib.udflc;
(xxxL) The acquisition of property on Just terms from any
idtatc or person for any purpose iu respect of which
the Parliament has power to make law's;
(xxxu.) The control of railways with respect to transport for
the naval and military purposes of the Common-
wealth ;
i .vxxtu.) acquisition, with the consent of a State, of any
railways of the State on terms arranged between the
Commonwealth and the State:
f v xx.xiv.j Hallway construction aud extension, in. aav State with
the consent of that State:
(xxxr/.A.) Terms and coaditioas of employment in industry, butb
not so as to authorize any form of industrial ’ con -
scriptloa:
(xxxv.) Clone uiatioa and arbitration for the prevention and
settlement of industrial disputes extending beyond
the limits of any on© State;
(xx.vvi.) .Matters in respect of which this Constitution makes
provision until the Parliament otherwise provides;
(xxsvii.) Matters referred to the Parliament of the Common-
wealth by the Parliament or Parliaments of any
State or States, but so that the law shall extend only
to States by whose Parliaments the matter is re-
ferred, or which afterwards adopt the law:
(xxxviii.) The exorcise within the Commonwealth, at- the request
or with the concurreoc.e of the Parliaments of all the
States directly concerned, of any power which can
at the establishment of this Constitution be exercise-1
by 5,-he Poslxamcnt of the United. .Is.mgdom or by
the Fedora! Council of Australasia:
(xxxix.y .Matters incidental to the execution of any power ve, ted
by this Constitution in the Parliament' or in either
Hoosa thereof, or in the Government of the Common-
wealth, or in the Federal Judicature, or in any de-
partment ox* officer of the Comuion wealth,
(2.) Without in any way limiting the generality of the expres-
sion * primary products ” in paragraph (i,A.) of sub-section (1.) a
of this section, that expression shall be deemed to include .dour **
and other wheat- products, butter, cheese and other milk products, *£
dned fruit and other fruit- products, meat and meat products and
sugar. ,
(S,) The power of the Parliament to make laws under para-
of sub~S6ctlOH {!*) o;f t'liis sdction bo 6X6rci£6&
notwithstanding anything contained hr section ninety-two of this
Constitution.
iimvxkiM
«So}fej'WSot<J
CO^giW’mjj
aaarsstlffg e?
swdroar*
pre«SaBls.J


THE CASE FOR YES.
IHTSOBUOTICiW,
The electors are asked to decide whether their Australian Parliament
is to have new powers hi relation to three matters. Inscribed v*>ry
briefly. these are; —
Social Services.
Organised Marketing of Primary Produets.
Terms and Conditions of Envployment in. Industry.
The full wording of the proposed new powers is printed in heavy black
type in this pamphlet.
You are required to vote separately on each of the three questions.
Yon may vote “ Yes” or u Ho” on each exactly as yon think fit. This
Case, though, will show why it is of vital interest to you ami to every
Australian to vote (i Yes n on ail three.
On . referendum day you will he called on to <1 in-barge a heavy
responsibility. Yonr vote will have a far--rear king infinenee not only
on yonr own future, but also on that of your family. There is a.strong
obligation on you to understand prnpcrly what is at stake.
Far liameiit has passed three Bills for altering the Constitution.
These alterations cannot take effect until they have been approved by
the people at a referendum.. It Is the people who are sovereign in this
country- —not the Commonwealth or the States. It is for the people to
say finally whether any particular power should he exercised by the
Commonwealth, or by the States, or not at ail. Bo it is for you to
decide. The object of this Case is to satisfy you that the progress of
Australian nationhood calls for three * Yes J? votes.


THE FIRST QUESTION.
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (SOCIAL SERVICES) 1946.
SOCIAL SERVICES.
blew paragraph to fee added to section hi of the Constitution,
“ (xxiii.A.) Tfee provision of maternity alltwances. widows’ pensions,
child endowment, iraemplojment. pharmaceutical,
sickness and hospital benefits, medical and dental
services (but not so as to authorise any form of civil
conscription), benefits to students and family
allowances: ”,
THE dUESTIOM FOE THE ELECTOJRS.
You are asked to approve an alteration of the Australian Constitution
In order to confirm the national Far 11amentis power to provide the
various social services that are mentioned in th# list at the top of this
"Sou probaoly know that the Common wealth is already providing
most of these services. It provides maternity allowances, widows'
pensions, child endowment, nnemplojment. sickness and hospital benefits,
and'benefits to students. But because of a legal decision, last year, the
Constitution now seeds altering to make sure that this can, continue,
FEOTISIOH MADE 111 1900.
"When the Constitution, was drawn up in 1900 and on this subject
it. is Just the same to-day—it mentioned in the Common wca I th's list of
powers only one social service, namely old-age and invalid pensions.
*' How then you ask, u did the Commonwealth come to provide
these other social services?’l
HEEB mm AEOBI FOE HEW SOCIAL SEEYICES.
Weil, as time went on, all political parties came to realise that it
was the community's duty to provide for the people benefits of a social
services character. What is more, if Australians in their different States
were to have these services on a uniform basis, without artificial
distinctions, they could only be provided by the national Parliament.
' This was recognized not only by Labour Governments but also by
their opponents. .For example, child endowment was introduced by &
non-Labour Government with the support of the Labour Party, and it
was increased, by the Curtin Government. Maternity allowances, widows'
pensions, unemployment, sickness and hospital benefits and benefits to
students were introduced by Labour Governments!
ABYEESE DECISION BY HIGH €O¥ET.
.Ever since Federation, all Commonwealth Governments, irrespective
of party, have taken the view that the expenditure required to provide
these benefits was authorised by section 81 of the Constitution. This
section says that Commonwealth moneys are a to be appropriated for the
purposes of the Commonwealth ",
(Argument FOB the Fropoeed Im w.)


The view taken was that the C.hn.o.nmnweaith can spend for sny
purposes it thinks fit tlm mmo ys that it roivoa from the people. That
view was acted on for mm >'h forty-five years. But it was shattered by
a decision. of the High i !-:r of Australia late last year.
Tire .Present Qovvrnua ur'- i %(maaeetdwal Ben a hi* Act .1.94.4 was
attacked, in the High. Oort by the then Attorney-General of Victoria, at
the instigation of executive members of the Medical Association of
Victoria. The Court declared that the Act was invalid;
What the High. Court said amounted in effect to this —that before
any social benefit esn bo (i a purpose of the Coraraoßwealth. n on which
Commonwealth money can be spent, it has to he named in the
Goustitatioiy like “ Invalid and .Old-age Pensions } \ (These pensions,
by the way, are not in danger, and are not involved in this referendum.)
MAMY TEESI¥T PAYMENTS MOW HAVE ¥0 COITTITIJTIOMAI
PEOTEETIOM.
" Mono of the benefits set out in the Bill are .named iu the Constitution,
as it stands at present. This means that, exactly like the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Act, they are all in danger of being declared invalid too at
any moment.
That is the position today with all benefits provided by the Common-
wealth through the Maternity .Allowances Act, the Child Endowment
\ct, the Widows* Pensions Act, and the Unemployment and Sndraess
1 < ru'fits Act as well ag parts of the Hospital Benefits Aot and the
I .d-mat-ion Act. Obviously too, the Commonwealth cannot safely provide
auy new kind of social service benefit.
If all these payments were to be: suddenly discontinued, widespread
distress would he caused. Strictly, no Act of the Commonwealth Par-
liament is invalid until it. has been so held by the Courts. Therefore the
Government, though it thinks that the principles laid down by the High
Court in the Pharmaceutical .Benefits case would also apply to those
other payments if they were challenged, Ims taken the responsibility of
continuing them for the time being. But they are all open to attach at.
any time. That is why the -Gov» mmrnt has taken, this early opportunity
of consulting tbe electors at ar< L-rcmlam. By voting a Yes ?? yon will
put these ether payments out of danger.
Do not he misled into thinking that just because payments to mothers,
to widows and to the sick are still, going on, this state of things can
continue indefinitely. These payments can easily be attacked, in quite a
number of different ways,
HOW IXfSfIICI SOCIAL SERVICES MAY 11 ATTACHE!,
Long ago, the High Court established a rule —and re-affirmed it
recently in the Pharmaceutical Benefits case—that the Attorney-General
of any State may question the validity of any Commonwealth Act.
Therefore the Attorney-General of a State -can, -either on Ms own
initiative or at the request or u relation ” of a taxpayer or body of tax-
payers. challenge too validity of any one or more of these social service
A An.
(Argument FOR the Proposed Euw.'l


If you think that so State Attoraev-General or private citicons would
be so unmindful of the welfare of the people as to make such a challenge,
too would be wrong. This is tiro very tiling that did happen and
recently too- in the Pharmaceutical Benefits case.
A direct challenge from a private citizen, can also be launched at any
moment in a very simple way. The various Acte impose penalties on
persons who obtain benefits by means of any false statement or other
pretence. If such a person were convicted, and appealed against his
conviction- —as he could do to the High Court-—-the validity of the Act
•under which he was convicted would immediately be under question, la,
view of the decision in the Pharmaceutical Benefits case, no defending
lawyer would hesitate f( r a moment to take such a case cm appeal.
This shows only too plainly that these Acte, and the benefits they
provide, are in an extremely precarious position. By voting “ Yes n yon
•will confirm the Commonwealth's-•• power- to provide all the present
benefits,
BILL INCLUDES POWE.E FOE HEW SOCIAL SERVICES,
The proposed new power does expressly mention those present benefits.
Hot it goes further, and will permit the Parliament to provide benefits
which you are not now getting, and which, at- present the Commonwealth
■has no power to give. These new services are (i pharmaceutical benefits 'q
medical and dental services ”, and “ family allowances ”, These are
benefits of a very similaj’ kind to those already provided. They all come
under the heading of SOCIAL BI.bRVICES, To confirm the present
benefits and stop there, without also giving the Commonwealth power to
provide these other benefits, if the people's representatives see fit, would
he very shortsighted. Other countries (such as England and 'New
Zealand) are providing similar benefits already. Australia once led the
world in -social policy, lx does not .want to lag behind now.
The whole purpose of social services is to ensure that people .may live
out their lives in freedom from fear and from want.
Sickness is the greatest cause both of fear and of want. Serious or
protracted illness in a family may cripple its finances for many years.
The Commonwealth has not had assured constitutional power to make
a just and all-embracing law for social security. Part of such a law must
be provision for health, because health is the basis of happy living.
We cannot have such a law until you give the Commonwealth jour
authority for it by voting YES,
WHAT THE HEW SEEVICES COULD MEAN,
Pharmaceutical. Medical and Dental Benefits.
II the people vote YES, the Commonwealth will be able to provide
free pharmaceutical, medical and dental services, either through separate
chemists, doctors and dentists or at centres where general and specialist
services will he available. These vital services could be brought within
reach of all, without regard to their means.
(Argument FOE the Proposed Law,)


Family Allowances.
Tins would, cover any allowance which is given to a family, or to a
person by virtue of xuemhershlp of a family. If Parliament thought fit it
could cover, for example, domestic help to mothers, assistance to families
to boy or rent homes, and assistance to persons who maintain aged, or
infirm relatives.
m mmTim of socializm medical ahb bemtax seeymes.
Yon will not be voting for any particular method of providing
medical and dental services. Whether or not they are to be provided,
and if so how, will both fee matters tor your representatives in Parlia-
ment .from time to time to decide, in accordance with your wishes, At
least once in every three years, yon can change yonr representatives if
you do not approve their actions.
Bat there is one thing the Parliament will not be able to do. It will
not be able to bring in any form of civil conscription. That, yon will
see if you refer to the heading in black type, is expressly safeguarded
in the .new power itself.
This means that doctors and dentists cannot be forced to become
professional officers of the Commonwealth, nnder a scheme of medical
and dental services.
THIS BBFEEEHBITM MOT A POLITICAL MATTER.
There is no Party question at ail. The? idea that doctors and dentists
might be conscripted was the only real ofe ration of the Opposition
parties in Parliament.'- The Government set that doubt at rest
fey agreeing' to the insertion of a clause in the power itself that there
shall "he no conscription. After that, only three out of all the members of
the Federal Parliament voted against the Social Services Bill Mr, A,
(Jamcron (South Australia) in the House of .Eepresentatives and
Senators Mattuer and MeLadblan (both of South .Australia) m the
Senate. These three are the only persons in Australia authorised to
present a Case for “ ’No ” in this pamphlet on this question.
OOMM OB'WEALTH AS Will. AS STATE FOWEIS HSCESSAEY.
These social services can only be dealt with fairly and properly on an
Australia-wide basis. Piecemeal laws made by separate States - create
confusion and unfair differences. ' Throughout the Commonwealth, all
Australians should share equally in social service benefits.
POE SOCIAL SECURITY, VOTE « YES
There is really no room, for doubt about how yon should vote. The
need for maternity allowances, child endowment, widows' pensions and
other social services is no longer disputed by any thinking person.
There is no doubt about the grave danger that is threatening them now.
In Australians interests, and in your own family’s interests, the only
vote is YES.
To vote YEB, pur the number 1 in the square opposite the word
u Yit'B rr and the number 2in the other square.
(Argument FOB. the Proposed Law.)


THE SECOND QUESTION.
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (ORGANIZED MARKETING OF
PRIMARY PRODUCTS) 1948.
ORGANIZED MARKETING.
New portions to be added to section 51 of the Constitution:
iir (1,) (iJL) Organized marketing of primary products/’
a (2.) Without in any way limiting 1 the generality of the expression
* primary products ? in paragraph (i.a.) of sab-section (1.) of
this section, that expression shall be deemed to include dour
and other wheat products, butter, cheese and other milk
products, dried fruit and other fruit products, meat and meat
products, and sugar,”
i( (3.) The power of the Parliament to make laws under paragraph
(i.a.) of sub-section (1.) of this section may he exercised
notwithstanding anything contained in section ninety-two
of this Constitution/’
THE QUESTION FOB THE ELECTORS.
You are asked to approve alterations to the Australian Constitution,
so as to give the national .Parliament in time of peace authority to make
eheciave laws for the organized marketing of primary products similar in
effect to the power exercised (hiring the war.
Th ore are really two points in the question. The first is whether the
Com momveal th should have power to deal on an Austral! a-wide basis
with the organized marketing of primary products. The second is
whether that power should he made fully effective by removing, so far as
concern? primary products alone, the restriction which at present is
imposed by section 93 of the Constitution.
Both these points need some detailed explanation which cannot bo put
in just a few words. The question is a vital one for every person in
Australia, and not for primary producers only. Our national history
shows that very clearly. The first point is dealt with under the next
seven headings,
ORGANIZED MARKETING HECESSAEY FOR THE PRIMARY
PRODUCER.
The problem of the primary producer is uncertainty as to the future.
This uncertainty is due to two main causes:
<o* Bad seasons—through drought, flood, lire, frost, hail and pests.
Fluctuating prices, and poor prices (often in good seasons).
fArgument FOE the Proposed Law.)


The following table shorn a year-by-ycar change is, total values of
primary psoduotioo wbidb. was dne not only to variation in output but
also -to masked rise and fall, in prices;—
Ttsrs. mmism a i’immis.
1931- . . ~ .. <,141-4
1932- , . .. . M2'9
1933- .. .. .. ..170*5
1034-35 . . .. . , ~ 138*2
1935- .. .. ~ . . 187 * 5
1936- .. . . . , ,<215-2
1937- .. .. . , 214-4
1938--39 . , .. 184-9
The change was often as- much as £30,000.000 in a yosr. TMs is
where organised marketing comes is. Organised marketing can ensure
a better average return to producers by—
■*s? eliminating speculation;
#■ stabilizing prices;
0 ensuring a just borne consumption price baying regard to the
interests of con seiners;
ensuring the best possible export price;
# establishing rescree funds in good years to meet losses in bad years;
<#> distributing proceeds fairly among the producers.
These measures will provide a return siilfioicmt to relieve tkc farmer
of the constant fear that he may be mnahle to pay bis way. This is of
vast importance to every farmer, including every mwk&mm who goes
on the laud.
Stabilization is the urgent need of every Australian primary industry.
Without organised marketing there can fee no stabilisation.
fiIMIAIIhEB M'/IEWITIIfCI BEMIFETS MOT EMIT MMAET
* BIOMJEEES BUT ALL AUSTUTIAMB,
The benefit of organized marketing will he shared by all. The basic
factor in the prosperity of .Australia is still its primary industries. The
total value of our primary production before the war was 30 per cent, of
the total national income, .Unless our primary .industries are prosperous
and stable we shall have to do without many things we need from abroad.
It must not be forgotten that tbe collapse of our export prices -and
markets marked the beginning in Australia of tbe areal depression of
.1998-32.
The second of tbe new paragraphs printed in heavy black type at
the top of page 0 shows that ** primary ■ products J * cover practically the
whole of Australians food-producing system.
Then again there are large numbers of wage earners employed
directly or indirectly through primary production. Before tbe war* 25
per cent, of all occupied males were engaged directly in primary industry.
Many others are employed indirectly, e.g. ? in making agricultural
machinery and fertilizers and in handling exports. All these wage
earners are depend cut upon the success and stability of our primary
industries.
(Argument FOE the fmpmei Law,|


Tills is the concern of everybody. Failure of primary producers
through unorganized markets and poor prices means that primary pro-
ducers must restrict their purchases in Australia, This in tarn has a bod
effect on all other industries, resulting in general depression and nneru-
nloymenfc, This again has a serious effect on traders of every description,
Shopkeepers and tradespeople of every kind learned only too well in the
last depression that there can be no money in their tills unless the people
of Australia are kept in employment. You see then that insecurity for
the primary producer means trouble and insecurity for the whole com-
munity including yon-—whether you are an employer, a worker, a clerk,
u shopkeeper or a professional man,
ORGANISED MAEKETING SUCCESSFUL DURING THE WAR,
Under temporary war-time powers the Commonwealth 'was able to
carry out organized marketing hi the main primary industries, but these
war-lime powers cannot he used much longer. The great benefits which
primary producers have received during the war is one of the main
reasons why they do not want the Commonwealth to lose its marketing
powers in the post-war period.
In spite of dislocation of markets at home and abroad, the incomes of
primary producers showed remarkable increases during the war period.
Although there was no increase in the number of persons engaged in
primary production, the number of primary producers reaching quite
comfortable income levels actually trebled during the first four years of
the war. The number of primary producers earning more than £4OO a
year increased in the five-year period from 1939 to 1944 by 200 per cent,,
and this improvement was maintained throughout all ranges of income.
There is the best kind of practical test for organized marketing undei
national control.
DIFFICULT MARKETING CONDITIONS AHEAD.
Unless the Commonwealth is able to continue organized marketing
there is a grave danger of collapse in our primary industries.
True, there may be good markets for primary products for a few
years. But we must look ahead. Competition from other countries will
increase, and also competition by substitute products, for example,
margarine. If Australia is not, to go down in the struggle, she must h#
able to organize her marketing efficiently.
NATIONAL MAEKETING POWERS HEtUIEEI),
The States obviously cannot deal effectively with interstate trade, lei
alone trade overseas. This difficulty was one of the main causes of
Federation in ,1900. Just because the markets of the major prim ary
industries are nation-wide and international, the problem is a national
one and must be tackled on a national basis,
PRODUCTION TO BE FREE.
Though this Bill does provide for national powers for organized
marketing, it will not give to the Commonwealth power to .prohibit,
restrict or regulate production In any way. Each primary producer will
fArgnm.cnt FOB the Proposed Law.)


be free, so fa? as the Commonwealth is concorned. to nr'-d--bow loneb
be likes and what he likes. Control of this important part tbe primary
industries —production—will remain with the States.
mmumm cam hate a sat m maeebtitci fiats.
Should the referendnm he carried, the plans for organised marketing
will have to he laid down by Parliament. There is no reason why there
should not continue to he a full measure of grower-control. Borne measure
of Government authority is necessary in the interests of the community
as a whole, e.g., to see that consumers in Australia are properly protectee
by reasonable prices and methods of distribution.
We pass now to the second point: involved in this question,
COTETITUTIOE’ HAMPEES OSO-AMIZEI) M AIIKETIEC IE PEACE
TIME.
(a) The First Obstacle—Divided Control,
Both the Stales and the Commonwealth, sometimes separately and
sometimes together, have tried to operate plans for organized marketing
for at least 80 years. Except under war-time powers, these plane have
not been successful in dealing with industries where there are big inter-
state and export markets. The Constitution contains two serious obstacles.
The first obstacle is that marketing powers are divided between the
Cbmmon-wealth and the States, The Common wealth has no power at- all
in peacetime to organise marketing within any State. For practical and
constitutional reasons, a State cannot -effectively organise interstate
marketing. In the major primary indnstd.es the distinction between
intrastate and interstate markets is wholly artificial. To he efficient,
marketing must he organized on a nation-wide scale. There h no
authority in Australia that has power to do this.
The Bill will remove this first obstacle by giving the necessary power
to the Commonwealth Parliament. This is done by the first paragraph of
the proposed now powers, printed in heavy block type at the top of
page 0, •
(b) The Second Obstacle —Section 92.
The second obstacle is the fact that, because of r restriction imposed
by section 02 of the Constitution, neither the B* ams alone nor the Oom~
monwealth alone, nor even the States and the Commonwealth combined,
can exercise complete power -to organise interstate marketing.
Section 02 provides that trade, commerce and intercourse amongst the
States shall be absolutely free. In the case of primary products this
auction has had an unfortunate effect which its framers never intended.
The position is that there are vital parts of Australian trade which
no -Government, whether it be Commonwealth or State, can touch. Those
•parts of Australia’s trade are beyond all law—beyond all control by the
Governments of Australia or by the people of Australia.
The history of marketing plans in Australia shews bow serious this
position is. Organized marketing was first tried by State .Parliaments.
It was soon found that any State scheme could be defeated by a producer
who wished to secure an unfair advantage by sending Ms product into
another State, or by bringing it from another State for sale in-the State
where the scheme was operating. Section 93 of the Constitution pre-
vented any State from controlling these interstate transactions.
12


The Commonwealth Parliament has general power over interstate
trade. The Slates therefore asked the Oomnumwealth to close this
loop-hole in their schemes. It tried to do this in. the dried fruit, dairy,
and wheat industries. In 1936, however, the Privy Council decided that
the Commonwealth had no more power than the States to stop these
interstate evasions because it too was bound by section 93,
(c) Uncertainty should be removed.
Section 92 had, and still has, every Australian Parliament tied up
in the matter of organized marketing. The Lyons Government
encountered this difficulty in 1937 and unsuccessfully endeavoured to
overcome it. The trouble has gone on, and is still there.
Since 1936, we have found that some types of marketing schemes
can be worked out between the States and the Commonwealth without
running foul of section 92. But the position is still uncertain and
dangerous, because both States and Commonwealth are tied down to a
very indirect form of regulation of interstate trade. The danger is
always present that a few selfish individuals will he able to break up
any scheme for organized marketing of primary products, whether it
is promoted by the States, or by the Commonwealth, or by the Com-
monwealth and the Slates together.
No thinking person can tolerate this. The Bill proposes to close the
serious gap which prevents organized marketing of primary products,
and to give the i( .missing power ” to the Commonwealth Parliament.
CONSTITUTION WILL STILL PROTECT AUSTRALIA FROM BOEDER
BARRIERS.
The Bill does not take section 92 out of the Constitution at all. The
section will still apply to all State-laws, and to all Commonwealth laws
too except laws for the organized marketing of primary products.
Interstate transport, communications and trade in manufactured goods
will still he absolutely free. Section 92 was framed to prevent trade
barrier? at State borders but was never intended to prohibit the Com-
monwealth from organizing the marketing of primary products .on a
na+ion-wide basis. Section 92 will still give that protection and will be
supported by section 99 which prevents the Commonwealth from giving
any preference to one State over another,
FOR STABILIZED PRIMARY INDUSTRIES: YOTE “YES”.
This referendum is not a party issue at all. The Country Party has
conGstently supported organized marketing of primary products. The
Ly ons Government submitted a referendum directed to the same end.
In 1944. the Opposition agreed that organized, marketing was
necessary. They argued, however, that to make this effective, section 93
should be amended. That is just what the present Bill proposes to do.
! E v e v v person in /'-"T'alia. no matter what party he supports, stands
to g‘- A by voting “ YES
'To vote YES. put the number 1 in the square opposite the word
*■ YES ’’ and the number 2 in the or her square.
13


THE THIRD QUESTION.
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT) 1946.
INDUSTRIAL EMPOYMENT
Hew paragraph to be added to section §1 of the Constitution.
“ (x«iy.A.) Terms and conditions of employment in industry, tat not
so as to aotiiori.se any form of industrial oonmriptionT
TEE aiJESTIOW FOE THE EIECTOES,
The question is whether yon are in favour of altering the Australian
Constitution so that the Contra on wealth Parliament mill l>o able to make
laws about the terms and conditions of employment in im.hu4.ry, but will
not he able to bring in any form of industrial conscription*
With this power the Common wealth Parliament, either directly or
through a body such as the Arbitration Court, could fix the basic wage or
decide what principles would be followed in .fixing it. It could lay down
a standard working week. It would decide on holidays. It could pre-
scribe better factory conoidons— for example in lighting, ventilation,
rest-rooms and other, arncmlta. It could introduce new and up-to-date
■methods of smoothing ont difficult;cs between management and workers.
For the first time in Australian history, there would be authority to lay
down a common rale for a whole industry,
ISIIIJSTEY OYEE-FIOWS STATE BOWBBAEIIS,
Australia has developed industrially m a aatinn--not as a collection
of States, Practically all of our big.'industries are carried on m several
States at once —and the workers and employers in all those Helds have
the came kind of needs and problems.
Then again, take coal and steel Those supplies which are vital for
industry are produced .mainly in .New Bouth Wales tat they are needed
and used, all ever Australia. The States are not self-contained any
longer. A coal dispute in Newcastle can put a thousand men out of
employment in. Adelaide.
So von see that so far as industry is concerned. State boundaries iu>
longer have any real meaning.
.All industry nereis control, and if we are to have proper conditions,
bringing peace, Justice and contentment to all those engaged, the control
must be national in its scope. That is simply plain, common sense.
There must, he a broad Australian plan —not six different and clashing
State plans.
Yet the Const!uitkm still stands where it did in 1900, curing general
industrial control to each of the States separately.
14


statesmen who worked out, our -present Uonstitutum r»U years ago
ihd not foresee the phenomenal growth of Australian industry, or they
could never have agreed to the confused, rigid and complicated arrange-
ment under which Australia has had to struggle ever since, and wink h
wa next proceed to explain.
CONSTITUTION NOW PREVENTS EFFICIENT INDUSTRIAL
REGULATION.
At present, power over industrial conditions is divided between the
Commonwealth and the States.
Apart from its fleeting war-time power, the only important industrial
power rhat the Commomveaith Parliament has is to set up conciliation
and arbitration machinery for preventing and settling industrial disputes
extending beyond, the limits of any one State.
This means three things—
Firstly, it means chat the Commonwealth lias no power at all unless
there is an interstate dispute. Therefore people are driven to cream
disputes as the only means of getting their claims before the Court.
Yon can see then that federal arbitration only begins to operate when
peace and order have already 'broken down. That is too late. What the
Commonwealth, needs in the interests of everyone is the power to take
proper steps before trouble occurs.
Secondly, it means that the Commonwealth. Parliament cannot itself
deal in any way with, the subject matter even of an interstate dispute.
St-iii less can Parliament itself fix wages, hours of work or working
conditions. The arbitrator only, and not the Parliament, can legislate
.in these fields. The odd contrast is that the Parliaments of the States
on the other hand can themselves do all these things. But they can do
•o only within their own boundaries, and only so long as their laws do
not conflict with awards of the Commonwealth, Arbitration Court, made
in connexion with interstate disputes.
Thirdly, it means that even where an interstate dispute does exist, the
(Amm.onwealth’s power is still very limited. All it can do is to provide
machinery for conciliation and arbitration.
The natural result of this illogical division and limitation of autho-
rity is confusion, uncertainty, expense, delay and injustice.
FES SENT CONSTITUTION ALSO ILLOGICAL.
Employment in industry ties in closely with tariffs for building np
An tralian industries, with bounties on production and with control >d
overseas marketing. The Commonwealth has these powers, but not the
i’; ! nsirml powers that should go with them. It is ridiculous that the
('yimnonwealth should not have the power to make sure that the benefits
o| f;.- laws on these other subjects are shared between workers and
emu severs.
15


T : ijv' pointed out by the present Leader of the Opposition, the
U; s i Honorable K. G. Mensde*, in a speech he made m the .federal
*'<i rJhouent on the 22nd .November, IMS.
He said--
It seetxta curio uv, looking back o:o. the matter at this stags. that ta«
Constitution slsorild have conferred upon tins Parliament power to control the
problems of customs and excise, power to -control the whole fiscal policy of tin:
-..ontluent, and made it an exclusive power, and yet, at the san>e tnne, suonnl
have refrained froxn granting to this Parliament power, the ancillary power,_ as
1 would have thought, to deal with the wages that should be paid and the
conditions that should be observed in the great industries which were bound, to
be established and fostered under the fiscal policy of the country - - -
That anomaly is one which will continue to exist until more effective treatment
of it Is made possible by giving complete industrial power to the Commonwealth
of Australia.
HEW METHODS NECESSARY.
The Constitution lias also prevented the Commonwealth from intro-
ducing other and newer methods of promoting better industrial relations
and better working conditions. War-time powers have shown what can
be done. One example is the successful handling of the women’s
employment problem. Another h the introduction of welfare services
in many war industries. It would he unfair to allow those who have
fought for Australia in the war or worked for Australia in to
go back to poorer conditions of work just because the Commonwealth
cannot protect them in peace time.
During the war, when the .Commonwealth exercised w'ar-tlmo
industrial powers, record production and an incredible expansion of
industry were achieved.
NATIONAL TOWLES WILL BEHBFIT AIL THE PEOPLE.
This Bill, like the other two, is good for every Australian, and not
only for workers and employers in industry,. Primary producers, for
instance, besides getting direct protection from a “ Yes ” vote on
marketing will also need the demand for their products that prosperous
home industries will provide. Every professional man as well as every
trader is dependent upon good industrial conditions. This business of
a simplified national control of employment in industry in Australia is
everybody’s business. Most oi ail, it is the business os the serviceman
wanting to re-establish himself in industry.
Workers in industry.
Yon will be able to bold your national Parliament directly
responsible, Just as the workers in Britain and Hew Zealand can, f;,r
giving you the best wages and conditions that, industry can bear. You
will be "able to say, at elections, whether you are satisfied with what the
Parliament .has done, and whether you want these matters dealt, with
hv courts or other tribunals, or by your representatives in Parliament,
or partly by one and partly by the other.
You will rot have to wait until a dispute arises or is a manufactured ' ,;
before making a claim for improved wages and conditions.
16


Employers in industry.
The great need of the men who has the respo.usrm.hty of employing
labour is to know where he stands, so that he ran plan ahead. The
intolerable confusion of divided centred, and of State and. Federal awarrb
eporatiiig in the one factory or business, has been a constant cause 01
worry and trouble to business men tlirongbont the Commonwea.l th. You.
too will be able to express your views to a national Parliament which wiii
have real power to decide industrial questions.
Women.
If yon are employed in industry, yon will benefit in the same way as
male employees. The Commonwealth has been able to look after your
interests under its war-time powers, but peace conditions without those
powers raise a serious problem* Unless this referendum is carried, -the
Commonwealth will not have the power to protect your interests.
If yon, are a housewife, yon are vitally interested in tins Bill through
your interest in the future of your husband and children.
To be efficient, the control of wages and of child endowment and other
allowances mast go together.
FSESBOM TO CHOOSE JOBS BAFIBIIAHBEIh
There is an express provision in the wording of the power itself to
prevent the Parliament, in exorcising the new industrial powers, from
authorizing any form of industrial conscription. This means that no
employee can he directed to work in a particular industry or for a
particular employer. He cannot be (< pegged ” in his job. An. employer
will be free to choose his employees. There is a written guarantee of
freedom in these matters ** Mo industrial conscription v .
YEMEET ARBITRATION POWER WILL REMAIN.
The (ionmionwealth Parliament will still have ail its present powers
to provide conciliation ami arbitration. The Arbitration Court cun be
retained and its funmhc’i. extended. It can bo on a. hied to make don si on a
without waiting for a hgic< to arise and without, being Inn lied to inter-
state matters. It can bo enabled to make a common rule for a whole
industry. On the other hand, the Oommon.wes.ith Parliament will be
able to act directly when it sees fit. That Parliament is responsible for
the national economy but. is at present without anything like adequate
power over one of the most important aspects of that eoo n omy—nan w ly,
industrial eon di tie us. The actions of the Pari I amour, are subject to
review by tbe electors at least every throe years,
NOT A PARTY MATTER.
This Bill, like the other two, b - i-'cnn. 'o do witSi parties, Ton
ought to vote iS Ym r , as the new m-wm si so exorcised by all future
Governments, labour or non-Mann. Pr mra sr men of all parties have
agreed for years that the powers mv r« w>wa' , Very similar proposals
were made by the Hughes Government- vo I old and the Bruce Govern-
meat in 1926,
FOE the Proposed Eawß


You will nor bo giving the now industrial powws to any pari v. bus
to your national Parliament.
As the referendum and the General Elections will be held together
it will be for you, at the time you grant the new powers to the Parlia-
ment, to determine by whom they shall he exercised.
For national control in Australian industry, vote “ YEB A
To-vote Yes, put, the number 1 in the square opposite the word
“ YES ” and the number 2 in the other square.
(Argument FOE the Proposed larv.)


THE CASE FOR NO.
No. 1.—CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (SOCIAL
SERVICES) 1946.
Why is the Commonwealth seeking further powers over
acrT.iees f Has there ever been any interruption of your payments of child
endowment, maternity allowances, old-age or widow's pensions, or any
other Commonwealth Social Service? Ho. Yet l>r. .Evatt claims that a
High Court decision in the Pharmaceutical Benefits case has shown that
«the legal foundations for social service legislation arc doubtful and
insecure.” . . . That ease was decided last year. But yon are still
■regularly receiving every one of the established 'Commonwealth Social
Service Benoits.
EEMEHIHE THE IEEATBIATBM i( HCIWBTB A
You may remember that similar doubts "were expressed by the same
parties at the last Referendum m respect of the Repatriation powers of
the Commonwealth. Bat the people of Australia wisely declined to be
misled by propaganda, and refused all powers sought including the
Repatriation power, fence that Referendum, the Common wealth has
added, to its then existing .Repatriation legislation, by passing the Service-
men's Establishment Act, the War Service Horne? Act and the Bowtier
Settlement Agreement Act I
WHAT TEE mm. : 001THT CASE EEAIXY BECEBIB.
The Phamvaceudeal Benefits case, the case ■with, widen the Common-
wealth k trying to panic the electors into granting further powers to
the Commonwealth, did not decide that benevolent social services were
beyond the present powers of the. Commonwealth at all. What it really
did. decide was that, the Commonwealth cannot use its present powers
ewer social services for exercising' bureaucratic controls over the people
of Australia, In his judgment in the case the Chief Justice of the
High Conn saidj-~" If the Pharmaceutical Benefits Act could properly
be described as an act for the appropriation of money (for social
with safeguards against wrongful expenditure of tnat money it is vaMd.
«If on the other'"hand,” said the Chief Justice “itis an act which,
although it appropriates money, is really an act for the control of doctors,
chemists, sale of drugs, and the conduct oi persons who deal with doctors
and chemists (as the whole Court found it really was) then it is invalid/
That is why the High Court declared that Act invalid—-because it sought
jjot Just to distribute moneys for the peoples benefit, but to exevm.se
unwarranted controls over them; and that is why the Commonwealth
wants, the powers so it can exercise more and still, more control over
your doily lives.
SOCIAL SEEYIOIS ARE HOT I2T BAIAEE.
It is clear, then, that new powers are not required for the purpose o?
maintaining the existing social services. Why, then, are they being
sought? The answer is that the Commonwealth seeks to gam further
far-reaching power* (of which the social service proposals appear <pnt.e
innocent on the surface ) and at the seme time to popularize the other
dangerous referendum proposals tlmomh the superficial attraction oi fbe
social service powers.


THREE REASONS EOR VOTING “ NO A
The following are three important reasons why you should vote
« KO ?J to No. 1 proposal, against the powers to provide specified social
services:—
(1) Because through them the Commonweaith can gain timber
far-reaching controls over your daily lives;
(2) Because they will enable the States to he ousted from their
present role of providing additional social services; and
(3) Because they are one step further towards the centralization
of all controls and powers in Canberra.
m CONVENTION.
The limits of the proposed powers have never been discussed, let
aione decided by any convention or legal tribunal. In actual fact, the
extent of the powers sought is such that it is impossible for lawyers to
define or limit it. Dr. Evatt said himself {Hansard, 26th March,
1946) “We shall be able to do everything incidental to providing these
social services. It is a very wide powerA
PRESENT SAFEGUARDS.
The Commonwealth already has wide social service powers for all
legitimate purposes, if they are ever proved to be lacking in any
respect, then every conceivable social service can be provided by the
Commonwealth in co-operation with the States under the existing powers.
What State could refuse to co-operate in any beneficial scheme at the
Commonwealth’s expense? That would be political suicide. Further-
more, Dr. Evatt himself has admitted that the Commonwealth can
“ make conditional grants of money to the States ” for all social services
under its present powers. The safeguard at present is that the Common-
wealth’s existing social service powers cannot he used for controlling
your every-day lives, for directing the doctor or dentist you shall
consult or requiring you to have periodical examinations you have
no wish for.
THE AUDITOR-GENERAL'S POSITION.
If the present powers are inadequate to support the present legisla-
tion, why has not the Commonwealth Anditor-Goneral challenged them ?
That is his job, No, the real reason for seeking these social service
powers, apart from their hoped-for effect on the rest of the referendum
proposals, is that .enormous powers, not apparent on the surface, arc
once again being sought.
THE POWERS ARE SOUGHT FOR EVER.
And remember, in conclusion, that if these enormous new powers are
granted, they are granted for ever to every Commonwea Ith Parliament
which may henceforth wish, to use them for any conceivable, purpose,
ulterior or otherwise, whether that Parliament may be. 'Labour, Liber ah
Socialist, Conservative, Com mum f. or fascist.
20


NO. 2.-CONSTITUTION ALTERATION ORGANIZED
MARKETING OF PRIMARY PRODUCIS) 1946.
In discussing this Amendment, as ■well as the others, certain general
considerations are important.
Amendments to the Constitution are designed to deal with the
powers of Parliament, and not with the particular way in which
those powers will be exercised by some party which claims your
veko.
0 Consequently the amendment of the Constitution should he a sou-
party matter, to be decided eairaly and deliberately, away from
party polities.
•0 The present Government, by deciding to b.avo the liefonm.du.ro vote
os. (tenoral Election polling day, is deliberately setting cut to
stake the mmmxmnt of the Constitution a party polifital affair.
it is doing so, not because it really belie ves that this is the right way
to amend the Constitution, bin because it hopes to fonfn.se the
issues, and in particular to distract attention from the real
problems of industrial peace and taxation and production and.
housing around which the election should turn.
These eonsidoratiexw alone will lead many people, who respect the
Constitution and value its basic and enduring, importance, to vote
KO T But on this Marketing Amendment there is so additional
point, 'which is-
The questions which have in the past arisen about the i( organised
marketing ?J powers of the governments arc legal and so intensely
technical that lawyers have never been able to agree about them.
Such questions are not suitable to be decided, by popular vote; they
should be dealt with by a competent Constitutional Convention
in an atmosphere of close study and careful deliberation.
Having ma.de there preliminary remarks, we turn to the actual merits
of the Anxendm on t.
file argument can he pat most clearly m a few questions and
answers—
Question.—Suva the Gcuteeemekts of Aus-m&Ma bktw rasiv them
Powia oyee Obo-ahiseb Mabhetiho To-»ay I
answer.—Yes- The Commonwealth Parliament bag power over trade
with other countries and (subject to, section. 92 of ihe
Constitution) over interstate trade, while the State Parlia-
ments have power over local trade (he,, within the
boundaries of the State), The States also hove tne power
to control production, which the Commonwealth cannot do.
21


Question. —Have these Powers been Exercised!
Answer .“—Yes, repeatedly. The latest example is the Commonwealth
Government's Wheat Stabilisation Plan. in which the
Oornxn-ou wealth and States, acting In co-operation, decided
upon a scheme. And incidentally, the Commonwealth
Government lias never suggested that the plan is legally
doubtful, even though Its Referendum has not been carried!
Question,—What are the Advantages of Joint Commonwealth and
State Action, as at Present?
Answer.—They are very great. It is either useless or dangerous to
guarantee prices or control overseas marketing unless there
13 some reference to, and if necessary regulation of,
production.
Yon. cannot have an efficient business in which the production
or purchase of stock is done quite independently of the
selling of it I
Now, as the States alone control production (land settlement,
water supply, transport, the licensing of farms or areas),
the total problem of organized marketing cannot bo
efficiently controlled without their co-operation.
As Mr. Scully said, in introducing the Wheat Plan to Par-
liament only a few weeks ago—
Go-operation with fee States is an essential part of fee Flan. TBs
States control production, and production must bo regulated
according to the markets available. ... In Marketing,
Commonwealth and States mast use tltelr Constitutional powers
in harmony if fee Plan is to fee effective; neither can provide
effective marketing unaided,
Question, — But if the Present Amendment is carried, wilt, not Tins
Need for Co-operation with the States disappear, so
THAT THE ONE PARLIAMENT CAN DEAL WITH THE WHOLE
Matter ?
Answer. —No, because this Amendment gives the Commonwealth HO
power over production, hut ALL power over marketing,
Y ou see how foolish this is, and how completely it contradicts
Mr. Scully’s oven words.
To have one government controlling all production, ami
another separately controlling all marketing, would be
fatal to producers and general taxpayers alike'
If wo arc to have sensible plans, therefore, co-operation with
the States will continue to be essential.
If the Government hopes by this Amendment to enable the
Commonwealth Parliament to act independently of the
Stale Parliaments, it is inviting disaster, because, we
repeat, it would then be putting marketing and production
into water-tight compartments.
( Argument AIMTWST the Proposed Law.)


O', on the other hand, the Government realises that eo-
■operation with the States will still remain essential, what
does it hope to gain by the Amendmentt
Ctnaatiou. —Am thebe .aw v Otheb Advantages rv having the Commojo
wealth am. Sr Arm both concerneo with Maewetino,
AS AT PRESENT I
Answer. —Undoubtedly. As each, scheme has to be preceded by discussion
between Commonwealth and State Governments and
carried out by Commonwealth and States legislation, there
is ample opportunity for those sections of -the people who
are affected, whether producers, consumers, or traders, to
express their views.
Marketing schemes which have to be discussed in six. State
Capitals are likely to he more widely known and. more
effectively controlled by public opinion than schemes
which are discussed only at Canberra.
Question. —What, mis, i& thk H’ett Effect of the Frofosjsu AMEND-
MENT I
Answer, To take away from the States their special authority over
local marketing and concentrate the whole marketing
power -at Canberra.
Question. — What does thus Meah, xk PaACTKur, Teems?
Answer, At present each State Parliament has the sole power to .make
laws and administrative rules regarding the selling of
primary products on the local market, he,, the markefv
inside the boundaries of the State,
The expression “ primary products ” is a very wide one. You
will notice in the proposed .Amendment references to
certain specifically- named and important primary pro-
ducts, But the expression is not confined to those products.
It extends to all the products of the soil All vegetables
and fruits and dairy products arc Included,
Under this Amendment, therefore, the sale of, e.g., local
vegetables and milk in the cities and towns and township
of any mis State, could for the first time be controlled by
Commonwealth laws, made in and administered from
Canberra I
llnesticu, But wourn not the Oentk auxino of Fow.ee make foe
Simplicity f
Answer.-—You can answer this question yourselves from your experience
of the past few years.
23


Oommonw eu Ith Government* have never learned how to
decentralize adrrdnistratkm, and toe stock answer — Ki .1
must refer it Canberra ”---has irritated thousands ol
ordinary citizens from one end of Australia to the otaer.
The best and most efficient govern men t exists when local
matters are dealt with by local authorities, controlled by
local people.
Question. — Well, even though there may be some decays and
DIEFJOUUTiES ABOUT i( REMOTE CONTROL ” OK THE LOCAL
Ml Of SuVBLY, WE WOULD STILL HAYS THE ADVANTAGES OF
IjXIFOBMITY, WoULD'NT ¥»?
Answer. —The word “ uniformity ” may turn out to be our greatest
curse, rivalling oven the rabbits. Why should every citizen
in Australia be subject to the same dull and uniform
col Section of rules ?
Why should there he the same rules for selling local fruit
in Queensland and Tasmanian apples in Hobart?
Why should a system of milk distribution which works in,
say, Newcastle, he forced upon the citizens of Melbourne ?
Question. — But did not the Lyons’ Government in 1937 put fobwakd
a Si mi bar Amendment?
Answer. —It did not. The Amendment of 1037 left the powers of Com-
monwealth and States exactly where they were, but simply
sought to free them from the operation of Section 92 of
the Constitution (the guarantee of interstate freedom of
trade). You. will see that this was quite different from,
and much better than, a proposal to put the whole market-
ing power into the hands of the Commonwealth!
Yet the people overwhelmlngly rejected even the 1937 Amendment.
Question,--- Yes, but since then the Problem of Post-war
Reconstruction mas arisen, and surely Planning is
NEEDED IE THAT PROBLEM IS TO BE SOLVED! AND DOES
not National Planning. Erqcirr Greatly Increased
Powers for the .Pab.ltam.ent?
Answer. —Nobody will deny the need for planning in our economic life.
But does planning require that we should have huge
Departments at Canberra, largely manned by people with
no practical experience of industry or production, and
that those Departments should control our industrial or
productive activities?
As a famous economist has said, the Government does its
best service by “ creating conditions under which the know-
ledge and initiative of individuals is given the best scope
so that they can plan most successfully.”
The best planning the Grovernment at Canberra can give m is
to be found in such matters as a reduced tax burden, and
industrial peace, and the maintenance of economic stability.
(Argument AGAIMST the Proposed Law.)


With these conditions assumed, practical men will he able to
do their own planning of their own alfairs.
gnestion.'--I>o,Bg Fbactioai. Exfb&isskc.e Bufpoht the Axswek to tub
Last Question ?
jtoswer.—lf you are a wife, ask yourself- If you a? <2 a bos band, ask
jour wife.
Wo have had many Boards during the war. Many com-
modities have been controlled. It is curious/but true, that
whenever something is controlled by a .Board, it seems to
become scarcer, dearer, and (in some .instances) of poorer
quality.
Perhaps this represents pure bad-luck on behalf of the Board 1
Or perhaps it means that most decent citizens carrying on
business, great or small, can satisfy the reasonable demands
of their customers better tban any Government Depart-
ments.
TO SUM UP.
The great primary industries have real problems which could never
he solved by the Commonwealth alone, but which need (as now) joint
Common weal tb and State action.
To put such matters entirely into the hands of Canberra would be
disastrous.
Local primary industries can only be handicapped (and their con-
sumers with them) by the creation of a new mass of Canberra rules and
regulations and hoards. They will best serve the people by remaining
under the control of local State laws, and in the bauds of local and
experienced people.
Under these circumstances, the ease for a .’NO vote is overwhelming.
VOTE “ II) ?? FOE A FATE BEAL TO
mmmmu aim ocwsumm
f Argument MfAIWBT tie Proposed Law,)


No. 3—CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (INDUSTRIAI
EMPLOYMENT) 1946.
The Chiiley Govern incai asks you to amend the Common weal t\ *
Cons! itniiou by transferring to the Common wealth Parliament the
whole power over the fixation of wages,, hours, and industrial conditions.
You will naturally be interested to know why this matter is considered
by the Government to ho of such urgency that your vote' on it must be
recorded at the same time as you are required to consider the many
complex issues of a general election campaign.
WE BELIEVE THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS TACTS THIS
COURSE BECAUSE Of THE STRONG FRESSUKE PUT UPON IT BY
THE MILITANT ELEMENTS WITHIN THE TRADE UNION
MOVEMENT. THE COMMUNISTS ARE OUT TO SMASH DUE
ARBITRATION SYSTEM, THEY HAVE MABI NO SECRET OF
THEIR OPPOSITION TO IT.
Wrlting in 1942- the critical year of our war with Japan -in a
pamphlet titled u The Trade Unions ,J , the President of the OoniinnnHt
.Party, Mr, Sharkey, said
The reformist trade union officials whole-heartedly support arbitration
They do not want strikes and -struggles to disturb their peaceful salaried
existence .... The Oounmmist* regard the State-controlled arbitration
system as a pernicious, auti-working class institution, whose objective is to keep
the worker shackled to the capitalistic state Strikes, properly led
end eoiKhicted. and properly timed, ate a revolutionary weapon.
Move recently, another leading Commimist, Mr. Ernie Thornton, has
condemned the arbitration system and demanded its replacement by
what he terms '* collective- bargaining n but what has been described with
more accuracy as collective bludgeoning/ 5
Associated with the agitation from these quarters for the elimination
of our present system of conciliation and arbitration are the demands-
lhat- the Commonwealth Government should, by Act of Parliament,
introduce a 40-hour week and prescribe a substantial increase in the
I-a.sic wage. This is the background to the proposal now submitted
to yon.
BEFORE YOU MARE YOHE DECISION, WE ABH YOU TO WEIGH
CAREFULLY THE FOLLOWING FACTS: -
During the last 40 years the Australian people, through their
Parliaments, have built up the finest system of compulsory industrial
arbitration in the world.
The essence of the system has been that there should be enough
tribunals to provide ready access to disputants; that the members of the
tribunals should be impartial, competent and independent, and that the
rights of employees should be established and enforceable by law.
(Argument AO-AIIMT the Froposed L&w.J


The- Commonwealth Court has had a iae record of
mki ewment and lies become am approved am! established institution in
mt community life.
Working under its Commonwealth, Act it■ has given to hundreds of
thousands of trades unionists benefits of a notable and enduring kind.
These benefits should fee remembered .bow that the Australian, people
are being asked by this Referendum to by-pass sack independent end
impartial and competent arbitration and to band over the direct control
of -wages and conditions to the Parliament at- Canberra, We would
remind you that when wc arc speaking of the Parliament at Canberra*
tins can so often mean in -practice a decision of Labour Canons, whose
regimented mem hers, are unable to express any dissentient voice when the
me tier comes to the Parliament itself.
lIESE APE SOME OF TEE TIIIMIS THE COMMONWEALTH
AEBITEATIOIf SYSTEM HAS POME FOE TEE ABSTEALIAM TEASES
lt has eneonraged organization by making the registered trade union
the authorized representative of all its members.
lt has made trades union rules enforceable by law and has provided
for every trades unionist baring a share in the control of bis
union.
lt lias given to employees the right to have employers ordered into
conference or court.
lt has created the right in unions to secure awards creating and
protecting the terms and conditions of employment.
It has given to the Unions the right to enforce awards not only
against a respondent employer hut also against bis successor in
business.
It- lias given to the. Unionist a right to sue for his legal wages and.
to prosecute for breach of award.
lt has protected the active Unionist against dismissal or prejudice
in bis employment by reason of bis activities in some industrial
dispute,
■0- It has been solely responsible for the important principle of the
Basie "Wage, which it must he remembered, was for the first time
created by the Court under the Presidency of Mr. Justice Higgins.
lt has periodically varied the basic wage in accordance with the
current cost of .living.
#■ li 'has established standard hours of work, with overtime and penalty
rates of pay.
I r Has. In Burma CaEATua fob this Ausmaxa an Tuauus Oniohjst
Almost Thu Eftibe P.aornoTnnv Which lie Bow Enjoys
Asaihst Exploitation awu Imuwncu.
27


For the Australian employer it 'has meant a, clear and detailed
definition of ills rights and responsibilities in respect of those employed
hj him. Given strict enforcement of the lam by Governments, lie would
bo able to -plan Ms production in an orderly way knowing the obliga-
tions for which he would have to provide.
The arbitration system lias meant much also to the Australian primary
producer and to the consuming public. If a decision on industrial dis-
putes were left solely to the parties involved, they could be settled by
nicking better wages available through increased costs to the consumer.
The Court has been built to stand not merely as an independent adjudi-
cator between the disputants but as a protector of the public interest.
When this Referendum proposal was being discussed at Canberra on
3rd April, 1948, the Leader of the Opposition (who has for a long time
favored a liberal view of Common wealth industrial power) speaking on
behalf of the opponents of the proposed amendment, suggested to- the
Government that the right way to strengthen and Improve the work of
the tribunals was not to abolish or override the arbitration power but
to get rid of all technicalities by altering it so that it would read—
Coadtiatlon and arbitration for the settlement of the terms and conditions of
employment in industry.
This was a constructive proposal but the Government was not willing
to accept it.
It preferred to abolish arbitration.
'What Dons Tins Feksv.nt Amknomknit Msastl
Quite shortly, it means that if the Amendment is carried the
Commonwealth Parliament will he able itself to make direct laws about
wages and hours.
The Arbitration Court will he pushed on one side.
The Parliament at Canberra will have full authority to decide not
only the standard working week but what the working hours are to he
in any industry, great or small, and for any class of employees anywhere
in Australia.
The Parliament at Canberra will be authorised not only to .tv the
basic wage but to fbc the wages of any group of employees or of any
individual employee anywhere in Australia,
It may exercise these far-reaching powers by Act of Parliament or it
may pass an Act which authorises some Minister or official to in the
hours or wages in question.
Do not be misled by the purely temporary and superficially attractive
argument that the passing of this amendment would enable the Common-
wealth Parliament to reduce standard hoars to 40 per week or to increase
the basic wage by a pound a week.
(Argument AGAIIfST the Proposed law,)


When You Amkvd The CoHEcn’romim X.o.u Amend it Pkema.kis.stet.
What one Parliament can do B&ller puwer another Farliameut
can undo.
You will readily -recognize that decisions upon working pours a.uo
upon wages are of immense and far-reaching importance to the whole
nation.
They ought not to be made upon some auction sale principle witn
political parties bidding one against the other for election support.
Thev ought to he made with., full knowledge of the facts, with,
impartiality, with, a considered judgment .and with a cietern.unat.ion to
do what is best for the people as a whole.
This, brings us to the really crucial question which yon have to
answer;
Do You .BELIEVE THAT MaTT.UUS OT fSTCOI MoM.ENT, A W.UOKU DECISION
UTOK WHICH MAY BE KuXKOUS TO THU NATIONAL ECONOMY A‘< D MAY
Fkucxtitatk either Inflation ob Deflation. .Boom ok Defkession.
SHOULD BE BECiDHO
Ok Pebbly POLITICAL Grounds by a ID iu.iamfnt Exectei? to
Deal with Foxjtioa.l Matiesh
or
By Competent and I.mfabtlu. d udoks who will Ufa n
Evidence ok Both Sides, will Cabkfu llv Examine .Exfeet
Views and will Hxak the Auhuments of all the Faktijcs
KE.KOK3B AhXCTVINO AT A DECISION?
Bet; us illustrate this by one important current question :
The Arbitration Court has for some months been engaged in the
hearing of what is known as The .Forty Hours Case ”. It has heard a
mass of carefully prepared evidence for the Unions and another mass
of carefully prepared evidence for the Employers.
It has had the assistance of intervening Governments.
It has been able to take into account the general well-being of. the
community as a whole.
Would you prefer in the interests of your country and of its future a
decision arrived at after this careful and painstaking inquiry, or a
decision arrived at in a few minutes at Canberra by politicians who were
under no obligation to hear either side, but under electoral pledges to
vote in aucordauee with purely political considerations I
This problem obviously touches the whole question of the value of
impartial decision after careful and impartial investigation.
If yon think that Members of Parliament who. after all, have a host
of problems to consider, both international and local, in the course of
a year, are qualified to determine all these matters of rates and working
hours,' then yon arc in effect saying that industrial arbitration ought
to be abolished.
ASkiJMM tie Proposed I jaw.)


But if you believe that industrial justice requires coin? luvesl.tganou
and impartial decision, then you will vote to preserve industrial arbitra-
tion. You will not have it messed about or overruled by party polities.
Thss Decision you havk to make is a Fatufuu One. Kven if the
Commonwealth Parliament, being armed by you with this new and far-
reaching power, decided to confine itself in the first instance to basic
principles and to leave the working out of tbe details to tlie Indnstriai
Courts, we all know perfectly well that every time there was -a dispute
about an Arbitration Court Award an appeal would be taken to Far-
liarmmt and enormous pressure would be exerted upon Ministers to bring
in some Bill to overrule tbe decision already given. This would inevitably
increase the already serious industrial chaos.
Wo cannot have a system of industrial Justice in which the industrial
courts are liable to be overruled at any moment by.people at Canberra
who know only some of the facts and have foe the most part heard non®
of the arguments.
The advocates of a ** YEB ” vote try to meet this powerful con-
tention by saying that the State Parliaments have a power of direct
legislation, upon the terms and, conditions of employment and that they
bare not committed any of the lollies referred to amove.
The answer to that is very simple; indeed, it can be put in the form
of a few questions—
How long could the industries in a State survive if its State
Parliament created hours of work and conditions of labour radically out
of line with competitors in other States 1
If the Commonwealth Parliament hoes not propose to exercise the
power to make direct laws on wages and hours, why is it asking for the
power to do sc?
If the Commonwealth Government is merely anxious to gel rid of
technicalities, why did it not accept the constructive suggestion of tha
Leader of tha Opposition?
It: the Commonwealth Parliament does propose to exercise the sew
power by passing seme laws in relation to wages and hours, what
assurance can you have that before long' it will not have so enfeebled the
Commonwealth Arbitration System that it will fall first into disuse and
ultimately into contempt?
AFTEE YOIJII EITTEE EXPERIENCES OF THE FAST FEW MONTHS,
1)0 YOU WANT TO WEAKEN ARBITRATION, OE STRENGTH EM
IT?
The whole position therefore resolves itself into this-
Axes you nos Inditstbial Apoßitxatiok by Comfjstbwt, ExPKBOSHO»
and Impaetlax Tribunals?
If you are, you will vote “ ,N O Y
(Argument AEAIIET tbe Frcpcsed Law,)


Abu you you Uouvuimuo the I)m..u.oTs Fboulkms of
Aboostmynt iJfTo Mattkbs of Poijttcau Baboaiaiuo SUU O.\??VASSmO
FOB YoT.ES f
If you are, you will vote u YES Y
Yt lien in the past the Australian people and the trades union move-
ment bare felt that the arbitration system eras challenged, they have
worked strenuously and voted consistently to defend it.
Have they changed their minds?
Or is the Government, by ,nho<ng this proposal, responding -to the
pressures of Communists, on *\, votes it relies, but who are out to
smash, not only our other democratic institutions, but in particular the
system of Arbitration we have so carefully constructed ?
FOE INDEPENDENT IEBITEITIOI-- _¥OTE «MO Y
31


When 'voting at the Jidbweu damp a voter should
indionte Bis vote in respect of EACH of tbe THEEE
proposed laws which will Be separately so.emitted, on
the me ballot-paper—as follows
; (a) If HE APPROVES of the Proposed Law—by
I placing the number 1 in the square opposite
the word, “ YES and the .number 2la the
square opposite the word MO or
(h) If HE DOES HOT IEEEOYE of the Proposed |
law —By placing the number lin the square |
opposite the word MO ” and the number 2 |
in the square opposite the word “ YES ”,
llj Aathontj: J. A OocrMunr,. CiwwssMwt Frlatw, M«lwsm




