

jIH jHtoui dsnirstl (^nsenslattb;
TOGETHER WITH DIVERS INTERVIEWS
ABOUT
IRRI G A T 1 GJS[ .
% HkECR j. ivimey,
Author of “ The Wide Bay and Burnett Directory
Gympie Mining Handbook “ Mining and
Separation in North Queensland .”
PRICE: ONE SHILLING.
[Mo*t of this letterpress -will be reprinted in Mining AND
Irrigation in Queensland.]
Brisbane:
DAVISON & METCALF, Charlotte Street.
MDCCCLXXXVIII,


T. P. GROOM,
Stjtlv attir jjjjitrt §wfe«.
(Member of the Brisbane Stock Exchange,)
FINANCIAL AGENT.
Agents at all the Goldfields, and Principal Towns in the
Colonies.
Latest Quotations Given on Application


OCKHAIPTON AND
Mount Morgan
& Hitting & ©esmpti&e Account
CENTRAL QUEENSLAND.
Presented by the People of Rockhampton to the
Visitors at the Great Centennial
Exhibition,
TVoagg RkECR J. IVIMEY.
BEISBANE,
Author of “ The Wide Bay and Burnett Directory
Gympie Mining Handbookand “ Mining and
Separation in North Queensland
DAVISON & METCALF, Charlotte & William Streets.
MDCCCLXXXYIII.


Introductory.
These pamphlets, most o£ which are intended for gratuitous
distribution at the great Centennial Exhibition, are mainly the
outcome of the generosity of a well-known Rockhampton
citizen, who has thus fittingly testified the interest he takes in
the welfare of the district that owes so much to him, and to
which he owes so much. What is given on mining matters will
be given on the authority of the persons directly responsible, for
the author has no mining interest whatever, and has never held
any, but he can speak with a personal knowledge of every gold-
field in Queensland. The present time is particularly appro-
priate for such a publication, now that the Central District is
more prosperous to-day than it has ever been. Never has its
financial position been sounder; never have its many mining
enterprises shown greater development; and never have the
inducements to the southern land speculator been more solid and
tangible, than that the city and surburban Rockhampton district
offer, that has known no land boom for some years past. The
object in issuing this little work is to attempt to interest some
of the home visitors at Melbourne, who have come to Australia
for the first time, and who cannot go everywhere, especially so
far north as Queensland, of which the most absurd and ridicu-
lous reports are circulated as to its climate and general surround-
ings. The youngest and richest colony of all Australia is the
least known of all to the world, and it is by such efforts as these
that it is hoped to spread a knowledge of what this portion
of Queensland really is. It is respectfully asked that the new-
comer reader to be kind and good enough to send this
pamphlet home to his or her friends there, so that the purpose
of the author shall be the more effectively c irried out.
ALEX. J. IYIMEY.
Rockhampton,
July 5, 1888.


Mr. Peter M‘Lean on the Farmers
Question.
The present Minister for Agriculture at Brisbane is one
whose word is beyond question, and who seems to have no
enemies at all worth mentioning. He is not a man of one idea,
and he is not wrapped up with a theory that he discourses to
death ; he is an ex-farmer himself, and the years of his official
experience have not made a machine of him. “We have sent
50 bushels of rust proof wheat to the farmers this year,” said
he, in commencing our interview at his office in George-street,
“ applications for which were invited.” Speaking of irrigation he
said, “ It is a fair thing : a man is a fool who cannot recognise
it as a source of great good to the country. One thing is
evident, that before village settlement takes place there should
be plenty of water available, besides that required for simply
domestic purposes, or lor cattle. An ample supply is simply
indispensable, and the present sources are insufficient for
irrigation.” Speaking of Mr. Chaffey, whom he had met the
week before at Melbourne, he said that on asking that gentle-
man if he was coming up here, he replied that his hands
were already sufficiently full with Mildura and Ken mark.
After a passing reference to the works at the former settle-
ment, Mr. M‘Lean stated that water could be found all over the
Downs by simply sinking for it. “For even in the summer
time you can get lucerne every 6 weeks that will be 30 inches
high,” said Mr. M‘Lean. He warmly eulogised the Downs as
being far more fertile than anything in Victoria, and staled that
proper irrigation would make a most remarkable transformation
of the Downs if it were fairly tried. But here came in the in-
evitable trouble—the “ big estates.” “Most of the Downs,” said
he, “is in the hands of private persons, and it is let only on
leases from 3 to 5 years, with conditions that the tenant must
leave lucerne behind him when he quits occupancy. Another
thing, the men who know how to farm are very few —the excep-
tions rather than the rule.”
THE SOUTHERN COMPETITION.
Coming at last to this matter, Mr. M‘Lean said, “ It will be
to the advantage of the farmers to have a little more competition
brought in between the Queensland mills, so that higher prices
may result. More manufacturers would mean better prices
among the farmers, but the present circumstances are in favour
of a milling monopoly.” Asked as to whether an extra pound


per ton on imported flour would make a difference to the con-
sumer, Mr. M'Lean thought that it would not ultimately.
“ The bakers would have to be content with a little less,” he
said, “ and so would the mills, and there are plenty of people
who will be ready to start fresh mills, to say nothing of the
possible creation of a far better maket for agricultural
machinery.” The land monopoly then came on the tapis again,
the result being that a land tax was voted the most feasible
remedy. It is so far satisfactory to be able to add that it does
not pay to graze cattle on such magnificent pasture lands, the
original cost of which to their present holder was about ss. per
acre.
HOW VILLAGE SETTLEMENT PROGRESSES.
Mr. M‘Lean, who had spoken throughout in a most cordial
and earnest manner, turned with an evident relief to the more
congenial subject of village settlement. He spoke warmly of
the district of the Burnett, where the land was available for the
people, and of the “magnificent land” near Nanango. Said
he, “ Twelve miles from Murphy’s Creek, 70 miles from Brisbane
on the railway, we have surveyed for village settlement, land
that will be applied for over and over again, for there is a very
large demand for it in that district. The terms are 6d. per acre
for 5 years, with residence of lessee.”
It is not for the writer to draw morals from Mr. M‘Lean’s
facts, but they are plain enough without any elaboration here.
No man in Queensland, save Mr. Jordan himself, could speak
with more authority than did this witness, and those who know
him will all concede that he is not afraid to speak exactly
as he thinks and feels. There was a pleasant lack of that
diplomatic reserve by which some politicians manage to conceal
the truth, and people of both sides who read this testimony will
agree that the present Minister for Agriculture is just the man
for his position.
An Interview with Francis Abigail.
One of the best abused men of the Parkes’ Ministry, happy
in the consciousness that his predecessors were equally abused,
and that his successors will probably thrive as he is thriving
under the same treatment at the self same hands. The fierce
light that beats upon a ministerial throne in New South Wales


is stronger than the strongest electric-dynamo that ever Edison
thought of; and when a man has no natural advantages of face
or figure to start with, and has besides a homely, quiet sort of
way about him, he makes a splendid target for a certain “ push,”
for he never answers back, and probably hasn’t time to read a
tithe of what his critics say —to themselves. As far as the
public are concerned they will be interested to hear that he and
his family are abstainers, and that he rather prides himself in
his staying capacity at stonewalling crises : “ I have done thirty-
five hours at a stretch,” said he the other day at his office, “ and
have seen the whisky-drinking men disappear one by one from the
benches.” Mr. Abigail has been recently travelling through
the country districts to get a practical idea of the farmers’
troubles. Speaking of the railway development of the colony,
he said it was a pity that the present cost of acquiring land for
new lines was so enormous that we had to pay double or treble
that paid but a few years back. He thought it a grave anomaly
that a farmer should pay £4 per ton for articles he required
for his daily work, and could have the thing he produced him-
self brought there from Sydney for 275. per ton. Some altera-
tion of rates was very necessary, and the new Railway Com-
missioners would be the best authorities to deal with them.
Then the Agricultural College and Model Farm came on, which
were to be spoken on by Sir Henry Parkes the following
Wednesday. If this matter was carried it might probably come
in his (Mr. Abigail’s) department, and that would of course cause
him to give increased attention to the matter. This naturally
enough brought Messrs. Chaffey on the tapis, as there had
been something about them in the previous day’s papers.
Mr. Abigail spoke of having received a circular from the
Mining Department of Tasmania about Messrs. Chaffey. I
ventured to express a pleased surprise at the fact that Tasmania
had a mining department, as judging by reports of somewhat
profane Tasmanians, that department was represented at Hobart
by a vaccuum. The letter was read by Mr. Abigail, and
appeared to refer chiefly to a Mr. Tine, and had it not been
headed as it was it might have come from a vestry meeting at
Great Dumbleton in the Darkshire County to the Lord
Lieutenant of that buccolic shire.
WHAT HE THOUGHT OF CHAFFEYS.
“ I have formed no opinion against them by reading this,”
said Mr. Abigail, “ on the contrary I think they have shown a
tremendous amount of spirit in the way they have taken up the
question of irrigation. 1 know nothing of the circumstances
beyond what the letter states, and I have had too much


experience of complainants who have made themselves appear
to me as martyrs till the other side proved them to be rascals.
Men who are trying to make headway in a new country should
abstain From saying anything that would rouse the feelings of
the community : still these men have shown a spirit that is to
be strongly commended. They have struck out in a manner
that shows energy and pluck, and very necessary it is in dealing
with any young country. In saying this Ido not commit myself
to an approval of their plan, but I cannot speak too highly of
the way they have placed it before the public. I must say that
it deserves the very best and most careful consideration. Any
scheme dealing with our waste lands to make them productive
and capable of supporting settlement must be a good one. The
terms must of course be a matter for consideration, but the
scheme as it is deserves to be highly commended. I presume
that if the man who makes two blades grow where one only
grew before is a benefactor to his race, then these men are
national benefactors in thus doing a public benefit. Such men
must be of strong character and determination.” Here the
workings of the Sydney land speculator came under discussion as
examples of the “ selfishness in our national life.” “ Land
speculation has gone to a fearful height in New South "Wales,”
said he, “ and now the rebound is coming; many hundreds of
people who have purchased allotments will not be able to keep
up their payments, and of these transactions, these of the
sellers are undoubtedlv the best of the lot.”
LAND SETTLEMENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
“ Land settlement in this colony is by no means in a satis-
factory condition at present,” said Mr. Abigail ; “ it arises from
a want of knowledge on the part of the cultivators how to best
do their work, and the Government's proposal to create this
college is the result. It will be a place where people will be
taught both theoretical and practical agriculture, and I believe
that the proposal will put new life into the farmers. The
Government are becoming very much alive to the fact of the
absolute necessity of more producers living on the soil.” After
alluding to his recently finished nine days trip among the
northern farming districts, the matter of Messrs. Chaffey came
on again. “We shall be prepared to meet them when they
come, and to hear what they have got to say,” said he, “ and we
will give every fair consideration we can to anything they may
put forth.” And as the writer passed out with the parting
words, “ I am very glad to have seen you,” echoing in his ears,
he felt that he had made a new acquaintance, who had at any
rate spoken and behaved as a gentleman, whatever the most
carping of critics may say it is not necessary to reproduce his


remarks on the troubles of the drink traffic, or of the safe
insurance for bodily and mental happiness that the prohibi-
tionist section of Chaffey’s scheme means, and the three-fourths
of the public who do not benefit at the hands of the publicans
will cordially endorse Mr. Abigail’s sentiment—the result of
years of conscientious practice. It may be added that the
minister shook hands heartily at parting, after few moments
had been devoted to a matter affecting the public and their
present so-called mining intelligence, in which an idea was
brought forward by the writer that had been originally suggested
by the Curator of the Brisbane Museum. Mr. Abigail disked
that the proposal should be put into definite form, which it is
hardly necessary to say was subsequently done.
On the Way Up.
There were a lot of people going up country when I left
Brisbane in the Grlanworth. The opening of Parliament had
just eventuated, and a two months spell to the stipendary
legislators was granted after a week’s duties, which on the part
of the MTlwraith men consisted chiefly of banquetting, and on
the part of the others on being very much outside. G-ympie
had refused to financially respond to a proposal of mine, and a
prospect of a three months’ trip among live people further
North, whose enterprises the southern public take a real interest
in, was pleasant enough to one who had known by painful
experience how much “ Little Pedlingtonism ” the southern
goldfield is capable of containing. On the boat the prospects
of the Eidsvold were discussed: the general opinon expressed
being that a judgment could only be pronounced on the field
when the machinery, now en route , was at work. There had been
good results even now despite bad batteries, but what would
come with approved appliances would furnish a far more reliable
test than any yet to hand. And so the Eidsvold visit was post-
poned for awhile. Among the sugar men on board there was talk
of the prospects of the “ chief agricultural industry,” The fact of
Sam Brooks’ defeat as an anti-black labour advocate was spoken
of hopefully, as shewing that white men were beginning to
regard sugar as something that would benefit the country
generally as well as the planters. One M.L.A. on board said
that most of the drivers and wood-cutters on the plantations in
the Bundaberg district were white men, as the kanakas were all
required for field work, which no white men could be got to do


at any terms. The substitution of double crushing machinery
for those mills yet sticking to the old style, the erection of
bigger mills altogether, and of increased economy in production,
was recommended, and it had been stated by a man who had
been on sugar plantations ever since the Burnett started, that
10s. a ton paid the grower if he had some kanakas to help him.
I know that in the wilds of Kolan some of the Teutons there
employ “ boys,” and growl a good deal that they can’t get
more. After all, what is black labour but the inherent desire
of all Queenslanders to get out of doing hard physical work ?
Look at the swarms of professional men and clerks in our cities.
Even on the boat we were travelling in the seamen got £7 per
month, and from £2 to £5 extra for overtime, as they charge
Is. 6d. per hour. The wharf lumpers get the same for night
work ; but the gentlemanly clerk, who supervises them, watches
the company’s interests and takes tally, works occasionally all
day and all niyhi for a beggarly and uniform £2 ss. a week.
Let him remonstrate, and he will be told that hundreds are
ready to take his place at 30s. The officers on the ships who
supervise the loading and unloading, get no overtime or at least
they get it without extra coin, and their pay is actually a good
deal less, while the hours are fully as long as of their so called
subordinates. One good word may be said for the Seamen’s
Union here —that they only admit qualified A.B.’s to their
numbers, and not ordinary seamen. Both men and masters are
equally solicitious to do as well as they can out of each other;
it is simply self-interest on both sides that governs our social
and political world, as it always has and always will do.
The A.U.S.N. and Smith folk have knocked their
arrangement on the head allowing passengers to travel on
either line with return tickets issued by either company. The
Smith crowd appear to be more on sufferance than anything
else as far as the Queensland coasting trade is concerned, and
the use of hulks that were not young when the Crimea was
on, as passenger boats, is significant of what might come if
they ever got a monopoly. This appears to show that the
former entente cordiale between the two companies is over; at
any rate, the change should be notified as much as the previous
arrangement has been, as the public suffer thereby.
The Vagabond once characterised the Mary river as the
most magnificent one he had ever seen —without water. This
remark was conjured up by the fact of the Grlanville sticking in
the river mud from early on Sunday morning till the afternoon.
The river trouble is not so bad on the Mary as it is on the
Eitzroy at Bockhampton, at which latter place there is a small
opposition to i he line to Port Alma that would save the steamers
the series of sandy troubles they have to chance if they


go up themselves. Maryborough has splendid deep water at
Urangan, 20 miles from town, where the boats could unload at
a jetty, and save 10 hours per trip ; but the line, although
authorised years ago, is not yet built, as a private local company
had the job in hand that was stronger in in prospectuses than
cash, and had, moreover, to contend against the same prejudices
that Rockhampton has exhibited.
Maryborough.
Maryborough was reported to be very dull, waiting (with a
sickness brought in by long watching) for the dawn of the era of
definite fiscal encouragement to her foundries and manufactories.
The election at Maryborough had preceded that of Brisbane,
hence the Mary city losing the chance of having the Speaker to
represent her, John Walker and Co. did all they could for Mr.
King, but the men took their own counsel and sent in two men
to the minority, thinking it was going to be the majority. How-
ever, Jack Annear is a Protectionist first and a Griffiihite
second, so he says, and Mr. Hyne is a timber-merchant who has
suffered a good deal from home and foreign competition and can
at any rate be trusted to work for his own interests that are
identical with those of the timber merchants and timber getters
all over the colony, who regard another 2s. on intercolonial and
foreign stuff as the only thing that can keep our sawmills
going. “It pays better to import than to produce in the timber
trade,” say Dath, Henderson & Co, of Brisbane, “and it is only
a matter of time when the men will have to go and find other
work if no.change is made.” Will it pay Brisbane to have its
saw mills idle ? Will it even pay the paper township creator or
the importer who pays £3 a week in wages for as many clerks?
Don’t you see, oh, mighty men, that you can’t live on yourselves;
if you buy timber at minimum rates, you will have nobody to
live in your houses, for by so doing you stop the producer of
the local timber from being able to earn his wages, and he has
been or must be your chief supporter. You must have someone
to live on, and don’t for your own sake kill the goose that lays
auriferous eggs, lest you some day be degraded to work with
your hands for your own living! “We cannot increase the price
of timber in Brisbane,” said a former Treasurer to me two years
ago, when he was told that the timber getters were out of work
and starving. What will the new men do? Sunday, 11.
Still on the mud. Several fat and healthy children playing
and occasionally howling overhead, who came down now
and then to run in the saloon. Bundaberg people becoming
resigned. Promised high water in the afternoon. No piano


on board; only amusement provided is by the children
aforesaid.
The Llewellyn, steamer, apparently a pleasure boat from
Maryborough, has come down, and two people —visible on
deck —are fishing, while the soft drizzle of rain makes the
Sabbath as dull as the most respectable person would wish it.
It is an appropriate preparation for Sunday at Mary-
borough.
It is not possible to see much of Maryborough in half-an-
hour on Sunday afternoon; but from an old friend who made
one of the welcoming crowd I learnt that the big foundry was
dull, and that the Vulcan had got the right of producing the
famous Watson and Denny pan. Eidsvold had taken a great
deal of money, and the reults were as yet indefinite pending
more tests by machinery then being erected. There were
various sorts of mining fraud enterpises in the district, one of
which, whose name I shall carefully omit, having been salted
with 23 carat gold. It must have cost him a lot of money, so
they said. “ Things are seldom what they seem,” and in mining
matters this is pre-eminently true. The Mount Shamrock was,
however, one of the tangible realities; but the new field the
other side of G-ayndah that had already over a thousand people
and a weekly paper would be better left alone till the last
moment of my return journey. Maryborough has none of the
babel and glitter of Queen-street: but a place of 10,000 people,
that have only had one serious smash in 7 years is something
that the sunny South would be glad to possess. Maryborough
can stand a dull time as well or better than any coastal town in
Queensland, and by the end of this year the real intentions of
the Government as to the encouragement of manufactories and
their artisans should make the forges of Maryborough busy, if
the explicit statements of the Premier on the matter are
realised.
Bundaberg
Was just as pretty and smiling as ever, only bigger and
more pretentious. Shops that had lacked paint two years ago
were now glorious in black and gold; vacant places had been
filled up, and the plate-glass windows showed an astonishing
increase. Every one was in good temper and with apparently
no grievances worth mentioning. People who had begged me
last year to tell them about Croydon when I got there, so as to
get out of “ that beastly hole,” were to all appearances more firmly
established than ever; and the railway that brought Bundaberg
and Maryborough together in two hours was in full swing.
Property values had gone up and were continuing to rise : and
the incoming of fresh sugar machinery, in spite of the low prices,


together with a definite determination on the part of some of
the planters to keep the “ boys ” at field work only, made things
more than prosperous, inasmuch as they appeared permanent. One
of the leading merchants there, albeit one of the youngest, spoke
with great earnestness about reciprocity with Victoria that
would make Bundaberg “ hum,” and would double the demand
for white labour in the district and treble the purchasing power
of the people. The Grovernor and Sir Samuel Griffith had just
before visited Bingera, where Mr. Angus Giibson employs 90
white men and 130 kanakas : and the triumphal arch that the
party went through up there was representative of the sugar
industry —supported by a white man on one side and a black one
on the other. It was an emphatic illustration of the sentimental
principle affirmed at the North Brisbane election, which showed
that the suuar problem, when expressed by some idle foundries-
and by half-time mechanics, meant a change from hungry senti-
mental to monopolist ideas, but which change included full wages.
One can’t argue with an empty stomach, and when the kanaka
means overtime to the city artisan he will swallow his prejudices
as easily as a democratic politician swallows a title.
Mount Perry was active again from its sleep of ten years,
and wonderful tales were told of its revival, which were empha-
sised by the absence of some of the tradespeople of Bundaberg,
who had gone up thither permanently. Last year it was more
desolate than Grindstone, if that be possible; but the fact of
some dozen of Mount Perry and Eidsvold mines having their
headquarters at Bundaberg was significant enough of the change.
Just another brief space more, so as to take the best and latest
news, and Eidsvold and the Mount shall appear in these pages
with all the possible justice that can be done to them. Andrew
Gtoodwin, of the Mail , reported everything as good as it could
be; and those who know him well know that he should know. That
the two “ sugar ” members were just returned unopposed showed
significantly enough ; and it may be a lesson to the yet virtuous
white man in the South and West who saves the careful three-
pennies in a place where his labour is as cheap as milling rings,
or big rackrenting landholders can make it, to reflect that one
of the most solidly prosperous towns in Queensland to-day owes
it all to the hated and abused kanaka. Keep out the Coolie and
the Chinaman if you will: but don’t cut the nose off the face
of the artisan community in order to remove what is considered
by some as an offensive excrescence. The fact that the
Mount Perry miners helped to put in a planter in 1886, and
again in 1888, and that it is “sugar” money mainly that has
revived Mount Perry, is a lesson that even prejudiced men
cannot help seeing. And to do him justice the miner is not
particular in working for or selling his mine to a bloated
capitalist if he can: and the only reason he does not sell to the


“ guardians ” who used to keep him from the South Sea boy is
because those gentry are not “on ” as a rule. And in G-erman
New Guinea, the only part where it is possible for white out-
siders to make a living, the Government regulations provide so
much labour for so much land. There is a complete official
machinery, and the employer is responsible for all his labour
individually and collectively, and the result is prosperity.
An Eidsvold Report,
Made this 7th day of June, 1888, by one who had been on
that field and not without honour since its start. Best lines of
reef; Lady Augusta best producing, Lady Helena next, and
Stockman which has been good. Lady Ann also good ; the p.c.’s
inl each case only on gold. Mount Jones just floated for
£9,000 in 10s. shares ; broker O’Grady, at Morwich’s Arcade.
Shaft sank ten miles from Eidsvold ; in middle of May share in
p.c. worth £25, now more. Bismarck p.c. floated for £lB,OOO,
shares 10s., secretary, Bark, Eagle-street. Beef about 3 feet,
estimated 2 ozs. No crushing yet. Directors (provisional),
Hughes, Lloyd (South Brisbane Insurance Company), Hannam,
and Heussler. Eorty tons up; down about 70 feet. Reef
found on the surface, also four leaders auriferous. Stockman
gave from 1 oz. to 2 oz. from moderate crushing: none since.
Expected to improve as deeper depths come. Eield alive, the
months’prospects middling; want to sink for water; nearest
permanent supply three miles away at the Burnett. Local
water filthy. Population, including Mount Jones, at Christmas
2,000.
Gladstone.
The same night in the small hours a party of people came
on board from Gladstone, and by their very open and audible
conversation succeeded in rousing some of us to the fact that
Gladstone was lying close by in a state of existence which has
been going on for the past thirty years or so without variation
or shadow of change. Being informed by one of the natives of
that place that the coach for Norton left at six next morning, I
uprose and landed on a narrow wharf that brought me into the
middle of G-ladstone in about two minutes and a-half. The
same space of time would have suffered to reach the outside
suburbs : and the town by moonlight presented a romantic
aspect, which in the day time is shabbiness idealised.
The shelter of an ancient hostelry being gained, and the
bedroom being reached after many darksome windings through
many deserted corridors, I tried to sleep but failed. The
uncanniness of the place reminded me too powerfully of the
roadside inn of my juvenile days and of very provincial theatres.


I tossed about till near 6 a.m., when the coach was due, and then
after seeing the semblance of that vehicle suddenly appear
outside in the semi half-light, I managed after much navigation
to get out of a kitchen back window with my belongings, and
following a lane came to the coach. The horses were reported
to be coming, and a clergyman was there waiting to start: but
the hotel was as silent as ever, the darkened windows exhibiting
no hope of breakfast. Finding that it must be at least a week
before I could return, and that the period of refreshment en route
was as foggy as the morning, I suddenly concluded to clear for
the Glanworth with all speed. And as that noble ship moved
off soon after I felt the only feeling of thankfulness that it is
possible for the passing stranger to feel for such a place —in
being mercifully permitted to quit it. I could understand how
that the Rockhampton man, who is engaged with the mosquitoes
in the hot and stilly night, after exhausting his stock of swear
words, yells out madly, “Oh, go to —go to —go to Gladstone! ”
Its very rough on the Grand Old Man, by the way, to have such a
collection of small sarcophagi named after him. Gladstone has
only one thing besides its three stores and three hotels, the only
thing the people did not have a hand in—the harbour: and
when one sees there how “ every prospect pleases and only man
is vile,” it raises a wish for a few earthquakes and a hurricane or
two so that all the manifold beauties and natural advantages of
Gladstone should not be further handicapped by its inhabitants.
And now that the railway from Bundaberg is being permanently
surveyed it would be a noble work for some wealthy and charit-
able southern merchants to take away the human part of Glad-
stone to the Isle of Skye, or to some other equally suitably
retired spot in the North German Ocean, and let the Crofters,
lawfully starving or rebelliously fighting for the right to live,
come out to Port Curtis, so that the obvious purposes
of nature therein may at last be fulfilled by the survival of the
fittest. The mines at Norton, 40 miles away, have an excellent
name, but had it been Golconda itself the preliminary purgatory
would have been too much. The fact that the boss, Mr.
Conran, spent a year in Melbourne studying the chlorinisa-
tion process, which is successfully working at Norton, shows a
great deal: and as a specimen of conscientious honesty it is
almost unique in the history of floated mines. There was a
strong probability of missing him at Norton, as his family
were away from home, and this is my main reason for
leaving Gladstone as I did. It is significant of the transforma-
tion that is coming on the sleepy hollow of Queensland that the
only machinery landed at Gladstone for 15 years was left by the
Glanworth. On board was the celebrated Maccabe, whom I
had met at a club in Brisbane, whose ideas in home opinions as
relating to Queensland came with refreshing effect. He said


that at home a certain number of noble lords, our hereditary-
peers or their sons, kept themselves going in the sanctity of the
inner circle of fashionable society, by loaning their names as
directors of public companies. A lot of them depended on this
as a main source of income, for the conditions were that they
should know nothing of the mine and should do nothing—two
qualifications that their rank and station admirably fitted them
for. No matter how big the swindle or barefaced the robbery
there were no lack of peers of the realm to be had if the money
was there. Mr. Maccabe said furthermore that Sir Thomas
MTlwraith was liked at home by the great middle class that
really rules England for his being the only Premier who had
not grovelled to the Imperialistic fad. When asked as to Sir
Henry Parkes’ defiance, Mr. Maccabe said it was simply an
alternative of bravado from a course of wholesale blatherskite
to the Imperial folk at home, in which his love of notoriety
and prominence were the only prominent causes.
ROCKHAMPTON.
The central city had just got over its Hanlan-Trickett spree,
which had brought heaps of visitors and any amount of hard
cash to the tradespeople. Trickett appeared to have been second
favourite from the start, and a handsome tribute of condolence
had been just presented to him by the citizens, who were busy
getting up another £1,300 for a next year’s aquatic carnival.
Everyone is mining mad more or less, and although there is the
usual lull after the aquatic storm there are great expectations
of good times with the new party in power, who have included
Eockhampton in the Cabinet almost for the first time. The
industries are anxious to see what the fiscal encouragement is
really to be, and there are signs of another land boom, prices
all round being exceedingly low. Tbe skating rink is a sort of
social boom, and the weather is simply perfect. Another editor
has just come on the Argus —the gentleman who “did” for
bis party in Eockhampton what the Telegraph “ did ” for it in
-Brisbane is gone, and Grifilthism is generally morbund. M‘ll


wraith and mining appear to be the chief features at Rock-
hampton.
An Interview with the Hon. W. Pattison,
M.L.A.
Now that Central Queensland is directly represented for
the first time in a Queensland Ministry by a man whose ap-
pointment has been made so far without a single word of cavil
or dissent from either side, it may be of interest to Roek-
hamptonites to hear his views on matters which vitally concern
his constituents’ interests. The Hon. William Pattison, apart
from his reputation as a millionaire or his connexion with the
present Ministry, is, and has been for a generation past,
as much a part of Rockhampton as the Eitzroy bridge, or
the Mount Morgan Company, of which he is the Managing
Director. He owes everything to the town, and it is not too
much to add that the town owes a good deal to him. His
appearance and manner are disillusory of the “ bloated aristo-
crat ’ of the shilling novel and the transpontine stage ; he has
none of that reserve that would lead a wealthy man at home to
live in a chronic state of mufti.” The occasion of the inter-
view which follows was only the third time I had seen him, and,
as will be noticed, he spoke fully and freely on every matter
brought forward.
THE RIVER DREDGING! AND IMPROVEMENTS.
That is a matter yet to be considered at the coming
meeting of Parliament,” said he, and the Harbours and Rivers
Department are busy preparing information on the matter.
Nothing can be possibly said or done just now, but it is cheerful
to notice that in connection with the river works that the
present Government have already given orders to push on
opera i ns in connection with them, paying special attention to
the reports of the resident engineer,"Mr. A. W. Jardine. In
the past the dredge has been kept going, and the silt has been
distributed right and left without retaining walls to keep the
river on its natural channel. Speaking as to the way the
Eitzroy had been washed away since the foundation of Rock-
hampton, Mr. Pattison remarked “ that during 2d years past 80
fe* < hail been taken away in this manner from the river banks.
The Government had made no definite promise in the matter, but
would be guided by the Engineer’s report.
THE central district and the big loan.
“ H was time,” continued Mr. Pattison, “ that something


was really going to be done for the Central District, for it had
received nothing from the late G-overnment’s ten million loan,
except the expenditure for the court-house, which cost £B,OOO,
and one or two other matters.”
THE RAILWAY TO PORI ALMA.
“ I scarcely think,” said Mr. Pattison, in reply to a question
as to the harbour facilities of Broadmount, “ that anyone who
had seen Broadmount and Port Alma would not admit that the
latter by far the best in every way. It is one of the finest
natural ports north of Port Jackson. To make Broadmount
eligible would entail considerable expense, whereas at Port
Alma a wharf costing £47,000 has been already constructed,
and the 26 miles of railway there from Rockhampton can be
made for a cost of £3OOO per mile. It is just as well, however,
to let this matter stand for the present, as it was a party matter
at the late election. A lot of small property owners seem to
think that if that line was built, the town would suffer injury to
its trade. On the other hand there are a great number who
think that it would not only do no real harm to the town, but
the convenience of deep water landing would be largely appre-
ciated by the steam companies sending larger boats. More-
over, there would be a considerable influx of visitors by rail,
who at present, don’t come up the river, as the trip up and down
consumes nearly all the available time at their disposal.”
THE TOWN SEWERAGE.
Mr. Pattison thought that the Council had acted in a very
praiseworthy manner hitherto in carrying out this work at their
own expense, so far borrowing their funds from the Govern-
ment. There was nothing specially promised by the Govern-
ment on this point, except that funds would always be available
for such a purpose.
THE MOUNT MORGAN MINE.
It will be of interest to the general public to know that the
plans for the new branch line to Mount Morgan, 13J miles from
the junction with the Central line, were originally ordered by
the Mount Morgan Company, as it had been their intention to
erect smelting works in the town, which have since been sus-
pended by the chlorination works now erected. The Central
traffic manager had spoken to the writer a week before, placing
a definite time for the finishing of the line and prophecying a
success from the start. Speaking as the chief director of the
great mine, Mr. Pattison stated that its value was now thirteen
and a half millions, and he had no doubt that, judging by


present returns, it would reach £20,000,000 during the present
year. These returns had been steadily increasing in value as
the average had risen during the past seven months from 5 to
7or 8 ozs. to the ton. More than that was being obtained in
places, but that could be taken as a safe average result. We
cannot at present charge the barrels sufficiently strong for the
gas to lay hold of the gold,” said he, “ but we shall know more
as we gain experience. At any rate, these results come from
the 300 feet level, at which depth the work has been stationary
for some time past.” [Since then shares are about £l6.]
MATER CONSERVATION.
“ More attention should undoubtedly be paid to this subject
by the Government,” said he, “for they can at all times borrow
successfully for such a work, which is fully as important, if not
more so, than railway development. Money is very cheap just
now at home.” On the matter of agricultural settlement in the
district, however, he shook his head rather sadly. “I can assure
you I speak from a practical knowledge of the matter, and have
taken all sorts of trouble in getting the best seeds and plants
procurable, and down comes a rainfall of 23 inches in 30 hours
—that was in last February, and we haven’t had a drop to speak
of worth mentioning since. If we can get the Legislature to
deal with this most important matter we might do something
eventually, but as far as the Central District is concerned, it is
no use trying agricultural settlement on in the present mode of
things; and as far as water conservation and boring on stations
can be spoken of, it too often happens that on a place of 25
miles square, where the water is a long distance from the
pasturage, lots of the cattle suffer severely in crossing the
intervening desert.
INDUSTRIAL.
On this matter Mr. Pattison spoke firmly and hopefully,
giving as his opinion that with the cost of carriage added to the
imported articles, the local manufacturer was able to compete
with the importer on equal terms. Alluding to Burns and
Twigg’s recent contracts for six boilers as a case in point, he
said that not only in boilers, but in crushing machinery, the
local men had almost got the trade in their own hands. lu spite
of paying double wages he believed that ironwork
could be produced here as cheaply as anywhere, and that there
was a strong feeling locally in favour of encouraging district
industries, the result of which was pretty perceptible to-day.
SUGAR.
“ Mr. Donaldson introduced the subject of reciprocity with


Victoria into the last Assembly, but it did not appear to be
well received,” said he. “As for the verdict of the late election
it was more against the late administration for being such a
one horse affair, as it undoubtedly was, than an expression in
favour of importing coloured labour for sugar. You may
depend on it, 1 think, that Sir Thomas MTlwraith will strictly
adhere to the pledges he made on the matter during his
electioneering tour. Still for all that I am perfectly certain
that we cannot grow sugar without kanakas, and if the Chinese
and Coolies alike were excluded and only kanakas brought here,
who don’t compete with white men, there would still be a large
demand for white-skilled labour that would otherwise not be
wanted at all ; and, besides, the business of our foundries and
timber-getting would be directly benefitted. Still as the arbiter
on the matter is after all the working man himself, it is im-
possible to say very much on such a subject pending the spread
of information among the masses that will enable them to use
their rights with a better knowledge of facts than some of
them have hitherto possessed.”
A Trip to Taranganba.
Owing to the peculiar ideas of some of the Eockhamptou
people, who are afraid to move outside their beloved city lest it
should depart in their absence, it is not surprising to add that
there is nothing particularly astounding in the way of progress
to be seen in their watering places. Emu Park and Teppoon,
the one thirty-four miles distant and the other thirty-two, are
both very much in embryo at present. A line to Emu Park is
three-parts finished, and will be completed by Christmas now
that certain political changes have happened at Brisbane. All
the way thither is flat and occasionally stony ; Stony Creek,
whose boulders fully justified its name, being the turn off to
New Zealand Gfully, now deserted. A drive of three hours
behind one of the smartest four-in-hands the town can
boast brought me to Emu Park as the dusk came on, a little
before the regular coach from Eockhampton arrived that had
started ninety minutes ahead. There were plenty of bush fires
all along the road which culminated at about half-way out when
the flames could be seen plainly enough in the sunlight.
Emu Park consists of about fifty houses, all more or less
respectable, which are chiefly suburban residences, except one
hotel (Comley’s) that is in all its first bloom of existence, and


another which has only got to the framework stage. Emu Park
is patronised by one of the local M.P.’s, and Yeppoon is
honoured with the house of the other. Emu Park Bay is
separated in its midst by a rocky peninsula, the further bay
being as smooth and as hard as Brighton sands at home, or
those of Sandown or the Isle of Wight. There are islands
many across the horizon of blue Pacific, including Upper and
Lower Keppel. The sea was as blue as only the Pacific can be,
and the gentle, regular fall of the surf made one forget as with
a lullaby the littleness and greatness of the central city far
away in the twilight. The atmosphere and the moonlight were
alike cold and pure, a state of things not generally associ-
ated with Rockhampton, and the bay shone out as with
subterranean fire with the beams of a full moon reflected in it.
The view from the top of the adjacent hill next morning was
as pleasant as the air was invigorating, for both night and day
are considerably cooler and healthier there than in the hill-
environed city of the plains. Emu Park will be too far away
for the noisy and sometimes inebriatedly madding crowd,
except from Saturday to Monday, and the prospect of liberal
season ticket arrangements, together with health and vigour
that are worth more than anything money can buy, will make
Emu Park the St. Kildaof Central Queensland. The terminus
will come right into the place, close to the Post and Telegraph
Office and the private mansion of an auctioneer, whose town
residence is the largest of its kind the city boasts. The agri-
cultural industry is catered for by two Chinese, whose “ callee
and cabots ” are only sufficient for half the supply. The gentle
Chiukey is evidently of a reciprocal turn of mind, judging by
the way a firework demonstration made by ray host’s family was
responded to from tho“wellee good” habitation not far off;
and when the celestials shall have learnt the beauties of the
eight-hour system, and of a combination to raise produce to
famine prices, they will have solved the problem of Australian
democratic civilisation by rendering the ten shillings per day of
the working man ultimately to be worth only five, when white
men with a strict sense of their value replace the ousted China-
man in their gardens and their gambling alike. And when we
prohibit the importation of opium, out of which we derive a
substantial revenue, it will be time enough to find out where the
contamination really lays.
Some day a future and more enlightened Rockhampton
will have an up-hill tramway to the top of the range behind the
city, where the most elevated society will mix, socially and
spiritually, free from sin, sweat, and sorrow. The idea will
probably be denounced as revolutionary till it is un fait accompli,
and the visitor will yet have to report of something good that


has come out o£ our Queensland Nazareth. Down by Comley’s,
near an outbuilding flanked with an awesome array of empty
bottles, is the shore of the rocky beach, where the remains of the
ill-fated ship Eastminster still exist. Of its human cargo no
trace has been ever seen.
Land is obtainable at about £l5O per acre on suburban
localities at Emu Park, and when the railway comes the rates
will mount like the East Street thermometers on the dog days.
The “ young idea ” will shoot all the better in a cooler, purer
atmosphere straight from the Pacific, more especially if the
next Grammar School is built on the heights’over-looking the
township.
YEPPOON.
About 12 miles from Emu Park along the coast northwards
over hill and dale, are tracts of well-grassed land, now as dry
as a Griffithite budget or a meeting of the Geographical Society
at Brisbane. Mr. James Boss’s station is five miles on, and his
brother's place at Taranganba is within a mile of the town of
Teppoon —one must call these places towns. After success-
fully crossing a saltwater creek, with the help of a small boat,
whose owner happened to be in sight as I came along, a walk
round a weary bay of loose sand followed, and after mounting a
small white avalanche of sand, which separated beach from main
land, or rather main sand, Yeppoon was gradually approached.
A very comfortable hotel was the first building, the main por-
tion of the maritime metropolis being further on, and consisting
of a street and a half of iron houses in a plain bounded by hills.
Yeppoon plantation, the only sugar depot in the district, is
some seven miles away, and the fact of ninety kanakas and thirty
white men working together for their common good is one that
has been apparently allowed to continue without protest from
anyone. The kanakas do their own work and spend their own
money, and the township benefits thereby. In fact, the planta-
tion has been the mainstay of the place, sand and all, till the
latest and greatest development of the last six months has
appeared. But this necessitates a separate chapter. Let us
head it
Taranganba.
J ust behind Mr. Ross’ house is a mountain called Pigstye,
which, with five other hill-tops, forms what is known to the
mining world as the area of the Taranganba Gold Mining Com-
pany, Limited, capital three-quarters of a million. Mr. J. T.
M‘Kenna, the manager, was busy at work writing, although the
day was Sunday, and the fact of the once a week coach leaving
Yeppoon at six a.m. the next day was my excuse for so troubling


him. After the horses had cooled themselves for an hour, Mr.
M‘Kenna came out and at once promised me whatever informa-
tion I required, premising, however, that it would have to be
imparted at Neil’s Hotel, at Teppoon, where he stayed. A
number of tenders awaited him there for firewood, hewn and
sawn timber, and log timber for the machinery fixings. As many
of the contractors were there and had, like myself, to return to
town early, the manager used up most of the evening to decide
upon the successful proposals. It is no exaggeration to say
that he is the centre of attraction at present throughout the
Rockhampton district, as any man who has £750,000 to deal
with must necessarily be in a place whose goddess is a golden
one. I sat waiting beside him at the hotel while his son made
an abstract of some twenty-five tenders, and when he had
finished with them, and not till then, did our conference
commence.
MR. McKENNA’S STATEMENT.
He had been in Victoria since 1863, having served his last
nine years at the Home paddock, near Smeaton, Victoria. Had
been at Taranganba only four weeks, having been engaged by
the Chairman of Directors at Ballarat. There was a series of
trenches when he came to the mine across the summits of
three of the same hills that constituted the company’s area
in which were quartzite conglomerate with no distinct veins
or lodes. “ I have seen gold only once since my arrival here.
I did not hear that it had been seen before at Taranganba. I
have seen Mount Morgan stone and it is similar to ours in some
respects, but there is more quartz here amongst the formation.
One thing in our favour is that we have five hills whilst Mount
Morgan has only one. I came here mainly to make preparations
for erecting the machinery and plant. A portion of this has
been supplied by Parke and Lacy, of Sydney, for reducing the
stone by breaking \vith rollers called dry or roller crushing.
These rollers work one into the other, the stone eventually
being crushed to a minimum of fineness, so that no particle of
gold is allowed to escape. It is estimated to save 97 per cent,
of the gold, and is the same process in use at Mount Morgan.
The machinery will be so constructed that the stuff will go
from the top of the works to the bottom, some seventy feet, in
one series of processes, so that the work of the men will be
little more than quarrying the stone. The final processes are
the calcining to get out the arsenic and silver, and the passage
into the chlorination sheds. Our apparatus when erected, which
will be in about three months’ time, will take 1800 tons per
week with a very moderate amount of labour for the quantity


crushed. Not more than half the men employed will he wanted
for this work—say about twenty.
THE AEEA OE THE LEASE.
The total area is 620 acres, and the lease is for 97 years,
I have made no assays from the mine yet, but I have seen some
eminent scientists up here testing the stone, including Dr.
Robertson and Mr. Ranft, and the directors have also caused
assays to be made. Mr. Ranft travelled all over the area from
Pigstye Hill to the eastern and western hills. lam sure that
by his report, which has since been published, he got an average
of two ounces to the ton. He was paid by two of the Sydney
shareholders on their own private responsibility, and not on
behalf of the company, which purchased his report afterwards.
This report was made before I came. He came back to the
mine subsequently, and he and I and Gresley Lukin and one
or two others went with him over the same ground he had
tested, and he specified where he had got the stone from. It
was about as complete and comprehensive an assay as could
have been chosen, for he took his samples right and left as he
went along. He expressed a most favourable opinion on the
mine. We have had many visitors since, including Mr,
Wardless, Mr. Emerson, and Captain Aldridge, who all spoke
exceedingly well of the prospects they had seen ; one of them
took 20,000 shares, and most of the others invested also. Every
one who has come here since I came has taken shares: the
price being 15s. to-day, and will soon go to £l. The actual
capital subscribed is only £33,000. The labour required at
Taranganba in four months time for the machinery, the brick
making, and the mine will be about 300 all told, including the
timbercutters, I have orders to lay out a township on the
company’s ground.
THE MANAGER’S IMPRESSIONS.
If the stone, as indicated on the surface, is a fair test of
the value and quantity of the whole, it is the biggest thing I
have ever had anything to do with, or have any knowledge of.
The greatest depth yet sunk is 130 feet, and we have got in at
the face of the hill, cutting 60 feet or over, and the stuff there
is equal to all appearance to the other. Ranft took an assay
from the cutting which gave three ounces, and he found his
best assays from the Pigstye and western hills. In the cutting
the belt of auriferous country was 60 feet wide, not defined by


walls, and distributed by dykes or horses. You cannot see the
gold at all.
THE CLIMATE.
About the most healthy place I have ever been in. I look
on Taranganba as one of the healthiest places in the whole of
Australia. I like the sea air here in considerable preference
to a winter at Ballarat. And the people living here seem to be
as good as the climate. We have no policemen, for there is no
necessity for them, and there is a much larger proportion of
married men than is usually found in such communities.
RAILWAY COMMUNICATIONS.
It will soon be absolutely necessary to get the railway here,
and there should be at least three mails a week from Rock-
hampton. The line would only be an extension of six or seven
miles from Emu Park, and would vastly improve the district.
I am calling tenders for 1000 cords of wood of 128 cubic feet
each.
SURROUNDING! CLAIMS.
Next day particulars of the following claims were obtained :
—The Peninsula, eleven miles away, near the beach further up,
good prospects found, and a rumoured floating of a company
at Rockhampton. Barmoya, another company, has for its
chief holder Mr. James Atherton, of Adelaide Park, Yeppoon.
Crofts, at Nangarene, near the Lizard Mountain, nine miles
west by north-west; 8 cwt. sent to Sydney for assay. Co-opa,
ten miles north, said to be floated for £1,000,000, the former
owner, Mr. R. Ross, retaining a large interest. Westbrook,
Limestone Creek, six miles south from Taranganba, taken up by
Dodgsin as a selection ten years ago; gold discovered about
1884; average value three ounces per ton; cutting trenches
same as at Taranganba. £SOOO is to be devoted to prospecting
this mine. Since writing this the Co-opa has been sold to a
Brisbane syndicate, as will be seen elsewhere. The Greek reef
also in the district has given enormous yields in time gone by,
and it being left fifteen years alone while the floods played
havoc with it have made its working since it resumption a
difficult matter. One of the shareholders, states from a recent
visit there that the old reef has been struck again, and
that good prospects are to hand, as evidenced by the results of
a prospect he brought hack with him. The Greek is now con-


sidered a promising claim, and the depth of working is 180 feet
down.
YEPPOON WANTS
Are, first and foremost, a good hotel, and a summary execu-
tion without benefit of clergy of some brigands who repaired the
road to town with loose earth, carefully covering up stumps in
the middle of the road instead of taking them out. Yeppoon
has a Presbyterian Church —the only one there, and which will
be used by all denominations till they raise their own temples.
Yeppoon is really a very pretty place, and it has an amount of
auriferous territory that will startle the reader who is not
accustomed to find watering places and goldfields combined.
Anyhow, a couple of millions has been floated for claims within
ten miles of Yeppoon.
Mount Wheeler and Cawarral.
On the way to Rockhampton the road turns off to the
Cawarral diggings at the half-way house at the foot of Mount
Wheeler, eight miles from the road. The Gallawa claim
possesses a ten-head stamper, now being erected by Burns and
Twigg, of Rockhampton, and which will be at work on a con-
siderable body of stone very early. The reef was discovered by
Morgan before he found the famous mount which bears his
name. He was at the Gallawa for two years, and got about
2oz. 4dwt. to the ton, of gold, worth £4 per ounce. This was
done with imperfect appliances which are to-day superseded by
Chilian mills and Berdans. The reef on the other side of the
creek has been worked in one shaft to a depth of 140 feet,which
is now filled up by water, and is to be pumped out within the
next week or so.
Morgan’s sudden departure did Gallawa harm, and work
has been suspended ever since, as the late holders were unable
to pump out the water. It is reported that Morgan only got
from £60,000 to £90,000 from the present owners of the
mountain.
The 14 h.p. winding and pumping machinery is from Burns
& Twigg, and is stated to answer well, Mr. Burns had been
out the day before I came. The engine, almost a new one, had.
come from the New Zealand Gully, now deserted. The other
shaft has been sunk 63 feet, and is expected to strike the reef
at about 200 feet down, which may be in from six to eight


months time. There will be twenty men in all employed when
work is in full swing.
The Lord Ailsa, a mile nearer Cawarral, has had some
crushings of small value, but is not now on gold. The reef,
which has pinched out in the shaft, is being tunnelled for, both
cutting the reef and taking the water out from the shaft. The
Long Tunnel employs six men, and has yielded good results in
time gone by: the management is not successful just now.
The “ Last Chance” is at the back of Cawarral, and has been
registered for six months. Three-ounce stuff has been got
out of this claim. The Hibernian has a tunnel in 750 feet,
which carried the reef 150 feet along. They are sinking in the
tunnel about 70 feet in, expecting to catch the reef again. The
reef has gone three ounces in times past, and has an average
width of two feet.
The Tom Thumb machine, which does most of the crushing
for the district, is beinir filled with the chlorination appliances
that are making .Rockhampton a name in the world. It is
situated on the road to Emu Park, adjoining the house of the
owner, Mr. Dalzell, who has a timber yard adjoining.
It will be interesting to add that Mr. Robert Ross, the
vendor of Taranganba, who revised the report taken from Mr.
McKenna, and found it correct, showed me a telegram from
Brisbane, announcing the floating of the Co-opa, seven miles
distant from his house, near Yeppoon, for a million of money,
in which company he will retain a large interest. There have
only been surface tests as yet, and the verdict of the first
crushing is being awaited with anxious interest together of
much speculation all over the colonies.
A Chat with Warden Lukin.
Whatever faults Warden Lukin may have —and no
Government official is without them if the vox populi means
anything —no one can accuse him of uncertain utterances. In
fact he has been accused of too much plain speaking by certain
wise men of that mining Gotham, Gympie, where the public
interests, to say nothing of their own brokers speculations,
were held to be imperilled by some statements of his which had
at anv-rate the merit of being endorsed by the outside w..rld.
His mining experience is of some thirty years, and he is one of
the most popular men in Rockhampton to-day with the miners.
It was my first meeting with him, and when 1 asked him to give
me his ideas on the district as a mining man, we soon got in
medias res without any preliminary ceremony, except that of


an introduction to Mr. Morgan, one of the original selectors
of the famous sixteen-million mine. Speaking of the chlorini-
satioa method now successfully at work at Gladstone and
Mount Morgan, he said, it was an entire change from the old-
fashioned method of prospecting and washing dishes, and of
crushing with stampers. In fact, the discoverer of gold in that
district would hope to see nothing in the stone with the naked
eye, but only by chemical assay; and the man who would ex-
tract it from the thousands of tons available must do so with
apparatus that would save the gold from floating away in the
tailings, as it had done by thousands of ounces prior to the
introduction of chlorinisation. “ I believe that this district will
be one of the best gold-producing in this colony, or in any
other,” said he, “ for we are only just beginning to find out the
treatment really required for our stone. From Gladstone to
St. Lawrence, all along the coast, there are a series of auriferous
formations that may develop into immense treasures with proper
appliances. The country has not been prospected, simply for
the reason that gold is not to be seen as most miners are used
to see it—sticking out from the stone. There are no defined
lode deposits as in the ordinary quartz mine, and the only way
to find the value is by assay.”
THE ST. PATRICK’S EXTENDED QUARTZ CLAIM.
This mine is situated about a mile and three-quarters to
the northward of the summit of Mount Morgan. It is near the
head ot‘ Dairy Creek, which creek joining the Dee Creek in the
Mount Morgan Company’s ground, is then called the Dee
River The claim is not far from the coach road, and is on the
left hand side of it going to Rockhampton. The coach road is
between the claim and Dairy Creek ; crossing the creek opposite
the St. Patrick’s is Cumming’s Wallaroo Claim, then the
Kangaroo Claim. In both these claims very rich stone has
been found of a similar character to that in the St. Patrick’s.
The proprietors are at present sinking on the reef in a shaft
already about 35 feet deep. From this shaft they have obtained
stone assaying as high as 13ozs. 6dwts. sgrs. to the ton, the
stone carrying loz. 17dwts. 13grs of silver. Levels have been
put in on this reef for a short distance at 12 feet and 30 feet
deep, from which assays have ranged from 2dwt. to loz. 12dwt.
to the ton. The reef is, so far, not very thick, being about a
foot, including casing ; but it appears to be making as the shaft
goes down. The quartz at the upper levels is rich brown
oxidised stuff, very much like Mount Morgan ; but at the lower
levels it resembles the stone in the Gympie levels of 200 feet,
being a rich blue pyritoge quartz, heavily charged-with mineral,


with a blue slaty casing. The reef is very nearly upright, and
from its direction appears to be connected with the belt of
veins running through the claims around Morgan. The in-
ducement to develop this mine is that the surface stone found
in the shaft was rich as has been stated, and secondly, that it is
known that rich alluvial was obtained many years ago in tbe
gully immediately below the claim.
The Great Mount Kaufmann G.M.C.
This mine, whose floating at Brisbane is a matter of compara-
tively recent occurrence, has its locale at a place some twenty
miles from the Westwood Station on the Central railway line.
The report already published in the local Bulletin was promised
to me by Mr. Kaufman, but it had not come to hand in time to
send down. This report includes the news up till the end of
June, and was given by Mr. Kaufmann himself. The main shaft,
or Kaufmann’s, was then down 80 feet, while the depths of the
others were —Central, 54 ; Northern Lode, 16; Boundary, 60;
Warner, 70 ; and Brisbane, 72. The Kaufmann shaft was being
opened out by stoping the stone, returning assays averaging
loz. 15dwt. at the Sandhurst works. There were 2000 tons to
grass from the various workings, estimated to give nearly 2ozs.
Machinery to cost £lO,OOO, which will resemble the Mount
Morgan plant, was definitely on the road to crush this stone,
and should be working on it between four and five months.
At that time it would be possible to realise from 50,000 to 60,000
tons ready for the first crushing. They were raising payable
stone so far, and further stuff for assays would be sent down
in accordance with the resolution passed at the last directors’
meeting Up till the present the results had been payable —
highly payable. A dam had been erected at the work crossing
the Dry Creek, having a capacity of storing two million gallons.
It will be an over shot dam, the cost of which, so far, has been
£BOO. At present it holds enough water to keep the population
there going for the next eighteen months. The number of
hands employed under the present exemption occasioned by
delay on erecting machinery was about forty-two; but when
everything was in full swing there would be 200 persons all
told living at and around the Grreat Kaufman.
CLAIMS SOUTH OF THE KAUFMANN.
Campbell & Co. have two shafts down, one 28 and the
other 45 feet, on apparently payable stuff, showing free gold in
the shaft. The lode is from 3to 4 feet wide. The Lady


Francis has one shaft 35 feet deep, and another 46 feet, and a
third 62 feet; the reef being struck on the surface, and
believed to be a continuation of the Triumph reef. The highest
assay from this mine is 60 ozs., taken last February. There are
200 tons to grass, and the claim is registered for six months,
pending machinery, having been working already six months.
The Clunes p.c. is down 50 feet on the reef, the only prospects
yet obtained being apparently good. Another claim further
south also shows payable gold in its reef, which is about a foot
thick. Lady Mary is down 52 feet on a 4 feet wide reef, show-
ing good gold, upon which two men are working. The holders
of an adjoining claim, Scott & party, are about 42 feet deep,
with a big formation that gives prospects of 23 ozs., of which
there are 60 tons up. Kaufmann South, immediately adjoining
the Kaufmann p.c., has in the shaft commenced in April, after
intersecting a seam of quartzite and slate at a depth of 80 feet,
made a granite dyke, through which they have driven a distance
of 4 feet. The formation gives definite indications of settled
country, the manager at present opening out at the 80 foot
level, for the purpose of driving east and west with, the object
of proving the claim. The surface shows every indication that
there is a full formation of a reef coming in from the Great
Kaufmann. There are other blocks to the southern bouudary
of the Great Kaufmann, some of which are working and others
idle, under registration.
To the other side of the Great Kaufmann the 1 North is at
present busy sinking to a depth of 78 feet searching for a reef,
a condition of things also characteristic of the North Kaufmann,
which is vigorously carrying on a contract of sinking 56 feet.
The Capricornian, north of the Great Kaufmann, is a prospecting
company which reports having just struck a crystalline slate
formation with quartz and slate intermixed, the lode being from
3to 6 feet thick, which good prospects are forthcoming. This
is a very promising show on the word of a well-known mining
authority. The stuff is ferrogenous quartzite, containing a
considerable quantity of minerals.
MR. KAUFMANN’S OPINION.
“What do you think of the prospects of the mine ?” “We
have got every prospect of an enormously big thing,” said he,
“as soon as we reach a settled country. There is not the
slightest doubt about the matter, and I speak from thirty years
of mining experience, that we are going to have something very
rich, perhaps one of the richest in the colony. The whole of
the formation gives every indication of proof that we have the
poorest stuff at the surface, and that the quality of the lode
improves the deeper we get, and if it goes i oz. on the surface


there is a probability o£ getting as much as 10 ozs. at the water
level. lam more than satisfied with everything that the mine
is going to turn out right. Of course, like every other mine,
we have some blanks as well as others have, and there is no
mine, even Mount Morgan itself, that is without them.” In
conclusion, Mr. Kaufman spoke well of Mount Musgrave, stat-
ing that he had received assays from the managing director of
as much from one to six ounces.
ROCKHAMPTON REAHENIJES AND LAND A r ALL T ES.
The returns of the Central district revenue for the year
ending June 30th, show an increase of £13,697 against those of
the preceding year, and the quantity of preserved meat exported
chiefly from the Lake’s Creek AYorks amounted in value to
£29,453 for the preceding three months. The Central Railway
manager states that the line is paying expenses, and anticipates
the ensuing quarter to be the best yet recorded. AVith a direct
line to deep water at Port Alma, where a wharf is already
erected, the Central railway would pay much larger dividenls.
The ivxunicipal revenues are in an exceedingly flourishing con-
dition, and show a considerable credit surplus. The fact that
the present prices of city property are exceedingly low, and that
a general rise is taking place without a sign of a land boom is
another proof of prosperity, and should place honafide induce-
ments in the way of southern capitalists that they certainly
cannot find in Sydney, Melbourne, and Brisbane. There has
been an almost utter absence of investment during the time of
the past depression, and the market lor city properties is an
exceptionally favourable condition for buyers. It is almost a
certainty that another 300 miners will be at work in the
Yeppoou district alone within the next three months, if two
new southern companies with a capital of one million each
mean anything. There will be seen in the mining reports
appended, as well as the AYarden’s remarks, which appear else-
where, that the central district of Queensland will have a season
of prosperity as brilliant as the past time of its adversity has
been dark and disastrous. One happy omen is present which
should make the auguries true. G-old mining is independant of
the weather in the central district, where the water is rather a
nuisance than otherwise, judging by the amount of pumping
gear in use ; so that if another visitation of drought does come,
for which provision is being energetically made both by State
and private resources, the mining interests, upon whicli the
central district mainly depends, will scarcely suffer at all.
Added to this the policy of the present Gfovernment is avowedly


in favour of developing the mining industry, and the posses-
sion of a Cabinet representative by the central district for the
first time is full of hope and encouragement.
A MOUNTAIN PIC-NIC AT EOCKHAMPTON.
On the principle that even the devil is not so black as they
paint him, the sin, sweat, and sorrow logic of Eockhampton is
really a very mild sort of thing after you get a chance of clearing
out from the straight square streets that all seem so very much
alike, especially on a hot day. Don’t go by yourself, if you are
fortunate enough to get an invite to one of the Saturday after-
noon “ affairs ” that Eockhampton is especially, famous for —
when you know it. The sapient scribe who confines his obser-
vations to the main thoroughfare and the chief hotel, and who
keeps himself steadily aloof from any of the “ bourgeoise,”
always leaves and takes unpleasant memories of his stay. But
the people, to give them their due, are always ready to do honours
if the recipient does not carry too much starch in his collar or
talk about the south with an irritating emphasis that is so much
tacit condemnation of the place he is visiting. There are charms
at Emu Park and Yeppoon, as has been seen ; but to get alto-
gether out of the dust and the blasting heat there is nothing
like a pic-nic up the mountains with a couple of waggonettes, a
couple of dozen of people, with a half-dozen hampers and hand-
bags. One favorite spot is out at the Lucas’ place—the hand-
some residence of a leading merchant nestling among the hills
and surrounded with all sorts of fruit trees that appear to
thrive in their way as much as their landlord is doing in his.
After leaving the waggonettes, a walk of half-a-mile or so
brings you to a paddock encased with barbed wire, the “ negoci-
ating ” of which is a pleasant feature in the trip. Then you
come to the bed of a creek that comes from the mountain top
in front of you, standing on 500 ft. of verdure, with here and
there a rock or a tree standing out from the hill. The way up,
though decidedly rough, has all sorts of fun about it, especially
when there comes an awkward pinch that necesssitates climbing
on one’s hands and knees and clutching wildly at the nearest
tree or shrub to make your foothold good. And as you get
higher and higher, still following the big craggy boulders, you
get an occasional snatch of mountain scenery that reminds you of
England, if you are a Britisher, or of Germany, if you are a
Teuton. And then the glorious perfect atmosphere that you
drink in like so much champagne, gives you a vigour and energy
that you could not dream of in East-street, and you may perchance
go right on to the top where you can see for forty or fifty miles
around, or if with the rest of the party you will return to some


pleasant rendezvous of boulders, where the billy is duly boiled
and the tablecloth laid, and where the ladies try to enhance the
natural beauty of the scene as much as possible. For pictures-
queness and for real downright enjoyment there is nothing
in Central Queensland that can get ahead of a really well-
managed outing where wiser and older heads than those of
festive bachelors have charge of the commissariat department.
And then the washing up and the packing up, and the downhill
return to the coaches is probably the best part of the affair, for
you feel a grand glow of health all over you and through you,
so that you will cheerfully undertake to accompany parties for
doing Mount Archer or Mount Berseker, quire forgetful of the
generally worn out feeling you will experience next day. And
then by this time the conventionalities will have worn off a
little, and you may, if you are sufficiently lucky,find that society
in Rockhampton is just as enjoyable and just as refined as in
the so-called hon ton of Sydney or Melbourne. After such an
experience as this, you will no longer sit calmly by to hear
Rockhampton maligned, which seems to be the fashion very
much at Brisbane and Townsville, who, of course, see nothing
good out of their own domains, and who are equally ready to
attack each other, if necessary, for the sacred cause of social
supremacy.
SPORTING NOTES.
The following are the officers of the Central Queensland
Tattersalls elected in July : —Judge, Mr. Alex. Reid; Starter
Mr. John M‘Phcrson; Clerk of Scales, Mr. J. C. Johnstone ;
Clerk of Course, Mr. T. Yicary ; Stewards, Messrs. T.
M‘Laughlin, C. W. Little, J. T. Tilbury, and D. Martin.
The proposed intercolonial match for 1889 was started by
the success of the Hanlan-Trickett match on the Fitzroy not
long concluded. Several sums were promised in aid of next
year’s fete ; but the man who is supposed to be the official head
centre states that he is not authorised to say anything. Mr.
John Deeble, of Sydney, Hanlan’s backer, who appears to have
more definite ideas on the matter than any one else, thinks that
six good scullers could be induced to come from all parts of the
world, the contest to be prefaced by three heats, in which any
number of competitors could enter. He thinks that £ISOO will be
wanted, and so do some of the people in Rockhampton who express
themselves willing to subscribe. The race meeting could take
place at the same time, and the local Turf Club has the reputa-
tion of being the second best in the colony ; and there might
be an aquatic and football carnival as well, which would bring
in a lot of money from some of the wealthy residents. It is


extremely undesirable that matters should stand in their pre-
sent condition, and it is necessary for someone to take the lead
and hold it.
I have been requested by an enthusiastic local sportsman,
who represents a Brisbane fresh food export house, Messrs.
Blank’s, to state that there is any quantity of the finest sport
in the universe to be had around .Rockhampton : that there are
armies of wild ducks —not to mention wild cats —and all sorts,
kinds, and conditions of water-fowl, with every possible and
impossible variety of fish. Some of the statements he has
made about the braces of birds he has bagged are so exciting,
that one feels degraded to think he can only sympathise
and not compete —in the shooting, not the storytelling. And
what is more, there is a general sporting fraternity at Rock-
hampton who are always ready to respond to anybody or any-
thing of equal selectness and respectability. There are Berseker
footballers and a Central Rawing Club, who are always ready
to give or take a warm reception, such as the merry Mackay
men recently got, whose desire of “ reciprocity ” by the way is
now stronger than ever. The Secretary of the School of Arts,
or Mr. Hartley, at the Bulletin office, will answer enquiries to
enclosed envelopes properly stamped. The latter gentleman is
a member of the Chamber of Commerce, and I found him much
more approachable than the very much occupied secretary, who
has to attend meetings of the Chamber as often as once a fort-
night.
THE SALVATION ARMY.
It is one peculiarity of popular movements, ever since the
start of the Christian era, that they have all been severally and
abundantly denounced as frauds until the first stage of presenta-
tion was passed through and the thing gradually got “respect-
able.” Christianity started with the son of a carpenter —or at
any rate He appeared so to His countrymen and His disciples,
uneducated fishermen as they mostly were, were practically
vagrants according to our present canons, for they certainly had
“no lawful visible means of support.” To-day we have the
experience of the ages to guide us, and there is steadily growing
amoung us Australians, and those who are gradually becoming
Australians, a studied, earnest desire to keep down all theological
or sectarian differences for the common good. It is better for
us all that the creed quarrels of the old country should not be
acclimatised here; and, although they have been zealously
planted by bigots on both sides, who would have burnt each
other three centuries ago, they do not thrive —thank heaven —
at anv rate, in Queensland. Gamaliel's advice will do best with
regard to this army that is most emphatically not “ respectable,”


if it is of divine origin—if they are really doing the work of
making the world better —then no criticism or action on the
part of us outsiders can have any effect. The law of eternal
right and eternal harmony that governs us as well as the
universe will equally blast such a cause if it have nothing but
professions for its basis, and will surely sustain it if it is really
doing what it professes to do —that which the “respectable”
Churches leave diligently untouched. If the worst of the Eock-
hampton Philistines can only talk of noisy street processions let
such accusers hold their peace. Personally, as a lover of
classic music, and as one who detests howling and yelling of
any sort in the thoroughfares, my sympathies and those of a
good many more would be dead against the Army; but let an
outsider once divest himself of the idea that these men are
simply singing and preaching as a means of livelihood, or for
lack of something better to do, and go and see the reason that
underlays their madness, and he will, if he is a honest man, give
them his good will if his own sense of justice leads him to do
nothing more. Let it be remembered, too, that the present
channels of respectability are notoriously and admittedly de-
ficient in appealing to the lower classes, whose idea of Churches
and parsons alike is better imagined than expressed. To carry
the war into the camp of the enemy, to scour the streets night
after night to pick up these waifs and strays who otherwise
might rot there as far as we are concerned, is nothing we can
conscientiously disapprove of, whatever we may say on the
question of nuisance.
COMMEECIAL AND MANUPACTUEING-
EOCKHAMPTON.
In every city of English speaking people all over the face
of the globe there seems to be an especially big drapery firm
that takes the leading position almost as a matter of course,
and holds it for years and years in spite of any competition that
may come in. The famous Bon Marche, of Paris, Whiteley’s
or Peter Eobinson’s, in London, Eobertson and Moffatt’s, of
Melbourne, Anthony Hordern’s, in Sydney, Einney Isles, of
Brisbane, are all examples of this rule. In the central city of
Queensland, the city of Mount Morgan and its millionaires, the
place of commercial honour is appropriately taken by Mr.
James Stewart, of the Criterion Stores, who is also a very large
holder of shares in the golden mount that he has stuck to ever
since the present company started operations. The corner of
the two principal streets in the city of gold is an appropriate
site for the Criterion, which has 02 feet frontage to East-street,


and IGS feet to Denham-street the two leading thoroughfares, and
is the largest building of the sort in Rockhampton. Its worth
in 1864, when occupied by Messrs. Stewart & Hemmant, now
of Brisbane, was about £SOOO, including the building; to-day
an offer of five times that figure would be refused, for the
owner is quite content to watch a continuation of development
in this direction during a good many years to come, till per-
chance the prediction that places Mount Morgan shares at £2O
apiece shall have not only been verified but exceeded. Mr.
James Stewart, who, it is rumoured, has put back most of his
gains into the district he got them from, started the Criterion
drapery nearly a quarter of a century ago as manager for
Stewart and Hemmant, and after holding it jointly with Mr.
E. Lucas, who is to-day a leading wholesale merchant in the
city, he took sole charge and interest in 1881. Since then the
big drought has come and gone, and the big mountain has been
found, that has proved a salvation to the whole of the central
district and its capital, which would to-day have been a deserted
village but for Mount Morgan, whose lavish stores of auri-
ferous ore kept the townsfolk going when the western country
was a scene of universal death and desolation. The Criterion,
which is only of one storey at present, will be rebuilt shortly so as
to keep the tall white mansion over at the opposite corner in
countenance. What the Criterion trade is to-day may be
guessed at when its staff of eighty are earning five times as much
as that paid in ’64, and that the rebuilding is necessitated by
the fact that the present accommodation is not half big enough
for the merchandise stored there. It may be interesting to add
that if it were possible to produce cloth from the magnificent
wool that comes to Rockhampton from the far west, it would
be well received at the Criterion, if it was able to compete with
the New Zealand tweeds, which are the only colonial manu-
factures of their kind popular at Rockhampton.
THE VALUE OE TOWN PROPERTIES IN ROCK-
HAMPTON.
Amongst those who took an interest in the early develop-
ment of Rockhampton and its suburbs, so far as the acquisition
of land was concerned, may be mentioned prominently, Sir
Charles Nicholson, Bart., Mr." R. Towns, and others who did not
intend becoming residents of the place, but who foresaw the
importance of the town as a depot for the enormous extent of
back country which would require a central port for an import
and export trade. Messrs. Archer Bros., who held the station
of Gracomere, which surrounds the town, as lessees from the
Crown, were to some extent jealous of the township being cut


out of their run, and did not look upon Rockhampton in the
early days with any particular favour. Those gentlemen in-
vested pretty largely in land in the town of Grladstone, evidently
believing that the harbour of Port Curtis would supersede
Rockhampton as a central port, a contingency which appears
further off than ever. The pioneer settlers and some few others
who earnest© the district took advantage of the Government
land sales to invest largely; but their purchases were not of
great extent. Still every such sale attracted more or less
attention and town lots soon found buyers, while in some in-
stances suburban areas were purchased. Money at the time
was not plentiful. These who had come to the town to make
Rockhampton their home required their capital to develop their
industries, and had to be sparing in locking it up in land. But
those who did invest had unbounded faith in their purchases,
and with few exceptions did but little trafficking with their pro-
perties. For many years, indeed until the “ eighties,” there was
but little done in cutting up blocks, or even original allotments
for sale. The first owners stuck well to their investments. For
a long time there was, so to speak, no market for land. But
when the investments took place in 80 and 81, in other com-
munities in the direction,of subdividing original lots, the infec-
tion spread to Rockhampton, that was very agreeably astonished
at the result. To cite one of many instances of the kind where
money was made by this procedure, one of Mr. Gr. B. Bhaw s
constituents, who was tempted to accept an offer made to him
for a block of land, was guided by the advice offered to put it up
for sale. After being subdivided, the result was an immediate
advance of over a hundred per cent, on the price offered a
fortnight previously. This is now an evident revival from the
depression of the drought, and the tales told by statistics else-
where are full of meaningjto the business man and thefinancier.
East-street is the Queen-street of Rockhampton, and William,
Denham, Fitzroy, and Bolsover-streets follow in the order
named. The highest figure is about £2OO per foot, or about two-
thirds what would be asked in Townsville for Flinders-street
frontages. Whatever may be the cause of these low prices it is
certain that they will rise, as the latest local reports speak of
“ hardening,” with a strong upward tendency. The fact of so
little present speculation in city frontages is probably the ex-
planation for this state of things ; but there are abundant indi-
cations that a big land boom will visit the central metropolis
when the present excitement at the northern and southern
capitals has begun to abate a little. There is North Rockhampton
on the other side of the Fitzroy that should not be overlooked,
that has a newspaper, a Council, and a tramway —such as it is.
The fact that frontages can be had there at £3O per foot, and the


fact also that the Emu Park line terminus is here too, and that
half the line is already built, should make to-day a good time to
look around in the direction of North Rockhampton.
ROCKHAMPTON CUSTOM RETURNS.
The following figures courteously furnished by Mr. Eahey,
sub-collector of Customs at Rockhampton, show a most encourag-
ing state of things, and proves beyond all doubt that the
troubles of the big drought are gone and over. The imports are
one-third less in three years; but the exports have increased, the
quantity of wool being valued at £857,947, or nearly half as
much again as in 1884. The increase of gold from £84,347 in
1884, to £348,091 in 1887, should he stronger argument than
anything else as to the hand Jides of the central district and its
metropolis :■ —
RETURNS SHOWING TOTAL TALUE OF EXPORTS, IMPORTS, AND
REVENUE COLLECTIONS AT THE PORT OF ROCKHAMPTON
DURING THE YEARS 1884 to 1887.
TOTAL VALUE of
IMPORTS.
Revenue Collections.
£ S. D.
620,962
552,400
424.273
437,948
114,767 5 6
112,916 6 6
99,840 4 8
114,376 13 11
TOTAL VALUE OF EXPORTS SHOWING PRINCIPAL ITEMS DURING THE
tears 1884 to 1887.
DESCRIPTION OF
GOODS.
TOTAL VALUE OF
TEAR.
VALUE.
EXPORTS.
841,040
1,152,106
837,096
1,351,164
84.347
18,668
16,532
30,810
669,214
Hides
Preserved Meats
Tallow
Wool


ROCKHAMPTON AND MOUNT MORGAN. 87
DESCRIPTION OF DESCRIPTION OF
TEAR. VALUE. GOODS. VALUE,
GOODS - 1886.
£ £
1885 Gold 73,616 Gold 195,854
„ Hides 41,180 Hides 13,728
„ Presrv’d Meats 135,062 Preserv’d Meats 1,334
„ Tallow 45,584 Tallow 5,825
„ Wool 835,181 Wool 596,790
TEAR, I DESCRIPTION OF GOODS. VALUE.
£
1887. ! Gold 348,091
! Hides 23,713
„ Preserved Meats 71,007
„ Tallow 31,189
„ Wool 857,947
H. MORAN,
For Sub-collector.
H.M. Customs, Rockhampton,
July 23rd, 1888.
IVT A TTPPH 'A/TTTNTTC'TX) A T TAT DAniTTT A TVTTITAAT
MATTERS MUNICIPAL IN ROCKHAMPTON,
Rockhampton has a Council that is claimed to he a sort of
municipal paragon, in that it is as wealthy as it is dignified ;
that it has the revenue from nearly all the town wharfages, with
the exception of some frontages t&at were gracefully given to
the Government for their own wharves. The income of last
year was £23,099 from general accounts, and £5487 from the
water account. The expenditure for 1887 was £18,276 for
general purposes, besides that for water supply, and about
£7,000 was paid off the bank overdraft, which is now reduced
to about £2,000. The town is supplied from lagoons at the
back of the Ethelstane Range, and is pumped up by machinery
to reservoirs at the top of the hills, which comes down to the
town by natural gravitation. During the recent drought sup-
plies got very low down. There was a lower lagoon that the
pumps did not originally sound and this was the stand by at the
height of the drought. About £40,000 has been spent, in-
cluding an ample reservoir, for there is nothing but the rainfall
to depend upon. The population is about 11,000 all told.
SEWAGE.
The sewage works have cost £20,000 and have been
erected under Mr. Byerly’s supervision. This would have been


done a great deal sooner if some of the last Grovernment had
sent on funds a little quicker. Another £IB,OOO would be
needed to finish taking the refuse and soakage alike through
the pipes to a flow ten miles down the river. The river bank,
which has been continuously washed away for the past
twenty years by the river, thereby making the ordinary
difficulties of Fitzroy navigation ten times worse, are to be
made more substantial from where the gas works are for some
miles down. The Grovernment have done a good deal, but
something more needs to be done on the town side of the river
to confine the scour to its proper limits and so deepen the
channel for vessels. The necessity for the deep water line to
Port Alma, was opposed by a good deal of local prejudice which
insisted that the present terminus should be a mile from the
wharves, so that carters should?not be out of work. There is
no wheat to carry down and there is only one sugar planta-
tion in the district, the traffic being chiefly in wool and station
produce. Rockhampton is a rich municipality for it now
gets £6OOO per annum for wharfage. The revenue from this
source varied from £5447 in 1885, to £4510 in 1886, and in
1887 to £5291. This year will mean over £6OOO, as the
machinery is coming in very fast. There is a necessity for
some permanent industry in the district, such, for instance, as
the manufacture of cloth from the wool sent down, some of
which is unsurpassed for manufacturing purposes. The one
great material necessity is a proper water supply, distributed
by irrigation and conserved by dams which will greatly
mitigate the fearful effects of drought. As many as 70,000
sheep had died in a few weeks in the last drought, and in too
many cases the banks allowed the unhappy squatter to keep
possession till the rain came, and then closed on him without
mercy. A National Bank will be the best check for this
aggravation of the drought. As a matter of fact the Council
borrows from the State at>£s 16s. Bd. per cent., which pays off
principal and interest as well in forty years. The adoption of
this system to the squatters will bring the banks to their
senses, and if their dividends are lower it would be all the
better for the colony generally.
SCHOOL OF ARTS
Has a membership of 350, and a library of 6000, the best
north of Brisbane. It has the largest hall in the town —not
much to say, considering what the others are. But the School
of Arts is to be made double the size, with two stories, that will
seat 1000 people comfortably. Even the present hall has held
600 on occasions, such as a temperance lecture. The institute


has a revenue o£ £I3OO, derived from land given by the State,
which has increased enormously of late.
THE CENTRAL LINE.
This line actually does pay expenses —a fact little known
down South, even though the Northern line has taken away the
Winton and Muttaburra trade by going south-west to
Hughenden. The worst times are over and the best part of the
year is coming on (June, 1888), which is expected to give the
largest returns on record. The Lakes’ Creek works have 300
tons per month of meat coming down, which is sent to England
in tins. The rates on the line have been recently reduced 20
per cent., and cattle can come from Clermont at £3 9s. per
head to port. There is no local traffic worth mentioning, but
one great addition will be provided by the line to Mount
Morgan, that will branch off 10 miles from Rockhampton the
distance from the junction being only 15 miffis. The land in
the district must have irrigation to make it possible to
grow anything. The department consider that it would
be possible to offer such facilties to the Winton people as to
regain their lost trade if the line to Port Alma was made, so
that the lightering at Townsville, the most expensive item of all,
would be successfully opposed by the railway to deep water at
Rockhampton. There are three artesian bores in the far west
district, one at Barcaldine that gives 120,000 gallons per hour;
another 20 miles on the projected line in the direction of the
magnificent Thompson River; and a third is 20 miles further
on. This last is not yet an accomplished fact as the sinking is
deeper the further west it is. It is intended to try every 20
miles further on till the Thompson River is reached, a stream
that eventually flows to the Darling, and is one of the most
important in the colony. The systematic damming upon the
Condamine and Thompson rivers will tend to mitigate the
droughts of the future, and make the great Western back
country a more profitable investment for Southern capita] than
it has ever yet been. Water is the only thing wanted, and it
is more essential than railways or anything else. The
the line so tar is about £3OOO per mile, or about a third ot the
Southern and Western. A prominent railway authority ot
great local experience says : —“We could do far better it we
had deep water to go to. It would increase the produce from
the west, and the townspeople would be the first to reap the
reward. The line to Mount Morgan would really mean 25
miles of traffic, for that of the first 10 miles to the junction is
now little or nothing.” It may be added that the squatters are
now doing their best to provide against future visitations by
extensive irrigation, there being a big plant en route to the


Portland Downs Pastoral Company. The soil of the Barcoo
will grow anything with water, and nothing but a little careful
utilisation of the gifts of nature is necessary to transform the
desert to a productive district. At Blackall the bore passed
through an oil strata on its way down. The science of silos
should be cultivated just now in the far west, so that the science
of bank overdrafts should be less necessary. There is being a
dam made up Barcaldine to store up the water from the
artesian well, some of which I tasted at the Bailway Depart-
ment’s office at Bockhampton. It was perfectly pure and
fresh. When the present Commissioner is disposed to make
wav for a non-political board, the Central line will flourish.
Bor some reason or another the present crowd at Boma-street are
very hostile to the Central line —I speak from the experience of a
few hours back at that place—but they had to admit that it paid 1
per cent, during the drought, while their Southern and Western
line only paid 2|-, chiefly by reason of prohibitory freights.
The recent change in tariffs was ordered by Sir Thomas,
at the suggestion of a pressman, who has been exposing the
suicidal policy of the Commissioner for years past that virtually
made St. Gleorge and Charleville portions of New South
Wales.
Mount Morgan and all About it.
The day following my arrival at the golden town was as
bright and crisp as nature could make it, and nature can do a
good deal in this direction at Mount Morgan in July. The air
was like champagne, and the finest sky that ever sent a poet
off his head at Naples or Venice could not have been finer than
the heavenly canopy of this eminently picturesque and moun-
tain-guarded village. It was but seven months ago that I had
seen Mount Morgan township for the first time, and the change
was simply enormous, representing at least a double popula-
tion by a double lot of habitations. There were two stores
then —Moncktons, and Acheson & Allan’s —now there were a
dozen all told, Acheson & Allan’s being a reproduction on a
much bigger and more elaborate scale than the place of
last December. There are at least three times as many people
going to and from Bockhampton, for two companies alone are
running two coaches per day, Sundays and all, and they always
appear to be loaded, while the road is somewhat a terror from
too much traffic. Such is the prosperity of the great mining
company that the two Divisional Boards there, of G-ogango and


Banana, don’t trouble themselves about the road to the Mount
at all, but simply allow the directors to spend as much as they
please, at their own expense, in the style of the Pickwick Club to
its famous members. The Banana crowd indeed, who are
supposed to control the district containing Mount Morgan,
their boundary being at Razorback, don’t take the trouble to
levy taxes at all on the miners, and strange to say this neglect
has not aroused any complaint on the part of the men who
have no privilege whatever in the way of" paying taxes. That
delightful millionaire company finds the men to make the Razor-
back road a little less razorback, and it spends hundreds a week
in preventing the main highway from becoming impassable with
the extra heavy traffic it is burdened with. To give an idea of
the goods trade between Rockhampton and Mount Morgan, it
may be stated that Mr. Scott, who has recently put up a
splendid establishment at Razorback, which has, like everything
else in the district, come out of Mount Morgan, has four
twelve-horse teams, making each five trips a fortnight between
Rockhampton and the township, Razorback being the
rendezvous. Each dray takes from five to six tons, the average
price—a much reduced one, being about £3 10s. per ton. That
would mean about £2O a trip there and back, and that multi-
plied by twelve gives £240 per fortnight as the gross—the very
gross—income of the chief goods carrier on this line, between
Mount Morgan and Rockhampton. With the twenty-six fort-
nights in the year at £240 each, there is a nice little sum of
£6,290, and this at £3 10s. per ton. It should be a simple
sum to reckon that if this amount can be earnt to-day by dray
for one way only, how much more could be earnt both ways at
one-third the present rate by a railway. Then there would be
passenger traffic, not only of Rockhamptonites—some of whom
would come every day if tlmy could—but eventually of visitors
from all over the world who would be able to come up to the
great “ show ” of Central Queensland, while their vessel was
unloading and discharging at Port Alma. Think of the amount
of speculation this would mean, oh ye small landholders of less
faith and still less understanding. You could get your share,
never fear, as long as your property had a frontage to a good
city street, and was not an indefinite second cousin forty times
removed to a dividend-paying claim.
THE STRENGTH OE THE MAIN SPRING.
This main spring is, of course, Mount Morgan—the main-
spring of the township of the central district, and of Rock-
hampton itself—the only mine yet in Central Queensland that
has paid dividends instead of*promises of them: the golden
mountain that has called into existence scores of shadows that


resemble it only in name, and in no other particular. It is
something like a tangible proof of the mighty power of this
mountain that its name alone bestowed on mountains close by
have brought millions of money from the public of England
and Australia, who have been living since on that species of
diet called hope deferred. It has done to the central district
what Gympie did to Queensland in 1867; but with this
difference that it has paid dividends from its start, a statement
which no other claim in Queensland can lay claim to. The
shadow of Mount Morgan covers a multitude of smaller mounts
in the eyes of the British public, and it is extremely fortunate
for some of the enterprising and imaginative floaters of these
small fry that they have something to show in Mount Morgan
of undoubted hond Jides with which, however, providence has
wiseley ordained that they have had nothing to do with. Mount
Morgan, like every other gigantic success, has a score of un-
successful imitators; but the success of Mount Morgan is all
the more brilliant, on that it is utterly above and beyond any
hostile machinations of the broker fraternity here or anywhere
else That the shares should be £l4 a piece (Mr. Bruce, of
Eockhampton, told the writer he had sold his shares for that
price at the end of June), must be a source of annoyance to the
sixpenny, shilling, and half-crown noblesse, whose mining
reports are even as menus of the eastern feast, that under high
sounding titles consisted of nothing but empty dishes. What
the anguish of these Barmecide feast-founders will be when
Mount Morgan’s are up to £2O, will be on a par with the frogs
who tried to swell themselves out elephants with disastrous
results of “ premature burst,” the history of which forms part of
our juvenile traditions. The latest quotation is £l6 12s. 6d.
A EEW W OEDS EEOM THE MOUNTAIN MANAGES.
If Mount Morgan had changed for the better since
December, so had the great mountain as a hive for the human
bee. There were three times as many buildings just across the
creek that separates the township and the mine; and in place
of crossing over on stones there was a log bridge with a hand-
rail duly attached. Just well inside the company’s territory to
the right was a tall building, whose once white and shining
galvanised iron roof was now coated a deep, dull, unchanging
brown. This was the big stone crushing place, where the dry
crushing process goes on continually day and night, that one
hears the echoes of miles away in a stilly eventide. Possibly the
reader will imagine as a necessary sequence than an army of
drays, or a network of tramways, or even a railway line, is a
necessary accompaniment, for the top of the hill is nearly a
mile distant. And when vou hear that 2 cwt. of broken Mount


Morgan conglomerate comes in every minute m the twenty-four
hours to that big structure coated in brown dust, and that it
doesn’t come along in trams, or railways, or drays, you will
probably inquire with bitter emphasis borne of much aggrava-
tion how in the name of common sense does it come it it does
ever get there. Ah ! that is one of the specialities ot the show,
so to speak. Cast your eyes aloft to the blue sky above the
ground vou stand on at the company’s mill door, and survey the
distant top of Mount Morgan straight ahead, about a mile away
and a full 600 feet higher than where you are. Ihere are a senes
of stages, some forty or fifty feet high, at regular intervals
en route, supporting a couple of iron wires that travel dav and
night from the brown building down here to the top ot the
mountain far away ; and at intervals of some 30 feet along the
wire are hanging boxes or trucks that each take a minute apiece
to go through the mill and discharge their “ golden gram
They come down on the upper line and go back empty on the
under one with never a hitch or a break. Mount Morgan
shows its greatness in every detail, and in this one it has some-
thing that no other Queensland mine possesses.
Mr. Wesley Hall was absent from the mine when 1 got
there; but the mountain manager, whom I saw six months
before, was after a good deal of persuasion induced to impart a
little information as to what had happened since then, i had
made a rough sketch of the mountain during my last visit,
and the manager recognised it. I might mention that this took
place at the mountain top, after I had been up one
ascent in a truck, trudged up another only to find tne true
coming un behind me, and had a desperate struggle on my hands
and knees, in taking a short cut to the top. My guide, looking a
the sketch, pointing to a hill in the gap, said; “That piece has
been taken away, and this slope down below has been made
broader and bigger, that’s all.” It was up that slope that I a
■just come, a distance of 30 feet; and on the landing below the
tramcars were taking stuff from the solid mountain to / '
down to the lower stage en route to the crushing mill. Un the
level I stood at were three enormous piles of broken ore, or a
deep blackened blue, which had been in a warm state some
time before Australia was dreamt of; ages before even t e
Phoenicians started the tin trade with the primitive Uousin
Jacks, who knew their way about even then How much gold
had been got out in that seven months I don t know—-the
directors half-yearly report will give that; but the mountain
was substantially the same.
THE MACHIKEET.
Speaking as to an outside statement about a duplication of


the chlorination work my guide admitted guardedly enough that
such a thing would eventually be necessary ; and that the
present output meant 600 men at the mine, besides the con-
tractors. That would mean about 8000 mouths to find directly
dependent on the Mount, besides a lot of others in Rock-
hampton that were indirectly dependant —such as the foundry-
men’s families.
As to the railway line to the Mount, he thought it could be
made very cheaply, as he knew of a route they could avoid the
Razorback grade altogether. “ I haven’t the slightest doubt
about it paying expenses from the start,” said he.
THE CHLORIDE OE LIME TROUBLE.
The delay of a sailing vessel from home with a cargo of
chloride of lime had been the cause of stopping some of the
chlorinisation works. I asked whether there was a disposition
on the part of the directors to encourage the local industries.
“There is not a more liberal-minded man in the world than Mr.
Pattison,” said he ; he would do everything he possibly could to
further the interests of the place and the people he has been
living amongst so long. We have got a lot of work done in
Rockhampton of a certain class, which we find is quite as good as
anything imported, and all that we buy abroad is such work
as the local firms cannot supply. We make it a rule never to
let a job pass Rockhampton if we can help it.” The lime has
since arrived.
SOCIALLY.
“ We have a very good hospital for the men, to which they
subscribe very liberally,” said he. “ There are three Churches,
all with good congregations. We have never had a single
trouble with any of the men, and what is more, we have never
had a serious accident at the mine.” This question was elicited,
by the fact of three or four blasts going off almost at the same
time, two down below in the cutting on the side of the hill, and
some more on the top, not far from where we stood, which
necessitated a sudden change of position. Asked as to the
quality of the stone, he stated that it had improved the further
down they had got, and that the deepest levels were the most
auriferous.
Most wealthy institutions have a great liking for big
buildings, whose massive walls and enormous pillars are suggestive
of a practical eternity of prosperity. But for conveying idea of
everlasting productiveness there has nothing been seen in these
colonies at least to compare with Mount Morgan. The hun-
dreds of thousands sterling taken out already was only a bump
the less on the top —only a deepening and a widening of the


curve down beneath. And even were the mountain, vast as it
is, as to be apparently inexhaustible at the present rate of
progress, I was informed later on by Mr. Watson, of the
famous firm of Watson, Denny, & Co., Limited, that there were
millions of stone included in the area of the company’s freehold,
on some of which the buildings were erected,which would not pay
to chlorinate, but which would render a handsome dividend at
the hands of a cheap crushing and grinding apparatus. He
had come up for the express purpose of fixing one of his
machines at the No. 1 shaft, which was going as merry as a
marriage bell, within a couple of days of starting erection.
LAST BUT NOT LEAST.
Gioing back to the mine to read over my report to the
manager, I was agreeably surprised to find an old acquaintance
in the person of Mr. Richards, the chlorinisator. When the
letter-press, referring to the impossibility of getting chloride
of sodium was read, he said that it was probable that the con-
sumption of this chemical would be minimised by fresh arrange-
ments in his department that would stop any chance of further
delays. He had 120 men under him, and he explained the
process treatment thus : after coming in from the bucket at
the top of the works it passes into the furnaces, where it is dried
of all moisture and made porous; the gold therein being so
very fine that would not be otherwise amenable to the action of
the chloride. The “ duty ” of the furnaces was 560 tons per week,
which averaged at present from six to seven ounces per ton.
The stuff is then cooled, trucked up to the chlorination barrels,
and treated with chlorine under a high pressure. After this it
is dumped out into the leaching vat where the golden solution
is drawn off. It is then tipped into the trucks and thrown into
the residue heap—a pile of sand containing no gold, or but the
most microscopic trace, for the percentage of the gold saved is
actually 98 per cent. Messrs. Corrie and Co., of Brisbane,
tell me that the dividends paid by Mount Morgan amount in all
to £383,333, and that ever since January, 1887, the quarterly
dividends have been of £50,000 each, so that the present rate
is £200,000 per annum. But this is not as grand as it is to
be. It is stated that according to the present increase in output,
and the facilties given by more machinery, the nett auriferous
output of July, 1888, may be increased three-fold by January,
1889, to something like £600,000 per annum. Given that same
rate for a year or so, and who shall say where and when the
limit shall come in ?


THE MOUNT MORGAN EXTENDED, QUEENSLAND.
Passing down the other side of the hill I had clambered up,
and walking round the base of the mountain, I passed through
a fence, and in about ten minutes found the Dee River Com-
pany’s shaft, with a pump working on the water at the bottom
of the shaft, in which we heard the picks of the men at the
higher levels. I saw the manager later on. A further walk
brought me to rising ground still more distant from the great
mountain, and on the summit I found a house with Mr. Oates,
the manager of the Queensland Extended, reclining on his bed
reading a newspaper. He warned me that it was pay day, and
that he had no time to spare, and so I made the best of the
opportunity with the noble art of stenography. The directors
were Sir T. MTlwraith, Messrs. Stevenson, M‘Ghie, Taylor, and
Perkins. He had been in charge since October last, and found
practically nothing done then, besides three tunnels being driven
and a winze sunk, that were producing nothing paying. The
present company was floated by a syndicate, the object being to
see if the ground was payable. Since he had come the main
shaft had been sunk to 105 feet through a defined lode at a
depth of 45 feet, through two defined walls six feet in thickness
carrying at the rate of 10 dwts. per ton. That was the result
from a ten ton parcel taken from No. 1 Tunnel top shaft, and
the locality near at hand. The No. 1 Tunnel was driven in on
the eastern side of Callans’ Nob, down as near to the bedrock as
it could be driven, so that water could not trouble them. That
had passed through a formation from 15 to 16 feet of defined
lode, about the same as that that paid oz.; there was six or
seven tons up. No. 2 shaft down about 62 feet in a large
quartzite formation, samples of which had not yet produced pay-
able results. The shaft was 8 by feet in the clear, and
timbered to the bottom. No. 2 Tunnel was driven a distance of
102 feet, through two quartzite formations which gave 5 dwts.
to the ton, as Victoria, of which 150 tons were up. They had
finished the erection of a 25 h.p. air compressing machinery
(which I subsequently saw at the bottom of the gully inter-
vening between the claim and Mount Morgan). It would
be started on the Monday following, and it was for working the
drills and air winch. They would go 50 feet further and then
open out. He intended to drive in the main shaft to cut
the reef that passed through the main shaft 45 feet down,
which yielded £ oz. to the ton, that he expected would be
richer the deeper it went down. According to Ballard’s survey
there should be two or three defined reefs in their tunnels
passing directly through the Nob which will yield from 1£ oz.
to ozs. per ton. He (Ballard) had struck a rich sandstone


vein in his claim that had given over 1 oz. to the ton. The sum
of £SOOO had been placed by the vendors to the credit of the
present company of which from £3OOO to £4OOO had gone, over
£IOOO having been expended during the past two months.
He intended to sink 250 feet below Callans’ Nob, and to
crosscut 150 feet at that level. Here the men turned up
outside, and I bade Mr. Oates adieu, feeling convinced at
any rate that if the mystery of the mine is to be satisfactorily
solved he will be the man to do it. The air compressing
machinery had steam on as I passed by round the Mount
Morgan side of the horseshoe that takes you round the creek
into the gully the township is in. The great difficulty is the
cost of treating, which to Oates’ Victorian experience meant
only five or six shillings a ton. One thing is certain —he
states he can take the stuff to a machine for 4s. per ton —
a good battery close by and better stone might solve the
difficulty after all.
THE (TREAT MOUNT MORGAN EXTENDED,
LONDON.
Situated close by the Queensland company of that name,
and alongside the big mine’s boundary on the other side of the
shoulder or ridge separating the two properties. Mr. Aldridge,
the manager, had been there since February 1887, having been
sent home by the Griffith Government to take charge of the
machinery ait the Queensland section of the Indian and Colonial
Exhibition. Practically nothing was done till he came, and all
that was there was a mundic lode averaging 9 dwt. to the ton,
at Heath’s, Rockhampton. A tunnel was now driven 350 feet in
the hill, and at 250 feet a lode or reef was struck, the highest
assay from which gave 4 ozs. to the ton at Gympie. Another
tunnel, No. 2, had been in 250 feet in the hill side, 200 feet
south, joining the other, both driving nearly east towards the big
mount. Small quantities of gold had come from this tunnel,
the stuff resembling that of Mount Morgan. In another place
was prospecting containing gold and giving 7 dwts. to the ton,
besides silver. The general stone he was working had been
going from 5 dwts. to 4 ozs. to the ton by assay, and there were
thousands of tons to get out. “ I am quite certain of the mine
being a success as soon as the machinery is erected,” said he.
“ In the third tunnel, 40 feet above No. 1, we have no definite
lode but a hematite quartz, which carries gold from 3 dwts. to
2 ozs. by assay. This should mean that the whole of the side
of the hill is a quarry, not a reef. Speaking of the row about
the former company —the west Mount Morgan at home, before
it was floated by its present directorate—he said, “ I engaged as


manager in the thick of the row when it was at its worst, but I
knew then as I do now that the mine is a genuine one, and it is
the only one really adjoining Mount Morgan. The Extended is
not paying expenses, for we have had no crushing, as there is
only a portion of the machinery on the ground, and grinding
and amalgamating will be enough for us as the stone is not rich
enough to chlorinate. I consider that we shall be able to pay a
dividend on the capital as soon as the machinery starts to work.
I have started a shaft on the Horsman’s Nob, that appears to
be one mass of quartz, in which free gold exists visible to the
naked eye. We have not assayed this stuff as the gold was
plain enough, and we shall have all the top of the hill for at
least 40 feet down to work upon. From my experience as a
manager on all the big goldfields of Queensland, 1 am quite
confident that this mine will be a success, and I anticipate this
before twelve months is is if the machinery is put up
promptly ; and what is more shares will be nearer £1 than 11s.
6d., the present price. I have seen so much of the mine,
especially within the past six months, that I have no hesitation
in stating that it must be payable sooner or later.” A former
manager of the mine, Mr. Welsh, who is now engaged at the
Dee River Company, states that Hall’s shaft on the opposite
side of Mount Morgan Extended (London), had given gold at
the rate of 5 ozs. to the ton. The Extended was between that
shaft and the Great Mount Morgan boundary. Good gold had
been got at the Dee River Company’s property adjoining as
much as 10 and 12 ozs. to the ton. Mr. Coombes, C.M.G., of
Sydney, went to the Mount Morgan Extended (London), and
had written a highly favourable report of it as a good property.
Another old mining man, who has no interest in the mine, said to
me : “ I went there last Thursday and was shown round by Mr.
Aldridge. I have no interest whatever in the mine, or any
other in that district. lam of opinion that the Mount Morgan
Extended will turn out a good mine yet when fairly developed.
I saw a lode from 4 to 6 feet wide, which I believe might be pay-
able when it got to the water level —it is well worth a trial.
There is another one further on in one of the drives not quite
so wide, looking very well. I should recommend all shafts to
be sunk to the water level and driven on. People here (Mount
Morgan) consider that if the mine was further developed and
the poor ores crushed cheaply it would be a paying concern.”
All these accounts are transcriptions of shorthand notes,
taken as they were given by one who owns no interest whatever
in that mine or any other, and who can defy anyone to show
that he has. The public will be the best judges in the long
run. The miner who spoke last has a very good name with
Mr. Watson, of Watson & Denny, who is staying here tern-


porarily putting up machinery on the Mount Morgan mine. I
admit having heard adverse accounts of this mine from a good
many quarters, and have given the evidence thus collated a
little extra publicity in consequence.
Mount Ballard.
This ground lies three-quarters of a mile west of the
summit of Mount Morgan. It adjoins the east boundary of
the property of the Mount Morgan Extended Gold Mining
Company, of London, and the property of the Mount Morgan
Extended Gold Mining Company of Queensland. The object
of the proprietors is to search for a similar deposit of gold to
that which is now being worked on the summit of Mount
Morgan. This deposit they expect to find beneath the desert
sandstone, of which the upper strata of their claim consists.
They also have reasonable hopes in their tunnels and shaft to
cut auriferous veins in the fissures of the sandstone, in which
hopes they are encouraged by the surface indications. The
existing works consist of a main shaft, also two tunnels, into the
eastern slope of the mountain. The whole of the strata so far
through which these tunnels and the shaft have passed contains
gold in small quantities, also silver; the highest assay yet ob-
tained for gold being eleven pennyweights to the ton out of the
solid sandstone, and ten pennyweights to the ton out of powdery,
burnt leaders in the same sandstone on the mountain side. The
works are onlv in their infancy, the shaft being but 40ft. deep;
No. 1 74ft. in ; and No. 2 Tunnel, 50ft. in.
The theory upon which the prospectors of Mount Ballard
base their hopes may be described as follows : —Standing on
the summit of Mount Morgan the white heap of excavated
sandstone from No. 1 Tunnel of Mount Ballard is visible less
than three-quarters of a mile to the westward, and near the
summit of the highest visible spur of the great table-land of
Desert Sandstone. Turning round and looking eastward the
table land of Desert Sandstone again appears at a distance of
four or five miles. This table-land of Desert Sandstone was
once the bed of the sea, which stretched across, covering Mount
Ballard and the ranges to the eastward. At the bottom of this
sea was a bed of sandstone from a hundred to two hundred feet
in thickness. , . ,
Volcanic or geyserous emissions from the bowels of the
earth (during the existence of this sea) finding their way
through fissures or veins now filled with pyritore lodes deposited
r


their load o£ precious metal ‘principally just helow the level beds
of the sands of this sea, while a portion of it passed upwards
into the sand and there became distributed, the lower beds of
the sand, however, being more heavily charged. Of this
principal deposit we have only yet fonnd an undisturbed mass
upon the summit of Mount Morgan , which mass seems to be
from 70 to 100 feet in depth, and all richly auriferous.
Geologic changes leave this sea dry, its bed becomes ex-
posed, its sands consolidated, further changes denude the sur-
face, rivers are washed in the strata, valleys and mountains
appear, and on the summit of Mount Morgan, alone of all the
mountains around, we find that we are standing on a level with
the bottom of the lower beds of the sands of this vanished sea.
All around the sandstone has disappeared, no evidence of it
except here and there amongst the oxidized surface debris, a
morsel of sandstone richly impregnated with gold , a relic of the
bottom bed of the vanished sandstone strata. From the
summit of Mount Morgan we look down on Osborne’s Knob 140
feet below us, on the Dee River Companies peak 180 feet below
us, on Callan’s Knob 270 feet below' us —we look all around,
and we find that we are standing on an isolated point above the
level of the highest peaks of the surrounding country, but
below the level of the table-land of Desert Sandstone on the
east and west. But looking across to Mount Ballard we find
that the table-land of Desert Sandstone towers more than 100
feet above us, the low point on the spur at which the main
shaft of the mine is going down, being 30 feet above the
summit of Mount Morgan ; from which point the country
rises to the westward to a considerable elevation.
On examining the sandstone beds in Tunnel No. 1, we
find that they incline to the west, so that the bottom of the
sandstone beds on Mount Ballard, corresponding to the bottom
of the sandstone beds on Mount Morgan, w'ould be at a level of
about 60 feet below the present summit of Mount Morgan ;
and this same inclination of the strata confirms the theory that
the present summit of Mount Morgan must be very little below
the level of the lowest sandstone bed which existed before the
mountain was utterly demanded of its sandstone.
The operations of the Mount Victoria Mine , some three
miles to the west of Mount Ballard, tend to confirm the above
theory; the auriferous stone they have met with in the sand-
stone being similar to specimens found in Mount Ballard, their
geological situation and conditions being similar.
Should these mines prove payable there is not a solitary
point on this sandstone range that will not be worked for gold,
.and the writer predicts that the sandstone ranges miles to the


north and miles to the south of Mount Ballard will he one day
the source of vast riches to the colony of Queensland.
Referring to the geological character of the country to the
west of Mount Morgan, Mr. Jack, the Government Geologist,
says : —“ About a mile to the west of the mountain is a mass,
apparently 150 feet in thickness, of horizontally bedded sand-
stone. It rests, apparently, at this point on a mass of rhyolite,
hut in other places it may be seen lying on the upturned edges
of quartzite and greywacke strata, similar in character to those
of the country around Mount Morgan. The base of this for-
mation is fine, volcanic dust.” Mr. Macdonald Cameron, the
great mining expert, says: —“Unfortunately, I did not visit
that part of the district, but may it not be possible , even probable ,
that what is here received as volcanic dust is identical in age,
character , and composition with what has elsewhere been termed
the ‘ silicious sinter ’ of Mount Morgan ; but what I verily believe
to be none other than a trapnean tufa or scoriae .”
Nothing could be more suggestive or encouraging to the
prospectors of Mount Ballard than the above.
When the corresponding deposit to that of Mount Morgan
is unearthed immediately below the lower beds of the Desert
Sandstone, or in the bottom beds thereof, it must not be ex-
pected to be similar in appearance to that of Mount Morgan,
which has been oxidised by ages of exposure. Large patches
of pyrites and galena will probably abound in the strata. If the
above denudation theory is correct, vast deposits of alluvial gold
will eventually be discovered by carefullv prospecting for miles
down the valley of the Dee. Mount Morgan and its vicinity is
situated as it were ai the division of a watershed, the one
running north, down Crocodile and other creeks into the
.Fitzroy, and the other south, down the vallev of the Dee River
into the Dawson, and on all these tributary rivers and creeks a
rich field is open to the alluvial prospector of which there is a
certain promise in the enormous deposit of gold still to be seen
at the summit level.
The writer being heavily interested in the success of the
mine is glad to accept the volunteered testimony of an eminent
local geologist to the soundness of his theories.
ROBERT BALLARD,
Mining Surveyor,
July 1, 1888. Rockhampton.
I have read the preceding report upon the Mount Ballard
Tunnelling Area, and am happy to certify that I thoroughly
agree with Mr. Ballard in all he says.
JAMES SMITH, E.G.S.
July 3, 1888.


MOUNT MORGAN OUTSIDERS.
Of these claims one of the best is the Union at Crocodile
Creek, which is quoted well, although not paying dividends ; the
last crushing going 17 ozs. for 18 tons, at their own mill. The
Who’d-a-thought-it has crushed 54 tons for 104 ozs. The
Kangaroo, two miles north-east of Mount Morgan, reports a
reef 18 inches wide carrying gold, which has been followed down
on the underlay 100 feet. A crushing from this claim gave
good results. The Wallaroo, parallel with the Kennedy, reports
also a reef showing gold. The Mount Musgrave, an account
of which was refused by the secretary at Mount Morgan, states
through the press that it has a tunnel in 100 feet on a lode 15
feet wide, assaying 26 dwts. The Dee River prospecting near
Mount Morgan have a vertical shaft 250 feet in that has cut a
reef, on which crosscutting is going on. Ihe Mount Morgan
North is said to be in the hands of a Sydney syndicate, who
are about to expend £3OOO. Ralz claim, south of Mount
Morgan, some mile or so, is stated from private sources to have
a reef 2 feet wide worth 15 dwts. per ton ; also that the 1 North
Mount Morgan has sunk a shaft 150 feet, with something
coming. The Mountain Maid, at Razorback, has a 132 feet
deep main shaft, with a reef showing gold, averaging U ozs. ;
it may be floated for a large sum. The Great Northern is under
six months’ exemption. The opinion expressed by an educated
man who had just come back from Mount Morgan, who had no
mining interest there, was that the auriferous deposit in the big
Mount was in the shape of an inverted flower-pot, and it would
take a hundred years to work out. It will be of interest to add
an item on the Question of the cost of chlonuisation, as a good
many wide guesses have already been made. A personal triend
of mine, who regrets he doesn’t own a single scrip in the great
mountain, states that the manager of it had estimated the cost
of the process at 255. per ton. The gold is very fine and pure,and is
worth over £4 per ounce. Just one word in conclusion with
reference to Eisenstaters chlorinisation works, that are so tar
finished that they will be at work within a few days near the
Hector p.c., on the road to Mount Morgan. Whether it is the
Hector he will ireat I know not, or whether it is Ins own
property ; but he has a good many friends wbo will be glad to
see his own venture, small as it is, turn out well. Ihe Hector
has never paid yet, but that may be due to the way the stone was
treated. Probably Conran’s mine at Norton would not be pay-
dividends had the stone gone through the old process ot
stampers, whose day appears to have gone by altogether in the
central district.
The Dee River Extended, Mr. Welsh manager, is sinking a


shaft to try to get a lode from the great Mount Morgan adjoin-
ing to the No. 1, said to be nearly 200 feet wide. Gold has
been found some distance from the surface. The Rise and
Shine, which is reported as having hoisted the red flag, is at the
back of the Dee, behind the hill, and not very far away is the
Moss Yale, which has hitherto produced more valedictions than
benedictions from its holders. There is a Mount Morgan, No. 1
North, that has got a new manager, and a shaft down 146 feet
which doesn’t show gold yet. He says it is the best thing out-
side Mount Morgan, a remark which is made about every out-
sider more or less. The Mount Morgan Consols have amalga-
mated with the Dee Company, on dif, and have twenty-five
acres a mile away from the big mine, behind Lowry’s Hotel,
with a twelve foot shaft “ convaniently ” in the hotel yard, and
another one farther off, neither of which have anything tangible
as yet, as the depths are shallow. A miner told me that Mr.
Wesley Hall stated the lay of Mount Morgan was north and
south —if so the Consols should mean something more than
3 per cent., for it lies to the south-west of the big mountain,
and is moreover, reported to have some thousands of pounds to
do the work with, raised by a Sydney company, of which Mr.
Garland, M.L.A., is a director in that city. The New Chum
lies directly to the south, between the Consols and the Mount
Morgan, but is owned by workmen who have no capital and no
prospects of getting any at present. 1 should advise them to
find something good enough to amalgamate with the Consols.
They report two shafts sunk, in one of which gold has been
found, and that the water is stopping'operations. Williams and
Brown are identified with it. Down in the valley overhung by
Mount Morgan is the diamond drill worked by the mining
department, the representative of which refused information.
Since found out was 580 feet down. The men at the South
Mount Morgan shaft knew nothing, as the manager was away.
Since stated that a mudic lode was struck 45 feet in the drive.
Gettinginformation anywhere butat Mount Morgan and two other
local claims is a species of worry anyone gets frightfully sick and
tired of. Nobody is silly enough to go out and report from
any offices of the district press except upon previous arrange-
ment, and then not seldom. There are plenty of men in every
field, even among the very best mining communities who will
£; blow ” more than they work. The most scientific man in that
line, however, on Mount Morgan, is not a miner. The local
barber, who is a “cullud man,” runs him pretty close, but he stands
no chance with his rival, who was evidently born to it.
There is plenty of the real mining element at Mount
Morgan, especially the men at the big mine, who know how to


stick to a good thing with so many imitations on every hand.
The company is very popular with the men, and the three
managers are spoken well of; and until those who try to sneer
at the biggest thing Central Queensland has yet produced, can
do more than sneer they will be treated with rather less respect
than the wind of heaven that “ bloweth ” where it listeth.
There are some who go further and talk libel loudly. That is
useless as a means of attack. For such people to praise any
particular mine would be a calamity indeed. The Mount
Victoria is alluded to elsewhere. An old miner who went there
informed me at my request that there were twenty claims with
reefs, averaging from two to five feet thick, assays of which had
given from one ounce to several, only waiting for machinery to
make a good field of it. This I believe to be a fair account;
all the same a man who comes to invest should have an assayer
behind him, and should take out his specimens after a shot had
been first fired, supposing there was a shaft or a tunnel to work
on.
Mr. M. L. Martin, of Quay Street, I found a fairly good
informant, both on mining and land matters. He used to make
carricatures for a now defunct print, entitled the “ Laughing
Jackass,” which involved a police escort, so enthusiastic was the
reception he experienced when out of doors. His sketches
came in, however, with good effect at the recent election, for
there is no Griffithite member in the whole of the Central dis-
trict. Mr. Martin had a tobacconist shop in the Canoona rush,
over twenty years ago.
MOUNT MORGAN—COMMEECI ALLY AND
OTHERWISE.
One of the chief hotels and stores combined is a firm that
has helped a good deal to make Allenstown what it is to-day as
a suburb of Rockhampton. Messrs. Lowry & Boeton, the firm
in question, have recently dissolved partnership, the former
taking the business at Mount Morgan, and the latter adhering
to Allenstown. The hotel which forms the chief building on the
township side of the creek consists of some thirty rooms, in
which both the classes and the masses are pretty well catered
for. The upper balcony is generally cool during the hotter
part of the day, which is never warmer at noon than it is at
Rockhampton at breakfast time. Lowry’s Sunburst Hotel is
the chief part of the firm’s building, from the upper balcony of
which a splendid view of the great mine is visible with the
mountain top to the left —or rather the mountain with 30 feet


of top half gone—and the chlorination works away to the right.
The Sunburst is a fairly good house for commercial and pro-
fessional people, for the Garetta troupe were staying at the
time of my visit, and Shearston’s Hall, the only place of enter-
tainment besides the churches, is not far off, on the hill-side.
Poor Ouda was worse off for room to turn sumersaults in the
hall than he was at Rockhampton.
Another commercial combination is that of butcher and
storekeeper, in what may be called the main street adjoining
Mount Morgan. Beef and mutton are as a rule exceptionally
good, but the present state of the country and the consequent
difficulty of getting cattle across, makes the local butcher a
somewhat worried man at times. The price of meat is no more
than in Rockhampton, and the same may be said about store
charges generally. The firm goes under the name of Dempsey
and Co., the partners being Messrs. Meade and O’Keefe. They
have some considerable interest in Mount Victoria as most of
the local firms have in places where the impecunious holder is
the workfhan whose hopes have to be sustained by tucker
obtained mainly on credit principles. Mr. Meade said there
were twenty men at Mount Victoria on gold. I received a
great many invitations to go out to the Mount, but as the
journey is one series of accidents and atrocities, and horses
were abnormally scarce, I concluded to let things rip till the
men resting “on gold ” had got down to where it was. One
who went there stated that the shows seemed good, but some
of the men were only of half-pick men—that is they could not
get more than half their picks into the ground. The competi-
tion among the many hundreds of Mount Morgans extended,
contracted, paying, non-paying, and otherwise, is too great to
bring the cash out of the speculator without something more
than a rabbit warren to show him for his money, although it
seems good enough to get credit out of the storekeepers. The
fact that this credit is comparatively easy to get at Mount
Morgan is a bad thing for the field, for it is so much easier to
do one long loaf and to talk big while the storekeeper foots the
bill, than to work steadily so as to show results at a decent
depth to the capitalist. £ ‘ He who doth not work, neither shall
he eal,” should be made the rule of the future with the mining
prospector of the Mount Morgan district.
Mount Morgan has a very decent weekly newspaper, and
it has volunteers, judging by the echoes and the distant glare
of the parade that took place one night while I was there. A
brass baud is now being established, and a School of Arts is
coming. It wants a dam for fresh water conservation very
badly, as the water from the ironstone soil is too flavoured to


be pleasant or healthy. There is a very distinct and palpable
need of a Municipality, if only for creating some local source
of news for the Chronicle aforesaid, besides the necessarily
limited news from the big mine, whose operations are of an
excessively monotonous character, chequered only by the monthly
pay day. If another of those oft promising Mount Morgans
would only make up its mind to definitely start so as to make
up an interim fortnightly pividend to help the storekeepers
along it would take well and give pleasure to all, A new brick
church is going up on gold apparently, for the foundations were
sunk on a reef which has already caused the desecration of the
churchyard adjoining. On being asked for particulars the
happy men at work replied that they were digging a well. This
shows that there is a strong admixture of the practical with
the reverential element in the Mount Morgan miner. May
they get their reward. There is neither crime nor poverty at
the township, for two larcenous offenders were all that were dealt
with during the past twelve months, and an occasional inebri-
ation cannot with propriety be condemned in Central Queens-
land where the import of whisky is the source of a large and
remunerative revenue. The spectacle of a mining community
healthy, moderately sober, and prosperous, with all sorts of
glorious possibilities in the future is one that will fully repay
inspection, and our Centennial visitors will find that an exten-
sion of their trip to Eockhampton and Mount Morgan will be a
pleasant and thoroughly enjoyable feature in their travels that
will give them another lion to talk about when they meet their
friends again in the good old country we call “ home.”
A firm of divers undertakings is represented by Mr.
Black, who does all the funeral business at Mount Morgan,
which the local senior constable states has a district population
of 3500, “no less an’ moind me now.” Mr. Black told me
that business in that line was exceedingly dull, as it didn’t
mean one procession a month. This must be depressing intelli-
gence for local medicos if there are any; but there is hope for
them if no attempt is made to form a rainwater reservoir as the
hot weather comes on. Mr. Black employs three hands making
furniture—not the death’s head business—but domestic require-
ments. If Mount Morgan men can learn to spend their money
where it is spent they will learn the first lesson in political
economy. He furthermore has imported the first piano for sale
on Mount Morgan, and judging by some harmonic outrages I
have heard there this last item shows an advance on civilisation
that should be encouraged.
The stopping place for the coaches is Moncktons. close to
the Mount Morgan works, and it naturally follows that there


are a good many visitors there, among whom, at the time of my
advent, was Mr. Watson, of Watson & Denny, who is putting
up some of his machinery at Mount Morgan —a fact previously
alluded to. The rain water is so short that it is dispensed only
in the hand-bottles in the bedrooms at Moncktons and also pre-
sumably at the bar. I had some there, but it was carefully
qualified, so that no evil effects resulted. The whisky there is
beyond cavil and the table is the best in the place.
One word about the little folks. There are some 150
children at the State school who have a popular master —he
must be, for I saw him before hours this morning teaching two
of his pupils on the verandah. The little ones on parade out-
side are a happy, ruddy-looking lot, well dressed and well
treated evidently. The coming generation at Mount Morgan
will be a fine muscular one, such as Queensland has too few of.
The country needs more country working-bees and fewer town
drones, official and otherwise, and any Government who wants to
fling away money in the already over-populated centres of
population will get brought up with a round turn. If a national
policy means only a national debt the sooner this sort of thing
is checked the better.
THE WATSON & DENNY GRINDING AND AMALGA-
MATING PAN.
It was in the evening of the day I had seen the great
Mount Morgan and some of the assorted varieties all round
that golden centre, whose radius is so abnormally circumscribed,
that I was introduced to Mr. Watson, one of the inventors of
the famous Watson & Denny grinders and amalgamators, that
are keeping two big foundries going at Maryborough in supplying
the Queensland demand, and that has three more foundries in
Victoria, including the Langlands, the premier of all, in keeping
up to southern requirements. Mr. Watson was a failure in
appearance as part proprietor of a patent that has turned out a
half a million worth of apparatus ; but in our conversation
about the famous Mount he had also just inspected he showed
himself about as fit an exponent of his company’s interests as
an unscientific outsider could have imagined. He said that
there were millions of tons in the company’s freehold that
would not pay to chlorinate, but which would return colossal
dividends with the Watson & Denny pan, that would only cost
about a tenth of the cost of the chemical process. The pans
were all complete “ box and dice ” for about £2OO a piece, and


were capable of being erected in a very short time, as I witnessed
at the Mount Morgan works next day. There is another
enterprise in the district close at hand, which may be briefly
described as a million’s worth of probabilities that will mainly
be decided by the cost of the process used, the comparative
poorness of the stone making chlorination incapable of produc-
ing anything but a direct loss. I saw a letter from Mr.
Lalonde, of the Mount Shamrock, referring to the Watson &
Denny process just erected there, in which he spoke of its sim-
plicity, low cost of working and efficiency, which had been so
recognised by the directors that three more pans were ordered
forthwith. Mr. Eoberts, of the Manning mine, Mount Perry,
had sent a letter to Mr. Watson, which I saw, stating that in
future he should recommend the addition of the pans to every
crushing plant he had anything to do with. The exhibit of the
firms will be a leading one at the Victorian section. Scientific
men will please read on :
This machine is the invention of Mr. Thomas William
Watson, of St. Arnaud, and Mr. Thomas Denny, of South
Tarra, Victoria, who have had many years’ experience in
connection with the extraction of gold, silver, and other metals
from their ores, and is now the property of the Watson & Denny
Q-old and Silver Extracting Company, Limited.
The great advantage of this invention is the extremely low
cost of treating large quantities of all classes of auriferous and
argentiferous ores. It is a well-known fact that all batteries
lose a considerable percentage of gold and silver in the tailings
and pyrites, which can nearly all be extracted by this process,
at a cost of less than three shillings per ton of the ore or quartz
crushed. This covers all charges for wear and tear, and work-
ing expenses ; one machine treating and reducing to slime all
the material produced by a five-head battery. These machines
treat the ores in a raw state, without roasting or other manipu-
lation, no matter what proportion of mundic, pyrites, or other
base metals the ores contain.
The process is more especially intended to extract the gold
and silver now being lost in the tailings and pyrites from the
various quartz batteries and other reduction works. It has
been practically proved, on a large scale, by this process, that
from 70 to 90 per cent, can be saved of all the gold and silver
known by fire assay to have been lost in the tailings and pyrites.
These machines, being continuous and automatic, receive all the
sand and pyrites either as they flow direct from the battery
boxes, or at the end of the copper and blanket tables, and need
very little attention, no additional men being required.
It not being necessary to crush the ores so fine as is now


the custom, much coarser grating may be used, consequently a
larger quantity can be operated on by the battery in a given
time.
In this process the action of gravity is not depended on to
sink the particles of gold and silver to the bottom to be amalga-
mated, the ore with its metals (no matter how fine and light)
being forced by the motion of the produced currents into the
quicksilver, which lies underneath, but not in contact with, the
grinding surfaces ; therefore the quicksilver cannot become
floured or sickened. The particles of gold and silver, being
caught in this way, are not further re-ground. The amalgam is
coarse, and yields from 30 to 50 per cent, when retorted, as
proved at Grrauya, Howqua, Malmsbury, and Waukaringa.
Each machine weighs about three tons, is very portable,,
and is inexpensive to erect. Notwithstanding the great
efficiency of this machine, a small proportion of gold and silver
is lost, varying with the different classes of ore. In order to
save this, it is strongly recommended that the Watson & Denny
Concentrator be afterwards used, thereby obtaining nearly all
the valuable metals, at an insignificant cost, the concentrates
then being re-treated by another grinder and amalgamator,
similar to those previously mentioned.
Therefore the complete Watson and Denny process consists
of :
Ist. Grinding the crushed ores and tailings in bulk to
certain degree of fineness, and obtaining there-
from the greater portion of the gold and silver.
2nd. Concentrating the ground ores in the concentrator.
3rd. Ee-grinding the concentrates to the finest possible
slime, for which the gold and silver is obtained, with
the exception of a very small percentage.
The whole of this process being one continuous operation
and the machines automatic, no handling of the stuff is required
from the time it is fed into the battery boxes until it issues
from the last machine as valueless slime. It will, however, be
understood that, in some instances, the first operation by the
grinder and amalgamator suffices to extract nearly all the valu-
able metals. In these cases the concentrator and additional
grinder and amalgamator would not be required.
The machines are provided with locks and keys, to
thoroughly secure the safety of the amalgam until the cleaning
up, which may be every week, fortnight, or month, this opera-
tion taking about an hour for each machine. A full descrip-
tion of the method of working these machines will be supplied


to purchasers, so that any ordinary batteryman can attend to
them.
GrENEEAL DeSCEIPTION.
The main body of this machine is a wide circular iron
casting, about 5i feet in diameter and feet deep, the
bottom of which is flat near the periphery, but rises slightly
towards the centre. A false bottom, consisting of corrugated
segements, is placed in a horizontal position above the true
bottom, the inner end resting on the upper part of the true
bottom, while the outer end rests on supports. These segements
have projections at both ends, which fit into places provided for
their reception, to prevent them from shifting. There is an
elongated wedge-shaped space left between the lower segements
and the true bottom : this is partly filled with quicksilver when
working, and it is here that the process of amalgamation lakes
place. The upper grinding segements are also provided with
annular corrugations that fit into those of the lower segements,
so that, when set up, there are radical spaces between each
piece. The upper segments are attached to the carrying
plate, which communicates a rotary motion to them from the
driver. Between these grinding surfaces the ore is ground to
an almost impalpable state; and the currents formed by the
rotary motion, the inflow and outflow of the material, together
with the effect of the guide blades, causes the reduced material
to pass numerous times against and into the quicksilver before
escaping into the classifier, prior to being conducted away. As
the quicksilver is kept in motion by the produced currents, it is
constantly presenting fresh surfaces to the material.
The classifier is fixed on the outside of the machine, its
three outer sides tapering towards the bottom, where it com-
municates with the interior of the machine by a hole. In the
classifier a deflecting plate is so arranged that the size of the
grains of tailings can be regulated to suit different circum-
stances. All grains over a certain size are automatically
separated and collected in the classifier by this means, and,
settling by gravity in the comparatively still water, are sucked
through the hole at the bottom into the machine and re-ground,
the waste passing aw r ay with the overflow, and the possible loss
of valuable material reduced to a minimum.
The gearing for driving purposes is placed under the
machine, being thereby protected jfrom dust; and there is no
danger of oil from the bearings getting into the machine to
sicken the quicksilver.


THE NEW COAL DISCOVERY IN THE CENTRAL
DISTRICT.
This information is given by a shareholder who had just
returned from the mine, whose lengthened mining experience
is well-known in Rockhampton. He states that the place of
discovery was half-way from town to Broadsound, on the coast,
which should make transit of its coal a comparatively inexpensive
matter. The seam is from 6ft. to 7ft. thick, “ good all through.”
Many carboniferous outcrops have been discovered in the area
taken up, the width of the lodes varying from 3ft. to sft.
Several bores have been put down the deepest of which was
140 ft. which found nothing fresh in seams, as judging from the
underlay double that depth will be necessary to sink to. Traces
of oily stuff have been passed through which will be properly
investigated at some future time ; and in the meantime a shaft
has been sunk a little distance from the outcrop to prove the
extent and permanence of the seam. The local railway depart-
ment reports most favourably of the specimens submitted which
experts have affirmed as is equal to anything of its sort in
the colony. It gives off a little whitish ash, and produces a
clear heat useful for a fire or for steaming purposes. It is
possible that a company will be floated at Brisbane when the
name is further developed. The local men already could float
it twenty times over if they wanted to.
IRRIGATION AND WATER CONSERVATION FOR THE
CENTRAL DISTRICT.
It has been said that provisions against drought are of
more importance than railways. True as this axiom is, it is
doubly true in Ceutral Queensland, which at this moment is
buying thousands of pounds worth of southern produce it
should at least attempt to grow here. It is ridiculous to affirm
that the storekeepers would suffer by a policy of district and
suburban cultivation, for the same business mediums in the one
case would act in the other. Besides, any sane man of business
would prefer the farmer to buy as well as sell in Rockhampton.
It is not for the advantage of the district that a certain portion
of its revenue must go down to make richer the merchants of
Melbourne and Adelaide. Those who love the digger and his
ways would be the sooner willing to protect h ; m from competing
for work at slack times with the adventurous nondescript, who
would be equally glad to try his hand at the plough rather than
with the pick and shovel. But what can he do in this district
of ours? He may find a billet on a far away station, where
colonial life appears in its most unpleasant aspect. For such


new comers the cultivation o£ properly irrigated ground would
be the most welcome of all pursuits, more especially in the case
of people with families, who could comfortably take charge of
a ten acre holding that would be reproductive from the start,
with a market close at hand where the settler would be welcomed
as an ally in the work of making Queensland a white man’s
country. The conditions of agricultural life are so vastly
different here from those at home, where heavy rents and a
tremendous competition from every civilised country makes the
British farmer’s life a constant struggle. Pending the State
taking up the matter, it could be very well initiated by a few
Rockhampton men, whose abundance of means, and whose love
for the place that made them, would render them less anxious
to make a profit from the project than to advance the welfare of
their own district. With all due respect to the great mine that
the town owes its very existence to to-day, is there not an
absence of popular local investment for the townsfolk, judging
by the enormous sums devoted to local enterprises of a more or
less purely speculative character ? The aggregation of many
losses produces an occasional lamentable scarcity of hard cash,
for the simple reason that it has gone south without returning
anything appreciable. Without presuming to discourage the
mining industry it will be found very desirable to create another
ulass of producers to help the district to prosper. To dam the
Pitzroy at the end of the bridge will be to make fresh water
available all along the side of the great chocolate-soil plain that
could keep the town going in produce of all kinds, by simply
utilising the sort of labour that is too often found unnecessary
here. One powerful check will be put to that second course of
intercolonial immigration that provides our sister colonies with
bone and muscle at our expense; and it will do more by giving
the public of the Central district something they can "take an
interest in that will return a certain dividend with very few
calls. The law should be altered to permit the city dwellers
who suffer or prosper with the district to take up small blocks
for agricultural and residence purposes, so that if the vagrant
they befriend by giving him a chance to earn his own living
turns out bad, no one but the vagrant himself will lose thereby.
That will be the first steps of a chain of events that may revo-
lutionise the Central District and remove the standing reproach
of its being a golden desert. The water bore should never be
idle, and each railway station should have its tank kept filled by
water trains supplied from the Fitzroy—they could run on the
“ off days,” so as to give some more tangible reason for their
existence. The squatter and the settler will yet learn the art of
silos that provides the food for the cattle in the drought. The


dwellers in the far west are working hard so as to conquer when
the next visitation conies along —which, pray heaven, shall not
come awhile. Why can’t the city people do something as well,
that no one will ever do if they don’t make a start F
A ROCKHAMPTON IRRIGA.TIONIST.
What a pleasant thing it is,” sings someone, “ to dwell
together in unity.” “ What a much pleasanter thing it is,” echoes
the reflective one, “ that everyone is not in unity on the subject
of irrigation.” Every good citizen “ approves ” of having a
suburban contingent of agriculturalists; and as long as someone
else pays he will live happily in union with the rest of the
citizens until the next drought comes and he prepares himself
with proper humiliation for the legal process that usually fol-
lows a first-class drought in the Central District. Such
thoroughly easy-going people are always getting into or out of
financial troubles that they have got used to by a long familiarity
with nature’s vagaries in this part of Australia. But,
thank heaven, there is not all unity here. There is one notable
exception at any rate, and he is no stranger to Rockhampton,
that worships his name in connection with the golden mountain.
He was the discoverer of what is the Atlas of Queensland. He
is a station holder and a stock breeder —a famous one —and at
Warwick, where he comes from, he got horsefeedfor six months
out of the twelve for 30s. per ton. Here he pays, or he used to
pay, from £3 to £7 10s. or even £lO a ton to the good people
in New Zealand and the south, who are kind enough to feed us
—for a consideration. So one day he took up an eight acre
corner of his domains at a place near the town called Lion Leigh,
on Lion Creek, where there is plenty of water and a small dam,
He bought a Tangye pump, boiler, and piping, that cost £l7O,
that pumps 5000 gallons per day for 12 hours a day. The man
turns on the water and unlocks certain outlets, and the other man
helps by cutting the lucerne for the cattle. That was started
about six months ago, no rain having fallen since, and the other
farmers in the district look at their patches of ground that were
once gardens, and are now as smooth and productive as a deal
table. That eight acre patch to-day gives more lucerne of prime
quality than all those horses and cows want, and they are as fat
as city aldermen; and there are other crops, such as oats, that
are continually coming up, once a fortnight, as fast as they are
cropped. There is a little rolling to do at the start, and then
the plough makes a lot of furrows across the ground, which are
so many tiny reservoirs, that flow every day by turning on the
tap. There is produce growing there from 18 inches to 2 feet
high, while in the next paddock the seeds haven’t shown them-


selves at all. And that it pays, is seen from the fact that Mr.
Morgan is going to put 100 acres under cultivation now instead
of eight.
PRACTICAL IRRIGATION AT LION’S CREEK,
ROCKHAMPTON.
Three miles from Rockhampton there is an oasis in the
wilderness —a patch of green in a desert of yellow,
which is about the first piece of real hona fide irriga-
tion yet successfully done in the Central District. Mr.
Ered Morgan recently took me down to this verdant little para-
dise, just to show me how he had carried out what you have
already seen referred to in “ a Rockhampton Irngationist.” The
same title might head this article, only, in that case you have
theory and in this practice. The buggy that did the three miles
from the big red brick house in Quay-street, was drawn by an
animal fed on Lion’s Creek lucerne, that trotted a good ten
miles an hour —a complete antithesis to the deplorable frame-
work of the previous week. The owner of the eight acre block
had died some time before, and the property had come into Mr.
Morgan’s ownership, who has had the satisfaction of at least
doubling its value since February last. Just see and judge for
yourselves how he did it.
The avenue leading to the house had some magnificent fruit
trees, chiefly mangoes, whose broad heavy leaves gave a deep
cool shade so refreshing after the short trip of a villainously
dusty road, surrounded with holdings almost as dry and dusty.
Past the manager’s pretty cottage we got out in front of the
eight acre patch, most of which was a mass of verdant green,
varying from the light hue of the barley to the darker colour
of the lucerne. At our feet from right to left ran a watery
trench a foot deep, through which the supply was pumped
from the dam on the other side of the house, that in its journey
round the boundary was sent at right angles through a series of
drills or trenches, by the withdrawal of a handboard worked on
the same principle as the miners race. These parallel ridges
were 16ft apart, shown clearly enough by the big ripe succulent
grass on both sides of the trench ; while in between the trenches
were barren spots, showing that the water had not got out that
distance. In future, these furrows will be Bft. apart. The
brilliant hue of the barley and the profuse supply all around
gave one the impression of a recent shower; but over the fence
on the next patch there was the same eternal light gamboge, so
noticeable on every side on the way out. Strange to say, no
rain had ever come to that land—all that was there was pure


and simple irrigation. A small patch of lucerne about an eighth
of an acre in size, which had been kept going by a side trench
and a diurnal squirt with the hose, had yielded the owner in
produce to the value of £5O at present rates during the past
five months. It is not hard to multiply this by 64 and to re-
member that one man and a boy were all that are necessary in
the way of actual labour. Mr. Morgan had fed 18 horses and
some few cows during this time, which he reckoned used to cost
about 10s. per head per week, taking a low average for the lot.
That means somewhere about £7 a-week as interest for the
outlay from only a small part of the produce. There was some
lovely oats, all a-growing and a-blowing, and some dozen or so of
fruit trees at the back of the house. A lagoon ran round the
property, and on the sloping sides all round, were dug holes for
eighty trees that are coming from the local botanical gardens
when the next shower takes place. A surrounding trench on
the top of the slope can keep all these fruit trees going till they
mature in three years, and commence to give a revenue that will
last for 15 or 20 years. That revenue alone, when realized,
would be enough to keep fifty junior bank clerks at their present
rate of what is called remuneration.
THE TANGrYE PUMP
And the motive power ? A 5 h.p. boiler on the river bank,
standing in the open air, waiting for a shed to cover it, sent
down steam to a Tangye pump at the waterside, that started
work simply by turning on steam from above. The cost of the
pump was £4O only, and it had never gone wrong since it had
been put there in Eebruary. “ I have used these pumps for
years, as a miner,” said Mr. Morgan, “and they are the best
for this sort of work. By the dam you see I have put up yonder,
I reckon that I 1 ave at least six months supply beyond it; and
this waterhole that we pump from is 30ft. deep, and that is good
for three months at least.” The dam in question was further up
the creek, two waterholes intervening; and here the supply
was full as far as I could see. The waterwall was composed of a
lot of bags containing earth and cooch grass, which has a habit of
growing and uniting as the bags decay, so that in time the dam
is as permanent as the bank close by. Moreover, the constant
presence of the water against the dam causes the grass to grow,
for through some of the holes in the topmost bags were little
sprigs of green that promised more by-and-by.
Speaking of Chaffey Bros., my guide spoke warmly in their
favour, thinking that there should be plenty of men in Queens-
land, holding large interests of agriculture, who should take
care to make Chaffey’s first visit a success in advance. It is


only fair to add that the prospect of doing a good thing for
themselves will be the main inducement in most cases to the
people of this colony, judging by the enormous amount of pre-
liminary palaver that takes place before the financial seeds begin
to sprout in any matter affecting the general benefit of the
community. Those who want more information can send to the
author at the Johnsonian Club, Brisbane, or to Messrs. Chaffey
Bros , Collins Street, Melbourne.
WHAT IRRIGATION MAY DO FOE THE DOWNS.
Most Northerners who have seen Alfred Shaw’s new place
at Townsville, who have walked from Queen-street to Adelaide-
street through the Brisbane premises, and have seen the firm’s
offices in Melbourne and in London, will agree in admitting
that nothing of its kind touches it in Queensland in the value
and extent of its trade ; for while the drapery emporiums of
the city show all they have above ground, and let off their upper
floors as much as possible. Shaw’s has a basement for storage
of goods that stretches 336 feet between the two chief streets
of Brisbane, and which is 20 feet below the level of the pave-
ment. On dit, indeed, that the receipts are larger than those
of the far-famed Lasseter, of Sydney, for there is a rumour that
Shaw’s have been selling a piano and a sewing machine every
week day in the year, while their agricultural machinery depart-
ment on the ground floor of the head warehouse would accomo-
date half a dozen ordinary ironmonger’s establishments, stock
and all. And in addition to all these there are several bulk
stores all over the city.
THE MACHINERY MANAGER ON IRRIGATION.
Mr. J. D. Russell has farmed in California years ago before
the Canadian Chaffeys started the Ontario settlement there,
which has since developed so wonderfully and so successfully.
He started with Shaw’s about thirteen years ago by endeavour-
ing to create a demand for machinery on the Downs, which
necessitated an advocate of exceptional and almost miraculous
energy, with a determined and tireless perseverance, considering
that at that time the farmers were a good deal more dense than
they are even to-day. The Wood’s harvester and binder had a
regular struggle at first to make a start, but at present 300 of
them are on the Downs; and the same maker’s mower and
binders have been found to save half the horse work necessary
for other makes, and to be more economical as well. The latest
introductions are the sulky and gang ploughs —the former for
sir tde furrow, and the latter for double, that cost from £ls to
£25. Now that the farmers have been made to understand bv


years of education that machinery minimises labour, they will
have to begin in the direction of irrigation, which is the only
natural and effective remedy for the irregularity of the seasons
in this erratic climate of ours. Mr. Kates, whose finance and
whose mills alike, have so much to do with the Downs farmers,
had invited one of the Mr. Chaffeys to see the district; but
when it appeared that the new Minister for Agriculture was
not to be Mr. Kates, but Mr. M‘Lean, the former gentleman
lost his philanthropic interest in irrigation, and Mr. Chaffey
returned south again without more than inspecting the country.
However, Mr. M‘Lean has reversed matters by calling on the
Messrs. Chaffey down south, as has been already stated.
WHAT WILL IT COST ?
There lays the bogey —and a bogey it was to the Liberal
Government, who may be described as a little, petty-larceny,
leasing, time-payment sewing machine crowd, that never
looked at anything ahead. The farmer has never had any
benefit yet from the Liberal party. On the other hand the
best Land Act ever passed was passed by the squatter’s
Government. And, speaking on the matter of irriga-
tion, Mr. Eussell stated “ that in one district of 20,000 acres
at the bottom of the dividing range, belowKillarney, Swan, and
Farm Creeks, some half dozen streams descended from the
heights, and ran down till they merged in the Condamine.
There was a fall of water 7 or 8 feet wide not far from Killarney
and the supply was never ending and pure. Anyone of those
streams could be dammed in the mountains at very little cost,
and the water could be flumed down to alongside the farms in
the valley, whose occupiers could make arrangements separately
for subsidiary rivulets to irrigate their land.”
“ I SHOULD LIKE TO TAKE A CONTRACT FOR ss. AN
ACRE.”
said Mr. Russell, “ with such natural advantages as these. And
•I am prepared to state, as a practical farmer, that land there
which may now be worth £lO per acre will be directly increased
from 100 to 500 or 600 per cent, in value. Canning Downs
forms a large part of this area.”
I could hardly help thinking what a lovely thing irrigation
would be for the capitalists who had to sell out —at a sacrifice of
course —on the part of the buyers, though not of the sellers. If
the State should take this thing up, the present market value,
without the increase by prospective irrigation, should be all that
the present men should get for it Some law should be passed


compelling the resumption of such properties, or laying a sub-
stantial tax on them while lying idle. The day of the producers
will be the day of prosperity for Queensland. Where there is
an available supply of water, as in the case first quoted, the
paraphernalia of irrigation for a 20 acre block will only be about
£SO, which, with a couple of horses and a boy to help will give
the “ gudeman ” the right of controlling nature, instead of sub-
mitting to whatever that comes from the clerk of the weather,
that may mean ruin to him and all he has.
WHAT THE PUMPS COST.
California is a country of windmills that work day and
night, pumping up water on the already irrigated land, and
which never strike for 8 hours or 12s. per day. One very im-
portant point, by the way, that should go straight to the hearts
of our farmers is that the Californians haven’t as much rain as
we have here, and yet they supply the world with tinned fruit
out of a land that cannot compare with the Downs. The best
pump is the Economy, the first of which cost Sir Joshua Peter
Eell £3OO, but which is working to-day, after thirteen years’
wear and tear, without a break. Those who want something
cheaper can get the Stover windmill that is modelled on the
Economy, and which costs from £2O to £5O. Shaw’s have sent
hundreds of these mills to the Downs, and there is a tradition
current there of a mill being put up in hours from the time
of arrival. Mr. Russell was one of the two men who did it.
There is an insane idea on the part of farmers that irrigation is
a game that only capitalists can play at. Mr. Ered Morgan, an old
Warwick man, is clearing not less than £lO a week out of an
8 act© patch he is cultivating near Rockhampton, and he is
taking tip another 100 acres adjoining the patch as you will
read elsewhere. As for the Killarney scheme the opinion of
Mr. Russell, who ought to know, is: “The cost of this scheme
would mean scarcely anything, as it will be simply a matter of
gravitation.” 1 could have wished that some of the National
party who talk vaguely about “ national this” and “national that”
could have been asked point blank how much they were pre-
pared to risk on such an enterprise. And Ido know also that
if he of Auchenflower had been there he would have led the
way on his own account, and the rest would have followed. Sir
Thomas is an irrigationist, but he hasn’t the power to make
other people so against their wills.
THE CONRAN MINE AT NORTON NEAR GLADSTONE.
The local Warden’s report on this mine in April last gave
the area as 1200 feet by 800 feet, or 22 acres containing four


defined reefs, with another property adjoining of acres, and
two machine areas. This mine was sold to Conran and Richard-
son, the present owners, on account of the ores being too re-
fractory for ordinary treatment at a depth or 25 to 40 feet,
although from 2 ozs. to 5 ozs. per ton had been got in the
higher levels. Two years experimental work was then done by
the owners in the direction of treating the ore satisfactorily •
this included a lengthened study in Victoria by Mr. Conran.
New chlorinisation works from Burns and Twigg’s foundry were
then erected at Norton, and from the fact that in three weeks
from date the shares have gone from 14s. to 225., it may be
assumed that results are satisfactory. One dividend has been
paid and other is forthcoming, as these lines are written (July
25). In addition to the ores, which are of great value when
treated with only 3 per cent, loss, one of the reefs has yielded
£14,300 worth of free gold.
BURNS & TWIGG’S ROCKHAMPTON FOUNDRY.
Rockhampton is as proud of its big foundry, that keeps
its seventy or eighty men employed all the year round, as any
place of ten or twelve thousand people ought to be ; and the
fact that it has gone on without a break for twenty-three years
is a strong proof of future permanency. Then the town was
not —East-street had two houses —one of them, of course, a
shanty—and a few stations away out West supplied all the trade
that employed some eight or nine men. To-day, the foundry
gets only a tenth of its revenue from the town, as will be seen
later on; but the wages are all spent therein, or such places as
the big Criterion store, that spends ten thousand a-yearm wages,
would find a difference. The proprietors, who work as hard
to-day as ever they did, have their office in London, and their
smart ironmongery shop in East-street.
The customers of the foundry covers a good area altogether.
From Bundaberg—a very solvent place just now —up to Charters
Towers and Croydon means a good many squatters and mines
and sawmills, and although the new northern field wants more
pumps than crushing machines, there are enquiries coming for
plants that may mature into orders when the sites for plants
are duly watered. Conran’s mine at Norton, near Gladstone,
that has just made such a succesful start on the stock
market by a rise from 10s. to 225. in a week, has a Rock-
hampton chlorinisation plant capable of treating 120 tons of
golden conglomerate per week, made and erected by Burns and
Twigg, in two months. Mr. Conran has expressed his satis-
faction with it, and as he has paid for it he has the best possible
right to think so, seeing that he gets 96 per cent, of the dross


that rules the world. The ore resembles that of Bavenswood,
which can very well afford to take the hint. The machinery for
the town water supply came from the foundry and pumps
40,000 gallons per hour from the lagoons, one of which has a
never failing subterraneous supply. But the town will never be
safe, so Mr. Burns thinks, till the bores have been put down in
the naturally irrigated sod, so as to get a supply that would no
only do to drink, but will cultivate the land as well. Possibly
the houses on the Upper Dawson road will not then have
to pay 4s. a week for their domestic supply as they do
now.
The biggest contract done by the foundry was the Port
Alma wharf, 500 feet in length and 60 in width, with 28 feet
of water at low tide and 44 at high tide, alongside which the
biggest Orient or P. and O. boats can call at any time. The
Orient line are credited with thinking of coming to Queensland,
as they have taken a wharf at Bulimba, near Brisbane. Queens-
land wants two big ocean lines, for the good of everyone con-
cerned. And the coast line for defence purposes must go to
Port Alma after it passes Gladstone on its way to Long Beach,
the future terminus at the Thompson Biver in the heart of the
great western district. Poor Gladstone will be crushed again,
for their little wharf is up a muddy creek —a proper place for
such a creaky structure. The pumping machinery for the.
Townsville water supply came from Bockhampton 10 years ago,
and Cairns and Cooktown, who are jealous of Townsville,
should get their own service, so as to be upsides with the Queen
City of the North. And Cooktown now is what Townsville was
in’7B. A plant for a Townsville boiling down company came
from Burns and Twigg in 1876, and it has lasted to see the
company reorganised on a paying basis.
Taranganba is the latest customer, with three 40 h.p.
Cornish engines, with a lot of general work and a prospect of a
chlorinisation plant which Mr. M‘Kenna will have to decide
very soon. He has £30,000 to spend in machinery, besides the
wages for 300 men to pay, in another three months. People who
like to talk mysteriously about Taranganba should remember
these little facts, more especially if they are interested in claims
that have never paid anything but wages, that they are always
in a state of glorified ecstacy about. The iron work for a big
hotel that will cover the handsome shops at the corner of Den-
ham and East-streets has also come from the foundry. Crushing
batteries to the number of fourteen, varying from five to
twenty-five head, have also come first and last. Two of these
have gone to resuscitated Mount Perry, and another to Norton.
Steamers of 40 ton capacity have been built, and anything in


the way of naval repairing can be attended to at Rockhampton
—a useful memo, for shippers.
The larger ploughs are made also, but when the present
7i per cent, becomes “accelerated” there will be more work
for the foundries, as there will be in any case when irrigation
comes. Mr. Burns believes thoroughly in damming up the
Fitzroy above the bridge, so that some thirty or forty miles of
rich river side soil that will grow anything that can grow, will
be made to yield its harvest in the way good old dame nature
has been hitherto pointing out in vain. What is more, he is
sure it will pay from the start. Read the testimony of the first
local beginner, Mr. Bred. Morgan, and then say what may
come to the Rockhampton district —a happy prosperous class of
our own kith and kin, with our own faiths and our own aspira-
tions, to give the Central District the one thing it has yearned
for ever since it came into existence.
BYERLEY’S FIRE BRICKS.
Mr, Frederick Byerley is one of the oldest notabilities
Rockhampton possesses, whose past career includes the holding
of some of the chief Government appointments in the colony.
He is an old gentleman now, who is one of the most frequent
coadjutors of the Warden at the local court, and he has ex-
ploited something in his researches around the district that is
well worth the attention of the building world. It is a pretty
well known fact that nearly all our fire bricks have to be im-
ported from home at a heavy cost, as the difficulty has hitherto
been in finding the right sort of stuff: out here to make them of.
At a place called Wycarbah, in the Central District, a peculiar
clay has been discovered that in point of heat-resisting power
has been declared superior to Stourbridge clay and only inferior
to some of the products of Wales and Scotland. Some tests
have been so satisfactory that a company is forming to put up
the best available machinery at Wycarbah for the purpose of
supplying a fire brick that will in time render such importations
unnecessary. Its relative proportion of silica, alumina, and
oxide of iron, as compared with Stourbridge clay, will be seen
to be largely in favour of the local article, inasmuch as the
silica in it is greater, while the iron oxide, which causes a flux
where it is present in too large a proportion, is much less than
at Stoui’bridge. The following table will explain :
Stourbridge. Eockhampton
Silica 63.7 69.52
Alumina... ... ... 20.7 ... ... ... ... 19.18
Oxide of Iron ... ... 4.5 1.89
Pending the formation of the company letters can be addressed


to Mr. Byerley at East-street, Rockhampton, from whom samples
of the clay can be obtained in the three stages, the latter having
undergone a heat of very high degree. A s this may mean a pound
or two cheaper than the imported article it should stimulate
enquiries from southern firms.
ALLENSTOWIS.
Is one of the very few suburbs Eockhampton possesses,
the first house there being put up by Mr. Egan, a quarter of a
century ago, when Allenstown was entirely out of civilisation
altogether. That property has j ust been sold by Mr. Egan, to
Mr. Boulton, who, with his former partner, Mr. Lowry, w r ho
now owns a large store at Mount Morgan, did a great deal to
make Allenstown what it is to-day. The hotel and store at this
place, erected in 1881, has a frontage of 260 ft. and covers two
acres of ground. The amount of business done may be better
estimated by the fact that the intervening space to the city has
since been filled up with cottage habitations, and that convey-
ances go to and fro every half-hour which always appear to be
pretty well patronised.
MESSES. T. KELLY & SONS.
One of the largest grocery and hardware importers in
Eockhampton, whose massive bulk store at Bolsover-street is a
fit accompaniment to one of the finest shop fronts in the main
thoroughfare. Mr. Kelly managed for many years the business
he now owns, into which he has recently taken his three sons.
The greater portion of the imports are for the squatters of the
Central and South Western district, and includes fencing wire,
galvanised iron, sheep shears, sugars and preserves of all sorts.
Mr. Kelly is the President of the Eockhampton Chamber of
Commerce, and recently took part with the Chamber in seeing
the Hon. W. Pattison as to the extending of the railway from
Barcaldine to Long Eeach, a long promised extension that will
bring the western terminus to the centre of a well watered and
flourishing pastoral country where there are a good many ex-
tensive stations. A request was made that the freight charges
for long distances should not be practically prohibitory by
reason of unlimited muliplication without any subtraction from
them. Considering the unanimous support accorded to the
present Ministry by the whole of the Central district the
Chamber feel that something more than “ official consideration ”
should be shown in the matter.
MESSES. GEEEN & CO.
This firm has been famous in years past as one of the leading,
shipowning houses of Eockhampton who sent vessels from


Keppel Bay to Newcastle and other ports in the coal and pro-
duce trade. The fearful time of depression of a year or so ago,
that paralysed everything commercial in the Central District—■
save and except the Mount Morgan—confined the shipping trade
almost entirely to the steamers; but to-day the returning wave
of prosperity, already signalised by a large and recent increase
in the produce trade will mean a resumption of shipping business
that is likely to be permanent. Messrs. Green are open to enter
into negotiations for outward and inward cargoes, and will be
happy to arrange for sending away the produce of the new coal
seam up the coast that is likely to have the patronage of the
A.U.S.N. Company.
MESSRS. W. HIGSON & CO.
Like most of the successful men of Rockhampton, Mr.
William Higson, is an old pioneer, and made his start in a part
of the town to-day known as Fitzroy-street, at a time when the
chief portion of the city was bush. He has enjoyed the honour
of representing Rockhampton in the Griffith Parliament, and,
although by no means an orator, his sterling sense of honesty
has made him something more than a mere politician. He has
started again in wholesale business in East-street not long since,
and is one of the direct importers from home who are trying to
bring a regular line of clippers here. Two of his agencies,
“ Boars Head ” stout and Perinet’s champagne, have received a
hearty welcome in the Central District, where long experience in
such things has made a good many first-class connoisseurs.
MESSRS. B. D. MOREHEAD & CO.
A firm as well-known in Rockhampton in connection with
its local partner, Mr. John Rule, as the Brisbane head office is
known in connection with the new Colonial Secretary of
Queensland, the Hon. Boyd D. Morehead. Ten years’ experience
of dealing with stock and station business at Rockhampton has
made the branch a particularly good one, as Mr. Rule has spent
altogether nearly 30 years in the district in which are few
localities he has not traversed or stations he has not visited. The
firm’s agency for the Scottish Australian Investment Company,
the shares of which are selling at more than double their
nominal price, includes the care of Bowen Downs, near Aramac,
one of the largest sheep stations in Central Queensland ; Mount
Cornish, an equally large cattle station; Nive Downs and Mount
Abundance stations near Roma, all of which are some of the
best known and largest pastoral properties in Australia. The
agency of the A. L. and Australian Land Company includes the


care of Wellshot station, one of the most considerable station
properties in the Blackall district, the town through which the
traffic goes being Barcaldine, the present terminus of the Central
District. Messrs. B. D. Morehead & Co. are agents for Messrs.
Weinholt Bros., of Saltern Creek, Katandra and Warrenda, who
take foremost rank among the squatters of this colony for
enterprise and go-aheadness.
Among the stations in the district is that of Peak Downs,
near Copperfield, the property of Mr. Horace Mayne, which
has produced some magnificient oranges seldom equalled in any
part of the world. It was cheering to hear from Mr. Rule, who
had first brought sheep to the western district in 1862 and
1863, that at no time in its history was there greater activity
going on in the far west in the direction of water conservation,
well sinking, and boring. In fact, with a definite supply of
water, which might be soon guaranteed at the present rate of pro-
gress, the far west would be the finest sheep district in the world,
and the proposed extension to Long Reach on the Thompson
River would go right into the centre of a glorious pastoral
district, of which Barcaldine was only the portal. It was a
strange thing to state, but it was perfectly true, that the last
extension opened had brought traffic to Rockhampton from the
South Australian Border from stations that had hitherto got
their supplies by camel from Adelaide. It was an absolute
certainty that this extension to Long Reach would fully justify
its expenditure. The present heavy rates of traffic, however,
should be modified considerably, considering that the Western
line had cut down its charges and that the Northern line could
take goods with a hundred miles less carriage to port than our
line could do it. With such manifold disadvantages on both
sides, it was not only a matter of policv but one of direct
urgency that this last extension to Long Reach should be com-
menced at once.
In conclusion Mr. Rule referred to a matter that had
already been brought under my notice at Brisbane by a well-
known official nf the Audit offic., whose journeys of inspection
sometimes revealed much more than figures to him —it was the
possibility of creating a great inland freshwater sea on the
Diamantina in the interior, by constructing a dam on a certain
river at a place where the banks were peculiarly fitted for it,
and where the outlay would mean a benefit for all time worth
millions. Mr. Rule stated that water attracted water, and the
rainfall of that mostly arid district might be doubled with a little
good luck that always comes from good scientific knowledge.


THE FITZROY FOUNDRY.
A modest place to look at, hidden behind the Fitzroy
Brewery on the river bank ; but a source of income to thirty
Rockhampton working men with their wives and children. The
wages run from £35 to £6O per week, and the work is the
manufacture of the famous dry crushing and chlorination
machinery that has helped to make Monnt Morgan what it is.
The Fitzroy started making “ plant ” for the big mine two years
back, and is now as hard at work as ever with prospects of
many years more contracts of the same kind. The machinery
will have to be continually increasing to provide for the in-
creasing quantity of stone raised, so that the present works,
said to have cost about £200,000 already, will want a duplication
in the course of the next few years. “ The contract will never
be finished,” said one of the parlners to me. “It is a sort of
life affair that we can’t see the end of yet.” He stated that he
was making a chlorinisation plant for the refining works at
Macrossan bridge, near Charters Towers, the present manager
of which was an ex-Mount Morgan man of large experience.
When finished the plant would heat ten tons per day. The
Fitzroy Foundry was the first to take up the manufacture of
dry crushing machinery ; they have appliances capable of turn-
ing out the largest pulleys made, and can make wheels of as
much as 20 feet diameter. Since the production of the first
chlorinisation plant there has been a continual run of orders
that shows no sign of slackening. On matters fiscal the Rock-
hampton iron bosses think that although it would be better for
the tariff to be raised, still the goodwill of the public, coupled
with the facts that imported articles seldom meet actual require-
ments, and are hard to put right when they get out of order,
makes the local work fairly payable—to the men. It is Queens-
land that gives her mechanics a salary seldom attained by the
bosses, who, as pioneers, have to put up with heaps of (roubles
that only they know. There is 100 per cent, more wages out
here, and pig iron is £5 per ton against £2 at home. However,
Mount Morgan never grudges good payment for good work,
and a firm who can pass muster with Mr. Wesley Hail has a
diploma of efficiency recognised anywhere. One important
thing about the iron trade is that there are vast masses of iron-
stone both in Queensland and New South Wales which want
something like State help to lead the way, as private enterprise
on such matters is very limited, for causes already explained.
If our mining department is going to do half that promised on
its account by Mr. Hodgkinson (what no doubt will be considered
binding by his successor), a thorough investigation into the
possibility of making colonial iron available to our mauufac-


turers at a reasonable price should be one of the first things
attempted by the department.
MESSES. KIRCHNER & CO.
There are few townspeople who have not some remembrance
of the firm of Alexander Reid and Company, whose business was
for a long time in hardware and glassware, and whose name in
big letters still adorns the lower part of "William-street.
Twelve months ago this business was transferred to two gentle-
men who trade as Kirchnerand Co., one being the relative of a
well-known Queenslander of that name, and the other, a Mr.
Longworth, who has seen a good deal of commercial matters in
the Central District. The wisdom of the change has been fully
exemplified by results, for thanks to a much greater prosperity
to-day, as compared with the dull times of the jubilee year, the
business now done is larger and more permanent than ever it
was under the shadow of past regime. The crockeryware and
glassware are the best procurable in Rockhampton and contain
the greatest variety; and the hardware is very well displayed in
what is far and away the largest ironmongery store in Rock-
hampton. The agencies of the firm include Perkins and Co.’s
windmills—not the Toowoomba, but an American firm who
produce self-reefing machines at an exceptionally low figure.
The agricultural machinery of Ritchie and Co., of Parramatta,
is another prominent feature. The Shipman Petroleum engines
that work with oil instead of coal, and avoid thereby a lot of
dirt and extra trouble and expense incidental to the stoking
department, are in operation at Kirchner’s ; and a small steam
launch that works on the same system can be seen and possibly
travelled in for an excursion up the Fitzroy by application being
made to Mr. Longworth. The cost is but a minimum of that of the
ordinary steamboat, for Mr. Longworth is his own engineer, and
there is no necessity for anyone else to assist. The fact of
Kirchner’s being in direct and regular communication with
leading home firms should induce those who want to import to
do so through the firm, who have the neeessary experience in
such matters which the average squatter has not. The space
at the rear of the East-street warehouse is as large as all the
rest of the ironmonger’s yards put together, and upstairs the
exhibits of crockeryware of all sorts and shapes is something
that would remind one more of Brisbane than Rockhampton.
Mr. "William Hopkins, of Denham-street, has a double-
fronted establishment devoted to the sale of moral literature of
all kinds. The North Rockhampton Times is purveyed for the


humble penny once a week, which circulates among several
highly respectable people in the immediate vicinity and neigh-
bourhood. The Bulletin , Capricornian , and i\\e Daily Northern
Argus , are also procurable here, the three chief papers of Central
Queensland. The weekly paper of the Argus is coming, but
has not come yet. Denham-street has also a large assortment
of brokers on the other side who “take well and give pleasure
to all,” themselves included. Kelman and Tompson is one
of the leading firms and there are heaps of followers.
GLADSTONE AWAKENED.
The change that had come over the spirit of my June dream,
or 'rather nightmare, at Gladstone, was emphatically demon-
strated on my return trip from Rockhampton. Then Conran’s
was only just known, now it was a big success yielding dividends
of 6d. per share, which had made the prices advance so rapidly
that people who had purchased but two months ago were some
hundreds to the good. The July dividend was directly the
result of the June working, which resulted in 222 tons raised
for 534 ozs., the cost of treating which, allowing for everything
including wages and wear and tear was £717 11s. 4d., leaving a
nett profit of £1435 3s. Bd. in the month’s work, the gold being
worth £4 3s. per ounce For July 650 tons were crushed at
Conran’s, yielding 1719 ozs. 5 dwts, value £6953 12s. Total
cost of treatment £2166, profit £4787. This does not include
the silver, of which there is a small percentage, and is more than
double the rate promised in the company’s prospectus. These
figures were given by Mr. Priseman, of Gladstone, to me, and
were vouched for as strictly correct. He has been in the district
many years and is looked upon as a leading man. T may add
that Mr. Conran is spoken of very highly, for he has done
what G-ladstone has been waiting for many a weary year to see.
If these statements are true —and it may be added that the
informant was told that his name would be given—then the sun
of prosperity has indeed arisen in that district, which in company
with the rest of Central Queensland seems to be destined
for events that will cause the present, wonderful as
it is, to pale before the future. A man at Gladstone, who
gave his name as Michael Ryall, showed me some stone from
a place called Miriam Vale, thirty-eight miles distant, where
there was a lode or deposit a mile wide. He repeated this
statement more than once in answer to my questions, and
added that the Sydney mint had given an assay of 23 dwts.


9 grs. from a specimen sent down. From what he said it
appeared to be a surface outcrop, as the stuff could be
picked up on the ground. Mr. Warden Lukin’s prophecy
came strongly across me, “ from Gladstone to Broadsound
will be one vast series of conglomerate deposits that will
require the chemist more than the old-fashioned digger to
deal with.”
Mr. Priseman gave me some further information about
Conran’s to the effect that the furnaces there only treat half
the quantity that could be chlorinated, and that when the
necessary additions are made the dividends will be correspond-
ingly large. The fact that the gold is lodged at the local
bank should be a tolerably good proof of genuineness; and
Conran’s long struggle down South to practically solve the
refractory ore problem, which has now brought such splendid
results are topics of common conversation at Rockhampton
as well as at Gladstone. In fact the chlonnisation plant came
from Rockhampton, as will be seen in the account of Burns
and Twiggs’ foundry. There is nothing Gladstone cannot
hope for if this picture is a true one.
The latest quotations from Mount Morgan (July 25), were
from £l5 cash to £l6 bills, a rise from £2 to £3 in a month,
which looks as if Mr. Pattison’s remark on the point is coming
true. Conran’s that had been quoted at 10s. in June, were 225.
on the date named, while Taranganba’s were 11s. for sellers, and
buyers 10s. One other latest item is that Woodland’s property,
alluded to in the account of Yeppoon, has been purchased by a
Melbourne syndicate, acting through Mr. Gresley Lukin, one
of the leading mining men of Queensland, who, I believe, is
agent for the Taranganba. This gentleman, with Messrs.
Ranft and Keiser, left Sydney tor Rockhampton about the end
of July. Possibly something will be done to start work at
Mount Co-opa, concerning which’ I had seen a month ago, a
telegram to Mr. Robert Ross, of Taranganba, offering a sub-
stantial sum, together with a large interest, for the mine. This
wind-up of a six weeks trip through the Central District is a
most agreeable and appropriate ending to what has been a
regular pleasure excursion.
AN ASSAYER’S NOTES ON QUEENSLAND MINES.
There are few men in Brisbane whose time has been more
occupied, Avithin the past few months, than that of Mr. E. B.
Lindon, late of the Royal School of Mines, of London. He has
not long since been compelled to take a partner, as his repeated
journeys to different mining centres to report, rendered such an
addition a necessity. His opinions have been quoted in the Press


on some of the largest mines in Queensland and New South
Wales, and as he confines himself exclusively to scientific specu-
lations, as distinct from those of scrip, his opinions are of value,
seeing they command a tolerably fair price in the mining market.
I caught him a few days ago at his Albert.street office, on the
eve of another journey to the Downs, and at my request we had
a short chat, interspersed with considerable note taking, of which
the following is the result. Mr. Lindon spoke by no means
unreservedly, and throughout our conversation he observed a
certain amount of caution, that was evident by the time he took
to consider some of the questions.
Commencing with the Great Mount Morgan, which he had
lately visited, he thought that the shares would still further ad
vance when the news of the additional facilities for chlorinisating
was known. He spoke of rich deposits, where the average was
something like lOOoz. to the ton, and of the No. 3 Branch,
where 1,3000 z. to the ton was met with. One of the next best
claims to the Great Mount Morgan was the Anglo-Saxon, of
May town, whose £1 shares were selling for £7 ; the capital
being only £34,000. There were also several excellent claims on
the same line of reef.
Eidsvold and Mount Peeey.
I have seen a great deal of Eidsvold stone, and I think
that the field is making its way. The claims are not very deep,
but a great number hold out promises of turning out well.
Splendid stone has come out of the Stockman p.c. and Lady
Augusta, showing gold freely, and other specimens have shown
very rich results. There is a lack of machinery. Good finds
have been made at the Mount Jones p.c , and I think that there
is a future in store for it.
The smelting works of the Mount Perry Company, under
Captain Bennett, are doing well, as the price of copper is £BO
per ton. There is a great deal of prospecting going on in the
reefs in the neighbourhood, some of the finds being rich in gold
and silver. Mount Mungi has not got sufficiently deep ; but it
appears likely to give good results when the reef is come on that
they are sinking for.
Cloncueey.
“This is one of the richest mineral districts in the colony,”
said Mr. Lmdon. “ Gold, copper, silver, bismuth, iron, and
manganese are all found there ; and a recently published report
on the field, writen by Mr. Jack, the Government Geologist,
deserves far more notice than it has received. Some of the ores


are refractory ; but it is pleasant to add that the attention of
monied men is being directed to the field.
Thane’s Creek and Talgai.
“ Thane’s Creek and Talgai are attracting a good deal of
notice just now,” said he. “ I have been there, and lam going
again to-morrow. As a rule the reefs are from a foot to three
feet wide, a good deal of the stone appearing to be of satisfactory
character, which may show Boz. at the battery. It was Gympie
that caused the desertion of Thane’s Creek in 1867. A good
many Toowoomba and Warwick men are largely interested in
these mines, as well as some Brisbane people. There are some
reefs that will pay to work by small companies. The stone is
not refractory, and much less per ton will pay there than at
fields farther north.”
A General Retrospect.
“ I certainly think that mining matters in Queensland have
far better prospects generally than they have ever had. There
is more practical prospecting going on, and that is better than
any amount of mining schools. Norton, I believe, 1 has especially
good prospects ahead of it. The main ftrouble appears to be,
that some rich properties are over capitalised, which do not pay
because excessive valuations are put upon them, which too many
of them cannot pay dividends upon.”
ELECTRICITY AS APPLIED TO MINING.
The science of electricity has revolutionised pretty nearly
everything within the past few years, since Edison literally
electrified the world with his telephones, which led to the inven-
tion of the phonograph, the possession of which would have
doomed the owner to death as a wizard, only two centuries ago.
It is only lately, however, as far as Queensland is concerned,
that it has been recognised as a valuable aid to the miner, and
three out of every four of my mining readers will find the
following news of intense interest to them. The authority
quoted is one of the firm of Trackson Brothers, of 227 Queen-
street, who occupies the position of medical electrician to the
Brisbane Hospital, which he attends daily at 5 p.m. He is also
the representative of several first-class firms, whose productions
have been supplied to different governments and official bodies
all over Australia, as well as to squatters and miners. One of
the most important is the Eclipse Electric lamps.
They contain their own storage of electricity and throw a
light on the workings that nothing else can do. This makes an


enormous difference to the miner, who can see at a glance where
to place his shots with the best result. The cost for 10 hour
light is about 2d., and the light itself burns in water covered
with a glass case, that immediately extinguishes the flame on
being broken. The price of a 10-hour lamp is 455., and of an
8-hour 405., and. they are absolutely free from smell or from any
fear of explosion. The use of these lamps is compulsorv in
England, where the Davy, and other so-called “ safetys,” have
been found wanting on too many disastrous occasions.
Another invention is one that obviates a source of trouble
common to nearly all miners in this colony. Probably more
accidents take place from shots going off at unexpected times,
than any other cause. The stampede after the first fuse is lit,
with the three, or four, or five to follow, is often attended with
danger, and in some mines the men wait a couple of hours after
four shots take place, in order that no accident may occur from
an explosion coming on after the men are down again. Electricity
solves the problem, by allowing every miner full time to get out
with none of the usual stampede. A single thread connects the
fuses down below with a battery overhead, that is housed in and
controlled only by the boss in charge. When everything is
ready the touch of a finger fires all the shots simultaneously, and
the men are able to return to their work without any danger of
a subsequent explosion. It absolutely minimises blasting acci-
dents, for electricity never misses fire. The present signal gong
that is pulled by a string from below T to direct the engineer,
does not always act directly, as the gear may get out of order,
causing the sounds to mislead the man on top. The substitution
of an electric wire, and a button to be pressed by hand, gives a
clear and instantaneous signal that cannot be mistaken. It is
possible to make this electric gong do the work of a telephone
from the manager’s house, when a code of knocks is agreed upon,
that can summon his attention in an instant, in case of danger, at
any time of the day or night. The cost of these gongs is only
£8 10s. ; and the electric lamps are being utilised for pouring
their intense light into the chlorination pans, so that every
partial of gold can be distinguised without trouble.
Automatic Telpheeage
Is the most extensive and ambitious invention yet accomplished
by electricity, in the way of transporting ores from the mine to
the machine. There is an over-head tramway supported by
wooden frameworks at intervals of 40 yards apart, which do not
depend on gravitation like the method in use at Mount Morgan,
but which can cover the most up and down country without the
cost of roads and bridges —for three or four miles if necessary.
The cost is guaranteed at one-half that of road construction


alone ; and the electric machine or dynamo is driven by a small
steam engine, whose steam could be utilised for chlorinisation or
crushing purposes also. The cars run on a single line tramway,
headed by the motor that is under the immediate control of the
engineer at the machine. The cars discharge their contents
automatically as they do at Mount Morgan, and in returning they
come with thrice the velocity than on their outward trip. The
dynamo costs about £l6O, and the cost of the motors is from £5
to £SO ; while the construction of the tramway framework, which
will pay interest from the start, by rendering horses and drays
unnecessary, will cost from £SO to £IOO per mile. Of course
the difficulties of the country must vary considerably ; but the
average cost of three to four miles of “ installation,'” is set r down
at from £2OO to £SOO. This, with the steam power, fwhich
would be necessary in any case, is at once the first and total ex-
penditure. This enormous saving in cost will mean the difference
in many cases between dividends and only prospects of them.
In electric lighting of all sorts, Tracksou Eros, have had
experience surpassed by no other firm in Queensland ; and one
of the largest syndicates in Brisbane, whose expenditure runs
into millions, is about to give them a large order. lam not at
liberty to mention names, but my informant added [that Track-
son’s would get all the electric work required by the company.
A representative of Trackson Bros, will shortly visit the northern
goldfields.
MESSRS. A. OYEREND & CO.’S IRRIGATION
MACHINERY.
Overend & Co.’s is a contracting firm of 15 years colonial
standing, who are now engaged among other work, on the second
section of the Cooktown railway, which will be completed to the
Laura river, 60 miles on the road to Maytown, in October next.
Thereare only 70 miles more to Maytown. Overend’s men get
£3OOO a month in wages, and as their Darling Dow r ns interests are
very large,they doagreatdeal in irrigation machinery,being agents
for the Allen' centrifugal and direct action pump that is con-
tracted for with the Home Government, on a very big scale. It
is only a part of the cost of a Tangye, and will pump up far
more water in the 12 hours pro rata than that of any other
maker. As small a supply as 50 gallons per hour can be had
for a £7 pump ; which, of course, has to be provided with steam.
The centrifugals are the cheaper of the two, and are adapted
where the supply of water is within 100 feet of the surface ; but
for greater depths a direct acting pump is required, which with
engine and boiler attached, that will bring water up 240 feet
with lOlbs. of pressure, will cost from £25 to £2OO. One


peculiarity about these direct action pumps is, that they have no
tappetts and that an accident cannot happen with any amount of
negligence. Any man of ordinary intelligence can use them
without preliminary training, and they are practically unbreak-
able. The total cost of irrigating a2O acre patch, boiler and all
would not exceed £l5O, the depth of raising being 50 feet; and
the brass casings of the pumps will prevent the water from
becoming mineralised which iron casings are liable to cause With
the present insane import tax of 6d. a bushel on wheat removed
and the duty of a £1 a ton on southern flour, the farmer will be
enabled to completely alter his present position, for instead of
being the “ slave of the ring,” he will have the competing
mill-owners bidding for his support, instead of fixing his prices
and his rate of interest as well.
Overend’s five, ten, and fifteen stamper batteries are known
well enough to require but a brief notice here ; and with regard
to appliances, they decide as to what particular sort are
necessary after Mr. E. B. Lindon, A.E.S.M,, has made an assay
of the stone to be treated. Overend’s people have an interest
in seeing their mills turn out profitably, and they are able to cut
prices much finer than the majority of the much advertised
machinery firms. The Cox hand borer for water—the patent of
which they own —is the ideal of cheapness and portability. The
weight is only 11 cwt. for every 100 ft. deep, and as much as 1,000
feet sinking is possible with them. Much greater depths can be
arranged for, but the firm do not send away a borer without a
man in charge ; and beyond their own staff, which includes the
inventor Mr. Cox, they cannot get competent men at £G per
week to supervise the work of sinking. The men already
engaged have three months work ahead.
AGRICULTURAL machinery.
It is of no small importance for the farmer in ordering to
to be able to do so from men whose knowledge of and
interest in the agricultural necessities of the Downs, should
enable them to know exactly what is required, though the par-
ticulars supplied may be ever so meagre or insufficient. It
would take too long to describe in detail the different imple-
ments and their various uses and capabilities ; but the fact of
their being purchased at first cost from the manufacturers,
where they are imported, and of being produced at first cost in
their own foundry at Brisbane, should be the strongest possible
proof that the former, who cannot always afford the cost and
trouble of a trip to Brisbane, will be just as well treated, and
his wants will be just as well understood as if he went down to
order. The firm have a very direct interest in the flour industry


of the Downs, so that they benefit themselves in assisting the
farmer in every possible way a manufacturing and importing
firm can do.
A CHEMISTRY AND ASSAYING! CLASS
Just a line in conclusion to state that Mr. Smithurst, the
General Secretary of the Brisbane Y.M.C.A., will be starting a
class at the Rooms in the course of the next few months, one
of the principal features being a chlorinisation class. The terms
are not yet determined upon, and those who want to know more
should send on to Mr. Smithurst direct. lam glad to be able to
put in this unsolicited par for him.
“THE QUEENSLAND INVESTORS’ GUIDE.”
It is proposed to publish a weekly newspaper with, the
above title, a large part of each issue being despatched to the
leading firms and speculators at Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide,
and at home. The promoter has been through Queensland, and
has made the personal acquaintance of some of the leading
merchants, in each town who will be asked to furnish the
information required for the outside world, and who will be asked
to notify any error in any of the reports published, so that any-
thing of the “ wild cat ” character will be strictly excluded. The
promoter has never held a mining interest in his life, and he
should therefore be able to do his best to give the straight,
honest truth about matters of investment in this colony, on the
authority of those best qualified to give it. He will travel
throughout the North to finish “Miningand Descriptive Queens-
land,” which will include the chief portion of the Rockhanpton
letter-press in an edition of 1500 copies, and he will appoint a
correspondent in each place, so that the “Queensland In-
vestors’ Guide ” will be produced on his return. Corres
pondence can be addressed to Aleck. J, Ivimey, at the Johnsonian
Club, Brisbane, and to the post offices of Rockhampton and Towns-
ville. The Guide will be printed on toned paper in large read-
able type, and will start with 16 pages of “ Australasian ” size, the
subscription being ss. per annum. Agents will be appointed in
every town in Queensland.


ACHESON & ALLEN,
AUSTRA.LIA.BT STORES,
William-street, Rockhampton,
TEA MERCHANTS, COFFEE ROASTERS,
Wholesale and Family Grocers, and General Importers.
A. and A. are direct importers of the choicest Teas
from Foo Chow and Calcutta, Ceylon Plantation and Java
Coffees Oilmen’s Stores and Groceries, Eastern Produce of
all kinds, Dried Fruits from the Levant, London, and San
Francisco, Glass. China, Earthenware and Lampware,
Holloware, Tinware, Brushware, Butter, Bacon, Cheese,
English Hams, Produce, and Provisions of every descrip-
tion.
AGENTS POE-
Gillespies' Steel Boiler Flour, Wheatmeal, Cornmeal, Peas Meal,
and Bice Flour ground and Manufactured on the Premises
hy Gas Power Machinery.
OUR BRANCH STORE AT MOUNT MORGAN
Is replete with every description of Merchandise which in addition to the
above, are to be found extensive sticks of Drapery, Boots and
Shoei, Ironmongery and Mining Requisites, Galvanised Iron, Timber and
Building Materials of every description.
Motto—Best Goods. Moderate Charges •
JAOHIESOISr Sc ALLBIT.


CREBLEY LUKIN & GO
Stock and Share Brokers, Mining and
FINANCIAL AGENTS
(-Members of Brisbane Stock Exchange ),
162, Queen-st., Brisbane.
(Opposite the Q.N. Bank,)
Also at Bank of Australasia Chambers, Sydney.
33. CIiIBB & CO.,
AUCTIONEERS,
Mining Brokers . Land, Estate, and
General Commission Agents .
132, QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.


AUCTIONEERING AND GENERAL AGENCY,
Gr. S. CURTIS,
ROCKHAMPTON,
Undertakes the Sale and Management of
LANDED ESTATES,
Receives PRODUCE and MERCHANDISE
for Sale on Consignment.
Possesses Splendid Storage Accommodation and
other facilities which enable him to
thoroughly protect the interests
of his Constituents.
G. S. OURTIS has had many years’ experience as an
Auctioneer in the Sale of Land, Produce, Merchandise, &c.
N.B—LEADING LINES
STATION SUPPLIES
ALWAYS OUST TELJ^IsTJD.


KELMAN, TOMPSON, & GO.,
A UCT[ONEER
STOCK, STATION, AND COMMISSION AGENTS,
ROCKHAMPTON-
Have always on Sale, at Lowest Quotations,
Shares in—•
Mount Morgan Gold Mining Co-
Taranganba Proprietory Gold, Co.
Conran’s, Morton,
AJSTD OTHER STOCK
ALSO
FAT and STORE STOCK of all Descriptions.
CORRESPON PENCE SOLICITED
ADDRESS-
DENHAM STREET,
ROOKHAMPTOIsr.


PERKINS AND CO.,
LIMITED,
BRISBANE & TOOWOOMBA,
WHOLESALE
anil %kit ftlmknts,
BREWERS AND BONDED WAREHOUSEMEN,
AGENTS FOB—
Robert Porter’s “Bull Dog” Ala and Stout
M. B. Foster and Son’s Ale
Goulet’s Champagne
Ayala Champagne
Clausen’s Champagne Lager
Ashby’s Ale, in Bulki
And various other prominent brands of Wines, Spirits, &c.
PERKINS & CO., LIMITED,
Are in receipt of Consignments from all parts of the United Kingdom.
Account Sales Promptly Rendered,
CLIENTS’ INTERESTS CAREFULLY PROTECTED,


"i'
i
CORRIB and CO.,
208, QUEEN STREET,
BRISBANE
i
I


Eagle Print'g Co., 204 Queen St.


OFFICES: —
New Zealand Buildings,
Queen Street.
djimnalanft (Blatriral Dqiot.
Workshops :
Adelaide Street.
Brisbane ; May ; 1888.
Bear yirj
Owing to the rapid expansion of our business, and
the consequent inconvenience and inadequacy of our late
premises / we have been compelled to seek more extended
accommodation. dfawing been successful in obtaining a
S£ease of the Offices and MJorkshops at the above address
we trust that; with the increased facilities for executing
repairs and developing the manufacturing portion of our
business that this step will afford us ; we shall be en=
abled to execute all orders in the future even more success=
fully than in the past.
We take this opportunity of thanking you for past
commissions, and requesting a continuance of your esteemed
commands.
We are ; (Bear (fir ;
f/ours faithfully
TRACKSON BROTHERS.


CONTRACTS UNDERTAKEN
For Running Telephone Lines. Directions given for Erecting Mining
Signals, dc.
on Hank af tlja Jallahring Jlpplxanas :
Medical Electric Apparatus,
Electric Blasting Apparatus,
Electric Motors up to £-H.P.
ELECTRIC LAMPS,
TELEPHONES,
ELECTRIC CAUTERIES,
INSULATORS,
CONDUCTORS,
WIRE,
DYNAMOS,
COILS,
MORSE KEYS,
INDICATORS,
BATTERIES,
ELECTRIC BELLS.
Semaphore Signals and Repeaters,
Complete Medical Apparatus for Electrolysis,
Electric Mining Lamps.
Fullest Information Forwarded on Receipt of Particulars.
Competent Workmen sent to any part of the Colony.


ESPECIAL HTOTICB^
MINING AND MILL PROPRIETORS
SOLE AGENTS IN QUEENSLAND FOR
Tl?e Qmencan System of Electric orc and
incandescent bsic^tincj.
—ALSO FOK THE—
Telepherage System of Automatic
Electrical Transports of
ETC., ETC., ETC.
A Travelling Representative of our Firm will visit your District
shortly, when he will be glad to answer any inquiries.
