





THE
WANDERINGS
Sketches oj Australian Life ,
By SMILER.
THIRD EDITION—3O,OOO.
SYDNEY:
RUNGE & CO., Printers, 117 Clarence Street.
1894.




INTRODUCTION.
I\ the pages which follow “Smiler” (A. G. Hales) tells
in plain and simple English of his own experience in
the back blocks and cities of the Sunny South. There
is little in the way of romancing introduced to colour
the stories he has written, and the majority of the
incidents are actual facts. The “ Wanderings of a
Simple Child” is the only book so far published which
may be regarded as reflecting Australian nomadic life,
and the manners and customs of those who consider
themselves crowded by the presence of a neighbour nearer
than ten miles from where they have driven in their pegs
It is redolent of the mingled perfumes of the mighty forest,
bright with the camp fire’s sparkle, pathetic with the dreamy
afterglow which follows the thoughtful interval between
story and story as the logs burn low and the bushman sits
looking through the glowing embers into the past, with its
memories, and ever and beyond the firelight into the black
bank of night as impenetrable as the veil which hides the
future. The writer has lived his life as well as written it,
and no Australian who picks up the unpretentious volume
will hesitate to pronounce it a holding of the mirror up to
Nature, a faithful picture of the inner living of the hardy
pioneers of progress, the lion-hearted adventurers, who, light
of heart and often lighter of pocket, threw the city’s smoke
behind them and strode bravely onward to force a passage
for the thousands who would follow when they had burgled
Nature’s strong-room and opened the rock-ribbed colters in
her earth-bound treasure house. The life of the bush


accorded with their ideas of perfect happiness, the freedom
from restraint was its chiefest charm. There, where his
mate was his sworn friend through good and evil report, in
sickness and health, in poverty and plenty, where his horse
was his comrade, and his dog his companion, the bushraan
lived the life he loved. Such a life was “Smiler’s.” He has
been with the pioneers, wielded the miner’s pick and the
stockman’s whip, swung the axe in the forest, and tramped
many a league through the trackless back blocks of our
southern wonderland. His patriotic love of his country is
discernible in every line of his writings. An accomplished
journalist, a powerful athlete, as good a horseman as ever
straddled a warrigal, an eloquent speaker, a white man, and
a sterling friend. He is Australian from his hocks to his
hat top, and, like his “ Simple Child,” has never wandered
out of sight of the coast line of the island continent. Now
the “ Simple Child ” makes its modest bow to its well loved
Grand parents, and asks for permission to tell its story.
JACK DRAYTON,


PRESS NOTICES.
THE “ADELAIDE ADVERTISER.”
Allowing for certain exaggerations of expression and the effects
of a lively imagination, these “ Wanderings of a Simple Child ” give
a fairly accurate picture of the dare-devil doings which are
characteristic of the first days of a mining settlement—and, for the
matter of that, of several of the after days, too. “ Smiler ” has evi-
dently modelled his literary style on that of the American humorists;
but he designates these sketches of life in the back country as
“written for Australians, by an Australian,” and the work gives
every evidence of an almost ferocious patriotism. The author all the
way through takes every opportunity to have a passing slap at the
imported element, which naturally forms a large proportion of the
humanity which gather on a new mining rush. Although not rising
in anyway to the dignity of a history, this work is a readable record
of life in the back blocks, and several of the best known identities
of the Barrier are sketched with a fidelity which those who have
been blessed—or otherwise - with their acquaintance, can honestly
vouch for. For instance, who that has lived in Broken Hill is not
familiar with Apple Jack ? Who did not know the unfortunate
Tom Long, the gambler ? And so on through all the long list of
quaint sobriquets. The drinking habits of Broken Hill, the
domestic discomforts of life in that settlement, the swindling that
is carried on there by pseudo-mining experts, share dabblers,
brokers’ touts, et hoc genus omne, are all well described.
“THE SYDNEY REFEREE.”
“ The Wanderings of a Simple Child,” by Smiler, has come to
hand, and it is a well got up and neatly bound book. “Smiler”
has a style peculiarly his own, and his writings are familiar to all
readers of the Referee. He has had a somewhat adventurous life,
and in the back-blocks and at Broken Hill he found numerous sub-
jects of interest upon which to dilate in his usual fluent manner.
“ Smiler’s ” book contains a number of racy sketches, which are
written in a spicy, readable narrative form. He is evidently a


student of human nature, and can gauge a man’s character well.
He has mixed with all sorts and conditions of men, and recounts his
experience in interesting form in his book. “Smiler”may be a
simple child, but, as the Yankee said, “ Darn me after reading his
book if I think so.” The neat little volume should sell readily, and is
dirt cheap at the price.
“ SYDNEY TRUTH.”
REVIEW.
The Wandering's of a Simple Child : a Record of Back-Block Life. By Smiler.
This is a charming book which we have read from cover to cover
with unflagging interest, and laid down with unfeigned regret. It
is fresh, vigorous, and unconventional, and stamps “Smiler” (Mr.
A. G. Hales) as the Bret Harte of the Barrier. “ Smiler” manages
to give a wonderfully faithful picture of life in the far west of New
South Wales. The mining scenes and adventures are given with
realistic vividness, and one who has been on the Barrier before and
after the “ boom ” must be struck with the fidelity with which the
rough and ready manners of the field are depicted. “Sm ler ”is
possessed of a fund of dry and spontaneous humor which serves him
well in dealing with the strange characters and events that marked
the pioneer era of that veritable Tom Tiddler’s ground. He has
caught all the varying lights and shades of the shifting panorama of
mining life, and the managers, the experts, the promoters, the gam-
blers, the travellers on the slug, the barmaids, the flats, the swin-
dlers, and the loafers stand before us as they lived and moved. Some
of the sketches have the ring of pure humor, while others are equally
remarkable for their unforced and unaffected pathos. The whole
book records the observations of a keen-visaged man who may say
of the things he relates quorum pars mar/na fui. Throughout there
is an air of free and easy vigor and an evident sympathy for the
person he treats of, and the scenes he depicts. The various articles
are not the production of a literary sensationalist who aims at effect,
but the frank outpourings of a healthy mind bent on giving a reli-
able account of what actually came under its notice. “ Smiler ” has
produced an eminently Australian work, which brings before the
Australian public some of the most striking incidents of bush ex-
perience. There is in it no mock sentimentality, no mawkish affec-
tation, no undue and unnatural coloring. The Barrier is shown as


it was, ami is, and the book will be welcomed alike by those who
know and those who desire to become acquainted with the customs
and manners of the inhabitants of the far-famed silver country. The
proverbs with which the book concludes are admirable for their
crispness, and while preserving an Australian flavor, are as quaint
and telling as anything penned by Josh Billings or Mark Twain.
We should think that “ The Wanderings of a Simple Child,” which,
by the way, is presented by the publishers in a neat, attractive, and
artistic form, should be in great demand, not only in Australia, but
also in England. It is a book that deserves to be appreciated for
its breezy style and unvarnished truth. — [A. G. Taylor, M.P.,
Editor. ]
“ PORT PIRIE STANDARD.”
“ The Wanderings of a Simple Child ” — This is the title of a
neatly printed little brochure which we have just received from the
author, who is no other than the redoubtable and talented “ Smiler,”
one of the best-known journalists that has ever blossomed forth on
the sterile wastes of the Barrier. “Smiler” writes in his usual
humorous style of the early days of the silverfield, and many of those
who knew Silverton in the early days will thoroughly enjoy his racy
sketches of such celebrities as “ Apple Jack,” “ Bob the Finisher,”
&c. “Smiler,” it is almost needless to inform the legion of
ex-Barrierites now residing in Port Pirie, gained renown on the
Barrier Miner, and his caustic pen and fearless style of showing up
wild-cat mining ventures gained him more kicks than ha’pence.
However, he is now a shining light on a well-known Sydney journal,
and is rapidly becoming as famous as ever. The records of his
wanderings in the volume to hand will still add to his fame, and
those who are acquainted with the generous-hearted, if impulsive,
“ Smiler ” will not lose the opportunity of obtaining a copy of his
recent work.
“THE BARRIER MINER,” BROKEN HILL.
“ Smiler ” (Mr. Alfred Hales), is so well-known to the readers
of the Barrier Miner, and indeed to almost every man, woman and
child on the Barrier, that it would be a work of supererogation for
us to say anything about him Nor is any extended criticism of the
work necessary. “Smiler” has a style and humor peculiarly his own,


and he has been termed, not inaptly, the Bret Harte of the Barrier.
But then his humor has a ring of its own, racy of the soil, and
genuinely Australian and democratic—and he knows thoroughly
what he is writing about. He has lived the life himself in the old
days of the Barrier, and knows .it in all its phases. He may
exaggerate now and again, but it is only the excusable exaggeration
of the humorist for the sake of laughable effect. The work cannot
be regarded by any means as an accurate history of the early days
of the Barrier ; but it is valuable as presenting the reader with
graphic pictures of the life of those times and some of the extra-
ordinary characters met with. Of course incidental reference is
made to the mines, and a full account is given of “ Smiler’s ” great
exploit in exposing great Junction fraud.


THE WANDERINGS Of A SIMPLE CHILD.
SKETCHES OF LIFE IN AUSTRALIA.
(By Smiler.)
lam a worm, and no man; and, now that I have come to
a just appreciation of my own merits, I sit me down to
chronicle the deeds done in the flesh by myself and some
more. I was born some considerable time after my parents,
and it is only just to myself to remark that I had no choice
in the matter, the whole of the proceedings being managed
by ray parents, and I fully expected them to take the respon-
sibility of the whole transaction; but, as a youth, I can’t
conscientiously assert that I consider I was a good invest-
ment upon the part of ray progenitors. I’m not prepared
to swear that they thought so either. I don’t mind doing
so now, as I haven’t the slightest regard for the truth, a
fact which will doubtless strike the reader before the back
premises of this volume are struck. I have a vivid
recollection of once seeing my father crouching behind our
garden fence fondling a three-foot sapling waiting to assist
me to bed at midnight, and anon my mother’s face rises
before me, as she lovingly drew from the pocket of my
Sunday pants my pack of cards, neatly stacked inside the
cover of a book of prayer. Alas! the sweet and happy
days of childhood soon fled ; no more shall the soothing hand
of my father grasp the broadest part of my pants; never,


ah, never, shall I hear him proudly exclaim, “ Smiler, you
diamond, you gem, you everlasting pearl without price, if
the hangman don’t get you you’ll die young.” As I grew
up to manhood I developed a striking fondness for doing as
little work as possible, mental or manual. T believe this
Was the only redeeming trait in my character, and it was
not hereditary. I declined to follow any lawful avocation
for any length of time, but I never missed a prize fight, and
am prepared to state on oath that I knew every bull dog
and game cock, with weight, age, and color within a radius
of ten miles of my father's abode, and every dog, bull or
otherwise, that had the remotest connection with an orchard,
knew me.
One morning I left home in a hurry. My paternal
guardian went with me as far as the gate. He didn’t
say, “My son, lo! I see that thy soul thirsteth after
fresh fields and sights that are strange, go thy way in
peace, and take my blessing ; here is a third of my substance,
do with it as it seemeth good in thine eyes, and, when thy
feet grow weary of roaming, return to the chest of thy
family, and I will kill the old family mule and the wether
goat, and we all will sing, drink, and have a bully time.”
No, I regret to say, he uttered none of those nice things.
He just spat on his hands, and danced up and down by the
old slip panel, and he gave me ten seconds start, and said if
I was anywhere within hitting distance at the expiration of
that period of time, my carcase wouldn’t fetch seven farthings
a pound at the boiling-down establishment, and be darned
dear at that.
As a rule I like to argue points, but I didn’t feel equal
to an argument that morning, so, when the ten seconds
were up, I was nine blocks away, and still going. I didn’t
stop long anywhere until I got to Ballarat goldfields, where


I learnt enough about mining not to want to do much of
it. From Ballarat to Bendigo was a nice move. Dear
Bendigo, I love thee still ; it was there I learnt to fossick
for gold ; it was there that I jumped daylight out of my
first Chinaman ; it was there that I chewed my first cake
of Mabel plug, and assaulted my first policeman, and paid
my first contribution to the coffers of the State, through
the medium of the police court. But away with such
recollections ! What have the calm, sweet joys of refined
Australian youths to do with this history? I did not
intend to touch upon the sentimental part of my career
until I was writing my own epitaph. From camp to camp,
from mining field to mining field I drifted, my sole comrade
a stump-tailed bull pup. Noble dog ! Many an argument
have we had in our wanderings, not the least interesting of
which was one that occurred when we got adrift in the
ninety-mile desert, the whole gist of which was whether I
should eat pup, or whether the pup should dine off me.
At last I got mortal tired of mining, and in the course
of time drifted into Melbourne city. I determined to
reform and become a credit to my country. I felt that I
had the makings of something nobler than a “ fossicker ’
inside my clothes. I thought the matter well over, and
determined to become a parson. I therefore attended all
the Young Men's Christian Association Meetings, and also
went under the wing of a rev. gentleman for tuition in
elocution ; and in less than six weeks, thanks to his able
guidance, I could get rid of a discourse in a nasal twang, a
cross between a howl and a Greek lamentation ; and from
him I learnt that, as a minister of religion, 1 should have
to dabble in tea-table politics, be an authority upon all
matters appertaining to baby-linen; that I should also
have to be a Pastrnaster in the glorious art of toadying tq


the rich and powerful, and yet know how to browbeat any
low fellow who had the impudence to be poor, or in ill-
health, and if the poverty-stricken wretch should happen
to be the father of half a score of the human race, I was
to be able to point out that he needed no Heaven, Satan
would give him brimstone enough, and Bryant and May
would supply him with matches, so that he could go and
make a hell of his own. This was a red-hot revelation to
me. I had been told by my mother that a parson was the
noblest work of God, that his mission was a grand and a
glorious one, that he had to rebuke the powerful sinners,
and to soothe the weak and uphold the poor; and
I said unto myself, “ Smiler, of a truth thou art a simple
child ! What manner of game is this that thou art after?
Is it not better to be a digger of holes, though you seldom
strike pay gravel, even in the back blocks, than a canting
humbug in a big city, preaching purity and pampering
rich, professing humility, yet scorning the poor 1” I arose,
and cast myself loose for a while, and gave the old Adam
the run of his teeth, and I felt better ; then I cast around
me for another billet fit for my exalted genius, and at last
decided to change my shirt, and become an editor. I had a
very exalted idea of an editor in those days ; in my eyes he
was just what Tennyson’s King Arthur would have been
if he hadn’t died of indigestion. I pictured to myself a
man of portly presence, with a kingly brow, and a halo of
glory sitting on his ears.
I wrote an article on one of the current topics of the
day, and sent it to the editor of one of the leading daily
papers, and sat down and waited for it to appear. Eagerly
I scanned each issue of that paper, morning after morning,
but in vain. I put in ten days at this sort of thing, and
then I determined that the sub-editor had kept that article


back from his chief; one quick inward glance and I saw it
all “ in my mind’s eye,” the whole scheme was as transparent
to my mental gaze as a square foot of sticking plaster. The
jealous fool was fearful of his own position on the staff; he
had read my article and had recognised the master-hand of
a literary genius through all the misspelling and bad
grammar, and, coward-like, trembled for his own flimsy
reputation. I started forth to interview the editor, and as
I went I laughed boisterously, as I pictured the dismay of
the fellow when he was faced by the writer of that brilliant
article on “ the price of coke.” I’d simply annihilate the
miserable insect, was my first thought; but as I walked on
and got nearer the office, my blood grew cooler, and my
wrath less fierce. Perhaps the poor devil had a sick wife
or an ailing sister utterly dependent upon his pen; I’d
spare him ; a man who feels that he’s a genius, that
underneath that shock of reddish undergrowth, which did
duty for a human head of hair, there dwelt a perfect well-
spring of inspiration affecting all matters likely to engage
the attention of mankind, and the Australian Colonies in
particular for the coming half century, could afford to be
generous, and never should it be written of me, Smiler,
that in the amplitude of my power I crushed a helpless
rival. Filled up to the roof of my neck with such
magnanimous reflections I reached the office and waltzed
with excellent stride up to the editorial sanctum.
I knocked. A voice like the muffled scratch of a blunt
rip saw going through a wet log, or the pitiful wail of a man
who has just discovered that he has married his mother-in-
law, snorted Come in.” I entered. Great Jove ! was
this an editorial sanctum, this mean, little, dirty den, this
home of dust and dirt, foul-smelling, untidy, and dingy ?
Was this the paradise from whence the rich bouquets of


literary thought were daily culled, and this insignificant,
shockheaded, unshaven, undersized human fragment, sitting
scribbling with the stump of a lead pencil only ten degrees
more dirty than the fingers that held it? Was this an
editor ? Could that sickly face, upon which the freckles
seemed to sit in a half apologetic manner, as if heartily
ashamed of their resting place, be the index of the lofty
soul of the modern King Arthur ? Even my stump-
tailed bull pup seemed to realise that one of my highest
ideals was knocked bottom up, as Horace classically puts
it, “ What is your business ? ” demanded the editer, “I
am the author of the article on the price of coke, sir ; my
name is Smiler.” “Ah!” he ejaculated, “you are a real
literary curiosity in your style, Mr. Smiler.” I bowed.
“ But your style is not quite in our line, send your next
attempt to the London 7 imes, or the Bulletin ; good after-
noon, sir.” “Do you mean to say that you refuse to
publish my contribution, you contemptible little whipper-
snapper? Why, you mealy-mouthed scrawler of played-
out platitudes, I’d write a better leader than your old one-
horse show has ever had in its columns since it first started
on its wild career as a sausage wrapper.”
“ I don’t doubt your word for a moment, Mr. Smiler ;
I believe your style is elegance, wit, and wisdom, squeezed
into one, sir, but you are too forcible for our columns.”
“ I’ll bet I sit right down here and write a—”
“ Bet you don’t, mister,” growled a bass voice in my
ear, while a vice-like grip took possession of my lower
extremities, and, as I went whirling through the door way
down the steps, out into the main street, and half way
across the middle of the road, I had a confused notion that
the editor, my article, a young cyclone, and myself had got
badly mixed. Next morning I read the following paragraph
in that same journal.


“ Late yesterday afternoon, a harmless but most exas-
perating lunatic, suffering from a bad bilious fever and
confirmed literary mania, called at this office fo see all
about an article on “ coke,’’ of which he had unburthened
his soul some time previously. Our editor bestowed a
little wholesome and gratuitous advice on the wild-eyed
aspirant for journalistic renown, but the aforesaid harmless
lunatic did not cotton to it kindly, and straightway pro-
ceeded to disrobe himself, for the purpose of spreading our
editor all over the sanctum. Fortuna'ely Donald Dinnie,
the famous cannibal destroyer, entered at the moment.
Friends of the afore-mentioned imbecile can come and
collect his fragments after office hours, if they desire to
keep them as family relics.”
And this was fame. I sat down and weighed the
matter carefully, and came to the conclusion that I had
been somewhat too free in my style. I would try once
more—and I did. I waited a week to allow some of my
back hair to grow again, and once more sought out an
editor. With a wildly beating heart, I boldly thrust open
the door of the editor’s room in Twaddle Street. There sat
a long gaunt specimen of half-fledged humanity, looking
like a lineal descendant of the leanest of Pharoah’s leanest
mules, or the half washed-out sign board of a second-hand
cemetery.
“ Your name is Drivel, sir, editor of the Bicker and
Bluster Journal , sir, I presume.”
“ That’s me, young man.”
“ It was you, sir, that made the sweet little ode to —”
He bounded wildly from his chair, every muscle
quivering, his eyeballs glaring fiercely. Fixing me with a
glassy eye, he wailed “ are you a poet too ?”


I thought I had touched him on a weak spot, and
instantly I remembered a touching little stanza I had dotted
down in a bush pub, entitled the “ Boozer’s Last Pint.”
Quick as thought I drew myself up to my full height and
fired it at him line by line. He stood it for about an hour,
and then suddenly curled himself up on the floor, as though
his backbone had collided with a tornado out on its initial
trip. I bent over him to soothe him, thinking he was over-
come with emotion, when I discovered to my unutterable
disgust that he had been sucking brandy through a straw all
the time I had been reciting to him. It was the brandy,
and not my pathetic poem, that had upset him. I fled from
the office, and vowed that nothing short of matrimony should
ever tempt me to become an editor. My next effort was
in the sporting line, and here I was more successful, as I
found that a good thing was to be made by becoming a
sporting scribe; but I threw this up at last in disgust, as I
found that the pugs and the printers were much alike. The
pugs boxed crooked, that is, they didn’t hit straight, and took
good care not to hurt each other, and the sporting scribes
stood in the little game and took five per cent, of the gate
money to boom the show. I began to wonder what branch
of the quill-driving profession was honest or decent; but
good luck dropped me on the tracks of a law court reporter,
who got me enrolled as a police court pencil pusher on the
staff of the “ Swaggerer, ’ a very high-toned journal indeed.
I stuck to this for seven weeks, and liked it so well, and
got so fat on it, that at the end of the time I have
mentioned I found all my clothes had got too big for me,
and I had to wear two pairs of suspenders to keep my
pants in position.
But I had my reward, for one day the editor of a
journal, published in the cause of Christianity and morality,


and known to fame as the Christian's Cry , saw me, and
remarked that I evidently did not belong to the wine-
bibbers and gluttons, and offered me a location as sub-
editor at fifteen shillings per week, and as many tracts as
I liked to read thrown in. I did not hesitate for a
moment; fame, glorious fame, and bread and beer, stared
me in the face. I embraced the offer. The Rev. Faddle
Twisttruth was the name of my chief, and though, since
then, I have been president of a lying club, and still hold
the champion record for darned meanness in my own
native land, yet I’ve never met such an artist in the noble
art of skipping the truth and lighting on lies as the editor
of the Christian's Cry. He dearly loved to come in and
write a bitter, soul-thumping article on the accursed dram
traffic, which he assured his readers knocked everlasting
daylight out of more pure souls than all other evil
patented by the devil, and then, in the calm seclusion of
his own den, he’d moisten his vitals with a drop of
Hennessy’s cough mixture. One morning I found the
rev. editor and visiting Sister Usher, delegate from the
feminine purifying sisterhood in the city, scattered loosely
about the room, with the cough mixture bottle lying empty
between them. My chief afterwards explained to me that
he and Sister Usher had been having a soul-stirring time,
offering up petitions for the sinful and the unsaved.
Shortly after this I had to report a Young Men’s Christian
Association Mutual Adoration meeting, and the amount of
humbug, cant, and double-dyed devilment I had to inhale
shattered my nervous system so severely that I had a bad
attack of brain fever, and, when I became convalescent,
the whole of Australia was beginning to babble about the
silver fields of the Barrier, and so once more I threw down
the pen and took up the pick for a living. How I got to


holy Adelaide, the laud of prigs and pure women, need not
be told. I got there, and soon got out again, and with my
blankets on my back, and my bull pup at my heels, started
on my long
BUSH TRAMP.
Now it came to pass in those days, that many men of
all kinds and colours, from the blustering, over-bearing
Englishman, with his pig head, broad shoulders, and beer
drinking propensit’es, down to the grinning African nigger,
with his white teeth and breath that rivalled not the
odours of Araby, sought for wealth in the back blocks.
Sometimes they combined and went in gangs, and I
(Smiler), being a sociable lump of loose morality, and not
desiring to exclusively enjoy the sweet charm of my own
society on the track, determined to join the first likely-
looking crew that I could strike. Rambling round Terrowie
early one calm, sloppy Sabbath morning, I saw a large
crowd of the genus digger, engaged in the refined
exhilarating pastime known to the elite of the back blocks
as “ heading ’em.” As I pushed my way through the
throng, lat once perceived that “ school ” was in. A man,
whose personal appearance warranted the idea that he was
president of the anti-soap and water persuasion, was
standing in the middle of an extensive circle, holding in
his fist a short piece of wood about four inches long, by one
and a-half inches in width ; upon this were placed a couple
of “ browns,” as the pennies were called by the aesthetic
circle. With a dexterous turn of the wrist he sent the
coins up in the air, spinning and whirling as they went.
When they at last touched the sodden earth, there was a
yell of delight from part of the team, curses as big as gin
cases from the rest. In the general hubbub some one,
advertently, or otherwise, smote some one else on the


frontispiece ; then there was half-an-hour of sweet, calm
joy. The two combatants stripped off to the waist, the rest
formed a ring and lit their pipes, being prepared to give
fair play and enjoy a good time on the time-honoured bush
principles. One of the pugilists was an Englishman, big,
burly, and brutal, half sailor, half savage, and the rest
British lion, and a lot of British pluck and bounce and
bluster thrown in to make up weight. The other was an
Australian native, a conductor of oxen by profession, tall,
sinewy, active as a wild cat and not half so handsome.
As the men shaped at each other the national characteristics
came out in each very strongly ; the Englishman wasted no
time, but, in the aggressive self-assertive fashion of his
nation, he just ploughed in to knock the cussed impudence
out of the Colonial who had the temerity to face a real
Britisher. The Australian avoided the onslaught, and,
as the representative of the “ Island of the Seas ” went
blundering past, he dealt a chopping right-hander on the
side of the face that laid cheek and jowl open to the bone.
It wasn’t a classical stroke; Jem Mace wouldn’t have
approved ot it if he had been there, but it was dealt by a
hand and arm that had been swinging a 22ft. bullock
whip for a whole lifetime ; then the men got together, and
blood and hair, and teeth and clothes, began to strew the
ground for nine or ten feet around. A hushed and solemn
stillness fell upon the throng, broken only by a long drawn
sigh from “ Terrible Dick,” or a heart-rending sob from
“ German Charley ; ” still the men slugged on. The
Australian’s right arm hung limp and helpless by his side,
his off eye was in deepest mourning for the wounded arm,
and three of his front teeth had gone on an exploring
expedition, But his left arm and near optic were still on
hind for duty. The Englishman had lost his arrogant air,


but what he had lost in insolence he had gained in nose,
for that useful member had suddenly developed a strong
penchant for roaming, and had by this time got nearly all
over every inch of available space on his frontispiece ; one
eye had got disgusted with the performance, and had
retired behind a lump half as big as an ordinary water
melon, while his lips looked like those of a dandy nigger
trying to look pretty, with his mouth full of preserved
’possum. All the time the rain came down in one steady
drizzle, and the soft zephyrs blew keen enough to reach the
backbone of a jelly fish, and the mud accumulated in the
ring as the gallant representatives of the greatest and most
Christian nation under heaven struggled and fought
blasphemed and wriggled, thumped and wrestled, At last
it got so deep that when the heroes fell after a clinch, it took
some considerable time to dig them out again. German
Charley suggested that the fight be declared a draw ; this
brought, as a reward, a sounding blow from Terrible Dick
who remarked as how “no foreigneering gent had a right to
try to spoil a little innocent amusement.” A countryman
of German Charley's kicked Terrible Dick in the abdomen
by way of retaliation, and then began a scene that desolates
my powers of expression, and leaves me bankrupt for want
of adjectives to carry out my contract. All hands joined in
the melee. Terrible Dick raged round, and hit out madly
at the nearest victim ; German Charley scored heavily and
often with the butt end of an old brandy flask. The
bullock drivers, true to the inborn instincts of their noble
profession, stood oft' and flogged away at random with their
heavy greenhide whips, every blow cracking like the sharp
shot of a pistol. Bob the Finisher totted up a decent
record by means of a pick handle, and all went merry as a
marriage bell. I should like to remark that I did not take


a hand in this deal; they were all playing for points, and
some one had to keep tally, so I glided rapidly under the
sheltering presence of an ox waggon, and watched the fray
from a place of vantage between the spokes, and now and
again “ the pup ” would cut in just to make things less
complicated. lam bound to confess that none of his visits
lessened the general blasphemy. But nothing can last for
ever, not even the ecstatic thrill of joy that goes up a man’s
right sleeve when he discovers for the first time that his
babe, the small unbound edition of himself, has out a
molar. One by one exhausted nature pegged out the fiery
throng. Then I went forth and surveyed the battle
ground; there lay German Charley, still grasping in his
mud grimed fist the broken brandy flask. Terrible Dick,
with one hand full of hair, and his mouth filled with human
ear, looked a noble but dissipated wreck; the two original
combatants were sitting in the mud, shaking hands in the
most cordial manner possible, and exchanging confidences
on religious topics. I could bear it no longer, so, whistling
plaintively to the pup, I drifted loosely away from the
location, feeling that as thing were fixed up satisfactorily
to the principals, it was a fair deal all round, and there
wasn’t a deuce ace in the pack.
MY START.
After attending the little amusing scene recorded above
I felt that I might as well attend church service; so, cutting
a plug of Dixson’s best into convenient junks for chewing
purposes, I got into my hat, and sailed out in search of a
soul-stirrer. I got to a gloomy-looking building, at the rear
end of which a man was tugging away at a rope, which had


a bell about as big as a washtub fixed at the top end. The
fellow’s whole soul was evidently in his work, and I
expect he was in training for the office of bell-ringer to the
Privy Council who intend to act on the day of judgment. If
I’m around at the time I’ll lay level money he fetches all
who haven’t been corpses more than a century. When he
had stopped the unearthly din, I went over to him and
enquired why he took such pleasure in his ear-splitiing
business ; he looked at me for a minute or two in silence,
and then grinned until I could see the knobs on his back-
bone by glancing down his throat, but I didn’t object to
that, as I like a man who laughs heartily, though I’m only
a Smiler myself. “ Stranger,” said the man, when he had
managed to get his mouth back into speaking shape once
more, “do you observe that cottage over there?” pointing
to a humble dwelling about 300 feet due east from where
we stood. “Yes, and I’ve seen a man in his shirt dancing
up and down the back verandah for the last three-quarters
of an hour while you’ve been making all that melody.”
“That’s it, stranger, that’s just where I come in,”
chuckled the fellow. “ See the joke ? ”
“ Not quite ; locate it a bit for me.”
“ Well it’s this how, anyway. Me an’ Bill Simmings
was runnin’ the same show for a considerable lump of time.
Her name was Belle Phelps; she wasn’t a beauty no way,
but we loved her, Bill an’ me, an’ she said as how she
didn’t know which of us two she cared for ; so me an’ Bill
we played a game o’ euchre to see which should marry the
belle of Terrowie. I put two aces an’ a jack up my sleeve,
but it warn’t no go; Bill had a whole bilin’ pack under his
hat, an Bill won, an’ he was married last night, and said
he’d have a picnic all to himself this morning, but he didn’t
reckon me an’ the bell in when he was takin’ his counts, an’


I’m going to ring for the Sunday school in the afternoon,
an’ bible class in evenin’, an’ service to night; an’ arter
that I’m going to try an’ rouse up a fire or two. Next time
Bill takes chalks he won't forget me and the bell.”
I crawled over the fence, found Bill sitting on the
doorstep polishing a rusty scythe blade, shook him sadly by
the hand, and fled from Terrowie. As I hurried away I
noticed quite a little crowd in front of me, and I pushed
along and caught them, and, as I found that they too were
bound for the silvertields, I joined their ranks, and plodded
on through the sweet soft mud that seemed so sorry to part
with us that it clung lovingly to our boots, or, for that
matter, to any part of our carcases on which it could find
room to cling.
THE CAMP.
Just as the sun was sinking where he usually does sink,
—in the west, we halted for our first night’s camp. I’ve read
about the beautiful snow, but I haven’t seen much of it,
and if it’s anything like the mud that existed where we
located ourselves, I want to see less during the rest of my
pilgrimage below the blue vault. The first thing our team
did was to build a fire, and it’s such a nice, easy thing to
light a fire on an open plain with a delicious cold wind
blowing fair in your teeth, and a steady rain falling
slanting on to your numbed and trembling fingers, and
making the sodden wood still more sodden. One by one we
had a try at it in vain, then five or six together, in vain.
Then the whole show fixed themselves in a circle four deep
round the little wood pile ; the first row had matches in
their blue cold digits, the second row wedged themselves


behind the first so as to keep out some of the wind, while the
third row leaned over the two others, and tried to keep out
some of the rain, and the fourth made themselves generally
useful and deeply respected by cursing the elements in all
the styles known on land and sea in the present degenerate
age. At last, seizing a moment when the curses were so
thick and hot that they blistered the lips of the pioneers, I
struck a light, and, amidst general rejoicing, the deed was
done—we had a fire. The next thing was to secure water for
making tea; seizing a spade Terrible Dick, who was one of
the gang, sunk a hole about three feet square, and, as the
rain came down in torrents, we soon scoopod up enough to
fill our billies, and it wasn’t long before we got ouside as
much steaming hot tea as oar skins could hold. A junk of
damper, hard enough to assault a policeman with, and the
fag end of a very lively mutton chop constituted my repast,
and then we had a sweet time all round. Hour after hour
the rain fell in torrents, and the wind got up a free concert
for our special benefit, and we squatted round the
spluttering fire, and refused to be comforted. Sailor Ned
developed highly atheistical tendencies, and wanted to know
what sort of a game Providence called that, letting a man
be tempted away from the sea-side to seek for a silver field,
an’ then a drownin’ of him out in the blankety blank bush,
where a drop of “ black jack ” couldn’t be had for love or
blasphemy. After a while we got up and tramped round
the apology for a fire, trying to keep a little animal heat in
our tired frames ; the mud was so soft, and our tramp so
persistent that, towards morning, we had worn a trench
down in a circle about waist deep. This was more
comfortable as it kept the wind oft’, and we took it in turns
to lay down and snatch five minutes’ sleep, the rest tramping
on to keep down the water.


At the first break of day the rain ceased, and, tired out,
we lay down in a row, banked ourselves up well with soft
clay to keep the wind off, and slept like cherubims. When
I awoke, the sun had dried the mud so tightly round me,
where I lay like a cousin Jack pasty, well baked, that I
couldn’t stir hand or foot, German Charley carefully knocked
away the heavier portions with the blunt end of an
American axe, and I was soon upon my feet, feeling as
lively and as blithe as a kangaroo after a bad drought. I
had used the “ pup ” as a pillow during my slumber, and
I fancied he looked as if he had enjoyed himself immensely.
During the day we had fine weather, and got along the
track fairly well, and at eventide once more we pitched our
camp, when it was found that the whole team had run out
of the staff of life, not a blessed morsel of bread or damper
being found amongst us, and then there was deep cursing
and loud wailing and much gnashing of teeth, and a council
of war was held, and I, even I, Smiler, the simple child, was
deputed to make one huge damper forthwith to satisfy the
cravings of the hungry crowd of tramps. What induced
those misguided men to believe that I could cook passes
my comprehension. But I came from a noble race, a race
that never allowed itself to be beguiled on to a field of
battle, or into a place of danger, and I can lift up my head
to-day and say proudly, that never did kith or kin of mine
shed blood for king or country. But this does not disprove
my assertion, that I am of lofty lineage, the wife of the
present Duke of Cambridge used to wash for our . But
enough, why should I repeat it? I count the mere accidents
of birth as idle and useless trappings, and if I had to be
born again, I’d sooner be the richest babe in Australia than
the poorest peer in Britain. After perusing the last
paragraph, you will feel quite prepared to believe that I


undertook the job to make that damper. First of all, I
spread out a piece of tarpaulin about 10 feet square, on a
nice flat piece of country, and then planked down about
seven buckets of flour. My assistant, a big nigger named
Cowslip Tom, got a lot of scalding hot water ready, and
when I had sprinkled the lot well over with salt, I com-
menced to mix the damper, which was to be about the size
of a buggy wheel when finished. At it I went with a will,
the rest standing round and admiring my style. I worked
away until my hair, eyes, and arms were one mass of
sticky dough ; still the contrary muck wouldn’t amalga-
mate. The perspiration poured from my brow in a number
of miniature tori’ents, though the loafers round the camp-
fire were freezing with the biting cold. I undid my shirt
collar, and the dough got down my neck. Exasperated
almost beyond endurance, I cast my upper garment to the
winds, and went at it stripped bare to the waist. In five
minutes the dough, in long, clinging, sticky particles, had
crawled all over me, and I had got no nearer to federation*
Some of the blessed stuff looked simply lovely, some more
didn’t, but just hung round like lumps of congealed slag,
and was a bit harder to deal with; the rest was half dough,
half dust, and T was dead licked. I called “ Cowslip” to
my assistance, and as he at once perceived the gravity of
the situation, he got out of the old woollen guernsey which
did duty for a shirt, and, side by side, white man and
nigger, we knelt and tackled that damper I’ve read all
about the man who wrestled the best of three falls, Cornish
style, with the devil, and I’m prepared to admit he had a
bad time, but his job was just heavenly compared to that
which “ Cowslip” and I had on hand that night. It was
bad enough before the rain came, but after that our
responsibilities became almost more than we could bear.


“ Sailor Bill” entertained us with a dissertation on the
inscrutable ways of Providence in such matters, and said
he hoped he might be “ struck fat” if he could see why
such things should take place. At last we got real mad,
and started out to worry that piece of pastry badly. I
seized an armful and dashed it down, and the rain falling
sweetly and serenely all the time at once converted it into
a dough puddle. “ Cowslip” w*as silent, but bent on
business, and as we wrestled and fought, punched and
sparred the slimy, sloppy compound, hither and thither, it
was hard indeed to tell which was white trash, and which
was nigger. At last we triumphed, as brave men always do
in books, and then we dug a hole, four feet square and ten
inches deep ; into this ten of us lifted our damper, carefully
but quickly, and then we heaped high the blazing fire-sticks.
Embers were hurled on top of it with savage glee, and then
Cowslip and I sat down to smoke and to watch, while the
rest of the tramps built a ring of fire round the “ Kake,”
as German Charley designated our bun. At last it was
cooked on the upper side, and we scooped oft' the fire, turned
the monstrous piece of confectionery upside down, and
rebuilt the fire. “ Sailor Bill ” was accorded the privilege
of acting as taster, to see how the cooking was going on.
He had once eaten a South Sea Islander, and so could claim
to be a judge of such matters. At length the mariner
declared that he'd be “struck fat” if the “Kake” wasn’t
just about ripe, and in less than five minutes we were
standing round the steaming bun, hewing and chopping at
it with every class of instrument met with in modern days,
from a pocket-knife to an axe. “ Cowslip ” was the first man
to swallow a mouthful, and, as soon as it [ ettled well down in
his lower regions, he was anchored to the spot, and the rest
shared the same fate. After tea, not a man could budge,


and we tarried where we had settled until morning, and not
a single man in the crowd complained of short weight.
From that day out I was admitted to be the dandy cook in
that team, and all points of dispute in the culinary depart-
ment were referred to me, and none dared to cavil at my
decisions. Day by day we plugged along, and at eventide
we used to camp round the solacing fire, and engage in
mutual improvement selections. “ Sailor Bill ” spun many
nautical yarns, during which he damned his own and
everyone else’s optics with customary maritime consistency.
Cowslip Tom told of the dangers he had undergone—or
dreamt about—in Africa. Apple Jack improvised a select
Salvation Army corps, which made such doleful music,
howling out “ fire away,” and the “ old chariot,” and other
pensive and heart-rending ditties, that the dingoes that
swarmed round our camp-fires were compelled to betray
their presence by joining in the ear-splitting refrain. In
fact, I have seen some of these wild canines so overcome with
the weird music, that nothing less than a dose of duck-shot
would shift them. For my own part I’d sooner take a dose
of fish-hooks any time, than be within a day’s journey of the
camp, when the “choir” was in full blast. When all the
singing was pumped out of the musical members of our
contingent, we indulged in a series of lying encounters,
and it is with a feeling of conscious pride that I state that
in this particular branch of the fine arts, I kept up the
reputation of my country. Though I did not take the
bun, I should have just about won this interesting trophy,
only the lie I was disgorging was so big that Cowslip Tom
had to shift my ears back three inches before I could
get rid of it, and, as no interference was allowed from a
gentleman of colour, I lost the match. But I wish it to be
plainly understood that I was only a novice then, and


am at present prepared to back myself in this line for any
reasonable amount. In this harmless and instructive
fashion the time was passed, until one day, footsore, weary
and dirty, as sheep in summer, the glorious mining camp of
Urnberumberka broke upon our view. At this period the
charming township consisted principally of dust, dirt, bad
beer, and profanity, with a few unwashed diggers scattered
in. I observed one lady only at this first visit; her name
was Old Poll; she was seated calmly upon a lump of rock,
barefooted, washing a pair of odd stockings in a billy can.
She did not appear to me to be particularly old, nor for
that matter particularly clean, and I thought then that she
must have been passionately fond of her country, for she
carried enough of it about on her person to make her a
fortune to a down-country brickyard. Old Poll had her
mouth chock full of strong tobacco, but that did not
prevent her from discharging a torrent of sanguinary
adjectives at Sailor Bill, because the amorous mariner
ventured to remark that he’d be “ hoisted kite high ” if the
lady in question wasn’t the dirtiest kind of a craft he’d
ever set his mortal eyes upon in any port, and he also opined
that she’d bear overhaulin’ from stem to stern afore she’d
be seaworthy again. I set to work to try and get a drink,
but found that there were only three taps on the job at the
shanty, dignified by the name of a “ pub,” viz., pain-killer
blood mixture, and hell-fire juice. The latter was the only
drink worthy of its title, and I tried them all. I thought
before I tried them that the “juice ” had rather a strong
sounding title, but, after my first nip, I came to the
conclusion that if that is the sort of stuff they have on
draught in Hades, I’ll swear I won’t trouble the bar tender
very much, for it tasted to ray uneducated palate like the
double distilled essence of double dyed damnation in a


liquid form. I heard afterwards that it was manufactured
upon the premises, by boiling down all the old tobacco pipes,
and adding the essence thus obtained to a mixture of
turpentine and over-proof rum, with a little nitro-glycerine
thrown in to make it lively.
THE FIRST MINE.
I hung round here for a few days picking up
information for this history, and found that there was a
spot called Thackaringa a few iriles back, which we had
missed on our upward track, and it was there that the
pioneer mine, the first opened upon the Barrier, was
located. The ore obtained was galena of good grade.
Paddy Green was the name of the man who found the first
silver on the Barrier, but, as he is now dead, and his ghost
is not upon my visiting list, I’m prepared to sell the honour
and renown of this important event to any ambitious
individual willing to pay a moderate price for the
distinction, say £lOO cash. Many a famous man has won
less fame for more money, a fact which can be borne out by
the Dry Creek, Pentridge, or Newgate calendars, or any
other poetical works published for the edification of posterity
and the police.
When I first saw the Barrier field, it wasn’t the sort
of spot the prophets used to write about when they
mentioned a land flowing with milk and honey. The
latter commodity I never stuck at, at any price, and the
former was represented by a gummy substance, condensed
in pound tins, at 4s. 6d. the tin. The first strong sign of
civilisation that I saw, was a beautiful black eye, and this
mark of social refinement I soon found extended to nearly


the whole of the community, with the exception of a black
tracker, and as he was only a nigger, no one, with any
common decency, could expect that he would show any
visible signs of the moral suasion that had, or might have,
been wasted upon him. As, however, I began to get the
drift of the new field, and the people upon it, I found that
they were not so far beyond the pale as I had first imagined.
It is true that every man wore a beard, and washed his face
all round every Sunday, if he could raise the water, and all
smoked, or chewed, and cursed, and danced, and fought,
and played the devil generally, in a neat, free, unadulterated
style that would have shamed any ancient Briton before
the visits of the Roman legions set in. But, in spite of
these little eccentricities of style, speech, &c , they had not
forgotten the primary lesson of their early days, upon
which the whole bulwark of civilisation rests and has its
basis. No, these men had not forgotten how to swindle
and defraud their neighbours, and they could salt claims,
and fake up assays, and tell glaring, full-faced, unblushing
lies, as well as any Member of Parliament, or lawyer, or
social reformer in the big cities, and that one touch of
Nature made them kin to half, and the biggest half too, of
the wide world, and my heart went out to them right there,
and I drank hell-fire juice, and was happy in my day and
generation.
JACK M‘CHEE.
Whilst I was hanging x’ound the Umberumberka
Mine I met a fellow named Jack M‘Chee, and he and I got
along well for a good while. We both had a fellow feeling
towards horses and dogs, whisky and women, but he’s under


the wild bush sod now. Poor Jack, the rough rider, was a
wild fellow. He was reported to have been well connected in
the old country. Not that he made much boast of it, but
there is always something about these fellows that seems to
betray them in spite of themselves. Some people said that he
had been an officer in a cavalry regiment in India, and had
been expelled for a piece of sharp practice at cards; but I
never could hear anything to substantiate this story. He
was a tall, well-built fellow, as straight as a dart, and a
perfect maniac after horses. He was a gambler, too, of the
very first water. Poor Jack would get off his horse to play
“ nap ” with a blackfellow for a quid of tobacco ; he would
never leave off while he had a shirt to his back, and when
luck and he shook hands, then any man might have the
loan of his purse. He svas an inoffensive sort of a fellow
if he were not molested, but when he was goaded into a
fight he could slog like a demon. Jack once picked up with
a couple of fellows whom he considered decent enough, and
the three became quite chummy. Well, they were thieves,
and they made Jack their dupe and decoy duck, and he
knew nothing of it for a long time. But he found out at
last, and then he waltzed round and found his two friends,
and he took off his shirt, and the way he pummelled those
scoundrels would have made Peter Newton’s mouth water
with envy. When the fever came along and encamped on
the field for a spell, and men laid down like wounded sheep
to die, with no mother’s hand to soothe them, no sister’s
love to relieve their sufferings, and in many cases deserted
by their mates —then Jack proved how good a heart palpi-
tated under his rough shirt. From camp to camp he went,
doing all that he knew how to do for friend and foe alike.
Jack was an infidel right down to the soles of his boots ;
but when he stood beside the camp of a poor fellow who


was hanging on to time by his back hair, with one leg just
about the boundary line of eternity, if the sick digger felt
a prayer would do him any good. Jack would go down on his
knees and send up such a prayer for peace and pardon as
would have melted the heart of a Greek god made out of
railroad iron. If praying would get his men to heaven, all
Jack's patients who “pegged out” must surely be there
now ! And he could sing, too ; his voice was wondrous
sweet and mellow, and he always sang, “ Abide with me ;
fast falls the eventide,” and such dear old hymns ; and
when he had ceased one he would fly off to another ; and if
that one were an infidel, Jack would scoff at all things holy,
and quote Voltaire and Colonel Tngersoll by the yard, and
help the poor wretch to die as it became a man. He had an
intense love for Adam Gordon’s poetry, and he never went
far without a volume of the great poet’s works in his
pocket. He was never so happy as when he struck a camp,
and, sitting round a fire, he would read the stirring, tender
lines of that great colonial bard. Hundreds of men are alive
now to testify that their lives had been made better and
braver by those lessons round the camp tire, culled by a
master hand from the pages of poor Gordon. He is the
darling of the bushman and the digger, though he may be
the rejected of snivelling English critics, who know not how
to appreciate anything except the watery drivel of their
own weak-kneed bards, whose loftiest ideal consists of an
elegy to an ass, or a sonnet to a primrose. Perhaps if Gordon
had eulogised a codfish he might have reached the genuine
English taste, and have been immortalised. Poor Jack
M‘Chee used to say that if there had been a mawkish poem
on every second page to “ Her Gracious” the Britons might
have read his work, and Jack was right. Poor Jack, the
last tinqe he was seen aUve, he was riding his big brown


horse, his pipe in his teeth, and Gordon in his hand. He
now sleeps at the foot of a desert hill in one of the loneliest
of our rough ravines, and his dog sleeps side by side with him,
constant in life, devoted in death, and if there is an
hereafter dog and master will rise together to wander in
the shadowland.
Shortly after I met Jack M'Chee, the whole district
was upset by a terrific thunder storm, though very little
water fell. The lightning was terrible, and seemed to come
straight from the infernal regions without waiting anywhere
to cool; trees were torn up and shattered into fragments,
great boulders of ironstone were flattened out like sheets of
iron plating, and there wasn’t a dog in the district that
wasn’t rendered short-sighted for life. All night the storm
raged with resistless fury, and it was plain that this was no
common event, the storm was not an ordinary war of the
elements. It was unanimously decided by all the diggers,
Old Poll included, that the storm was merely the herald of
some fearful disaster, and so it was found to be, for the
coach that morning brought the first lawyer to the field!
No wonder earth and hell met in jarring concussion ; I
shouldn’t have been surprised if it had hailed fire and
brimstone or tar and feathers.
Soon after the limb of the law put in an appearance,
I was astonished one morning, when tramping over to the
newly-formed mining camp, known as Silverton, to meet
three women. One was old, and not the sort of person t 0
tempt a modern Joseph to wander out of the beaten tracks
of virtue, unless the said Joseph was stone blind, and lost
to all sense of scent; the other two were not so bad in
general outline, but no schoolboy would have mistaken
them for Sisters of Charity out for an airing. I discovered
quite by accident that they had taken up their habitation


with a Chinaman located upon the banks of Stephen’s Creek.
They hung out a sign, which informed the passers-by that
washing and repairing were done upon the premises. I
look upon it as something phenomenal, the amount of
repairing that was required in that camp during the few
following days.
THE BIG RUSH.
At last the fame of the silver fields penetrated into
the big cities like a very fever, and a regular human wave
swept up from all parts of Australia, and even a few women
began to arrive upon the scene. John De Baun built a
small stone pub, and made his fortune; tramps became
silver kings, and harlots became heiresses.
One morning an electric shock went through the
camp—
A PARSON HAD ARRIVED.
I
From hut to hut, from tent to tent, on to the outside
camps swept the strange news, and hundreds of excited
diggers swarmed in to see the “cuss” and speculate upon
the probable length of his stay in our location, and I, Smiler,
the gentle, refined, went with them, and this is what I saw.
A thin, gaunt freckle-faced young man, with sandy beard,
bad teeth, and worse boots ; in fact, he looked the worse
for wear all round, and he wasn’t worth much as a boarding
house advertisement, anyway. He said his name was Andy
Riddle, and he turned out about the hottest conundrum I
have ever had to crack. His looks were dead against him,
for, as Apple Jack sententiously remarked, “if the Lord
didn’t look after the shepherds better than that, what the
blazes would become of the flock.” But behind that freckled


face Andy carried more gumption than is usually found in
a whole church, and though it took a power of good feed to
get him into decent shape, he left the Barrier a few years
later looking much less like an undertaker’s warrant
than when I first saw him. His first job cn the Barrier
was a wedding, which was a bully affair, being the first
event cf the kind upon the field. A German digger was the
male victim in the match, and, at an early hour, Silverton
was en fete. Guns were tired, thousands of rough men
yanked from pub to pub, three horses were hitched to a
spring dray, the bride and groom were hoisted in along
with Scotty Linton, who had a big drum, which he never
left off beating until he fell down in a tit brought on by
brandy and exhausl ion ; another man with a cornet, and one
with a fiddle, and six more with penny tin whistles, and
then the wild swaying half-drunken crowd of men started
the team with a series of ear-splitting yells that must have
set the dead thinking that judgment day had come. Round
and round the camp they drove until the exhausted horses
refused to budge, and then the blushing bride was lifted
shoulder high and carried through the human wave to her
own door, where she was deposited safely.
• -yi •• 'dS'fd*


THE MAIL DRIVERS.
The American people boast that they have the greatest
living drivers, but I am open to challenge their veracity on
this point, although I know that, as a general rule, a
Yankee can’t lie. The Australian driver is not like the
immortal Yuba Bill, of California. Oh, decidedly not !
He has not a six-shooter poking out of each corner of his
pants, and he don’t fill his mouth full of choice tobacco;
nor does he expectorate a 1! over the polished boots of his
passengers, and then gracefully invite the first grumbler to
inform the guard how and where he would like to be buried ;
nor does he fill the air with curses so hot that the axles
have to be greased ever} - four miles. He does not tell you
a pack of lies at every stage—lies so thick and solid that
you can feel them with the point of your boot on a dark
night. He does not always reserve the best box seat for a
pretty girl, and find it necessary to hold her on with one
arm while he drives his team with the other. Though
there are some very good one-handed drivers on the
Australian roads. I admire the immortal William of Yuba.
He is a man after my own heart, but I doubt if even that
artist was ever so popular as Jimmy Nicholas, the
Australian whip ; and the Australian was a wag as well as
a whip. Many and hearty have been the grins that have
caused my countenance to expand under the artful
manipulations of James, of Wagga. On one occasion we
were travelling together from Silverton towards Terowie,


and we had on board a stout, comely dame of about forty
summers. Jemmy offered her the seat next to himself, and
I cast a reproachful glance at him, for I had a weakness
for that seat myself. '• Whist, you fool,” said Jemmy.
“ Don’t you see how broad in the beam she is, she will
keep the wind off me all the way.” But the stout female
had her revenge, for, when she got to the first stage house,
James, of Wagga, came to me and murmured, “ She is a
widow; she has been married twice; her first husband was
a railroad guard ; I know where he was born, how many
freckles he had on each cheek, the colour of his hair, eyes,
and complexion ; the names and number of his brothers and
sisters ; how many children they had, and ” —“ Come on,
driver.” growled the passengers, and James went. At the
next change he pulled me aside and murmured, li She had
twins by her first husband; she had an awful bad time, she
was in trouble for three days, and nearly died. One of the
twins couldn’t feed without the other, and if one was put
to bed first the other howled in sympathy ; one was fat and
the other was thin; the thin one cut two teeth at seven
months, and they had to put two artificial teeth in the fat
one’s gums before the pair could be pacified at any price.
She had an illness when the twins were nine months old,
on account of the thin one swallowing a thimble. She was
so vexed, because thimbles were very scarce in the back
blocks. She was very fond of her first husband, and fell
fainting into the arms of a well-sinker at the grave. She
married the well-sinker three months after for the sake of
the twins. She thought they would grow up lonely unless
they had brothers and sisters to play with. Oh, yes !it
was all for the 'sake of the twins. The well-sinker was a
sober man at first, but took to brandy and bitters after a
while to keep up his fortitude. But he died. He—”


“ Coin’ to live here, driver ?” yelled Haifa dozen voices, and
poor Jimmy crept slowly up to the box, and on we went. I
was half asleep when the coach pulled up at the eating
house, but Jim came round and whispered, “ He’s dead and
buried, sure enough.” “ Who the devil do you mean, who’s
dead?” “The second one —the well-sinker—died just as
she was in a critical state, although of attractive figure.
She almost died of grief at the time herself. Her little
helpless innocent came along all right in due course ; but it
didn’t seem to thrive, and pegged out—had a gumboil on
the liver or something of that kind. She had several offers
from tradesmen within a few weeks of the well-sinkers’
death, but she thought she would take in washing, and live
a free life for a spell, and now she is going to see her friends
and relatives. I’ve got both her husbands pegged out and
decently buried. The twins are thriving. I know to a
cent how much she can earn at washing and doing sundries
but I hope to she feels sleepy, for I have had about
enough of her history.” “Say, you driver, damn it, hev
yer got yer blankets down there ? We guess it’s nigh time
to shove along a bit.” “ All serene,” murmured Jimmy,
pensively. As he crawled towards his seat I caught a
glimpse of his face in the flickering lamp-light, and I thought
he looked eight years older. We had not gone three-
quarters of a mile before I heard Jimmy singing life a
maniac. He sang until he was hoarse. Comic, pathetic,
descriptive song followed song. The whip cracked and
whistled. The horses tore along at full gallop. The coach
rushed into hollows and gullies and bumped out again, then
varied the monotony of the thing by dashing up against
boulders and over tree-trunks. Jimmy yelled, laughed,
and boo-hooed. The passengers put their heads out of the
windows, and asked if he meant to knock the whole concern


to shingles ; but Jimmy paused not until his cattle, fairly
exhausted, pulled up dead beat. Then he sidled round to
where I sat, and said, “ She will marry me before the trip
is through. I feel it—l’m sure of it \ I’m to be the third
sacrifice. I know all about her sisters and her sisters’
children ; I know what sort of time each has had, and
expect to have next harvest. She says she feels she can
talk to me like one of the family. For ’s sake take
the ribbons and drive the rest of my stage. I’ll introduce
3ou as the deaf and dumb driver of the back-blocks. Do
this, and you shall have my long-sleeve hat and my straw-
coloured pipe, and I’ll give over to you all my interest in
De Beaun’s new barmaid.” I did it, and James, of Wagga,
swears to this day that I saved him from matrimony or
suicide. Many a man knows Jimmy Nicholas on the
Barrier. He was driving when the first fever plague swept
through the mining camp, and his kindness to all who were
afflicted was a bye-word, and will never be forgotten.
James Wilkinson, the learned driver, is another character
whom no one in the days of coaching could help noticing.
Big Jim Wilkinson was a man of immense physical
proportions, a regular son of Anak—a perfect master of
his craft was he, and I much doubt if he would not have
mastered anything he had taken in hand. He owned a
passionate love for a good horse, and yet he was one of the
most able men I have met in my rambling career. He is a
statesman wasted. I remember once hearing him lecture
on “The Life of Adam Lindsay Gordon,” our own wonderful
poet, and I fancy there are few men in Australia who could
have compared favourably with the big mail-driver, as he
poured forth a torrent of impassioned eloquence which
sprang from his heart, for he revered the very name of
Gordon, and could quote from memory half the best poems


our prince of poets has written. Paddy O’Neil is another
knight of the road, and I have seen this good-natured
fellow drive into town with a fagged-out team, all dead beat,
and he himself so tired that he could only keep one eye
open at a time. Many a hair-breadth escape has he had in
his time. When the sudden floods came down like a whirl-
wind, he has had hard work to save life and limb. Yet no
one ever knew an Australian driver desert a passenger in
danger. There are scores of others. Billy White, who has
the reputation of being able to drive as the crow flies, by
flood or forest. Poor Jim Fuller—now dead and gone.
Jimmy Gun, whose coolness in danger is proverbial. Bob
Palmer and “ Sam ” all good men and true. If mortal
skill and pluck and energy can pull a man through
difficulties and dangers by road, 111 back the mail-drivers
of the Barrier Ranges against all comers, Yankees or what
not.
About this period of the world’s existence, the Bay
Dream and the Pinnacle mines began to make a stir. Both
these mines have proved rank failures up to this time,
though both have been the proud possessors of smelting
works, and both have turned out a lot of good silver ore.
I think that wretchedly bad management has, in both cases,
caused the diasters attending these mines, and I am fully
convinced that, when a certain clique are satisfied, the mines
will go on all right, and be found more than payable.
Considerable stir was also made over the Lake’s Grave
mines. I have heard a lot of yarns, good, bad, and
indifferent concerning Lake, but I don’t know which to
believe myself. I have visited his grave, and have even
gone so far as to borrow a paling from it to ignite a fire
upon a wet night, but I cannot truthfully assert that this
gave me much insight into the private life and morals of


the deceased, but, judging from the general outline of the
last resting place of the deceased pioneer, I should opine
that he was capable of being (when in the flesh) a most
accomplished horse thief and cattle duffer, or, for that
matter, a most zealous preacher or social reformer, or
teacher of the pianoforte. If I had possessed a more
intimate acquaintance with the gentleman in question, I
might be able to locate his peculiar abilities, but, as I have
not even a lock of his hair to guide me, I must give it up.
TRAVELLING ON THE SLUG,
I guess few city men understand the meaning of this
most expressive phrase, but I’ll bet my last dollar there is
not a single storekeeper alive, who was a resident upon the
Barrier in the early days, who does not know it well.
Just try and comprehend that at the period when this field
was cutting its teeth, silver was found lying round on the
surface in lumps, or, as they were called, “slugs.” Some-
times they were found weighing half a hundredweight, and
often much more than that; but it was no uncommon
thing to see a man lugging round a lump of native silver
as big as his fist. Many of these fellows were as poor as
Job’s leanest mule when the plague had done with it, and
they were consequently at the mercy of the storekeepers,
who were able to make their own terms with men who had
not sufficient cash to buy the skin of a stale red herring.
The storekeepers used to supply rations to the camp for an
interest in the claim where the slug was found. This was


all right for the storekeepers, so long as the finds were
genuine; but, in the course of nature, the genial bummer
came roosting along—he always does come where there is
anything to be obtained without working for it. The
bummers found “ slugs'’ generally upon claims well known
and close to town. Then they covered themselves with
dust, and put on a travel-stained appearance generally, and
lilted into the township with their treasure wrapped in an
old red cotton handkerchief. They were rushed by the
greedy storekeepers, anxious to get on to a good thing, and
they received an unlimited supply of goods “on tick.”
They ate, drank, and were merry, and waxed fat; but at
last even this good thing began to be played out, and the
storekeepers grew wrath, and hurled anathemas of a sultry
nature at the head of any dusty-looking individual whose
shadow fell across their doorways. If he dared to open
his red bandanna within a chain and a-half of their back-
yards they would threaten him with an immediate
introduction to their pet yard dog, which was usually kept
half-starved for the purpose. And the “ slugs ” wept and
refused to be comforted, because they could no longer drink
champagne out of quart pots, and live on the fat of the
land. They are gone. The last of their race has vanished
from the face of the Barrier. They were a creation of the
times. It would be worse than useless for an enterprising
loafer to try to travel on the slug in the present day. He
might just as well apply for the contract to supply stand-up
collars to the imps in Hades,


SUICIDE OE MURDEE?
At one time it was quite a treat to catch sight of a
woman upon the Barrier; and when one of the mail-
drivers whispered that he expected to have a feminine
passenger on board next trip, the information used to cause
quite a sensation, and hundreds of men would gather round
the little tumble-down shanty that did duty as a mail office
to discuss the pros and cons of the case. One night James,
of Wagga, came jauntily out of the dirty-looking den that
served as a dressing room for the artists of the road. Wei
who knew him, noticed that he had had a clean shave ;
also that his old felt crown had been laid aside, and a new
long-sleeve felt masher hat, with a bright leather band
round it, lay cosily on top of his close-cropped hair. I mur-
mured to Tom Creer something about a rise in James’
screw, but Mr. Creer did not reply. I looked into his face,
and I saw at a glance that he was cut up. I knew he was
bad and I whispered : “ What is it, old boy ?” But as he
failed to come to his senses, I called Jack Duggan to assist
me. Then Tom murmured softly between his faltering lips ;
“ Look at his boots—he’s cleaned ’em.” I looked and saw
that it was so. We felt James, of Wagga, had cleaned his
boots for the first time within the memory of man. One
by one we went solemnly round, and shook hands with him.
We did not speak much ; our hearts were too full for words.
He, too, seemed to feel his position very keenly, and, getting
mad at last, he jammed his new hat hard down over his ears,


tucked his polished boots out of sight under an old mail
bag, and his whip curled round the flanks of his leaders in
a spiteful sort of fashion, and the coach rumbled on its
onward way. Soon, however, it got round the camp that
James, of Wagga, had departed from the traditions of his
craft; and, when the hour drew nigh for the return of the
mail coach, a dense crowd gathered to see what was going
to happen. There they stood, in the waning light of a
summer’s day, bearded and browned, ragged and picturesque.
Some were old, grey-haired, grizzled ; others were young
and beardless, but not bashful. Some had red shirts, others
had blue; most of them had left their coats at their camps,
and had their sleeves rolled up over their sinewy arms.
All those who were not smoking were busy cutting up
tobacco. Most of them wore the soft felt hat of Australia,
but here and there might have been seen the battered,
weather-stained roof of an old cabbage-tree. They jested
and laughed in the style peculiar to a new mining
field, but not one of them ever attempted to disguise
the real reason why they hung round the mail office in
the dust and the heat. At last the coach was seen
advancing amidst a halo of dust, and speculation was rife
as to what it contained. Some one suggested that perhaps
a new barmaid was going to arrive, but Apple Jack
squashed this theory by remarking in tones of unutterable
contempt, “Think Jimmy l ud ’ shine his boots for a
bloomin’ barmaid?” But the crowd had not long to wait,
for the coach dashed up at a gallop, and then, with one
masterly turn of the wrist, the leaders were thrown back
on their haunches. The driver, with his new hat reclining
gracefully on the nape of his neck, threw the ribbons on
the backs of his steaming team, and proceeded to dismount.
This he performed with a deal of ceremony, so much so, in


fact, that Apple Jack hazarded the assertion that “ he’d be
busted if he could tell why Jimmy put on so much frill.”
A few anxious moments passed away, and then James, of
Wagga, handed down a tall, fair young woman, of about
22 years of age. All eyes turned upon this fair daughter
of Eve. One big German with his mouth open blocked the
path. Apple Jack at once dug his elbow in the Teuton’s
stomach, remarking in a serious voice, “ Shut that mouth,
will yer; do you want the young party to think it’s a slip-
panel?” A broad-shouldered son of the Emerald Isle crushed
up, and remarked in a whisper that he’d be obliged if the
lady would let him carry one of her jim-cracks. A florid
Englishman shouldered his way up, and offered his arm for
the purpose of carrying her shawl. Capper Saturday, an
Italian, picked up a withered leaf of laurel that fell from
her dress, and refused to sell it for a keg of rum. A
Frenchman and a Scotchman got to bad language over the
question as to who should carry her carpet bag, whilst the
black cook and the Chinese man-of-all-work at the hotel
nearly chewed each other in pieces to settle who should
clean her boots. After James, of Wagga, had deposited his
charge safely in the best parlour of the hotel, all the men
in the place wanted to shake hands with him, and some of
them swore that they wouldn’t svash their hands for a week,
because they had “ shook ” with the man who had handed
the fair unknown down. And, so often did James have to
drink his protege’s health that night, that he was carried to
his blankets singing, “ Dear old Pals,” in a voice thick with
emotion—and whisky. That evening the big Irishman,
who had been so energetic in his endeavours to get near the
new arrival, managed somehow to get an introduction to the
rose of the Barrier, and in less than four days he married
her, Ho one seemed surprised; no one was astonished,


and every one went. I remember the night of the wedding,
for I danced with the fair bride more than once that
evening, and I tried all I knew to be funny and make her
smile. The poor girl seemed dazed and sad, just as if an
awful calamity had befallen her. I remember the feeling
that came over me as I looked at her with her expression
of helpless misery and settled despair. Champagne flowed
freely enough, and noise enough to wake the dead was
made, but it was more like a funeral than a wedding after
all. The next day the wedded pair went out to the camp,
where they intended to dwell, and they were forgotten by
all the folks in Silverton. Eight days after that eventful
evening when James, of Wagga, drove the girl on to the
field, a horseman rode up at a mad gallop to the Warden’s
hut, and informed him that the poor rose of the Barrier had
hung herself to the ridge-pole of her tent. And it proved
only too true; for the body of that luckless woman, who
had proved an eight day bride and a suicide, was found
dangling by a piece of twisted flannel from the ridge of her
tent. Why she had stepped quietly over the confines of
the Shadow-land never became known, and I guess it never
will be known, for it is a true saying that “ dead men tell
no tales.” There are hundreds of men upon this field at
this hour who can vouch for the accuracy of the story I
have told. I never try to exaggerate a death scene, nor to
raise a smile over a burying ; for I hold that a man who is
not content with killing his heroines is a decided glutton.


WORTH HER SALT.
“ Guess I dun’no what wimin was made fer, less it was
ter plague the soul out o’ men,” muttered Abel Garth, as
he stood with one of his feet resting on the shoulder of his
spade. It was nigh sunset, and Abel had been out pros-
pecting his claim most of that hot, sultry day, He
returned to his little shanty, only to hnd it empty, and a
note pinned on the door reading this way : “ Abel, dear,
I’m gone off after the goats, and if I’m not home soon,
don’t get mad. They do stay away so, and baby is so heavy.
I won’t be longer than I can help.”
He was a man—a big, powerful, slouching fellow, with
the strength of an ox, brown as native copper, and almost
as hard. He was fond of his pale little wife, but he had a
queer way of showing it; and, now, as he stood watching
the sun go down away beyond Mount Gipps, he was as full
of growl as an Australian nigger is of laziness.
“ Wimin hev no notion of keepin’ things ship-shape-
If I was lookin’ after them goats, and that precious baby,
I’d keep ’em under my eye all the time. But wimin ain’t
built like that. When they start to make a damper, they
forget goats and babies, and the man that’s tralin’ over the
everlastin’ ranges lookin’ for silver in the wind and sun ;
and it’s the same way when they go gatherin’ sticks, or
washin’, or anythin’.”
“ What are you dreamin about, Abel Garth 1 Hev
yer found chlorides at last ? ”


It was a girl’s voice that put the question in a
bantering tone. As Abel looked up he saw a rather
uncouth figure perched on the back of an old grey horse,
which carried a man’s saddle, with the off stirrup thrown
over the pommel. Neither horse nor rider could lay much
claim to' beauty, but there was something about the pair
that said both were good in their way. The girl had
tangled hair, her hands were brown and large, and her feet
were shod in boots that would have scared a railway navvy,
her skirt was fifteen inches too short for a riding-habit,
and looked weatherbeaten and shabby. But her eyes were
large, and grey, and honest ; and her voice was sweet t«nd
full, like the notes of the wild magpie. She looked down
at Abel Garth, and a laugh rippled out of the corners of
her eyes and sprea'l all over her face. He looked at her,
and was evidently uneasy, for if there was anything on
earth that he feared, it was the sharp-tongued, keen-eyed
Australian girl.
“ Wasn’t dreamin’, Nell Finley,” he replied at length.
“ Where’s your missus, Abel 1 Is she ill again ?”
“ No, she ain’t ill; she’s away after them tarnation
goats. If I was a woman, I’d look after things better,
But you wimin ain’t good fer much that I knows of.”
The girl’s face clouded over at once, and her lip had a
cruel sort of a curve in it as she bent over the neck of the
scraggy old grey and said, “ Abel Garth, you an’ me don’t
get on well together, do we ? You don’t like me coming
up to your camp once in a while to talk to your wife,
though, barrin’ me, she don’t see a woman once a year.
You say we ain't much chop, but I’d like to know where
you’d be without your wife. Did you ever try to think
what this camp ’ud be if she was to go up among the
stars 1 ”


“ No, Nell Finley. An’ why should I think of it ?
She ain’t ill. She never complains of no'pain nor nothink,
and she is up afore the day breaks every morning, though
she don’t sing like she did one time.”
“ Wimin don’t complain ; the men can do ali that’s
required in that line. But you’ll miss her when she’s gone,
Abel Garth ! ”
The man shifted about uneasily from one foot to the
other, and the girl continued
“ Do you remember the day your boy was killed, and
you were smashed up, and Jack Royal was put on the
shelf for life? Do you remember who it was who rode
bareback through the bush at dead of night for help, and
back to nurse you when you was ravin’ mad with fever and
pain ? And didn’t the neighbours say as she was frettin’
her life out over her bonny boy layin’ in the grave in that
gully there? No, Abel, wimin ain’t up to much, but
angels is, and your wife is one if there ever was one on this
yere earth.”
The man’s voice was husky, and his lips quivered as
he replied,
“ She didn’t ’pear so dead beat over the boy. She
never cried much, nor never said much about it. I thought
maybe she’d forget it in time I did, Nell, true as I’m
standin’ right here. But if I thought she was frettin’ I’d
try and be a bit kinder to her at odd times. She’s been a
good girl since we was wed, an’ if I ha ve any luck in this
cussed hole I’ll make up for it all.”
“ Never you mind waitin’ for the luck to turn up,
Abel Garth ! ’Tain’t money as she wants—it’s love. Her
heart s real hungry for kindness, and, if you don’t believe
me, look at that track there —where does it lead to ? I’ll
tell you that it goes right from your cabin door to your


boy’s grave, and your wife’s feet made it. Good night,
Abel! Don’t wait for the chlorides, but begin lovin’ right
at once.” And, with a dig in the ribs, the old grey mare
cantered off.
“ Wimin ain’t worth their salt,” muttered the big
fellow, as he glanced uneasily after the flying figure. Then
he turned and looked wistfully in the direction whence he
expected to see his wife come. But she came not. Then
he lifted the rude latch and went into the shanty, and, for
the first time since his marriage, he kindled the fire, and
prepared the humble meal, and did what he called tidying
the place up a bit. Then he went out in the moonlight and
waited for awhile. Then he lifted his hands to his mouth
and coo-eed wildly, his heart almost standing still with
dread, for Nell Finley’s words had frightened him more
than he cared to own to himself. He waited for a long
time, but the bent figure did not come slowly toiling up the
rough hill side ; and his dog began to whine and whimper
at his feet, and at last set up a long mournful howl. He
could stand it no longer; and, cramming his hat hard
down on his head, he almost flew down the tiny track that
led to his child's bush grave.
He found her there—the poor, white, worn face, with
the deep furrows on cheek and brow, lying on the little
grave, over which she had just strewn a handful of wild
bush flowers. One withered hand held clasped a boy’s
Glengarry cap, while the other was thrown lovingly over
the head of the grave. The moon shone out coldly and
clearly, the wind rustled through the undergrowth, the
rabbits hopped round unmolested, and the dog howled
beside—the dead. The strong man sobbed out his sorrow
in the desolation of repentance found too late.


Even now a white-haired, weather-beaten, silent man
occasionally finds his way into the Mount Gipps township ;
but few people know the old prospector’s story, and some
day he, too, will slip quietly over the border, and the
humble drama will be played out in its entirety.


MY FIRST FUNERAL.
One bitter cold Sunday morning Frank Harman
kicked me in the ribs; this was the usual morning
salutation, and it was a point of honour witli me never to
omit it, if by chance I happened to be first awake, which I
regret to state was seldom. I arose. Frank had said
prayers for two while I was performing my toilet, which
consisted in tying up my boots and pulling on my hat,
“ Some fun on outside the tent—hurry up and enjoy
yourself! ”
“ Fight, or foot race ? ”
“ Funeral ! hurry up, or you'll miss the most exciting
part of the play.”
I wanted a little cheap recreation, and thought I
might as well go and enjoy myself at the burying as
anywhere else. I pulled myself together, and looked as
cheerful as I could under the circumstances, and went out
and shook hands solemnly with the undertaker, who was
beguiling the time by sitting on a fallen log, chewing
Mabel plug and cursing the gravedigger, who was no less
an individual than the immortal Apple Jack. Apple Jack
stood the storm of adjectives and tobacco juice for
some time in patience and blissful calm, and then he cast
himself loose. This style of expression alone would have
entitled any other man to a seat in the senate halls of his
country. Gathering himself together with an air of lofty
scorn, he addressed the boss of the burying thusly :
“ Look’ee ’ere, ‘ Bob the Finisher,’ if as how this
blamed plant don’t suit that ’ere corpse, you’d jest better


resurrect him, and let him dig one as will suit him ; I
don’t see as how he has any right ter be so pertickler,
anyway, seein’ as how he owed me forty bob before he
pegged, which he had the damned meanness to skip.
Corpses is corpses all the world over, and we all know that
they’re entitled to a certain amount of respect from them
as plants ’em, but I stands no airs an’ fancy work from
any deadhead, I don’t ; so if this hole aint big enough, you
an’ the corpse can take a deal, ’and see which makes the
burrow to fit. My hands are full, an’ I pass its regulation
size, 6 by 2, an’ I want extra for every inch over, or that
gent can stay above ground till ‘ judgment or the day
after,’ fer me.” And he sauntered oft to a shady spot,
singing—
Teach me the old, old story
Of unseen things above,
while “ Bob the Finisher,” his mate and a black boy
placed the deceased over the hole, and took turn about
dancing on the middle of it until it cracked across and sank
out of sight, then it w T as hastily filled in. No one knew
any of the burial service, so I recited Longfellow’s “ Psalm
of Life” over the grave, which caused Apple Jack to remark
that he considered it plaguey low bred to howl poetry over
a corpse before he’d got well and comfortably established
in his new quarters. So, to appease the wrath of the
sexton, I went to my tent and brought forth a volume of
“ Pilgrim’s Progress,” and read half a chapter over the
ashes of the defunct, and, if that don’t keep him below the
surface, I know of nothing that will outside of Hades,
unless it be one of Jaw Bone Neild’s flowery speeches.
Then the sexton, undertaker, and assistants had a foot race
back to the township, the terms being “Hurry up, blank
you ; the last man back to the pub shouts all round.”


BURNED TO DEATH.
Silverton was at its top; the dusty streets were
crowded with all sorts of vehicles, from a hand-barrow to a
camel express. The men did not do a heap in the dressing
line, but the barmaids did. I’ll have to give the charmers
a 'page to themselves, so no more of them now. Most of
the buildings were little tin shanties, commonly and appro-
priately called “ sardine tins.” In one of these lobster
pots lived Pell's Jimmy. Reg Pell was what is commonly
called a toffy fellow ; a big, broad-shouldered, handsome
man, a great sport, fond of wine—not women—of a good
horse and dog, and a good mill, with or without the gloves,
and Pell’s Jimmy was as big a sport in his own way as his
boss. He was a little fellow, full up to his ears of diablerie
and practical jokes. He had one only joy, and that was a
bull terrier of the finest breed, and where Pell’s Jimmy
was, it was safe to lay odds on that the pup was within
whistling distance, night or day. The last time I saw him
he invited me to knock off his hat, and when I did it, just
to oblige him, that infernal bull pup of his borrowed half
the calf of my leg. The fellow laughed himself sick, and
said that pup was the best cattle dog in the universe, and
had raised more calves than any dog he knew.
Yes, that was him all over. He was a dear little
chap for a harmless bit of fun. He used to get full right
up to the crown of his hat with whisky, and then he’d go
home and dance and sing for hours The fellows who were
camped near him would have goie up and choked him
many a time, only out of love and respect for that same
pup. Well, one night he got into a sinful state of brandy
and soda. It was the only fault he had, and he took care


of it accordingly. He got back to his shanty and locked
the door. By-and-bye, Bill M’Kechnie and Charley Webb,
who were camped close handy, heard wild yells and screams,
but they took no notice of it for a long time. They just
thought Jimmy was getting the jim-jams, and having a
time. At last they went out of their hut, and saw that his
shanty was one blazing mass. They didn’t stop to argue
points, but went for the miniature hell at a big pace. Mac
took a header into the middle of the ruins, but, blinded
with the flames and smoke, he was forced out again.
Charley Webb went at the red hot iron like a dervish, and
his blistered hands, arms, and face told how he forgot to
spare himself. It was a nice comfortable little iron crib
lined with matchboard, and papered, but it wasn’t a com-
fortable spot to stay in just then, and the crowd yelled to
the boys to keep out of it. But I think if old scratch and
a full-armed regiment of devils had been inside, some of the
lads would have had a plunge through that doorway. At
last one fellow went through with a rush and a big round
oath as full in the face as a pie melon. The flames hissed
and howled, and the roof caved in, and one side of the hut
fell. The iron curled up with the heat like shavings coming
from a jack-plane, when, through the lurid flames, staggered
the gallant lad, bearing in his blistered hands and arms a
shapeless mass of charred humanity Cheer after cheer
rent the air as he reeled forward with his awful burden ;
and when he faltered and fell fainting to the earth, strong
hands eased him of his load. Jimmy was dead to the
world. On his breast lay the charred remains of his pet
bull pup, which had tried to defend its master from even
the fierce breath of the tire fiend. I aint given to romancin’
myself, but if I was paid for lyin’ like newspaper chaps, I’d
have made a story out of that long ago.


THE MINES.
There are many classes of mines on this field—good,
bad and worse. The same will apply to the managers. I was
alive when most of those claims were floated. I hope I
shall not exist in a physical state when another batch of
the worst description are put on the market. I am not a
hard man, and I can look over a case of forgery and murder,
or bigamy, or any little thing of that sort, but I turn it
down at floating rabbit warrens and salt bush areas. There
is not a shadow of a doubt about the fact that some of the
outside claims are good, and will eventually turn out well,
if they are not ruined by bad management. I had a quiet
chat with one manager concerning his mine. For the sake
of the libel law, I will call him Tobias Topheavy. Now,
Tobias and I are on the best of terms. He is not proud, and
will drink with me just as often as I like to shout. I went
with him to look over his claim, and I saw that he had a
good lode close to the surface. I rejoiced with great joy.
I went further, and I saw 7 a shaft sunk 250 feet on country,
and there was no lode, nor a sign of a lode, in or near this
pit. I said, “ Friend, what’s this grave for ?”
“’Taint a grave—it’s a shaft,” he said.
“What’s it hollowed out here for?”
“ Goin' ter water level.”
“ Where’s that, Tobias?”
“ I’m darned if I know. Mayhap it’s five feet lower
down ; mayhap it’s 500. If I get water, shares ought to go
up, I reckon,”


“ Is this a water company then, Tobias ? ”
“ Water be d . It’s the Slocum and Sackem Silver
Mining venture.”
“Isit ? I shouldn’t have thought it. Why didn’t you
sink this hole on your lode then, or near it, eh ? ”
“On the lode ! Why any fool could do that, and no
credit to him either. If I get on to anything out here I’m
a made man. I fill my weekly reports with stuff about the
dip of the strata and the lay of the rocky formations through
which I pass, and they think I can see quite a hundred feet
through solid rock.”
“How long will you keep going down, Tobias?”
“ Well, I guess I’ll leave off sinking when the directors
leave off sending the sugar.”
“ Do you think you’ll strike silver here at a reasonable
depth?”
“ Guess we may—if it’s there.”
“ You don’t think it is likely that you’ll strike New
York city in that hole—at a depth ? ”
“Likely we may, Smiler; don’t see why we shouldn’t.”
“ And your directors, do they think your way, Tobias? ”
“My directors and me, sir, we never falls out. They
work their little game, and I cakes a hand. I gets a wife,
which says, ‘ Find the lode next Monday ; assays not to go
more than 85 oz. ; ’ and I find it, Srniler. It’s surprising
how those shares go up. Everyone hankers after our
shares; and, as I don’t like people to envy me, I let them
have mine. After a while I get another wire, saying, ‘Lose
that lode immediately;’ and I do that with very little
trouble, seeing as I haven’t found it yet. Then people want
to part with the very scrip they had been mad about a short
time back, and I always get ’em again, just to prove as


how I've cot heaps of confidence in the mine. It’s true
there’s a little difference in the price of buying and selling.”
I looked sadly at Tobias, and got into ray hat and out
of the claim as quickly as possible.
I went across to Muddle Makeshift’s claim, just to
see how they were getting along, and I found that they
employed one man and a manager. The manager spent
four-fifths of his time in bed, smoking his pipe, and the rest
he put through in the township. The man couldn’t work by
himself, so the boss told him to go prospecting, and take his
dogs with him. And a gay old time he had—£3 a week,
no boss, four dogs, a pipe, and plenty of tobacco (which was
charged to the company as fuse for tiring), a stroll over the
claim night and morning looking for wallabies, rabbits, and
kangaroos, and a snooze in the middle of the day. And yet
people wonder where on earth the money goes, and how it
is there is no work done on the claims. Plenty of the
managers are men of boundless energy and unlimited brain-
power, only they haven’t scope to display it. They are real
“Apple Jacks” thrown away, and destiny robbed many a
second-class soup-kitchen of a bright and particular ornament
when the managerial rod was placed in their hands.
m 8


ABOUT BARMAIDS.
Perhaps there is no situation in which a young, good-
looking, and unprotected female can find more scope for
her abilities than behind a bar ; and I, who am conversant
with the ropes which govern Society, know how much
influence for good or evil these sirens possess. In the
history of the world women have played an important
part. They are, and have been, “ the shadow behind the
throne,” and a rather substantial shadow, too, very often.
A barmaid, taken as a rule, is not a giggling, feminine
monstrosity. In fact, judging them as a class, they are a
long way above the average “ young person and more
bora ladies eke out an existence in that capacity than in
any other I know of. To be a successful barmaid a girl
wants more than a modicum of good looks. She must have
a fascinating style, be witty, well-dressed, and not loud-
voiced ; neither must she possess the mellifluous laughter
of the Australian jackass. There is not the slightest
necessity for her to dye her hair more than three different
shades during one season Carmine upon the lip is good,
especially when laid on with a coarse broom.. As a rule, it
looks bad if allowed to extend all over the, face. To be a
real success, however, in this line, a good, smart, intelligent
girl should always endeavour to lower he self to the mental
level of her customers, and she will thus avoid giving offence.
She should know something of horseflesh, and should be
able, at a moment’s notice, to teil Algernon Foulmouth


who Cupidon was got by, and what his chances are as a
sire. She must be well versed in the art of scandal-monger-
ing, so that she may enter with vim into any spicy story
that De Lacy Splayfoot may have to impart. She must not
be vexed if this insane specimen of human frailty becomes
coarse or indecently suggestive during ins narrative. She
need only turn away, and be busy soothing the troubled
brow of Alphonso Falseassay. And she can suggest to the
story-teller that, if she had her will, he would wear his body
a little longer in the neck. But she must be careful and
not give offence, as this class of beer-eat r is very finely
organised, and is extremely sensitive of his molehill dignity.
It is a maxim in medicine that a soft brain is covered by a
thin skin. I often go round town and admire the female
magnets that draw sixpences out of unwilling pockets.
Some of them are tall, and drape their willowy figures in
black raiment. Their hair is auburn, and their conversation
is refined and lady-like. They dip with consummate ease
into any and every subject of conversation in which a
lady may join with honor to herself and credit to her
surroundings. Their voices are well modulated, and
their laughter like a rippling of sweet water. Others,
however, are fit only to be the companions of stable
boys and Members of Parliament, and they often sur-
round themselves with the scum of the earth. Their
tones are like the chimes of a fire-bell on a rough night,
and there is neither music nor melody, nor modesty, nor
culture, nor anything that is good about them Ami, lo !
they are as a broad path that leadeth down to Sheol, and
their tongues are like unto the sting of an adder. They
love to sit upon the knees of young men, who have a few
dollars and no sense, and their delight is in a story that
would make a black gin blush with shame. There are others


among them who possess domestic tastes, and they prattle
artlessly about homes, and home-ties, and of babies, and a
cottage by a still, calm lake; and they tell us that their
heau ideal of perfect and unsophisticated bliss is a three-
x’oomed cottage, &c. Then there is the well-connected
barmaid, who catches hold of you by the button-hole, and
runs you into the hottest corner of the saloon, and pours a
torrent of hogwash into your ears about the ancestral home
she has left, and the patrician families, who were wont
to leave their cards at the castle inhabited by her pa and
her ma, She is probably an ignorant importation from
Slap-dash Island, and her ma, mayhap, never saw corned-
beef outside of a butcher’s shop. Then there is the frisky
little thing, who always gushes, and is constantly up to her
neck in business, if you believe her. And she tells foolish,
second-hand stories, and gives a little scream of delight, or
anguish, or surprise, as the case may be, and claps her
hands, and dances round promiscuously, and is constantly
trying to borrow someone’s silk handkerchief. This is just
the sort of dear “ creeter ” Mr. Noodle invariably falls in
love with at first sight. Miss Lackadaisical is another type
of bar-tender I have met; she, dear thing, loves to bill and
coo, and rest her frizzy forelock on some manly shirt front
—married or single—she is not particular. And she will
simmer over with soft stuff, and quote Byron and
Wordsworth; and sometimes, if she’s a real bad case, she’ll
give a verse or two of her own drivel—“ Just a little thing
I have dashed off in a hurry, you know, dear boy.” And
she will take anything you like to give her, just for
friendship, don’t-you-know —a watch, a pin, or a bangle.
And she is an abomination, an eyesore, a mouth-mop for
every “ spoony ” fool that drops in.


MININU EXPERTS.
The mining expert belongs to a species purely his
own, and it is hard to say what first generated this class of
egotistical rottenness, unless it was that the horde of fools
in the big cities were dying to be taken down by mining
sharps, and gave birth to the “ experts ” to facilitate the
operation. I guess this explanation is nearer to truth
than lam to heaven, anyway. About the first “ expert”
to pay the field a visit was a Member of Parliament. This
versatile genius had been cut out by Providence as a
huckster of oysters, but fate, or fortune, had interfered, and
he became a senitor and an “ expert.” He knew less about
mining than I know about the internal arrangements of a
healthy dog, and yet the airs of conceit this fellow
assumed would have upset the gravity of a marble man.
One night I was sitting in Williams’ pub, studying
astronomy through the medium of a pewter pot, when I
heard him telling his friends that he was going out on the
morrow to report upon one of our best unworked claims, in
which he had purchased a big interest. He remarked that
as he did not know where the claim was located, he'd
require a guide, so I volunteered to act in that capacity,
and was joyfully accepted. The next morning, early, I
started with the man of knowledge, and drove him to an
abandoned stone quarry, which I gave him to understand
was the mine he was in search of He pursed his lips,
tapped his august brow, and proceeded to take notes, and


in due course his journal came forth, and was delivered of
a startling article, in which the mine was spoken of as
being upon the eve of declaring dividends and so forth.
Drapers, wholesale and retail, made their way to the held,
and spent from three days to three weeks upon the spot,
and then went back to civilization and posed as c ‘ experts,”
God help ’em. The metropolitan newspapers behaved in a
shameless and disgraceful manner, and made themselves the
laughing stock of the Barrier by the arrant rubbish they
published, all in good faith, in regard to the mines, and
many a ruined man can lay the corner-stone of his undoing
at the doors of the big journals of those days. Among the
“ experts” who cursed the field with their presence was a
fellow who posed as an assayer. I was sinking a shaft by
contract at this time, and filling in my leisure hours
studying the science of metallurgy and assaying. One
morning a lump of a fellow named Sandy McGofF called at
my tent, with a nice looking specimen of gossany i onstone,
and asked what 1 thought of it. I told him it looked good
enough for a trial, and so he determined to take it to the
“ expert” for treatment, and in a few days was informed
that the stuff carried no traces. Sandy did not believe
that stone had had fair play, neither did I, and so a solemn
meeting was called of all interested in the matter. Rach
Andrews, a mason, Art Pincombe, a carpenter, Sandy and
myself, met in an old humpy, and a piece of stone, similar
to the piece tested, was ground into a powder; then a
shilling was filed up into grit; next, Pincombe produced a
gold shirt stud, which went the same way ; Rach Andrews
submitted a plug of tobacco, and I parted with the bone
end of a favourite tooth brush, while Sandy sumbitted a
lead button, and the whole lot, powdered and mixed, was
submitted to the assayer for analysis, and in the morning


he gave as the result; iron, 40 per cent.; lead, nil ; silver,
nil ; gold, no traces. (> That may be so,” murmured Sandy,
pensively, as he started to scatter the “ expert ” all about
the adjacent allotment, “ but what the hell has become of
my shilling ? ” The “ expert” is like the genial rabbit of
Australia—die may be a curse to a district, yet he is
plaguey hard to shift—and to this day this offshoot of the
Evil One may be found ready, for a few pounds, to affix
his signature to a bogus report upon worthless property.


THE JUNCTION MINE.
This highly valuable claim is located between the
British Blocks and the North Broken Hill mine. It was
floated in Melbourne, and it has been a “ gambler’s ”
property from its infancy, though it has had some straight
managers; yet, if the truth could only be sifted from the
falsehoods, I fear that it would be an easy matter to number
them. But public indignation was not thoroughly aroused
in regard to the property until about the beginning of
1889, during the time Francis Jolly, Esq., ruled there as a
sort of supreme being. This autocratic personage earned
for himself the title, “ The Czar of the Junction.” I’ll
describe him, so that my readers may dodge him as
earnestly as they would a young tornado, pregnant with
business intentions.
He was at that stage of life when most men deem
Holloway’s pills an urgent necessity—at least once a week.
His hair (excepting a few barren spots) was white (a deal
whiter, in fact, than his conscience.) His figure was
inclined towards portliness, yet not sufficient to impede his
activity, and he proved his smartness by running the share-
market up and down repeatedly, and yet always beating
it. His face was rather pleasant to gaze upon, and I can
candidly confess that I have seen many a wooden man of
less prepossessing appearance. His brow was not lofty and
full of soul, neither was it shallow and devoid of brain. But
he wasn’t built upon poetical principles. The number one


element was not forgotten when he was being evolved out
of eternal space. At one time I considered that a man’s
face was the index to his soul, and, fool that I was, I
considered that I had, by hard labour, possessed myself of
the mystic key, which would at all times enable me to
unmask a knave with a glance from my eagle optic. But
that was before I had met Mr. Jolly. Now , I consider that
the person, male or female, who invented that monstrous
absurdity, was a rambling drivelling, oyster-eyed sample of
human credulity, and would have been a fit and proper
subject for a hard week’s work on the part of a lunacy
commission. I looked long and earnestly upon the face of
Mr. Jolly, and I thought I saw a noble trait of character
trembling upon his speaking countenance, like a bird
fluttering upon the wing I followed this leader in my
mental prospecting down on the underlay; the lode forma-
tion seemed to widen out the further I went ; until I
imagined I’d struck a real old fashioned lode of solid
chloride. I have assayed some of that lode since, and find
that it really carried —
45 per cent, craft,
4,965 ounces long-headedness,
64 per cent, dissimulation,
the rest a mixture of mullock and matter, of various kinds,
such as self-righteousness, plausibility, versatility, and
bombast. When I first met the “ Czar of the Junction ’’ I
felt my soul go out towards him. Since then I have ex-
perienced moments when, if he had been a younger man,
something more solid than my soul would have gone out on
•6 visiting expedition in his vicinity. When I met this man
I had faith, a calm, beautiful, soothing sort of faith in all
things, from assays to oysters ; now, I’d not eat a bivalve
without opening the shell to see whether it was ancient or


otherwise. For a time we were friends, and he was unto
me as a father that leadeth an idiot son by the off ear into
pleasant places, and when his directors fell foul of the paper
upon which I earned enough to keep my family in bread,
and preserved milk, and the measles, and other luxuries
of a similar nature, and I was prevented from going
below the surface of the mine, this aged one, this
truthful one, this man without guile, took pity upon me
and said, “ Smiler, as my soul liveth, I will do unto
thee in this matter even as I would do unto mine
own son,” and I, being a cabbage of a verdant nature,
believed in him; and when he came and smote upon his
chest, and cried with a loud and bitter wail, that “ the
Junction lode has cut out, and the mine is a failure,” did I
not report accordingly in the columns of the Barrier Miner 1
and the shares, did not they fall down to five shillings 1
And, lo ! I heard something which made me believe that the
hoary one, the jolly one, was cooking me, and I went and
asked him to let me see with mine eyes, that I might have
faith in him ; he refused, and looked upon me sorrowfully,
seeing that I doubted his word, and he spat upon the
ground, and then, in the solitude of his office, lo ! he wept ,
and he took me in. But, again I received certain informa-
tion which I could not doubt, and, while in Adelaide city, I
was interviewed by a reporter on the staff of the Register ,
and I advised all men to hang on to their Junction scrip.
And so things went on until, one Saturday morning, I
waited upon the “Czar,” and he sware unto me that the
lode was only eight inches wide. That night, a little round
man, named George Stephens, a pressman on the Advertiser
staff, and I, arrayed oui’selves in the garments of miners,
and at midnight we got into the mine, when all hands were
away, and we crawled 200 feet down an abandoned shaft,


and thence along that level to the main shaft, and in so
doing I nearly lost my game little comrade, who possesaed
more pluck in that rotund little carcass of his than many a
six-foot frame of humanity knows how to carry. As we
skulked along in the darkness, through the narrow drift,
the Adelaide pressman stumbled, and, instinctively, I put
out my hand and grabbed at him. It was the instinct of an
old footballer that made me do it, and as my hand came in
contact with that part of his person which most resembles
a football, I hung on. When I had hauled George back a
few feet, we lit our candles and looked, and saw that my
chum had stumbled over a bit of loose mullock at the edge
of a winze only 100 feet deep. If I had missed that grip
in the dark, I’d have had the trouble of writing the
Advertiser report and Stephens’ epitaph, as well as my own
account of the midnight trip. We were of mutual benefit
to one another that night, and I think the big metropolitan
paper ought to feel proud of its plucky little representative.
At the 300 feet level, we found that the lode was nearer
eight feet wide than eight inches, and opening out every
foot, and all the scheming that the clever crowd knew could
not keep the public out of them, and now the shares are
worth about £7. Months rolled away, and the “ Czar ’
never forgave me for the criticisms passed on his dirty work,
and he openly boasted that while he lived I should never
again set foot in the mine, I said nothing, but I went to a
clever tailor named Joseph Burns, and borrowed a fancy
suit of clothes, and then, with his assistance, I shaved my
moustache, and dyed myself as black as Peter Jackson
with nitrate of silver and logwood. My hair was dyed jet
black, and curled with tongs ; my chest was padded until
I was fifty-six and a-half inches in circumference, a gaudy
tie, and no less showy pin and big bull-dog watch-chain, and


in this guise I went forth, and not a soul in the town knew
me. Then I tacked myself on to a crowd of gentlemen who
were visiting the mine, amongst whom I recollect Messrs.
Solomon and Weener, of Melbourne, and in open daylight
I was escorted all over the underground workings of the
Junction, in the very teeth of the “Czar,” by the under-
ground “ boss,” Harry Chappie. Since then I had the
pleasure of finding a drift which the “ Czar ” had studiously
tried to hide, and, as it was in rich ore all the way, I made
the fact of its existence public the same afternoon. My
little co-worker, George Stephens, was my partner in this,
as in former trials of skill in the detective department, and
again I found his nerve and pluck of great service. Since
then Mr. Jolly has been requested to resign, and the Barrier
has lost him, I hope and trust, for ever —and a week or two
after.


PISTOLS FOR CHOICE.
There is something very soothing in the general ap-
pearance of a revolver, especially if the shooting-iron is
loaded, and placed about nine inches in front of your manly
brow. I have seen men of undoubted courage men who
would not flinch from or turn their backs upon a whole keg
of spirits while there was a drop left —cow down before a
waistcoat pocket pistol in the most abject manner. I always
had a fondness for playthings of this description. I re-
member, when I was a boy, sticking my aged grandfather
up one dark night with a gingerbeer bottle in one hand and
a saveloy in the other. I only got eighteenpence in cash
and a half-pint of half-and-half for my trouble. But the
people I am going to talk about were not on the “ stand and
deliver ” ticket ; they were two honest prospectors, and they
owned a claim. They felt their hearts yearn for each other.
One of the trio was a little old fellow, a Spaniard, named
Micky O’Rourke ; he was a foreigner, as his name indicates.
He was of high lineage, and a direct descendant of a line of
kings from Moses downwards. When this Spaniard imbibed
too freely, as he often did, he used to use some of the
strangest language for a foreign gent, whose veins were
chockful of blue blood, that I ever heard. He loved to rave
about “me bleeding counthry,” which, according to his
account, was bound down with iron chains. His comrade
was a plain Italian count, named Murphy—a man of good
parts, and many years younger than the Spaniard O’Rourke,


These two men dwelt together in peace and pleasure for a
long time without the shadow of a growl. They hunted the
hopping wallaby, and lived on its flesh, and were happy.
Now, water was very scarce up their way, and they used
to roll a barrel for a distance of four miles to and fro from
their camp to the waterhole, This they did many times
without incident. But at last the monotony of their quiet
lives was upset. One morning they rolled that barrel as
usual, and filled it with the muddy, but precious fluid. As
they turned to depart a trap drove up, and in it there sat a
well-known barmaid. She was not so young as she had
been, but still the ashes remained of her beauty, and she
smiled upon the men who rolled that barrel. She did not
seem to mind, though O’Rourke’s white moleskin pants had
a black catch about the size of a saddle-flap in the bosom.
Her e y es were blind to the fact that one sleeve was missing
from his old red shirt, and that his soft felt hat had a black,
greasy mark right across it, for the classical Spaniard was in
the habit of using it as a means of lifting his billy on and off
the fire. As for Murphy, half of his hair protruded through
the roof of his old cabbage-tree hat, or, as he called it in
Italian, his “ cadee.” He wore no shirt at all, and his
singlet had not seen the wash-pail for a month or more.
He was a really proud man, was this Italian ; he was too
proud too wash himself more than once a week, which
O’Rourke called dirty Italian pride. It was dirty enough,
but I don’t know that it was particularly foreign. Now,
when the barmaid smiled on the two mates they glared upon
one another. They did not notice that her cheeks were
painted ; nor did they seem conscious that those rosy lips
were stained. Her teeth were false, and her hair she had
received from town by the last mail. But they heeded it
not. After a while, the beautiful compounder of cocktails


and lemon squashes went on her way. Then said O’Rourke,
“ Be me soul, 1 think I fetched her, wid me me insinivating
shmoile ” —he always dropped into Spanish when excited.
The Italian laughed scornfully, and said, “ To hell wid you
and yer shmoile; der yer fancy the lady wud look at a
catamaran like yourself 1 Get out, ye little devil, it’s meself
that she winked at.” O’Rourke said never a word more.
All the blue blood of his ancestors boiled up under his
patched pants. He forgot his former love for his old mate.
He remembered only that he was a descendant of a line of
kings, and he rushed at Murphy, and kicked him in the
stomach. After that there was peace and stillness for a
while. Murphy lay quietly curled up with his head between
his knees, and his hands buried in the dirt. At last he
arose, and he did not speak a word. He looked mournfully
at O’Rourke for a moment, then he picked up the remnant
of a broken slip-panel rail, and he banged the Spaniard with
that same until it became so covered with blood and hair
that it was hard for a truthful man to say which was
O’Rourke and which was the rail. After the amusement
had proceeded for some time, O’Rourke managed to find his
shooting-iron, and he did a sinful deed there and then, for
he pointed it at the Italian, and it went oft', and the bullet
struck Murphy on the chin. Grazing the bone, it came out
behind his ear, and for the second time that day Murphy
curled up on the turf. But he didn’t die ; he lived, and
he went and called at Silverton, and he saw the charmer
who had winked at him, and she gave him in charge for
attempting to press his lips to the nape of her neck.
O’Rourke paid the fine for him, and they went about arm-
in-arm ever after until the fever laid the Italian in the
grave.


HOW I MADE MY REPUTATION AS
A HORSEMAN
I had a burning notion that I was born to make a name
in the saddle, and I imparted this information to Bob Rees,
my old mate, and he advised me to take the first opportunity
that offered and win fame amongst the tamers of the equine
kings. I allowed myself to be advised by him, and so when
we came alongside a station, I put on my red flannel shirt,
blue necktie, my tights, top boots, and spurs. Bob lent me
his old cabbage-tree hat and a short black pipe Then, as I
wanted to look like an old hand, I strapped a big sheath
knife around my waist, and tied a flaming yellow and black
handkerchief round my neck. Bob, who was a most peculiar
old boy, remarked that I only wanted a feeding bottle to
make me look complete. Asl wandered up to the head station
I could not help weaving quite a romance. I had heard of
wealthy maidens falling madly in love with wild and rol-
licking blades and marrying them, and I thought I looked
killing enough to please any romantic damsel. Just before
I reached the homestead, my spurs got entangled one with
the other and threw me down in the saltbush. I had never
worn a pair of hooks before in all my life, and this pair
troubled me a lot. I wanted to take them off; but Bob
said, “ No, young ’un, don’t be a fool. All you’ve got to do
is to push that old cabbage-tree well back of your neck, and
lift your feet with a high prancing motion so as to throw
the gravel up a bit behind, it’ll take these station fellows


down a bit. All the best rough riders in the back blocks
walk like that, just to show they are the cocks of the walk.
Throw your feet well in front with a nice free action, and
be sure you make the rowel of your spur strike the seat of
your pants at every stride. They’ll think all the more of
you if you have a little blood on the spurs when they see
you.” A gentleman named Chris. Wade was boss of that
station, and as soon as he set eyes upon me he engaged me.
Bob said it was the action that did it. He was a jolly
sort of a fellow, and at once entered into conversation with
my mate ; and so well did the old digger please him that he
was rolling all over the place convulsed with laughter in less
than ten minutes. At last he told us to go down to the
men’s quarters and get a feed ; and away we sailed. You
can bet a bit that I didn’t forget to put on some “ frill.”
When we got down to the cook’s galley, one of the hands
came up to me, and offered to shake hands with me, remark-
ing, “ Well, Greenery, my boy, how are you popping
up 1 ” I said he’d made a mistake, as my name was
Smiler. At this they all roared, though I couldn’t see
anything funny in it. Then the same man said his name
was Timothy Tiddler, chief of the Ancient Order of Sun-
downers. I assured him I was only too happy to make the
acquaintance of such a distinguished gentleman. He shook
hands with me so long and so hard that it took me nearly
all next day to get my fingers separated from one another.
Then he said he wished I had come a few days earlier, and
he would have been proud to have introduced me to Lady
Tiddler, president of the Back Block Bummers’ Association,
but unfortunately she was at that moment in delicate health.
But, he added, if I liked I could drink her ladyship’s health,
and they all would ke most happy to join me. I felt quite
flattered, and at once ordered half-a-dozen bottles of rum


from the store room. All hands drained a bumper to Lady
Tiddler. Then Bob suggested another one all round for the
heir. Then we drank to the “ Bummers’ Association ” and
the “ Sundowners’ Society.” Subsequently Timothy Tiddler
proposed “ Long life to the Greenery,” and hoped there was
a large family of them ; also that they would all call in at
the station. This toast was drained with musical honours
by all present. I didn’t know the party, and confessed my
ignorance. Timothy replied that Greenery was the bush-
man’s friend, and it was my surprising likeness to the party
in question that had at first made him mistake me for that
great individual. After this, the fun waxed fast and
furious, and I heard a lot about bush life that fairly
astonished me. At last they fell to admiring my style of
walking, and made me prance up and down the hut, Mr.
Tiddler remarking that I was a real high stepper. Then
they made me mount the slip-panel, just to show them what
sort of a seat I had in the saddle. The boss came down
while I was at it, and, at his suggestion, they put a bridle
on one of the posts, curb-rein and all, just to let them see
what a light hand I had. Mr. Tiddler again remarked that
if my hand was as light as my head I ought to be able to
ride a steam-engine across country. After I had got quite
tired of showing off my ability as a rough rider on that rail
I dismounted. Then the conversation turned upon whips.
The black bullock-driver offered to bet me a pint of rum
that he could pick a fly off the hind-quarter of a stock horse
without making the animal flinch. I took him up on the
instant. They saddled up a sleepy-looking old grey quad-
ruped, that looked as if nothing less than the crack of doom
would rouse. I went up and took hold of the bridle, and
put my foot in the stirrup. The beast never even winked.
I put my hand on to the pommel of the saddle, and swung


myself in mid air. Just as I lifted my right leg high
enough to cross the crupper I felt a set of teeth fixed in the
part of my person that I was just about to fix in the seat
of that saddle. I never felt like that in my life before. I
remember once being struck in the same place by the
buffer of an express train, but that sensation was pleasure
to the feeling that went through me during the ten minutes
that I was in the jaws of that quiet old crock. After
shaking me until my nose bled, the beast gently carried me
to the slip-panel and deposited me on the other side. The
brute then went as quietly back to the spot where I had
attempted to mount, and complacently chewed up a yard
and a quarter of doeskin which it had robbed me of. I was
very wrathful at first, but Mr. Wade said he was sincerely
sorry he had neglected to tell me that he had purchased the
animal from a circus, and he said it was invaluable as a
trick horse. When I had put on another pair of tights I
again attempted to mount. This time I requested Bob to
catch hold of the animal's head. Timothy Tiddler said I had
nothing to fear, as the trick horse didn’t like veal. Still I
took good care to keep my calf well out of his reach. This
time I got fairly into the saddle, and Bob put a wet quid of
tobacco on the root of the brute’s tail. Then the black
boy swung his stock-whip, and Mr. Wade, who had kindly
consented to act as referee, put up his eye glass to see if the
grey mare flinched. At last a bluebottle fly lighted on
that quid of juicy tobacco. The nigger’s eyes flashed, his
white teeth showed clear and distinct like a chalk line
drawn from ear to ear ; his long bony arm whirled round
his head. 1 heard the lash hiss like an angry serpent in
mid air, and then it fell like molten lead right across the
sinewy rump of the trick horse. I had won my rum.
Did he shift ? Did he flinch ? Father of Hades ! His


head touched the dust at his feet and his hind hoofs went
up until he was three feet over the perpendicular, then the
order of things was reversed, and he sat up on the root of
his tail. He doubled his two fore hoofs under his shoulders,
and tried to scoop me out of the saddle. Then he tried to
squirm out of the girths by tying himself up like a cricket
ball. Still I hung on I never shifted half an inch. I
was never more surprised in my life. The station hands
cheered like sin. For three quarters of an hour that trick
horse kept gyrating round, trying every trick in the
equine calendar to get rid of me; but in vain. There I sat
as if horse, saddle, and rider were part and parcel of the
same beast. At last, worn out and breathless, the old out-
law gave in, and fell broken-hearted in the dust, never to
rise again. Then 1 tried to rise ; but I could not. Bob
tenderly put his strong arms round me, and attempted to
lift me to my feet, but he had to bring saddle and all with
me. I whispered in his ear for him to carry me to our room
in the hut, for I now began to realize how it was that I sat
that equine terrorso longand so well. Hedidaslcommanded.
When he had driven them all out and bolted the door, I
told him that when I had changed my pants I had put on
two square feet of sticking plaster to cover the wound made
by the grey’s teeth in our first encounter, and the heat of
my body had caused the plaster to adhere to the saddle,
and my reputation as a horseman was made through the
medium of a chemist’s shop. I did not patent the idea ;
I now fling it out upon the world for the benefit of my
fellow man.


BIRCHING.
On the Barrier Ranges, newspaper men often get into
hot water, and, as I am on the subject of newspapers, I
may as well mention that Broken Hill at the present time
owns two papers. The Silver Age is a morning paper,
originally published in Silverton. The Barrier Miner is an
evening journal, and is the organ of the working classes,
and devotes most of its energies to exposing shams and
frauds of all kinds, especially mining swindles. John
Carden was the first editor, and to his great journalistic
abilities the Miner owes its present position in a great
measure. He wrs the smartest pressman that ever emptied
a pewter pot on the silver fields. Mr. Prior was the next
editor, and a real smart, clever fellow he was ; he after-
wards edited the Sydney Mining Standard , and there are
few men knocking round who can give this young, able,
and energetic pressman a start. There was a paper
published in the great mining camp at one time, called the
Argus, but it died, and its editor was jugged for criminal
libel. F. E. Hammond was the name of this ill-used scribe.
He was fined £IOO for writing about J. J. Williams. But
my brother of the pen, little Advertiser Stephens, and I,
collected the amount and released Hammond, who, poor
devil, whate’er his faults, did not deserve imprisonment.
But it’s a dangerous game writing too much truth, and I
intend to steer clear of that rock, if I sink in the effort.
The Broken Hill Times was the first paper published on


Broken Hill, and I was its mining reporter when the concern
was sold, and the name changed to the Argus. Then I cast
in my lot with the Barrier Miner. During my career, I’ve
seen a lot of wild-eyed seekers after gore dashing round
seeking for stray newspaper men. I’ve had to jam the
business end of a loaded revolver down the throat of a prize-
fighter to induce him to postpone operating upon me. I’ve
been danced upon, flogged, thumped, and brow-beaten until
I’ve felt that I’d give my share of everlasting bliss to be
John L. Sullivan for one brief hour. Ye gods, if such a
transformation were possible there’d be more corpses strewn
round the mining camp in one hour, than a regiment of
parsons could pray over in a week. But all other modes of
punishment pale before birching. Do you know what class
and style of amusement it consists of? Well, I’ll tell you
how it is known to fame at the Barrier.
The birch is a good old-fashioned instrument of cor-
rection, which was introduced into Britain by a young
fellow named Julius Caesar, for the especial benefit of
editors and newspaper people generally, about two thousand
years before the present Kat'-hole Dam was scooped out.
Yet there is nothing to show that Julius Caesar kept a pub.,
or yelled indignant expressions at a packed gathering from
the back-bone of a trolly in Argent Street. The birch is
not, as is usually supposed by the vulgar, a straight stick of
a flexible nature, about as thick as your middle finger. It
is a piece of stringy-bark, about four feet long, and as long
and as thick as is convenient to grasp in both hands, with
a knob on the end of it as large as a spring cabbage. It
usually has a three inch wire nail driven through the end,
with the point outwards. This helps to make birching a
most lively and pleasant operation for the spectators. The
stringy-bark tree was weT known to the ancients. It is


mentioned in the Bible as the wood out of which Solomon
built the temple, and that accounts for the carpenters
taking so long over their contract. Now that you know
all about the instrument, let me tell you about the modus
operandi (that is the Italian for “ how to bang him.” I
like to translate my own quotations from the dead languages.
Not that the Italians are dead—l often wish they were
when that organ-grinder calls our way). First of all, go
into the darkest room of your house, lock the door, go down
on your knees, and make all the peace you can with your
Maker; next go and make your will, and put on a decent
suit of cloths—it does not look well to be carried home in
rags on a shutter. Then call on your neighbour’s wife,
if she be good-looking and tender, and give her a last
loving, lingering embrace —to be given to your wife when
you’re gone. Wives always like something of that sort
from the dead. But be careful she does not drop in during
the performance, or you may be compelled to sit out your
own wake. When you have done all these things to the
best of your ability, go and partake extensively of Scotch
whisky and gunpowder. Then, when you have an idea
that you can whip John L. Sullivan, Mass Kirby, and Mrs.
Gamp, in the one ring,, you are ripe and fit for the deed
that must follow. Then put a little Stockholm tar on the
palm of your hands, so that the birch wont slip in your
grasp. Next worry round for a newspaper man. When
you have found one whose opinions on the water scheme
does not coincide with your own, don’t say a word to him,
but creep close up on tip-toe and hit him with the cabbage
end of the birch on the nape of the neck. This will be
manly, and prove that you have sprung from a race of
warriors. If he falls after the first blow, pick him up and
prop him against the nearest convenient wall. Then hit


him again, using the nail this time, to wake him up. If he
recovers and tries to fight, call for assistance; and, when
there are eight or ten of you, knock him down and kick
his next week’s leaders out of him. If he tries to escape,
call him a mangy cur. If he shows fight, and takes the
birch from you, and jumps on your chest, and does you up
bad, and leaves nothing for a coroner’s jury to decide on
except a few fragments of humanity and the crown of your
hat, get your friends to have him arrested as a dangerous
lunatic, unfit to be at large If he should carry a shooting
iron, and should drill a three-eighth hole in your lungs,
which is more than probable, sink gracefully down in the
dust, fold your cloak around you, and send for the street
band, that you may die to slow music. And all men will
sing your praises as a martyr in the good old cause of
birching ; and the very scribe on whom you intended to
practice will write a column in your honour.


“ON TICK.”
“ Tick”—there’s a mysterious charm, which is really
marvellous to the uninitiated, about that little word. I
have striven to find out its origin ; and I have heard some
very queer versions relative to its birth. One friend told
me that it was invented for the sole use of pressmen, in the
first instance. If that be so, I can only say that it was
played out before my time. In Broken Hill at the present
moment I guess there are not ten persons, male or female,
who have not made use of the magic word “ tick ” during
the last few months. lam one of the ten. But where, oh
where, are the nine ?
Wishing to get at the feelings of the tradespeople in
this town in regard to the business application of that word,
I got into my hat and collar, and went forth seeking whom
I might devour. I first called upon a well-known tailor,
and inspected his stock, got the price of this, that, and the
other, and was measured for a five guinea suit. Then I
pursed my lips like a broker, when asked to shout, and said,
“Ah, Sharpshears, dear boy, I’ll have this first lot on
‘ tick.’ ”
I have stood by the bedside of a comrade while he
gasped out his sinful soul in long, laboured sobs ; I have
watched the Angel of Heath place his seal on the upturned
countenance of a digger away in the desolate hills. I have
seen some awful sights in my time. I have seen a young
married man’s first interview with his ma-in-law the night


after he had been caught fetching home a single girl at
10 p.m.; I have seen a gambler stake his last coin and lose ;
but never, no never, on my honor as a truthful scribe, have
I seen a man’s countenance change as that tailor’s did. The
smile left his lips, and the curl departed from his hair.
Then he fixed his eyes mournfully on my countenance,
while his hand sought the nearest flat-iron, and he said,
“ Mister, what did you say 1 Was it ‘ tick T Can it be that
one, who does not look like a stuffed edition of a meek Mon-
golian, can come on my premises and cut up rough like that 1
Mister, I’m a man of peace, and have been from my
youth up. But that word makes the bristles on my back-
bone rise up in anger. Get, you wicked one, get! ” I got.
And I’ll walk the streets of this town in all the majestic
grandeur of a born native before I’ll face that meek-voiced
man, who is so handy with a flat-iron again.
My next attempt was more successful. I called at an
oyster saloon, and threw myself down with an air of languid
weariness that I knew would fetch the proprietor, if any-
thing did. I inherit that style from the Yere de Yere
family, to whom lam related on my brother’s side. This
time I thought I might as well digest the goods, and try the
experiment with the word “ tick ” after. It was a happy
thought. After getting outside of four dozen and a half of
his best oysters, all very large and fine, I beckoned the
frowsy oysterman to my side, and said, “Friend, do you
know what “tick ”is ?” In a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye, ten bony fingers were clasped lovingly round my
neck, whilst a strong substantial knee-joint was pressed on
the spot where those oysters reposed. I was quite unpre-
pared for an argument of this sort on such short notice ; and
when I found myself lying minus my shirt-front and my
madmi collar in the dust of the street, I came to the con-


elusion that the bivalve man did know what “ tick ” meant.
I have never felt comfortable in the presence of an oyster
from then until now.
Still I was not daunted. I had commenced to go the
round of the town on a special mission, and I would not so
feebly turn my back on the task. I therefore twisted all
that was left of my hat gracefully over the left ear, and
buttoning my coat up to the chin to hide the deficiency
underneath, I put on my best smile, and sauntered into a
tobacconist’s shop
“ Day, sir,” quoth the man behind the counter.
“ Good day ; ah ! it’s warm,”
“You look as if you’d been getting warm, Mr. Smiler.”
“ Ah, yass, I’ve been eating oysters that didn’t agree
with me.”
“ Quite so; but you look as if you’d eaten a powder
magazine. What can Tdo for you ? ”
“ Give me ‘ tick ’ for a quarter of an ounce of best
bull-dog brand rough-cut.”
•‘Don’t keep any animals of that description on the
premises, sir.”
“ What animal ? ”
“ Tick, sir, very dangerous animal. Swallowed up
two hotels and a butcher’s shop quite recently, sir.”
“ Really, you don’t say so.”
“ But I do say so.”
“ What was it invented for, eh ? ”
“ For the use of knaves to dupe fools.”
“ Does it act well ? ”
“ Sometimes, not always.”
“Will it act this trip ? ”
“ No, you inquisitive, lop-eared animal, it won’t. But
I will. ’


And he did. I never speak to tobacconists now. I
had to borrow a pillow to sit down upon for five weeks after
that interview, or else stand up to my meals.
I began to understand what “ tick ” was by this time,
and determined to work out the idea unassisted. I came to
the conclusion that tick ”is a thing which, firstly, is in-
accessible to a Pressman; secondly, it is a boon and
a blessing to those poor bankers’ clerks who don’t
get screw enough to live upon ; thirdly, it is the curse of
the poor but honest labouring man ; fourthly, it is the
butchers’, bakers’, grocers’ nightmare, and the publicans’ god-
send ; fifthly, it is a good thing to have plenty of it, if you
have no conscience to prick you, and no goods for the
bailiff to seize; sixthly, if you are in business sooner en-
courage a leprous Chinamen about the place than a creditor
who wants to have the run of his teeth in your show on
“ tick.”


BOOZERS.
In the streets of any Australian town the “ boozer ”
can be met in all his many stages of progression, from the
youth who tips his little nobbier glass upside down in an
elegant manner, to the wretch who grasps a long beer with
both hands, and bolts the contents at a gulp. Standing at
a well-known bar, I see a bright young fellow, full of fun
and devilment, joking with the siren who gives a drink and a
smile for sixpence. His frame is lithe and active, his hands
are firm and strong, his voice mellow and merry ; I turn
from the picture with a smile, for it is pleasant to look upon.
He, in the pride of his manly strength, and she, in her
womanly beauty—and her paint.
As I move to the door a voice, cracked and broken,
croaks forth, “ Mr. Smiler, for the love of God, shout us a
drink.”
What is that bundle of rags, leaning against the wall?
I look again and see that it is a man, or rather the broken,
blasted wreck of a man—a thing both repulsive and
unwholesome, something to make a man shudder while his
blood is chilled.
“ You don’t know me, Smiler,” croaked the voice.
“Know you ! No, my man, Ido not; and I calculate
your ma would be clever if she would remember you now.”
“ That’s right, tread on a fellow when he’s down. I
remember the time, Smiler, when you would have been
proud to recognise me; when you hadn’t a bob to bless


yerself with, and had to knock bread and butter together
with pick and shovel. Strikes me, Mister, things have
changed a bit with both of us since then. Yes, things have
changed. I was a leading lawyer, and you were a common
digger. I used to earn 50 guineas a week, and you about
ten bob a day. Now you wear your hair parted in the
middle, and do the ‘ toff,’ and I’m a wreck.”
“Yes, stranger, you are a wreck, and a dirty one, too.
There must have been a water famine down your way for
a considerable time past,”
“ Yes, it’s a dry season altogether. Won’t you wet it,
Smiler.”
I gave the impecunious creature the needful *to
purchase himself a pint. As he sailed up to the bar, I
could not help thinking of him as he was when I saw
him four years before. Then he was an ornament to society,
a brilliant and clever lawyer, witty, able, long-headed ; the
companion and friend of men of letters, and the pet of
ladies of rank and fashion, not one of whom would deign to
touch him with a shovel to-day. And there' he stood, rags
from head to heel. His bloated face was dirty with the
grime of weeks. His eyes, bloodshot and sunken, looked
horrible ; and 1 turned away with a shudder, when a voice
I knew well sounded in my ear—
“ Clean your boots, sir ? ”
I lifted my small seventeen on to the box, and the
broken-down boot-black went to work, with his poor
trembling hands all shaking and shivering.
“ You remember the time when I didn’t have to do
this sort of thing, Mr. Smiler.”
“Yes, Jack, I do.’i’
“Maybe you remember when my hand didn’t shake
like it does now? Ah, those was times. I could lift a Ion"
&


beer with one hand, and not spill half it down my neck
then.”
I let him talk away as he brushed, for I had seen him
only a few years before, a powerful, active man. But Jim
Hennessy is a fiery wrestler, and few men can keep meeting
him day after day for a year or two without getting broken
up. As I left my old friend, the blacking artist, I met a
young fellow, well dressed and well educated. He called
himself “ a jolly dog, a real bit of stuff.” I called him a
“ beer-eater,” and thought him a mean-spirited cur.
Business transactions had often brought us together, and I
had watched him, as I watch everything that comes in my
way. I noticed that if he were in the company of men
who had money to spend, his laugh was always the loudest
at the silliest of jokes they made. He would slap a fellow
on the back, and double himself up with joy, for the sake of
a bottle of wine; and as for a barmaid, why there was
nothing under heaven he wouldn’t do for one of the dear
creatures so that he might call in and drink at their expense,
morning, noon, and night; for he was in a chronic state of
thirst, just as if he had been bred on saltbush. Mean and
despicable, he pretended to look with contempt upon the
working man, as an “ inferiaw creetchaw, you know.”
I turned in time to meet Jack Suckbottle, an itinerant
broker, one who sold scrip, and would drink with a hangman,
or an editor, or any other mean kind of man. This fellow
was young in years, but a most despicable beast, for nothing
was too dirty for him to do if there was a beer at the end
of the job. He would hold the candle for any act if he
could get the run of a whisky bottle; another mean
contemptible one, on whom even the ordinary drunkard
looked with scorn.


My next bibulous friend was J onathan Easyled, whom
his friends described as a fool to himself. Jonathan
informed me on his honour that he did not like drink; he
merely drank for company’s sake. He didn’t like it ! And
yet I saw him wipe out six long drinks in twelve minutes !
If he only liked it, now, I wonder how many drinks he
would consume in twenty-four hours.


DYING OF THIRST.
I had almost forgotten the story that I am about to
relate, although, at the time of its occurrence, it made a
deep impression on my mind. The painful narrative was
recalled to me by an ex-maildriver the other day. As I
was seated in the cosy parlour of his quiet little hotel, a
half-drunken fellow came in and swore that he had
narrowly escaped death from thirst on the preceding day.
The landlord looked at me and queried, “ Do you remember
poor Frank, who died raving mad, after wandering for
days on the Wilcannia track 1 Ah, if I’d only had a good
team that trip, he might have been kicking round even
now.” Then I remembered the story well, for 1 had stood
by the wi’etched man in his last awful agony, and I pray
God I may never see a human life end again as that one
did. It was on a bitter, scorching midsummer day.
Frank was a digger, and, like most of his class, he was a
brave, rash and careless fellow, full of life and merriment,
fond of whisky, gambling and the girls. He played a good
hand at crib, too, sat a horse well, could hold his own in a
row, and danced gracefully, tie could sing a bit, and was
fairly good on the accordeon. Add to this that he knew
how to do a day’s hard work, and you have a pretty fair
list of his accomplishments. Poor Frank had many a long
tramp, with his swag on his shoulders and his dog at his
heels ; but he was hardy enough for anything, as a man
must be who tempts fortune in the Australian bush. He


knocked about on the ranges for a long time before he ran
into a streak of luck, and I have laughed many a time to
hear him tell how he had shuffled to make both ends meet.
A prospector’s life was a hard one six years ago, even if he
had money at his command ; but it was devilish cruel when
he had little or none. A rabbit would have been looked
upon as a red-hot blessing in those days, and I have known
the time when a plate of oatmeal and a hunk of kangaroo
tail made a man feel that he was in luck’s way for once.
Frank was one of those diggers who could get fat on food
that would kill half the new-fangled prospectors of the
present time, who go out in patent-leather boots, and a trap
and pair of ponies, with food enough to feed a regiment of
niggers. At last, when he did have luck, he came right
along, picked up his old chums, and gave each a helping
hand. Then he set to work diligently to knock the bottom
out of his cheque, and it did not take him and his mates
long to do it either. I saw him one day in King’s hotel.
He gave the barman a sovereign for permission to shy his
glass at the bottles on the rack, and, as he only broke one
bottle a shot, it would have paid the publican to let him
keep on for a month at that game. In this mad fashion he
knocked his banking account to pieces very quickly. Then
he started out prospecting again, without a dollar in his
pocket or a second shirt to his back. He was out some
considerable time, and was just about forgotten in the camp
when one day he reappeared dragging his almost lifeless
limbs along the dusty street. His eyes were sunken
and bloodshot; his cheeks hollow and flushed; his limbs
shrunken and trembling. Something in his manner arrested
the attention of a passer-by, and the poor fellow was
dragged into an eating-house. But the unfeeling cur who
kept that den refused to allow the sufferer even to sit down


for a moment. When Frank was turned into the street, he
was met by James King, who then kept a hotel at
Silverton. Mr. King gave him bed and board, and he
needed it sorely, for the fever was in his veins. For many
a week he lay raving, in his delirium, of rich mineral
deposits, known to no one but himself. But the hardy
miner fought a grim battle hand to hand with death, and
won. He did look a miserable wreck when he came out of
his sick room. He mended rapidly, however, and one
morning, much against his friend’s advice, he planked his
blankets on his back once more, and sallied forth into the
bush in search of silver. He had been out of the camp
about eight days, when, one evening, Paddy O’Neill, the
mail driver, flogging his tired team through a cloud of dust,
saw a man reeling round and round in a circle that gradually
lessened as the poor wretch’s strength failed him. It was
Frank O’Grady. He had missed his track to his camp. His
waterbag was empty in his wasted hands ; his head was
bare, and exposed to the fierce rays of the sun; the fire of
madness shone in his rolling eyes; blood and foam trickled
through his gnashed and bleeding lips. Now and again he
threw his arms in the air, and laughed that strange and
thrilling laugh, which, once heard, is never forgotten. At
times he picked the dust from the track and let it glide
through his skeleton fingers, revelling in the maniacal fancy
that it was water. For a moment he would pause and
seem to reflect. Then he would roll and stagger round again,
yelling and cursing in all the awful horrors of one lost in
the desolate Australian bush. When strong yet tender
hands were placed upon him, he turned fiercely on the men
who were trying to save him, and accused them of trying to
jump his claim. In the next breath he pleaded piteously
for water, water, water ! None who knew Paddy O’Neill


in those days would doubt his courage or his iron nerve.
But, when he lifted that human wreck from the coach at
Silverton, his strong hands shook like a woman’s, and his
cheeks were ashen white. Poor Frank ! All that kindness
and care could do was done; but the powerful brain had
turned, the madness of despair had fulfilled its awful task.
In a few days, slowly and solemnly, we laid him to rest,
with a digger s last farewell.


A KANGAROO HUNT.
I don’t consider that a history of Australia would be
complete without a detailed account of a kangaroo hunt.
The bounding kangaroo is a most interesting animal to
study. If any “ new chum ” doubts this assertion let him
get his dog to stick up an “ old man,” and then go quietly
up, and gently raise the marsupial’s off eyelid. When his
friends have gathered up all that is left of the new chum,
he’ll be able to give a detailed account concerning the
modes of attack and defence as practised by the timid
kangaroo. I remember my first hunt ; and, as my
experience may, perhaps, be useful to those who have never
been initiated into the prince of the Australian sports, I’ll
jot it down. But I’ll start with a little sound advice.
Always take the first saddle-hack that is offered to you.
It looks squeamish and timid to refuse a mount just because
the horse is blind in one eye or shies. Some people don’t
care to hunt on a horse that shies. For my part, I say,
take him by all means. If he has two eyes and don’t shy,
perhaps he is inclined to stumble. Don’t refuse him on
that account. You may be old and weak in the legs
yourself some day. If the groom swears that your horse
won’t kick, just crawl quietly up behind him, and hit
him smartly on the hock with a piece of fencing wire. If
he don’t kick, then you will know he is safe. If he does
you can have the satisfaction of calling the groom a liar—
when you get out of the hospital. Perhaps the animal yon


are going to hire has the reputation of knowing how to buck
like a fly-blistered mule ; make sure of this at once. This
is how you should do it. Put on the simplest bridle you
can find, with a plain snaffle-bit. This will give the horse
the idea that you are not nervous about your abilities.
Then get your saddle on. Never use more than one girth
fora buckjumper; for, if a horse bucks hard enough to
break one girth, it’s forty cents to a turtle’s egg that you
will come off; and it looks better to go with the saddle than
without it. Always study appearances. Before you
mount, tell your groom to rub a well-greased cloth over the
seat of the saddle; it will enable you to show the natives
that you know all about the art of balancing yourself
according to the movements of the animal you are riding*
Be sure you have a crupper on, for it’s a most dangerous
thing to ride a bucking horse without one. You may,
perhaps, be thrown up so high that your mount turns
round while you are in the air; of course, if you are a
horseman, you will come down somewhere in the saddle, but
it frequently happens that you come down the wrong way
round, with your face to the horse’s tail. In a case of this
kind you will appreciate a good crupper. Don’t stop to
ask any questions from the onlookers; delays might be
dangerous ; but just freeze on to that crupper with your
teeth and both hands. If your friends chaff you afterwards
about your style, just say you were merely practising how
to go through a hedge backwards. If they believe you
your reputation’s made. If they don’t —and probably they
won’t—you will be no worse off than you were before.
When you first get your seat on a horse of a bucking
disposition, don’t sit too far forward. It’s a bad plan to
risk giving the animal a headache. Try and look as much
like a resurrected corpse as possible. If you don’t know


what a resurrected corpse is like, take a newly-promoted
cavalry officer as a pattern. If the beast you are mounted
on lays his ears back give him all the bride you can, and
let him put his head between his knees. Don’t try and
coax the brute in any way, but just dig the spurs into his
flanks, and yell like a disappointed jumper. One of two
things is sure to happen ; either he will go off or you will.
If you do prove victorious, as I expect you will, if you
follow my advice faithfully, the next thing will be how to
negotiate your jumps. Many great authorities differ on
this point. For instance, Tom McFie and Oscar Smith
never ride at a fence exactly alike. Oscar has a wild, free
style ;he loves to dash at his obstacles as though he were
following wildly in the wake of a funeral. He always
allows his hunter to pick his own panel; he shuts his mouth
resolutely—and his eyes also. He scorns to influence the
animal in any way, he simply flings the reins on the neck
of his charger, and hangs on to the pommel of the saddle
with reckless courage. Picture something quite the reverse
of this, and you have McFie’s style to a nicety. I advise
all beginners to copy “ Oscar ” My first hunt was a very
short one. I went out with a crowd, and came home by
myself—three weeks afterwards. When I was getting my
top boots on, George Raynor, one of the best mail drivers
alive, came into the room, and he gave me most of the
advice that I have given above. The animal I sat on on
that auspicious occasion belonged to Trooper Pyvis, and
was renowned for its fondness for trees. When I was
climbing painfully into the saddle, fearful of splitting my
tights (which I had borrowed from Billy Lees, the nine-
stone jockey), “Jimmy,” the black tracker, came up and
measured my foot with his hand. I asked him what he
was doing, and he replied, “Oh, you d one fool ; I


have to go and look after your body. Missis Connell tell
me.” I went away disgusted. Kangaroos were very
plentiful in those days, and we made for the Black Hill
Dam. When my gallant grey saw the water, he went for
it full gallop. I tried to stop him, but finding I couldn’t,
I sat down and yelled, just to make the others think that I
was in my element. I thought the brute would go right
ahead, but he didn’t. He stopped in front of that mud
puddle as if he had been struck by an earthquake. I did
not stop. It is one of my firmest-rooted principles never
to stop suddenly at anything I have in hand. I went on
by myself on that occasion for about thirteen yards, and
then stopped two feet under water. My friends hung me
upon the wire fence to dry for a while, and I looked so
limp and unmended that the crows began to crowd round
in showers, so I was hitched down, and we went on for
another 300 yards, when my steed spotted another smaller
dam. Off’ he went at the same pace ; but I was up to his
devilment this trip. I coolly turned in the saddle, and
hung on to the crupper. I never saw a horse look so
foolish as that beast did when he stopped dead in his
tracks. At first he attempted to turn round and back into
the water; but, as he couldn’t get up much pace on that
line of progress, I felt pretty secure. I was rather proud
of that exploit, and Jack Frost said it was the coolest thing
he’d seen for a long time. Mick O’Farrell said he didn’t
see any particular merit in keeping cool in a wet suit of
clothes. I was going to reply, when the dogs started an
old flying doe, and off’ we went. I won’t say how fast we
travelled, for I didn’t take the time, and I never draw on
my imagination, and I never drink with a man that does,
unless he stands the liquor. Suddenly a sheep-proof wire
fence rose up before me. Now at the best of times a wire.


fence is not a thing of beauty. I never struck a poet that
could go into raptures over a wire fence yet. If any one
else has, I’ll give him five crowns for his scalp, if left at my
office, and undertake to defend him if he is sued under the
Vermin Act. When I first saw that fence I was only
twenty yards from it, and going like an express train on a
down grade; and yet I had time to think of the first time
1 had lisped a prayer at my mother’s knee, and the first
time I had slept under the table, with a whisky bottle in
one hand, and a handful of red hair, that had belonged to
the barman, in the other. Every hen-roost and orchard
that I had robbed in my boyhood stared me in the face.
Like as in a dream, I saw my father standing with a prayer-
book in one fist, and a three-foot malacca rod in the other ;
and I felt it would be sinful to jump that fence on such a
still calm Sabbath afternoon. 1 was touched to the quick
with remorse. I’d shake hands with my old grey-haired
father before I’d jump wire fences on Sundays; and hear him
say once more, “God bless you, boy.” I hung on to that
bridle like treacle to a pair of woollen pants. But for the
second time the horse and I differed ; he would jump, and
he did. His hind leg caught in the wires, and I finished
the rest of that hunt on one elbow and the nape of my
neck. I have gone quick journeys in my time. I was 200
feet above water level in a balloon when the concern burst,
and we came back quick like ; I did forty-six miles in
eleven minutes in a runaway express train I was shot out
of an electric ten-ton gun when I was a boy at sea. But
these things were “ one-horse ” concerns compared with the
speed with which I parted company with that saddle. For-
tunately for me, the black boy had followed the party, and
when he came up they were delighted to see him. They at
once started him on my track, which they easily found, as


the horse still hung in the wires, and was quietly feeding on
two legs. With that wonderful sagacity for which the
aborigines are famous, he managed to find all my pieces by
sundown, and I was patched together at a shepherd’s hut.
Since then, I have followed the sport closely, and consider
the above a mere trifle.


DUTCH MOSES*
Dutch Moses was a Greek, who dwelt in the land long
before anyone found that silver existed on the Barrier. He
was a little, shrivelled-up being, with a face like a baboon
suffering from neuralgia. He kept a sort of grog-shanty
for the benefit of stray bushmen and cattle-duffers, as the
cattle-thieves were called in those days, and he made a good
thing out of it. I knew him well, and many an hour have
I spent in his company, listening to the yarns he would
tell concerning his former life.
One day I told him that I had heard from trooper
Pyvis, that the skeleton of a man had been found in one of
the ranges at the back of Lake’s grave, and that the police
were trying to find out who the poor wanderer was who had
strayed there in that lonely spot to die. I won’t try to
describe the horrid grin that spread all over his face when
I mentioned the police and their efforts. For a while he
seemed lost in a retrospect of the past years of his mysteri-
ous life. At last he left off chewing his quid of tobacco,
and said, “ Mister, you look like a fool, so I don’t mind
telling you about a man that got lost out that way once. I
was keeping a grog-shop those days, and I had some fun,
I can tell you. I used to get hold of all the tobacco pipes
that came handy and boil ’em down, and then I used to
mix the juice up with some beer, and sometimes I put in a
little drop of turpentine to make it lively. I never struck
a man yet, white trash or blue nigger, that wouldn’t thump


his own father after drinking three nobblers of that grog.
Why, I’ve often taken a couple of years’ earnings from a
bushman in one night like that, and the fool would go away
and not know but what he'd been located at my shanty for
at least a month. Sometimes they went crazy altogether,
and would wander off into the bush. May-be that skele-
ton belonged to one of my boys.
“ But I had other customers besides the station hands.
There was one big fellow, with a red beard, who used to
ride on a splendid roan horse. He was my best customer ;
but he never drank my chain lightning. I offered him a
glass of it the first time he called along, and he just tasted
it carefully. Then he got up and broke the jug over ray
skull, and as soon as I opened my mouth he jammed the
point of his pistol down my throat. I thought I was gone
up that trip, for he looked fierce enough to do any deed
of devilment. But ho didn’t pull the trigger, and I’m here
all sound, and he’s been rotting in a grave where the Sydney
police planted him, after they hung him for bushranging.
He was a real good fellow, in spite of his devilish temper,
and when he came, he always kept the boys drunk for a
week. Sometimes he came with three or four mates, and a
big drove of cattle that they had duffed somewhere, but not
often. Several times he and his gang were hard pressed,
and they had to turn their cattle adrift in the ranges ; and
that accounts for the number of wild cattle that can be
found running upon the Barrier now, although most of
them have been thinned off by the boys, or have made their
way back to the river. Sometimes Red Ned, the bush
ranger, would come down amongst us for a spell, when the
police were hunting him, and making things very sultry in
the more settled districts. One time when he was camped
down at my hut, a fellow came there with two pack-horses


from a back station. He was making down to the coast.
He had heaps of coin on him, but we couldn’t make him
spend it. I tried him all I knew, but I could only get a
few pounds out of him. Then I set one or two of the girls
at him, for I had three or four women I had picked up on
the river—half-castes and white trash. But they couldn’t
bleed this fellow. He seemed to be a very wide-awake
young chap, and one of the half-caste girls got sweet upon
him. I think she put him up to our dodges. Anyway, he
got up in the night and cleared out. He had let out to one
of the women that he had been nine years in the back
country dealing in stock, and had made a big pile. He was
on his way to Adelaide, and from there he intended to ship
to the old country to get married and settle down. As soon
as Red Ned heard how the bird had flown in the night, he
just grew mad. He put the saddle on that roan horse of
his, and, putting his revolvers in his belt, he rode off,
picking up the track as easily as a blackfellow. He was
away for five or six hours, and when he came back he had
the three horses that the stranger had taken away. Ned
had a bullet wound in his shoulder, and the big roan horse
was bleeding from a hole in his neck. I asked him how he
had got on, and he laughed as he pulled out a couple of bags
containing about £2OOO. ‘ And the other fellow—where
did you leave him ? ’ ‘ Oh, him, the fool, tried to throw us
off his track by doubling back. I picked him up out at
Lake’s Camp way, and I left him there. I never let a man
tell tales. I’m not built that way. The crows and the
dingoes will attend to him.’ ”
I looked at the little ugly demon in front of me,
chuckling with delight as he gloated over the details of his
picture of black crime, and I felt like choking him.


As I shook myself together to clear out, he said,
“ Look you here, Mister, perhaps that skeleton might belong
to that ’ere bushman.”
I met Dutch Moses one day at King’s Hotel, and he
offered to spin me a yarn for a pint of rum ; and. as I felt
interested in the old savage and his stories, in which I knew
there was plenty of truth, I stood the rum. When the old
renegade had demolished a good drop of the spirits, he
pointed to a daft, drunken, shrivelled-up sundowner, who
was leaning against the bar. <( See that cove, Mister
The boys call him old Towney. He’s had some rum times,
he has. When I knew him first he had the firmest seat in
the saddle, and the hardiest fist in a row, that I ever met.
His hair’s white enough now, and his hand’s shaky, too,
but I’ve knowed the day when that noisy young devil,
Terrible Dick, over here, would have run from him fast
enough. I saw him come here with Red Ned, and I heard
from one of my half-caste girls that he took up with all
about him. Women always get a man’s history out of him,
if they can make him sweet for a while, and they are a
crooked lot, too, I can tell. Now, Mister, just look at old
Towney for a spell. Do you think he has ever been a bit
of a swell in his time ?” I took a good look at that old
carcase, just to oblige my pot-house friend, and I must
say that, if I had been put on my judgment oath, I
shouldn’t have accused the old boozer of having rubbed
shoulders wdth good society. I could detect nothing of the
Mere de Vere stamp about him. His features were bloated
and sodden with drink ; his neck had not been scraped, let
alone washed for at least six months, and his language was
not classical. Just as I was taking stock of him he was
calling the barmaid several blanks, because she refused to
« tick.” No ; I really couldn’t say that I considered him a


faded drawing-room flower. Dutch Moses chuckled and
then resumed his yarn. “ The boys about yere called him
Towney, because he had such toffy ways when he first came
up here, and they started to chaff him ; but he didn’t take
kindly to chiack, and one by one he fought all the bully
boys ’bout here, and licked them. I saw him do Club-foot
Johnson, the boss of the river, and Club-foot was 13st. 101 b.
They fought 49 rounds ; then the big fellow caved in, and
no one else would strip off to Towney after that. He
was a groat drinker, too; I’ve seen him wager that he’d
drink nine nobblers while any other man drank three,
and he would always win. One day he had a row with
a bullock-driver over one of the girls, and they came to
blows. The bullocky got all the worst and a bit to spare
in a few rounds ; but he came along next day, and chal-
lenged Towney to tight him with whips to a finish. The
other animal agreed to that. The bullocky was to use his
bullock-whip, Towney had his stock-whip. Both of ’em
had a good pull at a bottle before they commenced, and
they did make the blood and hair fly, I tell you ; and the way
that stock-whip whistled was a caution, and in less than
five minutes he had the blood running down into the other
fellow’s boots, while his shirt was hanging in ribbons on
his back, until there was nothing but the buttonholes and
wristbands left. The bullocky was not idle, neither, and
when they were parted Towney had only one leg left to
his pants, while the beard on the left side of his face was
cut away as clean as a barber could cut it. I never saw
a closer shave in my time, and I’ve seen some close things,
you can bet. He was a rum fellow that Towney ; he would
gamble, and drink, and fight, and carry on with the women
trash free and easy-like for months, and then away he would
go, and no one knew where he went ; but he always came


back with lots of sugar in his pouch, and we weren’t very
particular them days. If any one asked him where he
raised the wind, he always said he was a lojal preacher by
trade, and that he followed his profession when away from
us. Once, when he had disappeared for a longer period
than usual, and we thought he had got caught, and would
never return to us, I asked his girl what he had been before
he took to the back blocks for a living, and she told me
O'
that he had told her his career, and she had read his letters
and other papers. He had been a Church of England parson
in the old country, and a famous scholar in his day—first
wrangler at Edinburgh University, or some such thing.
Anyway he had been a big gun. His papers said as how
he was a great mathematician, whatever that may be. I
aint up in that stuff. I know he could pack cards better
than a spieler, and he could play crib like sin. He told his
girl that he was stationed at a little town in the midland
counties, where he was curate, and he got shook on the
young wife of an old baronet, and they carried on high jinks
together for three or four years, and he forged deeds of
property, and all that sort of thing, to buy his swell lady
presents, and at last she got tired of him, and she let out on
him, so as to get rid of him, and the fool didn’t say a word
about the high falutin games they had been playing together
when his fine lady went into the box and swore his liberty
away. He got four years’ hard labour in an English gaol for
his share of that job, and then his friends sent him out to
Australia to bury himself That’s old Towney’s story. If
you like to stand another long sleever, I’ll give you some
more.”


808 THE FINISHER.
Bob the Finisher was a character well-known upon the
silver field in the early days. He was not an artist, nor a
silver king, nor a prize-fighter, nor a parson. No ; this
gentleman was neither one nor the other of these things. He
was merely an undertaker on a large scale, and he finished
so many in those days that it became quite fashionable to
be planted by the genial Bob. I never try to trade upon
the credulity of my readers, nor do I ever wander from the
beaten paths of truth ; for I have found that truth is
stranger than fiction lam not surprised at this, because
we hear and see so very little of truthful things, that it is
no wonder that what we do hear is strange to us. Bob the
Finisher was a dapper little man, who always looked well.
He was a philosopher also, and always made his philosophy
and business agree. For instance, I was talking to him one
evening, when a fellow came along and informed us that a
real live parson had arrived upon the field, and was even
then located in the camp. I said, for my part he might
come and be eternally blessed, for I was no lover of those
sleek-voiced gentlemen, who preached and prayed for bread
and cheese. But Bob the Finisher smacked his lips, and
said he intended to make one of the parson’s audience
anyway. I looked at him in wonder. Then he condescended
to explain matters, “ Don’t you understand, Mister; this
parson will do all the praying at the burials, and he will
have a lot to do with fixing up affairs, and if I’m one of his


deacons, aint it more than likely that I’ll get most of the
buryin’ to do?” And, true to his word, although he went
to bed blind drunk that night, Bob the Finisher was in the
front seat, closest to the parson’s chair, next day; and he
did become a deacon, and the Rev. Conundrum did give
him most of the planting to do. It was a sight to watch
him sailing along at the head of a funeral procession, in his
real black togs with a long streamer flying from his hat.
He would go all right until he got out of the streets ; but
as soon as he managed to get amongst the trees on the other
side of the creek, he would dodge behind a bush, off with his
long black hat, and pull out a flask of whisky. In those
periods of relaxation, he used to forget that he was a deacon
and a pillar of the church. He would then simply pull
out the cork, cast his eye towards the corpse, and murmur,
“ Well, here’s luck, and a pleasant journey,” and then
replace the flask in his hat or up his sleeve, and resume his
Onward march. Bob the Finisher was a most eccentric
character. One morning I was in visiting a sick friend,
who was down with the fever. My friend was a butcher,
and, as he felt himself gliding gently one leg at a time over
the shadowy boundary line which divides this land from
Hades and Paradise, his thoughts naturally turned upon
the lessons he had learned to lisp at his mother’s knee, and
to the time when he had smoked his first pipe. I, feeling
that he had smoked his last pipe, wanted to send for the
Rev. Conundrum, but ray friend declined, “ I don’t want
no sky pilot, mate,” he said, “ I guess they’re a bit mixed
about the right road themselves, for you never meet no two
of ’em that point you exactly on the same line of country.
Each parson that goes prospecting seems to have a different
sort of compass of his own, and they all swear that their
particular one is right, and the others will only lead you to


damnation, wherever that part of the country may be.” I
let him alone then for a spell, and fell into a dreamy
reverie myself, from which I was aroused by the entrance
of a big Salvation soldier. The man of blood and fire came
alongside that rough-made bunk, and, bending over the sick
butcher, asked in a sepulchral voice, “ Brother, can I do
anything for you ?” For a moment the fire of life flickered
in that old veteran’s frame. He clutched the soldier’s
hand, and pulling himself up half out of bed, he gasped,
“Yes, brother, yes ; pay me for those chops you had on
tick.” The red shirt man staggered back, and pulled out a
well-filled purse. He paid that demand, which seemed to
have come like a whisper from a far-off' land. Then once
more he asked, “ Brother, can I do aught else for you 1 ”
This time tears stood in the glassy eyes of the dying man,
as he slowly raised himself upon his elbow. The soldier
bent to lift him, and pressed his ear close to those poor
faltering lips to catch the few last words. At last the sick
man spoke again, as he pointed with his long bony fingers
to an axe and a big wood heap, “Yes, cho-o-op me that
wo-o-o-o-d ! ” The soldier fled. He could pray and howl,
but he was a cut above chopping wood for any man. After
he had left us, Bob the Finisher came quietly into the room,
and, looking down upon the patient for a moment, he drew
out a two-foot rule, and coolly measured the length of the
dying man, and went out and set his men to work to make
a coffin. In five hours it was stowed away on two tressels
in the butcher’s back room, waiting for him to peg out.
But the old fellow lingered nearly a week before Bob’s
final services were required. When they did go to bury
him it was found that the grave was longer at the top than
at the bottom, and the coffin would not go down more than
half-way. Bob got the friends away from the spot. Then


he pulled out an old hearth-stone from his dray, and
dropped it on the middle of the coffin, breaking it across.
Thus went the dead man down to his last long sleep at the
hands of Bob the Finisher.
MONSIEUR FRANCAIS.
After riding that old grey horse for Mr. Wade, I
became quite the idol of the bushmen. All the men swore
by me and none other. I remember when the dreary
monotony of our quiet lives was broken by the arrival of a
troup of athletes, known as the Victor-Graham Combina-
tion. They were a jolly lot of fellows—not wonderfully
clever, but passable. Victor was a Frenchman, and his
antics were well worth looking at. They gave an exhibi-
tion in our shed, and all the hands for miles around rolled
up to look at them. Victor put the gloves on with a big
half-bred who knocked round the station ; we called him
Black Andy. Victor said to Andy, “Vat you know ’bout
de boxing, den ?” Andy grew mad at this, for he thought
the Frenchman was only mimicking his broken English,
and, without waiting for the usual preliminaries, he drove
his fist fairly into the little professor's stomach. Victor’s
eyes rolled round and round for a second, and his tongue
protruded for about eight inches beyond his teeth. “ Mine
his toe fair under Andy’s chin, and lifting him clean off
the stage. Jack Graham ran in to expostulate with the
Parisian ; but he said, “ Look here, Schack, dot velp knock


ze stuffing out of me pefore I haf got mine hands up, so I
kick him ala Francais.” After this, “ all went merry as a
marriage bell,” and we sent the athletic combination away
rejoicing. The day before they left, however, I was
instructed to get ready to bear a hand in rounding up a
mob of wild cattle running in the ranges. Graham and
the Frenchman also decided to go and share the sport.
They had heard of my wonderful performance in the saddle,
and, of course, held me in great respect. I was mounted
on a big, raw-bone, chestnut gelding. Victor had a blue
piebald filly, and Graham had a flea-bitten roan. The rest of
the station hands were seated upon a good set of nags, for
we expected a hot chase. Of course I had a stock-whip,
although never in my life had I held one in my hand prior
to that occasion. I hope I never will again. At first all
went well enough. Victor laughed, sang, yelled, and told
some most infernal yarns about the wild beasts he had
hunted in foreign climes ; Graham, who was a thorough
Yankee athlete, told us some very tall stories in a very
serious voice. I remember one of his yarns, which I firmly
believe to be true. He was travelling with Donald Dinnie
in the Siamese forests, when they ran across a couple of
monster gorillas, with hair all over them three inches long.
As soon as the monsters saw the two wrestlers, they came
towards them menacingly ; Donald at once called out,
“Gang awa’, noo ; do ye na ken I’m Donald Dinnie?”
But as the gorilla still advanced, Donald called out, “ What
style do ye want to wrastle in, mon ?” and the next moment
they clinched. Fortunately, a band of Siamese hunters
came on the scene in a few minutes, and the great Scotch
athlete was saved, but he said afterwards that he’d wrestle
the hairy gent again in a mixed match, or Scotch style, but
he didna ken the Siamese style at all. Just as Graham


finished his reminiscences, we caught sight of the mob of
cattle, and all set off at top speed. Victor’s feet got out of
the stirrups almost at once, and he lay down on his horse’s
back, and cuddled the fiery animal round the neck most
affectionately. “Old Bob” remarked to me that he
guessed Victor was putting on the French hug ; as for
Graham, he had got a sort of half-Nelson hold on his beast,
and the grape-vine lock with his leg. As we got close to
the cattle, I undid my whip, and let the sixteen-foot lash
trail along the ground ; then, at last, I thought I was close
enough to an old bull to have a cut in. I swung the lash.
For about a second it whirled gracefully round my head ;
then I made my effort. Suddenly a shriek of wild despair,
mingled with a volley of French curses of the most approved
fashion, rent the air. I looked back, and found that I had
twirled the lash of my whip round M. Victor’s long neck,
and his horse was going in an opposite direction to mine.
I pulled up as soon as possible, and went and untied the
poor athlete, and, of course, apologised. But his wrath
knew no bounds. “ Sare, you are von villia-a-a-n; von
hypogrite. Vot you mean, sare? Do you take me for one
ginnie ass, sare 1 Ah, mon Dieu, I vill spit you mit mine
rapier, Monsieur. \y you hang me like von dog, eh ?” I
was trying to pacify him, when a straggler from the mob
came charging down towards us. Again I swung my whip
and let it go. This time it curled round my own neck
with such force that I was nearly lifted out of the saddle.
Victor looked at me and laughed. Then he said, “ Ah,
sare, ma foi, you are von artist mit dot vip. I tell you vot,
sare, you hold von end of him and I hold de odder, den ve
vill both be mooch safer.” We did so, and got home safely ;
but my reputation as a stockman was ruined. I determined
to leave the station, and I did.


PART SECOND
THE BARRIER AS IT IS.
At the present time the Barrier is a great improve-
ment upon what it was when years ago I first gazed upon it; for
now there is almost every convenience known to civilization
obtainable, at a price. At Silverton there is a full-fledged
council, and so also at Broken Hill. Of the former, I
know little ; of the latter, a lot.
Reader, did you ever sit out a council meeting 1 Did
you, my friend 1 If you have done so, you will remember
perfectly well that most of the noble, patriotic men who
comprised that body had an axe to grind. Some of the
axes were large, others were small. For instance, take
Mr. Theophilus Triplightly, who had commenced life as a
pot-boy in a London tavern, and had come out to Australia
as a stowaway, and had made money by informing on sly-
grog shanties, afterwards starting in business as a vendor
of land, scrip, and other chattels. Later on, he puffed out
his manly shirt front, and talked of the good old Tory
family from which he sprang, whose seat lay in the heart of
Buckinghamshire. This gentleman had a big axe to grind
when he pushed himself for aldermanic honors. His eagle
optic was fixed upon a seat in the Legislative Assembly of the
colony of N.S.W., and he meant to get it—if he could. He was
a ’cute, sly, pompous old radish, was Theophilus ; and I


hear he is in Broken Hill just now. Then there was
Mushroom Macsnuffle, Esq., who had an idea that he had
come into the world for the purpose of ensnaring the
affections of every damsel from eighteen to eighty-five.
This toad had a vast opinion of his own growing impor-
tance. He loved to appear in gorgeous livery, if possible,
at public entertainments. He also had an axe to grind.
His weapon represented social distinction, for which his
soul panted ; and rumour sayeth that he, too, is to be seen
upon the Barrier at this present hour. Another member
was Noble McDough, whose voice had a genuine manly
ring, and whose actions were unimpeachable. He was a
thorn in the side of those who sought to ride high horses
in the council chambers. I believe, as my soul liveth, that
he, too, is in these regions. Then there is Mr. Holywater,
whose voice always sounded like the moaning of a sigh in
a psalm-singer’s chest. He also had a seat, and he posed
as the champion of morality and virtue, and he voted that
the “ Army” be allowed to make night hideous with a big
brass drum, a howling nigger, and a sick timbrel, and that
they might disturb the sweet calm of the Sabbath after-
noons. His axe was that he should hear his name
mentioned from the pulpits when the faithful were
gathered together to bend the knee, and take stock of each
other’s garments; and he loved to sit with his hands
clasped over the third button of his vest and hear Sister
Sadface falter, “ God bless Brother Holywater.” And this
man too, have I, Smiler, seen in the dust of Argent-street.
And amongst the crew there was a man named Truerran ;
he was a fearless, honest son of the people, who had worked
his way up from the ranks, steadily and surely, a man
without frill, who looked with contempt on the shoddy
aristocrat and the foolish boasters; whose character


was clear as the sky at noon-day ; he was beloved
of the miners and the working classes, for he was
genuine; he was as the salt of the earth in that council,
and he, too, has pitched his tent in the silver city. My
trust is in him, as the hope of Israel, for he is not given to
windy speeches, nor is he a wine-bibber and a glutton, but
a serious worker for the good of all honest men; and he
will not bow down and kiss the nether garments of the first
little lord that goes up that way, nor will he trip over the
shadow of his own dignity. And when these men whom I
have mentioned shall be elected—as they surely will be,
for lam a prophet; have I not slept in the same room
with Baldwin, and I cannot lie—will there not be the devil
to pay ? One will rise and say unto his fellows, “ Let us
get our water from Stephens’ Creek ; ” and another will
rise and rend his garments, and spit upon his hands, and
vow with a great oath that the Darling water scheme is the
best. And will not another spring from his seat, and swear
that neither of the other schemes are worthy of consideration
at the hands of an intelligent body of men, and he will
forthwith expatiate on the Artesian well water scheme as
the best to be adopted; and will they not all speak and
howl at once, and invite one another outside to settle it ?
And will they not call each other dogs, and the sons of dogs
unto the third and fourth generation, and liars, and fools,
and hypocrites, and swindlers, and cheats? Yea, I say
unto you, dearly beloved, these things will they do, and
much more, or else they will be unlike the body of misguided
ones over whom Sir ’Enry Parkes holds sway.
Now, in conclusion, allow T me, as a man who knows all
about it, to give a few words of friendly advice to those
who intend to run for municipal honours ;


First. —Never treat your opponent as if he possessed
any brains ; it is bad form, and you must be well bred, or a
failure.
Secondly.—Don’t hesitate to call him a liar, whether
he is or not, unless he is bigger than you, and a better
tighter.
Thirdly.—Always hint that you know something about
your rival that would damn him if known. But be generous,
and don’t tell it.
Fourthly.—Don’t hesitate to assert that you have
reason to believe that he left his country for his country’s
good.
Fifthly.—Drag the name of his wife, or sister, or any
other female relative through the mud indiscriminately. It
will prove that you are a brave man, for if he don’t shoot
you he ought to.
Sixthly.—lf he is poor taunt him with his poverty;
it will show your fine sense of humour. If he knocks you
down, lay there, or he may repeat the experiment.
Seventhly.—lf at any time you have lent him a pound,
don’t fail to tell him of it publicly, so that men may
appreciate your generosity at what it is worth.
Eighthly.—Print all the most scurrilous lies you can
insert about him. It will prove thaf, if not truthful, you
are at least inventive.
Ninthly.—lf he told you to go to , don’t go ; the
climate is worse than our own.
Tenthly.—Give your adversary no chance, honourably
or otherwise. Rob him of his good name; blast his
reputation; and crow over him if you beat him.
These are the ten commandments, laid down for your
guidance by “ Smiler,” and if you follow them strictly and
live, your country should be proud of you, for you would be
a wonder.


ABOUT THE TOWN.
Round Broken Hill there dwell a set of loafers of the
worst type. They squat round public-house doors, and
chew tobacco, when they can cadge any ; for they are too
fond of their own dirty and unwholesome carcases to do
any work to provide themselves with the luxury (?) of a
“ chew.” One day I was perambulating round, when a
man called out to me—
“ Mr. Smiler, does Heaven provide all things? 1
“Yes, my friend, I believe so.”
“ Did Heaven send these things ?” pointing to about
forty-eight disreputable-looking specimens of the genus
bummer, sitting on a form.
“ I’ll pass. My hand isn’t strong enough to play that
game. Score one, Mister.”
“ I’m glad,” said the man, with a deep sigh, “ very
glad Heaven didn’t provide us with such garbage as that;
for the other day I was lookin’ at them, wondering why
they were born, and what they lived for, and my stump-
tailed dog was lookin’ at ’em too, and he has suffered from
bad eyes ever since. Yes, they are a measly, unsavoury set
of baggages, and I don’t wonder our superfine aesthetic
policemen refuse to run them in under the Vagrant Act;
for how could a policeman go mashing after defiling his
hands with such human garbage ?”
“ I’ll see for myself what manner of men these are,”
quoth I. And I went up, and taking hold of my nasal


organ between my finger and thumb, and standing seven
feet six inches away from the unsavoury group, I said,
“ Want a job, boys V
Silence all round, and no business.
“ I’ll take you one by one, boys. Now you seedy, un-
washed lump of mortality, I’ve seen you hanging round bars
and cadging drinks for the last six months, and you never
did one stroke of honest work. Do you want a job T
“ Got heart disease ; doctor says must take care and not
exert myself.”
“ Well you,” to the next man, “do you want to degrade
yourself by earning an honest bob ?”
“ I’m deaf as a post; can’t work on that account Mr.
Srniler.”
“You confounded rubbish heap. Do you swing a pick
and shovel with your ears,” I yelled.
“ I don’t drink with strangers,” said the dirty rascal,
putting his hand behind his ear as if trying to catch what
I said.
I walked away disgusted ; and, meeting an old played-
out Chinaman of the very lowest type, I offered him a
shilling to go and tell the cadgers to move off that form.
But the Mongolian looked at the group with unaffected
scorn, and limped off, muttering, “ I no touchee that lot
with a stick.” And I didn’t blame John either, for he would
have had to burn the stick afterwards.
Towards evening I sauntered off to the open-air
meeting of the Salvation warriors. Now, I’m religiously
inclined, and T honour the lads and lasses (especially the
lasses) who go out and speak boldly for the faith they have.
As I stood and listened to the confessions and the singing,
I noticed that the lazy vagabonds I had seen about town
during the day had mustered in great force to molest, jeer


at, and annoy, the Soldiers of the Cross. The cowards
would get behind the lasses and blow their foul tobacco-
smoke in the girls’ faces, and throw dirt at the soldiers ;
and, on several occasions, they pushed one another headlong
on to some poor girl, who would kindly rebuke the sneaking
ruffians with words of Scripture. I saw one sturdy miner
wheel round and plant his labor-hardened fist fair on the
nasal organ of one of these human jackals for a deed of
that sort, and the fellow sneaked away, whimpering, and I
said, “ Glory, amen, old fellow, and more power to you and
men like you, who won t see a woman insulted in any place
or time.”


“ BIG HEAD.’
On the Barrier, “ Big Head ” is a complaint which some
people get as regularly as babies cut teeth. It is a very
painful malady, but not dangerous. It is not confined to
any particular class or section of the community, and both
sexes are liable to it, though it is more prevalent among the
male than the female. The symptoms of this disease vary
greatly with the social position of the person afflicted. For
instance, if a bank clerk gets a sudden rise in his salary—
say, from thirty-five shillings to two notes a week, in nine
cases out of ten he has a bad attack of “ Big Head ” on the
spot. He refuses to wear a shirt more than five consecu-
tive days without getting it washed, and at once tries to
work out a mathematical problem in the shops, by trying
to cram a No. 9 foot into a No. 6 boot. He will wait on
the stairs of his hotel for the housemaid, and, if she refuses
to allow him to chuck her under the chin, he will go to his
dear friend Haway or Twom, or Jwim, and tell what
young fwings those servant-girls are —ba Jove!
He wouldn’t sit down at table with a miner or a tradesman
on any account, and wouldn’t be able to eat a morsel, if he
did—ba Jove! Though, if the truth were known, his pa
was boots in a fifth-rate sixpenny hash foundry in his youth.
The class of bank clerk that suffer most severely from this
affliction are usually overburdened with a colossal intellect
of the soft-drivel order. They are not things of beauty to
gaze upon. Half-starved in their youth, their bodies seem


to have been modelled into shape by being drawn through a
keyhole by the forelock. This gives them their sharp,
aristocratic appearance, which is so essential to their after-
success in life.
“Big Head” sometimes settles upon an enterprising
mine manager, and when it does, is bad—very bad—for the
manager, the mine, and the unlucky reporter who has to
visit the mine; also for the shareholders. I have not
often seen a manager, who was worth his salt as a manager,
afflicted this way. One day, I called upon the manager of
a well-known claim. I had known him in the early days
of this field ;he was a prospector then, and many a time has
he called at my camp and borrowed a billy of flour, and a
pinch of salt. He did not wear kid gloves then, nor an
eye-glass, and he didn’t smell like a cheap perfumery shop
out for an airing; and he didn’t have a lisp, nor did he
part his hair down the middle, nor wax his moustache at the
ends, until it was dangerous to get within two feet of him :
No, he was poor then, and it took him all his time to keep
his rags from flogging him to death on a windy day, and
the time he got a good solid square meal was to be
remembered. When I called on him he was ill—
very bad attack of “ Big Head.” I found half the men on
the claim doing a go-as-you-please to slow music. They
were evidently trying to break the world’s record by seeing
how little work they could do in a given number of hours.
I saw that everything about the claim was kept in an untidy
and slovenly manner. The machinery was out of gear, and
ore was scattered all over the place. I went down to the
manager’s house, and found him lying on a couch, decked
out like a Bundle-street beau on a Saturday night
promenade. He had some brandy and soda on a little table
by his side, which he considerately put under the couch


when he saw me coming, for fear of wounding my suscepti-
bilities, I presume. When I entered he adjusted his eye-
glass, and looked me all over, as if he were not sure whether
I was a man or a horse.
“ Good day, Captain ; how’s business in these parts ? ”
“ There’s no business in this location, sir. It’s mining.
You newspaper men don’t seem to know where the difference
comes in.”
“ Beg pardon, Captain. You’re quite right, there ain’t
much business about your mine.”
“ No, Mr. Smiler, I belong to a professional body, and
don’t you forget it. I’m going to stand up for dignity,
and the rights and privileges of my position.”
“I honour you for those sentiments, Captain ; and if
I had a drop of wine handy, I’d drink to sentiments that we
both honour. I notice, sir, by the last report, that nearly
£lOOO had been spent during the last few months upon
your claim, and yet I would be sworn that £l5O would
cover all the work done on the mine during that time.”
“ Mr. Smiler, from my soul I pity your thickheadedness, for
you are one who should know better. Do you think, sir,
that it is my duty to interfere with money matters. I boss
the claim ; the directors boss the funds.”
“ You are right, sir. ‘ Live and let live.’ It is a noble
motto; and yet I have been told that the directors are a
funny lot. One is a lawyer, and the legal adviser of the
claim ; the other is a kind of secretary, and so on, and so
on. Is it so, Captain 1 ”
“ I do not know the ins and outs of it myself. But,
as you say, they’re clever. I manage the mine, they come
and see me once or twice a week, and charge the company
for each little trip, and then, of course, they have a legal
consultation on the matter, which means, of course,


another little bill, and so the thing runs on until the funds
run out. But I’ll not speak of it for fear that I should
give offence ”
“ Captain, your nobility of sentiment should make the
shareholders proud of such a man. Do you think this mine
will ever pay a dividend ? ”
“ Sir, you ask me to reveal a secret which belongs to
my directors.”
“ I do humbly apologise, but would ask if it is probable
that you’ll strike chlorides ? ”
“ I expect to meet them every foot I sink,”
“ And diamonds—do you think you’ve any show for
diamonds 1 ”
“ It’s more than probable, for I’ve heard that geologists
say the sea on our coast is of the same colour as that near
South Africa.”
“ That’s a big argument in your favour, and shows you
are a man of deep discernment. I’d never have thought of
such a thing myself. And who knows, if you keep on
driving, Captain, you may strike the Suez Canal, or
Pentridge, or Bedlam, or the Court of Chancery.”
He closed his eyes with a smile of ecstatic delight, and
as I crept softly out of the house into the saddle, I heard
him murmur, “ diamonds, Pentridge, chlorides ; ” and I
whispered softly to the spring winds, “ big head, bad—very !


GAMBLER AND PROSPECTOR
Camped out at a new rush one night, I was meditating
on my sins, and on the sins of my forefathers. I had just
arrived at the conclusion that my paternal ancestors must
have been a plaguey bad lot, for it has been written, “ The
sins of the fathers shall be handed down on the children unto
the third and fourth generations.” I wished that my ancient
relatives had been better folk, then, perhaps, I might have
had a better run of luck. I say I had just arrived at the
above-mentioned conclusion, with the assistance of a bottle
of Highland Blend, when, out of the shadows flitting round
my camp fire, there issued the form of a man clad in the
usual garb of a prospector.
“ Know me, Smiler ? ”
£l Can’t swear that I do, mate ; but have a drink all the
same.”
Down went his swag by the fire, and he sat upon it,
lifting the pannikin of whisky to his lips. “ Good luck, and
a square deal to you, mate ; ” and the next second I heard
the fiery liquid gurgling down his sun-tanned neck.
I looked hard at him, for it seemed to me that this man
and I had met before in the early days; but for the life of
me I could not think where or when. He was the wreck
of a big strong man ; his hair was grey, but other agencies
besides the ravages of time had been at work with him
and it did not need a mind-reader’s skill to see that, either.
When he had finished the last drop of whisky, he pulled out


a short wooden pipe and a plug of tobacco, gazing dreamily
into the tire all the time. My dog cottoned to the stranger
right away, and crept close to him, rubbing his muzzle
against his trousers in a friendly manner. I began to
think well of my visitor at once, for I think a heap of a
dog’s opinion. There’s always something good in a fellow
that a dog chums with.
“ Been in these parts long, mate ? ”
“Nearly as long as you hev, Smiler. Say, do you
remember camping by a dam with your mates one bitter
cold night, ’bout four years ago, and you had no grub of
any kind, and no tea, nor sugar, nor tobacco, and you were
banging away at a fence with an axe to get timber to make
a fire, when a four-horse buggy drove up in the darkness ? ”
I have got off my seat quickly at various times in my
life. Once, when I sat on a bull-ants’ nest, I rose about
as fast as blasting powder, and made nearly as much noise.
Another time, when I sat on a mass of hot slag at the Day
Dream, I recovered an upright position as fast as if I had
sat on a baby and the mother had been in the room. But
when I heard the stranger put that question, I was on ray
feet as if I had swallowed a powder factory, and some one
was turning on the gas.
“Do I mind that night, Mister 1 By my beard, and
my father’s beard, I’ll never forget it. Frank Harman,
Dan Harrington, Bob Rees and I were starving that trip.
We reached an old dam, and camped. There was no
timber near the spot. We meant to have a fire, for it was
perishingly cold. I knew I had three posts down when a
voice hailed me out of the gathering gloom— * Camp—coo
—ee —ee—camp, there—coo—oo—ee ! ’ Ten minutes later
a big strapping fellow was handing out potted fish, flour
bully, mutton, tea and damper; and this was the man who


had been such a friend in need to me and my mates. I
took hold of his hand, and wrung away at it as if I’d got
the contract to shift it five inches further from the shoulder
joint. Then I started to fill him right up to the eyes with
whisky, and over the genial bowl he got talkative, and
gave me a sketch of his life since that eventful evening
when he and I nu t for the first time ”
“ Smiler, I heard you had thrown down the prospec-
tor’s pick, and picked up the pen, and I’ll give you
something to write about. I was very lucky on this field,
you know, and 1 got hold of all the coin I wanted in a few
months. I made my way back to my old home, a rich and
happy man. When I reached my native village I thought
that everyone looked strangely at me. There was a sort
of compassionate glance in the eyes of all I met. I hurried
on to my home, I lifted the latch of the garden gate, and
went swiftly up the little path, and found ruins. A
black, ugly heap was all that was leT of my pretty cottage.
I stood still and looked on, with a sort of stupid horror
creeping all over me. I don’t know if I was there like
that for an hour or only a minute. I was conscious of
nothing until I felt a hand on my shoulder, and, looking
round, I saw Tom Long, the gambler.
“ Where are my wife and children 1 for the love of God
tell me quick.” Tom was a hard nut in his way, and
when I saw tears in his eyes I knew that he had no good
news for me. Softly he took me by the hand, like a little
child, and led me out of the garden over the fields into the
cemetery. As we reached a newly-dug grave, with a snow-
white tombstone, the gambler lifted his hat and turned
away, leaving me alone with my dead. I saw it at a glance.
‘ Sacred to the memory of Maria and two children,
burned to death on the .’ I recollect no more. They


told me afterwards that T ran through the town like a
madman, howling out curses and threats. But I knew
nothing of this ; I only remember waking up in a neat,
clean bed, feeling weak and hopeless, and Tom Long was
sitting by my side. He had nursed me through that long
delirium with kindness and skill, and from the lips of the
gambler, I learned how my wife and little ones had been
burned to death in their home. No one knew where I was,
and it was Tom who had just put the tombstone on the
grave. He did not know of my luck on the Barrier, nor
did anyone else. But once—long ago—l had done him a
kindness, and he had not forgotten it ; and, as he was in
our town for the race meeting, he had, for the sake of an
old kindness done, put up a token of remembrance He
stopped with me till I was well. Then I told him I was a
rich man, and he would stay no longer. ‘ Not on the job
now,’ he said ; ‘ you’ll only think I did it for your stuff if I
stay longer, and so will the other people ; for it seems that
a gambler has no heart in the eyes of the snivellers who
go to church, and sing and pray and forget their pals in
time of trouble. I’ve travelled in the game all my days,
but stiffen me if I ever went back on a mate. Good-bye ;
I’m off.’ And he went. I got on well enough for a while,
and then I took to drink. Many a hard battle Jim Hen-
nessy and I have had since. Then I went gambling, and,
between Jim Hennessy and the dice-box, I was soon hard
up. People said I’d gravitate to the usual pub-loafer, but
you see I’m not put together that way, and when the
Teetulpa gold-field broke out, I went there. I had a little
luck for a bit, until one morning I woke, feeling heavy and
tired. I went about for a few days, and then I turned in,
and lay on my back for three or four days, in a sort of half
sleep. One day a man came and saw me, and cleared out


quickly. He came back with another fellow, and I heard
the new-comer say, ‘Wonder who it is, and what’s the
matter with him ? This ’ere aint a put up job. He’s got
all his little bit on, and he’s goin’ for the lot, I think. He
can put up the pack ; it’s a deuce, ace, and the candle nearly
out,’ I tried to lift my head, but could not, for it seemed
heavy as galena. ‘ Well,’ said the same speaker, ‘ I’m pretty
near stiff. But this chap must have a sawbones ; you go
and get one—l’ll stand the racket.’ In a little while, a
doctor was feeling my pulse, and he said, ‘ typhoid fever,
and bad at that. He wants fresh air, good nursing, and a
cool room, at once, or he’ll die for sure.’ ‘ls that all he
wants ? Couldn’t you find something else that he might
like, doctor? How would a trip to America do? You
medical men always want to cut and shuffle, when you ought
to be dealers ! You play your hand and get; I’ll see to this
chap.’ It was Tom Long again ; and once more I owed my
life to his nursing, and I never saw him again. I heard
that he was pegged out, and I tramped up from Terowie to
put my hand on his grave; for I can do no more. But,
Smiler, if I have any luck, on this new rush, I’ll put a
tombstone over that gambler’s grave that very few parsons
would have a right to claim.”


A YANKEE SHARP AND BARRIER
FLATS.
A short time ago a world-renowned gambler came to
the Hill, and he made jx golden harvest on the silver fields
of the Barrier Ranges. This free lance was an American
citizen, and his name was a household word amongst the
free and easy population in the wild west of his native land.
He was famous for many reasons. In the first place he
was one of the most expert gamblers alive There was no
game of cards known to science at which he was not an
adept, and every class of swindling adopted by the clever
people who travel on the game was familiar to him. He
had the soft white hand and delicate touch, so necessary to
a man who manipulates playing cards fora living. If cards
were not popular in a place where he took up his abode, he
could turn to the everlasting dice-box, and go through men
who considered themselves artists at the mystic “ shake,” as
more than one of the knowing blades of Broken Hill know
to their sorrow. In the land of the stars and stripes this
man had won a certain sort of renown by his cool impu-
dence and reckless daring, for there a gambler’s hand has to
be as quick with pistol and bowie as with card or cue. I
could fill a whole paper with stories that I have heard from
men who knew the man in his native land, but one will do
for a sample. One night, this needy child of luck found
himself in New York city without a i’ed cent, in his
pockets, or the means of obtaining a bed for the night.


He did not sit down on a doorstep, and think of the
days when he went to Sunday school, and weep bitter
tears, and sob out big three-inch sighs over his wild and
wasted life. No, he just walked quietly into a pawn-
shop, and taking out his silver-mounted pistol, and his
handsomely-carved ivory-handled knife, he popped them
both for a few dollars, and made his way into one of
the lowest and most dangerous gaming hells in that city
of gamblers. He risked every cent, he had on the first
chance that came along, and won. It was characteristic
of the man that he went the whole hog. One after
one he cleaned out the whole gang, beating them at every
game they put upon him, for he was clever, and sinful,
and full of guile. At last, even he was satisfied, and made
up his mind to depart with his plunder ; but he knew that
it was a cool hundred to one against his getting out of the
hole he was in. The blacklegs who frequented that den
were not in the habit of losing their coin so quietly Not
one of the gang dreamed that he was unarmed, and his
cool determined air, as he went through them all one by one,
told them that he was an old hand, I hey shrewdly guessed
that the first man to lift hand or voice too high against him
would get a bullet through his skull for his trouble. After
thinking the matter over for a while, the gamester made up
his mind how to act. He had noticed one fellow in the
gang who looked reckless enough to play with the devil for
baked chestnuts, and that he was well armed he was sure.
Catching this man’s eye, he beckoned him aside and proposed
a game of cards. The other fellow grinned, and said he was
clean broke. “ I’ll lend you twenty dollars, stranger, just
to see if your luck will change.” “ I’m on that job right
away,” said the other; and they sat down. In less than
ten seconds our man had told Ms new comrade that he was


unarmed, and that if he would stand by him in the row
that was coming they should share and share alike. The
stranger’s only reply was to slip a loaded pistol on his knee
under the table, and, a few seconds later, a useful but not
very ornamental bowie knife followed suit. Then they
rose ; and our man, lifting his revolver and pointing it dead
at the crowd, said, “ Boys, I’ve won your money, I’m going
ter say good night; I don’t want any parting favours, and
I’ll tell you straight I never mess a man, and I’ll send a lead
pea into the right eye of the first man that stirs hand or
foot, and my pard here, he’s good for one more. Good night,
boys, and better luck next time ; ” and so saying, with
revolvers levelled, he and his mate backed out of the room,
and ran for dear life. In Texas, he killed several men in
fair fight, and more than one in gambling rows. At Broken
H ill he had a little quiet amusement. As he was a well-
educated man, and dressed with exceeding good taste, he
was soon picked up by some of our bloods, who have an idea
that they are clever ; they had no idea that they had to
deal with one of the cleverest gamblers alive; and, lulled
by his quiet calm manner, they proceeded to “put up a job
on him.” He saw through the scheme at once, and pro-
ceeded to take the conceit out of them, He did so consider
ably. In vain they tried all their little tricks on the
veteran, He knew them all and smiled. At last they put
a pack of marked cards on the table and began to play.
He stoo lit for a while, and then coolly rang the bell for
the waiter. When that factotum arrived, he said, “ Here
my boy, bring us a pot of paint, and a brush, that I may be
equal with these gentlemen.” That was enough for our
silver kings. They rose as one man and wanted to fight
him, ala Sullivan. But he smiled contemptuously and
informed them that, it would not pay him to knock his


hands about on heads so thick as he had proved theirs to be;
but, if they were not satisfied, they could have their revenge
like gamblers or gentlemen, either with knife or pistol.
This put an end to all their bluster ; and, since then, they
have confined themselves to more legitimate gambling in
scrip and claims.
ADVICE TO SPECULATORS,
Dearly beloved, but brainless mining speculator, thou
art a fool, though you may not be aware of the fact. Yet I,
Smiler, being conversant with the ways of the wicked who
trade upon the credulity of men like unto thee, laugh thee
to scorn, for there is more energy in an oyster than wit in
thy brain, and the brokers and other harpies know it. Get
thee out of my sight, for an idiot is an abomination in my
eyes. As my soul liveth, I know not the thing that is soft
enough to be compared with thee unless it is the remnants
of the dead dog that lieth at the corner. But who am I
that I should go out of my way to advise thee, thou stiff-
necked one ; thou thrice accursed, money-grubbing, mystery-
guzzling imbecile I have warned thee, and thou didst not
heed my warning. Yet once more will 1 raise my voice, as
one that calleth to a sick mule in a corn patch ; and, 10, I
say unto thee, keep thy hooks off shares, of which you know
less than you do about your prayers. Go not bald-headed
into every trap that is baited for thee, or thy gold will melt
like a pint in the lips of Apple Jack. What did thy mother
rear thee for, thou soft one? For what end wert thou


begotten, thou knowing one ? Out on thee, I’d sooner be a
lame dog, and bite my brother, than such an one. In the
days of my youth, when I sat on a rail, and sucked treacle
through a straw, I was as thou art, thou cunning one, but
I was never caught twice in the same melon patch. But,
as for thee, thou art like unto an ass that bolteth away
from water on a hot day, because it is wet, and the devil
himself could not guide thee. Hearken unto my cry, and
allow the voice of reason for once to enter into that cavity
which E ature scooped out for a brain-holder, between thine
eyes and thine ears. I tell you, Mr. Speculator, that an
artfully-designed prospectus may be printed upon the best
paper in circulation, and it may not contain a single typo-
graphical error, and yet it would not answer as a passport
into the Kingdom of Heaven on a cold day. I have seen
more earnest, solid, unadulterated lies within the limits of
one innocent-looking prospectus than I should expect to
find in an unabridged History of England, or in a poem
dedicated to the wrongs of Ireland. The prospectus, in
nine cases out of ten, is prepared to take its Bible oath
that the mine it is canvassing for will turn out a remunera-
tive concern. I have seen seventeen thousand, nine hundred
and forty-three raining prospectuses published on the Barrier
—l’d like to see the odd forty-three payable mines in the
same district. But I don’t expect to, unless the Divine
Providence sends me back to earth a few centuries hence
to collect a report, or spread typhoid, or cemetery statistics.
Mr. Speculator, if you feel disposed to invest a pound or
two at any time drop it to me, and I pledge myself to put
you straight at all times; but beware of a flourishing or a
too modest prospectus, for it will be unto thee as a blister
on the broadest part of a baby, something to be felt to be
appreciated.


BLACKLEGS.
A year or so ago the union miners in Australia refused
to work with blacklegs. Now a blackleg is a miserable,
moonstruck, second edition of a played-out public house
bummer, which, by the grace of God, has managed to get
amongst decent workmen. It is not a man, and it most
decidedly is not a woman ; there are no blacklegs amongst
white women, at all events I never saw one, and 1 know a
lot of women. It is not a dog, and it is too low to be
called a devil ; the foul of a blackleg never dies, but roosts
midway between earth and hell, to black-mail the shades of
man and beast when the battle of life is fought and won,
and death scores the odd trick. Bome scientific writers
affirm that the American animal known as the “ skunk ”
can trace its origin back to the blackleg, but 1 don't believe
it. A “ skunk ”is not a noble animal ;it is three degrees
lower, in my estimation, than a jelly-fish or a jackass, but
it is coming down too hard on the “ skunk ” to assert that
it sprang from the loins of a blackleg. No 1 give the
“skunk ” a show ; it is bad enough to be the least odori-
ferous quadruped under Heaven without ringing in relatives
thatran earthquake would refuse to shift from one block to
another. Well, the miners refused to work with the
creatures in question, and after they were out for a week
the battle was won, and they were once more accorded the
glorious privilege of working for £3 per week, and getting
leaded for nothing.


TOM LONG, THE GAMBLER.
HE HAD AN EVEN DEAL.
Yes, strangers, Tom Long was a gambler; he’d bet on
any mortal thing, from a horse race to the size of a girl’s
foot. He knocked round Sydney city once, and was well-
known in Adelaide and Melbourne, and when he came up
to the silver fields he made all the boys sit up, for he knew
a thing or two and knew ’em well, an’ yet he had such a
quiet, calm way of doing things, no one could get offended
with him. He had a knack of remembering his friends
too that was real uncommon, and he’d go a long way out of
his track to return a deed of kindness. He had several
good friends up on the diggings, but his chief admirer was
“Juno”—Harold Grey’s “Juno,” whom all old Sydneyites
will remember ; dark-eyed, sarcastic, taper-fingered, slender-
waisted “Juno,” whom the “ Pilgrim” used to admire so
much when his pen was the scourge that Sydney people
dreaded. And Tom Long, who reverenced nothing on
earth or in heaven, who scoffed at priest or parson, and was
ready to lay odds about the number of coffins that would
be ordered each week, when the plague was laying low the
pride of the mining camp, worshipped the clear-witted
woman, who lashed him with biting words whenever he fell
from grace, by doing anything tricky, for “Juno” could
stand nothing in the shape of shady work, and her big, black
eyes would blaze like the diamonds on her pretty fingers.


and Tom would get right under the shadow of his old felt
hat, while his mouth would work like a Chinese puzzle.
Tom had another friend, a tailor, named Joe Burns. Joe
was what the boys called a “ fly joker,” and knew exactly
how many peas should be in one pod. He had been pretty
wealthy once, but had had a bad time backing the “neddys,”
and one morning he wo':e up and found himself, like
Byron, famous, but dead broke ; so he turned to and started
a tailor’s shop, though that was not his game, and he soon
had the best business in Broken Hill, for he was real smart
and full of pluck, and when Tom Long called in one sultry
morning the pair determined to do a bit on the turf as well
as run the scissors and tweed biz, and they did, and many
a good golden shekel was gathered in. Often have I sat
and watched them night after night while the cards were
dealt, and the little piles of gold and silver grew into goodly
heaps in front of them. I can picture them now in the
quiet little back room of a certain pub; the tobacco-smoke
rises, and Alls the room with a filmy blue cloud ; the dice box
rattles, and the notes pass from hand to hand ; curses are
fluttered, low and savage ; brows grow sullen and grim ;
faces turn pale with hate or greed, bitter taunting words
ring out fierce and high, yet the two gambers never lose
their nerve ; their luck is in to-night, and the gamblers from
the river are having a bad time. The stakes are raised, the
men crpuch round the table, eager, wrathful, and keen-eyed ;
every movement of hand and limb is watched with savage
intentness. No fear of a clever trick being rung in on that
crowd; it is more than a man’s life is worth to try to be
“ clever ”at such a moment. Suddenly one of the river
gamblers sends the bones rattling on the table. Joe grabs
the dice, and, with a face black with wrath, he swears that
loaded bones have been substituted for the genuine squares.


“ Let’s have fair ‘ dinkum,’ ” yells TOm, and the next
moment he was under the table, a shattered tumbler strewn
On the floor, and the fellow that threw it grabs the money
On the table j but Joe Burns never misses when he sends a
decanter on an errand of mercy, and the next second the
big-bearded rough is curled up in]a corner with a gash in his
skull like the side of the sewer, and then Joe bounds bver
the table, and, gripping a chair, he stands over the body of
his chum. Swinging the missile over his head, he defends
Tom from the feet of the crowd; and the moments that pass
are not merry for him.
Tom Long never got over that night’s joy ; he didn’t
get ill, but he used to linger round with his pipe in a quiet
corner, and even Juno’s sallies could not rouse him. One
morning he and Joe went out to the Day Dream races
together, and when the sport was over they started home ;
but, when in the middle of a dreary salt-bush track, sur-
rounded on all sides by the savage monotony of the uncouth
Australian bush, the gambler asked his chum to pull up the
horses. Joe did so.
I’ll about peg here, Joe, old pard ; I’ve had an even
deal, and I’m dead broke. Say, Joe, do you believe in
Heaven ? ”
“ Not much, pard, but I think there’s a sort of spot
where good sports go and have a good time, after they hand
in their checks.”
“ Yes, Joe, that’s my religion, too; and, say, Joe, I’ll
•bet you an even fiver I break the first heading-school I strike
in the glory diggings ” And he dropped his head and passed
over the border ; and to this hour Joe Burns swears that
when it comes to his turn to quit he expects to find Tom
Long waiting on the landing for him ready to claim the
fiver, as neither up above or down below was there a heading-
school Tom couldn’t break, providing he got a dean deal,


APPLE JACK.
A BROKEN HILL IDYLL,
Peeking of runt, and tottering towards the Glory gold-
fields went Apple Jack, the best known figui’e on the great
Australian silver fields. Apple Jack was a person privi-
leged to perform many antics, which it would have been bad
for any other man to attempt, for amongst the mass of wild
bloods who opened up that field, he was known as the
greatest drinker the world ever saw, and that was a recom-
mendation which endeared him to their hearts, and united
them in bonds closer than brotherhood, for that which was
dear to them was dearer far to him, and they honoured
him for it.
Out of the mining camp he staggered, a wreck of what
he might have been, an old felt bat crammed down over his
ears, and on his drooping shoulders hung a weather-worn
overcoat, though it was mid-summer. From the pockets on
cither side peeped the neck of a whisky bottle.
A worthless boozing wretch, not fit to cumber the
earth, you are about to remark, reader ; but stay, keep your
charity until my tale is told. As he ploughed through the
dust of the streets out on to the track leading towards the
racecourse he did not have many outwards points which
might recommend him as a hero, and yet within that
debauched frame thei’e dwelt a heart which many a Sydney
dude could not carry if he was in a Sydney tram car.


Away from the noise of the drinking shanties, out of reach
of the curses and the yelling of the diggers, clear from the
devilish din of the fighting, singing, gambling, dancing
crowd, staggered the champion boozer of the Southern
Hemisphere. At last he struck the shady course of Stevens’
Creek and ran against Downie’s Camp, where Jack Stewart,
prospector, gambler, sailor, and now a wealthy book-maker
and tobacconist in the new mining camp, was dispening
hospitality with no niggard hand to a crowd of dead-beats.
Ned Saunders, Jim Downie, and Bill M‘Kechnie dealt out
rum and religion alternately, free of cost. Apple Jack
looked at them sadly for a moment, pensively let his left
hook fall on a bottle of three-star, and all was peaceful and
still except the gentle ripple of the brandy as it gurgled
down the champion’s neck. At last even he was satisfied,
and then Jack Stewart, ever ready to do a good action,
took him by the feet and converted him into a wheelbarrow
until the fiery spirits worked their way out again, and then
he was laid to rest amid the salt-bush to dream of home and
mother. When he awoke the camp was deserted ; not a soul
was in sight, not a sound broke the stillness of the bush.
He sat there ruminating for a while until he saw a strangely-
assorted pair coming along the bed of the creek. A big,
powerful Afghan was leading a little white girl by the hand,
at a sharp walk. He looked anxiously round him, but did
not perceive the silent camp. Apple Jack knew the girl ;
she was the daughter of one of the roughest diggers in the
place, but a pet of all the camp, though quite a child. The
great burly fellow seemed to be trying to coax the little one
to hasten her footsteps by promising her something, but he
failed to catch the words. When nearly opposite where he
lay the girl stopped, and refused to go any further. The
Afghan cast one keen look behind him, and then, swift as a


hawk sweeps down upon its prey, he swept a heavy shawl
from his shoulders and folded it round the child’s head and
face. A muffled cry was heard, two tiny childish hands
beat the air convulsively, and the strongman held the pant-
ing girl in his arms. Three swift strides took him into the
low thick scrub on the opposite bank of the creek, and he
was lost to view. Then the feeble drunkard shook off the
debauchery of years, and was a man once more. Seizing a
pick handle he passed noiselessly over the sandy bed of the
creek, and plunged after the giant. A few paces further,
and he saw him kneeling by the terrified little one, whose
hands he had pinioned behind her. His eyes were filled
with the lust that spares not age nor station. His mighty
frame trembled with pent-up passions, and the next moment
he bent to work a helpless little one’s undoing. Apple
Jack, looking like a beer-stained edition of the God of
Vengeance, lifted high the pick handle, and it fell full
and level on the Afghan’s skull, and sent him face down-
wards in the salt-bush, but the thick turban saved him, and
in a moment he was up and had closed with the avenger,
and Jack had a time that was sorrowful in ihe extreme
his hair was torn out in handfuls, his face was beaten to a
jelly, his throat was shifted round under his ear, and he was
kicked, bitten, and beaten until the whisky he had imbibed
the week before began to ooze out of the pores of his skin,
but he hung on to the dark skinned foe like a plague to a
slave-ship, and in the meantime the girl had escaped. When
Jack’s fragments were gathered up by his friends, a few
hours afterwards, it was found that the gallant old digger
had taken such a gruelling as would have sufficed to kill ten
ordinary men, and to this hour he vows that if he had been
a teetotaller he would have perished on the spot; and when
he pegs out and goes prospecting away back in the land of


Shadows, the warden in the everlasting ranges will surely
wipe out the whisky score, and credit him with that deed of
bravery, and Jack will be happy sitting on a log in the
Shadow-land with his own chums who have gone before him
from the bleak, bitter wastes of the Barrier fields.
CHINESE GINNIE.
‘ Somethin’ ’ll hev ler be done, mates, or we’ll get no
luck in these diggin’s. Look at ’em down there now ! ”
And the group of diggers did look, and they let their
human feelings rise up and bubble over in sundry powerful
expletives as they saw about forty calm-looking Chinamen
carting wash-dirt down to the banks of the little stream
that divided the two camps. The Celestials didn’t seem to
mind how much cursing was expended upon them by the
band of European gold-fossickers, and they went jogging
along in the twilight as if the blasphemy hurled at them
was good for their health. Each man had a long cane on
his shoulder, and at each end of this instrument there was
a canvas bag attached, after the fashion of the Mongolian
vegetable hawkers in and around the city of Sydney. They
were a silent crowd, and all day from dawn until dark they
pegged away and seldom spoke to one another; and when
they did, it was in their own sweet tongue, which to
English ears sounded like the clucking of a moulting duck
in the bowels of a gunny-bag.


“Curse’em,” growled the white diggers, “ I'd like ter
get fourpence ha’penny a scalp for the whole gang. I’d
make one good day’s pay onyway.”
“ Fourpence ha’penny ! I’d give the Government ray
share of the year’s clean up for the privilege of scalping the
yellow crew for nothing.”
Judging by the tenor of these remarks a stranger
entering the camp might have been justified in surmising
that the white folks were considerably riled, and so they
were. Seven mouths prior to that evening I had ridden
from Melbourne to this rush, which was located in the very
heart of the Mountains, and I had found the place full of
contentment and go. Americans, Englishmen, Dutchmen,
Germans, Frenchmen, Italians, and Australians were
all there, and the greater number of them were getting'
good gold. The tents lined the mountain ridges, and the
caravans, drinking and gambling shanties did a roaring
business, and all seemed prosperous. One morning a long
yellow line was seen advancing at a trot through the mouth
of the gully, and a mob of Chinamen in Indian file came
into view. They didn’t meddle with anyone. They didn’t
speak unless spoken to, and then they smiled with the half-
cracked expression which they know so well how to send
cantering over their mahogany-coloured features, and seemed
so hopelessly imbecile that the impression gained ground in
our camp that the whole boiling lot of Celestrals had recently
escaped from a third-class lunatic asylum in the Flowery
Land, and were quite harmless. But from that hour trouble
overtook the field—first of all came fever, and the boys
began to peg out, and were planted away in a shady spot
amongst the trees; then litigation followed, and that just
raised hell, for no man’s ground was secure. As soon
as a fellow bottomed on good pay dirt then his claim


would be jumped, and a law suit and fights would
follow, and at last the gold seemed to peter out. The
only thing that kept steadily on was the Chinese element,
and that never shifted or varied, week in or week
out, until it began to be whispered about that the Mon-
golians had killed the luck of the camp, and slowly one
by one the diggers dropped away from the place, for the
genuine fossicker is as superstitious as a seaman, and once
let him get an idea that a spot is unlucky, |and all the gold
in Australia wouldn’t keep him hanging round. And now,
on this Christmas Eve, the remnant of the once flourishing
camp consisted of about five-and-twenty diggers, and they
looked down on their luck, if ever a crowd did. After a
spell, one of the boys began to build up the camp fire for
the night and the rest followed suit, and soon billies were
hissing on the logs, and bacon spluttered in the flames ; and
the moon came out and shed a soft light down on the
wooded heights, and the evening breezes fluttered through
the trees, and the stream rippled along and watered the
plains at the foot of the ranges, and the men lay round the
camp fires and smoked and told tales of other lands until
the barking of a kangaroo hound told * the approach of an
outsider. I was sitting at our fireside reading to half-a-
dozen fellows “ The Romance of Britomarte,” as Adam
Gordon, the bushman poet, had written it, when the yelping
of the hound caused me to arise to hurl a junk of quartz at
the animal, when I suddenly saw a woman advancing. I
knew her in.a moment. It was Chinese Ginnie, a poor
devil from the slums of Little Boui’ke-street who had herded
in with the Mongolians.
The boys began to curse her and order her off, but she
beckoned me aside, and throwing down my book I left the
camp and went with her into the shadow of the forest trees.


“ What’s up, Ginnie?”
■“ I’ve come to tell you something.”
“ Well.”
“Ah Ling knocked me down again to-night, and Li
Hung kicked me all over.”
“ Poor devil.”
“ They are always thumping me and bashing me
round.”
“ Why don’t you quit ’em ? ”
“ Quit ’em ! Where else can Igo ? I’m a woman of
the Chinese camps, and the lowest hell in all Melbourne
wouldn’t give me room. No, I can’t quit; besides they give
me opium sometimes, and I can’t live without it now.”
“ God help you.”
“ They’ve turned me out to-night to starve, or rot, or
die like a dog ! ”
“ Why ? ”
“ ’ Cause they've found rich gold, and don’t want white
folks to know it.”
“ Where is it ? ”
“ Away up behind their camp on the slope of the hill,
an’ they intend to go and peg out all along the line at day-
break.”
“ Ah, you'd better camp with us to-night, Ginnie.”
“No, I’ll go back, and after you have pegged out your
rich claim you won’t forget me; I know that. Send me
somewhere where I can die in peace. I’m young yet, and
you might get doctors that could stop this craving that’s on
me. Good night.”
She slipped away in the bush.
Ten minutes later I was in the centre of a mob of
quiet, but desperately-determined men. I had told of the
Chinaman’s find, and waited to hear what would follow


Black Andy was the first to speak.
“ Boys,” he said, and his voice was fearfully low and
husky, “ Boys, we must save that unfortunate female.”
And as he spoke he knocked the head off his pick and spat
on his hands, and began to fondle the handle tenderly.
“ That’s a fact,” echoed the rest, and in less than a
quarter of an hour five-and-twenty men were sneaking
through the darkness towards the Chinese camp. Each
one gripped a bare pick-handle, and walked on his toes.
At the base of the hill, within a stone’s throw of the Mon-
golian huts, Black Andy paused and drew the band up to
him and sobbed :
“ Boys, we all on us had mothers once, recollect that
an’ foller me. We’re goin’ to rescue a poor lone woman,
an’ disperse a crowd of yaller devils wot never grew on this
soil. Whoop, come on ! ” And they went. A wild half-
hour followed, and at the expiration of that time there
wasn’t a Chinaman within five miles of the spot except two,
who met with accidents as they attempted to leave in a
hurry, and had to be planted later on in an old abandoned
shaft. The poor woman was saved —and I might also
remark that the line of rich country was pegged in peace at
dawn, and no heathen son of Confucius ever troubled that
locality again.


THE MEEK HINDOO.
“ That’s a BUrmall ruby or Tin a fool. 15
“You’re a fool alright, Smiler, ruby or no ruby ; hold
your tongue and let the nigger speak.”
The nigger (?) was a high-caste Hindoo, and one of his
swarthy cheeks bore the imprint of a weapon of some sort.
He wore no hat, and his jet-black hair was coiled up all
over the back of his head and fastened in its place by a
green comb shaped like a crescent. He was not dressed in
European costume, but wore the picturesque dress of his
people. In his right hand he held a number of stones of a
dull red colour. They were not much to look at from a
novice’s point of view, but to one who had made the art of
lapidary a study they were full of interest. In his left hand
the Hindoo held a small heap of sparkling gems, and as he
toyed with them I could see the fire in his keen dark eyes
grow almost as brilliant as the light in the precious gems_
We stood and watched him, four shrewd speculators, in a
broker’s office, and I, a mining reporter, for he had come
there to sell a secret of the Australian deseit, and we waited
to hear him make his terms. Turning to me with all the
expression crushed out of his mobile features he said:
“ You wrong, sahib, those stones not come from Bur-
mah ; those I found in Australia. My Afghans brought
them down two years ago when out with the camels. I
know the spot. I sent some to Burmah and had them cut


and polished. These are the samples, some rough, some
ready for sale.”
“ You want to sell your information ? ”
“ At a price, yes.”
“ How much 1 n
“ Five thousand pounds of the English money.”
“ I think you are a fraud, my friend.”
“It is well,” replied the Hindoo, calmly, putting the
stones back in a little pouch of goatskin ; “ the sahib does
not want to buy ; I want to sell. I will take ray know-
ledge elsewhere,” and he made a move to the door.
“ Hold on, Hassan,” said one of the brokers ; “see if
we can’t strike a bargain. If you tell the truth the find is
worth our money, but the devil of the thing is to know how
to prove whether you are a liar or not.”
For about ten seconds the black man stood meditating,
and then, turning towards me, he said to the others :
“ Send him.”
“ Will you show me the ruby fields ? ”
“Yes, at a price.”
“ How much 1 ”
“ Two hundred pounds shall be paid into my hands
when we start, and the rest I shall claim when we return.”
“ Damnation ! Hassan, this camel will rick every bone
in my body.”
“ Not so, Sahib; it will be easier to-morrow.”
“ Easier be d ,” I growled as we went through the
dreary, waterless, salt-bush desert, with a sun overhead so
hot that it made the hair on the back of my hands curl up
and break off like needles, and the dust rising round us
settled like a yellow pall on man and beast, and the flies,
the little grey flies of the desert, crowded into the corners


of my eyes and up my nostrils, and the devilish thirst, and
with it all the fiendish jerk, jerk, of my first day’s ride on
camel back. The three Afghans didn’t seem to mind it in
the least, and they seemed disgusted as they saw how often
I took the peg out of the water bag. Three days of this,
days that seemed years, and the morning of the fourth saw
me gaping round alone. My camel was picketed there
quiet enough, and it did not take me long to realise that I
was deserted, and with a curse that reached from that spot
to Singapore, I turned back on the home stretch.
Ten days later a blear-eyed, sad-faced, dirty looking
mining reporter was standing meekly in a broker’s office,
while four indignant speculators emptied the vials of their
wrath upon him, and cursed everything black, blue, and
ruby coloured while they moamed over the £2OO that had
gone with the meek Hindoo, and the £l2O that lay in the
outfit.
Five years later rubies, and good ones too, were dis-
covered in that region, but I was not near it, nor shall 1
be until they have something a trifle better than camel
traction.


GALLAGHER’S LUCK.
“ Strike me dead, Sailor Bill, I’ll deal wid you if you
don’t keep that tater thrap av a mouth av journ shut.”
“ Easy, Owen ; it’s bad to get excited. An Irishman
in love is hard to deal with, and the sailor has not done you
any harm ; he only said you were a nice-looking sort of
creature to take a girl’s fancy.”
“ Aisy is it, Juno? Sure, I’m only Owen Sullivan,
but the devil said me face was only lit for leeches ter learn
their thrade av suckin’ on, an’ me body had more corners
on it than the road to Heaven. An’ he said the children
I’d raise ’ud look like warts on the face of nature.”
“ Well, Juno, aint he a picture to please a girl’s fancy?
Why the idiot can’t see that old Price’s daughter is making
a fool of him, and when I tell him of it he sits up and
squeals. But it’s a fact. She don’t care no more for that
long, leather-slabbed ornament than I do. She has the
pick of the whole camp to choose from, and there’s some
smart chaps here on the Gunnerach goldfields.”
“ To h 1 wid you, I’m goin’ down now and I’ll make
things mighty sudden fer some of them smart chaps before
I come back,” and Owen Sullivan swung his long gaunt
frame out of the tent and kicked the flaming embers of the
camp fire viciously as he strode away towards a hut which
nestled in a deep gorge, surrounded by dense and heavy
timber.


“ Gallagher, Gallagher. Here’s to Gallagher’s luck.
Drink it up boys, an’ fill ’em agaid,” and the speaker, a fair-
faced girl, with pale blue eyes and a mass of golden brown
hair, suited the actions to the words by tossing off a nobbier
as if she had a constitution of iron. Her eyes were full of
a pathetic, dreamy light, her soft red lips looked like damp
sea coral, her hands were small and soft, and her dress, wild,
bright, and picturesque, she looked just the sort of creature
whom poor old Adam Gordon would have idolised in his
poetic way, and a painter would have thought her a wing-
less angel, but like most things feminine, her looks were the
best part of her, and her pearly teeth the softest part of her
anatomy. Those sweet lips were fonder of curses than
prayers, and whisky would climb out of a bottle on its own
account to get past her teeth ; and as she drained her glass
she looked round on the desperate, rough-looking gang who
filled the drinking drum and nearly drove the men to mad
ness, for she had robbed every one of them of gold at one
time or another, yet the fools, men like, worshipped her in
their rude, passionate fashion, and she knew it. Gallagher,
the lucky finder of the richest patch ever struck in South
Australia, was the latest victim, and though he knew she
would pass him by like one of her worn out stockings as
soon as she had fleeced him, yet he bent to her will and was
happy.
“ Have a drink, Owen 1 ”
“ Dhrink be d ; I dhrink wid no Gallaghers.”
“If you came here to pick a row, Owen, you can quit
as soon as you like.”
“ Put me out, I’m only one amongst a mob, but it’s
Gallagher’s bad luck you’ll be drinkin’ to-morrow if you try
—you she-devil.” Bang went a tumbler at the head of the
pugilist, and as he wiped the blood from his brow he


grinned, and turning his back on the girl who threw it he
walked straight up to Gallagher and levelled him with a
blow on the chin. And then the row became general,
bottles and lumps of quartz flew in all directions, and men
fell gashed and bleeding, cursing and blaspheming, raging
like wild animals, and the sweet creature behind the bar
bent her head pensively on the palm of her hand and sent
lief rich contralto above the blasphemy of the crowd in the
refrain of the sweet old hymn,
“ Lord, let me linger here,
For this is bliss,”
and she did not shift until Owen Sullivan, all blood and
dirt and with little else on but his socks, stood before her
and informed her that the picnic was over, and Gallagher’s
luck was dead out, for he had been taken in two different
hand-barrows to his own tent.
“ JSot guilty, your Honor,” and' Gallagher’s voice
quivers as he pleads that he had not murdered his little
son. The case goes on and the prisoner has a big chance.
Owen Sullivan leaning over the railing of the court-house
on the silver fields looks at his old rival, the man he had
half killed on the goldfields three years before, and murmurs
“ I’ll take 6 to 4 he gets out of it,” but he pauses, the
woman of the old camp life rises before him as sweet, as
pensive as of old, and deliberately swears away the life of
her paramour. As she goes out of the court after the
verdict has been passed he catches the words hummed in
the same sweet contralto, “ Lord, let me linger. ” “ Strike
me dead,” muttered Owen, “ I’m d glad I missed her,
for it’s even money I’d have struck Gallagher’s luck.”


THAT D M FOOL KIT.
I was dead broke, and nigh dead beat, in the summer of
’79, and I made up my mind to get away into the back
country somehow ; so I pulled myself together one Satur-
day morning and walked down King William-street,
Adelaide, cursing my luck and all that had the remotest
connection with it, until I ran against Dave Reid
and Ted Watson, a couple of chums, who were good over a
bottle or in a dance room. Dave opened fire in his usual
prayerful style by informing me that a motherless foal would
not change faces me ; and Ted wanted to know if I
was looking for a billet as a crow scare for a nursery garden.
“ No, I’m not looking for a job of that sort. I’m going
to quit this holy city and have one more cut at bush life.”
“ Not foolin’?”
“No.”
“ Well, I know a fellow who’s going as far as Haughton
Station on the Murray with a mob of sheep, an’ he wants a
fellow to help him as drover. Will you grip on ter that
job, Smiler ? ”
“ Yes, by thunder ! ” And I did, and Monday morning
saw me plugging along towards the Murray behind the
cussedest lot of sheep that ever reared a bale of wool. 1
got on right enough with the sheep and the two dogs, but
the boss drover was a bully of the first water, and he led
me the sweetest life I ever had, but all things come to an
end, and at last, travel-stained, footsore, and dirty, with big


blucher boots and moleskin pants, and a beard about two
inches long, I got to the station.
I shan’t forget that night as long as I live. The
Government House, as they call the homestead on the big
station, was a big, roomy, low stone building, with a
verandah running round it, on which were grouped a lot of
people, amongst whom were a couple of young ladies and
two rather elderly ones. On the step stood a young fellow
in riding togs, a fine, well-knit lad, with a frank, open face.
My boss went up and spoke to the manager and settled his
business, and then he came and paid me the money I had
earned, for I was to quit him there, and I had got enough
to purchase a screw that would carry a saddle, and I
thought I’d perhaps get a job on the station and so earn
enough to buy a saddle. I was going towards the boss of
the station to ask if there was a chance for a job, when he
came towards us, and I said :
“ Any chance for a job here, sir ? ”
“Yes, my lad, if you’re any good. What can you do?
Used to station work? Will the drover recommend you?”
“ Hang his recommendation. I’m young and strong
and I’m not afraid of any graft you can give me. Try me
a week, and if I’m not worth having I’ll pack, but I don’t
want a word from that cur—l’d rather starve.”
The boss smiled, and the young fellow on the steps
grinned, while a young lady in a white dress came and
leant over the verandah rail, as pretty a picture as I ever
saw. The drover turned and said to the boss, “ I’d give
him his supper to-night, sir, and then let him pack; he’s a bad
lot; disgrace to his people; I picked him up in the gutter.
I’d borne that bully’s curses and ill-treatment all the way
up the track for the sake of getting a good word at the
station, and he thought it was because I was afraid of him,


but I put that notion out of his head, for, remembering
Peter Newton’s advice, 1 got home first, and the blood Hew
all over my bare arms, and then I set sail at him. He tried
to fight, but he was a fool at it, and as I pressed him back
he backed up against the young chap who had been standing
on the steps, and who held a stockwhip in his hand; before
I knew what was coming he snatched the whip from the
youth’s hand, and smashed me on the head with the heavy
loaded whip handle, and I went to sleep.
About a week later I woke up in a room in the home-
stead. For a while I was as balmy as a loon, but, pulling
my brains together, I soon got the hang of things, and then
1 knew I was not alone. The young girl whom I had seen
on the balcony was there, and the youth whose whip-handle
had spread me out. The girl was speaking.
“ Kit, you’re mixing with a bad lot on the other side.
Why don’t you keep away from them ? They’ll get you
into trouble.”
“ Shut up, Nell.”
“ I won’t, Kit. You and that girl are carrying on in
a disgraceful way, and you’ll be ruined. I’d like to horse-
whip her. Nice times you are bringing on yourself.”
“ Say, Nell, it strikes me you know too much for a
young lady. I always thought girls didn’t know these
things till they got married, and their husbands put 'em up
to the wicked ways of mankind.”
“ Kit, you’re a decided fool.”
“ Why don’t you say as all my male relations say it,
‘ Kit, you’re a damned fool ? ’ I’m used to that, but shut
up ’bout me. Talking of horse-whipping, wonder how this
poor beggar here feels? I guess his skull’scrackecj.”
“ Not this trip.”


“ Hello, mate, got your wits at last, have you ? Here,
Nell, he’s not going to peg out after all.”
Three weeks later I was out at work on the station,
and I found Kit was the orphan nephew of the boss, and as
wild a young cub as ever I struck. We chummed in
together, and he and I were sent out mustering together,
and I grew fond of him. His two male relations always
spoke of him as that d fool Kit. He had run mad
riot more than once and seemed to like it, and they were
anxiously expecting another outbreak of folly.
After the shearing we had lazy times, and 1 itched to
cut the quiet station life and get on to some goldfield, and
as soon as I told Kit he was mad to quit and go with me,
and I saw he was in red-hot earnest, and so 1 made up my
mind to tell Miss Nell and sneak off without him, for I did
not want to take the lad out into the world. To my
surprise she seemed delighted. “Take him away from
here ; take him quick, to-night, if you can,’ she said, and
then I remembered the conversation in the hut when 1 was
sick. I’d often seen him saddle up and go off at sundown,
and he never asked me to go with him, and I
guessed that he was in with a bad crew, bo when I
saw him go out that evening I saddled up and followed in
his tracks. He got into a dingy and pulled over the river,
leaving his mare hobbled on the bank ; so I rode down to
the blacks’ camp and asked one of the lazy rascals to pull
me over, and then take my horse and leave it with Master
Kit’s. I soon got my way by the aid of a flask of whisky
and a cake of tobacco, and then I stepped out for a cluster
of log cabins I could see in the distance, and as I did not
linger by the way I soon got there, and leaning against the
slip panel 1 saw Kit talking to a woman, i nodded as I


sauntered past, and he laughed. The woman smiled, and
wished me “ Good evening/’ and I went into the first hut,
for I had too much knowledge of human nature not to know
at a glance what class of society this girl belonged to.
Inside I found half-a-dozen station hands, stockmen, and
boundary riders drinking rum that would make a horse
buck, and these damsels of the soiled-dove persuasion
helped them. At first I didn’t get a warm welcome, as
the sly-grog shanties are often run down by police in
disguise, but Kit, who anticipated this difficulty, put his
head in the door and yelled, “ He’s all right, he's a mate of
mine.” Then the fun began in earnest, and the work of
“ lambing ” down the guileless bushman began in reality.
I got into a chat with one of the women, and she told me
that there were six of them, all city girls of easy virtue.
They had been brought up by a fellow called “ Cross-eyed
Sara ” as a speculation, and with the assistance of mighty
bad rum they were coining money. After awhile some one
brought out a violin, and the floor was cleared, and as all
the girls were up and about, and quite a crowd of fellows
had gathered, a regular night’s bliss was started, and what
a night it was ; the dirty lamp threw out a dim light, and
the tallow candles stuck promiscuously in bottles all over
the place helped ’em ; the men excited by drink, and the
savage lust of long pent up, but now fully-aroused, animal
passions, raged and sang, and swore and stamped their
steel-shod feet; all were bare-headed, all had blue or red
flannel shirts on, and all were as willing to fight as to dance
or sing. The women in the finery that had once been their
glory when they flirted up and down Hindley-street in
search of flats, with cheeks painted and lips stained, hair
dishevelled, and eyes alight with all the unholy fires that
drink and lust can arouse, sang, laughed, shrieked, and


raised hell in small sections. Now and again some of the
men would come to blows over the women, and the night
wore on, and the wildest there was Kit; and I saw that the
woman I had seen him with at the slip panel had a big
influence over him. I tried to get him away, but it was no use
talking. He said it was his last night there, and he meant
to enjoy it. All at once a general row seemed to break up.
The whole crew set sail at each other, and the women were
worse than the men. I got up on a rafter and enjoyed my
share of the fight from there, when I saw Kit stagger back
and fall, and the next instant I saw a fellow throw a sheath
kangarooing knife into a corner. Down I dropped from my
pei’ch, and picking up the nearest bottle that carried a
candle I flung it at the head of the assassin and spread him
out. Then I bent over Kit, he was just like a man asleep.
I put my hand on his side and found it bathed in blood.
I was hard at work lifting the lad to his feet when I
received the toe of the assassin’s boot fair under the ear,
and went down in a corner dazed and helpless; but after a
bit I pulled myself together, and got hold of Kit, and as I
did so a scream from one of the women told me that the
flimsy bark hut was on fire, and in their drunken folly the
bushmen threw bottles of spirits at the blazing walls, and
barred the outlet, but at last the danger scared them, and
they staggered outside. Then the mad fools joined hands
men and women, and capered round the blazing pile to a
drunken chorus, while I was trying to rub life back into
that d fool Kit. Only one man was missing, and that
was the skunk who had used the knife. At last I knew it
was hopeless, and laying the poor lad tenderly down by the
willows, I ran to the water and cooeed to the blacks’ camp,
and they, hearing my tale, soon caught my horse, and one
rode to the station for help, but when they came, and in the


grey light of the morning, stood round the lad, every man’s
head was bare, every woman’s eyes were wet, for he’d
slipped quietly off into the big back country, which for
want of a better name we poor folks call eternity. We
planted him there, and when the moon rose the first night
on his grave, I went to wish the lad farewell, for I had an
idea that his immortal part was still close to the scene of
his last mad orgie. On the new grave a woman was lying,
sobbing as if her soul was going to come up in sections. It
was the girl who had lured him from the station night after
night, and she showed as she knelt there with white, weary
face, and dishevelled hair i hat she was not utterly worthless,
forher sorrow for the dead lad was genuine I heard her as
she tried to pray, looking upward towards the clouds, “ Oh
God,” she wailed, “ Oh, my God, forgive me.” Then she
broke down, “blast it, I can’t pray. Oh, Kit—Kit, you
d fool Kit.”


SHE DID IT.
“ Smiler, were you ever struck by lightning ?” It was
a rough old digger who had accosted me as I took one of ray
quiet rambles.
“ No, stranger ; that is a luxury I have not yet en-
joyed,” I said, surprised at his strange question.
‘‘ Look at that now ! But it proves the truth of the
Scripture quotation that ‘ Providence is good to the blind
mule.’ ”
“Go slow, stranger. You are not trying to run in a
cheap providential advertisement on me now, are you ? If
you are you’ll find that, simple as I am, the softest part
about me is my teeth.”
“ You didn’t talk like that when you ran against Long
Charley and me about this time ten years ago, Smiler.
Then you were only a miner, grafting at the Uncle Tom
mine, round Ballarat. Now you are a quill-driver, and I
guess you are ashamed of your old chums, the prospectors.”
“ Mate, that’s where you lie. There’s no more truth
in that last statement than there is in a barmaid’s false
teeth. The man that’s ashamed of the ladder he rose upon
is like a dog with sore feet—good to bark through a fence
but a bad beast for a journey.”
“Go up one, Smiler. But a fellow scarcely knows
how to treat his old chums when lie meets ’em now. Some
of ’em who have made a few pounds put on such airs They
try to forget the days when they had only one shirt, and


that had more holes in it than there are windows in heaven.
When I saw you prancing round in a new suit I felt
‘ offish’ like ; for I didn’t like to intrude; and, for the soul
of me, I couldn’t help thinking of the old Purnamoota days
when you used to wear one boot at a time for fear of wear-
ing out the pair before winter set in. Yes, Smiler,
they were giddy old times. Do you remember how Ned
Saunders, Bill M‘Kechnie, Dan M‘Kay, and a dozen more
of us only had one white shirt between us, and used to take
it in turns to wear it Sundays. Remember that shirt, do you,
Smiler. Well, I carried that old garment about with me
for three years, and ‘ Long Charley’s ’ wearing it now.”
“ Things must be mighty queer with your old mate, or
else he’s uncommon fond of old acquaintances.”
“You haven’t quite got the hang of it, Smiler, Just
shift that stump-tail bull-pup of yours a few feet and I’ll
explain.”
I shifted the pup and filled my pipe, and the unknown
said calmly,—
“ Yer see it’s this way. Long Charley’s planted. He’s
six feet under the dust, aw r ay back on the Mount Brown
track. It ain’t no kinder use as I can see of sitting down
ter howl about. Howlin’ won’t do him no manner of
good; if it would I’d be champion howler in these parts.
Cause why ! ‘ Long Charley ’ an’ me was mates, an’ he
was the best pal I ever had.”
“ Sunstroke ? ” I interrogated.
“No.”
“ Jim Hennessey ? ”
“ No.”
“ A woman ? ”
“ Y”es, and a red-headed one, too, Smiler.


Then he smoked on in silence, while his hard face
worked like a lame hound in a ploughed held. Presently
two big shining tears crept down into his beard. At last
he spoke. Then the pup crept in, nestled down at his feet,
and sighed out of pure sympathy. I knew at once the
stranger had not lied. I’d trust the instincts of that pup
any time as far as lying is concerned. I’ve often noticed
that if I tried to prevaricate ever so mildly that pup would
look at me in a heart-broken sort of style, and then slink oil
out of earshot amongst the saltbush.
“ Damn her!” at last he broke out with awful
emphasis.
“ Do it some more, friend, if it eases you
“ I don’t wish that girl any harm, but if she’s half as
hot now as I wish her she won't send back for her blankets,
I’ll bet.”
Did 1 know her?” I insinuated.
“ No, Smiler, you didn’t. Long Charley and me went
across to Wilcannia to knock down the cheques we made at
silver-hunting. We did as most fellows do in a bush-town
—we got drinking and gambling. One night we got down
—well, never mind where—and it was there that ray mate
met the girl that pegged him out and left him to rot like a
dog on the lonely bush track. What was she like? Well,
I ain’t good at word-paintin’, especially as regards women
If it was a horse, now. or a gold show, I’d about tix it for
yer. This woman was rather small, and had yaller hair—l
call it red —and dark brown, wicked eyes. Her’s was a
cruel little mouth, with ripe warm lips that would fetch old
Scratch away from a phPe of hot nuts if she’d met him.
Well, she .just got hold of Long Charley and played the


devil with him. I saw how the lode was beginning to dip
and tried all I knew to get him away from that nest of hell.
But he only rounded on me for it, and we nearly cametoblows.
1 kept clear for a while, thinking she'd quit him as soon as
his money began to cut out. But she didn’t. She seemed
to have made up her mind to ruin the young stalwart
digger from the brace to the bottom ; and she did it. I’m
not great on religion, Sroiler ; but when I first saw my
pard going hand over fist to the slag-heap, I thought I’d try
if a parson would do him any good. But devil a parson
could I get to go near the lad ! I was giving it up for a
bad job, when I met a priest, and he went with me. The
girl just sat down and laughed at us both, and the priest
had to quit those diggings without doing any good. At
last my mate got mixed up in some bad scrapes and did a
term for assault and robbery. When he came out of the
jug I was there to welcome him with two good horses ready
for the road. But he’d not quit. He was just mad for the
temptress. He went, and I never saw him again until I
picked him up, a drivelling lunatic, away between Yandarlo
and Mount Brown. I was mad with him that day at the
prison gates, and I left for the goldfield, where I kept
myself miserable until about Christmas time. Then I
started for Wilcannia, hoping that once more I might get
hold of my chum. Just as the sun was setting on Christmas
Eve I found him lying on the track—a broken, drought-
stricken wretch. I didn't see his anguish. He was past all
that when I found him. His eyes were bloodshot, his lips
cracked and smeared with blood, and the only words he
faintly uttered were ‘ She did it.’ I ain’t quite sure,
Smiler, but I think he was just telling the angel of death
what brought him down so low. I don’t know what digging
fie is prospecting in now, but I’d like to know; for, no


matter what sort of climate it is, I’m going prospecting in
the everlasting diggings with ‘ Long Charley ” if X have a
vote at the Judgment Day; for his faults were not his
own, and his crime was hers.—She did it.”
SPANISH KITTY.
“ The water is getting precious low, mates, an’ I guess
there’ll be a row on this field before long.”
“ D the water, it’s the whisky that’s troubling me,
pard. I’m going up to Spanish Kitty’s drum, an’ I’ll fill
my skin for luck.”
“ Easy, Jim, it ain’t the whisky that takes you away
from your camp fire every night; an’ I tell you, lad, I smell
trouble ahead, an’ I wouldn’t be in your shoes for all the
gold on this field ; would you Smiler '] ”
“Ned’s a born fool at the best of times over a woman ;
but he’s dead gone on this dark-eyed Spanish-looking girl,
and he’ll get daylight let into his hide, dead sure, before
he’s through with her. She’s no good at the bottom.
Women are a crooked lot at the best, but this one, who is
spending her time taking down the diggers’ gold in a sly
grog-shop, is about as bad a specimen as I’ve struck for a
while.”
“ Good boy, Smiler,” laughed Ned Saunders. “ When
did you turn tender-footed about women 1 ”


“ I’ll take all the chances. I like the girl partly
because she’s a beauty, partly because she’s as crooked as
chain lightning, and partly because she’s full to the ears
with devil ; good-night, lads, I’m going,” and he stretched
his powerful frame in the moonlight, and poking the toe of
his boot carelessly in the tire, he sent the embers amongst
the three dogs that lay near it.
He looked, as he stood therewith his brown, curly beard,
as handsome a young digger as a woman’s eye might wish
to rest upon. After he left I stood looking down Brady’s
Gully watching the miles of tents and camp fires, and listen-
ing to the hum of the diggers’ talk and the snatches of songs
as they now and then burst out on the night air. A sudden
yell of anger, 'a hoarse shout of rage, and then the sound
of a horse in full gallop broke on my ears. Old Bob Rees
was at my side in an instant. “ Smiler, there’s trouble up
at Spanish Kitty's.” The next instant, in the bright moon-
light, a horseman, bare-headed, and with his face covered
with blood, came tearing down past us. I could have
dropped him, horse and all, if 1 had liked, and I felt strongly
inclined to do so, and ray hand sought my hip-pocket
mechanically. Then we hurried on to the spot where diggers
were crowding in thousands. At the door of Spanish
Kitty’s drinking drum the trooper was standing facing the
angry mob; his face was desperately white, and the moon-
beams glistened on the barrel of his heavy revolver as he
menaced the crowd. As I pushed through I heard him say:
“ Keep back, boys ] the first man to pass the tent-peg goes
cold—” when lie saw me. He beckoned me to him. “Go
in and see what you can do for your mate, Smiler.” I
pushed through the opening, and found Ned Saunders lying
on a couple of blankets on the tloor. His coat had been
torn oft’and his shirt hung in tatters, and his pale face


The Wanderings of a Simple Child. I ")?
carried one or two ugly bruises. A woman knelt at his
side, and tried to stop the blood that ebbed in a never-
ceasing stream from a gash between his ribs. He looked
O n
up when I touched him, then his grey eyes tilled with the
laughing devilment of the man, and he murmured, “ You're
a dandy prophet, old chap. You’d knock Daniel and the
rest of the Jews out in one act. Drop gold-hunting and
start a show of that sort, and put me on your testimonial
ticket.”
“ Much hurt, Ned 1 ”
“ Yes, pard ; jest about enough to get me through to
the dark diggings without fuss, but, by Gad, I laid some of
’em out before I went under.”
“ Spanish Kitty moaned and wrung her hands in bitter
grief, for her woman heart was real sore, though six weeks
after we planted Ned at the foot of the Bluff she was up to
the handle with another fellow and as gay as ever, but six
weeks is a long time for a woman to wait, anyhow.
It was the old story. A loose, pretty woman, a mob
of diggers at a card-table, bad liquor, a run of luck, a few
sneers and a blow, and then ten minutes hacking and
cutting, and a man carried out cold.
® i ML


THE ACE OF SPADES.
“ What the are yer standin’ there fer ; can’t yer
come and get a feller his tea ? ”
“ Do you want it real bad 1 ”
Yes I do, by thunder.”
“ Well get it, you’re ugly enough.”
“ Devil take yer, 111 break yer neck, yer black-headed
she-serpent,” and as he spoke the man jumped through the
shanty door and raised his hand to strike the young woman
who was leaning indolently against the side of the rough
slab hut. As he strode angrily towards her she threw up
her head and smiled a peculiar, tantalising sort of smile,
which showed every tooth in her head, and a beautiful set
they were.
“Don’t make a mistake, Jim,” she said; “I ain’t
asleep, you know.” And as if by magic the man’s attitude
changed, his face grew pale, and his strong, dirty hand fell
by his side as if stricken powerless. Again the woman
smiled, and her darkly-beautiful face seemed the very incar-
nation of mocking devilment, and looking at her with her
superb figure, draped in rude but artistic apparel, with
plenty of lovely-rounded ankle showing, and more than
enough of bright snow-white bosom, I thought her the
loveliest feminine thing I had ever gazed upon. I had been
in the saddle all that dreary red-hot day, and my horse and I
alike were weary ; and as I pushed into the Mount Brown
gold-mining camp I felt that it was not good for man to dwell


alone. The sun was just sinking in a cloud of dust over
the god-forsaken plains, and I had pulled bridle in front of
what I had guessed was a bush shanty—half eating-house,
half drinking-drum, and the rest a gambling hell, and
perhaps worse. But it was the best the bush affords, and
half a lifetime spent wandering round had taught me how
to look after my own carcase pretty well. After looking
at the insolent beauty and the cowed savage man for a few
seconds in silence I made a noise which drew their atten-
tion, and the woman came forward and helped me oft
saddle with rapid, deft fingers, and I didn’t need to be told
that she could handle a horse fifty times better than I
could. All the time she was eyeing me keenly, and I knew
she mistook me for a trooper.
“Seen Jim Pyvis lately?” she asked.
“ Pyvis, the trooper ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ No.”
“ That’s an infernal lie.”
“ Thanks.”
“ I know a trap when I see one,” she continued, laugh-
ing maliciously, “ and I know you have seen Jim Pyvis
within the last two months.”
“ How do you know ?”
“ Look there,” she said, pointing to the hobbles 1 had
just fixed on the legs of my hack, “see that mark.”
“ Yes, it looks like a bullet mark.”
“Tis a bullet mark. Jim Pyvis was taking those
hobbles off his horse one morning here in this paddock, an’
one of the boys fired at him, the bullet ripped through his
shirt an’ hit the hobbles.”
« What for?”


She laughed, “ Jim and me was chums. One of our
boys was mad jealous, and tried to lay Jim out cold,”
“ What'd Jim do ?”
“ Saddled up mighty quick and cliased him, and caught
him way down by the timber there, and laid him out with
a clout on the head with his stirrup-iron, same as if he was
laying out a kangaroo.”
“ H’m, yes; that’s about his style. Say, are you the
Ace of Spades ?”
The girl laughed, “Yes, I’m her. Did Jim tell you
anything T
“ Told me I’d see the handsomest she-devil in Australia,
and advised me to keep both eyes open at once if I met
her.”
“ Well, come up to the shanty and have some tea.
It’s rough, but you ain’t a new chum ” —and we went. The
fellow who had been eyeing us all the time we had been
chatting greeted me with a scowl, and looking him square
in the face, I saw right over the temple a great ugly scar
such as might be caused by a swinging blow from a steel
stirrup-iron. The ‘ Ace of Spades ’ saw my eyes rest on the
wound, and she laughed.
“ Jim’s trade mark ?”
“ Yes.”
I looked round and saw the fellow fidgetting with his
belt, so I thought I’d let him know I knew him. “ Say,
sonny, have you improved any since you banged at Trooper
Pyvis a couple of months ago, if not don't try it with me.
I’m the best shot in the back country.”
He got out of the hut and went away cursing and
heaving rocks at a couple of kangaroo hounds that slunk
after him.
“ Rather nice fellow to live with that. Who is he T


“ Husband.”
“ Bah r
“ Fact ; look here;” She Went to a little box and pro-
duced a dirty patch of blue paper.
“ Mar riage lines ?”
“ Yes.”
“ Fond of him T
“ lake you better/’ and she tossed her head and
laughed.
“Thanks, but you’re a bit dear; I’d get an ounce of
lead from that precious husband of yours. I think I’ll
pass.”
“ ’Fraid ? ”
“ Not particularly ; let’s have a feed.”
While I was at my meal, which, though rough, was
clean, the Ace of Spades lifted a couple of blankets, that
acted as a partition at about the middle of the cabin and
disappeared. I was just through with the meal when the
door was forced open violently, and the husband stepped in
and looked rcund the place with a suspicious scowl.
“ Lost anything?” I exclaimed, sweetly.
“ Go to blazes.”
“ Thanks; not to-night. I’m a bit tired,” and tilling
my pipe I pushed past him and went out to watch my neddy
picking up his scanty supper, and to have a quiet smoke (
I sat out on a log until the moon got up and the cabin was
all aglow with light. I had seen half-a-dozen diggers go
into the place, and now I could hear them laughing and
singing, while now and agian I caught tin; rattle of the dice-
box.
“ He threw twelve.”
“No, eleven.”
“I say twelve.”


“ You’re a liar.”
Crash ! Crash 1 Crash !
“ Say, mister, come in and stop these two devils;
they’re fighting like tigers/’
“ Let ’em fight.”
“You’re a nice sort of a trooper.’'
“ I’m a trooper; I’m a reporter.”
“ Jim Py vis’ pal ? ”
“ Yes.”
“Smiler?”
“H’m.”
“ Well, they think you’re a trap, you’ll do just as well.’
“ Don’t care about it. Say, did the Ace of Spades
send you ? ”
“Not much. She’d never stop a fight. She ikes the
fellows on to do it. She’s a devil, I think.”
“ You're a tender sort of a husband.”
Just then three diggers came out, carrying a wounded
man with them. They deposited him out in the cool air,
tied up a beastly ugly gash with a dirty towel, and propped
his head up with my saddle, and then left him to get round
by himself. I went in with the gang and saw the Ace
standing in her half-naked beauty in the centre of the hut
holding a dice-box in her hand. The crowd glared at me,
and so I took the opportunity to call for drinks all x’ound,
and then introduced myself.
“ What are you going to do here then, Smiler, write
or dig ? ”
“ Bit of both. Dig for gold, and fill in odd times
sending down news to papers.”
From that moment 1 was O.K. with the diggers. I
sat and read Adam Gordon’s poems to them, and told yarns
of earlier days; and they gambled and fought, and played


the devil generally. For some reason or another the Ace
hung round me night and day, though I soon found that
Jim Pyvis was right when he said she was a heartless jade,
cruel, bold, bad, and beautiful. Ten weeks I put in there
in that most dreary plague-stricken hole, and L was fairly
lucky. One morning I awoke with a start, for a strong
hand was on my shoulder. I jumped up and saw Jim
Pyvis and Paddy Flynn, two of the best back-country
troopers that ever put bracelets on a rough.
“ Hello, Smiler.”
“ Hello, Jim. Eh, Paddy ?”
“ How’s the Ace of Spades ?”
“ Blessed if I know, Jim.”
“Eh How much gold have you struck since you
came here ?”
“About £250 worth.”
“ Where is it V
“ Gone.”
“Where ?”
“ Don’t know.”
“ But I know who has most of it.”
“ You do Who ? ”
“ Ace of Spades, I’ll bet my life.”
“ What brings you here, Jim
“ Warrant for sheep-stealing and murder of a shepherd.’
“ Who’s the joker ?”
“ Ace of Spade’s husband. She informed on him, and
we are up to nip him now.”
As he spoke I thought I heard a soft footfall outside
the tent, and ray dog growled savagely.
Half an hour we chatted there while I dressed, and
then I went down with them to the drinking shanty.
All quiet.


With his revolver in one hand Jim went into the dark
room, then he lit a lamp, and we passed into the bedroom.
All quiet. On the bed the Ace was lying gagged, with
hands and feet pinioned, and her face slashed and scored
with a knife-blade, her nose and lips were horribly mutilated,
and her beauty was a thing of the past. A sheet of paper
lay beside her, and on this the husband had written in the
wife’s blood : “ Spades are trumps. I hold the Ace.—
Yours truly, in a hurry. P.S.—Don’t talk about arresting
a man before you do it another time. Ta-ta.”
Out we dashed and horses were saddled and hard we
rode in all directions; but the fellow who had dealt out the
last card in the bush game, was gone for ever, and we,
though we held the ace were euchred.


THE GENTLE SHEPHERD.
“What’ll we do with the parson, brother Maddern ! ”
“ Darned if I jest know. If he could rough it like any
of the diggers we’d soon fix him.”
“ Yes, but he can’t. Say, brother, did it ever strike
you as bein’ strange that all the Lord’s shepherds should be
lean, consumptive lookin’ streaks, jest like a rail out of the
bridge of etarnity fixed up on end.”
“ Does appear strange, brother Davis; but the vine-
yard must have workers, an’ I’m in a hole as to what we’ll
do with this chosen one. Can’t you suggest something 1 ”
“Well, I guess we’d better go down and see the boys
an' ask for a special meeting ; we aint very strong. 1 here s
“ Bub” Cleeon and “ Riffi” Gas Jack, an’ Zekiel Strong,
an’ old Bob Grant, and a few more of the convarted ones
who’d meet at the old Sunbeam shaft at sundown and puddle
this question out. I’ll round the boys up, an’ you can get
on with yer graft, an’ make the charcoal, for we must
sharpen the picks to-night.”
“ Right you are, sonny, I’ll watch while you pray
every man to his own gifts.
At sundown way back in the Purnamoota ranges a
gang of serious-looking diggers and prospectors met at the
mouth of the Sunbeam shaft. They were mostly Cousin
Jack miners from Moonta and Wallaroo copper mines in
South Australia, a place notorious for its religious tend
encies. The fellows were rough enough in all conscience
and if forced by the ungodly into a row they could fight
and wrestle with the best of ’em.


Zedekiah Thompson opened the meeting with a long
and labored prayer, in which he asked the Lord for most
everything a miner wants, from pick handles to blasting
powder, with chlorides and native silver thrown in. Then
they sang a hymn, and how they could sing, it was wonder-
ful where those rough uncouth looking chaps got the music
from. Then they buckled down to the special business for
which they had been called. Ephraim Jones produced a
copy of the Barrier Miner , in which it was stated that a
young parson named Custard Lee had arrived on the field,
and was about to locate himself in the Purnamoota ranges,
amongst the roughest class of prospectors, and the paper
opined that the gospel dispenser’d have a sad time at the
hands of Terrible Dick and his gang.
“ When’s he going to get to these diggin’s, Zekiel?”
“ Termorrer,”
“ We’ll hev to fix him.”
“ Yes, but where an’ how ? ” chimed in a dozen voices.
“ How about Widder Moffater?”
“Ah ! yes, just the thing. Hit it, by hokey. Never
thought o’ the widder. Bully for you, Jake,” and so on.
The chairman smiled blandly on the meeting, lifted his big
side-of-mutton hand towards the setting sun, and blessed them.
Next day the parson arrived. He was a lean young
man, with so many freckles on his face that until you got
close to him you thought he was one big freckle from ear to
ear. He had a soft, sad voice, and a slow, sweet, subdued
smile, and he didn’t look as if he’d be above ground long.
He called all the boys together on the second night of his
coming, and they crowded in, saints and sinners, Terrible
Dick, Tiger Tom, and every rough on the location. He
prayed for them until the toughest began to grow moist
about the eyes. Then he lifted up his voice and sang,


“ Abide with Me,” and when it was finished, Terrible Dick
went up to Tiger Tom, and said, “ Look here, d you,
if you ever meddle with that fellow I’ll kick your ears off.’
The “ widder ” and her daughter sobbed until they looked
like one big tear dressed in feminine apparel, and a water-
spout in Woolloomooloo would have looked like a dry bless-
ing compared to either of ’em.
From that day out the parson Avas a red-hot favorite.
He visited every camp until he knew em by heart, and as
he could pump a victim beautifully, he soon learned which
of the claims were properly held and which were not, and
as is often the case, about half the best mines in the dis-
trict were jumpable. Months rolled away, and the boys
began to whisper amongst themselves when they saw the
“ widder ” and her daughter, for, strangely enough, though
both were single both began to look as if they ought to be
wedded. But no one thought of the parson until one day
all the ranges rang with the news that in the early dawning
a band of claim “jumpers” had been at work and had
secured all the best shows in that part of the field, and
gradually it leaked out that the parson had given them
away. Then an angry mob saddled their horses, and taking
tar and feathers, they galloped down to the parson s nest,
but the wily bird had flown and only a couple of weeping
women remained.
“ He promised to marry me,” sobbed the “ widder.
“ He swore he’d never desert me,” wailed the daughter.
“We’ll never leave him if we lay hands on him,”
howled the mob. And away they dashed in pursuit, but
they never saw that consumptive streak again. And what
was their disgust when they learned that he was not a
parson at all, but a wily Melbourne broker s clerk sent up
to spy out their weak spots


NOT ENOUGH DEVIL IN ’EM.
A cloud of bright yellow dust, large, deep, and yet full
of life, a mad thunder of flying hoofs and clashing of steel,
the snorting of steeds, and the clinking of stirrup-irons.
It grows nearer, and the mob of diggers and their wives,
sitting on the fences and upon hillocks of mullock, can
see in this vast cloud the forms of horses and the faces of
men, and well in front of them all, sitting like a statue in
his saddle, rides the famous swordsman, Captain Jennings.
Every man in the troop has riding cords and top boots,
each wears a loose slouch hat and a light flannel shirt with
a loose blue coat open all the way down, and nearly every
man wears a beard. On they go like a mighty dust storm,
right through the open space to the west end of the miners’
camp, until right in their tracks little mounds of earth rise
up like ant hills, and one old digger turns to Ins mates and
remarks :
“ Geordie, them young chaps ’ll get sore bones afore
they get through that patch of country—see if they don’t.”
The words barely leave his mouth before the whole
troop at the charge sweeps down on the dangerous spot.
The captain lifts his horse over the first rise on to the
second with consummate skill, and half a dozen lengths
behind him the guerilla corps of the backblocks do the same
to a man. The pace is almost frantic now, as the bold
riders of the bush, worked up to boiling pitch by the cheei’s
of the onlookers, and the wild, nameless intoxication which


takes possession of horse and man when hoofs rattle and
steeds neigh and the hunting fever grows rioting. A rotten
piece of country gives way, twenty horses stagger in
their stride and lurch forwaul as if stricken with grape
shot, hut like a flash twenty pairs of spurs strike deep, and
forty sinewy arms lift them boldly on to their hoofs again*
and not a saddle is empty. Away over the rough ironstone
ridge sweeps the Captain, and at his heels ride the Burgesses*
and the Hills, and the Nicholases, and many another bold
rider whose deeds in the saddle have formed the theme for
many a camp-fire narrative. Now a horse blunders and a
stirrup-leather breaks, and a man reels in the pigskin, but
in a twinkling of an eye he is home again, and so on they
go out of the camp, over the ridge, past the tanks to the
southward, out into the open country, the home of the emu
and kangaroo, and then the bridle hands are dropped, and
the lean game heads of the bush-chargers stretch out and
with girths almost level with the saltbush they charge the
timber ahead at racing speed. Captain Jennings turns
half-round in his saddle, and as he looks he mutters undei
his moustache,
“ Not a white feather amongst ’em, damn em, they d
whip the world.” Right on to the timber they go, and
crash into it with a bound and a cheer that maddens the
panting horses now. Here and there a hat falls and a
streak of cloth shows where a coat or a breech cloth had
come in contact with the low, light, but tough and springy
forest timber. The bastard mulga of the silver country,
which, though frail to look at, sweeps the novice from the
saddle as surely as the bough of the overhanging wattle.
But there were no novices there. Ihe men who formed
that troop were the pick of the Western wilds, and nun}
of them could have ridden stirrup to stirrup with Adam


Gordon or Harry Stockdale or Rowley Pickering, great
horsemen as they were, and neither of the three riders and
writers all need have blushed for their company over wold
and waste.
“ Halt !”
The voice rings out like a bugle caT, and the foaming
steeds are hurled back on their haunches by hands that
never faltered Avhen they gripped reins.
“ Boys, I’m going away to leave you. This is my last
day in the saddle with you, but I want to tell you I’d like
to have the job to lead you once, only once, in the face of
half Europe up to some battery. Boys, I’ve seen England’s
best and America’s best; but for devil and dash and natural
skill I’ve seen none like you.”
“ Right wheel: trot.”
# *
“ Thunder, is this our new Captain, ‘ Smiler !’ ”
“ Looks like it.”
“ Looks nice enough to eat—bet he couldn't ride over
a turnip patch without a spill.”
“ Dry up, Jim.”
“ Looks like one of them book soldiers, all lecture and
no light.”
“Shutup ; he’ll hear you.”
“ Bet he won’t suit us.”
“ Bet we won’t suit him.”
Add the boys were right, he didn't suit us. Day after
day out in the broiling sun he kept us perched in the saddle
while he lectured us on “ discipline ” and “ tactics,” while
all the time our souls yearned for one good gallop with the
fiery Jennings. At last the men mutinied. I knew they
would, and I was deputed to ask for a little bit of actual


practice and a little less theoi’y. That night, standing
drinking in the cool saloon, the English officer informed his
friends and the public generally that we were too chicken-
hearted for soldiers—we hadn’t devil enough, and the men
swore a mighty oath that the first time they got him to
lead them out in the rough country, they’d show him what
Australians were made of, and they did.
An hour and a half, sitting like half-baked yams in the
fierce sunlight, with the dust and the flies maddening us,
a lecture on the propriety of strict obedience as dry as the
weather, and then
“’Tention! Left wheel ! Trot out into the open country
straight for the timber. Charge! ” And the gallant
Briton dashed off in front of us, sitting squarely in his
saddle, but we knew he was ours, for those toes, sticking
out like iron posts, would never clear timber.
On we went at a hand-gallop, until twenty lengths
from the timber.
« Halt ! ”
Divil a halt was there.
“Halt!” a mutineer yelled above the neighing of
Worses. “ Show him our devil, boys.” And then every
horse was lifted forward like a thunderbolt, and the officer
was swept like an atom of wreckage in front of us. The
timbers bent and cracked, and the men yelled as if rounding
up cattle. The Captain’s off stirrup was torn from the
saddle, his near leg was caught between a forked limb ;
there was a yell. His hands gripped the reins frantically.
His charger reared, pawed the air, and came down with a
crash, and he was left hanging head down midst the blue-
bush and mulga, and there we left him, and when once more
we reached the mining camp we shook hands all round like
men who had done a deed of solemn duty, and that was the


last time we ever drew bridles together, for we were dis-
banded, but it wasn’t because we hadn’t enough devil, by
Jove.
BACK-BLOCK JOURNALISM.
RECEIVING A DEPUTATION.
It was a wooden shanty with an iron roof, and in
front hung out a glaring signboard bearing in mighty tall
letters the legend that the only reliable and readable paper
in the whole mining camp was published within. At the
rear of the premises, in a sweetly-furnished apartment, sat
the “staff.” Will Hammond, Yankee pressman and editor-
in-chief, lounged on a beer-keg with a feather pillow-
strapped across the top. His feet were elevated on the
window-sill, and his mouth daintily curved round the stump
of a remnant of a Henry Clay, while his left hand lovingly
clasped the neck of a black bottle labelled “ Dawson’s best.”
Hammond was a typical American, fond of a good weed, a
good glass, and a tall yarn. Next to him, reclining upon a
luxuriously circulated blue blanket, was the massive frame
of the manager, “ Old Targett,” as white a man and as
good a fellow as ever kicked a bully or pulled a cork, He
habited in a regal set of pyjamas noted more for their
ventilated circumstances than for any special line of beauty.
Curled up in a corner, with the neck of a suspicious looking


jar protruding from his pocket, lay the stately form
of reporter Bedford, a youthful scribe, who could write a
rattling “ par ” on any mortal thing, from the incubation of
a barn-door chicken to the decease of an Archbishop. In
the opposite end of the “ sanctum,” in a similar state of
somnolency, caused by precisely the same circumstances,
slumbered Charlie Chandler, the mining expert, leader
writer, poet, and pugilistic editor ; all good fellows and true.
This was the “ staff ” of the Ao'gus, a clever racy paper, full
of devil and declaration. There was a knock at the door
and a scuffle of feet in the passage. 'lhe editor didn’t yelh
“ Come right in,” as editors usually do. Not so ; he had
too keen a perception of what might be on the other side of
that door.
Bedford climbed out of his corner, tied his braces round
his waist, pulled up both sleeves, and struck an attitude
ready to lead with the left and come across solid with the
right as soon as the door opened. The editor pulled down
his feet and extracted a club from a handy nook. The
manager rose and tightened the string of his pyjamas, and
straightened an arm that would have felled an ox. The
poet stripped with ready alacrity to his singlet, and then
climbed on the top of the partition and peeped over into
the passage, One glance was enough; down he got, and
made three or four frantic passes at imaginary Peter Jack-
sons, and intimated to his colleagues that there were ten
men outside and all bent on destruction. The lock was
turned. Waltz right in,” chirruped the editor. The
flimsy door creaked upon its hinges, and the posse of citizens
entered.
“Are you the editor of this journal?” snarled the
leader, a big, red headed, flat-footed, beer-eating bummer,
who never did a day’s work in his life except when in gaol.


“We are the editor,” replied Hammond, waving his
hand majestically towards his colleagues, and intimating
himself with a final flourish.
“ We’ve dropped in to tell you that unless you leave
off calling our claims bare bush swindles and wild cat acre
jumps we’ll tar an’ feather the whole boilin' pack of you and
level this caboose with the dust of Argent-street. We ain’t
goin’ ter have our bread an’ butter taken out of our mouths
jest because a set of white-fingered chaps are so thin-skinned
that they can’t allow decent prospectors to take down the
flats and tender-footed fools in the city,”
“Go slow, Mister, this office won’t be dictated to on
points of social etiquette.”
“ We are the voice of a mighty big crowd round by the
Silver King,” replied a splay-footed creature with cross eyes,
and a mouth that a gorilla wouldn’t try to frighten a black
boy with.
“We used to get flats to buy claims that we’d salted
real handsome before you chaps came up here, and now we
can’t raise a couple of hundred anyhow. \ou clear out of
this, and don’t go to sleep on the track neither, for we are
going to make a fire just where this darned office now
stands, that’s what we intend to do and we .”
“ Gentlemen,” meekly replied the manager, “ Gentle-
men, this deputation’s been received, its grievances hev
been decided in an impartial spirit, and now we’re going to
show the power of moral suasion. Sail in, boys, and don’t
forget to punctuate your sentences. Here’s a head-line for
a leader,” and out went the mighty right fist of the brawny
manager and the leader of the deputation was knocked
through the match-board partition that divided the office
from Mrs. Roberts’ pub. Hammond left a note of interro-
gation on the scalp lock of another fellow’s bend with his


club, while the poet indicated a stanza on the fallen body of
the man nearest to him, and reporter Bedford sat clown
contentedly on the frame of the hardest bummer and straight
away dissected him - hair, eyes, and ears. It was a peace-
ful scene while it lasted, and when it was over every one of
the “ staff” had a mark of esteem to show from the hands
of the visitors ; one had lost a couple of teeth, another had
gained a “ head,” while more’n one ear was missing, and it
was quite a trouble to keep the stray dogs from the place
for they smelt cold victuals and could not be chased away
with a gun. Next day the Argus came out handsome and
complimented the townsfolk upon the possession of such a
set of level-headed, energetic townsmen, and invited the
same crowd to try the experiment of interviewing the £, staff ’
twice a week.”
SVk i
ah W


TAKEN DOWN QUIETLY.
1 was milling reporter and assayer for the Harrier
Miner, and a jolly life it was. Year after year out in the
open air, half my time in the saddle. I guess I’ll never
know such days again. Daybreak usually saw me saddling
my hack, and then the yelping of the pack of kangaroo dogs
I always kept used to make the fellows in the neighbouring
tents curse me with more force than elegance of diction.
That didn’t matter a heap, for a fellow cares mighty little
for anyone's feelings as he dings the camp behind him and
feels a big, well-bred brute straining and plunging under
him as he speeds out in the cool fresh air. Then the short,
sharp yelp of the dogs as they catch sight of the timid game,
and the loosing of bridle-rein, and the wild gallop over the
plains. After that tirst wild burst the steady jog along the
bridle-track to Purnamoota, or to Thakaringa, or the
Pinnacles, the quiet smoke and calm redections, or, better
still, a volume of Gordon’s poems to kill the journey. Then
the greeting at the outside camps. How the hardy, jolly
miners used to make things hum—wild devils they were,
but real grit. And I never expect to look upon their like
again. After the rest a clamber through the mine I had to
visit, then the knocking of ore from the “ faces,” then the
ride home, to dnd a boy had my furnace in full blast, and
down I’d have to settle to dnd out how many ounces of
silver and how much lead the ore carried,


Assaying is a most enchanting game to follow. When
I was first getting initiated into its many mysteries I used
to go up to old Jim King’s office and sit and watch the ore
crushed and mixed with chemicals, and I’d sit there
hour after hour picking up wrinkles from this clever,
good-hearted pioneer, who is now located on the new
mining rush at Zeehan, in Tasmania, where he is
doing business as an assayer and general adviser to
speculators. Many a night I’ve heard him tell of the cute
dodges that mining sharks tried to put up on him ; but they
didn’t often get away with “ Old Jim.” But I’ll never
forget the way I was once “ sent for ” by a crooked share
sharp. It was like this. I was paid a good round sum to
go and look at a claim which was to be floated into a
company, and they wanted my report to attach to the
prospectus. Henry Fenton, who was part proprietor of the
Barrier Miner , advised me to keep both eyes open, as he’d
heard a whisper which made him guess the folks I had to
deal with were crooked. I grinned, for I didn’t think the
man was built of clay who could take me down at that
game. I went out and saw the property and found that
there was a pretty big lode of decomposed ironstone running
through the property. This had been worked to a fairly
good extent, but the ore body did not look to me to be of
much account, and I said so to the two “ sharks” who had
accompanied me.
“ Oh, well,” said they. “ That’s right, do the square
thing, you know; if it’s good, say so ; if not, burst it
up. We don’t want to float a fraud : do us a lot of harm
you know.”
“ I’ll take a few of those samples back, and assay them
myself, but I’ll bet a new suit this stuff don’t carry more’n
10oz. of silver, and I guess not a trace of lead. What’s


about the average return you’ve got from the other
assayers ?”
“ About 40 oz. silver and 25 per cent, lead.”
“From this stuff?”
“ Yes.”
“Well, it’s a heap better'n it looks, then.”
“ Well, yon wade right in and let us know the truth.
Good day.”
Off they rode, and I made back to the Barrier Miner
and reported myself to the bosses, Knight and Fenton—
both of ’em well known to all compositors in Sydney city.
“ Be careful, Smiler,” was the order ; “ you’ve got smart
cattle to deal with this journey.”
“ They’ll have to be smart. I blasted the ore from the
‘faces’ myself, and I took mighty good care to get a clean
* face ’ before I sampled the stuff. It has never left my
hands from that moment, and I’m going to crush it myself i
mix it myself; allow no one near the furnace while it is
being run down ; and I’ll weigh the silver button if there is
one when it comes out of the slag. I’m a cooked onion if I
can see how I’m to be got at ”
“Right you are; blaze away.”
Home I went, got my furnace ready, carefully dusted
both the pestle and mortar, and set to work and pulverised
the ore. I knew at a glance that it carried mighty little
lead, if any. So, to make it work I added the usual amount
of “ litharge,” which, I will explain to those not up in
metallurgy, is refined lead, pure from all other substances.
That will do for the average reader. The other stuff
required was also carefully added, mixed, and the lot placed
in different crucibles, which I had taken the precaution to
heat to a white heat, turned upside down in the furnace,
and I chuckled as I reckoned that, with so much care, I


could not be at fault. I stood over the furnace, watched
the tire do its work, and never took my eyes off it until I
pounded it out into the mould, like a mother watching for a
first child’s front tooth. I waited for it to cool, and then
smashed the slag and drew out the button. This had to be
cuppelled, and as I watched the bone-dust absorb the lead
I grew anxious. At last the work was done, and then in
each cuppell lay a tiny glistening bead of pure silver. This
F weighed, and found to my utter amazement that the ore
averaged about 560 z. of silver and 10 per cent, lead per ton.
I could do nothing but believe my own eyes and the
evidence of my own experiment, and yet I was astonished.
Still, I felt that the tire could not lie, and sat down and
wrote a most favorable report upon the property, the said
report to be attached to the prospectus. Half that night I
tossed about in bed but could not sleep. I was haunted by
a presentiment that something was crooked. At breakfast
next morning my wife asked me tf I had found a packet in
the assay office which had been left by a stranger the day
before—a packet and a note.
“No, 1 had not. Did you put it on my desk ?”
“ No, the man saw the furnace through the doorway,
and said he thought you were in, so he left it for you him-
self.”
I got up and went and looked, and there sure enough
was a sample of ore left for assay, and a mighty rich sampl 6
too. The note, which was signed by a man unknown to
me, stated that the assay would be cal'ed for in a couple of
days. 1 don’t know now why £ grew suspicious of that
sample, or rather of the man who left it. Hundreds of
samples had been left in a similar manner. T went down and
told Mr. Fenton, and as he was a very careful man he said,
“ Look here, ‘ Smiler,’ you keep that blessed report in your


pocket until you feel quite certain you’ve not been ‘ had.’ ”
I went home again, and overhauled all my chemicals and
every article in the den, and felt that I was right enough,
Until it struck me that I’d better light the furnace and try
some more of the ore, but first of all to make dead certain
I set about testing the “ litharge ” or purified lead, I’d put
it all very carefully through the mill only a week before,
and knew that it was perfectly pure, but I meant to take
no chances. I ran down about 200 grains of the litharge,
and what was my horror to find that some one had tampered
with it, for the infernal stuff carried so much silver that I
no longer wondered at the poor looking ore giving such a
good return. Off I danced to Sully’s store and got some
more pure litharge, and with this I tried out the ore from
the claim and found that it was mighty little richer
than road metal, carrying 21, ozs. of silver, and lead nil.
The fellow who called while f was away had been employed
by the “sharks” to steal unv purified and tested litharge,
and substitute stuff which they had doctored by adding
chloride of silver powdered fine. Old boss Fenton and I
gurgled more’n one whisky on the strength of that discovery,
and Sid Knight twirled his blonde moustache lovingly as he
allowed himself an extra “ Henry Clay,” but the schemers
never got that encouraging report. If that prospectus had
been issued carrying the report many a poor beggar in the
cities would have been swindled out of scores of pounds,
but it fell through, and the claim is now a rabbits’ warren.
-»Sr


MATES.
We planted him down by the side of the creek. His
name was Bill Harper. None of us felt particularly sorry
that he was under the gravel ; for, to dodge all lying and
keep clean handed over this little job, I may state that
the defunct jvas not so desirable as an acquaintance while he
was an active member of society as when he was a decent
corpse. He had one or two qualities that did not recommend
him as a law-abiding citizen on the Avoca gold camp. His
education had been sadly neglected in his youth, and he did
not know the exact difference between his own and other
people’s property. This little weakness was well known in
the camp—so much so that when a man lost a horse, or, for
that matter, a couple of horses, the usual thing to do was
to secure a shot-gun and a stout comrade or two and then
make a bee-line for Bill Harper’s camp. As a rule the
horses turned up a few days later, a little the worse for
wear, perhaps, but still as good as new. H a miner missed
his tools he didn’t think of making a fuss about them. If
he was a man of any grit he’d just crawl round near Bill
Harper’s camp and lay low, and as soon as the big raw-
boned carcase of the roughest tough on the place got into a
convenient place, it was deemed a matter of digger etiquette
to rise softly and bang him to sleep with a pick-handle;
and whilst he remained dead to the world it was the usual
thing to go to his tent and hunt for the plunder, which, as
a rule, was found calmly reposing in Bill’s camp. The same


state of affairs applied to missing bags of oi’e; in fact
nothing portable ever was lost which he was not accused of
annexing. Bill was never known to resent a visitation of
this kind. He used to remark that it was part of the play.
If he got clean away no one had a right to grumble; on the
other hand, he held that it was most ungentlemanly for an
“ annexer ” (that was how he styled it) to complain if caught
and dealt with. Bill said he was a philosopher. No one knew
exactly what he meant, but they understood that he knew
the inside of nearly every gaol in the country better than he
knew the outside of any church. He was very quarrelsome
in his cups, and could fight like a wild beast when annoyed,
and so great was his strength and so formidable his wrath
that he was considered a good man to dodge by most people.
He had one peculiarity—no matter when or where, or under
what circumstances Bill met a dog, the canine and lie would
make friends on the instant Blear-eyed bull-dogs that would
make no bones about chewing half another man’s leg offwould
blink and slobber and fawn upon him. Kangaroo dogs
that wouldn't go a yard on a hot day with their owners
would skip off gaily with him ; and his tent, which lay far
away from the rest of the camp, was always full of dogs of
all sorts and descriptions, and when he wasn’t out fossicking
for gold on the slope of the ranges or in the gullies he was
either out kangaroo hunting or seeking wallabies in the
rocky ledges, or else at his camp with dogs of all breeds,
and no breeds, round him, and he was happy with his pipe
between his teeth as he made them perform some cunning
trick of his own designing.* He was always alone until
about six months before his death, and then he took up
with a mate, much to the surprise of everyone Bill’s mate
was a youngster who came into camp one Satui’day night
footsore and weary, quite a lad of about sixteen,rather a good-


looking boy, but very sullen and backward. A couple of the
roughs had got hold of the youngster in one of the drink-
ing shanties, and had started pulling him about and playing
rough jokes on him. He took no notice of their taunts,
but as soon as they began to handle him he hit out like a
Turk, and was in a bad way for a hiding when Bill set sail
at his tormentors, and soon made them let up on the boy.
The pair went out to Bill’s camp together, and were never
found far away from one another afterwards. Many a good
hiding that boy got when caught raiding the camps at
night time, and it was in one of these scrimmages that Bill
met with the visitation that caused him to be planted. He
was hit on the head witli an asli hammer-handle, and when
picked up was insensible. He raved like a loon for five or
six days, and then handed in his tickets, and we planted
him nice and snug, after the jury had held an inquest and
arrived at a verdict that death had come about by the hands
of Providence. His mate nursed him in great style, and
howled and cried on his grave in rare style, and next day
shifted out of camp, and we heard no more of him, until
one day the mailman, Paddy O’Neil, jumped off Ids box
and dashed into the Empire Saloon.
“ Say, fellers !”
He was so excited we all yelled, “ What’s up, Paddy?”
“ Remember Bill's mate V
“ Who, the kid—?”
“ Yes, the same party.”
*• Well, Paddy, what’s up ?”
“ Found dead at the Devil’s Elbow, and he wasn’t a
boy at all. Bill’s mate was a girl, and a deuced well reared
girl too ; but Bill never knew it. She had a letter on her
addressed to a friend in Adelaide, and she’d told the whole
story of her and Bill.”


“ What was slie doing in boy’s togs, Paddy?”
“ Boys,” said the mail driver sadly, “ boys, do yer
think I’m as low as them newspaper chaps—do yer think
I’d try and interview a corpse T
AN EIGHT-DAY BRIDE.
Eight thousand stalwart diggers were strewn all over the
face of the Barrier Ranges, the camp fires glowed in the
gullies and on the rocky Men of all grades and
color searched amidst the dust and the heat for the precious
silver slugs, and drought and death, whisky and wealth,
went hand in hand. But the face of a woman was an
unknown joy. One or two broken-down feminine creatures
had struggled there from the river Darling, and had per-
ished miserably after a few months’ debauchery, such as no
person can describe, no pure soul realise. At this time I
was camped away back with my mates, in a spot upon
which Dame Nature had evidently spread herself for the
purpose of seeing how near to the heights of dreary misery
she could go and yet have enough to sustain life. The
rocky ridges rose towering above me, inhospitable, bare,
bleak, and barren ; the gullies below were devoid of mois-
ture ; there was no sign of vegetation above or below, even
the saltbush had withered beneath the glare of that tropical
sun, and the very air was laden with a thirst insatiable.
Beautiful clouds of dust swept over the fragrant hillsides


laden with the perfume of decaying cattle and drought-
stricken sheep, and, like poor old Adam Gordon, I often
stood and gazed around me, wondering,
“ If this life was worth living at all.”
One evening when I returned to camp after a hard
day’s search for silver prospects, I found that something
unusual had happened. I hobbled in as fast as my blistered
feet would allow me, for I thought that perhaps some kind
Samaritan had called and left us some vegetables, and to a
man who had not seen a green leaf for a couple of years this
meant joy unspeakable. But I was wrong. Tom Greer
had come in breathless with excitement, and as I entered
he exclaimed impressively, with his hat in one hand and the
other lifted towards the heavens, “ It’s a fact, mates, as
sure as I’m a living man ; Jimmy Nicholas, the mail-driver,
told me so himself.”
“ What’s all the row about, boys ? Anybody struck
an earthquake?”
“ No, Smiler,” and Tom’s voice fell to a low, awe-inspir-
ing whisper. “An earthquake’s a fool to this lot. Next
Sunday week Jimmy Nicholas is going to fetch a—woman
to the Barrier.”
I drew away from my old chum with a look of pain on
my face, for I felt it was mean of him to come and try and
put up a job on me after we had worked and starved and
trusted together as we had, but I would not reproach him,
so pulling my old felt hard down over my eyes I slunk
away into the darkness and tilled my pipe. Tom came
along, and pulling out a lock of his dead mother’s hair from
his swag, he placed it solemnly between his hands and said
“Smiler, I’ll swear it’s a fact by my mother’s memory,
and I’m not trying to ring in any soft stuff on you and •'the
boys. All the camps for a hundred miles round know about


it, and on Sunday week there will be six or seven thousand
diggers waiting for the mail.” I believed him then, and
lost all appetite for damper and tea. For the next ten
days our camp was in a state of feverish excitement.
Old world finery was dug out half slyly, half proudly,
from hidden receptacles, and on the eventful Sabbath
morning at daybreak vve proceeded to dress for the
festive occasion. Long Page came out on top, much to
the general chagrin, and he presented a gay and gallant
picture. His six feet two inches of narrow, sinewy frame
was crowned with an old, weather-stained white felt
hat, below this a black swallow-tail coat was the first thing
to meet the observant eye, then came a blue flannel shirt,
guiltless of a collar, a big leather belt carried a six inch
knife-blade in a leather sheath ; and then came a tight-
fitting pair of moleskin pants, one leg of which was rolled
up to the knee to show in all its glory a faded top-boot that
had helped to win many a steeplechase down country, but
the other one had been sacrificed in the Ninety-mile Desert
when provisions had run out, so that the off leg of the long
fellow’s pants was allowed to run down as on that foot he
wore a number 11 Blucher boot. Bob Wallace was our
second sti’ing on whom we depended to mash the fair
unknown if Long Page failed, and Bob svas a gem in his
way. Red shirt, white pants, hob-nailed boots, cabbage-
tree hat, blue handkerchief round his sun-tanned neck, no
coat nor vest, and an honest, open countenance, and curly
brown head did for him, and he was a good specimen of the
real old prospector, few of whom now live to talk of the old
days. After a hearty feed on dry damper and kangaroo-
tail soup, washed out of sight by a pannikin of strong
black tea, we took a last glance at ourselves as we stood
reflected in a dish of dirty water tipped up for the purpose


against a tent door, and then went off on the mash. 1
doubt if ever a hollow-headed Sydney dude has strutted
down George-street with more dignity than was displayed
as we pranced out of camp on our seventeen-mile tramp
under a burning sun over a blistering, sun-baked plain
towards the big mining camp of Silverton. As we pegged
along we met Willie Wilson and Bob Hale bent on a
similar mission. Willie is now a millionaire and the owner
of a racing stud, but he was a prospector in those days, and
a big-hearted manly fellow at all times; one of the few who
made money without getting a bad attack of big head. He
had put on a pair of button-up gaiters and oiled his mous-
tache for conquest, and we felt at the first glance that our
long champion hadn’t an even money chance whilst the ever-
green gallant William was on the job ; our only hope was in
James Hennessy, and we forthwith started to put up a job on
him. We had one bottle of Hennessy with us, and we deter-
mined to beguile the smartest man in the back country to im-
bibe enough to make him slumber. He agreed to our modest
request “to have a drink,” and he and his energetic comrade
seeing through our device sat themselves down and con-
sumed the bottle, and when it was done Willie went away
chewing the cork and wishing for more. That made us
feel bad about our chances, and when my stump-tailed bull
pup deserted me and crawled along in the shadow left by
Long Page’s big feet, 1 knew luck was dead against us. At
Silverton a scene that beggars description met our view,
from Sully’s store down to the reserve the place was black
with moving male humanity, oaths as big as a full-grown
cheese were scattered round regardless of cost, everyone
shook everyone else by the hand, men who had not spoken to
each other for years met, shook and embraced. Alf. De Born
fell down early in the day from sheer exhaustion, worn out


with drinking his own health; big Jim Wilkinson, the
learned mail driver, spouted Adam Gordon’s poetry until
the dead body of Gordon turned over in his* quiet
grave to write an ode on the exciting scene; black-
fellows and Chinamen, Irishmen and Germans, Yankees,
Australians and Englishmen, Dutchmen, Cousin Jacks
and Red Indians fell over and fought, bit, hacked,
kicked, and drank with each other in pure joy; and
the beautiful red dust rose in a golden haze from the
roadway, where it lay three feet deep and loomed
above the cursing, howling, singing, laughing, dancing
multitude, and all were as peacefully happy as in their
childhood’s sweetest hours, until a dozen men who had been
perched on the top of the pub received notice that the coach
was in sight from Scotty Linton, who had been appointed
chief scout for the people. Scotty had been lashed to the
end of a 45ft. pole, and this had been reared on end and
kept in position by a dozen sober men, who ever and anon
sent the energetic little scout up a long beer by means of a
rope, the end of which Scotty kept round Ins neck. No
sooner was it known that the mail was in sight that fifty
men mounted in hot haste. Some one accidentally lifted
me on to the back of someone else’s horse, and before the
owner could remonstrate the band of bronzed and bearded
bushmen set off' at a gallop with a cheer that cracked the
nuts on the table in the diningroom of the pub, which same
had a new cloth in honor of the glorious never-to-be for-
gotten event. Down the track we tore, each man eager
to be the first to set eyes on the lovely human link that
was to re-unite us with outside humanity. Right up to the
coach we swept, and then we fired a volley of <l bravoes ”
fair at the head of the noble driver, the inimitable Jimmy
Nicholas, or, as he loved to be styled, James of Wagga, with


his high-crowned soft felt hat, tip-tilted majestically over
his manly brow, Jimmy looked at us unflinchingly for the
twentieth part of a second, then with a masterly turn of
the wrist he threw the foaming team back on their
haunches, rose from the box seat with the air of an aider-
man welcoming a duchess, bowed gravely to the right and
the left, borrowed a plug of cut-up from the nearest horse-
man, condescended to accept a flask of best “ three star”
from the gentle Smiler, gathered up his ribbons, made the
leaders lift the coach out of its tracks with one crack of the
flying lash, and on we sped until we reached the mail office.
Then a hushed and solemn silence fell upon the throng, the
feeling could not have been more intense had the fate of a
nation been trembling inside the mail-coach. Slowly and
severely “ Jamy ” let himself down from the box seat; the
hush in the air grew oppressive, and could be felt with a
jam tin ; strong men trembled and stood still. Jim opened
the door, turned the quid of cut-up from the near cheek to
the off" with a click of his tongue, bowed gracefully and
gallantly, and offered his arm. Men shuddered and stood
still, until out of the darkened coach with the blinds all
down there stepped forth a vision of female loveliness
seldom §een without wings, even in books. Then every
tongue was loosened, and the Englishmen, Yankees, and
Australians roared “ Hooray !” the Germans howled “ Ach
Himmel !” the Frenchman squealed “ Vive La Belle !”
Chinamen wheezed “Welly good!” Spaniards, Portugese,
and Italians shrieked “ Vivas ” until all Heaven seemed to
shake and the tall, blonde beauty blushed and bowed her
stately head, and smiled on the throng through a mist of
tears. A big, bold-eyed Irishman pushed up and seized her
portmanteau, and considered himself blessed ; an Italian
and a Frenchman came to knives over the right to carry


her shawl; a big-bearded Australian picked up a spray of
maiden hair fern that fell from her button-hole, and refused
to sell it for a dozen shares in the best mine in the district :
the Chinese cook and the black yardman went for each
other with firewood to see who should clean her dainty
boots ; and James of Wagga had to drink so often with
men who wanted to shake with the man who had driven
the Rose of the Barrier that in due course he sank under
the table, chanting a stave in which fair women and sweet
wine got badly mixed.
Within a week I danced at the wedding of the fair
Rose of tlie Barrier, who was united to the bold Irishman
who had carried her portmanteau on the day of her arrival,
and they formed a goodly pair to gaze upon, but even when
I waltzed from corner to corner of the small bail room, the
cynosure of all eyes, I seemed to feel that the shadow of the
hand of fate was resting on the white brow of my fair
partner.
Two days after I was standing at the hut in which the
warder carried out his duties and entertained his friends,
when a horseman galloped up, and bounding from his
saddle, conveyed to our astonished ears the astounding new r s
that away in the rough mountain gorge of Lakes Grave the
body of the Rose of the Barrier had been found hanging to
the ridge pole of her tent dead and cold, and so it proved,
for the bright young beauty who had come amongst us, the
sweet bride of a week, had of her own free will slipped over
the boundary line and gone prospecting in the bright glory
goldfields. Doubtless I shall meet her when I, a poor
scribe, shall quit this land of long hours and short drinks
to go prancing round the everlasting ranges where the
lawyer never practises and the member of Parliament is a


misery unknown, where the policeman lays down his baton,
and the fighting man ceases to bluff, and the editor with
his asthma and his headache, his indignation, and his ignor-
ance, is never admitted. “ Peccavi.”


THE PROVERBS OE THE SIMPLE
CHILD.
Hell is hotter than Africa, yet it is better populated.
A pressman is the noblest work of God—when he’s
sober.
A bummer is not a thing of beauty, yet his breed live
for ever.
A bee gathereth honey, a dog accumulated fleas, and a
barmaid fools.
Trust to the word of a wanton woman, that thy friends
may giggle at thee.
Multitude of years should teach wisdom, yet in one
mining boom a man can learn a lot.
If a bigger man than yourself insults you don’t retaliate
on his person—poison his dog.
A wife that faileth to find Joy in her own home will
surely bring sorrow to another’s.
My son, I charge thee shun these three things : A frail
woman, a stale oyster, and a tearful parson.


Iron is dug from the bowels of the earth. God only
knows where conceited counter-jumpers spring from.
If a man is very humble in the presence of his master
shun him. He will be a bully to those under him.
Wives, rule your homes, and let not the housemaid and!
the husband search for the slippers at the same time.
Mark me and be astonished, for I say unto thee, a
new friend is like a prickly burr in the hands of a fool.
Do not weep over the troubles of the widow or the-
orphan. A couple of sovereigns are worth a ton of tears.
If a youth keepeth late hours watch him diligently, for
the sins of the sons often have to be paid for by the
father.
If you are mashed on a waitress at a restaurant always
call in the busiest hour of the day, it will show your great
tact.
A wise youth weareth padding in his pants when he
learneth to skate, but the conceited fellow saith “I am
foot-sure.”
Never insult a fallen foe—-kick him.
Over a pot of beer some men will build a friendship.
An unchaste woman is like a candle lit at both ends-


A pretty woman for a picnic, but a wise one for a wife.
Few people find so much evil in the world as those who
profess to be pure.
Mark the righteous man, and observe the upright, but
dodge the policeman.
Many women prize their looks as a fruiterer his goods
—by the market price.
How forcible are right words, yet a stone in the end of
•a sock will carry some weight.
Don’t hanker after money; it looks low, but a good grip
on the dollars does no damage.
There are very many men who are willing to sacrifice
themselves to God—for a fat salary.
I said in my haste all men are liars and I’ve nursed a
•black eye and a sore head ever since.
Heaven will not hold two poets, and hell isn’t wide
enough to contain two musicians.
Let fools spend their money as fast as they get it—a
wise dog buries a bone in the garden.
Don’t be too eager to tell of a sister’s downfall—the
feet often follow where the fingers point.
You can make a knave look like a gentleman, but you
•can’t make a fool act like a man of sense.


If you hate your enemy, tell him not that hell is his
(haven of refuge. Send him to an amateur concert.
The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to its mouth,
but the tongue of the lawyer waggeth for ever.
As a half-fledged pup that yelpeth on the highway, so
is the bank clerk who apeth the airs of a millionaire.
If ye have respect to persons ye commit sin, but if ye
have it not the other fellow sins, and ye get the swelled head.
Though your spirit and the bride say come don’t be too
hasty. Hear what the spirit of the bridegroom says
About it.
If a new neighbour asketh the loan of a shovelful of
•coal, refuse the request insultingly. It will show your
good blood.
They that stoop and cringe and crane to men in high
places shall be exalted, A worm can get higher up a tree
than a lion.
Call every man who disagrees with you in an argument
a fool and a liar. You will be the most popular man in
town, if you live.
A forward boy with a saucy tongue, in the street, is
like a slush-bucket with a hole in the bottom —no good can
come out of him.
A wise and wealthy people is known by its rulers —
what a God-forsaken, poverty-stricken, slab-sided country
ours must be.


The snows of winter and the dust of summer cannot
mingle ; therefore a woman in her old age should not wed
with a man in his prime.
Water weakens whisky, yet it taketh dirt from a
soiled garment; so a woman that would madden one man
may be an angel to another.
Be honest and virtuous, pure and just, that the sinful
may go through thee like a dose of fish-hooks.
Boast not of the virtues of your children. It is a
wise rooster that can crow over his own chicken.
A merited reproof doeth more good to a wise man than
a blow on the skull with a shovel to a fool.
Covet not your neighbor’s wife, for a lustful eye-
leadeth to big damages in the Divorce Court.
As a roaring lion after a sucking pig, so is a Member
of Parliament after the votes of his constituents.
Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker ; but
he that mocketh a rich man gets a month and no option.
If thou wouldst keep thy soul free from guile and all
unrighteousness, shun the daily papers as you would La
Grippe.
I have seen many male servants upon horses, and
many female servants upon asses, while their masters were
standing.


Tread upon a serpent and he will bite thee ; kiss a
maid and she will cling to thee; lend money to a dear
friend and he will forsake thee.—Selah.
An adulterous woman wipeth her mouth and saith, “ I
have done no evil: ” and a parson refuseth to give alms to
the orphan, and yet saith, “ I am pure of heart.”
A vain man and a sick black should be bound together.
A squalling child in the night time is as a sore eye in
dust storm.
Flatter not thy neighbour unless his melon patch is
bigger than yours.
Never write a lie about your neighbours—get a news-
paper reporter to do it.
Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but half a brick
is useful in debate.
A cold in the head is a bad thing, but a nagging wife
is worse than influenza.
The fear of man bringeth a snare, but the want of fear
-bringeth a sore head.
Lying lips become not a prince, but what would a
lawyer do without them.
Never pay thy wagers till the numbers are up; it is
*not good to be too honest.


Never trust a pretty barmaid, but ask her as often as
convenient to trust you.
Cast thy bread upon the waters, and if you don’t go to-
bed hungry you ought to.
Make no haste to become rich, but a cut in the tram-
way grab do not thou refuse.
A'good name is preferable to riches, therefore are we-
exalted above our banker.
An overfed hound will reject good meat, but a hungry
dog will jump at a bone.
A still tongue maketh a wise head.—What a lot of fools,
there must be knocking round.
A woman who hath slipped from virtue herself should
never ridicule broken windows.
An angry man stirreth up strife, but a brandy and
soda bringeth peace to the soul.
A barrister in his robes is a noble animal to look upon
—and so is a half-fledged rooster on a rail.
Put not a curb on your thirst, for a drunken man is a
thing of beauty—so is a black eye.
Never perjure yourself in a court of justice—you can.
get a lawyer to do it for a guinea.


Fools make a mock of sin, but the righteous man
comiritteth it and saith nothing.
Better is a dinner of herbs where love is than an
empty belly amongst the unemployed.
Give not thy strength unto fast women, for they will
be the first to spit upon thee in trouble.
As a corn between the toes, so is a politician who is
always sounding his own praises.
A crawler shall be covered with glory, for a lying;
tongue can dodge a multitude of faults.
If a man insult thee, kick him in the abdomen. It is.
more blessed to give than to receive.
A merry heart secureth a glad countenance, but
saucy tongue breedeth a black eye.
He that toucheth paint shall be soiled, but he that
shaketh with a politician shall be cursed for ever.
1 >rop a flower-pot on the head of a passer-by ; is it not
lawful to do as you like with thine own ?
If a wealthy man curse, it is called high spirit. If a
poor man do likewise it is called blackguardism.
A foolish man putteth his money on every favorite,,
but a cute fellow spotteth first and punteth after.
A man who seeketh for fame is like a woman with
false teeth. He biteth off more than he can chew.


Shun the truth, chew tobacco, and pay no debts, and
you will be remembered longer than you are loved.
Be just to yourself before you are generous to another,
Generosity without justice is like a big foot in a small boot.
Suit yourself to your circumstances. A little fish can
be caught with a big hook, but you can’t catch sharks with
a sardine line.
Don’t believe every man who uses soft words. A foe
may have flattery in his mouth, and a knuckle-duster in the
pocket of his pants. 0
If you see a young man making friends with your
yard-dog, put a double lock on the servant girl’s window.
Don’t envy the man who has hosts of friends, a
million sparrows make less music than one nightingale.
Don’t despise anyone, however lowly. An inch ©f
banana peel bn the right spot can bring down a policeman.
In time of drought pray all day for rain ; but a visit
to your neighbour’s tank at night-fall might be judicious.
Treat a lying enemy with calm contempt. He would
rather he beaten with a bath-brick than be utterly ignored
If you want to get on in this world don’t know too
much. The calf that kicks four feet at once don’t do much
damage.


Be not over-confiding amongst your neighbours ; the
man who leaves his fowl-house open don’t rear any
chickens.
Seest thou a man steering straight to a bar-room before
breakfast—there is more hope for a leper than for such an
one.
Have faith in your fellow-men ; the man who counts
all the world as knaves must have dirtied his own hands
early in life.
When you give charity to the poor, never give it to a
deaf and dumb man. A blind man can talk about it and
give you a boom.
A drunken man is worse company than a corn between
the toes, but a drunken woman is worse than a boot full of
bunions.
Do one or two tilings well, but don’t try to shine in too
many lights. A greyhound can catch a hare, but he’d
make a bad show after a shark.
When you go to the theatre talk about the age of the
actresses and the size of their feet ; people will not then
need to be told that you can trace your descent from
Balaam’s ass.
It is not good to believe in the hopes of youth. At
20, the poet lets his hair hang over his collar ; at 35, he
shaves it close to his scalp, and tries to make strangers
think he was a fighting man.


Do a man a good turn, and he will slander thee for it.
If you hunger for fame, get into the Divorce court.
A dog chaseth his own tail, and a vain woman her
shadow.
Great men are not always wise, but only a fool will tell
them so.
Stolen waters are sweet, but stolen whisky sootheth the
Feet that are swift to run after faults in another are
seldom clean.
A policeman is one of the noblest works of God—and
so is a tomato.
A man of unclean lips is higher than a dog—when he
climbs a tree.
Find me an upright man, and I will find thee a pink-
eyed blackfellow.


Sydney ;
RUN6E & Co., General Printers,
117 Clarence Street.






A Record Lijc
i *■- —
