

THE
Claims of Animals.
THE HORSE.
PUBLISHED BY THE
♦
®«tomn jsffcietn for tjje f w&ontion of Cmltg fo Animals.
OFFICE-BEARERS.
Jhtsibmt.
Sib W. F. Stawell, Knt., Chief Justice.
©ice-Jltesibtnts.
The Eight Worshipful the MAYOR OF MELBOURNE.
The Hon. Sib JAMBS M'CULLOCH, K.C.M.G.
The Hon. Shi GEORGE F. VERDON, C. 8., K.C.M.G.
35 on. Ittasurtr.
HENEI J. HART, Esq., J.P.
Son. Secretnrn.
Mb. J, S. GEEIG.
lion. tWtrinarn Surgeon.
G. MITCHELL, Esq., M.E.C.V.S.
fiollerfor, t?t. , I snsjjutor.
Me. THOMAS LATHAM. 1 Me. F. A. S. EE ID.
The Society’s Office is in No. 24 Market Buildings,
Collins Street West, where complaints can be lodged every
day from 12 to 2 o'clock ; Saturdays, 10 to 12.


We sometimes talk of our dumb animals. Beasts of burthen are
not merely dumb —they are voiceless under suffering. They cannot
cry out when in pain like some other animals ; if they could there
Would often be a strange outcry in our streets. There is nothing,
therefore, to remind men of their feeling pain, and thoughtless
men are apt to fprget that they feel at all. They come to look upon
them as so many machines, which can be kept going by blows or
otherwise for a certain time. Yet all the while they are sensitive, and
suffer, just like one of us. Would it not make men think more of
what is due to animals if we could possibly hear what animals have
to say for themselves 1 If Providence endowed, say, an used-up Cab
Horse with the power of stating his wrongs, would he not have a
sorry tale to tell ?
This idea has lately struck some thoughtful people in Italy, where,
as a rule, animals are treated very badly; and they have published to
the Italian people an address which is supposed to be spoken by an
ill-used horse to his masters. This address has been placarded on
the walls, like a large playbill, at every cab-stand and bullock-stand,
and at the public stables, in Trieste, as also in Nice and Florence,
and many other cities in Italy and Austria. It is said to have pro-
duced a very good effect, and to give the people there a few new
ideas about animals, making some at least to understand that, after
all, poor brutes suffer from pain, fatigue, fright, despair, just like
ourselves. This is quite a new idea to many Italians, but not, we
hope, to the people of Victoria. Yet, though all of us may admit
the truth, it is not so easy to realise it, and until we do realise it we
cannot be just to these servants of ours. So, to help in promoting
the fair usage of those who are quite defenceless, the Victorian
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals re-publishes the
Italian placard, altering it somewhat. Here it is':—
A HORSE’S APPEAL.
To the Drivers and Owners of Carriage Carts, Cabs, &c., &c.,
living in Victoria.
Man I—God1 —God made me for your benefit; but He also recom :
mended me to your mercy. I wish to serve you and obey your
will, and to love you too, if you will let me. Do not, therefore,


break my heart with ill-treatment. I have intelligence, memory,
affection, and gratitude, only Ido not know how to speak. I want
to understand you and do your bidding, but I am often so terrified
by you that I no longer know what you want me to do, or why you
punish me. Often lam full of pains from blows you give me ;my
whole body writhes with your lash ; my mouth and teeth ache with
the hard bit which you incessantly tug at as if it were a bell-rope.
I am old, and am become so lame from years of hammering away
upon the hard metal that I can’t easily put my foot to the ground;
jet I must still run up and down hill, over the stony roads, all day,
in a burning heat or a cutting north-east wind, often overladen.
My collar frequently works a sore upon my shoulder —look at that
wound that goes nearly to my bone—and when it presses upon me,
if I falter, instead of looking to it or easing me, you cut me in two
with your whip. I willingly, even in my old age, struggle my
utmost to do your work; yet often, when I am broken down, you
take no further thought for me than to turn me out upon a common
to die from starvation. God has made me a nervous animal, and
when you call upon me I strain every muscle. But often you over-
work and ill-use me so that I become faint and ill, and then you
curse me for a sorry brute, when it is you that have made me so !
I come home quite knocked up with hunger, thirst, and fatigue, full
of pain and misery ; and then my food is poor, and old, and scant,
and I often cannot get rest for the next day’s struggle. If you do
not care for me, as I wish you would, only think of this ; that if you
treat me well I will do more work for you and last you much longer,
and so you will make more out of me in the end. And think of
another thing: You also have a Master. You are as much in His
power as I am in yours, and you will want mercy from Him one day.
Can you fairly ask it if you show none now to me I —Signed respect-
fully by
A Beokbn-Down Cab-Hoesb,
In the name of all the 111-treated Horses and
Bullocks in Victoria.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.
