

THE SYDEY RAVELS
OF
BACCHUS, CUPID, & MOMUS;
BY
CHARLES ADAM CORBYN.
SYDNEY, 1854.








PREFACE.
Although in Great Britain and America, the Press
literally teems with publications, until “of making of
books there is no endand, although through the
facilities of modern transit, the Colonists and Native-
born of Australia can have access to the multitudinous
literature of the British race and language, still it is
a fact which is felt, that no description of reading is
so vitally interesting to the settled inhabitants and
natives of a colony or country, as that which deals
with, or touches upon, matters of interest, of excite-
ment, and amusement, which have taken place in the
country itself j for when the Australian reads the
exploits of the British warrior or statesman, or the
daring deeds of the pioneers of American civilization
and liberty, whether as pourtrayed in the sober pages
of history, or in the brilliant novel writings of a
Cooper or Sir Walter Scott, still while he admires and
applauds, he feels a certain something wanting—a
want of national identity to complete his participation
of the pride which receives its stimulus from the feeling
that the hero of the volume is the reader’s com-
patriot.
Since Australia was first peopled by the ‘‘pale
faces,” no thrilling incidents have occurred to furnish
materials for the novelist or romancer. No bloody
wars against foreign invaders, or intestine wars against
civil tyranny have affixed their calamitous glories to
the historical archives of Australia, while our Indians
have confined their deeds of violence <o the butchery


and plunder of solitary individuals, instead of
whooping, scalping, burning, and murdering, in for-
midable armed bands.
During tlie last three years, I have been engaged
as a reporter for the Empire and Bell’s Life in
Sydney, newspapers. During that time, I have con-
stantly mingled with the mass of the Sydney people,
having been a regular attendant at the Police, and
other public offices and places ; and in the hope of
providing a source of amusement and merriment to
the Colonists, I have, with great care, selected from
my writings in the aforementioned newspapers, the
most entertaining and most humorous of my reports,
and I have compiled them in the form of the present
little volume.
In its perusal, I trust the Public will be diverted
with the Sketches of Life and Character, which are
faithfully drawn from the Life ; and if the good-
humoured and laughter-loving Australians are gra-
ciously pleased to iavour and patronise it, my first
appearance before the Australian Public, the flatteriug
distinction will be a great reward.
CHARLES ADAM CORBYN.
Sydney, March, 1854.


SCENES IN THE POLICE OFFICE.
“Satire's my Weapon —Juvenal.
THE CRACKED CROWN.
Chancey Pedro Scudder, Esq., landlord of the Three
Crowns, on the top of Church Hill, and his lovely and amiable
consort, were charged by a stalwart son of Erin, named Pat
Healy, the former with “ taking him in hoults,” and the latter
with cracking his crown, by hammering him on the head with
a quart measure. Mister Hely being a gintleman who is
rather fond of a drop of the crature, went as usual, on Friday
last, to do pinance at the Triple Crown, by drinking a few
tumblers of Irish whiskey—oh! but when the whiskey’s in,
the wit’s out, says the old proverb, and Paddy Hely soon
arrived at fighting point. He looked around for an object
upon which he could display his fightable propensities, when a
Mr. Cockburn made his entrance, and was at once floored by
the pugnacious Pat. Mr. Scudder said that his house was not
the Fives Court, and laid hold of Pat to restrain him, but Pat
pushed and pulled in so determined a manner as to alarm Mrs.
Scudder, who tried which was the hardest, Paddy’s head or a
quart pot. The head got the worst of the trial, as was
evinced by the enormous masses of plaster with which it was
studded. Another Pat, whose surname is Connor, was called
to prove that Mister Hely had been almost murthered entirely
quite, and that he was a paceable, illigant, harmless gintilman.
Mr. Nichols appeared for Mr. and Mrs. Scudder, and called
two witnesses to disprove the assault, and also to show that
Pat Hely behaved more like a bull in a China shop than like
an illigant gintilman. They failed to disprove the battery
with the quart pot, as although inflicted by the delicate hands


of Mrs. Scudder, between the hollowness and emptiness of the
pot and Paddy’s head, the sound might be heard at a con-
siderable distance. The magistrates dismissed the case with
regard to Mr. Scudder, but sentenced the fair landlady to pay
five shillings (the value, we suppose, of Pat Hely’s head) and
half the costs, viz., two bob and a bender.
ANCIENT PISTOL.
A gentlemanly-looking elderly person, named William
Christie, was charged by a Bardolpheian-shaped mass of
humanity, named Patrick M‘Gratb, with threatening to shoot
him, at the same time presenting a loaded pistol. Pat.
M Giath deposed : I m Postmaster general of Burwood, and
dat ould gintilmin came to me, wid murther written in his
countenansh. iticoliek, says he, dish pishtilfs loaded, and by
de tails of me coat lil lodge de contints in yer big thick
carcase.”
Mr. Dowling“ Are you afraid of him, that he will do
you some bodily harm?”
Paddy M'Grath : “Is it fraid ye mane; shure an I’m in
a moitial fear. Look at his countenansh; it’s plain to parcave
the murderoush intinshins.”
Mr. Dowling:—Do you bear him any malice?”
Paddy M £ Grath :—“ O ! hone, me bear malice ! Not at nil,
only the swatest of lovingkindness and friendliness. I’m the
paceablest crathur on the terrestial globe, but it’s a murther-
mg kind of gintilmin is Misther Christie! ”
Mr. Cory : “ Have you got a savage dog ?”
Pat. M'Grath ; “What! my dog savage ! poor Faugh-a-
ballagh savage! Shure an he’s never bit nobody yet; the
cndest crathur of the canine genius in this counthrey or any
Ihe magistrates decided upon binding Mr. Christie to
* ! * s va^an t propensities for three months, himself in
and two sureties in £lO each, or in default to be im-
prisoned until the Quarter Sessions. The sureties were at
hand, and Mr. Christie was released.
A JOLLY MARINE.
i ?H S n € r a 2V r i m ° ates ’ of the R °y al Horse Marines, on
board H.M.S. Calliope, stood at “ eyes right” and “ attention”
in the witness-box, while a nymph of the pave with a pair of
eyes like two burnt holes in a blanket, and a waist like a
hogshead of porter, lounged with her chubby arms over the
afu charged with making more free than welcome
" - the Jolly s pockets. Sergeant Tim Oates stood as


erect in the box as if he had taken a breakfast of ramrods
and ball cartridge, and told the Mayor and Mr. Dowling that
he came ashore to have a jolly good spree and to pay his
devoirs at the shrines of Venus and Bacchus, when he met the
female in the dock, who is known by the euphonius appella-
tion of Lizzy Mac Cluskey. There was another “ lady” or
two with her, and also a couple of “ coloured gentlemen” and
Lizzy, who was so polite that he accepted her invitation to
walk home and take tea with her in her house built in the
Elizabethan style in Mr. Patrick Erwin’s Alley. The bohea
promised was very rum tea, for Lizzy suggested a quiet pint of
pure pine-apple Jamaica amongst, which, as she remarked five,
“ couldn’t ’urt a vorm,” and she further proposed that Mr.
Timotheus Oates should pay for the same. This was carried
nem. con., and Lizzy received two shillings from him ; procured
the alcohol and poured him out a “ball.” He had stood
many a ball before in his alligator-like life, on sea and land,
but the ball which Lizzy served him with, soon put him hors
do combat. He shifted from Bacchus into the arms of Mor-
pheus, and, although it was only about seven in the evening,
lie did not awake until three or four o’clock next morning,
when he heard Lizzy and the “ colored gemmen” singing ‘ how
do you like your taters done.” He also made a discovery that
he had not a shot in his locker, but had been lightened of 12
sovereigns, and £1 ss. in silver. Under such circumstances
he besought the advice of constable Rawson, who hauled
Lizzy off to the watchhouse ; but the “other and the
coloured gentlemen had sloped. While Oates was going
through the process of kissing the book, Miss Lizzy indulged
in a strain of random oratory more expressive than polished.
Sergeant Oates winced a little at this species of attack, and
said he could not swear who stole his money. Miss Lizzy
was once more set at liberty with a warning from the Mayor
that the pitcher which comes often to the fountain gets
broken at last, To this she replied quietly “It warn’t a
pitcher, please your Vussliip, but a glass decanter.”
ASSAULT.
Mary Ward, a pretty blonde, with rosy cheeks, ruby lips,
light auburn hair, sparkling fawn-like eyes, pearly teeth, and
alabaster forehead, dressed in an elegant and modest attire,
appeared on the floor of the Court to answer the complaint
of Ann Rudgeley, an old mulberry faced, grizly-haired woman,
with a cast in her eyes. The charge was, that Mary Ward
did, on the 31st of last month, assault the aforesaid Ann
Rudgeley. Mrs. Ann Rudgeley bit the book, and swore—


a bhe threw a cap at me.” Police Magistrate—“ Was it a
dead cat or a live cat ?” Mrs. Rudgeley—'“ It was not a cat
you goose you, it was a cap.” Police Magistrate—“ Was it a
China cup or common crockery ? Mrs. Rudgely—“ Surely it
was not a cup at all, it was a cap ; don’t you know what a cap
is? don’t you wear a night cap ?” Police Magistrate—“ Oh !
it was a cap, and she threw it at you? Did it hurt you?”
Mrs. Rudgeley “ Och hone! Och hone! I’ll never come
here any more. No, I won’t. She didn’t throw a cap at me
man ! She pulled a cap to pieces off my head.” Mr. Nichols
appeared for Mary Ward, and cross-examined Mrs. Rudgeley
who admitted having called Miss Ward “a dictating hussey.”
Mrs Rudgeley also grinned rather savagely at the learned
gentleman, and called him “Ohy ou lawyer.” For the prose-
cution two witnesses were called, namely, Henry Miller and
Nicodemus Dunn. Neither of them were able to impugn the
fair defendant s character. For the defence Mr. Nichols called
a A'T™ liamGd Devarjn y> anti a young lady named
Arabella iJills. The case was dismissed, and Miss Mary Ward
walked out of Court with flying colours, arm in arm with her
charming friend Miss Arabella Mills.
THE STOP-W'ATCH AND THE TICKER.
Mr. Thomas Lynch keeps a grocery establishment at
Homebush, within a few doors of the Homebush Inn, kept by
Mr. W. Cutts, A young man, named William May, lived at
the inn ; and the scene opens in the bedroom of Mr. Lynch.
It was past the midnight hour, and silence and darkness
reigned conjointly, when Mrs. Lynch awoke, and said, « Tom,
get over a little further, there’s a duck; you’ve nearly pushed
rue out of bed. You ve got all the clothes off me.” Mrs
Lynch got up, ht a candle, put the bed-clothes to rights,
looked at the watch suspended over their heads at the bed's
head, saw it was twenty minutes to one o’clock, blew out the
hg it, and jumped into bed again. It is necessary to inform
tie reader that besides the ticker from whose face Mrs
Lynch ascertained the time o’night, another patent lever
which had stopped hung over the heads of the happy pair.
o her and Y ft n °l were SOOn °S ain «"•«>• arms of each
othei, and of Morpheus. But Mrs. Lynch dreamt a dream.
? '“‘igined in her vision that a stout man with a chubby
face, and hair which curled like a pound of pork sausa-es
emerged from beneath the bed. With stealthy step he ad-
oxtended°'i arl fi P ' ,io ' V ; He stretched fortl ‘ a sinewy arm,
extended his fingers, and clutched the watches, guards, and
all! He raised his other arm! Mrs. Lynch awoke and


screamed. Her dream was true. Mr. Lynch also awoke,
leaped out of bed, and in his night-dress pursued the midnight
marauder, who seemed to know every nook and corner of the
house and shop, as well as the proprietor. He first dodged
Mr. Lynch round and round a sugar cask ; then he hopped
over the counter, and back again, having the advantage of
Mr. Lynch in being dressed and shod, whereas the worthy
grocer was without shoes or stockings, and in his calico. The
robber bolted into the passage, and into the kitchen, hotly
pursued by the grocer, who had ample opportunity of seeing
him by the light of a tliree-log fire. Here a “ follow my
leader” ensued among the pots and saucepans, when the robber
again dashed through the passage, and the shop, slapping-to
the door after him with such force as to entangle the grocer’s
calico, and detain him until the pursued had opened the front
door and escaped with his booty. Mrs. Lynch remained in
bed in excessive trepidation during the chase, which she
animated by calling out “ Murder ! robbery ! fire ! rape ! ”
Mr. Lynch mentioned the circumstance of the robbery to
constable Harper, 5, but desired him to say nothing about it
for a day or two, in the hope that the thief might endeavour
to sell the watches, and thus afford a clue to their recovery.
He afterwards took out a warrant against the object of his
suspicions, W. May, who was arrested. Lynch swore positively,
malc/re the cross-fire of Mr. Roberts, who attended for the
defence, that May was the thief, and that he distinctly saw him
by the light in the kitchen with tiie watches in his hand. Mr.
Cutts, landlord of the Homebush Inn, was called. He said
he had known the prisoner during the course of eleven years.
He would not believe him capable of such an offence. He
had often entrusted him with large sums of money, and he
had never betrayed the confidence reposed in him. On the
night of the robbery the prisoner was so drunk that he could
not see a hole through a ladder. Witness put him to bed at
eleven o’clock, and saw him there at seven on the following
morning. Two or three men slept in the same room, and did
not miss the prisoner. The Mayor said he had no alternative
but to commit the prisoner for trial at the next Quarter
Sessions ; bail being allowed in £BO and two iMO’s.
ASSAULT.
Mary Hamilton, of Market-lane, spinster, charged John
Jamison of the same place, shoemaker, with assaulting her by
slapping her face and kicking her, on the 26th of last month.
She complained of the system of persecution to which she
was subjected by the defendant, who constantly taunted her


with being “an old maid.” Mr. Nichols appeared for the de-
fendant. But it so happened that the maiden lady had two
witnesses ; they were females, and took such a length of time
to arrange their bonnets, their curls, visites, &c., that they
were not in court when called, whereas the bold shoemaker’s
witnesses were men, and were all ready. The defendant was
fined in the mitigated penalty of Is., and 6s. costs.
STORMING AN EATING HOUSE.
A brazen-faced brawny-armed female named Mary Ann
Smith, was brought up by Sergeant Swainston, charged with
attacking and storming an eating -house in George-street, kept
by one John Cawley. She had destroyed glass and crockery
to the value of 9s. Mr. John Cawley, a dapper little fellow,
unfolded a handkerchief and produced what appeared to be a
quarter of a grindstone, which Mary Ann had sent in through
his windows. llo* described the onslaught of Mary Ann,
which threw Lord Exmouth’s bombardment of Algiers com-
pletely into the shade. Mr. Cawley’s better and bigger half,
next entered the witness box, with a marvellous long boa
entwined around her neck, whilst her nose evinced a great
curiosity to look into her eyes. She also described the
granitic attack of Mary Ann as more sublime than beautiful.
During the recital the defendant was not idle, but rattled away
with her only weapon, her tongue, at an amazing rate. She
was sentenced to pay 95., the value of the property destroyed,
or to be imprisoned during fourteen days. She took the latter
alternative.
AN ENGLISHMAN'S HOUSE HIS CASTLE,—THE CASE REVERSED IN SYDNEY.
Bernard Devine, a decent looking citizen, residing in
Clarence street, was placed at the bar, charged with assault-
ing constable MacGeoghehan, 12 A. Mr. Cory appeared for
the prosecution ; the prisoner was undefended. 12 A deposed
that, between four and five o’clock on Friday afternoon, he saw
the prisoner in liquor, and ordered him to go home. The
prisoner at once obeyed, and went into his house. When
inside his own house, the prisoner insulted 12 A’s dignity, by
clapping his hand in the manner the military do when drawing
a fresh cartridge from their cartouche-boxes. 12 A got in-
censed, and rushed into the man’s house, seized hold of him,
and tried to drag him out. The prisoner resisted, and in the
struggle obtained hold of a poker, with which he struck or
slightly burnt 12 Ain the palm of his hand. 12 A struck the
prisoner also, and eventually succeeded in dragging him to
a watchhouse, where he confined him. Mr. Cory urged that


the prisoner was justly in custody before he entered his own
house, but 12 A, who is an honest fellow', although a novice in
the police, denied Mr. Cory’s allegation, and distinctly declared
that he did not take the prisoner into custody, but ordered
him to go into his house, an order with which the prisoner
promptly complied. 12 A also said that when he was trying
to drag the prisoner out of his house, the prisoner’s dog
attacked him, and tore his coat, an event which would lead to
the belief that the faithful dog knew the law better than the
constable, or than the magistrate, as they convicted the
prisoner of the assault, and sentenced him to pay a fine of os.
and 2s. Gd. costs, or in default to be imprisoned during two
days.
A FAMILY QUARREL.
Catherine Ryan, a girl about sixteen years of age, was
charged with assaulting an old man, named James Murray,
who stated “ that the girl was her mother’s daughter,
and he was her mother’s husband.” He added that
on last Tuesday evening the girl called him all sorts of
names, pelted him with stones, excited a mob to chase
him into his house, in some lane off Parramatta-street, and
she then beat him with a coarse sweeping broom. The girl
expressed a wish to call her mother to prove her innocence,
but the old man protested against such a proceeding, as he
said her mother sided with the girl against him, and had helped
to beat him. He told the Bench that he was determined to
press the charge against the girl. The mother came forward
(not on oath) and made a statement that it was she, and not
the girl who had struck the old fellow. She said that her
name had been Ryan until, to her grief, she had been beguiled
to join that old ragamuffin” (meaning her husband) in
wedlock. He did not earn anything to maintain her, but lived
upon the hard earnings of herself and daughter. The old
man was sometime ago a bailiff, since when he has figured
rather disgracefully for dishonest offences. The Bench fined
the girl Is. and 4s. Gd. costs.
A YOUNG JEIIU.
Charles Madden, a boy about sixteen years of age, sur-
rendered to his bail, charged with a breach of the Police Act,
under the following circumstances: —Terence M £ Mahon, of
Newtown, labourer, stated that on the night of the 16th instant,
between nine and ten o’clock, he was passing along King-
Street. He attempted to cross the street. The young de-
fendant was driving a cab as hard as it could rattle. Witness


tried to get out of the way, but the youngster drove over him.
Ihe horses hoofs struck him on the face and head, and lie
became insensible. Pie was taken to the Infirmary, where he
remained three days, and he had been since under the medical
care of Dr. Rutter. In cross-examination Terence denied
that he was drunk at the time; he had taken a glass or two,
but was able to toddle. No man was thoroughly drunk until
lie tried to light his pipe with a bucket of water. He denied
that the boy gave him any warning whatever, or that he
touched the horses. The defendant exclaimed that Terence
was quite drunk, and laid hold of the horses’ heads, when the
accident occurred. He had done all in his power to prevent
any such accident, and hailed Terence three times to get out
of the way. He then called Inspector Singleton, who deposed
that he went to the spot where the accident occurred, and saw
tne old man Terence MhVlahon lying in the street, senseless
and bleeding. One of the horses in the cab had also fallen
down. Having put Terence into the cab, he drove him to the
Inm mary, and afterwards drove the boy to the watch-house.
He had seen the boy driving about five minutes before the
accident. He was going at a moderate pace; in fact they
were such a couple of miserable quadrupeds that they would
haidly go at all except down hill when they could not help
themselves. When he took charge of the reins he had a tough
job to get the horses along, and they stopped several times
ascending King-street to recover breath. He was inclined to
blame the people who hired such a stripling to drive, as he
was not sufficiently powerful to manage a pair of horses. As
to Teience M‘Mahon, he was drunk. The deieiidant then
called as witness Samuel Jones, aged about sixteen, who
deposed—l was riding with Charley that night, and we were
going a jig jog pace. The horses were as slender as parch-
ment. They are regular jibs up a hill. I saw the old man
Terence in the road. He was tacking about this way. (Here
Samuel Jones went through the drunken gyrations of Terence.)
We shouted to him to get out of the way, but he caught hold
of the old mare’s head, and she was so weak that she tumbled
down. I cannot say which fell uppermost, the old mare or
Terence. Ihe Police Magistrate asked to see the de-
fendants master. A person named Mullaly came forward, and
explained that the boy was as capable of driving a carriage as
any man in Sydney. In fact he had been brought up among
horses. Ihe defendant was then discharged from custody.
ROBBERY.
William Dunn and William Ryan were placed at the bar


by constable Rowe, who had apprehended them on a charge
of stealing two gold rings off the fingers of Margaret Clark,
in a public house in Clarence-street, on the previous evening.
The prisoners were defended by Mr. Parry Long. A pug-
nosed, rosy-cheeked, humpty-dumpty looking woman, with a
bonnet trimmed with artificial cauliflowers, staggered half
drunk into the witness-box, and gave vent to the following
original oratory :—“ I’m as honest a married woman as ever
the sky grew over, and sure its in Sussex-street I was. Well,
Mr. Clarke, that’s my husband, the big blackguard, goes out
to get a ball; lin course goes to fetch him home. As soon
as I goes into the public house, Dunn axes how I did, and
caught hold of my hand and squeezed it, so he did, and then
passes my hand to the other gossoon. £ It’s mighty free yer
making,’ says I, and with that I looked, and sure enough my
rings were gone.” Mr. P. Long : “ How many persons were
in the public house at the time?” Mrs, C.: “I didn’t count
them.” Mr. Long: “ Were you drunk at the time?” Mrs.
C. :“Isit me you mane ?” Mr. Long : “ Are you drunk now ?”
Mrs. C.—“ls it me? Sure I’ve only had one glass before
breakfast, and that wasn’t a full one, for they gave me bad
measure.” Mayor: “The prisoners are remanded until
Monday. The woman is too drunk to be able to give evidence ;
take her over to the watch-house for contempt of Court.”
Mrs. C. (dragged out by the police): “Isit me you
mane ?”
ILLEGALLY ON PREMISES.
About four a.m., yesterday morning, a Mrs. Cherry, whose
where-abouts did not transpire, discover a drunken fellow
called Patrick Long, on her premises. She screeched out the
usual cries, of “ thieves, fire, murder, police, &c., when
Constable Samuel Long, B 9, run to the spot, and quickly
collared Paddy Long, who was almost too drunk to go along.
In the due course of time Paddy Long was brought before
the Bench by Samuel Long, but Mrs. Cherry having stopped
at home too long, Paddy Long was cautioned by the Bench
and ordered to go along.
BUCKLEY AND WIFE.
John Buckley was charged by his wife with turning her
and her three children out of the house, neck and crop, and
refusing to maintain them. She said her husband was a
plasterer, but he “mixed it too much;” lie was constantly
drunk, and would not give her the price of a loaf of bread ;


he lived upon ale and tobacco; he could earn nine or ten
shillings a day, but he was too fond of drink to stick to his
mortar and plaster ; moreover, he often illused her. He turned
her out of doors on Valentine’s day. Defendant; ‘ I’ll take the
pledge.’ Wife : ‘ What’s the use of that; you’ve broken the
pledge four times already !’ Defendant: « You are welcome
to come home to my house, and I’ll be good to you.’ Wife :
“ Your house ! 1 never knew you had a house.” Defendant:
“ I'll do anything to please her, your worships, if you will let
me go ; I’ll get her a new house.” The Bench postponed the
case until the 2nd of April to enable the Buckley family to
adjust their differences.
BOBBING A LODGING HOUSE.
A plump, good-looking female, gaudily attired, called Sarah
Dennison alias M‘Leod, was placed at the bar charged with
stealing £B, and a silver watch and jewellery worth £l2, the
property of Mrs. Brown keeper of a lodging-house, coffee,
oyster shop, &c., in Market-street. Mrs. Brown stated that
the prisoner and her husband had lodged at her premises
about two months; they seemed very respectable persons;
they paid her £2 a week for their board and lodging. A
short time ago the prisoner and her husband quarrelled, and
the husband went to the diggings, leaving his wife in very
straitened circumstances. She expressed an intention of
going into service, hut witness said she would find her plenty
to do if she liked to stay with her, and she would also keep
her in pocket money. On Sunday before last the prisoner
suddenly decamped, and the money, &c, was missed. Inspector
Singleton apprehended the woman at a late hour on Saturday
night. None of the missing property was found upon her.
She denied the charge and cried during the examination. Mr.
Hobcrts defended the prisoner, who was committed for trial
at the Quarter Sessions.
EXTRAORDINARY CHARGE OF THEFT.
A pretty little fashionably-dressed young female, appa-
rently just arrived at sweet seventeen, was charged with
stealing three gold rings from the dwelling of Mrs. Elizabeth
Wilkinson, milliner, of Goulburn-street. Mr. Cory appeared
for the defendant. Mrs. Wilkinson stated that the defendant’s
proper name was Mrs. Plotner; her husband had a station on
the Clarence River; he was nephew to the Duke of Argyll,
and had gone to the mother country to receive a fortune which
had just fallen to him. The defendant was taken by Mrs.
Wilkinson as an apprentice to the millinery business. She
had an allowance of £5 per week. When she left Mrs.


Wilkinson, she owed (hat lady a debt of £5, and gave her
charge of the three gold rings and a locket, to detain them
until she should pay the £5. On Thursday, the defendant
called upon Mrs. Wilkinson, and made her a payment of £l.
The locket was then restored to her, but soon after her
departure Mrs. Wilkinson missed the rings. She hastened to the
house occupied by the fair defendant, who hastened to (he
door, opened it, and welcomed her in, but when (axed with
dishonesty, she threatened to “ lag” Mrs. W., while a gentleman
in the house, acted the preux chevalier on the occasion, and
administered a kick which sent her out of doors. Smarting
under the indignity, she was rejoiced to see Inspector Higgins
passing by, and gave Mrs. Plomer into his custody. She at
once produced the rings, and delivered them to the Inspector.
Mr. Cory urged that the defendant had only taken her own
property, which was not an indictable offence, and Mrs.
Wilkinson’s proper remedy would have been an action of
trover. The Bench concurred with Mr. Cory, and discharged
the fair defendant from custody.
SHARP THIEVES AND SMART POLICE.
John Smith was placed at the bar, charged with stealing
from one James Nye, gold-digger, a cheque on the Union
Bank of Australia, for £4ll 18s. lOd. and George White,
Edward Hannigan alias Rogers, and Emily Wall, were charged
as accessories. The robbery was one which displayed unex-
ampled skill on the part of the perpetrators, and the discovery
of the criminals redounds to the sagacity, courage, and fore-
thought of Inspector Higgins. The male prisoners are young
uien, and w r ell dressed, excepting Smith, who had been stripped
of some of his plumage by Mr. Higgins. In fact, the plundered
man easily believed two of them to be clerks in the bank. Ihe
female prisoner is a very beautiful looking young woman, and
was very fashionably attired. Sergeant Wilson deposed :
I apprehended Hannigan on Tuesday morning, in Castlereagh-
street, on suspicion of being an accessory to the crime. I
found upon his person, two sovereigns, some silver, and a large
gold ring. Inspector Higgins deposed: —About eight o clock
on Sunday evening, 1 apprehended Smith, in Goulburn-street,
near to his residence; he was in his shirt sleeves, and was
carrying a newspaper and two bottles of ginger beer; he
asked permission to go into his house for a coat which I
refused. I told him that I arrested him for stealing a cheque
for £4ll 18s. Gd. from one James Nye. I asked him if he
had been to the Union Bank on Saturday, and he said he had
not. After I had confined him in the watch-house, 1 returned


to his house, at his request, to get him a coat. I saw a liVht
burning in the house, and knocked several times at the door,
but no person came to open it. I then climbed over a fenc
at the rear of the premises and entered the house by the bac
door. No person was in the room, which was lit up, anci
glasses upon the table. At last the female prisoner and
another woman came in. The female prisoner said she livec
there, with a man called ‘Johnny’ (meaning the prisone
Smith) who had gone out. She shewed me her bed where
she and Johnny slept; I warned her that whatever she told
me I would feel bound in duty to tell the magistrates. I fed;
the pillows on the bed, and in one of them I felt somethin**
like paper. I also noticed that the seam had been recently
sewed afresh. I was about to open it when she said that
there was money in it, and she would tell me all about it. I
opened the pillow and found £llB wrapped up in a piece ol
old newspaper. She said she did not know how much money
was there, but Johnny had given her the money in the morning
for the purpose of putting it into the pillow. She also said
that he had given her £2 for herself, and had entrusted her
with £5 to get some socks, a pair of trousers, a vest, and
other articles for himself. She gave me the coat which Smith
wore on Saturday ; it is a light summer coat, and I gave it to
him in the watch-house, but I now produce it torn to pieces
1 took her in charge. I asked Smith afterwards in the watch-
house, if he had left any money in his house. He replied that
he had plenty of money in the Bank of England, but had only
3 shillings in his house. 1 took from him a new silk hand-
kerchief, trousers and vest, which he said lie had brought
from Melbourne, ten months ago, but which 1 have since
ascertained, were purchased by the female prisoner, at the
shop of Mr. Hickey, near the Bull’s Head, in George-streef.
When I discovered that he was without his coat, in the watch-
house, I asked him where it was, and he said, some person
had entered his cell and taken it from him. I searched the
cell, but could not find it. I afterwards saw Constable Can-
non pull the coat, torn to pieces, piece by piece out of a rat
bole. The female prisoner told me that she is a married
woman, that she has an infant, and that her husband is in New
Zealand. I apprehended the prisoner White on Monday, as an
accessary, from information which I had received, that he had
been at Smith’s residence, in Goulburn-street. I showed
Smith to White, and White denied having seen him, but White
has been identified, as having been in Smith’s house on Satur-
day. I apprehended White in Pitt-street. I found between
and ~3 on lmn. Inspector Singleton was with me, and


asked White if he had not purchased a gold watch. He
denied having done so. He also denied having any £SO notes
in his possession lately. I was present when Sergeant Wilson
apprehended the prisoner, Hannigan alias Rogers, He denied
all knowledge of Smith. He denied having been in Goulburn-
street on Saturday. I was in the station-house on Monday,
when the prosecutor Nye, identified Smith.” Mr. Nichols was
retained for the prisoner Smith, but declined asking the In-
spector any questions. The other prisoners were undefended.
They declined asking any questions, but Emily Wall said, she
wished, there and then, to make a statement. The Police
Magistrate declined to listen to it. Sergeant Wilson, re-
called, deposed: “ Hannigan told me that ho did not know
Smith. He denied having been in Smith’s house, in Goulburn-
street, on Saturday. Smith acknowledged having seen
Hannigan. I have frequently seen Smith and Hannigan in
company, dodging about the different Banks, and in the
markets on Saturday nights.” James Nye was next called.
He is a very old man, and deposed :—“ I am a labourer, and
live at Sutton Forest. I have just returned from the Ovens
diggings, where I have been lucky. On Saturday, between
11 a.m. and noon, I sold some gold at the Mart of Mr. J. G.
Cohen, in George-street. I can neither read nor write. I
received a cheque for £4ll 18s. lOd. The larger portion
belonged tome; the remainder to my son-in-law, William
Stewart. I had 56 ounces of gold, and Stewart had a few
ounces less. I received the payment in a single cheque. My
son-in-law went to meet my wife to get another lot of gold
from the Exchange Rooms, where it had been brought by the
Gold Company’s Escort, while I went to the Bank to get the
cheque cashed, [The cheque was upon the Union Bank of
Australia, at the corner of Pitt and Hunter streets, but it seems
that the old man had gone by accident along George-street
to the new Bank of New South Wales, where he fell in with
the robbers.] I got to a Bank where I saw two gentlemen
standing outside. They are the prisoners Smith and White.
I asked Smith if that was the right Bank, and handed him the
cheque to look at. He replied, ‘ Yes it’s all right, but it must
be cashed at once, as Monday is a holiday.’ He ran inside
with it, and soon ran down the steps again, saying, ‘ I see this
office is shut, we must go to the other place.’ He then ran off,
and I was too old and enfeebled to keep up with him. I saw
him no more until in the watch-house. The prisoner White
continued to pace to and fro outside. I supposed them to be
clerks in the Bank. I can identify the prisoners Smith and
White. It was near the Bank door where I met them. I


spoke to Smith first. I never saw the prisoner Hannigan or
the girl before.” Cross-examined by Mr. Nichols for Smith :
“ I gave him the cheque to read for me. I did not give it to
him to keep. He said, ‘ it’s all right,’ and bolted.” By the
prisoner White : “ It was between eleven and twelve o’clock
when I saw you ; you were walking backwards and forwards; I
had no delay after getting the cheque ; I did not notice your
arm being in a sling.” White then exclaimed, that he could
bring witnesses to prove that he was elsewhere at the time
mentioned by the prosecutor. George Dent deposed :“I am
a ship joiner, living in Globe-street, opposite the Queen’s
Wharf. I was in the Union Bank between eleven and twelve
o’clock on Saturday. I saw the prisoner Smith come in to get a
cheque cashed, and heard one of the tellers direct him to put it
in at one of the pigeon holes. He wore a Californiabat, similar to
the one produced. He seemed in a great hurry, and pushed
rudely pass a person who was waiting. He pushed against
me. I remarked th it he had not been used to banking
business, and asked him what he pushed me for.” William
Stewart deposed: “lam a gold-digger residing at Sutton
Forest. Mr. Nye is my father-in-law. I was concerned with
him in the sale of the gold. My share in the cheque amounted
to <£2o3 11s. 3d. I left Nye at the corner of George and
Hunter-streets, to go and get the cheque cashed, whilst I
returned to my mother-in-law, at the Exchange Rooms, to get
more gold for sale. While I was selling the other parcel of
gold, my father- in-law came in and told me how he had lost
the cheque. I identify the cheque now produced.” Mr. W.
C. Greville: “ 1 am the chief teller in the Union Bank of
Australia. I remember the prosecutor Nye coming into the
Bank with Mr. J. G. Cohen, on Saturday, to inquire about the
cheque. Mr. Cohen keeps an account at our Bank. I
paid the cheque to a man who had presented it about three or
four minutes previously. It w'as about half-past eleven o’clock
when Nye came in to complain of his loss. I paid the cheque
in eight £SO notes, one £lO note, one £1 note, and 18s. lOd.
in small change. All the notes paid are notes issued by our
bank. The notes were rather new, seeming to have been but
about once issued. Saturday last was an unusually busy day,
and 1 cannot swear to the man who presented the cheque, as
I was extremely busy; besides, the man was so cool and
collected that my suspicion was not excited. I swear to the
best of my knowledge, that the prisoner Smith was in the
Bank that same morning previous to half-past eleven o’clock.
I think that he had on a blue jacket. 1 know nothing of the
other prisoners.” Daniel Matthews : “ I am a cab driver and


proprietor. On Saturday, shortly before one o’clock, 1 was
engaged by the prisoner White, and a man not in custody.
I drove them to Chippendale, then back to a public house in
Bathurst-street. White and his companion called for luncheon
and treated me. We had ale, porter, and champagne. Every
person in the house was made welcome. I then drove them
to the house in Goulburn-street, where I believe Smith and
the female prisoner lived. White and his comrade got out,
and some drinking was going on inside. They called me in to
settle with me. 1 saw the female prisoner there. I charged
them £l. Some dispute took place. White’s comrade paid
me. White struck me with his fist on the Tip. When I first
entered the house White had hold of Smith, who was lying on
a sofa. I advised them not to fight. Smith told them to pay
me and send me away.” Mr. Thomas Parkinson: “ I keep
the Wellington Inn, George-street South. On Saturday, be-
tween twelve and one o’clock, White and another man drove to
my house in a cab. I had known White before as a customer,
but not by name. They called for nobblers, and afterwards
for a bottle of champagne. One of them laid a £SO note on
the counter. I had not sufficient change, and sent the note
to a grocer’s shop, but could not get it changed. White it
was who asked me for change. White then asked me to lend
him £2, which I did, and have not been repaid. They only
stopped about a quarter of an hour. The £SO note was an
old note. I cannot say on what bank.” John Sturmie: “ I
am a mariner, but am at present keeping a boarding house.
I have two houses in Goulburn-street. I let three rooms in
one house to the prisoner Smith. I live myself in the other
house. Smith and the female prisoner have lodged there
about a fortnight. I always knew the female as Mrs. Smith.
I let them furnished apartments. On Saturday last I was
removing some of my goods to the other house. I was
putting up a bed in Smith’s room. I remember the cab,
driven by Matthews, coming to the house. Only Smith and
the female were in the house at the time. White came in the
cab, and another man not in custody. I have seen Hannigan
before, but cannot swear that he was in Smith’s house that
day. The men quarrelled about paying the cabman’s fare,
and I afterwards saw the cabman come out of the room with
his lip cut.” Owing to the lateness of the hour, and the
necessity of calling another witness, the prisoners were re-
manded until Thursday. Eventually the prisoners were all fully
committed for trial, Emily Wall turned approver, Smith was
convicted and transported to Cockatoo Island. The other
prisoners were acquitted.


A COMICAL BANQUET. *
In the early part of June, 1852, the citizens of Sydney
were honored by a visit from John O’Shannasy, Esq., one of
the members of Council for the Province of Victoria. Mayors,
lords, literati, &c., have now and then visited Sydney, and
have been suffered to depart unnoticed, but strange to say,
upon the appearance of Mr. O’Shannasy, a sudden effer-
vescence of hospitality occurred, and a sumptuous feast was
provided at the Masonic Hall in York-street, at which Mr.
O'Shannasy was the honored guest.
Subjoined is the account of the proceedings :
A “ spread”on a sumptuous scale was given (?) by Host
Entwistle to the Member for Melbourne, on Thursday se’night,
7 p.m. “ Welcome”—was written in letters of gold, on a
green ground, in a conspicuous part of the hall.
Two catgut scrapers, a banjo man, a drummer, and a
“ bones,” having struck up the “ Roast Beef of Old England,”
the rattling of the knives, forks, &e. commenced.
Some discussion ensued on account of an accident
occurring to the banjo, but that was sson and happily
remedied; one of the gents, in Mr. O’Shannassy’s traiu having
brought among his baggage a “ hurdy gurdy,” which answered
exceedingly well as a substitute.
Mr, G. R. Nichols acted as president. The vice-
president’s chair was amply filled by P. Long, Esq.
After the viands had been demolished, and the scraps
removed, the usual (or priming) toasts were given and drunk
with immense enthusiasm, such as the Queen —Prince Albert
All the yonng Alberts—The Governor-General, &c.
These successive draughts having properly primed
and loaded the cheerful assemblage, and most of the
guests being in that happy state in which thev would have
“ toasted” Beelzebub, if that worthy’s name had been proposed,
the sport of the evening commenced. The Chairman
proposed the “ guest of the evening**—Mr. O'Shannassy, and
in a speech which sparkled like the champagne which had
conjured it, he proclaimed Mr. o‘Shaunaßsy as a “ broth of a
boy.”
Mr. o‘Shannassy returned thanks. He was overcome by
the honor done to him, and by the eloquence of the worthy
Chairman. He was in a state of conflustration, botheration,
and eveiy other ation. He could only conclude by expressing
his certain conviction that a more sociable gentleman than
their worthy Chairman did not exist. His speech, and the high
distinctions conferred upon him would be as indelibly engraven


on his memory as the grass on his sheep station at Wirrindillily
Creek. He could do no less than return the compliment
conferred upon him by Mr. Chairman, by proposing his health
—(loud cheers—hiccup.)
The catgut scrapers then played u The Australian Polka,”
which was danced gracefully by Mr. o£Shannassyo £ Shannassy and the
Vice-President, amid loud and vociferous applause.
The Chairman returned thanks for the handsome manner
in which they had drunk his health —a manner so handsome
as to render it necessary to replenish the decanters. He
hoped to see Government House, and every other house,
especially the Custom House, knocked down (loud cheers
■—No! no! from Mr. Councillor Thornton—knock down the
Custom House !—No !no ! no !—hiccups—a growl under the
table). He would, before resuming his seat, propose the health
of the “ Fine Old English Gentleman.” At the bottom of the
table (loud cheers and hiccups.)
The Vice-Chairman, in an eglegant speech, acknowledged
the honor, and proposed “ the Legislative Councils of both
Colonies,” which being drunk with all the honors, the services
of the band were called into requisition. Unfortunately all
the performers, save he of the hurdy-gurdy had fallen fast
asleep, under the combined influences of the drink and the
speeches, but the hurdy-gurdy man made a noise resembling
“ There’s nae luck about the house,” which was considered by
some of the guests to be a very appropriate air.
Dr. Douglass, who had hitherto sat tolerably quiet, being
engaged in a philosophical and chemical test of the relative
strength of Champagne and Sherry, now rose and put in his
pestel and mortar. At the conclusion of a brilliant oration,
interrupted occasionally by cheers, yells, tears, and laughter,
he proposed, the Agricultural, Commercial, Pastoral, Mineral,
and every other”—‘al interest, especially his own interest on
the Murrumbidgee and elsewhere.
The toast was drunk with deep sensation, and old hurdy-
gurdy contrived to play “ Money in both Pockets.”
Mr. Joe Simmons was “nid nid nodding” in an easy chair
of ample dimensions, when the favourite tune of “de monish
in both pocketsh” aroused him from his reverie, and staggering
to the Chair, he exclaimed “ Here’s de girlsh.”
Hurdy-gurdy having played “ the dear little crathurs, 5 ’ a
sprig of fashion, yclept Gynne, returned thanks on their behalf.
“ The Press” was next toasted, on the motion of the
Chairman, and was responded to by Mr. Parkes, who spoke
with great animation in behalf of that most beneficial power in
society. He would never prostitute the Press —No !—rather


would he “sweep a crossing” than contaminate the Press.
Deep—vastly deep—was the responsibility which rested on the
head ot any man who had the control of that mighty engine—
the Press—but he had a head able to bear that responsibility.
(Immense applause.)
A few other toasts were drunk. The clerical portion of
the guests had long since retired. Those who were able now
followed their example, and those who were incapacitated,
were permitted to 101 lin their seats, or to lie under the table
till morning (gratis) by the worthy host.
A NAUTICAL MELODRAMA.
James Arthur, senior, a bluff, weather-beaten, good look-
ing person, whose head of hair had but recently been in a
heavy gale of wind, appeared on the floor of the Police Office,
to answer the charge preferred against him by Mr. W.
Pemberton Palmer. The latter deposed, that on Monday last
the defendant made his sudden and unwelcome appearance,
during a torrent of rain which made him look like Old Neptune,
on board the Adventure schooner, of which he (Palmer) was
commander. The defendant tried to descend the hatchway
ladder, but Palmer repulsed him, and drove him back on deck.
The defendant threatened to throw Palmer overboard, and
fearing bodily harm he sought the protection of the Bench.
Palmer also stated, that the defendant tried to seduce the
crew from their allegiance, and called upon them to follow him.
He admitted that the schooner formerly belonged to the
defendant, who was consequently his owner, while he com-
manded her; but he was aware that the Sheriff had caused
the schooner to be sold off. He did not know who was the
owner of the schooner at the present time. The defendant
declared that he could prove that Palmer had no just authority
on board the schooner. The magistrates dismissed the case.
THE WEIRD SISTERS.
Catherine Kelly, charged by Inspector Singleton with
being constantly drunk and disorderly, was sent to gaol for
three months. Margaret Lynch, another veteran female toper
was brought up by Constable Itowe. The Mayor sentenced
her to be confined for a month. “ That’s better than nothing,’’
she replied. Eliza Norris another old woman, was brought up
by Constable Ellis, \ 7, who stated—“ I found her in bed at
one o'clock on Sunday morning. She has no place of restive-
ness, and is often here under the Bagabone Act. She generally
sleeps at the Market Wharf, and she was snoozing, there when
I broke upon her slumbers, and hauled her off to darings wile.”


The Mayor said he would find a better bed for a month, and
wrote out her mittimus to the Darlinghurst dormitory.
A LOVER OP LITERATURE.
An intelligent looking respectable young man, named
William Cooke, was placed at the bar of the prisoner’s dock,
by Constable Lucas, who stated that the defendant was in the
habit of sitting, day after da}', in a secluded part of the Govern-
ment Domain, reading books and newspapers. The constable
took it into his pate that the defendant intended to destroy
himself, and, therefore, put him in the watch-house. The
Police Magistrate said that he had seen the dclendant in his
favourite seat in the domain for the last year and a-half, and
knew him to be perfectly harmless —indeed, numbers of children
seemed to take peculiar pleasure in playing about him, and he
never molested them, although on one occasion he had been
robbed by a little boy. Cooke was then discharged from
custody.
DIABOLICAL OUTRAGE.
On Monday night some execrable miscreant, bent on mis-
chief, perpetrated an outrage of unprecedented horror in the
annals of crime, by causing a nasty dead diseased bullock,
horns and all, to be deposited opposite the domicile of Mr.
Stubbs, the Inspector of Nuisances. The venerable Inspector
was awakened from a dreamy morning nap by the disagreeable
smell, and supposed, at first, that he was prosecuting some
hapless proprietor of a dead ox in the precincts of the Police
Office, but judge his surprise! —his inexpressible horror and
disgust!—a big cockhorned brute lay inanimate before his
door. Mr. Stubbs has offered a reward of £1 for the appre-
hension of the diabolical miscreant.
THE HEAD OF THE FAMILY.
Robert Tindal, of Pitt-street, a hen-pecked old man, was
charged before Messrs. Dowling, Arkins, and Murnin, with
using threatening language to his daughter. Miss Mary Anne
Tindal, a good-looking girl of eighteen, stated that on the
12th instant her papa threatened to knock her down if she
followed him : she believed him to be of unsound mind.
Old Man : —The girl and her mother want to make out
that I’m crankey, but I’m as sound as a drum.
Dr. Rutter stated that he had conversed with and
examined Tindal, and had discovered no symptoms of
insanity.
Mrs. Tindal then displayed her prominent proboscis and


vari-coloured head-gear in the witness-box. She said if o]
Bob was not actually crankey, he had at least ‘lost a shingle
Still, she had no objection to give him another trial and tak
him home with her, on condition that he consented to qu
the house then occupied by the family, and go to anothe
house, which (said Mrs. Tindal) “ I have in mv eye.” llobei
was then discharged, and lugged off by his affectionate wif
and daughter.
BABEL.
About half-past twelve o’clock yesterday, such a tumul
tuous clatter was made in the Police Court, as is not every
day to be heard or witnessed. On the Bench sat Mr. Chambers
taking the information of some man; near him stood P
Grant, Lsq., taking the oath of another. In front sat the
deposition clerk calling to the Chief Inspector. Next to him
stood Inspector Higgins shouting at the top of his voice for
iary Ann Robinson. Carrol, the summoning constable, at
he same time vociferated “ Larkins against Dundle.” Mr.
Cory, Solicitor, was reading aloud the Bth section of the Police
Act, while Mr Parry Long was endeavouring to restrain the
passionate exclamations of a female client. The heavy tread
of divers policemen moving to and fro, and the hum of the
spectators added to the scene, which was crowned bv some
itinerant fruiterer outside the door, bawling “Here’s your
peaches ! two-pence a dozen !” J
A COMICAL CASE OF DESERTION.
Ann n tepbe r n T /T ins ap P eared to answer the complaint of
aW h o S f Wl r ’ £ deSertln ? her and their two inf ant children,
about a fortnight since. It appeared from the evidence that
one night the defendant came home drunk, and, having fallen
down on the floor, be sunk into a profound slumber Ann
beddinT &c %, h °” e and dra ?’ da PP ed a!1 the furniture,
bedding, &c., on the dray, and took her road to her sister’s
residence, at Ultimo. She actually stripped the house of
every portable article, and, taking advantage of her husband’s
th argy % She c PUlled ° ff MS C ° at aad shir t, and took
them with the rest of the property. When the unfortunate
ow came to himself, he found that he had been deprived
swoTn< h T h r» and .goods and chattels, at one fell
call that desertion, “fltefbufTn ZZ
seven davs^oT 1 iTtl ■ * cn< * ad j° urned ' the’ casTfor
C " dajs, to enable the parties to effect a reconciliation.


ASSAULT.
Mary Ann Murphy, as neat a little specimen of the
feminine gender as ever scratched a face or flung a quart
bottle, danced the drum polka on the floor of the Court, to
show why and wherefore she gave Mrs. Mary Wilson a black
eye, by throwing a tumbler at her. Both ladies reside in that
most warlike part of the city called Cumberland-street. Mr.
Roberts appeared for the complainant. The defendant spoke
as follows:—“l’ve Mr. Nickells as isn’t here. She drinks;
she must have tumbled down, and trod on her eye. I didn’t
do it.” The defendant was sentenced to pay a fine of £l, and
4s. 6d. costs, or be imprisoned during seven days. She paid
the fine. ,
ROBBING A SAILOR.
Edward Lappage, who described himself as a man of
war’s man, charged a female pirate, named Jane Johnson, with
boarding him while becalmed in Rum-and-water bay, on
Tuesday night, and plundering him of specie to the amount of
two sovereigns. Jack still seemed to stagger from the effects
of the action, and spun but an indifferent yarn, his log book
having gone overboard during the engagement. Mr. G. R.
Nichols appeared as “ tender” to Jane, who sailed out of Court
with flying colours.
HUSBAND AND WIFE.
Thomas Saddler, a tailor, was charged by Dennis Doolan,
15 A, with threatening to knock his wife’s brains out with his
lap-board. The wife also said that she believed him insane ;
he drank “ three half-pints” daily; he slept with his shears
under his pillow, and often threatened to run them through
her. She was in fear of her life. The unhappy tailor was
ordered to find sureties for his good behaviour for six months,
himself in £2O, and two sureties in £lO each, or to be im-
prisoned until next Quarter Sessions.
ONE OF THE SWELL MOB.
A showily dressed young man named John Howard, was
brought up by Inspector Higgins, charged in the first instance
with having absconded from his bail, and secondly with being
concerned in robbing the landlord of the Pelican Inn, on the
South Head Road, on the 3rd of last November. Mr. Nichols
appeared for the prisoner. According to the evidence it
appears that in the early part of October last, the prisoner was
apprehended for fraud ; on the 4th of that month, Howard


and some other men entrapped a country gentleman named
Harper into the Glasgow Hotel, Pitt-street, and defrauded him
of about £GO, by inducing him to join in placing large sums of
money in a hat, and another person supposed to be an
accomplice of Howard, called to a coin. Harper was victimised
to the tune of £OO ; he obtained a warrant against Howard,
who was fully committed for trial at the Central Criminal
Court, but allowed bail; himself in £BO and two sureties in
£4O each. He kept out of the way when the Session came on,
and his recognizances were ordered to be estreated. On
Wednesday, 3rd November, while on bail, the prisoner Howard
was seen by Constable Lawless with a well-dressed man named
Terrett to enter Mrs. Aylward’s, the Pelican Inn. It so
happened that Mrs. Alyward served Terrett and his companion
with some diink in a back parlour; she afterwards went up
stairs to get some money from her bedroom, when Terrett
lushed from under the bed, struck her a severe blow, rushed
down stairs and out of the house, and after a severe struggle
he was over-powered and captured by two men named
Osborne and Baker in the Sheriff ’s gardens. Terrett’s com-
panion escaped. Terrett was sent for trial at the Central
Criminal Court: he was convicted, and sent to Cockatoo
Island for five years. On Sunday last Inspector Higgins
appi ehended Howard at a house in his occupation on the
South Head Road. With regard to the charge of absconding
from his bail, he was ordered to be sent to prison on the
01 iginal warrant. With regard to the charge with being
concerned in the robbery of Mr. Aylward’s, constable Lawles”
swore that Howard was the man who, on the day of the
Robbery, entered the Pelican Inn with Terrett. Mr. Aylward
thought he resembled the person, but could not swear to him,
neithei could Baker or Osborne. Howard was committed for
trial at the Quarter Sessions.
FURIOUS HI IING.—GEORG E-ST IIEET RACES.
On Friday afternoon, Mr. Stubbs, Inspector of Nuisances,
&c., saw a blue-frocked gent, top heavy with liquor, galloping
at a racing pace along George-street. One man who was
crossing the street had a very narrow escape of being ridden
down by the fellow. Mr. Stubbs was not mounted upon his
ancient Rozinante, but upon an animal of good blood and
met He, and the venerable but chivalrous old officer set spurs
to his horse and pursued the man, who stopped and dismounted
at the Royal Hotel, The man gave his name as George
1 attenden, and appeared at the Police Court yesterday, to all
appearance as drunk as ever, tic told the magistrates he was


one of the best riders in the world, and if they doubted it,
he would break in a horse for either of them. He had only
been three weeks in the colony, and thought it very hard to
be pounced upon in such a manner. In fact he considered
it was a gross shame to impose upon people, and such a thing
would cause a riot in England. The Mayor told him that he
must look out for the laws here. The defendant replied:
“ Yes, and it seems I must look out for the people too. lam
too good a rider to hart anybody; and 1 never hurt anybody
in my life.” Mr. Nichols appeared for the prosecution, and
appealed to the bench to inflict the highest penalty upon the
defendant. The Bench inflicted the lowest penalty, viz.: 40s.
and 13s. costs. The defendant was evidently thought a great
deal of, and well respected, malgre his humble attire, for bank
notes were extended and proffered to him in all directions to
pay the fine.
THE RIVAL NANCYS.
“ Call Ann Cox against Ann Callaghan,” bawled the Chief
Inspector, in a voice which would have done credit even to
bluff King Harry the Eighth. Obedient to the mandate, a
little squinting, cock-nosed female, arrayed in her best,
answered to the name of Ann Callaghan, and made her debut
on the floor of the Court. A visible movement took place at
the same time among the crowd of loungers who patronise
the witness’s seats, as a female Daniel Lambert, with a
platter face and pug nose, forced her way with her
dumpling fists through the throng to the witness box, and
announced herself as Ann Cox. The parties are residents in
Castlereagh-street, and near neighbours; but unhappily one
individual of the masculine gender wormed himself into the
tender affections of the two Nancys. On Saturday evening,
Ann Cox’s feelings approaching to a climax, she invaded the
back yard of her neighbour, Ann Callaghan, armed with a
broomstick. The defendant flew to where a number of empty
bottles were deposited, and she threw some of them with such
excellent aim, that she nearly put her neighbours nose and
face on one broad level. One Edward Dempsey was called
for Ann Cox, but he proved nothing. For the defendant, a
female friend named Eliza Johnson was called, and she so
admirably supported the cause of Ann Callaghan, that that
amjable female won the day, and having thanked the Bench,
especially Patrick Grant, Esq., she walked out of Court, and
once more put up her parasol in liberty, sweet liberty !
AN INJURED PUBLICAN.
A masculine-looking woman, named Catherine M‘Carthy,


was charged with marching into a public-house at the corner
of King and Clarence-streets, kept by J. J. Ralph, and
wantonly demolished four panes of glass and two bottles of
lemonade, of the value of four shillings. Kate’s defence was
ot the vent, vidi, vici,” order—to wit, “ I was drunk ” She
promised to make amends to Mr. Ralph for the damage done
and she was released upon bail to settle the matter. Geoi-e’
l riday, a tall black-looking man in a white shirt, and a red
neckerchief, was then charged by Mr. J. J. Ralph with
assaulting him. Mr. Ralph deposed that the defendant came
into his public-house, and accused him of assaulting Mrs
Iriday; the defendant then struck him in the face. Mr’
Ralph admitted that he had assaulted the defendant’s rib and
turned her out of the house. There was also some unintelligible
affair concerning a shawl and a bonnet. He did not know at
lie time he turned the woman out that she was Friday’s wife
and he had never enjoyed the felicity of seeing Mr Fridav
before. The defendant was sentenced to pay a tine of 20s. and
4s. 6d. costs, or in default to be imprisoned for seven davs
Saturday^ 6 Somethin S about its being a very black
ASSAULT.
1 1 alla S har b an apopletic looking female of middle
stature, but extraordinary breadth of beam, appeared before
Mi. Dowling, to answer the complaint of Margaret O’Brien
or assaulting her on the previous Monday evening. Mar«-aret
was a rather formidable looking dame, with fair hair and florid
complexion, bearing a strong resemblance to the military gen-
tleman who beats the big drum of the Xlth’s band Mr Corv
was retained by the dumpling Callaghan, and having twirled
out of Court ° pe 6 Campaign ° rde ™S “'1 witnesses
Mrs. O'Brien then produced from beneath her shawl a
ragment of stone in use among the masons at work in Barrack-
ane. On Monday night,” quotli Mrs. O'Brien, ‘-my blessed
msband went to St. Pathrick’s, a’eos 'tis a taytotaler he is I
sends my darter arter a pound and a-half of pork sasingers
jist to have reddy gamst he earned home, for that taytollin*
work allers makes him mortal hungry; when that baste of a
woman as Ins huffing and blowing afore the Court, hits my
darter who screeches, and out 1 runs. I axked her in
turns the laison of her wiolenee, when she ups with this sthone
runs arter me and just as I gets into my own door, she send!
hereto tell the Vale.”* 0 Mt 1 not hare beet


Mr. Cory—Was there anybody present ?
Mrs. O’Brien—Was there anybody present?
Mr. Cory—Have you got any witness ?
Mrs. O’Brien—Have I got any witness ?
Mr. Cory : —Now, Marm, I ask you again, have you got
any witness, and what’s her name?
Mrs. O’Brien :—She’s a famale,, and her name is Lizzi-
bith.
Mr. Cory:—ls she a little girl ?
Mrs. O’Brien : —No shure, but a middling aged girl.
Elizabeth M‘Gregor, a pretty girl about seventeen, with
her bonnet trimmed with an astounding quantity of pink
ribbons, was called on behalf of Mrs. O’Brien, and stated that
the podgy female opposite threw a stone which took effect on
Mrs. O’Brien’s leg.
Mr. Cory:—What did Mrs. O’Brien throw?
Elizabeth: —Oh! nothink; Mrs. O’Brien was very good,
considering: she only made one row that evening by calling
Mrs. Callaghan anythink cept an honest woman.
Mr. Cory having announced that he had three ladies on
his side to prove his client’s innocence, called
Miss Mary Anne Walsh, a middling aged spinster, whose
brown complexion was admirgbly relieved by the white linings
of her bonnet. She also was adorned with a large quantity of
pink ribbons, pink appearing to be the chosen colour among
the fighting females of Sydney. “ I seed,” quoth Mary Anne,
“ all the row on Monday evening. Mrs. O’Brien eame to Mrs.
Callaghan’s, who told her as how she was’nt wanted, and she
chucked a big stone at Mrs. Callaghan houldin the blessed
babbie in her arms at the time, and Mrs. Callaghan never
flung anythink at all, but only says she, “ murther! I’m kilt!”
Mrs. O’Brien :—Hevings forgive you, Mary Han, for telling
sich a whopper; yer an hinnercent gal, Mary Han, and
expects to be married; Hevings forgive you !
Mary Anne Hevings forgive you !
Hereupon Mary Anne and JVI rs. O’Brien leaned over to
one another, speaking both at once in that hostile manner
which usually precedes a resort to fisticuffs; and the Police
Magistrate, unwilling to have the Police office arena the ring
for the adjustment of the grievance, dismissed the case, and
Mrs. O’Brien was by the aid of Sergeaut Mat Carroll ushered
out of Court.
STEALING A WATCH.
William Mansfield alias Counor alias M‘Govern was
charged with stealing a watch, of the value of eight guineas,


tne property of Mrs. Frederica Niecker, a German lady. IVT
Brenan conducted the prosecution, Mr. Roberts the defenc
It appeared, from the evidence, that the prisoner was a wait
in Mr. Govers’s lodging-house, in Bligh-street. The prosecutri
another German lady named Biere, and a gentleman named
Hirsch, lodged there. Mrs. Niecker kept her watch suspende
against the wall in her room, which was on the ground floo
under the verandah. On Wednesday evening the prisone
went into the lady’s room and looked at the watch, inquirin
it it was gold. On the following evening about dusk h
noticed the ladies lighting a candle, and invited them to go an
sit m the general dining-room, saying that it was lighted iq
Ihe ladies did so, and in the course of an hour Mrs. Niecke
returned to her room and missed her watch. The prisone
was sitting under the verandah, and as the gate was fastene
he was suspected, because it was said that no stranger couki
have got in. There were some other suspicious circumstance
against the prisoner, who protested his innocence and wa
very ably defended by his advocate. Mr. Govers said he had
been acquainted ivith the prisoner during the last 20 years
and believed him to be an honest man. He had known hin
as Connor, but had lately discovered that he was called Mans
held, and the prisoner had shewn him a discharge in the name
of McGovern. Mr. Hirsch gave evidence against the prisoner
ant among other tacts said that when he was going to fetet
the police the prisoner desired to accompany him. He wishet
to find Inspector Singleton, and the prisoner proposed to o-o
m oi n. <slieCtlon w,n!e Mr * Hirsch went in another. Although
Hr. Hirsch was a long time before he found Inspector Sin4e-
ton and returned to Mr. Govers’s, yet the prisoner did not
come back until some time after. The prisoner was com-
mitted tor trial at the Quarter Sessions. In the afternoon a
man came into the court and delivered to the Police
Magistrate the gold watch, which had been left in his wife’s
care by the prisoner Mansfield. The Police Magistrate at
once sent it to Mrs. Niecker.
disorderly conduct, resisting THE POLICE &e.
George Patterson, a smart looking tar, belonging to the
Melbourne steamer, was fined 10s. for interfering with
constable G C. m tne execution of his duty.— Thomas Bolt, a
very old man who has been forty years in the colony, was
charged by Sergeant Brigden with disorderly conduct It
appeared, from Brigden’a evidence, that Bolt was intoxicated
in 1 oik-street, on Sunday, and was shouting out “Fish ho!”
and acting in an eccentric manner. He was fined half a crown,


which a gentleman in court at once paid for him.—Charles
Brown, a respectable young man, then surrendered to his bail,
charged by Sergeant Brigden with inciting Bolt to resist him.
Brown denied the charge, and said that he merely told brigden
and another of the police not to pull the old man along the
streets, when he was laid hands on and dragged away. His
wife asked the police why they were taking him, when they
pounced upon her and dragged her off also. Two or three
witnesses were called by Mr. Brown to prove the accuracy of
his statement, and the case was dismissed.
A COMICAL DECISION.
Robert Hanslow, a smart looking boy, between eleven and
twelve years of age, was charged by F. W. Meymott, Esq.,
barrister-at-law, with absconding from his service. Mr. Mey-
mott said, that he had engaged the boy as a general servant,
for the period of three years with consent of his father. He
sent the boy to school half of each day, excepting during the
holidays, allowed him to get anything he liked to eat, and
gave him a shilling or two whenever his conduct was good.
The boy made a statement that Mr. Meymott sometimes beat
him. Mr. Meymott admitted, that when the boy was naughty
he did chastise him, in the same way as a father would chastise
a refractory child. The boys’ father stepped into the witness
box, and denied in toto that the boy was hired to the com-
plainant, be had lent him to that gentleman, but fur no
stipulated time, and he was unwilling for him to remain ivith
Mr. Meymott any longer. Mr. Chambers seemed sorely
puzzled, but recovering from his perplexity, be interrogated
Mr. Hanslow, as to the manner in which he obtained his living.
The gentlemen of the Press instantly nibbed their pens or
sharpened up their pencils, expecting that Hanslow senior, had
fallen under the ban of the Vagrant Act, but Mr. Hanslow
plunged Mr. Chambers into a fresh labyrinth, by declaring that
he was a retired butcher who lived upon his rents. ah.
Chambers having received a hint from one of the senioi Police
Officers, then asked Hanslow the elder, if he had not been in
gaol. He replied in the affirmative. Mr. Chambers then told
the boy to go back to Mr. Meymott, who be said, would pio-
bably prove a better father and friend than his natural one.
If lie did not comply with the order, he would be sent to gaol.
Mr. Chambers next addressed himself to Hanslow senior, and
threatened him, that if the boy returned to the paternal
domicile instead of to the house and service of Mr. Meymott,
he would deal with him, Hanslow senior, tor enticing his son
away.


THE LAWS OF THE MEDES AND PERSIANS.
Ann Keast appeared against Mr. Alfred Toogood : this was
the third and last time of asking. A few weeks Mr.
Alfred Toogood returned to Sydney, of which famous city he
had formerly been a resident. Among the other items of
property which he brought to Sydney was a female servant,
yclept, Ann Keast. Mr. Toogood hired the spinster at £8 per
annum for two years, and he also paid £25 for her passage
money. When Ann arrived in Sydney she soon found out
that she had a wealthy aunt, one Mrs. Bluck, of Clarence-street,
and at the same time she made another important discovery,
to wit that female servants in Australia are missesses, and
that £8 per annum would not keep a Sydney female servant
in visites and parasols. Ann was consequently very eager to
bid Mr. Toogood “ good morning,” but Toogood did not°relish
the idea of losing £25 by paying the passage of an utter
stranger. Ihe parties have, therefore, on two occasions been
before the Police Magistrate. In the first instance Mr.
Toogood charged Ann with absenting from service, and her
aunt with harbouring her, but the charge or charges fell to the
ground. In the second instance Ann charged Mr. Toogood
with assaulting her “by trying to shove her down stairs, only
she clung to the bannisters.” Mr. Toogood expressed his
willingness to release her from her engagement if she would
pledge lieiself to refund part of the amount of her passage
money. To effect such an arrangement the Police Magis-
trate postponed giving any decision in the case until
Monday (yesterday), The case was, however, called on when
Mi. Chambers was upon the bench, as the moment of that
gentleman’s advent was the moment of the Police Magistrate’s
exit. Mr. Roberts was engaged for Ann Keast Messrs.
Nichols and Cory for Mr. Toogood. The learned gentlemen
explained to Mr. Chambers that the case had been initiated
befoie the Police Magistrate— ergo, it had been commenced.
Mi. Chambers was of a contrary opinion, observing that initia-
tion did not mean beginning, and dismissed the case
MASTEft AND SERVANT.
Cha Sin, a Chinaman, was charged by his master, Mr.
Raper, of George-street, butcher, with neglect of work. Mr.
Kaper said that Cha Sin had been fighting with some other of
his seivants, and had since taken to bed. He seemed to like
that sort of remedy so wee’ll that it was next to impossible
to get him from among the blankets. Cha Sin was sent to
take a week’s nap in Darlinghurst. John Smith was charged
by Mr. Borton, of the Cricketer’s Hotel, with being absent


From sci \ ice without leave since the 12th instant. He was
sent to cultivate the acquaintance of Cha Sin, in Darlinghurst.
ASSAULT.
Henry Charles Rignell was charged by Mary Dick with
assaulting her on the 18th instant. Mr. Cory conducted the
prosecution. Mrs. Dick stated that she let some premises to
the defendant, and while he was in gaol suffered his wife to
remain in the premises at the rental of four shillings per week,
ibe defendant owed her <£2 165., and as she experienced some
difficulty in obtaining a liquidation of her claim, she paid him
a visit, accompanied by Israel Chapman, bailiff, whom she
politely introduced to him. Chapman was so struck with the
elegance of the furniture, that he pulled out his pencil and
paper and began writing it down. H. C. Rignell, was so
unmindful of the honour conferred upon him, that he upset
Chapman and toie the kivcr off his Sunday hat. He next
commenced hostilities against Mrs. Dick and “he hit her here,
and there, and every where.” He also tore her gown. The*
defendant denied the charge, and the debt, He declared that
while he was “ out of town” his wife pulled the rings off her
fingers and gave them to Mrs. Dick as payment for the rent.
Mrs. Dick did not deny having the rings ; in fact she had them
on at the moment in the witness box, but said they had been
given her as presents by the defendant’s wife. The defendant
was fined 55., and 4s. 6d. costs.
A DESTITUTE CHILD.
A little flaxen haired boy, called Edward Gray, was brought
up by Inspector M‘Cook, who found him lying asleep, between
two and three o’clock yesterday morning, in George-street.
The child said his father was in London, and his mother had
lately died in the Benevolent Asylum. The Mayor told the
officer to take the child to Mr. Dowling, and he would pro-
bably obtain his admittance into the Asylum for Destitute
Children. Mr. Dowding sent him to the Benevolent Ayslum.
FIRE AND WATER.
Two elderly females of remarkably warlike aspects, con-
fronted each other. Mary Dent was the accuser, and
Margaret Waller the accused. It appeared that Margaret’s
hair was similar in colour and coarseness to the hair of a
shaggy French dog, from whose coat Mary Dent cut a lock,
and then held it up, pointing out the resemblance between
the canine hair and Margaret’s. The latter got into a passion,


especially as it was on a Sunday evening, and she opened fire
at Mary’s windows, sending brickbats and other missiles into
her house. Mary endeavoured to repel the assailant, by pour-
ing on her a copious shower of water. Margaret Waller was
fined ss. and 4s. 6d. costs.
ASSAULT.
Jane Whital, a neatly dressed, delicate looking young
female, who obtains a livelihood as a seamstress, charged a
lodging-house keeper in Clarence-street, named Malabar, with
assaulting her on last Tuesday. It appeared from the evidence,
that Malabar lives close to the young woman, and set two dogs
fighting near her door. She was sitting with a female com-
panion sewing, and picked up a stone to drive off the dogs.
Malabar then abused them, using unwarranted appellations
towards them. The complainant was so indignant that she
threw a stone at Malabar, which struck him, and he then hit
her with his fist on her left ear. The bench dismissed the
case upon payment of 6s. costs, by the defendant Malabar.
BRUTAL ASSAULT ON A WIFE.
A man named Thomas Smith, was brought before J.
M‘Lerie, Esq., Superintendent of Sydney Police, charged with
violently assaulting his wife. The poor old woman was very
weak, and her head bandaged. She had to be accommodated
with a seat while giving her evidence. She said that her
husband wanted a ring which she refused to give up, and after
some verbal altercation he struck her on the face and head
with his fists and with a candlestick. Although they are far
advanced in the wane of life, yet it seems that the man Smith
was jealous of an elderly tailor who lodged at the same house.
Sergeant Bridgen proved that on the 31st ultimo, he appre-
hended the prisoner, and found a brass candlestick produced,
the edge of which was covered with blood, in the house of
the prisoner, in Clarence-street. The old woman was in bed
and insensible, and the Sergeant asked the aid of three
doctors, who one after the other declined to attend unless
previously paid a guinea. At last he applied to Dr. Silver who
hastened to the aid of the hapless woman. Dr. Silver deposed,
that he had attended on the woman at 11 p.m., on the night
of the assault: her hair was matted with blood ; the bed-
clothes were covered with blood ; a pool of blood was on the
floor. Her skull was laid bare on the right side of her head ;
she had two other wounds, one over each eye. He considered
her at the time to be in imminent danger. He had since
attended upon her, and she was now convalescent. Such a


weapon as the brass candlestick produced might inflict such
wounds. So extensive was the wound in the side of her head,
that he had to insert six stitches. The prisoner made n
defence, and was fully committed for trial at the Centra
Criminal Court. Bail allowed prisoner in £2OO, and two sure
ties in £lOO each.
A CHALLENGE.
A good looking little spit-fire, with a baby in her arms
named Mary Lewis, was charged by a man named Butler, of
Titus Oates cast of countenance, with assault and batten
Butler said that on the 26th instant, the young woman cam
up to him in Cambridge-street, and challenged him to “come
and fight her fair.” He refused the offer, and she flew a
him! she gave him a blow on his jaw, and spit in his face
Mary letorted that her reason for striking Butler, was because
he had tried to tempt her to deceive her lord and master
At hearing this, Butler turned up the whites of his eyes in a
manner which must have conveyed conviction of his innocence
to the minds of all beholders. Mary Lewis was fined 10s, and
6s. costs.
ASSAULT AND ROBBERY.
Michael Sullivan and Elizabeth Morgan were charged
with assaulting one Patrick Walsh, at Concord, on Monday
night, and stealing from his person the sum of 19s. Mr.
Roberts appeared for the prisoners. Walsh made out a sad
case against the prisoners, alleging that the male prisoner
knocked him down twice with a paling, and the female took
the money out of his pocket. The prisoners cohabit with each
other. Mr. Roberts raised a defence which proved that Walsh
was very drunk, that he had burst open the door of a bed-room,
where the lemaJe was-lying, and attempted to take improDer
liberties with her: that upon hearing the screams of the
woman, the male prisoner came to her aid, and Pat Walsh and
Mick Sullivan had a regular Donnybrook fight with the rails
of a fence, which served them instead of shillelaghs. Pat
Walsh had got a few ugly clips on the nob, which was wrapped
in his wife s shawl. The Bench dismissed the charge of robbery,
and convicted the male prisoner of the assault, for which
offence he was sentenced to pay a fine of 405., or be imprisoned
for three weeks.
RINGING THE CHANGES.
Thomas Jones, a woolly-headed individual, in a coat and
vest adapted to the form of Daniel Lambert, was placed at


the bar. Thomas Jones was a private in the 40th Regiment,
but he rung the changes in the following comical manner.
One Dennis Sullivan, or as he called himself Soolevan,
came to Sydney a few days ago from a successful trip to the
diggings. Denny was a hale, hearty fellow of some eighteen
or twenty stone, while Thomas Jones weighed about half that
quantum. Denny had seen his share of hardship in early life.
He knew that he had a mother, but the devil a bit of a father
had ever been known to poor Denny. At a very tender age
the little bog-trotter was sent to cut turf; and, disliking the
operation, he cut his stick. Denny next made his appearance
in England, and after he got his tail cut, and his mane trimmed,
and himself tamed, he became mighty comfortable. However,
he happened one day to pick up something which did not
appertain to him, and he was sent on a voyage of discovery to
Botany Bay. Now, although Denny has been away nearly
twice as long as Sir John Franklin, the devil a bit of an expedi-
tion has been fitted out by the British Government to enquire
after Denny’s health. At any rate, Denny had sojourned in
Somersetshire, and he had listed, but was discharged for being
bandy, yet he cherished grateful reminiscenses of Somerset,
and of the ‘ hunger and ease’ of a soldier’s life. He there-
fore on coming to Sydney from a fortunate trip to the Dig-
gings, made the acquaintance of Private Thomas Jones. They
drank together until Denny became overpowered, and the twain
put up for the night in a double-bedded room. But Thomas
Jones became infected v»ith the gold-digging mania, and he
resolved to desert. He accordingly rung the changes with
the clothing, leaving his half-dress regimentals at Denny’s
bed-side, and investing himself in Denny’s gai'ments, which
gave him the appearance of a ramrod in a bearskin. When
poor Denny awoke rather late in the day, he discovered with
astonishment the change in his apparel, and after divers
sti'enuous efforts he succeeded in putting his legs rather too
far through the deserter’s trousers, minus the seat. Having
crammed his brawny arms into the scarlet shell jacket, poor
Denny sallied forth into the street, all legs and wings like a
stuffed albatross, or a modern Guy Faux. He kicked up a
terrible hullabuloo amidst the vociferations of a numerous
juvenile attendance. Meanwhile, Thomas Jones hastened to
the Johnny-all-sorts shop in Sussex-street, kept by an old
retired soldier, named William Gilmore. Thomas sold him
the coat stolen from Denny for eighteen shillings, pocketed
the money, and went his way. Chancing to cast a glance
behind, he observed Gilmore hanging the coat on a peg out-
side his shop for sale. A thought struck him that he might


as well have the coat and the money also. He accordingly
returned and unhitched it, just as Denny and his attendant
crowd of native kiddies turned the corner, and the dealer
emerged from his shop. Thomas Jones beat a precipitate
retreat, fast pursued by the multitude, Denny in the red shell
jacket and regimental trousers leading the van—the dealer a
length and a-half behind. After a brilliant run through Sus-
sex-street into Kent-street, the deserter made for cover in a
public-house, where he was brought to bay and captured. The
Magistrates sent him for trial to the Quarter Sessions.
EXTRAORDINARY POLITICIANS.
In September, 1853, a Public Meeting of the Inhabitants
of the Town of Parramatta, was held at the Court House, to
discuss the all absorbing topic of the New Constitution for the
Colony.
The meeting was at first well attended, but one of the
speakers who figures in the appended ‘ Fragment of a Report,'
a German Jew, lately settled in Parramatta, and who had made
himself unpleasantly conspicuous in Sydney by his political and
other whimsicalities, took it into his head to dictate to the in-
telligent British born, or descended, townsmen of Parramatta, in
his broken language, so that numbers who attended the
meeting foi'sook it in disgust.
(A Fragment from our Reporters Notes on the Parramatta Con-
stitutional Meeting .)
At a meeting of the Parramatta-onians on Thursday, a
noted toper called ‘‘Tom the Cook,” staggered half seas over
into the Court House. Tom was negligently attired in duck
trousers and a shirt of (joose-pattern ; the sleeves being rolled
up cook shape. Tom the Cook rolled into a seat, in the
attitude attributed to the late Duke of Wellington in the Im-
perial Parliament; that is to say, he stretched out his legs,
crossing them like a pair of sheep-shears; folded his ruddy
arms, and concentrated the force of his gaze or glare upon the
very intelligent countenance of the speaker, Mynheer J.
Nicholas Beit. With arduous imbibing, and constant exposure
to the kitchen fire, the face of Tom the Cook bore a marked
resemblance to a parboiled knuckle of ham; and the red glow
of his features seemed to have reflected sympathetically upon
the visage and nasal organ of Mr. Beit, the hue of which turned,
during the violence of his loquacity, from milk and water pallor
to mulberry hue.
“ Dish his ” exclaimed the ex-J. P., “de whilest concock-


shun in the universal hatmospheere. Dish fettersh freed-hum
Conshittuthion tam borminable. Ve alls nos de Breeteesh Con-
shittuthion, under whose wine and vig-tree de peeplish recline.”
lorn the Cook—“ Shut up dere, vill yer; nominationalistn
fur hever says hi ; hoo ray. ’
Chairman —Order! Order !
Tom the Cook—“ Shan’t take no horders; never does cept
in the kitchen ; nominee for hever ; hoo-ray !”
Mr, J. N. Beit—Mine goot fren Tommy, de Cooksh is von
werry greble gentlemansh, but I tink hein no hab giben de
conshittuthional politiks deep resurch and doo conshiderashun.
1 can hexplanish to him dat de Bill of Bill Ventvorthsh is
munstrush, and more w'orthy of de Gran Toork, or of de reign
or Cicero, or Ponthias M‘Pilate, dan of de henlighted nineteen,
vat you call him, am him name shentury.”
Tom the Cook—“ Tour a nice old covey, I don’t think j
vat does hi care lor Punchas Pilot. I’d like to see him bone
a fowl or truss a sucking pig longside on me. Nominee for
hever; hoo-ray. Hard dumplings and drippen, hoo-ray. Bill
Ventworth for ever, hoo-ray. Everybody for ever, hoo-ray.”
Ihe excitement caused by his poetical political paroxysm
was too much for 1 om the Cook, who soon sunk into a state
of somnolency, while Mynheer Beit was permitted to proceed
with his flowery oration, until his oratorical powers were ex-
hausted, and he had sent half the persons who attended the
meeting to an unusually early dimmer.
THE FIERY ELEMENT.—BED-MAKING EXTRAORDINARY.
Mrs. Fitzgerald is a buxom lady, living in the aristocratic
locality of \\ ynyard square. Among her domestics is an
‘ Hinsll Orphing,’ named Katey, her surname deponent knoweth
not. Mrs. Fitzgerald gave Katey ‘ her turn out ’ last Sunday,
and Katey went to mass at St. Mary’s, and thence to sport her
Mousseline de laine and silk parasol in the gardens. Just as
Katey was returning home, whom should she meet but Teddy
M‘Mahon, who drives the Garry Owen milk machine, rale sweet-
heart to Katey. He allured Miss Katey to promenade with him
on the Lovers’ Walk. It was in vain that Katey protested that
‘ she had not made the beds, and share missis would be angry,
so she would ; it was late before Katey could extricate herself
fiom the loving embraces of Teddy, after promising to accom-
pany him to the next races in the Garry Owen milk-car. Katey
hastened home, lighted a candle, rushed up stairs, and com-
menced giving missisis bed a hurrah turn over. In her hurry
and agitation, her head brimful of love and Teddy, she ignited
the bed curtains, and screaming piteously, ran down stairs to


I quaint her missis that the room was in blazes. Great con-
ation reigned in the halls of the Fitzgeralds which was only
toyed by the pvon.pt arrival of Mr. Bown and the tore In-
,ranee Company’s engine. The firemen ext.nga.shed the
antes before they communicated w.th the> a "‘ h °
ipir denarture, one of the firemen assured Mrs. hitzgeraici tnat
they had douted the fire, but the bed was m hashes, although
ie post and postesses was safe.”
daekey ken.
Donald M-Kenzie, an ogre-like Negro of the dirtiest
lack colour imaginable, was charged belore Mi. C. H.
Chambers, with stealing two sovereigns and.one> shill,mg, h
ironertv of Philip Macedon Mealby, fcsq. Mr. P. M. Mea by
s a P Ni Ecr of a superior grade to the prisoner. His complexion
esembled a bronzed tea-urn which had gone a long time with-
,ut deansing. He was dressed in a faded bottle-green surtout
vhichhad once been very fashionable, but had been modermzed
w the formation of patent ventilators at the dbovis. Mr. 1.
Vlacedon Mealby’s hair -s rest rea^
transcend the power of uesci ip ion- ] ce pt & board
“ T a h , at , h " l 0d h S u d se a for e stogl S e 4ger g LJn in Maorie Lane.
and lodging housefor sin 1 Ee shoulder ’tuck
at table in Mr. him two sovereigns
or two afterwards Mt e n . gger> he tell him so.
gone. As he suospe ™ coloured gemmen in house
Berry unwilling be searched but all coloure g trouser3>
sraa 2
Prisoner “ Dat all stand back in the dock, while
The prisoner was ordered to stanOD he made his
the young Creole was • g on fche bench , h is arms
aktabo, a e „d"ed--Now X be here! who wants to a, me
any q Mr. S Chambers Where do you come from, and what's
y ° Ur wTn^U“My name’s John Hilt; I’m Merican, I come


fiotn fttates New York, I reckon T’m 4i *<.
ES-SiSSi
pretty nearly all ni-ht and dL ,s takln S oaths all day, and
curses and *«»
rnore questions as it’s r .lne« ,• k alive, if you ve any
coloured Niggers at Byers’s li P ‘! m . ner llme > alld 4v °ut them
MrX’haS; "f 8 ,Cady Sha '-P“^-
ofp ß^^ h - th “ i " t '=^srnr? pl,,oe
all the Lawyers goes, anTaccordtog to Va’acooun"! itT’*"?
f®
worthy magistrate permitted him to gir o evldenc^r'n’
tobotated that given by Mr P M m n ■ ’ which eor-
The poor Nig<4 in the dnolW h m eve r.v Particular.
“ 4 bag, arhTsr t h fi e t f e 0 d k hi Ll:" s “it;f' ike ** »«-
that it was the first occasion upon »hicl"l e W T?® 1
practice that species of legerdemain T d attem P ted to
trial. ° oruemain. He was committed for
AN ITCHING PALM.
acquisitivenes^s'tro® was™] 0 ” '''‘l' t -° organ of
the pockets of diyer s S persomL P the Policed " M \l ” ckin »
vious day. A otpii- mnn i r 01 ce Office on the pre-
Police o y ffi ce, A as“ r s e peet™:r'of° rt: c e b el' ,g in *■“
peep in, hut the trial of the culprit t „ John tl)uk »
strain his natural propensity to in. th f“B°“S on could not re-
the spectators’ pockets One ® pect the co "tents of some of
hands in his pocket turned , Pe ° ple findin S strange
“halloa you’ve °ot your hand T nd t 0 with a
a-vy, J ,, c <-> ut jour Hand in my nocket f « VrAi ,> .
difference,” replied the thief « VO np!n n t Y eli / vot s the
if you likes.” Inspector Sini • PUt ourn * n to n dne
kept an eye on LawsoV Zt hav >"g notice of the matter,
frisking the pockets of ?w„ I™ S °° n aftenvarda was detected
Peters. Lawson ™ a 1 S "T naraed Mettleprook and
at hand, and on the followin^d' me J* latel J’ ln tbc watch-house
Quarter Sessions. S day he Was seat trial at the
A GOLD-DIGGER’S PRANKS.
One Peter M’Laren, who lodges at tho
gold-digger, and who is in the habit of amust^,^


what in the style of the Marquis of Waterford, of indigo flooring,
and lamp-glass smashing fame, has one among other playful
pastimes, that of engaging cabmen to drive him about the City
and suburbs ; and then, when asked for payment, replying in a
line of a very favourite melody.
“ Call again, call again, to-morrow.”
The day before yesterday, a cabman named Mullally com-
plained to the magistrate, that one night as he was driving
through Castlereagh-street, Peter M‘Laren hailed him, and
ordered him to drive him about for a few hours. Mullally
complied with the request, and drove Peter with one of Mother
Kitty Wright’s chickens through the streets during four hours,
Peter then begged permission for himself and the chicken to
spend the remainder of the night in the cab, which was put in
the owner’s stable. Mullally refused the modest request, and
Peter being charged £1 for his ride, invited Mullally to call for
his payment “to-morrow”; but on the principle that “to-
morrow never comes,” he declined to pay the cabman. Mull-
ally said that Mrs. Wright had interposed with a very gracious
offer to act as negociator between him and Peter —nay she
even went so far, in her, “peace principles,” as to offer pay-
ment in propria'persona but Mullally being of opinion that as
Peter was the party who had hired the cab, he was therefore
bound to pay, applied to the Bench, Mr. Dowling passed
sentence unpon Peter (who did not attend the summons) to
pay £1 and costs, or to be imprisoned during three days.
THE SAILORS AND THE GIG.
William Hodgkins, a seafaring man, was charged by the
Superintendent of Police with, in company with a shipmate,
driving a horse and gig at a furious pace in George-street.
The sailors were drunk and could not steer. They either
believed they had a foul wind to contend against, or the gig
would not answer the helm, and they tacked continually from
one side of the street to the other, and ran broadside on to the
Superintendent’s gig- Mr. M‘Lerie said that in his opinion
the livery-stable keepers who lent gigs to drunken sailors were
most blameable. Hodgkins was cautioned and discharged.
LARCENY.
Timothy Callagan, a very ill-favoured ex-Policeman, who
when in the Corps Indigo was distinguished by the soubriquet
of “ The native dog,” was brought up by Sergeant Pegg, 21 P>,
for stealing two Wellington boots, valued at £i, from the shop
of William Stock, on the South Head lload. It appeared from
the evidence, that in the evening while Mr. Stock was fitting


an Adelaide boot to the delicate pettitoes of Mrs. Anne Murphy,
the prisoner made his appearance in the shop, and enquired'
the price of hoots. Without purchasing any, he pulled down
the two odd Wellingtons before the Court and bolted. Mr. Stock
pursued and captured him. He was sent for trial to the Quarter
Sessions.
THE GROCER AND THE SNOB.
Mi. John Joe Currant, a methodistical looking grocer, re-
siding in Parramatta-street, appeared before the Mayor and
Mr. Arkins to complain of Thomas Parker, a vicious looking-
little shoemaker, for assaulting and beating him on the 24th
instant. Mr. Curran or Currant asseverated on oath : Lo!
and behold ; he ow-ed me a bill for divers supplies in the
sugar, soap, and candle line, and when I presented him with
my bill, he jum-ped off his stool; he blasted my eyes with his
tongue, and my forehead with his lapstone.
Mayor : Did not you give him any provocation except
presenting him with the bill ?
Grocer: \erily none whatever, save calling him a little
rogue, a rascal, and a swindler.
The grocer then produced his small boy, who had been
an eye-witness of the affair ; and as it appeared from his
testimony that the grocer had been as sweet as sugar-candy
while his assailant had been as fiery as currie powder, the
grocer gained the day, his adversary being mulct in the penalty
of £l, and 4s. Gd. costs, or in default of payment to be im-
prisoned during seven days.
A NIGHTMAN’S LADY’S MAID.
An elderly lady in black, called Mother Marrington
appeared as sweet as sugar at the Police Office, in lieu of her
old man, the well-known John Marrington of Kent-street to
answer the complaint of Mary Atkins, a turnip-nosed, eribbige-
faced female from the land of Erin, for refusing to pay her
wages, amounting to £1 12s. The dispute was simply
whether Mary was a weekly or a monthly servant; but so
unintelligible was the gibberish of Mrs. Marrington and her
maid, that the Bench was pretty considerably puzzled
Mr. Hargraves Were you lady’s maid P
Mary: Och! shure an gintilmins maid, and everyting
else into the bargain. * s
The Bench ordered Mrs. Marrington to pay the girl her
bad grace o **“ ° f Ul ° Court > wllich shc did with a very


THREATENING LANGUAGE.
Jane Kirby, a well-clad, cock-nosed little female of not
impregnable virtue, was charged by her neighbour, Elizabeth
Solomon, of Clarence-street, with threatening to “ settle her.
Under the circumstances Mrs. Solly was frightened, and
besought magisterial protection. It happened that Mis.
Solomon was a female of nearly double the size of Jane Kirby,
and therefore Jane endeavoured to impress upon the mind of
the magistrate that Solomon could not reasonably be in terror
of battery from so diminutive a female. Jane also displayed a
scratch on her face, which she alleged had been imprinted by
Mrs. Solomon’s talons. She also that Mrs. Solomon s big
sister had attacked her. The Mayor said he was well aware that
little folks were generally very violent: he would try and put a
stop to their fighting follies. Jane was ordered to find sureties
for her peaceable behaviour, or to be imprisoned until next
Quarter Sessions.
A BULL IN A NET.
A wild looking man in the garb of a workman, who re-
sponded to the name of Henry Bull, and who onl} lacked the
horns of his patronymic (being a poley), was summoned before
a full Bench fur creating a commotion while infuriated with
liquor, in a certain alley, called Elizabeth-place. Mr. Bull was
not captured at the time of the row, for he had made so
furious and irresistible a charge, that he had cleaicd tie
alley ; the women and little ones taking refuge in their houses,
while the solitary policeman appointed to keep order in tliat
•locality was tossed into the air nobody knows whither \v hen
Mr Bull was summoned into the Police Office arena, he tossed
his head, and looked about him in that, wild manner which
betokened considerable danger to the legal and other gentry
in his immediate vicinity. He was sentenced to pay os., and
ditto costs, and was eventually driven to a solitary stall to chew
the cud of repentance for twenty-four hours.
A PARTY OP PLEASURE.
Lewis Brown, John Marlin, David Traynor, John Russell,
and Mary Hickey, Elizabeth Whalan, and Elizabeth Larvan,
were charged by the very warlike Sergeant M hoy, o the
Mounted Patrol, with disorderly conduct in i itt-street, at eleven
o’clock on the previous night. Lewis Brown and David Iraynor
are a couple of unwashed, wealthy gold diggers, having pockets
full of sovereigns, notes, and silver, found upon their persons.
It is a sincere matter of regret that these two worthies do not
invest a little of their capital m soap, hot water, and shaving.


nirt nr ? b ? a l>P earcd as lf ‘hey performed the double
pait of night and day dress, and it was evident how innoce
they were of Eau de Cologne or lavender water, by t
. P, 100 ® 1 uttered by old Stubbs, who chanced to pass by the
;n hl f entree into the court. Johnny Martin is a stunte
freckle-faced hobbledehoy. Mary Elickey and Elizabe
Whalan are a couple of unfortunates whose once good featur
have become completely brutalised by long habits of d
bauehery John Kussell belonged to V
cabman, his eyes and nose being the only token which distil
glushed him from a grizzly bear. Elizabeth Larvan is a prett
and interesting looking young girl, who but a very few week
go walked the paths of purity and innocence, and might b
et occasionally in the Park tending the children of he
mistress, being employed as a nursemaid. The blush of sham
has not been yet obliterated from this poor young creaturT’
f";d n thi: ks S ed Kke “ bCai,tiful amids
unnn ’ S ° lTie nervous People are always in alarn
upon the appearance of a comet, that the fiery meteor will se
the earth m a blaze, but there seems to be equal dan-er from
the exceedingly fiery color of Sergeant M‘Koy’s moustache and
whiskers ; if he only made his debut in Wortman’s lucifer match
manufactory the premises would instantaneously be blown skv
b,gh. He stated that at 11 p.,u. the defendants*were inTcab
Russe! acting as driver. They were driving through and
through Pitt-street, creating a terrible row, by singin- different
songs at once and hurrahing, making a medley like a grand
chorus of devils. At length they stopped to imbibe andTft
the management of the reins to Elizabeth Larvan. A glorious
iow (hen took place upon the pavement, and on the party of
S e em Ur an r t e „' e ;f , ' inS * t !‘ e , 0ab ’ Russel! Tdrive
em all to the watch-house. Instead ofdoino- so he can
tinned to rattle through Pitt-street as hard as the horses couM
then legs to the ground, whereupon M‘Koy drew his sword
seveied the reins, stopped the horses, and with the back of his
sabre he nearly cracked the driver’s crown M‘KW n i
‘bom a., lo the watch-house. Brown had dS, and'Tret™
which was becoming-intolcrablp n f A i 1 10 P ractlce >
women ralthng in c*abs “
a tjzj;. th u P rr:rthe of def e r—
a promise not to oflend again, his Wo rs 4 td Mr fk"®
discharged them; but Russel, was detained,^


Mr. Stubbs with a breach of the hackney carriage by-law, for
driving without a license, lie was fined £5, 01 a month in
gaol.
BEAUTY AND TIIE BEAST.
A very pretty girl, named Mary Ann Sheen, was appre-
hended by Sergeant Swainston for waging an unequal warfare
in Goulburn-street, with an ill-favored buck oiange and oystei
merchant in that locality. Mary Anne fought with her tongue ;
the oysterman with his feet and fingers. Swainston took
Mary Anne for too free use of her tongue, contrary to the
Vagrant Act. The oysterman made free use of his limbs, and
disappeared amongst a cart load of oyster-shells.
A MIDNIGHT INTRUDER.
Mr. Robert Starke is one of the numerous residents of
George-street, and at 15 minutes to 10 o’clock precisely, on
last Wednesday night,
“He to his couch retired, and once more tried to sleep.
Shakspeare.
But—“ So coy a dame was sleep to him,
That all the weary watching of his eyes
Couldn’t win her to his couch
Ditto.
He was just dropping off nicely, when,
“ He thought he heard a voice cry —
Sleep no more ! to all this house !”
Ibid.
It was evident that Mr. Robert Starke had been to see
the performances of his namesake of the sock and buskin, and
had become slightly infected with the tragic mania.
Again Mr. R. Starke was just dropping off, (in ‘ Richard’)
when a voice cried —
Awake, Richard ! Awake !
Mr. R. Starke jumped up, and out of bed in an instant;
when he was astonished by the appearance of one George
Davis, who had evidently been “ walking the Barber” in Mr.
R. Starke’s bed-room. He had taken a sovereign and some
silver, from the vest pocket of Mr. Starke, who raised a cry of
“ thieves ?” and Davis hurried away. He was pursued by a
policeman named Pendergast, one of the largest men in the
Force, nature having gifted him with a pair of legs which
resemble Number Eleven. He captured Davis, and brought
him in due course before Mr. C. H. Chambers who sent him
for trial to the Quarter Sessions.


lAN OLD GRIEVANCE.
; Tollll l ; !avis appeared to answer the complaint of David
Bradbury, for assault and battery. David informed 7bl
magistrates, that he and the defendant had been the warmest
incident 1 th •“! UC ,™.' S birtllda y> when through some unlucky
me dent the.r friendship hitherto existing was dissolved bv
StITTT? 5" debto be settled by
. DaVld had been residing at Davis’s house *
nsi mg friend; but, upon the breaking out of the quarrel ho
summoned David to the Pour*- nfßn , quarrel, he
ward and lod-mnr David “ SCOre for
iff n „ri n • , VIC ( to us e his own words) set un a set
lountable difficulty of ‘taking^out*^ f e ™ n ™ d tbe inB ™-
tsclved to « take /out Of S roZ a lo b o :
Irb^^ne-VsTa on D d Wt P'^" 8 his ht on his
“ *> the’wi^ B TavMdt
urmed him. Ver ‘ first having stupifiedt
=red!bie K ° bCrtS ’ fOT defend ” nf ’ said that David’s story was
Mr. Dowling: He’s got a nasty black eye.
ring Wt“r W £2 ’ "' Uh >oeked up
liquidating a washing bill.
Maria Williams a handsome brunette, was charged before
. Vinegar-cruet Dowling, with stealing. Edward Hooper
, e Cn ' Q ua y» blacksmith, stated that he missed his
t and handkerchief In the pocket of the coat were Id”
, . c ‘ e I q,lc - Policeman D 8 proved the finding of the
minus the money, and the admission by Maria that she
made free with it. It appeared that Maria and the black
th dwelt in the same residence, but upon what terms dhi
appear Maria asserted that the blacksmith owed her for
"ssX 0 " 1 r e a nisht - c “ ps ’
ned the tail-coat to pTy 1 e l/f “T S ' lo
rtunate as to give


had either fallen out of bed that morning, or had breakfasted
upon pickled gerkins and vinegar. His Worship sent Maria
for trial at the Quarter Sessions.
SWEETS AND SOURS.^
Peter Hindle, a middle-aged barrowman, was charged
with having stolen a box of sweetmeats and a half chest of
tea, valued at £3 10s., the property of Messrs. I utkis and
Lambert. Mr. M. Lackland stated that he was employed as
storekeeper by Messrs. Purkis and Lambert. Peter was wont
to ply in front of their Auction Rooms with his barrow for
hire. One day witness put three cases of sweetmeats outside
the door for the purchaser to take them away. This person
(a Mr. Lee) soon afterwards informed witness that one of the
eases was missing. As Peter and his barrow were also missing,
witness ran about the streets in quest of him. His hunt was
unsuccessful, and on his return to the auction mart, there sat
the identical Peter on his barrow, looking as innocent as “ the
unborn babe/’ Witness set a boy to watch Peter, in order
to trace him to his home, in hope that the missing sweets
would be there, the residence of Peter being a mystery. The
boy kept a sharp look out, and so did Peter, for fancying that
it was “ all right”, he picked up half a chest of tea from the
door and wheeled off with it. The boy informed witness, and
they followed Peter, who led them unsuspectingly to his
humble dwelling, where the sweets were duly discovered. In
vain did he protest that he was employed by a gentleman to
take them. The magistrate believed that no gentleman except
the “gentleman in black” had employed Peter, who was sent
to taste for a season the sours of Darlinghurst, to face Mr.
Cheeke and a jury of his country.
THE DEVIL AMONG THE SAILORS.
Tom Evans, a jolly looking tar with an enormous tri-
coloured handkerchief like a Dutch flag round his neck, and a
brother sailor named George Sims were brought before the
Mayor by Inspector M‘Cook. The Inspector stated that
between one and two o’clock in the morning he saw a crowd
of sailors in Gloucester-street. Tom challenged George to
fight, and to work they went Lankey fashion. They closed,
cross buttocked, and went down, and kept down, rolling over
one another like two porpoises in a hurricane. The scene was
so exciting to the couple of dozen of sailors who were specta-
tors, that they got up a hurrah row, and a general scrimmage
took place. The Inspector laid hold of Tom and George, and
hauled them off the watch-house. The chief mate of Tom’s


slup stood up, and addressed the Bench, assuring- the Mayor
that Tom was the smartest chap that ever rigged out a ton
mast stunsad yard. He could hand, reef, and steer, and, like
an an™] 1 " The P 0 '™B’’ 8 ’’ could P la T u Pon the fiddle like
an el. The good-natured Mayor, giving due weight to this
favorable evidence, let the tars off upon payment of a crown
AN UNPLEASANT FEATHER-BED
stree? Ir 'f? enry C . ummins , the well-known poulterer of Kin«-~
pe r Son COntrived to wedge his corpulent
Pdwo ni h teStl p Vlng bot 0x > t0 P refer a complaint against
Edward Looker, a decently dressed lad, with hair like the
asTh!? 6 ° f ] a re . Cen l ]y hatched gening, and a face as smooth
the epidermis of a fresh plucked fowl. Mr. Cummins
>" He Too/- 6 ! 1 ' 1 Tl’ thß b ° y hirCd With
months. He took French leave two months prior to the
expiration of the term. The boy replied that he had hired
no specific period, and his grievances were such as no
rtran'dateduJfo I Sta ‘’ d ' P ' aCe B ' lich Mr ' C™™™
an ulated the fowls was assigned to him as a dormitory
and his bed composed of feathers was full of the “varmint”’
which had been summarily ejected from their holdings on
seen M* the routed fowls. Therefore he could not
sleep Moreover ghosts of headless turkeys, and of fowls with
eir heads dangling by their sides, haunted him through the
hours of darkness, and gave him no repose. Mr. Cummins
Da c ared that what the boy bad stated was a foul storv. Mr
_ lng Said that be had al ways believed a feather-bed to be’
i f ' ly> aild P ie b°T must be a goose to perch upon such a
defence. As he was but a chicken in age, the Bench would
foTsevendlys." 1111 ™ S6nt t 0 r °° St at Darlin gburst
A FORESTER'S LODGE.
, At a It- 6 h ° Ur ° n Wednesda y n igbt, Mr. Neville, of Bridge,
sheet, publican, gave Edward Farmer into the custody of
to°thnmounfo?£ C l 4 'a” Soverei S ns and bank notes
o tne amount of £l4. According to the version for the pro-
secution, a Forester s Lodge had been held at his house on the
previous night, and the prisoner had been specially retained
for the occasion as a waiter. This part of the evidence was
sufficiently dear, but the remainder was as follows “2
.Neville took the money m payment for the tickets, and placed
* In „ a tumb er on a sideboard. In process of time Mrs
Revile entered, accompanied by her servant-maids. One took
the tumbler and passed it to Mrs. N., who passed it to Sal


Doyle, and when Sal was subsequently interrogated, she de-
clared that she had given it to the waiter, and he declared that
she hadn’t, and the Magistrates declared that it was such a
cock-and-bull story that it was more than a match for magis-
terial brains; and, ergo , they gave the waiter the benefit of the
doubt, and acquitted him.
STREET PUGILISM.
As the patrons of the drama were pouring out of the
Victoria on the night of M‘Gowan’s benefft, a slight discussion
took place between two of the gallery guests, one being Alick
M‘Kenzie, the other Andy Evans ; one a foretopman in the
Cleopatra, the other a loblolly boy in H.M.S. Acheron. From
words they quickly came to blows ; the ladies from the dress
circle held back in alarm, while their gentlemen protectors
formed a ring, in which the tars fought Lanky fashion. Wilson,
a sergeant of the Detective Force came up at the time, and
hauled the men off to “ durance vile,” while they were desirous
of going to Durand’s-alley. The Mayor and John Campbell,
Esq., pardoned and discharged them, having first cautioned
them in some such terms as the following :
Let French and Prussians war and fight
With Boney ’gainst Bulow ;
Let naughty women scratch and bite,
For ' tis their nature too ;
But sailors never shouldn't let
Their angry passions rise ;
Their tarry fisties wasn’t made
To punch each other’s eyes.
A (K)XOTTY AFFAIR.
Thomas Mackey, a decent looking mechanic, was placed
at the bar before Mr. Dowling, charged with stealing the sum
of £40 s the goods and chattels of Elizabeth Nott, a tall, rough-
looking dame, in black velvet bonnet and party-coloured shawl.
Sergeant 4 C having given his evidence, Mr. Dowling
desired the surrounding Indigos to call Mrs. Nott.
Several Policemen:—Mrs. Nott! Missis Nott !
Grand Chorus of Policemen : —Mrs. Nott! Mrs. Nott!
Sergeant 4 C : —Yer Wurtchip, Mrs. Nott’s not here.
Mother Nott (struggling through the crowd): —I’m a
coming.
Mr. Dowling :—I shall not detain the man if the prosecu-
trix does not attend.
Mother Nott (nearly strangulated):—l’m a coming.
At length the worthy female presented her black bonnet
and ship’s-biscuit face in the witness-box.


Mr. Dowling (to Policeman) :—I thought you told me
Mrs. Nott was not here.
Mother Nott: —Well, and s’pose they did; I’m here;
Nott’s here ; and I’m Nott; not here } he ! he ! he !
Mrs. Nott then kissed the sacred volume, and gave the
magistrate to understand, that on the previous evening she
went into Bergin’s grocery establishment in George-street, to
buy some stick liquorice. She diskivered soon after leaving
the shop that she had lost £4O in notes, sovereigns, and silver.
She hastily returned, and finding no person excepting the pri-
soner there, she gave him in charge. Mrs. Anna Maria Bergin,
as pretty a little female as ever did duty at a shop-counter,
was called, but her evidence clearly exonerated Mackey from
the charge of theft. The Police Magistrate at once discharged
him from custody, telling him he quitted the Court with an
unblemished character.
Mrs. Nott also trundled out of Court, exclaiming, “ Veil
hi never! Did you hever ?”
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
George M‘Sprien, a stalwart, big-whiskered, moustachoed
carpenter, was charged under the Act with ex-tailing a black
Tom cat, the goods and chattels of Mr. J. Barnett, of York-
street, wine and spirit merchant. Mr. R. Johnson appeared
for the prosecution. Mr. Roberts for the defence. Mr. Bar-
nett proceeded to describe the exquisite qualities of his Tom
cat, in terms which would have deeply affected any elderly
spinster lady. He averred that it was a plump cat, of a glossy
blackness. It was so tame that it would sit up at table and
eat any meat upon which it could lay its claws !
By Mr. Roberts :—Prosecutor had often given a couple of
guineas for a cat, and as much as eight for a dog. Tommy
was certainly in the practice of ascending the roof of a night
and crying “moll-row” like other Tom cats. He valued
the injured Tom at two guineas. It was an excellent mouser
and ratter, and a most faithful, affectionate animal. It answered
to the names of Puss or Tom. It was in very delicate health
since deprived of its tail, which had been done by the ruthless
hands of the defendant.
James Scotter, a lively lad, living next door to Mr. Barnett,
stated that the defendant lived and worked at his father’s.
On Thursday last the defendant caught Mr. Barnett’s black
Tom cat, laid it on a block, and chopped off its tail with a
chisel and mallet. The defendant was fond of ill-using cats.
By Mr. Roberts: As soon as the cat lost its tail, it ran
off to Mr. Barnett’s. There were a dozen or two of cats about


the place. One or two of them had their tails chopped off,
but they were tabbies and tortoiseshells.
Mr. Roberts, in defence of his client, attempted to awaken
the reminiscenses of the magistrates as to their juvenile pro-
pensities to ex-tail cats. He also pourtrayed in lively colours
the annoyance caused by Tom cats in their amatory rambles
and serenades during the hours of darkness. He believed that
a cat was all the better for being deprived of its tail, however
unconscious of the benefit the animal might be. The learned
gentleman also quoted the opinion of Mr. Richard Stubbs, as a
venerable authority, and a man of great experience among
Tom cats. Mr. Stubbs was aware of the existence of numerous
amateurs who derived great felicity from hunting cats and
obtaining the ‘ brush.’ There was no reason to doubt that
defendant was such an amateur.
In spite of Mr. Roberts’ eloquent and pathetic appeal
before a full Bench, in a crowded Court, which seemed to feel
intense interest in the cause of the injured cat, the Bench
sentenced the defendant to be imprisoned with hard labour
during seven days.
AN ARTFUL SHAVER.
George Capstick, an itinerant barber, whose personal
appearance was utterly at variance with the dandyism generally
affected by the members of the tonsoric art, was charged with
victimizing one Samuel Adkins, a fireman on board the Hellespont
steamer. Samuel said that on the previous day, old Lather-
suds, then in the dock came on board the vessel, and proffered
his services to shave and cut the hair of all the ship’s company.
Samuel’s locks hung about his head like a New Zealand mat,
and he placed himself under the hands of the barber, who
clipped off his hair, leaving him what is called in the Old
Country, “a country crop.” For this kind office he received a
shilling. Samuel then requested to be shaved, and handed the
barber his own l’azor to perform the operation with. The
barber requested the loan of a hone and a piece of soap, not
having brought any on board. He next surrounded Samuel’s
throat with a piece of an old top-gallant sail, and having sump-
tuously lathered his face up to his very eyes, taking especial
care to stop his mouth and bung up his nostrils, he left him
squatted on a mess kid. Samuel sat a long while in this posi-
tion, but finding that the barbarous barber, in lieu of barberi-
zing him, had made off with his razor, &c., he applied to the
Police, who brought Capstick vis-a-vis with the Mayor. The
Right Worshipful observed that the evidence was insufficient


for a Jury to convict upon it, but it was Very close shaving.
Capstick was then discharged.
THE RACES.—£IOOO STAKES.
Among the many companies which have been formed since
Australia’s golden wealth has been patent to the world, was
one framed under the auspices of a few parties in England,
styled the “ Australian Mutual Gold Mining Association. 5 '
Directors, engineers, picks, shovels, and cradles; iron bars,
long Toms, and, above all, a Purser Extraordinary, named
Stratford Hartigan, were sent out. The virgin Turon became
sensibty agitated when the Don Whiskerando, It. W. Collett,
made his appearance with a hardy band of miners—“ all armed
in mail !” But the virgin daughter of Turon had little cause
for.alarm. Collett and Co., couldn’t strike the vein. They had
bad luck. Mr. R. W. Collett was one of the directors sent
from England to superintend the affairs of the company in the
colony. His co-director was a shrewd-looking Wellington-nosed
gentleman, named 11. W. Ellis, who had formerly been a bar-
rister-at-law. Owing to bad luck at the diggings, the directory
and other officers began to be in difficulties, or according to
the evidence on trial, “ d d hard up.” The treasurer had
to shut up shop, cos vy, he'd not got no treasure. But news arrived,
that although there was famine in Canaan, there was corn in
Egypt, id est though the treasury in the colony was empty, the
wise men in the concern in England had full purses, and were
read} 7 to remit to the directors, Collett and Ellis, funds to carry
on the mining enterprise. Now a split had taken place between
the directors in England, and also between Messrs. Collet and
Ellis, in Sydney. Mr. Collett suspected that Mr. Ellis was up
to something, and Mr. Ellis took a similar view of Mr. Collett.
Therefore, they used to attend at the Post Office window as
regularly as the clock struck nine every morning, to the in-
finite annoyance of the clerks ; their object being to get the
remittance jointly, being joint directors. But on the night of
Her Majesty’s Birthday, Mr. Collett could not resist the temp-
tation to attend the ball, where he displayed his moustaches
and whiskers, and his heels and toes, to the ineffable delight
of the ladies. But what with the supper and the champagne,
he slept too late on the following morning, while Mr. Ellis was
wide awake, arrived at the Post Office at the usual hour, and
obtained the long expected letter. It contained a letter of
credit for £IOOO, with which he honourably attempted to dis-
charge the liabilities of the Company. But when the sleeping
hare arose from his form at the Royal Hotel, and found that
the “ slow but sure” tortoise had arrived at the goal, and


gained the prize, his rage knew no bounds. He threatened
Mr. Ellis, but his threats being laughed at, he tried the law,
and employed Mr. J. R. Brennan to prosecute Mr. Ellis for
larceny and embezzlement. The investigation at the Police
Office, before Mr. Dowling, after lasting several days terminated
on Thursday, when Mr. Johnson rebutted the charge to the
satisfaction of the Bench, who honorably acquitted his client.
THE SNOB FAMILY.
Mr. Ninivan Stewart is a long-nosed, lank-jawed, hypocriti-
cal-looking shoemaker, dwelling in Kent-street. His wife is
named Bella, and her propensities are decidedly bellicose.
Thomas Hopkins is a miserable looking little wretch of a cob-
bler, inmate of the Stewart snob family, of which he is also
part and parcel, and to which he acts as journeyman and bottle
drainer. Catherine Woods, otherwise Case, is about as inter-
esting a young female as the admirers of tranquil, melancholy
beauty can imagine. Her light hazel eyes are fringed with
dark dewy lashes, and shaded by arched silken looking brows.
Her rich chesnut hair, simply parted on either side of her
intellectual pearl-white forehead, descends in negligent wavy
tresses by her soft oval face, touched with the slightest tinge
of colour imaginable. Yet Catherine is poor, and with her
husband and their only babe the}; have been necessitated, in
these times of high rents, to take “unfurnished apartments”in
the upper part of the rookery in occupation by the snob family.
Catherine Woods, alias Case, appeared to answer the complaint
of Bella and Ninivan Stewart, for wilfully and maliciously
destroying their property, to wit: a mirror valued at £2 10s.
The gnome journeyman snob crawled into the witness-box to
prove the charge. Mr. Grantham was employed by the snob
family; Mr. W. Roberts for the lovely Catherine.
Tommy Hopkins:—l lodges long on muster and mother
Stewart, and I seed that ere lady a getting hup stares. I wur
’pon the bed, a’ having a lie down, as his nat’ral ’nuflf, seeing
has how master Stewart vos avay : cos, don’t ye know, ven the
cats avay, the miees does play. That ere lady has thinks her-
sel above the likes on me, ups with the jug off the wash-hand
stand, and lets fly, and smash goes the looking-glass; lor that
tvur a smash.
Cross-examined by Mr. Roberts:—Mussus Bella Stuvart
vos bin the room; she picks up vot they calls “ The Morning
Chronicle” in Lunnon, first, and she make?, ready, and presents,
and fires at the lady Catherine, and at the same moment the
lady Catherine ups with the jug and shies it at mussus Stuvart,
who bobs bout on the vay, and hinsted on the jug catching her


hon the nob, it smashes the glass to smithereens. Hif musstis
Bella Stuvart had stood fire, it might have smashed her fizzo-
nomy, hor vot the feelosofers calls hit, but hid voodn’t have hit
the looking-glass. I knows as how the lady meant the jug to
hit mussus, and by her bobbing, the glass was smashed.
Mr. Dowling You need proceed no further; the mali-
cious intent to destroy property is disproved; the case is dis-
missed.
Catherine was soon arm -in-arm with her youthful husband,
and sister, and quitted the precincts of the Police Court, but
not before she was grossly and cruelly insulted by Mistress
Bella Stewart.
TALE OF A CHEMISE.
A giil named Alice Gray was charged, before Mr, Dowling,
with having stolen a chemise, valued at 4s. 6d., which had been
wont in its turn to encase the fair form of Harriet, a dark-
haired, sprightly eyed, pretty-faced wife of a fancy baker who
makes batches, twists, crackers, turnovers, &c., on the South
Head Road. Harriet was attired in the neatest style imagi-
nable; on her head was a well got up Tuscan bonnet, trimmed
with a wreath of raspberry leaves and red berries. Her black
satin visite was of superior texture and shape. All the other
parts of her dress, visible, displayed great taste, but how could
Harriet do without her chemise? Her beautifully moulded
Grecian nose, and her small soft pretty mouth tended to im-
press the beholder with the idea that Harriett was all love and
tenderness, but her prosecution of poor Alice Gray demon-
strated that Harriet had a little spice in her composition ; but
how could Harriet do without her chemise ? It appeared' that
Alice had been lady’s maid to Harriet, but had lately quitted
her service; soon afterwards some trifling articles of apparel,
including the chemise, were missed, and the chemise was found
in Alice Gray s box. Alice admitted having purloined it. The
chemise was exhibited in Court, and spoke volumes in praise
of the merits of Harriet’s laundress, being literally as white as
the finest flour in a kneading trough. Alice Gray’s sole defence
consisted in a flood of tears. She was sentenced to seven days
of the bread of adversity and the water of affliction with hard
labour in Darlinghurst; while Harriet returned home in triumph
with her recovered property. With regard to the hard labour
to be performed by the delicate-looking Alice, it would puzzle
famous engineers how to carry out that portion of the sentence,
unless Captain Webster sets the girl to kill mosquitoes.


MINCE-MEAT EXTRAORDINARY.
Hannah Hall, a tall bony woman, about sft. Ilf, and
about 50 years of age, appeared before the Magistrates to
complain of Andrew Flannan, who threatened to “ chop her up
into mince-meat,”
Mr. Chambers suddenly grasped a policeman’s castor
which had inadvertently been placed upon the bench, and from
the manner in which his Worship held his head down, and from
the “ yar-yar” noise which succeeded, the chances are that the
fortunate Indigo, on resumption of his tile, found, like the
widow’s cruse, it had been miraculously replenished.
Mr. Dowling:—Do you actually believe that he will chop
you into mince-meat?
Old Woman : —l’m afeerd on him ; he’s a lodger of mine,
and to tell the truth, I’ve been a living with him these many,
many years ; but lie’s turned out such a mortal drunkard that
I’m resolved to get rid of him at any rate, cost what it will.
Mr. Dowling:—The old gal wants to cut the connection,
and if we release you from custody, will you promise not to go
near her house ?
Andy Flannan :—I rants to know if all the things be hern ;
I wants my own things.
Old Woman : —He aint got nothink at all.
The Magistrates adjourned the further hearing of the case
until Mondav, the 12th instant, to enable the adverse parties
to effect an arrangement.
THE BALL AT THE SARACEN.
John M‘Guffin, a fashionably attired, respectable looking
young man, was placed at the bar, charged before the Mayor,
and Messrs. Hargraves and Arkins, with assault and robbery.
William Elkins, a rough looking nugget, with a sunburnt
face and a bruised eye, stated that he followed the occupation
of gold digging. On Tuesday evening he went to a ball at
Maxwell’s the Saracen’s Head. He polka-ed, waltzed, double-
shuffled, &c., until midnight, when feeling sundry qualms of
stomach, he made inquiries about supper. He was directed
below to the supper-table, but, alas! it was so beleagured with
guests, principally of the weaker sex, that the hungry digger
was unable to pick a bit. Like the little boy in the fable,
yclept Tommy Tucker, who wanted bread and butter, Billy
Elkins the digger began to cry for his supper, in the plaintive
strain of an expiring grunter. Mr. M‘Guffin was touched with
compassion, and assisted Elkins to some victuals. But Elkins’
appetite was far from easily appeased, and watching an oppor-
tunity he grabbed a plate, a fowl, a loaf of bread, a knife, and


a bottle of Champagne, with which he retired to the seclusion
of the vacant ball-room, and began to enjoy himself. Some of
the guests on their return to the ball-room told the digger
that he musn’t eat there, and being rather excited by copious
libations, the digger sent the plate and the skeleton of the fowl
flying out of the window. The prisoner at the bar then pitched
into the digger, struck him in the face, gave him
a black eye, and finally trundled him neck and crop into
the street. Some persons ran to lift the digger up, and he
became under the impression that an attempt was made to
stnp his finger of a nugget ring. When he recovered his
equilibrium, he found that he had lost his pocket-book, con-
taining two £5 notes. He took out a warrant for Mr. M‘Guffin’s
apprehension.
. Cross-examined by Mr. Johnson :—I offered to pay him
nmepence for the broken plate. I wanted to pull off my coat
to fight him if he was game. If you speak plain I’ll be able to
un erstand, but I doesn’t know nothing bout dickshonary. I
chdn t know the prisoner gave the bail. The ball was held
next door to the Saracen, but the supper took place at the latter
place. I thought little of the pocket-book, but a great deal
of the mashiahng I got. I came from Melbourne last Janivary
m the helling Bear (Helen Baird).
The Mayor held that the proof was insufficient, and at
once discharged Mr. M‘Guffin.
EXCHANGE NO ROBBERY.
Thomas Williams, a very black blackamoor, lately cook,
slut, and butler at Hile’s public-house in York-street, was
charged with stealing a golden sovereign out of the bed-cham-
ber of Rebecca Fletcher, the good-looking maid-of-all-work in
the same hostelrie, and substituting, in lieu of the golden coin
a tin medal, of the value of half a farthing. Charles
Bnch, another black man, with a face as fat as a fool’s, stated
that he “ put up” at Hile’s, and one morning after performing
his toilet he was descending to the breakfast-room, when he
was struck “ all of a heap” upon perceiving the other coloured
gentlemen, the prisoner at the bar, enter the bed-room of the
air Rebacca.. As Massa Birch entertained serious thoughts of
a proposal, his jealousy was aroused, and unable to brook the
pretensions rival, he deliberately watched the antics of
.ruder Tom. That worthy was intently scanning his hideous
visage m Rebecca’s mirror, and from the contents of a tin can
v uch he carried, he anointed his woolly poll with a quantity
o upping, He then passed Rebecca’s comb through and
irough his top-knot, until he appeared convinced that he out-


shone “Dandy Jim from Caroline.” Massa Birch, in the inten-
sity of his emotions, uttered the “yah! yah!” exclamation
used by the representative of Quashee on the minor London
boards, in the rnelo-drama of “ Three Fingered Jack.” Bruder
Tom faced about, exclaiming, “Vat! dat yer Masr Birch!
Cum my darkey, and let’s hab a ball.” Massa Birch accepted
the invitation, and was astonished when his sable fellow-coun-
tryman in payment for the drink demanded change for a
sovereign. Pretty Rebecca having discovered the changes
which had been rung in her portmonnaie, and it being satis-
factorily shewn that the substituted medal appertained to
Darkey Tom, that unworthy professor of the gastronomic art
was pinioned and trussed and sent to the Darlinghui'St safe,
preparatory to being spitted at the fire of the ensuing Quarter
Sessions.
THE HONEYMOON.
Mrs. Selina Booth, a newly married bride, the nuptial knot
having only been tied a week, sported a coal-scuttle shaped
white bonnet, trimmed with a supei'fluity of orange blossoms,
in the witness-box, to complain of her neighbour Maria Lyons,
of Sussex-street, who threatened to “ jump her inside out.”
Maria explained that Selina was the aggressor ; she had acted
in such a manner as to induce Maria to threaten her with an
introduction to “ Old Stubbs” in his executive capacity as re-
mover of nuisances. After a hard day’s washing, Maria was
hanging out her toggery on the line in the yard to dry, when
Selina sent the contents of her slop-pail through the window
on to the washed linen, which consequently required an addi-
tional rinse. With regard to the threat, Maria made no denial,
and added that could she have caught Selina “ on her side the
fence,” she’d have scraped the slop up with her wedding bon-
net. Mr. Dowling adjourned the case until Tuesday, to afford
opportunity to the rival Abigails to settle their quarrel,
FIGHT BETWEEN JAMES AND CROWLEY.—THREE-DOZEN OVSTERS ASIDE.
John James, list. 41bs., with a face like an oatmeal
cake, walked into John Crowley’s oyster-shop, where single
"gentlemen are boarded, lodged, and done for in Lower George-
street. It was ’tween two and three o’clock in the afternoon,
and James not having dined or lunched, felt rather hungry.
He devoured six dozen oysters with pepper, salt, vinegar, and
a tolerable proportion of bread and butter. “ What’s the
damage?” inquired James. “A shilling a dozen,” replied
Crowley. James then placed 3s. on the counter, asserting that
the oysters had been split in halves. Crowley was very indig-


nant; a recriminatory dialogue took place. The men too
leir Places; fist to fist, and toe to toe, and at it they went,
lcound Ist,—-James hit out with his right, which wa
neatly stopped by Crowley, who planted his left in James
bread basket fetching up a dozen and a-half of the aforesai
goobled oysters with vinegar, pepper, &c., &c. James the
tned his right foot; caught Crowley rather below the belt
and sent him backwards into a tub of oyster water (loud hur
down to James). 6 Sail ° rS a **
Round 2nd.—Crowley made play with his head, trying the
butting process. Countered by James. Crowley tried again
and caught James cleverly under the chin. A rally James
commenced fighting ‘out’, hopped round the oysterman like a
coopei round a cask. James picked up halfabarrel of pickled
herrings, and performed the ceremony of coronation upon the
oysterman s cocoanut. The oysterman all agog.
_ Round 3rd.—The oysterman, on coming too, could not see
his opponent, who had ‘cut his lucky’. Oysterman endea!
voured to pull up his watch to see if «time was up.” Found
that time had gone—gave information to policeman, Rowe
that James had sloped with his ticker
S crat o or d let th fl^°an e f and . J T eS) - Ti,e Ind «°- ‘°«ng the
scratch, let ny all fours at once. He attempted the latest
new cut to lut with both hands, and kick with both feet, a
the same moment. James at the same moment made play
with his frontispiece. Both down. Mob of Indigos broke the
ung. James in the sponging crib.
Ivound sth (the Mayor and James).—His WorshiD
appeared rather out of pluck, and evinced a determination to
tight cautious. He made a feint or two with his right but
James, who stood behind the wooden barrier at thfpilice
his’twwr ro tlTf^ 6 r WSrlike whh
IIS ugly head [9 to 1 for James]. The Mayor at once threw
up the sponge, and James walked off with flying colours.
THE OLD MAID AND THE WIDOW.
An elderly lady in the weeds, named Nell Rochester
appeared before Dr. Huntley and Mr. C. H. Chambers charged*
by a scrag-of-mntton faced spinster, who had seen about
forty-five summers and as many winters “barring” one named
Catherine Fitzgerald, with assaulting and tearing the hair from
fo, the deft e" f " , the Mr. NichoS
“ start ” Mictts W ,\ e ma t= lstlat es having given the word
Aait, Miss kitzgerald got the steam up, and her tongue ran
on the rail at tremendous speed. b


Mr. Little evidently anticipated a crash or explosion, and
appealed to his client to diminish her speed—“ O! Miss
Fitzgerald, do stop, O ! pray do, if you please.”
Mi’. Nichols :—“ You mean if she can, not if she pleases.”
Now (to Miss Fitzgerald) “ did not you call the old lady
names ?’’
Miss Fitzgerald:—“No, I never, but she”—
Mr. Nichols (interrupting) “ I wish you’d confine yourself
to answering my questions, Miss Fitzgerald.”
Miss Fitzgerald :—l’m only telling the truth, and I’ve got
Julia Riley and Mary Richards to prove it.”
Miss Julia Riley, a blooming spinster of about five and
thirty, then entered the witness-box, and* narrated that as she
was “ironing,” she heard Miss Fitzgerald a screemen and rushing
out, she diskivered Miss Fitz a sprawling on the ground, and
the old vidder a tearing the little scrap of hair out of her
head.”
Mary Richardson was next called. Mary was as neat and
pretty a little married female as ever exhibited herself in the
testamentary picture-frame. She gave a clear account of the
matter, by which it appeared that the old maid and widow
were engaged in a hurrah fight. They were both on the
ground, scratching and tearing each other like a pair of belli-
gerent tabbies. One was as much to blame as the other. The
Bench believed Mary, and dismissed the case.
FOX AND GOOSE ; OR THE GRAPES IS SOUR.
Gentle Reader, would you wish to see the concentrated
essence of feminine Hibernianism ? If so, pray inquire, in
the aristocratic seclusion of Goulburn-street, for Mary Fox,
spinster. You may easily recognise her should she be out a
marketing. Her rotund shoulders are enveloped in a sea-green
shawl, while a dingy white bonnet acts as a bold relief to her
red-nosed, sun-tanned face. Mr. James Brown is a handsome
mulatto gent, whose whiskers uniformly point to ‘west-nor-
west/ Habited in a plaid coat, well plaited shirt, and variegated
trousers, Mr. James Brown ensconced himself in the rear of
his solicitor, Mr. G. R. Nichols, to answer the charge of
" assaulting Poll Fox, by kicking her in the bread pannier on
Sunday last.
Mr. Nichols : —What gave rise to the quarrel, Miss ?
Mary Fox: —He rose his foot.
Mr. Nichols ; —Did you not call his wife bad names ?
Mary Fox:—Were you ever in the Cove of Cork?
Mr. Nichols : —Did you not accuse his wife of infidelity ?
Mary Fox:—ls it funning me you are ?


Mr. Nichols :—Why did you abuse his wife ?
Mary Fox :— Bee-cos she harboured my ’usbimd,
Mr. Nichols :—Did you call her anything else P
m,Vhf! ary r°i\ : ~i YoU d bGttCr Send for her; y° u seem s to be
mighty partial to her.
Mr. Nichols : —Did you ?
Mary Fox Did I ?
my q“es‘t^ d,O ' S : ~ C °“ e ’ MiSS ’ 1 “ USt troublc > ou to
Mary Foxl suppose you’re the gentleman he was a’
a ving about. He said lie had a great, great lawyer as could
argmfy for him through the epochs of ages. But two can play
. t that game, and Ire got two policemen who will speak for
me and they promised me last night that if Fd stand Gob-
blers round, the;? d spake to Miclehery for me
tjon lice M^istrate: ~ Wh y are you called in the informa-
turn L ary Fox, spinster, if you are married ?
Ma 7 t ?ox : Ax no questions, and you’ll hear no stories •
and mind your own business, which is the first law of nature
Police Magistrate .-—Have you got any witnesses ?
l ary FoxShure enough and I’ve got the two traps to
whom I stood trate last night. *
Police Magistrate :-What are their names ?
Mary Fox An how should I know their names s One
of ern s dressed in a big blue coat, and so is the other, and one
eves But H R ° Se ’ the other has a cast in his
eyes But they re sure to be here, because I trated ern last
light on purpose, and they promised me they’d swear a hole
no ugh a gate-post for me in the morning. Here ! you two
constables ! why don’t you come?
sour. Mr * Nlchols: ~“ rm afraid > madam, that your grapes are
Mary Fox :-How do you know ? You never tried them.
A pietty little female, named Mrs. Sal Wheeler, alias Tur-
ner, wars next called into the witness-box. She informed the
lag is trate that her maiden name had been Sally Turner but
sh P e°h d e ber tin ; al T liCitation ° f a g ° od lookil i blacksmith,
she had been induced to turn Turner into Wheeler. That was
all she knew of the assault complained of.
Police Magistrate :—And is that all the evidence von
have got to give ? You had better have remained at home.
is. Wheeler :—O! but I wanted a holiday, and I can
give you lots of evidence if you want it. I’ll tell you one
creafurc a ,tJ oliy V °* ? “ jealouB as P°®ible. ami no mortal
« herho but she
trunks she s arter her blessed husband.


Mrs. Amelia Thompson, a good looking, respectably clad
young woman, next appeared in the witness box, and took the
book in her right hand. “ Kiss it,” exclaimed Sergeant .Mason.
Must I?’’ enquired Amelia. “By all means,” responded Ser-
geant Mason. “ Veil then, here goes, if it must be done, it
must be, but it’s a curious thing is this ere law, as much
kissing and hugging as if one was christening a baby.”
Amelia forthwith clasped her lovely arms around the sergeant’s
neck, and kissed him with such violence that the smack
resounded through the Court.
Police Magistrate : —You need not kiss the policeman, you
stupid little thing. You were told to kiss the book.
Amelia forthwith performed the necessary benison, and
told such a harrowing tale of the jealous propensities of Mary
Fox, that the Police Magistrate decided that the brush per-
tained to James Brown, the coloured gemman, and Mary Fox
was compelled to quit the Court, without having, as she ex-
pressed it, “ hobtained sat-his-wax-shan.”
THE TURF.—NORTH SHORE RACES.
John M‘Mah on, the well-known sporting character and
steeple-chase rider of Lane Cove, was summoned by policeman
Hydes, 14 E, for racing against another Cove, at the North
Shore, on the 15th instant. Any person might predict that
the ‘ event’ would prove unfavourable to Mr. M'Mahon, who had
the bad luck to be arraigned before Mr. Dowling, a magisterial
gent who lives in continual horror of cockney sportsmen, hist
horsemen, and suchlike. Mr. Dowling lias on several occasions
hinted that every amateur sparrow'-shooter makes the space
in front of his Worship's residence at Woolloomooloo his
poaching ground, and if any gent wished to practice
equestrianism in the style of Bonaparte crossing the Alps, he
was sure to pitch on the same locality. Policeman Hydes also
was a person of a severe puritanical aspect, who would
naturally discountenance any attempt at levity, while to make
matters worse, the great Cory had been specially retained for
the prosecution. Policeman Hydes stated that, on the 15th
instant, he saw Mr. M‘Malion and another young gentleman
. “ racing like winking” at the North Shore. “ They wos a girl-
hopping scandalous down ill. A crowd of little boys vos going
to school, and bawled out ‘ ooray ! go it! go it!” Roberts
appeared for Mr. M'Malion, and explained that the information
being filed under the Toll Act, it must be quashed on the
ground of informality. It had not been shewn for the prose-
cution that the place in question was a place appointed by the
Governor-General for the levying of toll, and by the preamble


of the Act, and by the 2nd section of the Act, it was necessa
M'S 6 T h I" h l eVklenCe * Mr ‘ Dowling sentenced M
M Mahon to pay the heaviest penalty of £2, and £l 6s. cost
iiis Worship also expressed his regret that he could not ‘serv
him worse.
PUTTING A DRUNKEN MAN TO BED.
A shabby genteel, who called himself William Barne
O Flanmgan, complained to the Police a day or two tha
he was robbed by Ferdinand Heishin, a melancholy lookin
Geiman. Mynheer Ferdinand was accordingly accommodate
th a nights lodging in the George-street watch-house, and
matutinal introduction to the Mayor. The O’Flannigan sai
he lodged at the “ Help-me-through-the-World,” in Bridge
street. In order to help the landlord through the world h
drank so hard that at night he could not pull his own clo’the
o . Ihe lugubnous looking German was waiter, and kindlv
undressed O’Flannigan, who fell asleep. On awakening on the
to lowing morning, he averred that four sovereigns hid been
taken out of his trousers’ pocket. He therefore, to help the
waiter through the world, gave him in charge. The German
made an eloquent defence in an unknown tongue, which the
hinfto liberty 1 P6lfeCt J to com P reh end, and at once restored
the weird sisters.
, , An " Sa ” iveI ’ “fy S '” ith and Jane Quin, were brought
before Mr Campbell by Bradbury 23 B„ for cracking the win-
(OWS in the Crown Inn, and splashing mud over the newly
painted Bides of that hostelrie. Robert Cook, landlord of the
Crown, in Elizabeth-street, said that he had had a taste some
time ago of the too jovial qualities of the feminine trio before
the Court, and was very solicitous that the acquaintance
hitherto existing should be dissolved, as the drapers say.
leat was his terror when he saw them making towards his
door on Thursday morning at an early hour. He forbade them
lo enter, declaring that he would not serve them. “ Wo’nt
you, well then we’ll serve you”, screeched one of the females.
Ihe trio then conjointly commenced an attack on the Crown.*
t had been fresh painted, and they bespattered it with mud,
so that it had the appearance of being stuccoed, or painted in
fresco They sent a few stones in through the windows, and
them 7 7 , Mr ; C^ uk r° best ° W a partin g salutation upon
h v n,, ? °, J r ' Campbell, the landlord expressed his
belie, that the females were all married. He had no wish to
mrt them, but it would be necessary to have the Crown


washed, to free it from the mud. A compromise was effected
by which the three married ones paid twelve shillings among
them for the damage done to the Crown, and with a graceful
obeisance to their Worships glided from the Court.
THE BARLEY BREE.
On or about the ninth day of this month, the good ship
Robert came to an anchor in the beautiful harbour of Sydney.
She brought to our shores a considerable increase to our popu-
lation, and among them a number of young bucks who would
have done honor to the days of Tom and Jerry. Among them
was a Mr. E. W. Cross, Mr. Patisson, and George Lumbey,
Esq. These three young gents had become remarkably social
on board the Robert , and with a few more shipmates, whose
names, we regret not having been able to make public, they
paid a visit to Borton’s, the Cricketer’s Arms, Market and Pitt-
streets, Billiards, pretty bar-maids, plump hostess, and all the
other delights of a hostelrie. To be laconic, the trio got
lushy. On Tuesday evening they paid a second visit to Bor-
ton’s, and repeated the affair. They lugged one another about
in that friendly manner which jovial spirits are wont to do when
their joys are at the pinnicle. Mr. E. W. Cross was noticed by
Mr. Borton to feel the vest pockets of G. Lumbey, Esq., but
he took nothing out of them. Soon afterwards the famous
i whip’ yclept Charley Chuck, was called to the hotel door, and
G. Lumbey, Esq., and Patisson, Esq., were bundled in, as they
were ‘ too fou’ to be able to toddle home. On the following
morning, G. Lumbey, Esq., found himself in the gutter near
the Club, in Bent-street, and Patisson, Esq., found himself in
another gutter, in the vicinity of Miller’s Point. Lumbey Esq.,
was minus a watch, chain, and twenty sovereigns, and Patisson,
Esq., w T as minus a similar amount. G. Lumbey, Esq., took it
into his head that Mr. E. W. Cross was the individual who had
emptied his pockets, and gave him into custody. On Tuesday
and Wednesday Mr. Cross was placed in the prisoner’s dock
of the Police Court. Either the Sydney grog, or the Sydney
mosquitos, or both, had made sad havoc with Mr. Cross’s face,
which was as full of pimples as a currant dumpling. It was
proved that all the gentlemen had been drunk, very
drunk, but the same perspicuity did not exist in tracing any
guilt to Mr. E. W. Cross, who was restored to liberty.
A TITIVATING HUSBAND.
A hopping disciple, named Addison William Blakey, with
a head like a prize cabbage, and one good leg and a swinger,
was introduced to the Mayor for neglecting to supply the


natural wants of Ann, his wife, and a couple of young Blakeys,
who, fortunately, seem to take more after the mamma than
their daddy. Mrs. Blakey said, that about five weeks ago, her
“ model ’usband” gave her the magnificent sum of 6d., saying
(for Addison W. Blakey is a cove what has seen better days)
“ here miladi is maintenance for bub aud grub fora fortnight."
On Saturday last, Addison VV. B. inserted his cauliflower noddle
and gave his missis eighteen pence. ’
Mayor : What can he earn if he likes to work ?
Wife:—-I don’t know what he can earn; he is mostly
drunk ; but if he keeps sober he can earn six shillings a day.
xhe Mayor asked one of the Police Inspectors if the Bench
had not formerly made an order on Addison W. B. to maintain
his wife. Singleton replied that an order had been made for
him to pay five shillings a week, but he did not pay it at the
rate of half a crown per annum.
W ife I don t want to have him sent to gaol, for he can’t
earn anything there.
Mayorlt seems that he would be as useful to you in
gaol as anywhere else.
Wife Yes, I think he’ll be better, because he’ll be sober:
but hell miss his nobblers.
Mayor :—Does he come home at night ?
. , V Y ife : ~ lndeed he does > but always tipsy ; and he is very
sick after drinking.
. A. W. Blakey was then asked what he had to say for
himself, and after a preparatory “ hem, hem,’’ he stretched for-
ward his gammy foot, and said—<« ’Tis not with the slightest
intention to entei into disputation that I commence to”
Wife (interrupting)“ Oh, he can speak fast enough, and
thats about the best thirghe can do. There ain’t a lawyer in
Sydney can be backed against him for ‘ spitting the Dick.’ ”
Mayor . \» ell postpone the case for a fortnight; and in
the mean time an information shall be filed against you for
non-comphance with the order of the Bench. If i n the course
of the fortnight you can come to an amicable arrangement
with your industrious, creditable, but ill-used wife, there will
be an end to the matter; but if her ground of complaint con-
tinues to exist, you will be sent to gaol, and there deiained tilk
you comply with the order.
Addison William Blakey then put a California hiver on his
cabbage head, and ambled out of Court.
WANTED ICOO YOUNG MILLINERS FOR THE GOLD DIGGINGS. - HERE'S SOME
Miss Elizabeth Darby, a comely young damsel, residing in


Market-lane, which was said to be next door to the Sheriff’s
Gardens, took a seat in a chair near her legal Sir Leoline, Mr.
Nichols, to show cause why and wherefore she administered
broom-stick castigation to the voluptuous form of Miss Mar-
garet Develin, or Devilout, or Devilskin, but we believe the
first to be the correct cognomen. Miss Devilin is of Irish ex-
traction ; she has been to Cork, and has licked the blarney-
stone, and she brought two or three other young needle-women
to prove the justice of her cause, and the magnitude of her
grievance. “Ah shure,” quoth Margaret, “ it’s not saying
notink at all, at all, I was, when up conies Miss Darby, and a
lady as is a mighty good fren o’ mine was a nursing on her
baby, and she sings a little ditty bout—
“ She caught him, she stabbed him, she tore him in three,
Bekase he had murthered her babby and she.”
And Miss Darby runs at me vid de broom, and hits me a pol-
thoge on de shouldur.”
Miss Annie Wright, Miss Angelina Donoghue, and another
young lady, proved how unprovoked had been the assault upon
Maggy* A looking young female, with an infant in her
arms, was next ushered into the witness-box. She was the
lady who had warbled the ditty. Her testimony was in favour
of Margaret.
Mr. Nichols cross-questioned Mrs. Melville, for so was the
lady called, to try and shake her testimony, but she only shook
her baby. Mr. Nichols asked her a question, and she * danced’
the baby. Mr. Nichols repeated it, and the motion was re-
peated ; the agitation of the movement being rather more
palpable, and so Mrs. Melville continued until the movement
was quite alarming. At last, poor, poor woman ! she could
not longer maintain her silence, but she said—“ I’m na a natif
av Saydnay, and theerfur am unable to gie ye the geographical
posithun av Market-lane, but mayhap ye ken the Sheriff, and
if ye’ll just gang to him I dinna doot he’ll ensthruct ye as to
the desirable spot.” Miss Elizabeth Darby was fined a crown
and costs.
BURLESQUE UPON THE ANTI-TRANSPORTATION LEAGUE.
On Tuesday the 29th of June, 1852, when scarcely a
shadow of cause remained to occasion any alarm in the minds
of the colonists of a recurrence to Transportation an attempt,
and an abortive one, was made by certain would-be conspicuous
patriots, to get up a Monster Meeting of the League.


The following is the report of the proceedings :
Monster Meeting of the Great Anti- Transportation League.
Pursuant to notice, a public meeting was held on Tuesday
evening, at the Circus, York-street.
At an early hour an immense concourse of people
thronged King-street, to witness the members of the Political
Association march in procession, according to advertisement,
and shortly after 6 p.m., shouts of ‘they come !—they come !’
burst from the lips of the excited multitude. First came
Richard Driver, Esq., of Threetuntavern, in the city of Sydney,
grandperpetualchairmanextraordinary, of the Political associa-
tion. Next came Martin Guest, of Spokesbane Hall, Esq.,
carrying in his hand the banner of the Association, on one
side of which was described something intended for a tree and
the cap of Liberty, but which a wag in the crowd near us
mistook for a birch broom and a pudding bag; on the other
side of the flag was the motto, ‘ Every man take care of No. 1/
which we suppose to be a translation of Boney's cry, ‘ Sauve
que put.’ Next marched E. Hawksley, and J. Dewhurst, Esqrs.,
arm-in-arm, wearing cabbage-tree hats of colossal manufacture,
ornamented with tri-colored ribbons. Next came—but oh !
nobody came next, the quarto forming the Political Association,
which proceeded to the Circus, followed by the acclamations
of the immense multitude.
On the arrival of the procession at the Circus the chair
was already occupied by White-Choker-o-Charley-Cowper-o,
the League President, at the meeting between whom and Dick
Driver the spectators were deeply affected. These two eminent
patriotic heroes fell into each other’s arms, o’erpowered by the
intensity of their emotions. The tender manner in which these
great men hugged each other reminded us forcibly of the
meeting between Wellington and Blucher, the Heroes of
Waterloo, after the rout of the French, on the heights of Belle
Alliance.
When White-Choker-o-Charley-Cowper-o had succeeded in
extricating his herring waist from the iron grasp of Dick Driver,
he began the business. He thanked the ladies for adding grace
to the Anti-transportation cause by their presence. He «had
just returned from Van Diemen’s Land, where he had fulfilled
his mission, and would now call upon the Secretary of the
League to read that most important document, the report of
the League for the last year.
The Great Gilbert then read not only the report of the
Executive Board of the League, but also the Supplemental
Report of the League, for which he received immense applause


from the audience, and the more sincere anathemas of the
reporters.
White-Choker-o-Charley-Cr-o then rose, and made along
peroration, which was as interesting as the other numerous
speeches which he has from time to time made in favour of
the League.
The Venerable Archdeacon M'Encroe was the next speaker,
and talk he did in rale arnest for an hour and twenty minutes by
our patent lever. His speech comprised a great variety of
matter. Soldiers, clargy, convicts, squatters, colonists, traitors,
and arch-traitors, pilots, priests, doctors, patriots, Queens,
Jesuits, secretarys, and many others, being jumbled together
by his riverince in one great Irish stew. He concluded by pro-
nouncing what he called the Irish benediction —Ceacl mille
failthe. It, and the speech, were received by the audience
with roars of approbation.
Mr. James Norton then expatiated on the delightful task
of acknowledging the services, and hailing the return, of one
who had gone forth to do battle in their cause. He alluded to
theredoutable valour of White-Choker-o-Charley-Cowper-o, and
his associated band of heroes, who had gone to Van Diemen’s
Land, undaunted by the dread of convict contamination, or
assassination, and had bravely partaken of every public dinner
and dejeuner to which they had been invited, undeterred, and
undismayed by the possibility that the drink might be hocussed
—that the viands might be poisoned. Mr. Norton’s harangue
in favour of the League and its heroic president, met with
warm applause, while his denunciations of Earl Grey, although
now grown stale and fusty, caused those funny noises which
reporters of the press describe as “ groans and hisses.”
White-Choker-o Charley-Cowper-o, then made another
speech, in which, amidst thunders of applause, he stated that
he had been invited to a soiree at Launceston, by one hundred
and eighteen young men of the town and adjacent country,
and no mark of attention which he had received during his
stay in the island was more gratifying to him than that.
Jack Lamb, our noble sailor representative, then spun a
long yarn, which, though very well received, was too tough a
one for us to inflict upon our readers.
Mr. Holden then spoke in favour of the League, amidst
cheers and cries of hear, hear. To publish his, or any one
speech, would be, in our opinion, an invidious distinction, as
every speech made at the meeting was equally interesting, in-
telligent, and patriotic.
Mr. Campbell, M. L. C., then made a speech about the
Monster Anti-transportation Meeting at the Circular Wharf—


the great evetat in his (Mr. Campbell’s life). He also dilated
upon the the safety valve of passion—talked about Christen-
dom, and its steadiest throne, and resumed his seat amidst
loud plaudits.
Mr. G. A. Lloyd then used unanswerable arguments in
favour of League-ism. He pulled out of his pocket a London
weekly paper, \vhich he said contained an article that would
throw consideiable light upon the subject. Upon examining
the paper the knock-down gentleman was perplexed to find
the ai tide alluded to, as he had marked so many articles,
advertisements, &c., alluding to sales by auction, &c., but he
took the only sure course left open to him, and read the entire
paper to the meeting, advertisements and all, commenting on
them copiously as he went along.
The Rev. Ralph Mansfield then said it was time all honest
people were in bed, but he could not conquer the cacoethes
loquendi with which he was filled. Having said his say, he con-
cluded by remaiking that as the evening w’as so far advanced,
he wished the meeting and Earl Grey a very good night. This
witticism was appeciated by the meeting, as such a meeting
alone could appreciate it, and was received with loud cheers
and laughter.
Mr. H. Parkes then regretted that a slight rheumatic
cachinnation should debar him from the possibility of making
a voluble declamation, but against the continuance of trans-
portation should ever be heard his fiery and indignant denun-
ciation. If the Government refused the colonists the boon of
cessation, which they had in contemplation, he hoped that
from British thraldom, they would soon take forcible emanci-
pation (tremendous cheering).
Mr Demehy then rose, and made, not only a broth of a
speech, but a regular hogwash of a speech. Kent, Australia,
bluster, braggadocio, young Australia, Connaught, Scotland,
Yorkshire British hearts and sturdy souls, praver after prayer
petition after petition, remonstrance after remonstrance, had
been made in vain.
_ At the close of a very long speech, Mr. Deniehy resumed
his seat amidst a perfect hulloobooloo of applause, which lasted
tor several minutes.
Gilbert!-The Great Gilbert Wright! then rose amid
enthusiastic applause. Such a speech ! Whether for length
or language, it has seldom fallen to our lot to hear. Long l after
the meeting had separated, and our editorial head had reclined
on its pillow, the beautiful, gentlemanly verbiage of the Great
llbert, the very soul of the League, rung in our ears, and pre-


vented our repose. And then, his poetry ! Listen to his tuneful
lay, relative to the revolt of some convicts at Woolwich :
“ Such a sudden flood of mutiny,
Fol de rol, de ray ;
He never did remember,
Whack ! fal lal ra lay."
Again—Listen to his blank verse
This Continent, of spacious heaven, adorned
With plants, potatoes, flowers ambrosial, gems and gold,
Should cease to be the cesspool and common sewer
For the criminal feculence and excrement of the empire !
Immense applause followed this poetical effusion, so replete
with delivery and refinement; and the ladies who had graced
the meeting with their presence, were noticed to hold their
kerchiefs to their noses, probably to prevent their crying.
Mr. Hunt moved a resolution, that three preceding reso-
lutions which had been passed by acclamation, be embodied in
an address, signed on behalf of the meeting by White-Choker-
o-Charley-Cowper-o, and sent to the Governor-Generalfor trans-
mission to the Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Mr. R. Rowand seconded the motion, which was carried
nem. con., and the meeting separated.
THE DEVIL AMONG THE GRACES; OR, DID YOU EVER SEND YOUR WIFE A
MARKETING IN SYDNEY ON SATURDAY NIGHT ?
Mrs. Elizabeth D., the plump, agreeably-countenanced
landlady of the Melbourne Hotel, King-street, whose personal
charms struggled for ascendancy with the splendour of her
apparel, took a seat on a chair upon the floor of the Court,
under the protecting genius of her solicitor, to hexplainify why
and wherefore she administered castigation to the beautiful
person of Catherine Trevor, the belle ideal of blonde, beauty,
neatly, yet fashionably attired. Catherine Trevor’s cause was
entrusted to the chivalric guidance of Mr. G. R. Nichols,
esquired on this occasion by the trusty Sancho Panza of
Australia, Parry Long, Esquire. In their approach to the Police
Office trysting arena, Catherine was escorted by a goodly bevy
of ladies, all true and tried friends, the lawyers bringing up the
rear ; but Mrs. D. and suite were (in addition to young Roberts,)
accompanied by a couple of male friends, whose black mous-
taches, and semi-military looking countenances, tended to
awaken feelings of hair triggers, a dozen paces, &c. Sergeant
Bourke proferred the book to Catherine Trevor, who, pulling
off her Parisian glove, received it in her dexter .transparent
fives, and in presence of Mr. Dowling and Mr. George Hill, took


the oath to tell ‘the truth—the whole truth, and nothing; bu
the truth.’ a
The information read by the clerk set forth, that on Satur
day, the night of the 3rd instant, Elizabeth D. did assault an
beat Catherine Trevor.
Catherine, then under examination by Mr. Nichols, spok
as follows : I was out a marketing on Saturday night, but a
I was passing by The Melbourne, a heavy fall of rain inducec
me to enter. I was accompanied by three ladies. The land
lady of the Glen Albion Inn, Mrs. Irwin, and Catherine Lewis
I made some remark relative to the change in the times ‘sine
the ‘good old times’ when Mrs. D. and her husband kept Th
Green Dragon. Mr. D. was asked to drink with us.
Mi. Roberts What ! has the Court to be occupiec
istening to this rigmarole ? We have nothing to do with wha
Mr. D. said.
Catherine Trevor—l was just a beginning from when
entered the hotel to when I was put out of it. Mr. D. took
glass with the landlady of the Glen Albion. Mr. D. pushed me
out of doors and Mrs. D. struck me and tore my bonnet off
She cut my lip. She accused me of speaking about her, because
she is aware that 1 knew her secrets. She threatened me.
. [Here an argument arose between the legal arrav, in
which the magistrates took part, relative to the propriety oi
entertaining a charge of threatening, but Mr. Nichols cited a
case in point, in which a defendant charged with assault had
been bound to keep the peace, and the learned advocate in-
sisted, that in cases of misdemeanour the defendant could be
bound to the peace.]
Catherine Trevor—l do believe she is determined to injure
me. I know she has been accustomed to do battle with quart
pots and similar missiles, and I’m sure if she met me by night
she d ill-use me.
Mr. Nichols—Don’t get angry with Mr. Roberts, he’s one
oi the best tempered young gentlemen in Sydney.
Catherine Trevor—l’d be very sorry to be on bad terms
with him.
Mr. Roberts—How came you out so late at night ?
’atherine Trevor—You don’t call half-past nine late on a
Saturday night! You’re not such a brute as that! You must
Know that every lady in Sydney is out on Saturday ni-ht a
marketing. That was the only time I’ve been in her hou<e
since she kept The Melbourne Hotel, but I lived with her when
she kept Ibe Green Dragon. I had no gin hot. I swear to it.
Jt was only gin and peppermint. It did not make me hot.
Nobody ever saw me tipsy; but Mrs. D. and her husband have


often been so. Now, Mr. Roberts, you can’t puzzle me. I
and the other three ladies entered the hotel two and two. I
can’t say I was leader. I did not exclaim, ‘ Come on —follow
me to victory or death. 5 We could have gone to the Glen
Albion if we pleased, but we believed that The Melbourne Hotel
being a public-house, we had as good a right there as others,
provided we behaved ourselves properly.
Mr. Roberts—How many gentlemen were with you ?
Catherine Trevor—None whatsomedever.
Mr. Roberts —I’ll produce them.
Catherine Trevor—We saw some gentlemen in the room
when we entered, and we said ‘ We hoped we did not intrude. 5
The gentlemen replied, ‘ Quite contrary
Mr. Roberts—Who did the screaming ?
Catherine Trevor—l, sir ; I did the screaming, when he
pushed me out of the green-baize door. I did not scratch Mr.
D.’s face. 1 sha’nt tell you whether I struck him or no.
Magistrate —It is a fair question, as it might tend to
justify a woman in jightingin defence of her husband.
Mr. Roberts —Is the bonnet you have on the same that
was pulled off your head ?
Catherine Trevor—Yes, sir,the identical one; and I bought
these new blue strings to-day.
Mr. Roberts Well, I’m sure your bonnet’s none the worse ;
I never saw a better one.
Catherine Trevor—Then you’re a very bad judge of bon-
nets. I did resist Mr. D. when pushing me out.
Magistrate—Why did you make a comparison between
The Melbourne Hotel and The Green Dragon ?
Catherine Trevor Because Mr. D. seemed above
drinking with me and my friends; and I said he had drank
many glasses at my expense.
Catherine Lewis, a sleepy-looking beauty, in a lilac satin
dress, black velvet visite, Leghorn bonnet, white and lilac rib-
bons,’ lilac flowers, black veil, and a fascinating little mole on
the centre of her forehead, next ungloved herself in the wit-
ness-box. She was out a marketing, like other ladies, on
Saturday night, and meeting propitiously with her sister graces
during a storm of rain, she went with them into a parlour of
The Melbourne Hotel. She heard Mr. D. say, ‘ Come, my
ladies, I’ll have no more of that.’ She saw Mr. D. push
Catherine Trevor out of the house, and afterwards saw her
bonnet a-sprawling outside.
Mine hostess of the Glen Albion next made a curtsey in
the witness-box, amidst the gaze of an admiring court. She
went with Catherine Trevor and Co. into The Melbourne Hotel


on the fatal Saturday night, and had the pleasure of taking a
glass of ale with Mr. D. She heard Catherine Trevor tell him
that he had drank many a nobbier at her expense. Mr. D. put
Catherine outside without further provocation. Catherine
Irevor screamed, and mine hostess (witness) followed suit.
Witness had been in The Melbourne Hotel before, and was on
good terms with Mrs. D. She went there on Saturday night
iroru motives of pure friendship^
. r * Roberts here intimated his intention of putting six
witnesses in the box to prove that an assault had been com-
mitted ; but, upon the magistrates hinting their intention to
adjourn the case, the learned advocate contented himself with
calling two only.
Mrs. Mary Conroy, a very pretty, fair-complexioned
Grace, with beautifully tinted cheeks, and a most encouraging
smile, then stood up for the defence. Her rich satin visite, her
black velvet bonnet, lined and trimmed with orange colours
were utterly cast into the shade by the prettiest duckey of a
parasol ever purchased in a Pitt-street haberdasher’s reposi-
present ( said Mai T Conroy) when the ladies came
to The Melbourne Hotel. Mrs. D. was in her bar all the time,
and I swear she did not assault Kate Trevor. I saw Mr D
put her out. ' *
Cross-examined by Mr. Nichols—l only went to the step
outside the door. Ha! ha! ha ! he! he !he ! Oh ! you’re
such a funny man, Mr. Nichols, you do make me laugh so—he !
® ! Ho 1 ho ! ho ! Her bonnet couldn’t a’ been knocked
oft without my seeing it. He ! he ! he ! Ho ! ho ! ho ! She
c ldn tgo outside, didn’t Mrs. D. I heard the screaming. He !
le .he ! I don t know who did the screaming ; ’twasn’t I I
never screams. He! he! he! They knows best who’did
scream, so they do. Ha! ha ! ha!
lady?^ r * ‘ Nichols — Pei 'baps it was yourself who struck the
Mrs. Mary Conroy (screwing up her little mouth)—Me
snkeher what, me. Well, that is not so bad neither. He'
he ! he !
Mi. Nichols Come, you seem to like that.
Mrs. Mary Conroy—Well, then, I did not strike her. He '
he! he!
Like Napoleon the Great, Mr. Roberts reserved his veteran
Guaid until the last—until the crisis of the battle had arrived
Lie now, fearing the conflict of the battle was against him
bi ought up his Old Guard. He called to the charge one Lizzi-
nnd f T °"’ a military-looking old lady, helmed in a death
‘ a gloiy bonnet, whose bronzed visage betoked the old cam-


paigner. Mistress Elizabeth Atcheson swore point blank that
Mrs. D. did not strike Catherine Trevor, and that she could
not have done so on the said Saturday night without her cog-
nizance.
Mr. Parry Long, in this dire extremity, nobly attempted
to arrest the progress of the Old Guard, but although he ex-
posed her to a severe cross fire, her columns remained
unwavering.
The Graces were routed—the case dismissed.
Mr. Nichols, on behalf of the discomfited Catherine
Trevor, applied to the Bench for a copy of the depositions.
EXTRAORDINARY CASE OF ASSAULT.
Mary Daniel, a pretty young female, was charged by a
rosy-faced, chubby young woman, named Mary Westhall, of
Clarence-street, with assault. The complainant stated that
about eight months ago the defendant gave her a young child ,
as she had another which was as much as she could maintain,
whereas the complainant was childless, though married. Mary
Westhall became passionately fond of her little adopted, Avho
was about two years old, and the mother signed a written bond,
in the which she promised to give her child to her friend Mary,
and would not take it away from her. After maintaining the
child for eight months, a day or two ago Mary Daniel drove
up to Mary’s door in a cab, and assisted by two policemen,
forcibly took the child and carried him off. Mary Westhall
complained that in order to secure the person of the child, and
take it from her embrace, Mary Daniel took hold of her hand
and put it in her mouth ; but did not bite it so as leave any
mark. Mr. Cory, for the defence, said he had no witnesses to
call in so trumpery a case. Mr. G. R. Nichols, who was re-
tained by Mary Westhall, denied that the case was a trumpery
one. His client had maintained the defendant’s child for eight
months, and then without making her the slightest remunera-
tion, the defendant entered her house, carried away the child,
and assaulted his client. Mr. Dowling fined Mary Daniel 10s.
and costs.
THE BATTLE OF ATHLONE.
Jane O’Brallaghan Callaghan is a stout, ill-featured dame,
living in a certain place, called Athlone-place, in Pariamatta-
street. Sal Dunn is a cribbage-faced specimen of female
humanity, living in the same delightful locality. Yet strange
to tell! though these two women were a perfect pair in per-
sonal unattractiveness, and in the gift of the gab, this, veiy
similarity of features and disposition caused frequent collisions


between them Sal Dunn (don’t read this, ladies) swore, ay
like a mounted policeman ! She swore at Mrs. Brallaghan
O Callaghan, and also accused her of a crime of which her
ugly face instantly acquitted her. For this reason Sal was
summoned before the blindfolded deity of the scales. Sal
i etained the legal assistance of Mr. G. li. Nichols, who cross-
questioned the O Callaghan in the following manner •
the Athlone U ? the ** ** ° f
S u„ > r t s:fc^ th b L ,he hoke * rm not d «
?? r ‘ Did yOU give her an y Provocation ?
Airs. O Callaghan—ls it me provooke her ? Shure and all
I said was, * Go it, Sal, I’ll hould yer bonnet.’
Mr. Nichols I ray, what are you, madam ?
and 'ieve;®’a < ii a ve! Sha "~ I ’ m ““ “°‘ her ° f si * teen <*“*•».
what are yS 0k ~ rm ” 0t aSkinS ab ° Ut your c,lildre "> but
Mrs. O’CalJaghan— F m forty-two next Janivary.
are you? miw S ~ D ° ” 0t 7 ° U Understand question ? What
Mrs - O’Callaghan—Fm a widder woman, as has buried two
usbuns, and expects to bury two more.
p rS ’ o< Callaghan then called an old man named William
Rutledge, and he swore that he heard the defendant and the
complainant quarrelling during the last five weeks. When he
was at his work he was out of hearing, but when at home he
hTi ‘“STI®?? 8 ® f ° r * moment » Save when he
Ud4s and th i? ear i i^ 1 Dimn and but couldn’t
uudei stand the other old ooman, cos she was Hirish, and he’d
never been m Hireland. Constable Nethercutt. B 23, was
then called, and he cooked Sarah Dunn’s potatoes while the
vatei was a boiling. He not only heard that elegant lady
Ldestv oT’ 93 g llaghan ’ but slie even to insult the
majesty of -3 B, and threatened to smash his oilskin kiver if
M d i- e , d ,° Cr ° SS the thresh °ld of her door. For the defence
b 1. Nichols called a poor little creature named Mrs. Ann Flat’
but it was evident from the sympathy with which he ever and
anon glanced at Sal, that he considered the odds were against
her ; nevertheless he pitied his little bantam hen Ann Flat
against the field, and the little lady did her best Dr’
iS" 88 p" h PParently Up ° n tentei ’-books during the examF
nation. Perhaps some mischievous elf had inserted the
apeneot intended for himself into the Doctor’s coffee at break!
last time that morning- At any rate, no sooner was Mrs.


Flat’s examination completed, than the Doctor exclaimed,
Fined 20s. and costs, or fourteen days,’ and shot from the
Bench like a flash of lightning through a gooseberry bush.
THE FOX AXD THE GOOSE.
After the Doctor had made his hasty exit, the Police
Magistrate came upon the Bench, and Alice Fox, a young
woman upon whose beautifully regulated features sorrow and
suffering had stamped their lines, came before him to complain
of her husband, Martin Fox, a heavy horse policeman attached
to the Gold Escort, for a most brutal and inhuman assault.
So cruel was his conduct as exposed by his hapless wife, that
the application of ‘ coward’ is not sufficiently ignoble for him:
It appeared, from the evidence, that the complainant had been
previously married: her first husband had gone to ‘ that
bourne from whence no traveller returns,’ leaving her with a
sole pledge of his affection. Martin Fox was a widower, with
two children, and the widow and widower met in society.
Whether Mrs. Fox’s first husbands name was ‘ Goose,’ did not
come out in evidence, but she certainly was a goose to trust
her future guidance to the care of Martin Fox. They had
onty been married six weeks, and within the first fortnight the
ruffian had presented his horse pistol at her, which perchance
he would not have presented with equal alacrity to a bush-
ranger. He had ill-used her several times, being smitten with
the demon of jealousy. Now a man who is jealous without a
good reason must naturally think but little of himself; but so
it was, and a day or two ago Mrs. Fox and her good looking
sister, Jane Murptry, had been to Pitt-street, to try and obtain
a little needlework to ‘keep the pot boiling’, On their return
to the cover of Martin Fox, that gallant officer was slumber-
ing, but on awakening, he rose up in a fury, accused his bride
of having been to meet another sweetheart, felled her to the
earth by°a blow of his leg of mutton fist, and on her rising up
struck her a dreadful blow on her wrist with the back of a
tomahawk. The unhappy young woman exhibited her wrist,
which was shockingly lacerated. In reply to a question from
Mr. Dowling, she said she was only acquainted with the
defendant three weeks before they were united. Mr. Dowling
said it ought to be a warning to females not to contract
mati'imonial alliances upon so short a notice. Martin Fox
was sentenced to pay the full penalty of £o, inclusive of costs,
or in default to be imprisoned during a month.
THE YOUXG IDEA A’SHOOTING.
James Willock, a little criminal, about fourteen years of


age, was charged before the Police Magistrate and J. Arkins
Jisq., J. 1., with assaulting Marianne Anderson, a little cock-
nosed maiden, aged thirteen. Marianne deposed that
shevvasa playing at ‘ fly-the-garter,’ with some other young
ladies, when the boy ‘heaved her down by a stone on the
Police Magistrate—Now, Master Willock, have you anv
questions to ask the little girl ? J J
Boy (grinning) I’ve a few. Himpri-miss, is yer sure it
VOS hi has heaved the stone ? J
Little Maid—l’m positive.
Boy—Vere’s yer mark?
Little Maid (pulling off her bonnet, and displaying a shock
go en hair which would have charmed the heart of Robert
Burns)—Here’s my mark. c
Boy Vot sort of a stone were hit has hi heaved ? Were
hit a nugget, hor a iron-stone, hor arnarvel ?
Little Maid—lt was a stone, and it hurted me.
Boy (doubling his fist) - Wor hit has big has this ?
Little Maid—lt was a stone and a very hard one. You
weie standing by Reach’s fence.
Boy—lt’s a tarnal story.
The Police Magistrate fined the young legislator 5s and
4s. Gd. costs, or to be locked up for forty-eight hours.
andvMerT g ° fc no blunt ’ so HI take it out in bread
THE ARTFUL DODGE.
. Ja ™ es Ewen > a licensed retailer of beer, wine, and spirits
v o is about to come out in great style in Lower
co, n .pla,„ed ““ * ®bb y named Bill Broughton, of plenty to-’
say-for-himseff-at-the-Pohce-office, notoriety, refused to carry
ctv N and P°“derous carcass through the streets of Sydney
fn f ? a T a PP eared that Bill had no predilection
i the aforesaid Jamie Ewen, who sent his dutiful son and heir
on Tuesday week to tell Bill that pa wanted his cab. ‘ Then
want will be his master,’ responded Bill. Like most great fat
men, Jamie was a great Scot, and out he waddled to see if
B d T ] 6 I ™? erance t 0 refuse him in propria persona.
Bill was perched on his box, and no sooner did he twig the
unwieldy fiame of mine host, than he said, ‘ Gee—gee ’ and
quietly drove off the stand. Nor was he content with debarring
the t°hV h “ but he ffave the office
together T I s ° n the Stand ’ and the y all d ™ve off
together. Jamie then returned towards his home, and the
Jam^ eS F retUrne t m a St , ring t 0 their Stand ’ Back a S ain went
' a lie Ewen, puffing and blowing between passion and fat like


a whale in a butter bowl. Broughton looked out and piped
him coming, and off went he and his brethren of the whip,
among whom it was evident that Jamie was no favourite. At
last Jamie, as a dernier resort, roared aloud, ‘ Will ye take me
to street ?’ to which Bill shouted in return, ‘ I’ll see you
d d first—l’m already engaged.’ In his defence Bill called
a gentlemanly looking person named McCarthy, who swore that
on the morning in question he had engaged Broughton to call
at 3 p. m., to take him to a funeral, and he had done so. The
justice (Mr. Dowling) held that Bill must again fork out the
possibles, as he was decidedly at fault. If he was engaged he
had no business plying on the stand, and when he saw Mr.
Ewen coming to hire him, he ought to have enquired how long
he required his services, and if he needed him so long a time
as to render him unable to comply with his agreement with
Mr. M‘Carthy, then he could have refused. Broughton was
fined one shilling, and five costs.
NARROW ESCAPE.
A person named Griffin has complained to the police that
as he was going past Pearce’s wool washing establishment at
Paddington, on his way to his home, at the Surry Hills, at nine
o’clock at night, some person fired a gun at him. Fortunately
the shot only whizzed past without striking him. Some
malicious person has hinted that the spot is haunted, that Mr.
Griffin was influenced by some spirit, and that he was alarmed
by a shooting star.
A ROW AMONG THE GRACES.
Miss Maria Boyle, of Castlereagh-street, spinster, enrobed
in all the panoply of satin, silk, and lace, whose Parisien
bonnet was wreathed with a collection of flowers, by far out-
rivalling the entire collection in our garden botanical, and
whose pretty little dumpling face was partially concealed by
the ample folds of a huge ‘ boa,’ took up a position in front of
Alderman Egan, on Wednesday last, to explain how, why, and
wherefore she wilfully smashed all the windows in the “ Cottage
of Love,” inhabited by Ann o‘Callaghan, in Castlereagh-street
aforesaid. Maria and Ann are neighbours, so far as living
next door to each other constitutes neighbourhood, but they
seem sadly to omit the due performance of their duty to each
other as neighbours, an old grudge existing between them.
Miss o‘Callaghan said that, on Friday last, Maria came and
broke seven shillings worth of panes of glass, wilfully, and
without cause or provocation. She (complainant) hurried ofl
to Mr. Dowling, and took out a summons against Maria.
The latter then came again, and remarking that it was as


well to be hanged for a sheep as for a lamb, broke all the
remaining glass in Miss O’Co.’s windows, and then knocked in
the sash. Maria’s companion, a beautiful Grace, called Mollov
McCormick, who tried to clear Maria from the charge. She was
sure that Maria had cut her hand more than a week ago, and
had never ‘ gone out’ since the accident. Maria had to pay
down seven shillings for the damage, and four and sixpence
tor costs.
DOVES AND EAGLES.
A handsome, richly-dressed female, named Hannah
Moses, appeared on the floor of the Court, to answer the
charge of Elizabeth Gill, a rival to Hannah, in beauty, costly
apparel, and folly. Hannah was charged with a breach of the
agrant Act, by abusing Miss Gill just as she was descending
from a cab, at one of the coteries in Castlereagh street, and
using language of a most revolting description. The Mayor
and Mr. Ronald occupied the seat of justice. Mr. Nichols
acted the legal protector to Miss Gill, while Mr. Martin
advocated the cause of black haired, dark eyed Hannah. As
soon as Miss Gill had sworn to the Billingsgate, Miss Harriet
Phillips was called to prove the same, which she did in a very
satisfactory manner, but with visible reluctance. In fact
Miss Phillips was in deep mourning, but even a coalscuttle-
shaped black silk bonnet, with bunches of imitation
elderberries, could not conceal, though it might dim the
surpassing loveliness of her face. The defence set up by Mr.
Martin was, that Hannah, instead of using the epithets to
Elizabeth, had only politely inquired why she had used such
terms to her, The learned gentleman c*lled a couple of
turtle-doves, named Eliza Green and Alice Garland, to prove
that V iss Gill had been the aggressor; that she had acted
the hawk, while Hannah had been the meek and gentle dove.
'I he magistrates decided in favor of Miss Gill, and ordered
Hannah to pay, in fine and costs, half a sovereign minus six-
pence.
FROM MOBES TO AARON.
Mrs. Hannah Moses and her friends and foes having re-
tired from the battle-ground, their places were quickly supplied
b.} Louisa Aaron as defendant, and Eliza Green as complainant,
both described in the information as, of Castlereagh-streeE
spinsters. Louisa the mirthful, good-looking brunette, was
charged by the interesting-looking blonde Eliza Green, with
threatening to give her “a d d good hammering !” ’ Miss
Green being in fear of the aforesaid hammering, besought the


Bench to bind over her opponent to keep the peace. Mr.
Nichols appeared for Miss Green, while Louisa bravely dared
the storm, without a lawyer, although several spare ones were
at hand. Miss Eliza stated that she met Louisa in the Victoria
Theatre on last Tuesday night week, when the the threat
complained of was made. She was greatly alarmed, but the
most dashing young officer in the police—to wit, Inspector
Singleton—opportunely came up and protected her. He saw
her safe outside the Theatre. The Mayor asked Singleton
what he knew of the matter. The officer replied that he saw
the ladies “ sparring” in the upper circle at the Victoria, and
just as Louisa was about to ‘ go in and win,’ he interrupted,
and parted them, especially as he perceived that Miss Green
was suffering from a severe attack of influenza. The Mayor
said it was not a case which called upon the Bench to bind
the defendant to keep the peace, and discharged Louisa with
an admonition to be less warlike in future.
MISS TRIFF.
In one of the late arrivals from the Isle of the Rose and
Thistle, Sydney was honored with the advent, of a fine, stout,
good featured, tall, decently dressed lass, named Miss Mary
Ann Triff. She had as she said served in some of the best
families in England, Dukes, and Lords of all degrees. On her
arrival in Sydney she hired with a natty, spicy little neighbour
of ours, a knight of the hammer and pulpit, named Samivel B.
Legge. Mrs. L. did the amiable to the recent arrivals, who
was forthwith installed as chambermaid, cook, slut, and butler,
at £3O per annum, to be paid “ any how she liked it.” Seven-
teen days had barely elapsed, ere a ’no rid night was seen by
Miss Triff. The little dapper auctioneer and his lady had a
slight family difference, which they proceeded to settle in a
tournament with their fists. Such scratching, pulling of hair,
and punching Miss Triff never did see “ in all her blessed born
days.” And so she gave notice to quit there and then, and
demanded 30s. and a discharge and character. But the little
hammerman determined to test her claims in the police
jousting circle, and being served with a summons by Miss Triff,
or by Constable Matty Carroll for her, he served her with
another for quitting her service; and thus they met. The
P.M., having heard the proing and conning, gave his decision
in favor of the lady, ordering he of the hammer and bawling
box to stump up £1 6s. each party to pay one another’s costs,
Miss Triff having put her shawl to rights, unfurled her parasol
and sloped.
INTERESTING RECREATIONS.
About 1 p.m., on Thursday, Mr. Beale, landlord of the


I Currency Lass, Hunter and Pitt-streets, was astonished at the
sight of a Currency lad, of gigantic proportions, dressed in a
red shirt, a pair of trousers, and nothing else except a profu
sion of brisly hair around his mouth and lower part of th
face, which would enable a person with a moderate capital t
open in the scrubbing-brush line with good prospects. Th
semi-barbarian called for a glass of gin and bitters, got i:,
drank it, and shied the empty tumbler out of the window
smashing the glass. Mr. Beale began to put the quid pro quo
but was soon grappled by John Stratun (so the fellow gave hi
name) who tore his vest off his back. Luckily the landlady o
the Currency Lass made her appearance, and the superioritj
of her personal charms had such a wonderful effect upon the
red-shirted barbarian, that he opened his mouth in wonder
and letting go his hold of Mr. Beale, he clasped his hands in
admiration, and they were soon linked together with a pair of
iron bracelets by that vigilant police luminary constable Rider
No. 00. Yesterday he was brought before the P. M., but an
arrangement was effected by the red un paying £l, the price
af the damage done to Mr. Beale’s windows, his tumblers, and
ais vest. Another ruff, named Sarchefield, dressed in a red,
vhite, and blue striped linsey wolsey upper tog, and wondrously
limsey lower togs, and whose eyes stared, and whose hair
itood ‘ah he< like Paddy running from a bull, was charged
vith amusing his leisure hours on Thursday night by smashing
dl the tumblers he could find in the Royal Hotel. A waiter
if ‘Samivel Weller’appearance came forward to prove ‘ wat a
towdacious rapscallion that ere tricolored cove was,’ when the
nan agreed to pay the damage, and that affair being satis-
actorily arranged, he was suffered to depart, with an admoni-
ion to amuse himself in some other manner in future.
FIRE.
Monsieur Jonson, Professor of Lingo, residing at the
orner of Hunter and Elizabeth-streets, went to the* 3 Victoria
heatre, on Wednesday night, and returning about 10 p. nr,
e retired to his dormitory. But his slumbers were destined
> be of short duration, as he awoke about 1 a. m. on Thurs-
ay, and found his room enveloped in fire and smoke. Mon-
eur J. put on his spectacles, and beat a hasty retreat in his
ght cap and shirt, and although greatly heated by the fiery
ement, the winter air and night breeze in Hunter-street soon
factually cooled. Meanwhile, Mr. Bown and his engines, and
e engine of the Corporation, came to the scene, and aided
7 sorne of the blues, they put out the fire. Monsieur J.
ates that his loss amounts to nearly £IOO. Among his


losses are a stuffed paroquet, and some interesting' volumes,
especially a medical work, entitled “ Pokenhorn” on the dis-
eases of the great toe,” with illustrations, notes, appendix,
&c., &c.
SHARP AND FLAT ; OR ALL’S NOT GOLD THAT GLITTERS.
Many of the swindling confraternity when they take it
into their heads to victimize their favourite patients, the hotel
keepers, and licensed victuallers, generally adopt the style
bounceable. They make their debut at the ina, dressed in the
most approved and modern style of fashion, with a carpet bag,
a valise, or such trumpery, filled, most likely, with a dirty
shirt, and a pretty assortment of brick-bats. They vociferate,
Waiter—Waiter—
“ If you’re not smart, you insignificant fellow, I’ll pop your
eye out with my umbrella.’
Such was not the case with Mr. John Spence. He knew
full well that the day of imposing with a genteel dress had
gone by. He knew that to be suspected of riches now a days,
it is needful to ennoble in an old blue frock, dirty face,
neglected beard and whiskers, broken-rimmed hat, toes out of
shoes, and any sort of pantaloons. Mr. John Spence had a
pretty little assortment of 4 Brummagem gold;’ it had been
electrotyped, and felt tolerably ponderous when put together
in a dirty leather pouch, but still it lacked that lustre belonging
to gold. Now, where could he find any flat so very flat as to
buy his toys for guinea gold. He peered into several shops
where announcements were placarded 4 gold bought here,’ and
4 the highest price given for gold ;’ but John’s heart failed when
he beheld the shining cunning eyes, the prominent noses, the
thin lips, and the shrewd glances of the Israelitish gentlemen
who sat behind each counter. John Spence had well nigh
despaired of selling his baubles, and was thinking of pitching
them into the harbour, when he went into Pat Lee’s public-
house with his last threepenny bit to get a nobbier to keep
his spirits up by pouring spirits down. But the sight of Pat
Lee’s little bullet-head, his lesser forehead, his little blinking
grey eyes, and his harlequin mouth, inspired John Spence with
a renewed courage. 4 Here’s a chance if ever there’s one,’
soliloquized he, so he assumed the airs of a gold digger. He
pretended to be drunk. He drank and quaffed, and treated
all around him, and suddenly remembered that he had no
money. Mr. Lee began to frown, and so did Mrs. Lee. John
Spence then lugged out his dirty old leather pouch with lib.
weight of gold in nuggets. He would sell it for £3 10s. per
ounce. Mrs. Lee knew that it would fetch £3 11s. She


winked at Mr. Lee. He walked back again. The bargain
was made. John was paid £4O in guinea stuff, the drinking
account being deducted, and he ‘ sloped/ Mrs. Lee put on
her bonnet and visite, her gloves and spectacles, and hastened
off to Mr. Marks, of George-street, bullion merchant, gold
assayer, &c. Mr, Marks opened the leather bag. ‘ Where
did you say this came from, ma’am ?’ ‘ From Balyrat,’ replied
Mrs. Lee. Mr. Marks went to the door of the office, looked
out, whistled, and Mrs. Lee was in the iron grasp of a police-
man. Her artless tale eventually procured her liberation, and
John Spence w r as taken before he had time to change his dress.
A Mr. Alick M‘Keskitt was walking with him, and according
to the fable of the stork among the geese, he was doomed to
share John Spence’s hard lot during the night, on the floor of
the watch-house cell. On Thursday they were brought before
Mr. Dowling. Mr. Roberts appeared for Mr. M‘Keskitt, who was
restored to freedom, while John Spence was sent to ruminate
in Darlinghurst until next Criminal Court.
THE DRAPERS STAKES.
A great bustle was discernible in the principal portion of
Pitt-street, on Wednesday, one horse shays, saddle horses
(some of them tidy nags) cabs, patent Hansom’s, &c., &c.,
being drawn up at the doors of the principal drapers, who had
given ‘ their counter voltigeurs’ holidays, each in his turn to go
to Homebush after taking the shutters down and dressing the
windows. Smack, crack, rattle and off dashed the Sydney
cockneys in great glee. Now it chanced that a couple of light
fingered gentry, not in company, but each on mischief bent,
took it into their pates that the shops being tolerably emptied
of the smart young men, a good opportunity offered to 4 do a
little drapery.’ Daniel Colwell, about 19 years of age, but a
practitioner of considerable expertness in the shoplifting line,
sneaked up to the door of Mr. G. C. Tuting, picked up a roll
of flannel worth between three or four pounds, and started.
On the opposite side of the way, lived Mr. J. T. Woods,
another draper. He saw the transaction, ran into the street,
and gave the alarm, at the same time running after the thief.
Young Dan soon saw his pursuer, and made for Market-street,
turned the corner, and an animating chase or race ensued,
Dan keeping the lead, Woods fast gaining, and Long Police-
man Daddy Long Legs, joining the pursuit, kept up the rear.
Some of the populace appeared quite elated, and hallooed at
the Daddy Long Legged Policeman, but he seemed too tightly
girted, and lost ground. In the meantime, young Dan carrying
weight, lost breath and ground, and after a beautiful race half


way round the market, Mr. Woods pulled him by the neck. At
the time when Daniel Colwell took the flannel, an older,’and
more artful dodger, named James Sandars, approached the
devoted shop of Mr. G. C. Tuting, and made what is called a
‘blackguard snatch.’ He pulled down a pair of beautiful
scat let blankets, trimmed with black, and which were valued
at 355. He started off at a slashing pace, but Pitt-street had
not been left utterly destitute of ‘ nice young gents,’ and a
Mr. Cousens, and other shopmen, sallied forth and then
began,
“ A heigh ho ! chevy !
Hark, forward ; Hark, forward tantivy.”
which resulted in Sandars being run down, pinned and secured.
Hie lesult need not be told. The two unworthies were brought
before Messrs. Dowling and Hargraves, and sent to answer for
thcxi misdeeds before a dozen at the next Quarter Sessions,
AN ELOQUENT COOK.
Mis. Stone s establishment, the King’s Arms, in Pitt-street,
needed the services of un maitre de cuisine. Mrs. Stone was
subpoenaed to the Sessions; her pretty young daughter was
sick; and the cook had retired from public life. In this
extremity, Mrs. Stone was necessitated to put up with the first
person who offered his services to lard, baste, bone, and truss.
Now black men, generally speaking, are rather deficient in
personal beauty according to the British Standard, and the
biacks of Sennaar transcend the rest of their sable brethren
in hideous physiognomy. A small paper placard, inscribed
‘ Wanted a man-cook,’ was scarcely wafered to the window by
the tiny fingers of Miss Stone, than the ugliest male of the
ugliest tribe of Sennaar applied for the vacant billet. In the
emeigency of the moment his services were accepted, and he
was duly appointed commander-in-chiet of Mrs. Stone’s kitchen,
saucepans, frying-pan, &c., &c. But if Thomas Webster had
an ogr' s face, and an equally matched black wife, he had to
counterbalance his personal defects, a tongue. O! such a
tongue ! He had a domicile of slabs and bark on the road-
side near Longbottom, where he left his wife Priscilla to attend
to the comforts of wayfarers ; and having hired with Mrs.
Stone at £1 per week, he used to enter her kitchen in the
morning, and after he had washed up the tea-things in the
evening, lie trudged home to Priscilla. On Tuesday last,
1 homas YY ebster and his wife Priscilla were brought before -
iVli. Dowling and Mr. John Campbell, by Constable Graham,
Ciiaiged with stealing ten sovereigns and fourteen one pound
notes fiom one John Smith. Graham stated that Smith had


informed him he had gone to rest upon the bed of Mr. and
Mi s. Webster. Priscilla paid him every attention until the
return ot her husband, who put an Othello’s face upon the
matter, and Priscilla, to clear her honour, and prove her
fidelity, aided her sable lord in rifling Smith’s pockets of the
money. However, Mr. John Smith started so late from Lung-
bottom, that in consequence of his absence when his name
was called, Thomas and Priscilla were acquitted and discharged.
‘ You can go,’said an attendant Indigo to Thomas. ‘Mo be
in hurry,’ replied Thomas, and wheeling round he exhibited
his frightful phiz in the witness-box, to accuse the landlady of
the King’s Arms of neglecting to pay him £1 for his week’s
services. Mrs. Stone declared that he had been a great
nuisance to her, and had made use of her kitchen as a refectory,
but had done no work whatever. He had only remained a day
or two, and had put her and her family to great inconvenience.
‘ Wat dat!’ exclaimed Thomas. ‘ She berry bat missis. She
cum in de kitchen, ’buse me, call me black brute, cannibal,
ebery ting; ben de mississes get gemmen like ob me, dey no
no how to use him. I washer up brikfist tings, den say dinner
reddy, den she send me down fish. I been boilee corn beef
til me shamed lookee one cow in de face.’
Mrs. Stone— * Did not you go away before your week was
up?’ Thomas —‘ Now, now, no you crosscut me, Missee Tone.
I’ll disgrace you ’fore de entire congregation. Who tole my
hot cake out ob de oven ? Now, Missee Tone, you know you
tole him.’ Thomas gabbled on in a very eloquent strain until
struck dumb by being told the case was dismissed, when he
was bundled out of court by constable Matthew Carroll.


Second Series.




SECOND SERIES.
THE BEAUS AND BELLES OF SYDNEY;
OR,
PAUL PRY IN AUSTRALIA.
WITH AN ENTIRELY NOVEL TALE, ENTITLED
THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF MR. TOM NEWBERRY,
GIVING A LUCID INSIGHT INTO THE ROMANCE OF REAL LIFE IN THE
FAMED CITY OF SYDNEY.
BY
CHARLES ADAM CORBIN.




PREFACE.
In preparing this little volume for the amusement of
the public, the Author has acted up to his opinion
that a style of reading relative to incidents which have
taken place in the City of Sydney, and which are,
many of them, of sufficiently recent date to neutralise
contradiction upon tiie score of their authenticity and
truthfulness, that which agreeably intermingles the
pathetic with the comic, will invariably prove most
attractive and acceptable.




INTRODUCTION.
Probably some of our readers will express astonish-
ment, when they are informed for the first time, that
Paul Pry, Esq., so famed in the capital of England,
has actually paid a visit to this City.
But if they refer to the list of arrivals by the
steamship Chusan , upon her first arrival in the Port,
heralding the so much desired steam communication
with Mrs. Mother Country, let them rest assured that
amongst the “75 in the steerage,” was no less
illustrious a personage than Mr. Paul Pry.
Let not, however, the reader surmise that Paul
was influenced by any covetous gold-digging ideas in
crossing the ocean. His great thirst for knowledge,
called by some ignorami, inquisitiveness, too fully
engrosses his faculties to be supplanted by any mer-
cenary penchant, but to a train of extraordinary
accidents may be attributed the circumstance of his
visit to Sydney.
Some people believe that ‘ there’s a great deal in
a name,’ and that of ‘ Paul’ seems to lend a colour to
the inference. At all events, we can challenge any
historical scholar to point out in the records of the
past, a dozen Paul’s who have been infamous or very
unfortunate, while those of the name who have stepped
prominently forward in any sphere in the drama of
the world, have almost invariably attained to


eminence, whether as an apostle, a pope, a writer, a
commander, and lastly in the character of the indi-
vidual known as Paul Pry.
Paul chanced one morning to step into a first-
class carriage, in the wrong train. His inquisitive
nature induced him so to do to raise comparisons, but
before he had completed his investigation, the door
was slapped to, the bell was rung. Off went the train,
and Paul instead of breakfasting in London, performed
that necessary and pleasant duty at Deal.
Phe Chuscin lay at anchor in the Downs. Many
persons of both sexes visited her, regarding her as an
object of curiosity, bound as she was to Australia.
Paul thought that as no opportunity would offer to
return to London until evening, lie might as well
share in the general feeling, and perceiving a boat
containing two ladies and a gentleman about to shove
off, lie pitched his umbrella into it, and nimbly fol-
lowed in person.
“ He s g°t a good cheek,” muttered the gen-
tleman.
“ ° Eliza!” ejaculated one of the ladies.
•t» 4 P°PP e d in ; hope I don’t intrude,” chimed
in Paul, who was permitted to seat himself in the boat,
and was soon on board the ocean steamer.
Fancy agenuine cockney at the Downs, on board
a first-class steamer, bound for the wondrous land
of gold, and you will have some feeble idea of the
state of mind of Mr. Paul Pry, who, with his umbrella
under his arm, passed fore and aft the splendid vessel
perfectly unmolested, his comical, mild, intelligent set
of features disarming all resentful feelings when he
took the liberty of peering into the cabins, the hatch-
ways, and every hole and corner of the vessel.
Amongst other items of intelligence which had
reached Paul’s ears, and imprinted themselves upon
his mind prior to his emerging from within sound of
Bow Bells, was the fact that “sailors lived upon
giog. Of the possibility of a jollv tar existing
without grog, Mr. Pry entertained no more idea than
of his own power to live without his umbrella, or a


Mandarin without his head. He made known his
desire to imbibe the nectar of Neptune, and it was
amply gratified. So greatly did he admire the liquid
that he soon began to feel excessively valiant, longing
for a brush with the French, enquiring if the cannons
were loaded, helping to pull a rope, and in fact
behaving in an unusual manner.
At last, a certain qualminess began to pervade
his frame ; his eyes kept blinking like those of an owl
in an ivy bush, his head felt dizzy, while his stomach
partook of a novel and unpleasant feeling.
There is not a more compassionate class of men
in the world than sailors, when a landsman is the
object thereof. It is true that Jack will regard with
disdain those half landsmen, half sailors, those
amphibious gents, who ape the seaman’s dress and
manner, but when an unmistakeable landlubber hoists
signals of distress, he at once becomes an object of
deep commisseration to Jack. There could be no
mistake about Mr. Paul; his sparrow tailed coat, his
tights and straps, his narrow rimmed hat, his smooth
face with its turnup nose, and above all, his umbrella,
soon interested one of the tenants of the forecastle.
“ I say matey,” said the sailor, bringing Paul to
his recollection by a clout on the crown of his hat,
which would have sent that useful article over his
mouth, had not it been stopped by the turnup nose
before mentioned, “ go and lie down in my bunk there
for half an hour, and take another swig of grog;
you'll soon come too man; you’re only a little sea sick.”
Paul gurgled out an expression of thanks, emptied
the proffered pannican, and turned in to the sailor’s
sleeping berth.
How long he slept he never could ascertain cor-
rectly, but upon awakening he was soon reminded of
his whereabouts, by the terrible crack he received on
the crown, as, oblivious of the circumscribed space of
the sailor’s berth, his head came in contact with a
beam. He managed to get out of the berth, but
despite the advantage afforded him by using his
umbrella as a walking cane, poor Paul found it


excessively difficult to maintain his equilibrium.
After several ardent struggles, he contrived to
clamber up the fore hatchway on to the deck, where
his solemnly grotesque physiognomy was the signal
for uproarious mirth.
“Where am I? Where’s the boat?” stam-
mered Paul, as a heavy roll of the vessel, which was
steaming and sailing in a heavy sea under the influence
of a fresh gale, exemplified the fact that his head was
at the moment the most ponderous member.
“ Where are ye indeed ?” responded his sea-
f.uing acquaintance to whose hospitality he was now
indebted for a sea voyage, “ why you ai’nt far off
Chiney; at least we spects to be there against eight
bells#
In fact it turned out that Paul had overslept him-
self, and being forgotten in the bustle of putting to
sea, he was bound to feydney, wdiere in due course of
time he safely arrived.
They sent Paul Pry ashore at the wharf,
possessed of nothing in the world save the clothes on
his back, a capital appetite, and his umbrella. Several
young gents who have been tempted to our country
since the Great Discovery have, from time to time,
made lamentable complaints through the columns of
the papers, that although armed with letters of intro-
duction in galore, they obtained a very so so reception.
1 herefoie Paul was naturally in a fix, knowing no
person, without introductory letters, satisfactory testi-
monials, or money ; indeed, devoid of everything save
a huge amount of brass, and his umbrella.
But it’s better to be born lucky than rich.
Paul, left to be his own pilot through the metro-
polis, soon found himself in George-street. Passino-
by an auction mart, with the letters “ J. G. Cohen”
emblazoned in gold upon a cerulean ground, and
attracted by the clamorous biddings of a mass of per-
sons assembled inside, Paul “just popped in,” and
was astonished beyond measure at the descriptive
powers of the auctioneer. 1
“Only two hundred thousand pounds, gentle


men ! Only two hundred thousand pounds for this
most magnificent property ! Bounded on the north
by a road running south; on the south by a road
running north ;on the east by the rising sun, and on
the west by the splendid territories of the Native King,
Tin-pot Jackey. Two hundred and fifty thousand,
Mr. Bladderskite ; thank you, sir.
“ Ah ! then, and it’s only six weeks ago, day
before yesterday, Mr. Auctioneer,” exclaimed a seedy
looking Celt, “ that you sold me the splendifirous
estate of Swampitibog, faix and yer swore by every
thing an inch high, or an hour old, that there was a
’rection on it fit for a Prince’s Palace, but divil a bit
of a house at all at all could I find, saving a covering
of six hurdles and bark.”
“ Why, my worthy friend,” replied he of the
hammer. “ I meant an aboriginal Prince, and we all
know that those high and mighty potentates usually
consider the sky the roof of their palaces.”
In the meantime, Paul Pry, who felt wondrous
peckish, as do all new comers to Australia, was
making a tolerable lunch off samples. An open box
of ling S furnished him with fish ; biscuits were there
in abundance. Being Friday, he made a virtue of
necessity, and abstained from flesh, contenting him-
self witli a few handfuls of Zante currants, in lieu of
pastry and dessert, and for lack of wine, occasionally
slaking his thirst with a sample of best malt vinegar.
Having satisfied the immediate cravings of nature,
and safd Grace, Paul was about to depart in quest of
further adventures, when he was attracted by the
appearance of a person who at the moment entered
the Auction Mart.
The new comer was a fine looking man, in the
prime of life. A ruddy, healthy looking flush per-
vaded his countenance. He had good teeth ; a mouth
expressive of determination, yet by no means destitute
of good humour, and handsome, curling, dark brown
hair. His garb was a melange between that of the
mate of a vessel and a gentleman miller. His rest-
less, nervous glance rapidly scanned the group before


liim ; at length it hit upon Paul, when a mutual
expression of amazement ensued.
What! Pry, my fine fellow ! What the dickens
brings you out ?
Paul extended his dexter hand to his quondam
friend, who shook it heartily. He speedily narrated
the accidental manner in which, nolens volens, he had
been literally transported to Botany Bay. “And
now, friend Newberry,” he added, “ I am" regularly
hard up, not knowing what Mrs. Pry and the children
will think of my sudden disappearance. I must at
once write home for means to enable me to return,
and. in the interim I am all impatience to hear your
account of yourself since last I saw you at and
Co.’s, Army and Navy Agents, London.”
“ I 11 put you in the way of Sydney as much as
possible, replied Paul s newly discovered friend j”
and 1 11 tell you all my travels, and shew you all that’s
to be seen, for old acquaintance sake, and also because
J’ve heard my late father say that the blood of the
Prys is akin to that of the Newberrys ”
Tom Newberry kept his word, and Paul Pry
contrived for a length of time to follow the bent of his
disposition in the City of Sydney. From the papers
which he has left behind him, it seems that he delayed
his return to England through inquisitiveness, and
probably with a design of publishing a book upon his
return to the ‘‘ big smoke,” as he was prone to call
London. At any rate, he has disappeared a month
or two ago in as sudden and mysterious a manner as
that in which he formerly quitted London, w hither
perchance he has been accidentally kidnapped back
again. His manuscripts, now presented to the reader,
consist of a great variety of Sydney matters, inter-
spersed with the adventures of his friend Tom New-
berry. T herefore, if from their want of formality, anv
dispraise is considered deserving, the blame must rest
solely upon Paul Pry, for leaving his writings in such
an incongruous state ; but the author dares to indulge
a hope that in the amusement afforded by the fol-
lowing- pages, all censure will be forgotten.


THE ADVENTURES
OF
TOM NEWBERRY.




TIIE ADVENTURES OF TOM NEWBERRY.
0
CHAPTER I.
THERE’S MANY A SLIP ’TWIXT THE CUP AND THE LIP.
I was born at Cawnpore, in British India, Anno Domini 1829.
My father was a Major in the Xlth Light Dragoons. My
mother died ere I was six years of age, leaving me an only
pledge of the ineffaceable love that existed betwixt her and
my father. I was thenceforth tended chiefly by Hindoo
women, kind, faithful creatures, until I had attained my eighth
year, when my father determined to do violence to the tender
parental affection which bound him to me, by sending me
home (as he termed it) to England, according to the usual
custom of British gentlemen in India.
This severance from my sole surviving parent caused me,
young as I was, excessive grief, and was a proportionably
severe trial to my father, for admirable and enduring as a
mother’s love is, I am persuaded that it cannot outrival the
tender affection of a widower for his only child.
After a pleasant voyage in the good ship Slierbourne, I
arrived healthful and safely on the shores of Old England, and
was introduced into the family of Mr. R., an artist of great
talent, and considerable celebrity, residing in Berner’s-street,
Oxford-street, London. This worthy gentleman was no
relative, but a staunch friend of my father, and had continued
his friendship after that my father, then but a lieutenant, had
given unpardonable offence to his family by his union with my
mother, a young lady whose only dowry consisted of her
beauty, virtue, and accomplishments.
Mr. R., my guardian, had married late in life, long after
his natural hair had been supplanted by a wig. He was old
enough to be my father’s father, but as if to make up for his
so long delaying to enter the connubial state, Mrs. R. had
presented him annually, during the four years of their Avedded
life, with an infantile addition to the family.


After spending a few week's at Mr. R.’s house, I was sent
to school at Kensington, where I remained six years, save that
I spent each midsummer and Christmas vacation at the house
of my guardian.
My father constantly corresponded with Mr. R., and the
tone of his letters plainly pourtrayed the deep affection, and
parental interest, which he felt for my welfare. When in my
fourteenth year, he began to unfold his views and wishes
relative to my future career. He longed to procure for me a
commission, as soon as I should have arrived at proper age, in
the 16th Lancers, to which regiment he had exchanged when
the Xlth was metamorphosed into Prince Albert’s regiment of
Hussars, and ordered home. My wishes exactly assimilated
to my father s, and listening as 1 had oftentimes done to the
thi illing accounts of the performances of the British troops in
India, during the Scindian and Afghanistan wars, I panted
eagerly for the arrival of the moment, I should share the
exploits and the dangers of my father, whose name had several
times received honorable mention in connexion with the
encounters with the foe.
At the close of a holiday term, I returned as usual to
the school, but a fortnight had only elapsed when I was sud-
denly summoned to my guardian’s house. The slight pleasure
which I felt at this unexpected holiday, was speedily turned
into most bitter, unavailing grief. The charming spell of
almost unalloyed and uninterrupted happiness which hitherto
had been my lot, and the bright beauteous vista of the future,
were in an instant dissolved. I was an orphan! My dear
father was no more ! He had been murdered !
So deep was my filial love, and so indelibly was my father’s
image imprinted on my mind, that young as I was, the blow
was nearly overwhelming, and some months passed by ere the
consolations of my guardian and his family exerted a beneficial
influence.
At the time when so tragical an end befel my father, his
regiment, with others of the British army, had taken the field.
Among his numerous servitors, my father had for a kitmaghir,
a Mahometan named Oram. This man had followed the for-
tunes of my father, during eleven years, with unfailing fidelity,
a usual trait in the character of the Mahometan population
of India. But the Moslems have another peculiar character-
istic, as devilish as the former one is admirable. They are
extremely revengeful. One evening Oram had been desired
by my father to perform some seemingly trivial office, but of
really particular importance. Oram, finding other business in
his opinion more needful to intervene, he neglected the com-


mission entrusted to him. That night my father returned at
a later hour than usual from the mess, where some festivities
had been going on. He was so exasperated for the moment
at the Mahometan’s negligence, that he struck him on the face
and pulled his beard, and this indignity he put upon the man
in presence of several brother officers who had accompanied
him as far as his tent.
About midnight, the dobeewallur, or washerman, whose
tent was pitched in a declivity a short distance from that of
my father, rushed in great trepidation into the tent occupied
by the guard, giving the officer in command the following
information. He went outside his tent to inhale a little cool
air, and glancing his eyes towards the Major’s tent, he saw
Oram seat himself at the foot of my father’s bed, deliberately
place the blade of a sabre to his own throat, and then, holding
the hilt with one hand, and the point with the other, he drew
the weapon rapidly across, and fell backwards.
The timid dobeewallur was alarmed too much to enter
my father’s tent, and had hastened to the guard, a portion
of which, with several officers who had been awoke by the
noise, hurried to my father’s tent, where a terrible spectacle
met their gaze.
Major Newberry, who had charged in many a desperate
field of strife, unharmed by the matchlock bullet, or the
AfFghan sabres, had fallen before the more fatal unanticipated
vengeance of the suicide assassin! His head was literally
severed from his body, and his limbs and person frightfully
gashed and mutilated! The Mahometan had gratified his curst
master passion ! He had washed away the disgrace to which
he had been subjected in his benefactor’s blood!
Like multitudes of villains, he had forgotten ninety-nine
good turns under the smart of a solitary bad turn, and then,
preferring death at his own hand to suffering by the hangman’s
cord, he had, with the sabre yet reeking with my father’s
blood, nearly severed at a stroke his own neck, and falling
backwards on to the bed, his gore had intermingled with that
of his immediate victim.*
(to be continued.)
* The circumstances of this act of assassination and suicide are facts, and by
no means distorted. The Author was in Calcutta at the time.


AGNES BARR; OR THE MYSTERIOUS FAIR ONE.—A ROMANCE OF SYDNEY
LIFE.
Agnes Barr, a fair-complexioned, beautiful young female,
with blue eyes, light auburn hair, and the slightest Scottish
pronunciation imaginable, appeared sobbing and sighing in the
witness-box, to complain against William Jones for violently
assaulting her. Mr, JNichols appeared for the prosecutrix.
Ihe defendant was a low, vulgar looking man, with neither
coat nor vest, and wearing a coarse check shirt. He stood
throughout the trial with an air of dogged defiance and deter-
mination, How two persons, so very diverse in appearance
and habits, came to be intimate associates is a mysterious cir-
cumstance. The air, the manner, and the language of Agnes
Barr, proclaimed her a lady by birth and education, while her
extremely painful state of excitement tends to create suspicion
that reason is tottering on its beauteous throne. She stated
that she returned to her home rather late one night from mar-
ket. The prisoner lived in the same house; he forced his way
into her sleeping apartment, knocked her down, and kicked
her until she was severely bruised in several parts of her person.
He then seized her by the throat, and endeavoured to strangle
her. She made several efforts to rise, and succeeded once,
when he again felled her by a blow on the forehead. He left
her for dead, and then suspended himself by the neck with a
rope to the bannisters. She got up, procured aid, and he was
cut down. He subsequently went into the streets, and was
taken by the Police for drunkenness. She obtained a warrant
against him for the assault. She implored the Mayor not to
suffer the prisoner to go at large, for she felt assured that he
would slay her.
Mayor—How did you become acquainted with him ?
Agnes—He came from the diggings and took the house.
I furnished it. I have not been living with him as a wife.
Prisoner—l took a lease of the house in Union-lane,
eleven weeks ago, at £1 10s. per week. lam willing to give up
the lease to her, and my furniture, for which I paid £l 4 if
you will release me, and let me go and take my clothes avvay.
I assure your Worship that I never injured the young lady, but
she has been in superior circumstances, and is now in the habit
of falling into fits, aud becoming greatly excited. When she
came home from the market the other evening, she became
hysterical, and upon her recovery, I gave her two or three clips
over the head with half a dried salmon, but the bruises she
inflicted upon herself, when falling in fits upon the floor.
* Agnes—’Tis false ; that man is a very desperate fellow.
After he was taken by the police for drunkenness, I found a


hatchet and a carving knife concealed under my bed. I
have no doubt he was resolved to assassinate me.
Mayor —How long have you been in the colony; and
where are your friends ?
Agnes—l have been but a year and two months in the
colony; and as to friends, alas ! I have not one ! [Here the
unfortunate young woman burst into tears.j
Inspector Singleton stated that he apprehended the pri-
soner at the residence of Agnes ; he lived in part of the house.
Prisoner —I took the house, and let her two rooms. I
acknowledge that I took it in the name of Barr, representing
myself as Mr. Barr.
Dr. Duigan stated that he examined the lady, and found
numerous marks of violence on her person. Her throat was
also injured, as if a man had gripped it fiercely with his hand.
Her arm w r as bruised. He believed the bruises on her person
were the result of kicks.
Prisoner—lt is false : she got bruised while on the ground
in hysterics. She is always weeping, and lamenting, and fainting
about her husband. Her husband’s crest and coat of arms are
over the mantelpiece in her room, and whenever she looks at
them she weeps and goes off into hysterics.
Mayor—How long has your husband gone from you .
Agnes—About three months, and I cannot tell how or
where. I’ve never heard anything of him.
Prisoner I hope your Worship will release me. I am
innocent of the charge.
Agnes—O! pray do not release him, or he will take my
life, and the life of another also. #
Prisoner —Since she is determined to injure me, I will say
the whole truth of the matter. She has been living with me
as a wife, and 1 had a right to go into her bed-room, and assist
her when she was in hysterics. .
Mayor—ls it true that you lived with this man as his
wife ?
Agnes—No : it is utterly false. .
The prisoner was committed for trial at the Quarter
Sessions.
A MILLINER SQUEEZED BY HER LANDLORD.—SHE SQUEEZES HIM AGAIN.
Miss Maria Ann Pattison, of No. 16, Prince-street, dress-
maker, a pale, neatly-attired, pretty young woman, appeared
as defendant in a Tenement case before the Police Magistrate,
and Messrs. Chambers and Alexander, at the suit of an elderly
gent, named Walter Soper, whose physiognomy was as long
and as yellow as a bar of Mr. W. B. Allen’s best colonial. Mr.


Husband, solicitor, was retained by the pretty milliner, and
although she could call him Husband, while he was incompe-
tent to call her ‘ wife,’ he brought her through the landlord
fire, unsinged, and in triumph. The case was simply another
edition of the old story. Miss Pattison’s rent was raised, and
raised, and raised by the elderly commission agent, until she
could stand squeezing no longer, and then the next business
was to turn her out of house and home. Mr. Smith, solicitor,
appeared for old Walter, but he was so dull of apprehension,
and so short-sighted, that Mr. Husband dealt with him in a
Signor Blitz style. ‘Now, sir—good sight, I hope—can see
without your specs. Now, sir, have the goodness to inform
me whose signature this is ?’ Old Walter’s answers plainly
proved that Miss Pattison is a tenant at will, and so Walter
lost the day. Mr. Husband appealed to the Bench for costs
for his fair client. He said she was the sole support of her
aged and widowed mother, and the expense of employing a
solicitor, and her loss of time, were more than her slender
finances could bear. The Magistrates dismissed the case, and
ordered the complainant to pay £5 ss. costs.
AN AUSTEALIAN NELSON.
John Leggett, a fair-haired, handsome sailor-boy, was
c arged by Dawley, 17 A, with creating a terrible hullabooloo,
by boarding several gun-boats in Clarence-street, at midnight.
17 A. having kissed the sacred volume, and smoothed his bristly
hair, deposed that-" There vos hay lot of howdashis fimiles
kicking hup hay row m Clarence-street. Hup cums the sailor-
lad, and shouts hout, ‘ clere de vay, here be hi has fresh has
liever. A publican named Ralph shoved him out of his house
as he was a forcing his way hin, and I axes him who he vos,
and he says - yer hies. He said he’d split the cout hoff
my back, and let me see he wur has good hay hossifer has Hi.”
t+ • 77° y .^IT 1 wa ® attackd b J a mob of a dozen traps, and
I tued to beat them off, but I swear I never swore that I was
drunk, but knew what I was doing, and I swear 1 never called
him son of—a what he says. I had a dozen traps at me, like the
after-guard at the capstan bars.
John Hudson, another young sailor, belonging to the
defendants vessel, the Isabella Hind, ‘did all he knew" to clear
his messmate, but without avail, for the Bench fined young
Leggett 10s., which he promptly paid.
CHINESE CHRISTIANITY.
There is a story extant of an Otaheitian lady, a supposed
convert to Christianity, of whom the padres entertained great


hopes. When at the point of death, she was asked, e if she
would like anything.’ She gently replied, ‘no massa, notink
but lilly piecey roasty child!’ A Chinaman of remarkably
warlike aspect, named Tan Tong, was arraigned before the
Mayor and Mr. Thornton, charged with assaulting George
Moore, in Mr. Wallis’s kitchen, with a certain instrument
denominated a rolling-pin.
Mr. Caesar introduced a Chinaman to the Bench as an in-
terpreter. This fellow said his name was Jan Warnur ; he was
a Christian, and had given the interpretation uf witnesses at
the Court of Quarter Sessions.
Mr. Thornton—What Church do you go to on Sundays >
Chinaman—Me no go Church :me gottee summut else
to do ;me work d—d hard on Sunday.
Mr. Thornton —What prayers do you know ?
Chinaman —Me know von werry capital prayei— — You
sal troo and do ley try, and troo deliv’rance make, a’tween
Sov’ laddie e Queen and dish prisoner at de bor.’
Mr. Thornton—O ! that’s no prayer.
Tan Tong then took up the cudgels in his own defence,
and by dint of broken English, and violent gesticulation, he
got himself clear oft, and was discharged. Mr. Thornton said
that some of the Chinamen who pretended to act as interpre-
ters, kept gambling houses, whereby they enticed their fellow-
countrymen to abscond from service, and if they did not quit
that profession, they might possibly find it disadvantageous to
their personal comforts some of these days.
A JOVIAL JOCKEY.
William Lynch is a light weight, first-rate groom indeed
he has been born and bred in the stable. As Mr. Thornton
assured his brother Magistrate, Lynch is a right good fellow
when sober, but he’s almost always drunk. He was charged
with driving a young horse so carelessly that the safety of
other persons was endangered. Lynch laid all the blame on
«the nasty awkward baste of a hanimal .’
Mr. Thornton —I saw you only a day or two ago riding a
young horse, and you were making him go backwards and
would not let himfgo forwards.
Lynch O ! of course I must tache him that qualification
as well as others.
Mayor Why don’t you turn teetotaller ?
Lynch—l—l—l re-al-ly think I w-w-will.
Lynch was fined £2 and costs.


ROMANCE IN REAL LIFE.
William Coleman was the son of his father, and attracted
by the exciting tales of the gold diggings, he resolved to try
h.s fortune. Unwilling to probe too severely the susceptibilities
of our fair readers by a description of the parting scene
between William and the partner of his joys and sorrow, we
shall leave William up to his knees in water digging on the
Macquarie, and follow for a while the adventures of Mary
Long and anxiously did the fair Turon widow wait, and wait
and hope. No letter, no nuggets came to her. Eagerly did
she look at the daily papers for the list of gold receipts per
Escort, but amidst the names of Moses, of Samuel, and others,
the name of Mary Coleman never met her gaze. And then
the fears she endured ! Perhaps her William had become
unfaithful or forgetful! Perchance they had Lynched him!
1 oor Mary found that love, however warm, would not keep the
pot boiling ; and to relieve her necessities, she engaged herself
for a certain space of time as servant in an establishment at
Paddington, called the Asylum for Destitute Children. Mr.
John Layton was a middle aged gentleman, with silvery hair
and of diminutive stature. He was one of those persons so
difficult for the historian or the novelist to describe. At first
sight you would imagine him a member of the legal profession
but upon a closer inspection that impression would vanish. He*
would not pass for a member of the clerical profession, but a
studier of mankind would be likely to connect his appearance
with a chaunter of such lines as
“ How blest is be-e-e-e-e, wbo ne-e-e e’r consents.”
Mr. John Layton was master of the Asylum. He had a variety
of written orders to guide him in the due performance of his
duty, and one of those orders was, ‘No visitors permitted to
the servants. No lover of cold taters and scraps need venture
there, and area-loving policemen accelerated their pace as they
passed the once famous < Juniper Hall.’ The order would have
delighted Malthus, poor fellow, had he lived until now, for the
male servants were like hermits, and the females like nuns
On the afternoon of Wednesday, the 22nd of December, 1852
with ? a , djU f blrC u hed tw ° little bo^s and sen * them out
with the rest to play, when a shadow! the shadow of a man »
appeared on the ground before him ! Slowly and fearlesslv he
ItT ltVr 7™’ a r d S T a stran S e and ferocious looking form
7 WaU 1 The Stran » er wore a tattered
! b k ’ held together around the waist by a girdle made
u o some ropeyarns and the fragments of an old cotton


handkerchief. A jugular and carotid artery looking knife,
fastened by a string, peered from beneath this girdle. Mud
soiled shoes and trousers spoke of toil and travel, while a
slouched brab hat just shaded a face long a stranger to soap,
water, or razor. This wild looking being took a hop, step, and
a jump across the yard ; the next momant he stood before the
laundry door ! another, and he was clasped in the arms of
Mary Coleman ! Yes, it was her own, own William, just come
home from the diggings. He told her now his golden dream
had been tolerably well realised, and pulled out a pouch full of
the glittering ore, when, oh! the uncertainty of all human
joys! he was tapped upon the shoulder by Sergeant Hodge!
Let us pass over the screams of Mary or the vain lamentations
of the distracted digger, and bring our narrative to a close.
Yesterday, William Coleman was placed at the bar of the
Police Court, before Dr. Huntley, J. P., charged with being
illegally on the premises of the Society for the Protection of
Destitute Children, and the facts of the case were duly
attested by Sergeant Hodge and Mr. Layton. Happily for
William and Mary, the Secretary of the Society, the Rev.
A. H. Stephen, was in attendance, and said that it was not the
wish of the Society to press the charge against the accused,
but requested him in future to apply to one of the Committee
for leave to enter by the gate instead of crossing the wall,
when he wished to repeat his visit to Mary, and she should be
released from her engagement as soon as a person could be
procured to supply her place. William was restored to
liberty.
THE MARCH OF INTELLECT.
The following bull-of-tin has been freely circulated during
the week ; it is a verbatim and literatum copy.—C Division,
10th October, 1853—Memo —Lost—A black water spaniel
dog, belonging to Sergeant Ditcham. —Description : —A black
dog, with a white Brest , a little white on the nose, four feet,
white long ears, about 3 months old, go by the name of “ Dash
Sergt. Ditcham.”
A HUNGRY THIEF.
Mr. Jesse Sherlock, of Camperdown, likes a nice little
breakfast on Sabbath mornings, and as was his wont, his good-
looking, and good-natured rib, laid in a tolerably good stock
of provisions in the course of her marketings on Saturday
night. But there’s never a rose without a thorn, and, on
descending to her larder on Sunday morning, Mrs. Jessie Sher-
lock became (as the hon. and learned Member for Westmore-


land terms it) ‘patent to the fact,’ that some robber had
bui’glariously entered through their window on the ground
floor, had stolen a coat worth £3 10s., two gowns worth ,£B,
and had gourmandized a cold plum-pudding, sucked a dozen
of eggs, and drank a jug ot milk.
SCIENTIFIC CRACKSMEN DISAPPOINTED.
At a late hour of night, or rather, early in the morning,
after Mr. Lucas, publican, at Camperdown, had closed for the
night, some burglars took it into their heads to re-open his
house, at peculiarly early hours. Accordingly, they forced a
shutter, and cut an entrance through the glass with a glazier’s
diamond, but after ransacking the bar, till, &c., they only
obtained about five shillings worth of small change, with which
they decamped.
BEARDING THE POLICE.
On Tuesday last Jerry Higgins, Inspector {gin-rale) of the
Sydney Bluebottle Rangers, noticed a man of six feet two in
his shoes, named W. Beard, and whose appearance indicated
that he was a lineal descendant of Blue Beard, carrying a
brace of horse pistols in his girdle, partially concealed. Jere-
miah informed the man that it was his painful duty to take
him up. ‘lf you offer to take me up, I’ll take you down,’
returned the man with bull-dog sullenness, at the same time
levelling a pistol at the head of the Inspector. ‘ The last
hours of Jerry’ appeared at hand, when that sagacious officer
remembered the old line of the ballad—
“ Swate shillelagh never missed fire,”
Acting upon the hint, he flung his baton of office with such
accuracy of aim that he knocked the pistol out of Beard’s
hand. In a trice he had Beard’s hands in the manacles, and
on the ensuing day Beard was committed to take his trial for
the offence.


CHAPTER II.
(Continued from Page 101.)
I heave hitherto been unable to discover the author of the
adage, that ‘ misfortunes never come singly.’ In my case it
has proved too applicable. My guardian had a numerous
family, and his health and eyesight began to fail. His means
were but limited, and when my father’s affairs were arranged,
a very trifling pecuniary balance remained. My guardian was
obliged soon afterwards, in consequence of increasing age and
decreasing health, to give up his professional pursuits and
retire, from motives of economy, to the country.
He was anxious to obtain some opening for me, whereby
I might have an opportunity of pushing my way in the world,
for, with my father’s death, the idea of procuring a commission
in the army was abandoned.
Oh! how difficult I found it, even in great, wealthy Lon-
don, to procure employment somewhat suitable to my birth
and education. There are many thousands of respectable,
intelligent, and well disposed persons who internally acknow-
ledge the truthfulness of my remark. The great and wealthy
philosophise and talk lengthily about crime, it's cause, and the
means to eradicate it. I can save them their lost breath.
The gross inequality of the circumstances of mankind is the
chief cause of crime, and to level that inequality w ill prove the
most certain means to eradicate it. Talk about crime! why
to many thousands of both sexes in Great Britain it is impos-
sible, utterly so, to keep above the worse than Stygian stream
of vice and its parent, penury.
At the time of the sudden reverse of my fortunes and
prospects, neither crime or any moral dereliction had been so
much as charged against me, yet, boy as I was, I soon chilled
to notice and feel acutely that as the tale of my poverty
became knowm, my richer fellow men, aye, and fellow boys,
treated me with coolness and neglect.
“ Riches do not bring happiness,” say many w'ell-to-do
old prosers. I admit the truth of their remark, and will go
farther and allow that poverty is not directly and absolutely


misery, but it is very near akin thereto. To lack money is to
want ‘ honor, love, obedience, troops of friends it is to want
respect and sympathy, and the ordinary courtesies of society,
besides, occasionally victuals. The possession or non-possession
of money makes the difference whether life has to bean
enjoyment or a task ; whether it is to be a walk over a smooth,
verdant lawn, amid fragrant flowers, and aromatic shrubs, and
all things that minister pleasure to the senses ;or a wearisome
up-hill journey through thorns and briars, and ungracious impedi-
ments. It makes the difference whether you have to go bounding
exultingly along like the free, full-blooded courser, or wind
your way wearily and slow, like the laden and despised pack
horse.
To want money, in a highly civilized state, is to be a kind
of slave ; it is, at least, to be dependant on the whims and
caprices of others, instead of indulging in all the pleasant
eccentricities or originalities to which your temperament may
prompt you. It is to have to rise soon when you wish to lie
late, and go to bed early in order to be enabled so to do. It
is to have to liye in unwholsome and anti-respectable parts of
the City, and mix in daily communion with people whose ways
are not your ways. It is to be a drudge, a hack, a machine,
worked lor the profit and advantage of others until the springs
are broken. It is to roam about invitationless at Christmas
and other festivals, and to be omitted in family celebrations,
weddings, birthdays, or christenings. It is to put up with
equivocal nods of recognition in the streets. It is to have all
delicate sensibilities, all free and generous feelings, all aspiring
thoughts, checked and crushed within you by a petty but over-
bearing necessity. It is to have to suffer the greatest misfor-
tunes and the most contemptible vexations, and to be obliged
to be uncomfortably careful of coats, hats, and other habili-
ments. It is to put up with all these, and very many other
ills, until the temper becomes soured and the feelings
deadened!
And hypocritical mock philanthropists with blandishments
and false argument, strive to enforce the doctrine of the
righteousness of inequality ! That necessity and reason unite
in ordering that millions shall gasp in want, that thousands
may bask in gluttonous profusion ! Stop a while. They are
educating the masses. Let but the great mass of the people
become semi-educated; the scales will fall from their eyes,
and they will assert their claim to food and raiment as well as
to education.
While the ward of the talented artist, the son of a field
officer, with a brilliant prospect before me, I was uniformly


welcomed with smiles by our visitors, or in the houses whereat
we visited ; but now, when I was forlorn, and my father’s poor
but faithful friend endeavoured to procure for me a footing on
the lowest step upon one of the many ladders which point to
fame or fortune, many were the objections which were raised
to my prejudice. With one I was not old enough, while another
entertained a directly reverse opinion. Another employer ex-
pressed his belief that I had been educated in too gentlemanly
a style, and with too much care, ever to become useful. But
eventually as a great favour, a house of agency which had long
transacted business with my father, received me as a junior
clerk, giving me the munificent stipend of £52 per annum,
together with a prospect of promotion in the office. This
prospect I speedily discovered to be on the extremely per-
spective principle ; for instance, if I lived to be an octogenarian
with continued fidelity and good conduct, it was possible that
by that time my salary might be actually doubled. I entered
upon the duties of my office with a feeling very diverse from
joy, neither did I consider the salary matter of congratulation
to a youth who had received an excellent education, and was
a good scholar, linguist, and arithmetician.
Will you believe it, Paul, that nearly eight years of my
existence were consumed in that office. From morning until
night, save on Sundays, did 1 for £1 per week exert my abili-
ties to aid my employers in swindling and defrauding officers
of the Navy and Army, especially the poorer sort of officers,
out of a portion of their pay. I made several endeavours to
better my condition, or at any rate to change it, but without
relatives, fortune, or influence, my efforts were unavailing.
I have no doubt that millions of the human race are
worse off than I was during those eight years. So much more
the pity that amongst the human brotherhood such a state of
inequality should exist.
I’d rather that I had been brought into existence as a
wild dog in Australia, or a Spanish wolf, divested of other
feelings than those of sense and instinct, than possessing the
fine feelings of civilized man, return and linger out the remain-
der of my life behind the desk of, and upon the insufficient
pittance I received from—the firm of “ and Cos., Army
and Navy Agents.”
One evening after the office was closed, I was wending
homeward my lonely way in the crowded streets of London,
when the more than usually confident outcry of a newsvende-r
attracted my altention.
‘ Here’s the latest intelligence from Sydney, the capital of
Norfolk Island, vot vos used to be called Bot’ny Bay, vere


Captain Cook vos eat by the saviges,’ vociferated the man,
‘ consarnin the most howdashus lots of gold has hever vas seed
in the world afore. Bangs Peruvia and King Solomon’s Ophir
all to nothink! It vos fust diskivered by Signor Hargraves,
vot vos hemperer hof Californy huntil hit vos taken from the
Mexicans by the ’Merican general Santa Hannah. Vun doctor
has his called Kerr, has got a nugget wich had to be smash to
hattins, and hit took six vaggons to carry the pieces. Doctor
Kerr vos a going at the time to confine a black princess who
hadn’t got no money, hand hay son and heir vos the conse-
kence. And ven the princess’s husband, vot’s called King
Bungy Bungy, Sultan of Bathurst, seed his son and heir, becos
he’d not got no blunt, he gives the doctor a mountain vich
turned hout solid gold, hand so yer sees as how the doctor
did’nt do no harm by doing a charitable haction.’
Regarding this rigmarole in the light of an extravaganza,
founded on fact, I purchased the paper from the man with the
sixpence intended to procure my evening’s meal. Thenceforth
I eagerly sought for the Australian news, which I often feasted
my mind upon at the expense of my stomach, and the
astounding accounts which I read of the gold discovery and
its consequences, filled me with a desire to be freed from my
worse than servile condition, and hie to the land of hope and
promise.
It appeared to me that the Almighty Disposer of events
had ordered the revelation of the golden wealth of Australia,
to import hope into bosoms where it had either never shone,
or had long ceased to shine ; into the hearts of the millions of
the crushed, ground down, poverty stricken, sons of toil, mental
and physical; to do that which rich, proud man refused to do;
to equalize in a great measure the condition of mankind.
I resigned my clerkship, but experienced great difficulty
in procuring a passage to Sydney. At the Emigration Com-
missioner’s office I was rejected, because I stated truly that I
had only been employed as a clerk, but at the same time a
hint was given me that if I called again in the assumed
character of a shepherd or a labourer, my application would
be successful.
My reverence for sincerity and truth prevented me from
making use of the hint, and I visited in succesion every vessel
which was advertised to sail to New South Wales, and offered
my services in any capacity wherein they might be deemed
worthy of acceptance, as an equivalent for my passage.
I met with naught but refusals from the officers, and
astonishment and pity from the sailors. My very unsailorlike
appearance, dressed in a threadbare tail coat, napless beaver


hat, and other habiliments to match, was greatly against me,
and the tars, when they heard the nature of my request, gazed
at me with as much surprise, as they would have done had the
veritable Neptune himself came on board, and offered to ship
boatswain.
(TO BE CONTINI'ED.)


HELPING A CONFINE TO ESCAPE.
A couple of stout youths, named Hugh M‘lnnis and George
Lord, were charged with rescuing a man named John Cruden,
a prisoner under sentence of imprisonment for life, from
Cockatoo Island. Mr. Maurice Finnucane informed the Bench
that he is Inspector-General of Cockatoo Island horse-marines.
The defendants were allowed to call at Cockatoo Island for
ballast. The boat they called in was called a ketch, and a
day or two ago he was informed that they had ketched Johnny
Cruden. He instantly got into the guard-boat, and the Cockatoo
sea-fencibles pulled after the ketch. He stood upright on his
horse in the boat, and therefore he was higher than the ketch’s
sky-scraper. He twigged Johnny Cruden, who was making
divers clever attempts to hide himself in a two gallon
water keg. He had succeeded in getting his head in,
but could not conceal his black and yellow trousers from the
vigilant eyes of Mr. Maurice Finnucane. The youths were on
the starboard tack, as the wind was not a fair one to Sydney,
and one of them was for’ard, sweating up the jib, while the
other was gallantly beating to quarters. Maurice Finnucane
called to his men to ‘ board,’ which they did with complete
success, and without the loss of a single man. Johnny Cruden
was sent back to his prison at Cockatoo. The youths were
ordered for trial at the Central Criminal Court, and the Bench
recommended the issue of copper medals to Inspector-General
Maurice Finucane and his gallant horse-marines, who won the
glorious naval victory of the Straits of Cockatoo !
CHIN CHIN FOR JOSH.
Catherine Wallace, a blue ribboned, pink gowned, young
heroine of the pave, was charged by a filthy looking, half-caste
Tartar, with filching from him a gold ring, worth £2. The
girl had been remanded from day to day during the week for
want of an interpreter, but yesterday she was under the legal
wing of Mr. G. R. Nichols, who objected to the ‘ fast’ practice
of swearing the outcast Tartars in Sydney by allowing them to
smash plates. He considered kissing his thumb would be as
binding on the Chinaman’s conscience. The Chinaman said
his name was Sam Dicky, and he would swear by * Chin Chin
for Josh.’ Mr. Nichols urged that in China the people were
sworn by a particular caste of officers. As to ‘ Chin Chin for
Josh’ it was an image ; he had one of them as an ornament
upon his mantelpiece, and if the Magistrate wished it he would
send for it. Mrs. Ann Ford, of Cumberland-street, stated that


the Chinamen told her that one of his countrymen, named
Foo Loo, had given the ring to the girl, who was thereupon
discharged from custody.
THE HEROINE OF COOK’S RIVER.
Mrs. Elizabeth Hilton is a tall, powerful woman, whose
face outvies in colours those of a round of spiced beef. Her
nose has a very aristocratic tendency to climb between her
eyes. Her husband is a basket-maker, of hammering notoriety,
living in the suburban retreat of Cook’s River. Mrs. Hilton
displayed her buffalo-like dimensions in the witness-box, to
complain of Mr. M. Gannon, the well-known innkeeper, at Cook’s
River, and also of William Gannon, his son, for assault and
battery. The basket-maker’s wife was rigged out in a style
which completely overtopped the smartest midnight rover of
Pitt-street. Her slate coloured satin bonnet was adorned with
a complete resemblance of a fruit and flower garden. Imita-
tion sunflowers, roses, peaches, grapes, green peas, &c., &c.,
were wreathen around it in delightful variety. Her gown was
of a bright damask and black carpet pattern. Her mantle
shone like a nigger’s well-oiled skin, and her colours —her
fighting colours —nailed to her mast-head were red, white, pink,
black, green, and yellow. Thus togged out. and evidently bent
upon conquering the Magistrates by the splendour of her
appearance, with the same facility with which she has frequently
welted opponents at fisticuffs, she perpetrated the following :
—There was a slogging match, or fite a’tvveen two coves at the
River t’other afternoon. Von has his called Jones, and a
stranger cove ; Gannon, the old ’un, offers to bet a £5 on Jones,
and my husband sends for five sovereign to take on t’other.
Fluffen Bill hits out at my ’usband. I lets drive at Fiuffen, and
knocks him over a bush. Old Gannon gives me a right-handed
spank a’tween the peepers, and sends me on the broad of my
back. Up comes young Bill Gannon, and he jumps on me,
and up comes two or three of ’em, friends of Gannon, and they
jumps on me and kicks me, and precious nigh knocks the breath
hout hof me. I never hit a blow, but behaved like a baby.’
Mr. Shuttleworth appeared for the Gannons, and he proved by
his witnesses that the basket-maker’s wife was the most dan-
gerous character in the community, and a terror to all the
peaceable folks at Cook’s River. Her husband was also a very
pugnacious being, and they had put an advertisement in some
of the papers, to the effect that Hilton the basket-maker,
Elizabeth his wife, and their dogs and cocks, would fight any
like number throughout New South Wales. The witnesses
proved that on the afternoon of the row, Mrs. Hilton attacked


and knocked down a person called Fluffem Bill, who was too
drunk to defend himself; that she struck him when on the
ground; that Mr. Gannon, senr., expostulated with her on her
unwomanly and brutal conduct, when she turned upon him in
a fury, and with her husband’s aid would doubtless have
inflicted a most serious injury upon him, but for the opportune
intervention of his son. That the force used to Mrs. Hilton
was only necessary to prevent her from murdering some per-
son, as she fought with her hands, legs, teeth, and with glass
bottles, stones, and old boots. A decent looking young woman,
named Elizabeth Taylor, was the only person who gave any
colour to the statement of Mrs. Hilton, and she (Mrs. Taylor)
complained that she had been kicked in the scuffle by the
younger Gannon. Mr. Shuttleworth said that his clients were
not aware of any such fact, and knew of no reason for anything
of the sort. He advised Mrs. Taylor to effect a reconciliation
with William Gannon. The Bench gave similar advice, which
was rejected, and in consequence of the lateness of the hour,
the case of Taylor v. W. Gannon was postponed. In the case
of Hilton v. Gannon, senr. and junr., the Bench ordered Mr.
Gannon, senr., to pay £1 and costs. W. Gannon was fined 10s.
WANTED A BOOKKEEPER.
Mr. Henry Lookalive Sloman emigrated to this colony
from the sequestered shades of Dyot-street, Bloomsbury-square,
in hopes of bettering his fortunes, in consequence of a quack
political sarmint which he heard preached in the Gallowgate by
the werry reverend Dr, Done More Lang. But poor Lookalive
was blessed with a prolific vine, who annually presented him
with a Christmas box in the shape of twins. When the Look-
alive family reached Port Jackson, they naturally anticipated
being lugged nolens nolens, into an Australian palace, and there
freely fed and fattened. The extreme reverse was the case,
and they were glad eventually to ensconce themselves in a six
feet by four garret in a rookery in the back slums of Sydney.
Not a place was advertised but poor Lookalive was a candidate
tor it. Light Porter, Bottler off, Accountant, Butler ;in fact
he w 7 as ready to do anything for his daily bread ; but then the
three pair of twins ! and the prospect of as many more! were
such obstacles. Poor Mr. Sloman’s linen was reduced to a
single shirt, and that, alas ! was in the wash at Missus Ann
Smith’s, in Clarence-street. A day or two ago, “ Wanted a
Bookkeeper” appeared in the newspaper advertisements. “ The
very thing!” exclaimed Mr. and Mrs. Lookalive in a duet.
But ho w was poor L. to go? His shirt had not come from the
wash. His excellent wife left him to nurse his last born babies,


and hurried off to Mrs. Smith’s. Judge her horror upon per-
ceiving that worthy laundress’s house on fire, and Mr. Bown
standing on the flaming roof leading the hose of the Insurance
Company’s engine, which hurled a volume of water in conflict
with the flames! After a tremendous struggle the water
obtained the victory over the fiery element; but not until the
latter had devoured the only shirt of Mr. Lookalive Sloman,
who was thus debarred from contesting the election for the
office of Bookkeeper with two or three hundred other candi-
dates. It is rumoured that poor Mr. Lookalive is still between
the blankets, being unable to appear in public for want of a
shirt.
A VISIT TO THE RAILWAY.
Many of the citizens of this metropolis, and especially
the new-comers, are fond of paying a visit to the Railway
Works at Paddington ; but if the terminus is an Australian
lion, much more so is John Walker, Esq., commander-in-chief,
full constable in ordinary, &c., &c. Mr. John Walker is a nutty
looking old gent, marvellously possessed by the demon of
irritability, and “ war-hawk I” to any cockney individual who
selects the railway embankment for the end of his Sunday
walk. Mr. John Walker rushes upon him like a pet terrier
upon a rhinoceros, and invests his person in the nearest watch-
house in a ‘ quarter less than no time.’ Last Sunday two
respectably dressed young men, named Maurice Evans and
George Clarke, took a walk to the railway. ‘ Pon onor,’ said
Maurice, ‘it’s werry sky-antiffic, so it be.’ Mr. John Walker
instantly grasped the back of Maurice s cranium, and hoorooshecl
him along the road into the little temple of Janus near trinity
Church. Mr. John Walker speedily retraced his steps, but,
judge his astonishment upon perceiving Mr. G. Clarke, with his
hands under the lappels of his Oxonian, taking a lunar of the
railway works. Old Johnny Walker grappled with the inter-
loper, and stopped not until he had placed him side by side
with Mr. Evans. On the following morning Messrs. Evans and
Clarke were presented at the Mayor’s levee, and Old Johnny
Walker detailed his numerous honorary titles, more numerous
than those pertaining to a first chop Mandarin, or a Pacha of
nine tails. The Mayor was very inquisitive in his examination
of Old Johnny Walker, requiring to be informed if that worthy
bore any propinquity to the famous Hooke Y. Walker, lately a
candidate for publicity. Old Johnny Walker seemed desirous
to avoid the question, but being hard pressed by
his Worship he made an acknowledgment of relation * by the
mother’s side.’ The Mayor then sentenced Mr. >l. Evans to


pay to her Majesty the sum of one shilling, but Mr. Clarke was
entirely exonerated from blame. The Mayor also expressed
his opinion, that the conduct ot Mr. John Walker in dragging
visitors to the watch-house was ‘rather too much of the mon-
key,’ an opinion which was received with murmurs of applause
by a multitude of people in the Court.
OUT OF THE FRYING PAN, &c.
A young man, named James Gibson, was brought before
the Magistrates, charged under the following circumstances.
In the early part of last December he hired as cook to Mr. J.
Ewen, of Lower George-street, for six months. On Christmas
Day a number of friends and relations were invited to partake
their Christmas cheer at the board of Mr. Ewen and family.
The materials of a sumptuous repast were provided, and the
family went to church, leaving Gibson to cook the dinner. It
is to be hoped that the reverend gentleman who officiated in
the pulpit on the occasion, dwelt upon the virtues of absti-
nence and patience, for the Ewen family and friends needed
strong spiritual consolation to atone for their material loss.
Upon their return home they ascertained that the intended
feast day had been turned into a day of fasting, consequent
upon the scampish conduct of the cook Gibson, who had
absconded, leaving the dinner uncooked. The next notice Mr.
Ewen received of the existence of Gibson was, that that un-
worthy had been doomed to a six months’ residence on the
delightful island of Cockatoo, for not being able to keep his
fingers to himself. Last Monday Gibson, whose period of
imprisonment had expired, was met by his quondam master,
Mr. Ewen, who had not forgotten the Christmas affair, and
who gave him into custody. Mr. Dowling and Dr. Huntlev,
who were the presiding Magistrates, sentenced Gibson to a
month’s locking-up at Darlinghurst.


CHAPTER III.
(Continued from Page 113.)
One day I had quitted a fine vessel bound for Sydney, my
application having been refused, when a noble looking sailor-
like personage, who was' hastening on board, took particulai
notice of me. I in turn had a faint remembrance of his features.
At length he addressed me, and upon my mentioning my name
and parentage, he at once made himself known to me. He had
been a young officer in the Sherbourne. When a little boy I
sailed in that vessel from Calcutta to England. He was com-
mander of the vessel which I had just quitted, and he welcomed
me on board.
After a fine and agreeable voyage, I arrived here m
Sydney, and when my friend the captain once more set sail
for old England, he provided me with means to support myself,
as he said, for my services as clerk, in helping to keep his
journal, so that neither he nor I doubted that ere I had run
through the money, I should be in the road to fortune.
My heart panted and my eyes watered with unfeigned
gratitude, when I bade farewell to the captain and my other
shipmates, and the pretty vessel set sail down the haibour of
Port Jackson.
The first thing requisite upon my landing in Sydney, was
to procure suitable lodgings, until I should either proceed to
the gold diggings, or procure employment, and for information
on this point, I appealed to the waterman, who was sculling
me in his wherry from the vessel to the strand. He was a
hardy, wiry old fellow, with a deep mahogany complexion, and
a face seamed like a sailor’s biscuit, and I found him wonder-
fully communicative, so much so, that he told me all he knew,
and a little over.
«if it’s lodgings you want, Pm the chap as can plant you
upon out-and-outers,” said Hawlwell, for such I understood from


the letters in the boat was his nan)e. “ Don’t g*o by no means
to put up at a lush crib, for they landlords and landladys ’ll
think you’re a robbing on em, ’cept yer ailers as drunk as a
tiddler. And do’nt go to none on em ere half ’spectable cribs,
vere em calls it ‘ board and residence thems the worsest
places for prog in the town. But I’ll take yer to a first-rate
place in Kent-street; altho’ it’s nothing much to look at, it’s a
rattling place for grub and bub. It’s keep by an old ’ooman
named O’Callaghan, wot keeps cows, and pigs, goats, chickens,
and other domestic reptiles. I’ll take yer and introduce you
to the old ’ooman ; yer’l find her rough and ready.”
“ But tell me,” said I, “ which is the best gold field for me
to go to ; or if respectable situations are plentiful in Sydney.”
“ Why as to that,” replied Hawlwell, “ the Turon’s done,
at least for ah but the knowing ouns, and as to Tambiroory, I
can’t recommend it. Then the other diggings on this side are
pretty well hockipied, and you’re too bran new a chum to do
much good at ’em. As for Ballyi’at, and them other places on
to ther side, yer very likely never to be herd on no more if yer
goes to them, fact hevery thing’s dull jist now at the diggings
everywhere ; at one they’ve got too much water, and at another
too little, tho’ these ere ‘ our correspondents' keeps the pot
boiling, a writing long twisters to the papers, which’ood make
a Johnny Raw ’spect that the roads were lined with gold ; such
articles about ‘ good hindikations here,’ and ‘ quartsose’ there,
but them fellers writes by the line. Now, as for sitivations,
there’s plenty' in Sydney, that’s to say ’spose you can cook a
dinner, or vait at table, or drive an oss ;or if yer likes hunger
and ease, they’ll give yer five bob a day to crack stones for the
Corporation. But I takes it that you couldn’t cook a dough-
boy, nor do nothing menial, but you’re a sort of a swell cove,
wot ud do for coloniel sekerterry, or guv’ner general, or
’torney’s clerk, or such like games, and a lucky feller yer’l be
if yer ketches any on them ere billets. There’s more swells
out of luck than Jews (and they be plentiful,) in Sydney. Von
thing 1 11 put yer a fly to ; yer’l not do no good without plenty
brass, or cheek, or whatever yer likes to call it. Ailers speak
up well for yerself, and you’ll stand a chance in Sydney. But
here us is at the cirkeeler wharf. Do yer know vy they calls>
it the cirkeeler wharf? by cos it’s nearly straight! Come my
lad, 111 pilot yer to mother Callagan’s, and ven yer gets a good
billet come and let us know and I’ll put yer a fly to summat,
for I knows a little I assure yer. And vy shouldn’t I, ven I’ve
been knocked about in this colony since I wos a kid, and as
had been knocked about and no gammon.”
With my little bundle under my arm, I accompanied the


lood Matured waterman, who took me to what he called a ‘cir-
ambendibus’ to shew me the principal streets.
The magnificent gold and jewel shops in George-street
stonished me, as no doubt they do all new comers, and im-
ressed me with an idea of the solid nature of the wealth that
country, of which this was the metropolis, contained. My
uide next led me through the principal portion of Pitt-street,
dth it’s splendid display of silks, satins, and drapery of eveiy
escription, with the numerous young shopmen habited, as the
rticles in their shops were ticketed, in the ‘ first style of
ashion.’ The streets presented at that time of evening, by
•as-light, a very gay and animated appearance, and I contrasted
he equality, on the score of good clothing, and spirited appear-
tnce, of all the people who passed me in the streets, with the
narked distinction between the very poor and the very rich to
)e met at every step in London.
My guide took me down Park street, into a dark gloomy
ooking street which he called Druitt-street, where our atten-
tion was soon attracted to a severe struggle which was going
an between two men, to the infinite delight of a large mob of
children who cheered them on with cries of ‘ give it him,
‘ don’t be grabbed Paddy,’ ‘ hit him where yer father stuck the
pig,’ and many similar jokes.
We discovered that one of the combatants was a police-
man, who was vainly attempting to take his adversary to the
neighbouring station-house. As soon as we came near, the
policeman by a desperate effort, released himself from the
grasp of the man, and called on us in the Queen s name for
aid. At this moment an Inspector of Police arrived. “ Who
the divil are you ?” inquired the inspector of the battered
policeman, whose hat was flattened, the tails torn oh his coat,
and was plastered with mud from top to bottom.
“ My name’s Denny Hogan,” replied the novice, “ and it s
taking dish rashkil sure enough I was.”
“ Wat’s the charge ?” asked the inspector.
“ Salt with hintent,” replied the sub, “ to do may sum gra-
vious bothily arm ! Its a walken I was anent that bagabones
house, when over comes a thumping big sthone, and hits me
on the hat and mashiates it! Ha! ha! says I, sure and 111
have yer presently. Over comes another mortial big baste of
a sthone and skelps me on the head itself! 1 sees dish villin
by the fence, and seizes him by the scruff of the
« Was it you dat flung the shtone ?’ says hi; ‘ troth it was not,’
says he. ‘ Come hout of dat!’ says hi; ‘ how can hi cum hout
lion hit, ven I’m not into hit !’ says he. ‘Disperse!’ says hi;
* how can one man disperse ?’ says he. So vid dat 1 sculldrags


him to get him to the watch-house, and he sculldrags me to
get away.”
“ Well! and so you’ve been fighting the man for that!’’
replied the inspector,’ while some thavish divils have cracked
old Simpkins, jist round the corner, and sacked two hundred
and fifty pounds besides jewellery ! Of all the uninteresting
double distilled, contaminated, dem’d obnoxious specimens of
superlative humbug, dat ever came from the bogs to wield the
shillelagh in Sydney, your the double milled infinitive, as sure
as my name’s Jerry Higgins ! Get away yer big baste Denny
Hogan, and go on yer bate !
Leaving Jerry Higgins and his sub, we turned the corner
into Kent-street, and were in a few minutes at the house of
Mother O’Callagan, as she was usually termed. The outside of
the edifice first attracted my astonishment, being one of those
old buildings which were hastily put up in old times, when the
future importance of the City was scarcely so much as imagined.
It was stuck upon a mass of rocks, creating the belief that the
street had been formerly about twenty feet higher than at
present. So insecure did it look in the uncertain gas-light, as
to occasion the unpleasant impression that any two or three
powerful men mischievously inclined, could prize the entire
building off its perch, by means of a lever, into the street
beneath. The grotesque appearance of the building was in-
creased by several modern additions, which had been found
necessary on account of the increasing population, and the
increased popularity of Mother O’Callaghan as a board and
lodging-house keeper.
On each front window was pasted half a sheet of foolscap,
inscribed with the following notice :
bord han Loggin here
for singil ginthilmin han their
wives han childer if so be they’ve
got hany by Judith 0 Callagan.
The front door was open, and my conductor without ceremony
led me in, shouting out ‘ halloa mother, come here if ye ar’nt
dead!’
The worthy hostess soon presented herself. She was a
hale, powerful looking dame, of about five and forty, with a
perpetual grin on her features, as if some time pre-
vious she had laughed so excessively that her mouth never
afterwards resumed its regular shape.
“ Arrah Hawlwell,” said she, “ it’s right glad lam to see
yer; I’ll send for a ball of whatever yer like. Here ! Mary


lan ! fetch a bottle and get a pint of brandy. Come here for
CI A rough Hibernian brogue, which of course emanated from
[ary Anne, who was in an adjoining bed-room, answered,
husht yer clatter, and wate a wile, till I puts hon my mante-
“ Och did ye hever hear the like!” shouted Mrs.
I’Callagan, “it’s coming to something with these sarvant gals
i Sydney ! Divil a shoe nor a shstockin did Mary Han ever
3 e sight of afore she cammed here, but now! woo! look at
er’” „ i
* This was said just as Mrs. O’Callagan’s maid of all work
queezed her extensive silk surronndibus, protruded all arouni
y her hooped and starched under garments. An ill-shape
Jack mass, like a coal sack split down the middle, and termed
„ mante-de-la-reine, covered her upper person, being seemed
n»the front by an enormous cameo brooch, which in cases
iXessity would have served the purpose of a frying pan. Her
lead was surrounded by a fire coloured silk bonnet,Rimmed
mtside with a profusion of green ribbons, and by two tl g
'esembling congreve rockets in explosion. Inside it was orna-
mented by imitation broad beans in blossom, cherries,
asparagus, and other floral, fruit, and vegetable adornments.
This elegant young creature was armed with a aige size ,
amber coloured pfrasol, which she handled.with the grace
attributed to a bear when being instructed m the manual exer-
cise with a musket. Her nose was at once the most prominent
and the most pretensions feature of her face being a sort
superior to turned-up, and generally distinguished as coc .
Her lips were protuberant, particularly the lower one, dis
playing two rows of formidable teeth which would be reckoned
handsome if pertaining to a pony. hnndv
Having received the bottle and the price of the brandy,
Mary Ann Sas again disconcerted. ‘By jabers, exclaimed she
• 1 can’t find my retikal! and my podmunhay is in it! Dye
think I’m going widout my retikal ? not 1 by jabirs .
At length the reticule was found, the brandy was produced,
and after the boatman had canted half ot it into his gullet,
prepared to depart. ‘ And now mother, he remarked, mind
Ld give this young gentleman (introducing me) the height ot
Zod treatment. He’s a particular friend of mine We ve been
pals together in old times in many a capital freak, so use him
kindly for my sake.’ . , Q , p . t _ r St p atr ick
Dame O’Callaghan having invoked St. letei, St. Fatric ,
and numerous other Saints, to bear witness to her promise of
treating me as if I was ‘ her own blessed born son, Havvlwc


shook me heartily by the hand and took his leave. I felt
grateful for the kind interest which he had so generously dis-
played in my behalf, although I certainly wished he had not
drawn so extensively on imagination with regard to the palship
and roystering affair. Mary Ann took a light and showed me
to my dormitory, and I was soon in the arms—not of Mary
Ann —but of Morpheus.
(to be continued.)


I JOHN CHINAMAN.
One of the flashest-looking. moon-faced first cousins of
le Sun, who ever quitted the regions of his Tartaric Acid
taiesty, in the vain hope of bettering his fortune by entering
ie service of an Australian Shepherd-King, was placed at the
ar before Dr. Mitchell and Mr. Chambers, J.P.’s, for stealing
ie’entire Sunday suit of ‘Lee Tin/another Celestial. Mr.
Isesar acted as interpreter.
Prisoner—How many years you go givee me f Me no
are (In fact Mr. John Chinaman had picked up the
wearing portion of the British language with remarkable
acility.) You givee me five or six years, and soon as I comee
ut, I settle that Tartar superhumanary. Yes, and me settel
The Magistrates seemed greatly shocked. They consulted
00-eter for some time. At any rate they laid their heads together.
rhey came to the determination of giving wretched John
Chinaman such a dose, that prussic acid is a fool to it. They
jommitted John for trial at the Quarter Sessions, and, mirabile
iictu, decreed, that after the sentence of the Judge, consequent
ipon a verdict of guilty being returned by the Jury, should
mve expired, that he, John Chinaman, should give bail to keep
the peace to all her Majesty’s subjects. On being removed
from the dock, John gave expression to a very warm meeting
which he anticipates at the ‘ consummation of all things, in the
following classical language. ‘ You two old . [the res
is libellous.]
THE PIRATE CREW.
Mary Ann Crew, a thick-lipped, cock-nosed female, of
remarkably accommodating habits, was charged, by Blue 9 b
with stealing seven sovereigns from the trousers’ pocket of a
roving digger, who was smitten by her charms. But officer 9
B unfortunately, or fortunately, (as you like it,) forgot the name
of the robbed man, which was Bill Houlder. The Mayor as
how the man was to be called if the policeman had forgotten
his name ? Poor 9 B was in a disagreeable dilemma, but with
thorough Hibernian wit, he cleared himself by calling out
‘Och! call anyone. Och! honey; call Mickey Brian. Ihe
aristocratic nomenclature of Mick Brian, with the pretty
variations of the police, some of whom called ‘ Ryan, ‘ Cayenne,
< O’Shine/ cum multis aliis, resounded through the Court, but ot
couise the hapless Bill Houlder never contemplated that he
was the party invited to the testifying ken. Therefore, as no
person responded to the call for Mickey Brian, &c., Mary Ann
Crew was discharged for want of a prosecutor, and hoisting


her piratical skull and marrowbones, she unmoored, set sail,
and stood to the nor’ard.
UNLAWFUL WEAPONS.
John Short, a bald-headed, cranky-looking, elderly man,
whose frontispiece was splashed with blood, which he seemed
to have taken peculiar care not to wash off, was charged by 9
B Shields, with assaulting him. It appeared, from the evidence
of Shields, that the prisoner lives in Durand’s-alley. At a
late hour of night an Amazon, called Mrs. Short, was dragging
about, and ill-using an unfortunate female. Shields interfered,
when Short and a couple of old female companions rushed upon
him, and compelled him to retreat. He procured the aid of
Sheppard, 8 B, and returned to the charge. Short rushed out
of his hovel with a most formidable iron bar, and struck Shields
such a desperate blow, that he sent the bar clean through the
rim and body of his hat, as if he had struck him with a sword,
and cut him also on the temple. Shields then prostrated the
cowardly brute by a blow of his baton, and wounded and bleeding
as he was, with the aid of Sheppard, he secured both Short
and the woman, and in spite of the ruffians who attempted a
rescue, took them both to the watch-house. The woman was
fined 55., and discharged next morning, but Short was detained
for the assault. Dr. Rutter testified to the dangerous nature
of the blow which had been struck by Short, and passed an
eulogium on the manufacturer of Shields’ oilskin non-ventilator
which had saved his skull from fracture.
Mayor—Have you any witness ?
Short —Faith and I’ve my wife.
Woman—Don’t tell lies, man, I aint yer wife.
Short —I’ve got several of the most respectable and in-
fluential gintilmin of Durand’s-alley, male and feymale.
Mayor—You can bring them at your trial; you stand
committed to take your trial at the Quarter Sessions.
CHARGE OF ASSAULT AND ROBBERY AGAINST A HORSE-POLICEMAN.
Andreas Brown, a horse policeman, dressed in a light green
coatee, lilac vest, striped pants, and a policeman’s cap, and who
wore his plain clothes in consequence of being suspended
for previous drunkenness, surrendered to his bail, to answer
the charge of assaulting and robbing a young man, named Wil-
liam Norman, at night, in Pitt-street. Mr. Nichols defended
the prisoner. Norman said that the prisoner met him in the
street, knocked him down, and forcibly took a crown and two
half crowns out of his trousers’ pocket, which he tore. Andreas
then gave him in charge for assaulting him in the execution of


lis duty ! This, of course, must have been a false charge, in-
smucli as Andreas Brown was in plain clothes, and was sus-
ended, therefore he could not have been upon duty. Norman
wore most positively to the fact of the robbery. He said that
-hen seized by two foot policemen to be dragged to the watch-
ouse, he complained to one of them tnat he had been lobbed,
iiit finding no notice taken of his assertion, he held his peace
ntil bailed out by his friends. Two policemen and a sergeant
-ere called into the witness-box to clear Andreas, but although
hey slightly contradicted one another in some points, the
’olice Magistrate discharged Andreas Brown from custody.
A TREACHEROUS COMRADE.
Henry Cunningham, a sandy complexioned young soldier,
>elonging to the Band of the Xlth Regiment, was placed at the
>ar by Sergeant D 1, charged with assaulting Mr. C. I. Clarke,
>f Miller’s Point, and robbing him of a gold watch and chain,
md £2 2s. 6d. Mr. Clarke stated that he had been enjoying
i glass with a friend, when they were intruded upon by the
soldier, who could not be got rid of, and who took so sudden
i liking to Mr. Clarke that he actually clasped him in his arms
md kissed him. They were in public-houses and in the streets
until 4 a. m., having walked about since the shutting up of the
Victoria Theatre. Mr. Clarke drank three bottles of soda
water and a nobbier of gin. The soldier drank several glasses
of port wine. Mr. Clarke’s friend had gone home, but the
soldier stuck to him like a leech. Witness met a lamplighter
on his patrol, and the soldier called out to the lamplighter that
Mr. Clarke had plenty of money. The lamplighter recom-
mended him to take it from him. Acting upon this advice, the
soldier soon afterwards pounced upon Mr. Clarke, and foicibly
deprived him of his watch, chain, purse, and money. The
soldier then beat a quick retreat. Mr. Clarke made application
to the Sergeant-Major at the Military Barracks, and that non -
commissioned officer beat the band up from their sleeping
quarters. The watch and chain of Mr. Clarke were found in
the prisoner’s bed. The Sergeant-Major said that the prisoner
made no secret of having the watch, alleging that it had been
entrusted to his safe-keeping by Mr. Clarke. He also gave the
prisoner, who is only 21 years of age, a good character. The
prisoner was committed for trial.
COOPER A.T HOME, OR COOPER ABROAD.
On Wednesday last Mr. James Couper was engaged at the
Police Court, in a suit to eject an old market gardener named
Benson, from his horn and garden at Rushcutter’s Bay. Ben-


son spoke very ably in his own defence, but was not a match
for Mr. Cooper, backed as he was by Mr. Johnson, solicitor.
In the course of the trial Benson denied that Mr. Cooper had
any claim upon the premises. * But/said the Police Magistrate,
‘ he is agent for Mr. Daniel Cooper, abroad !’ ‘ What!’ ex-
claimed Mr. Johnson, ‘ do you call England abroad ? I always
considered England at home.’ * That’s a matter of opinion,’
retorted the Police Magistrate, ‘you may call it at home, but
we Currency lads call it abroad, and this our home.’ With
regard to the ejectment case, Benson was ordered out, furni-
ture, fruit, vegetables, and all. He was also ordered to pay
three guineas costs.
POLICE PROTECTION.
James Ryan, a stout stalwart man, who seems to be so
universally beloved by the Royal Blues of Sydney that they
take every possible opportunity of making his acquaintance by
giving him lodging ( gratis ) in their strongholds, was charged by
a fine looking young Indigo, named Sheppard, 88, with riotous
conduct at the corner of Pitt and Goulburn-streets. It seems
that a harem is established near that locality, and about mid-
night 8 B detected Ryan endeavouring to force an entrance
through one of the windows, to the great terror of the feminine
inmates. They were screaming piteously, like a number of
tortoiseshell pussies tied with their tails across a line, and Ryan
had nearly stormed a practicable breach, when 8 B approached
to do battle for the fair ones.
Ryan—Did not you almost crack my shins with your
waddy ?
8 B—l only gave you a blow or two in self-defence.
Ryan—Did not a gentleman complain, and cry out ‘ shame
upon you !’ for hitting me on the shins ?
8 B—How can I tell he was a gentleman ?
Ryan —Vy you must know he was a gentleman ; cos vy !
he vore a vite at !
8 B said he would have taken the gentleman also for being
drunk and kicking up a row, if he had had sufficient assistance.
Ryan then exhibited his shins to the Bench. They seemed
to have certainly been ‘ touched upon the raw/ and the Magis-
trates therefore let him off upon payment of the small sum of
a shilling and costs.
FEMALE BATTLE ROYAL.
Mary Anne Pedley was shoved up against the prisoner’s
box, to answer the complaint of another female scold, for
assault and battery. The prosecutrix, Mary Anne Martin, and


the defendant were denizens of a mellifluous lane which runs
from the Golden Gate in George-st. and Kent-street. They had
a row. The defendant and a female crony attacked the domicile
of the plaintiff. They broke the lock of the door, but the plaintiff
with her feminine gossip gallantly resisted the assailants, and
soused them heartily with the suds of their washing-tubs. The
attackers ultimately took the fortress by assault, and then
Mary Anne gave the ancient female a hammering. Dame Martin
appealed to the Magistrates, and they fined Pedley Is. and costs.
LATEST NEWS FROM ENGLAND 1— LONDON TAKEN BY THE FRENCH!! !
The A.S.S. screw steamer Hokeypokey, which arrived from
Coventry late last night, brought us an old file of papers. We
extract the following thrillingly exciting news : ‘ Boneyparte
the Third has made the long expected coup dC etat upon la per-
fide Albion. He gulled the British fleet to a muzzle to muzzle
encounter with the fell Russian Bear, w'hen at the signal of
command the French cried same qui pent, ’bout ship, and left
the English Admiral Thingumbob, Lord Dontknowhoo, to
grapple with Bruin. On the 32nd of the same month, the
French fleet suddenly landed at Kidderminster, debarked their
troops, scaled the walls of Hounslow Heath, and issued the fol-
lowing bulletin ‘ Soldiers of the Empire! Victory has
crowned our Eagles! We are avenged! The thousands of
English slain appease the manes of those French who gave
their last groan on the field of W 7 aterloo ! Let us now be mer-
ciful as we have been triumphant! Let quarter be granted to
those English men and ladies who seek it, and acknowledge
themselves the subjects of Napoleon III! But there is one
exception to the rule of mercy. No quarter is to be given to
Punch, that unalterable foe of France ! Crow'welle Monkeyface,
Marshal of France.’ On the following day 6 divisions of the
French army of occupation, moved, under the command of
chosen generals, against No. 58, Fleet-street, the citadel of
Punch. The Londoners generally fled at the approach of the
conquering Gauls, but Punch hoisted an oriflamme, and
ensconced in his fortress proclaimed his stern resolve to defend
it to the last. But superior numbers triumphed. The French
played upon the place with 50 pieces of cannon, while Punch
in return threw out odd copies of his journal among the
soldiers, who, on looking at them, generally split their jaws with
laughter, and expired with cachinnatory convulsions. But at
length the ammunition of Punch was exhausted, a breach was
effected; Pimch was taken, decapitated, drawn, and quartered ,
his quarters to be sent through the different provinces to terrify
the wretched inhabithants !”


THE ADVENTURES OF TOM NEWBERRY.
0
CHAPTER IV.
■
(Concluded from Pare 124.)
“ ALL S WELL THAT ENDS WELL.”
I found the character which Hawlwell had given me of
my hostess, a true one in every particular. She was rough and
ready, but never ill-tempered. The table was spread with
wholesome abundance. The house was kept clean, and at the
same time the charge was reasonable. I was anxious to pro-
cure a situation, in which, if I gained nothing else, I at least
might obtain colonial experience ; but I was astonished at the
obstacles which stood in my way. My only sources of informa-
tion were from the waterman Hawlwell, and from the daily
papers, wherein I read numbers of advertisements for clerks,
book-keepers, accountants, secretaries, and other offices which
1 would gladly have accepted, but always found the advertiser’s
offices besieged with hosts of applicants, most of whom
possessed what in Sydney is deemed of vast importance, ‘ testi-
monials of competency, character, &c.’ Some of the gentry
whom I met upon these errands, were fortified with enormous
and numerous testimonials, looking voluminous enough to con-
tain the history not only of the applicants’ life, but of his
primogenitors since the landing of Hengist and Horsa.
One evening in passing the Royal Hotel, the sounds of
great noise and cheering attracted my notice, and prompted
me to enter. Two or three hundred persons, mostly of an
appearance a grade between a respectable man and a common
labourer, were surrounding a platform, upon which about a
dozen vulgar looking but well dressed men were seated or
standing.
I asked one of the spectators the reason of the assem-
blage. He gazed at me whh unconcealed astonishment and
contempt.
“What’s it about,” ejaculated the man, with ineffable
disdain; “ why ain’t yer heerd ? you must be a new chum and
a spanker ! why it’s about the hedikating kevestion ! and thes
ere s a meeting of the ne-plus-bultra radicals wots all in favour


of the manuale-planiferous system has I thinks they calls hit;
that’s not to bose a boy’s head with such rubbish as Greek and
Latin, and grammar, and mathematics, and history, and music,
and drawing, and dancing, but to teach him—to teach him—
oh! it’s surnmat else, but you’ll soon hear, here cums the
horators.”
As the man came to this abrupt conclusion, a tall gentle-
man, dressed in black, came on to the front of the platform.
“ Gentle-mew,” he began, emphasizing the last syllable,
after that the cheers which greeted his appearance had died
away ; “ gentle-men, the ultrademocratic expressions of some
persons in this community meet no responsible sentiment in
the curticle of my bosom. Ido not opine that the eventful
moment has arrived when the erection of Australia into an
entirely independent state would prove extra superlatively and
transcendantly felicitous. We are not ripe, gentle-mew, we are
notripe! [A voice—Tell us about the cloven foot.] No! I
did not come hither to answer for the appearance of that
article in the journal under my direction, but I came to address
the mob (terrible uproar; two or three little fights.) Tun-
bellied Chairman—Order, order, you pack of ragamuffins.]
I came to address the sovereign people (tremendous cheering)
upon the vital import of the great question—the question of
questions —the question which we are assembled to agitate
Educates ! (Loud cheers.) My battle-cry shall ever be,
« Educate them-asses!’ Yes, gentle-men, my last thoughts by
night, and my waking aspirations, shall ever be Education—
that the mob, (another uproar) the sovereign people (cheers)
be educated ! Then shall the voice of bad grammar be no
more heard! Then, instead of seeing with grief, rough men
meet in the street with their ‘ how’s every inch of you,’
and * how do you weather the gale ?’ we shall hear the meanest
labourers exclaim at meeting, ‘ Salve Paddy ’ Sis to quoque
salvus, Mr. Connelly.’ (Great applause ) Therefore with my
latest breath will 1 exclaim ‘ educate them-asses.’ My tomb-
stone shall contain the simple inscription, ‘ educate them-
asses.’ (Cheers and confusion, occasioned by some foolish
men imagining that the speaker pointed at them during his
gesticulation, and termed them ‘ asses.’)
As it was near Dame O’Callagan’s supper time, I withdrew
from the Royal, just as a gentleman, whose name I heard
mentioned as Daniel Coughlan, commenced a flowery oration
on the importance of education.
The worthy hostess presented me with a note which had
been left for me by Hawlwell. Its contents ran as follow :


Dear Tom,—
A gen’lman liof the press, named Diehard, as wears a wite at and a wherry
big’ed informed me that a wacancv was open for a particklarly well hedit ated
gen’lman, as a riter in the Ligisslatif Council, He says as how he's bidding for
it, and as got wonderful hinterest—hall the middle class aristocracy has rekee-
mended him ; has Mouncasbel the imminent ’after, Hill id the fancy shoemaker,
Cleave, the king of the butchers, Geordie, the head baker, Vilsin the vonderful
vatchmaker, Benjim, the mognificent builder, Bill Long, the bottle-nosed wine
merchant, with many others of equal influence. But don t you be alarmed at all
at this. I’ll lay my boat and oars that if you goes to vork by my direkshins,
you’ll get the billet, and a good un it his ; four hundred a year and nothink to do,
paid monthly,
In the fust place I've gotten more hinfluence at ’ed quarters than some people
reckon for. Some of the gentry who hold their eds highest owes a deal of favors
to me, and if I told tales about the parties who sometimes use my boat for their
picnic parties, there’d be a screw or two loose. Sometimes it s Captain , and
Mrs , and a few friends of the bexecuttof, with ladies to match They
generally looks out for my boat, for they knows I’m the wrong mark to peach on
’em. Now you just draw out a couple of. what dye call ’em, testimonials and
put my name to one on ’em, and Judith O’Callagan to the other. At ten o’clock
to-morrow morning spruce yourself up, and don't lose your time kicking your heels
at the colonial sekeetories hoffice, for he's a going away 1 knows for a fact, and
therefore he won’t bother his head. Do you go straight to the Australian Club,
in Bent-street, and ax to see Captain . Shew him the testimonials and tell
him as how Tom Hawlwell will take it as a partikler favour if he'll give you a
lift.
You 11 find it as right as one o’clock, and so no more at present from your
well-wisher,
Thomas Hawlwell.
Tom Newberry, Eskvire,
Old Mother O Callagan’s. Kent-street.
A man in necessity will grasp at anything. My purse was very
nearly empty, and at the hour mentioned by the waterman, I
stood under the verandah of the Club. The waiters informed
me that Captain had not called, but would probably do so in
the course of the morning. I took a seat, and could not help
taking notice of what was going forward. The Club seemed to
to consist of two distinct sorts of persons. Several elderly
gentlemen were seated at tables, eagerly occupied in reading-
papers, books, and pamphlets, and one respectable old indivi-
dual was gesticulating vehemently before a looking-glass. I
subsequently ascertained that he was a member of the Council,
practising his speech for the evening on the Bathurst burr
question.
A knot of young men, mostly moustachiod, and many of
them extensively bearded ; some dressed in fantastique desha-
billes, and some in the height of fashion, were lounging in a
corner, talking and laughing loudly.
I was soon convinced of the justice of my opinion that two
different castes of persons composed the Club, for I occasionally
heard some of the seniors mutter ‘ pert young scamps,’ while
the junior members, when alluding to the cithers, styled them
‘ fusty old muffs.’


I Presently I heard the name of Captain - mentioned,
,and perceived a tall, fine looking young man, in a light summer
)a t and a drab hat, with a profusion of curling, fair moustaches,
iter the hall. He was accompanied by a gentleman about
s own height, similar in features, but whose hair and whiskers
ere glossy black, or very dark brown. The latter gentleman
ore no moustaches, and the only nomenclature which I heard
ttached to him was ‘ Georgey.’ , e
One of the waiters having mentioned the purport of my
isit, Captain was advancing towards me, but at the
loment two other gentlemen entered and joined the thiong o
oun«- gentlemen. The elder of these two was a cadaverous
Licking personage, with a crop of fair frizzly hair around is
ps, chin, and cheeks, and on his head, which gave him, at least
is features, a similarity to those of a domesticated I olar hern.
le was dressed in light summer clothing. His companion
ras habited in the finest West of England broad cloths, his
•oat being cut Newmarket fashion, and furnished with arge
,right metal buttons. He had a chubby, rosy face, and the
•■ait of a rich booby. . „ ,
The hairy faced debauchee led Captain from the
.hrong a few paces, but within my hearing, and observed in a
raice a little above a whisper, ‘ must fetch him out Uiptain ,
dch as Crossus; bought a slap up station on the Darling .
twenty thousand sheep, herds of cattle I 1 H introduce him to
our lot.’ Then stepping forward he commenced the intro-
duction of the novice. ‘ Captain , Mr. Brasnose ; Mr.
Brasnose, the Captain. Georgie. Mr. Brasnose ; Mr. Biasnose,
Georgie. Gummy, Mr. Brasnose ; Mr. Brasnose, Gummy, bo
the introductory course went on until the Captain and his lot
were introduced to the young gent, who soon shook his feathers
and commenced a conversation— ‘ dem’d remarkably Peasant
gals in this confounded country,’ said Mr. brasnose. Ah
you young dog,’ responded Gummy, you’ve found that all
already, have you?’ ‘ Really I’ve lost my heart half a dozen
times over,’ sighed the novice, ‘ and am in despair for want o
an introduction to some of the fair creatures. Oh ! but you
must never despair,’ remarked the hairy-faced gent, while
there’s life there’s hope. We’ll introduce you, never fear.
“Ah! when, my splendid fellow! you know that delays
are dangerous.” , .
“ Why, let me see,” replied hairy face, “ there s going to
be a hop and supper at Kate’s to-morrow night, 111 take care
that you’re properly introduced.”
At length Captain courteously approached me ; I
handed him my testimonials. He read them, and burst into a


hearty and lasting fit of laughter. ‘ Georgie! come here,’ he
shouted, and we were in an instant surrounded by the whole
throng comprising ‘ his lot.’ He handed the certificates signed
by Judith O’Callagan and the waterman around, and his
associates made the place ring again with their peals of
laughter, to the great annoyance of the elderly muffs.
“ D— n it/’ observed Georgie, “it would be a good action
to get the young fellow the billet. I’ll give you a lift any how,
Mr. Newberry. Old Enigma will be here in the course of an
hour or two. He’s a jolly, hearty old fellow, and he’s sure to
have Thomson’s berth when the latter goes to England, which
will happen before long, so that Enigma’s word will go a long
way for you. Call again on Monday, and we’ll all, the whole
lot of us, do our best for you in the meantime.”
I returned to Mrs. O’Callagan’s considerably elevated in
spirits, having firstly returned thanks to ‘the lot,’and secondly
to my friend the waterman. The latter bade me be certain of
success.
The following day being Sunday, I entered the Church of
St. James. The congregation were mostly assembled, and the
Church was almost filled in every part, but perceiving a pew
entirely empty in or near the centre of the Church, I entered
it and commenced my devotions. A few minutes had only
elapsed, however, when the legitimate owners of the pew came
up to it. They consisted of a stout matronly dame, who might
have passed for a dowager Sultana of Constantinople, and four
young ladies, her daughters. The five were dressed alike, in
rich and costly garments, save that the bonnets of the young
ladies were pink, that of the dowager purple.
The leading pile of the young ladies had entered the pew,
when a soporiferous looking pew opener beckoned me to come
out. Ihe first young lady, with a graceful smile, welcomed
me to remain, assuring me that there was plenty of room.
I staid the service out, but probably it would have been
to my spiritual advantage, had I followed the intimation of the
pew opener, for the lovely face and figure of my charming
neighbour sadly distracted my attention from the service.
At its conclusion, the ladies quitted their seats imme-
diately, while I remained a few minutes to listen to the beautiful
sounds of the organ, a description of music to which I have
ever been attracted. As I was quitting the pew, my eyes were
attracted by a costly brooch, which the young lady next to me
must have dropped. I placed the jewel in my pocket, and
returned to Mrs. O’Callagan’s to dine.
Next morning 1 saw the following announcement in the
papers:—


« £lO Reward. —Lost, between St. James's Church and
street, a brooch set in gold, and having a representation
on the face of it of the Battle of Waterloo. Any person
finding the same and bringing it to Miss , at Ko. —,
street, shall receive the reward.”
I lost no time in presenting myself at the house, and
returning the jewel, but of course declining any sordid recom-
pense. I was invited to step in, and at my departure was
welcomed to * give a look in’ whenever convenient.
I then hastened to the Club, saw Captain , and several
others of ‘ the lot;’ was introduced to Mr. Enigma, and finally
I obtained the situation for which I was a candidate.
1 was now once started in the way of doing well, and felt
as much happiness and contentedness as usually falls to the lot
of mortals. Most of my leisure time I spent in visiting at
R ’ s , in street, and the more frequently I saw, the more
passionately I adored, the eldest daughter, my fair neighbour
in the pew, the loser of the locket, Eliza.
Thus things seemed to go on swimmingly, until one evening
when I presented myself at R—’s, I was shewn by a servant
into a parlour, told to take a seat, as Mrs. R — had something
to say to me.
A chill struck through my frame! “Ah!’ thought I,
‘ what vain dream is this which I have permitted myself to in-
dulge ! Me, a poor young man, just beginning life, with no
dependance but Providence and my exertions, to think to gain
the hand and heart of this beautiful, accomplished, and wealthy
young lady ! Now, perhaps, I shall be forbid the house, and
then ! oh then ! my happiness is for ever broken !
The jolly looking dowager entered the next instant. I
got up to meet her. ‘ Sit down young gentleman,’ said she,
‘ I’ve a few straightforward questions to put to you. In the
first place, we should be all blind and deaf if we were not fully
aware of the reasons which induce you to favour us so frequently
with your visits. Now, who are you ? What are you ? Where
were you born ? How old are you ? and where did you come
from ?
In as brief a space of time as possible, I made the excel-
lent lady acquainted with the leading facts of my birth and
fortune, and of all which had befell me. At the conclusion, I
sunk upon my knees, and earnestly besought the continuance
of her friendship, frankly acknowledging the intense love and
admiration which I entertained towards Eliza. I entreated her
to allow a continuation of my visits, until the day might arrive
when they might deem me worthy of her hand and affections.
Mrs. R— held out her hand to me, and 1 covered it with


kisses. It was late that night when I took my leave of Eliza,
the first and only idol of my heart, and of her mother and
sisters, with not only a permission, but many kind invitations
to repeat my visits whenever agreeable to me.
And now my dear friend Paul, I have told you all my
adventures, so far as they are worthy of mention ; but one
thing I had almost forgotten ! mind and come here early in the
morning ; for Paul, I’ve something worth all the rest to tell
you!
I’m going to w 7 ed Eliza to-morrow !
FINIS.
Hawhsley and Williamson , Printers , 150, Iviny-street, Sydney,








