

MI STAKES ABOUT THE [
JOS. C. VERCO,
Reprinted from the “Australasian Christian
March , 1896.
Ctlelboupne :
AUSTRAL PUBLISHING CO., 528 ELIZABETH STREET.




MISTAKES
ABOUT THE BIBLE
Jos. C. Verco,
M.D. LOND., F.R.C.S. ENG.
REPRINTED FROM THE
AUSTRALASIAN CHRISTIAN STANDARD, MARCH, 1895.
Melbourne:
PRINTED BY THE AUSTRAL PUBLISHING CO., $2B ELIZABETH-ST.


PREFACE.
The following paper was prepared for the
“ University Christian Union,” of the University of
Adelaide, and delivered as a leCture at its monthly
meeting in September, 1894. A week or so later it
was read at the Annual Conference of Churches of
Christ in South Australia. Necessarily, it partakes
largely of the nature of a compilation ; all its faCts,
and the objections refuted by these faCts, being derived
from various books. My chief sources of information
have been the pages of The Australasian Christian
Standard, edited by Mr. F. G. Dunn, of Melbourne;
a series of admirable publications, entitled “ By-Paths
of Bible Knowledge,” issued by the Religious Tract
Society of London ; and “ The Empire of the Hittites,”
by Wm. Wright, D.D., kindly lent me by Mr. A. T.
Magarey, of Adelaide. I acknowledge freely and with
pleasure my great indebtedness to them all, and trust
to obtain still more “ faith and knowledge ” in the same
easy and pleasant way from their further labors in this
wide and ever-widening field of research.


Mistakes About the Bible
* »
VJ ‘HE purpose of my paper is to strengthen our faith
f(j£\ in the truth of the Bible. This might be at-
Vj«/ tempted in various ways. But I will confine
T myself to one line of argument. The fadls
which might be marshalled along even this one
line are so numerous as to forbid a reference to them
all, and will allow only a hasty glance at some of the
strongest and most interesting.
What a household word has the phrase “ Higher
Criticism ” become. And to many it has a fearful
sound. It seems to embody the antagonism of a well
established science to the word of God, and to threaten
the overthrow of our belief in this as a divine revelation.
It gathers up vast numbers of undeniable fa6ls, draws
from them apparently incontestable conclusions, con-
trasts them with the Scripture record, and demonstrates
its serious departure from truth, and therefore the
impossibility of receiving it as inspired of God. And so
their faith changes to doubt, they begin to question the
accuracy of the good old Book, and to lose their
reverence for it, their attachment to it, and their confi-
dence in it.
Of late years, the attention of scholars has been
largely directed to the Old Testament, and its history
and prophecy have been closely and thoroughly
scrutinised; with the result that all sorts of errors and
corruptions and falsifications have been discovered.
Books attributed to one man have been proved—yes
proved —to have been written by two or more.
Prophecies uttered, or supposed to have been uttered
before certain events, have been shown by these highly
educated men to have been written after the occurrence
of the incidents prediifled, and hence are forged
prophecies palmed off upon the credulous. And the


consequence is, we are liable to lose confidence in
Isaiah and Daniel and Moses, because they are only
noms-de-plume for all kinds of people, who concodted all
manner of stories, at various periods of time, and in
order to give them credibility, have attributed them to
Moses and Daniel, who had no more to do with them
than you or I.
Now what I want to do is this, to show how little
tjiis Higher Criticism is to be feared, because it is so
little to be trusted. It has already made so many
egregious blunders, that it cannot expedl us to repose
any very implicit confidence in it. This can be
demonstrated over and over again, by instances which
cannot be denied. The critic has taken a certain
assertion in the Book. He has said : “ This is not
true, it cannot be possibly true ; and this is the reason
why it cannot be true.” And after he has said this over
several times, some other scientific man has appeared
on the scene with a brick in his hand, and shown that
this Bible narrative IS true, even to the satisfaction of
the Higher Critic himself. But as bold as ever he
replies : “ Though the Bible is absolutely right in that
particular, it is absolutely false in this ; ” and here he
cites another scientific deduction, and gives another
scripture quotation. And once more, after he has
loudly defied the word of God, some scientific David
picks up a stone out of the brook, and with one twirl of
his sling, smites him in the forehead, and the Philistine
champion is in the dust.
Now it seems to me only reasonable, that every
instance adduced, in which a definite charge of in-
accuracy has been levelled against the Bible by the
critic, on scientific grounds, and has subsequently been
shown to be an unfounded charge (shown in such
an unmistakeable and forcible manner, by faCts which
cannot be gainsaid, that the critic himself is compelled
to acknowledge it), every such instance must weaken
our respedt for the critic, and must discount any further
criticism offered. And when we find these refuted
charges accumulating by the score, may we not begin to


question whether we need pay so much deference to
Bible criticism, and may we not, while we listen atten-
tively to the objedfor, be quite justified in holding to the
accuracy of the divine word.
Should we not thus a (ft in secular affairs ? Suppose
we had a bosom friend, whom we had implicitly trusted
all our life. Then comes A. and says : “ Your friend is
not reliable, he has told you what is not true about such
a matter.” He adduces his fadfs, and really it does
seem as though a gross falsehood had been perpetrated.
But after our mind has been worried for awhile, B.
communicates another fadf, of which A. was ignorant.
This puts a different complexion upon the whole case, and
confirms our friend’s integrity, and refutes the accusa-
tion of falsehood. A. acknowledges his mistake, and
our confidence in him is scarcely shaken. But soon he
returns with another charge of falsehood* and has an
equally convincing array of fadfs, and we cannot see
exadlly where there is any fallacy; and again we are
disturbed about our friend’s untruthfulness. But in
process of time we talk it over with D., and he produces
a document, which proves A to be wrong again, and our
friend to be true to the very letter. Our reliance upon
the judgment of A. is further shaken, and while we do
not for an instant question his sincerity or his love for
truth, we are beginning to suspedf his infallibility. Now
when he advances a third time, with other irrefragible
evidence of our friend’s departure from veracity, shall we
not retort, “ See here, Mr. A., you have impugned the
truth of my friend twice, and have been proved wrong
yourself. I will note your statement of fadfs, and your
incontestable conclusion, and your charge of falsehood;
but I shall, nevertheless, continue to believe in my old
friend, for, so far, I have found his charadfer a great
deal more trustworthy than your judgment.” Such
should be our attitude towards the Higher Criticism in
its relation to the word of God.
Now let me draw your attention to a few examples
of the inaccuracies of the Higher Critics. Some of
them are very simple and superficial, and are easily


followed. Others are rather intricate, and a little
mental concentration may be required to follow their
course. But I will try to make them as plain as
circumstances will permit.
Renan, the writer of “The Life of Jesus,” in his
History of Israel expressed his convidtion that the
Hebrew account of the events recorded in the four
books of Moses, in Joshua and Judges, could not
possibly have been written during the period in which
the events therein described took place. The story
must have been written at a much later date. The
reason why he came to this conclusion was because the
art of writing was not sufficiently advanced, or suffi-
ciently known, in those early times, to allow such
written records to be prepared. But they purport to be
compilations of that very age. This convidtion of
Renan’s, therefore, was damaging to the Old Testament
in two ways. First, this gives the impression to the
reader of being a contemporary history, which, of
course, is false ; and, second, as the account was not
compiled at the time of the occurrence, there is the
possibility, and even the probability of error, through
oral transmission and legendary exaggeration. But,
after this convidlion of Renan’s has become the con-
vidfion of many others, who have accepted his ipse dixit
without question, and it has done its evil work, what do
we find ? The convidtion was utterly unfounded, and
altogether a mistake. The discoveries of the last six
years have shown that the art of writing was well
understood and extensively used, not only before the
time of the judges, and of Joshua, and even of Moses,
the writer of the very first book of the Bible; but long
even before the times of Abraham, who lived nearly
five hundred years before Moses began to write.
Great numbers of documents, unearthed from tombs
and ruined palaces in Egypt and Mesopotamia, prepared
many centuries before the epoch of the Judges, are now
colledled in the libraries and museums of Britain and
the continent.
Now, before we pass on, let us look at this exploded


criticism, and learn the simple lesson which it ought to
teach. On what ground did Renan form that conviction ?
Because he did not know the art of writing was so well
understood and so generally used. Had he known the
art of writing was not understood and used, that would
have been a rational ground for a conviction, that
would have been an opposition of science, for science is
just another word for knowledge. But, as a matter of
faCt, his ignorance was the ground of his conviction.
Because he did not know books were common at that
time, therefore he concluded these books could not have
been written then. This opposition was actually the
-opposition of ignorance, and not of science ; as the New
Testament so severely, and yet so truly, calls it in one
place, “the opposition of science, falsely so called.”
Because he was ignorant of a faCt, therefore he denied
a faCt, and thousands of people accepted his denial, and
repudiated the faCt, because he was supposed to know
so much. And if Renan were alive to-day he would be
compelled to acknowledge his mistake, made through
ignorance and unbelief. The lesson to be learned is
this, “Science and not ignorance ought to be the source
of criticism.” The affirmation or denial should rest on
what is known, and not (as in this instance) on what is
not known. _
The natural outcome of a criticism such as Renan’s
constitutes a second grave objection to these early
books of the Old Testament. The country of Palestine,
therein described, is asserted to be almost wholly
imaginary, and never to have existed in such state.
The incidents narrated were only myths and legends,
and transformations of a later age. Many of the
persons referred to were quite fictitious, and of course
as such to be rejected by all but the credulous. But
what is the answer? A mound at Tel-el Amarna, in
Egypt, has lately been explored, and has revealed a
series of letters, 320 in number. They were written on
clay tablets while they were soft, by means of a style or
pen, shaped at the end something like a horse shoe nail.
The tablets were then baked like bricks. These letters


were sent to the King of Egypt from Babylonia and
Arabia, and from various cities of Palestine. They,
were entirely of an official character, were on official
business, and were preserved among the official ar-
chives. In facft they were part of the contents of the
Egyptian Foreign Office, or the Colonial Secretary’s
Department. They are in Babylonian character,
evidently the official language of that early period,
the lingua franca of the nations. They are of very
ancient date, some of them before the times of Abra-
ham, and all of them more than 1200 years before the
Christian era —that is, before Samuel, the last of the
judges. Now Captain Conder, so well known for his
long superintendence of the Palestine explorations, has
recently published a work, in which he gives transla-
tions of no fewer than one hundred and twenty-six of
these letters, all of which were written from Palestine
to the King of Egypt, or other official persons. These
official documents were excuted just about the time of
the sojourn of the Hebrews in Egypt, or of their exodus
and conquest of Palestine. These settle definitely and
for ever the question, that the Palestine of the tablets
was identically the Palestine of the books of Moses and
of Joshua. Many of the letters were written from cities
named in the Bible history of that period. Mention is
made of the nations and tribes referred to in the Bible.
And some of the letters translated by Captain Conder,
in the volume just published, were written by men
whose names, titles and adlions are registered in early
Bible history. In Joshua 10 : 1 we read how Adoni-
zedek, King of Jerusalem, sent unto Japhia, King of
Lachish, and others, seeking to form a confederacy
against Gibeon, the ally of the Israelites. In Joshua
11 : 1, another of the enemies of Israel, Jabin, King of
Hazor, unites the seven nations of the land of Canaan
to fight with Joshua at the Waters of Merom. Is it not
an interesting and astonishing fadf that amongst these
tablets found in Egypt, assigned by Egyptologists and
Assyriologists to a period, which must be about the era
of Joshua, are three, one from Adoni-zedek (King of


Jerusalem), one from Japhia (King of Lachish), and one
from Jabin (King of Razor). Thus there is furnished in-
contestable evidence, the evidence of their autographs,
that the men named in the book of Joshua lived at the
very times to which they are assigned by the Bible, and
at the very places in which they are located by the
Bible. And is it not a significant and remarkable fa<st,
that some of the letters are appeals from these rulers in
Palestine to their suzerain, the King of Egypt, to
furnish them aid against the Aperui ? The “ Aperui,”
who are they ? Why, the Hebrews ; for most philo-
logists and linguists regard the Aperui as a foreign word
for the Hebrew race. They were apparently invading
the land at this very time, and the kings ot Palestine,
in fear, were writing down to Egypt for help. W here
is now the criticism that the Palestine of Joshua was a
fictitious one, and its kings were nothing but empty
names ? It is burst like a bubble.
In Joshua 17 : 16 we read, “And the children of
Joseph said, “The hill is not enough for us ; and all the
Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have
chariots of iron.” These Ephraimites had outgrown
their possession in the hill country, but they had not
been able to drive out the inhabitants of Jezreel and
Bethshean, because of their iron chariots. These
•chariots of iron have been an argument of the critics
against the accuracy of the Book. This they say is an
anachronism. It is evidence of composition at a much
later date ; for in the early period, during which Joshua
is supposed to have lived, iron had not been brought
into use. The people did not know how to smelt
it or work it. The possession of iron chariots was out
■of the question. And the mention of them here proves
the author of the book of Joshua to have lived long
-afterwards, in the age of iron and iron chariots, and in
a moment of forgetfulness to have transferred the iron
•chariots of his own day to the times of Joshua. Just as
an Adelaide boy, writing a description of the first years
of the colony, might tell how Governor Hindmarsh,
•over fifty years ago, spoke from Glenelg, through the


telephone, to Colonel Light, at the Government Offices
in Victoria Square. Now for the anachronism. The
site of Lachish was discovered by the conductors of the
Palestine Exploration Fund. During their excavations
they found evidence that several different races of
inhabitants had consecutively occupied the same site,
and each one had left a stratum of debris, in which the
relics of their occupation were deposited. When the
excavators reached the lowest stratum, they found the
remains of the original city, the old Amorite town,,
which was standing in the days of Joshua. This was
proved by the discovery of clay tablets of the same
character and of the same age as those found at Tel-el-
Amarna in Egypt, to which we were referring a few
minutes ago. This was sufficient evidence that all the
Amorite relics in this stratum were as ancient as the
time of the Hebrew invasion. And here comes the
revelation. In the monthly magazine for April, 1893,.
which contains the reports of the Palestine Exploration
Fund, there was announced the discovery of “ a smelting
furnace for iron, attributed by Mr. Bliss (the super-
intendent for exploration) to 1400 b.c.” Usher s
chronology gives 1444 as the date of the Ephraimites’'
complaint about the chariots of iron. This is a fairly
close approximation, surely close enough to silence any
objection on the plea of anachronism. These criticisms
remind me of the boomerang of the Australian aboriginal.
It hurtles through the air, and threatens to kill the
game he hunts ; but is liable, instead of that, to come
whizzing back and wound the one who sent it on its
way.
In 2 Chronicles 33 : 11 it is written, “The Lord
brought upon them (that is, Judah and the inhabitants
of Jerusalem) the captains ot the host of the King of
Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and
bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.” -
To this passage the Higher Critics took exception.
They pointed out that the capital of Assyria was not
Babylon, but Nineveh, and the deportation of Manasseh
and his people to Babylon by the captain of the host of


the King of Assyria would be about as likely as the
sending of prisoners of war captured by a French army
to London, the metropolis of “Perfidious Albion.” So
the Bible was plainly wrong again. The compiler of
the Chronicles was so ignorant, or so careless, as to
confound Assyria and Babylon together, and put the
capital of the one in place of the other. But “ the
potter who hath power over the clay ” providentially
preserved some of the clay tablets of this King of
Assyria. It was Esarhaddon. His father had con-
quered the adjacent kingdom, and razed Babylon to the
ground. But Esarhaddon rebuilt it, and in order to
win the goodwill of its conquered people, spent one-half
of his time there. He was, therefore, as likely to be at
Babylon as at Nineveh ; and it would be simply a
question of the season of the year when Manasseh was
forwarded to the king, whether he were sent to Nineveh
or to Babylon. So again the edge of the critics’ knife
is blunted by a stone. The old Bible, which was
wrong, turns out to be right after all. The critics, who
knew so much, are proved to have known less than the
truth, and probably less than the writer of the
Chronicles, who seemed so lamentably ignorant. It
strikes me these writers of the Bible are rather
dangerous individuals to attack, and anyone who has a
regard for his own reputation should be very careful
how he accuses them of mistake or untruth; for these
Babylonian bricks (which are lately so much in evidence)
appear to be remarkable weapons of defence, and
capable, not only of repelling charges, but of inflicting
damaging wounds upon the foe.
Isaiah, in his 10th and 20th chapters, prophesied,
during the reign of Hezekiah, an Assyrian invasion
under Sargon the king. As an inspired seer, he
described the enemy as approaching along the usual
high road from the north-east and halting at Nob, only
an hour’s journey distant from Jerusalem, on the very
day the oracle was uttered ; while he declared that
Jerusalem should fall into the hands of the enemy.
But, said the critics, “This is all fancy ; this is an ideal


invasion; there never was a king of Assyria named
Sargon, profane history is silent about him ; the attack
upon Palestine to which this refers was made by
Sennacherib during the time of Hezekiah ; and he
entered the land, not from the north east, but from the
south-west, and besieged Jerusalem ; and according
to the Bible account given elsewhere, Jerusalem did not
fall into his hands, but the angel of the Lord smote the
army one night with a pestilence, the siege was raised,
and the invader turned back to his own country. The
prophet was simply flying a kite. There cannot be
found in history anything to which it will correspond.”
But once more the stones speak out and confound the
critics. They show that ten years before the Senna-
cherib incident, another king of Assyria about whom
the world was profoundly ignorant, Sargon by name,
did enter Palestine, did enter by the north-east, and
conquered the whole land. And thus “ the ignorance
that is in them ” has again been demonstrated to the
critics, and the falsehoods of the prophet, thinly veiled
under the honeyed phrase of “an ideal campaign,” are
established as the simple truth of history and of God.
The prophet Jeremiah in his 44th chapter predicted
a desperate conflict between Nebuchadnezzar, King of
Babylon, and the king of Egypt. He described how
the former would overrun the land of the Nile, and
sang the burden of her chief cities. But, singularly
enough, nothing of all this was to be gathered from
profane historians. And so the truth-loving critics
jumped on the Bible again. They said: “We really
cannot allow the occurrence of this campaign. Here
is another sad instance of inspired men drawing upon
their imagination and pourtraying picftures of wars
which never were waged.” Well, Nebuchadnezzar was
both a great warrior and a magnificent builder. Numer-
ous records of his building operations are extant. But
only one little fragment referring to his wars has been
unearthed. Yet is it not a providence ? That little
contains an allusion to his invasion of Egypt. It took
place in the 37th year of his reign. It is moreover


•confirmed by the monumental hieroglyphics of Egypt,
which show how he overran the whole of the northern
portion of the land. And so once more the prophet of the
Lord is vindicated, and the prophet of Higher Criticism
is convidted of unbecoming haste in denying the records
■of holy writ, and attributing falsehood on no other
ground than his own want of knowledge.
In the first verse of the first chapter of Daniel we
read : “ In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim,
King of Judah, came Nebuchadnezzar, King of Baby-
lon, unto Jerusalem, and besieged it, and the Lord gave
Jehoiakim, King of Judah, in his hand.” Now in the
first verse of the 25th chapter of Jeremiah it is written :
“ The word that came to Jeremiah, concerning all the
people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, King
of Judah ; the same was the first year of Nebuchadnez-
zar, King of Babylon. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts,
I will send and take all the families of the north, and I
will send unto Nebuchadnezzar, the King of Babylon,
my servant, and will bring them against this land and
■against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these
nations round about, and these nations shall serve the
king of Babylon seventy years.” And in accord with
this we read in the 2nd verse of the 46th chapter of
Jeremiah, “ Of Egypt, concerning the army of Pharoah
Necho, King of Egypt, which was by the river Eu-
phrates, in Carchemish, which Nebuchadnezzar, King
•of Babylon, smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim.”
Here is an apparent discrepancy. Daniel tells us
Jehoiakim, in the third year of his reign, was given
into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar ; whereas Jeremiah,
in the fourth year of his reign, threatens Jehoiakim
with an invasion, and further affirms the defeat of the
king of Egypt at Carchemish on his way down to Judah.
It seems impossible that both can be right. If the king
-of Judah was taken prisoner in his third year by
Nebuchadnezzar, then certainly Nebuchadnezzar was
not coming up to fight with him in his fourth year;
it seems as though one of the two historian prophets
must be in error.


De Wette, one of the Higher Critics, makes a
vigorous attack upon this very point. He writes. “It is-
obviously false that Jehoiakim was carried thither at that
date (that is to Babylon); and the false statement in
the first verse of the first chapter of Daniel renders the-
historical existence of Daniel exceedingly doubtful.”
The want of correspondence between these two passages-
is branded as falsehood, and this falsehood leads to the
suggestion that no such person as Daniel ever lived.
He was a myth, a creation of some inaccurate writer of
a later day. The remark about the first year of
Nebuchadnezzar’s reign introduces a further compli-
cation. Jeremiah says the fourth year of Jehoiakim
was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, and Daniel says
Jehoiakim was given into his hand in the third year of
his reign. Therefore his capture was in the year before
the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, or in other words,,
the king of Judah was given into the hands of the king
of Babylon, a year before he was king of Babylon,,
which of course is absurd. .
Well, after De Wette and two or three of his friends
have nailed Daniel’s lies on the counter, what do we
find ? Daniel was perfectly correct, and so was Jere-
miah, while De Wette was wrong. Yes, after asking
us not only to disbelieve Daniel’s statement, but to
discredit the very existence, wipe him out of the adtual
world, and consign him to the limbo of figments; after
this the clay tablets prove De Wette to be at fault..
The explanation of the disagreement between the two
prophets is as simple as could be wished. The wonder
is that nobody guessed it before it was revealed by the
tablets. , , , A ...
Daniel wrote his book in Babylon, and wrote like a
Babylonian ; Jeremiah wrote in Jerusalem, and wrote
as a Jew. The one computed after the Babylonian
style, and the other after the Jewish, and their method
of computation was quite different. for instance,,
among the Jews, if a king had ascended the throne in
September, 1892, and reigned till December, 1892, that
would be regarded as the first year of his reign ; from


January, 1893, *° December, 1893, as h* 3 second year,
and from January, 1894, as third year. Hence, if
he had died in March, 1894, he would have been spoken
of as reigning three years, because he had been holding
the sceptre during some portion of three separate years,
although he had really sat on the throne only some
eighteen months altogether. But among the Baby-
lonians, if a king’s accession had taken place in Sep-
tember, 1892, and he had lived till December, 1892,
those three months, would not have been reckoned to.
him, but to his predecessor. The first year of his reign
would be calculated from the first New Year’s Day
after his ascension, viz., January, 1893 ! from the next
New Year’s Day, January, 1894, the second year of his
reign would commence. Should he die in March, 1894,
two years would be imputed to him, though he had only
worn the crown eighteen months; and should he survive
till December, 1894, h e would still only be credited with
two years, whereas he had actually reigned two years,
and a quarter. From this it is plain, that the first year
of a monarch’s reign, according to Babylonian reckon-
ing, would be the second according to the Jewish ; and
the third year of Jehoiakim, calculated by Babylonian
methods, would be the fourth year of Jehoiakim, counted
after the manner of the Jews. The third year of Jehoia-
kim, computed by Daniel in Babylon, would be the
fourth year of Jehoiakim, computed by Jeremiah in.
Jerusalem. And so the two prophets are shown to be
in complete accord. Daniel is right, De Wette is wrong..
We will still believe in Daniel as a fadt in history, as a
man beloved of God, and as a revealer of the future as
well as a faithful recorder of the past.
Isaiah in chapter 21 : 1-10 prophesied of the fall of
the Babylonian Empire, and sang its doom in some of
his most impassioned utterances. But here again he
was set upon by the Higher Critics. They were not to.
be drawn away by his high-flown language. They
loved truth, they did. And more, they were acquainted
with history. Now what did he say ? Why, that
Babylon was to be given into the hands of Elam


and Media. But it was not; it was given, as everybody
knows, into the hands of Persia; for Cyrus the Persian
came against the city and diverted the river, and went
into the capital along the bed of the stream, and con-
quered it. They had their Herodotus; does not the Greek
historian tell us all about the siege, and give us the
details? And after this, we are expected to believe
Isaiah ? Why, his prophecies were made up after the
event transpired ; so long after that the circumstances
had been largely forgotten, and their inventor was
exceedingly unfortunate in his manufacture of the
predictions, for he mistook Elam and Media for Persia.
But what say the tablets? Nabonidus, the King of
Babylon at the time it was taken, calls him “Cyrus, the
King of Elam,” and says he overthrew the Marida, or
barbarians (another name for Medians). Perhaps he
was wrong, like Isaiah, and did not know Cyrus was a
Persian. But if anyone in this world would know, it
would surely be Cyrus himself. What does he say ?
On a cylinder made by himself, he calls himself “ Cyrus,
the King of Elam.” “ Without fighting or battle,
Merodach (that is the God) caused him to enter into
Babylon.” This surely settles the matter. First he
>vas king of Elam, then he conquered Media—that is
-certainly known ; and it is believed that after this he
acquired Persia. So that, whereas he was in a sense
king of Persia (as we find it written in Ezra i : 2) and
king of Media too, he writes himself down as “ King of
Elam.” But where is Herodotus then ? Well, very
much at sea in comparison with Isaiah. For not only
■does Cyrus say “ I am king of Elam,” but he also says
“ I entered Babylon without fighting or battle.” So
the grand description of the siege of Babylon, by
Herodotus, is a mistake, and Isaiah’s forecast was
correCt. And now the critics find out that Herodotus
must have inadvertently transferred the incidents of the
capture of Babylon by Darius the Persian to the entry
of Babylon by Cyrus the Elamite. Once more Isaiah
-stands acquitted of the charge of perjury.
The Old Testament repeatedly mentions a people


called the Hittites. It represents them as a mighty
power in the land of Canaan ; as occupying an extensive
territory, and as existing for many hundreds of years.
Look at some of the references. Abraham bought the
Cave of Machpelah for a burying-place from Ephron
the Hittite in Hebron. Esau, to vex his father and
mother, married wives of the children of Heth. When
Joshua entered the promised land the Hittites, with
their chariots of iron, opposed his progress, and were
hopelessly defeated in the great battle by the Waters
of Merom. Their soldiers of fortune led the hosts of
David and Solomon. Both these kings formed matri-
monial alliances with Hittite women, and Solomon
himself was the son of David by a Hittite wife. One
of the sources of revenue to King Solomon was his
traffic with this people. He bought horses in mobs
down in Egypt, and then sold them at an advance to
the warlike Hittites. In the second Book of Kings is
the record of the siege of Samaria by the Syrians.
The Israelites were shut up in their capital, and were
reduced to such straits through starvation as to compel
unconditional surrender to the enemy. But according
to Elisha’s prophecy, “ The Lord made the host of the
Syrians to hear a noise of chariots and a noise of
horses, even the noise of a great host, and they said
one to another, ‘ Lo the king of Israel hath hired
against us the kings of the Hittites and the kings of the
Egyptians to come upon us ; ’ Wherefore they arose
and fled in the twilight, and left their tents and their
horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and
fled for their life.” According to Biblical accounts
then, there existed a Hittite empire from the days of
Abraham until at least the captivity of Israel. Now
the time of Abraham, according to Bishop Usher’s
chronology, was about 1900 years before Christ, and
the captivity into Assyria and Babylonia Bpo before
Christ; so that the Hittites were a prominent and
powerful people for more than a thousand years.
But here is a strange circumstance, classical history
is almost absolutely silent regarding them. Their very


existence rested upon the testimony of the Bible. How
is it possible, it has been asked, for a mighty nation,
such as this book represents these Hittites to have
been for more than ten centuries, to have dropped
completely out of history, so as to leave scarcely their
name remaining ? The answer of the Higher Critics
has been : “ It is not possible ; it is not conceivable ;
the Hittites were an imaginary people.” The references
to them in the Bible have been impeached as untrue,
and the veracity of the word of God impugned. For
instance, in 1857 Prof. F. W. Newman, Fellow of Balliol
College, Oxford, in his “ History of the Hebrew Mon-
archy,” speaks of the Bible references to the Hittites as
“ unhistorical,” and as “ not exhibiting the writer’s
acquaintance with the times in a very favorable light;”
while T. K. Cheyne, Fellow of the same College,
writing on the Hittites, in the new edition of the
Encyclopaedia Brittanica, treats the Bible statements
regarding the Hittites as unhistorical and unworthy of
credence. And so our dear old friend the Bible lay for
years under the suspicion and accusation of falsehood;
for nobody would believe there ever had been a great
Hittite nation except those prejudiced and unscientific
people, who just believe whatever the Bible says.
Then the hieroglyphics of Egypt began to yield up
their secrets and subsequently the cuneiform inscriptions
of Assyria; and marvellously strange, there began to
emerge from the oblivion of centuries, the nation of the
Hittites. No petty tribe, but a potent empire of warriors,
in constant conflict with the great monarchies on their
borders. Assyria had to hurl the whole force of her
kingdom upon them in campaign after campaign so as
to hold her own ; and even the great Rameses of Egypt
was willing to make a treaty of peace with the “ Great
King of the Hittites,” and to cement the union by marry-
ing a Hittite princess. And the evidence is very strong
that the Shepherd Kings of Egypt, who conquered the
country and upheld their dynasty for a long period,
were no other than the self-same Hittites. Now the
Hittites, thus disinterred after a burial of two thousand


■five hundred years have been found, in almost every
-detail, to correspond with the Hittites of the Bible.
Nor is it uninteresting to note how the Grand Old
Man, the many-sided Gladstone, has made his con-
tribution to the vindication of the Bible, adding one
more gun to the battery upon the Impregnable Rock of
Scripture. His intimate knowledge of Homer supplied
the following quotation from the Odyssey as translated
by Pope :
“The time would fail, should I, in order, tell,
What foes were vanquished and what numbers fell;
How, lost through love, Eurypulus was slain,
And round him bled his bold Cetsean train ;
To Troy no hero came of nobler line,
Or, if of nobler, Memnon it was thine.”
In regard to which quotation Gladstone remarks. “ The
manner of the mention in Homer is completely in
accord with”—the idea of—“the greatness of the Hit-
tites, Ist Because the slaughter of their chief seems to be
the crowning exploit that had been performed by the son
of Achilles. ‘I will not,’ says Odusseus, ‘name all that
he slew, but only the hero Eurypulus.’ 2nd Because
the Keteioi (the Hittites) are named without epithet,
description or indication, which accords with their
being a famous and well-known race.” The Kheta of
the Egyptians, the Khatti of the Assyrians, the Keteioi
of Homer, and the Hittites of the Bible are one people,
and the book becomes a reliable, if not a supreme
authority respecting them.
Now let us glance at our criticisms again, and see
how they bear the light of these recent discoveries.
Prof. F. W. Newman says of the narrative I have
■extracted from the Book of Kings, “ The unhistorical
tone is too manifest to allow an easy belief in it.” He
thinks “there was a real event at bottom,” for Xenophon
in his Anabasis speaks of dangerous night panics in the
Greek and Persian hosts, and, therefore, the Syrian
army may have fled in a sudden panic. “ But,” says
he, “the particular ground of alarm attributed to them
does not exhibit the writer’s acquaintance with the


times in a very favorable light. No Hittite kings can
have compared in power with the king of Judah, the
near and real ally, who is not named at all. Nor is
there a single mark of acquaintance with contem-
poraneous history.” Looked at from this side of the
hieroglyphics, is not the criticism enough to make one
laugh outright ? He casts discredit on the incident
because he thinks the Hittites were too insignificant to
have caused alarm to the Syrian hosts. But what
light do the Assyrian inscriptions throw on this
particular point ? According to Prof. Sayce’s chron-
ology, the tablets show that at this self-same time the
Hittites were a mighty people, spread over the north of
Syria from Carchemish, their capital on the Euphrates,
to Lebanon. They had numerous chieftains or kings,
who ruled over independent districts, and were distin-
guished among the nations for “ their swift chariots,
their horses, and their engines of war.” We are thus
led to the conclusion that the sacred writer was
thoroughly acquainted with the times in which he
wrote, and with the fadts which he narrated, and that it
is Prof. Newman’s acquaintance with the times of
which he wrote that does not appear in a very favorable
light. Here again is a choice morsel for the critic. T.
K. Cheyne, referring to the Bible statements regarding
the Hittites, declares they cannot be taken as of equal
authority with Egyptian and Assyrian inscriptions.
Very well; then let these sit in judgment. According
to the Bible, the Hittites were a power in the land
igoo b.c. Now they appear for the first time in
Assyrian inscriptions on the tablets of Sargon I. of
Agane, placed by Prof. Sayce at what date ? 1900 b.c.
Is not that a strange coincidence ? Again, the Bible
tells of the Syrians flying in panic at the fancied noise
of the chariots of the Hittites in b.c. 890. In the
Assyrian inscriptions they are mentioned for the last
time on the tablets of another Sargon, b.c. 717- If the
tablets of the two Sargons are correcft in these instances,
then the books of Genesis and Kings are correct, for
they are in perfeift accord. If the Assyrian tablets are


historical, then these books are historical. The eminent
higher critic appealed from the Bible to the inscriptions
of Egypt and Assyria, and the stones with their records
have established the Bible, and fallen upon his criti-
cisms, and ground them to powder.
And now I must draw my paper to a close. We
have recorded quite a number of “ Mistakes about the
Bible. “Men of light and leading” have closely
studied this book. They have put their finger down
upon one verse after another, and said “ Here is a
mistake” and “ This is false.” But further knowledge
has confuted their criticisms, and established the truth
of the Bible in those very instances. Such objections
have, manifestly, had their origin in the ignorance of
learned men. Had they known more, or had they
known their own ignorance, they would not have laid
such charges, and would not have made such mistakes.
But all their criticisms have not been cleared up!
Not by any means. It is hard for some people to learn
wisdom. They have put their finger down on many
other places, and are still repeating the formula, “ Here
is a mistake ” and “ This is false.”
But what should be our attitude towards them and
what the spirit of our mind towards the Bible ? We
should observe the same attitude in regard to the
Science of History, as was displayed in respeCt to the
physical sciences, in a paper now lodged in the Bodleian
Library in Oxford, which was drawn up by the British
Association for the Advancement of Science in 1865.
It was signed by 617 members, many of whom
were at the time among the highest scientists in the
world. “We believe it is the duty of every scientific
student to investigate nature for the purpose of eluci-
dating truth, and if he finds that some of his results
appear to be in contradiction to the written word (God’s
word in the Holy Scriptures) or rather to his own
interpretation of it, which may be erroneous, he should
not presumptuously affirm that his own conclusions
must be right and the statements of scripture wrong.
Rather leave the two side by side, till it shall please


God to allow us to see the manner in which they may
be reconciled ; and instead of insisting upon the seeming
difference between science and the scriptures, it would
be as well to rest in faith upon the points in which they
agree.” So with us. Having an implicit faith in the
divine origin and complete accuracy, of Bible history,
we should be pleased with every addition to con-
temporaneous history from profane sources, Egyptian,
Palestinian, Mycenic, Assyrian, Cilician, Babylonian,
feeling assured that such added information—as far as
it may be true —will only serve to confirm the sacred
narrative. To what an unexpected extent this has
already occurred it would take too long to show, and
there are strong reasons for believing such corroboration
will reach a far higher degree in the near future; so as
to establish the truth of this ancient volume beyond the
possibility of adverse criticism. We may anticipate
that further explorations into the realm of faCf and
truth will only support the testimony of holy writ, and
demolish every engine of attack brought into position
against it.
But in the present state of partial knowledge about
those early times we ought not to accept every im-
peachment of the Bible by students of oriental history.
They know very much, and with a wonderful industry
and acuteness have acquired a vast amount of know-
ledge. But there is a vaster amount for them still to
gain, and it is what they do not know which is liable to
lead them into error. Our paper has taught us how
profoundly wrong many of these profound objections
have proved, and how puerile may be the studied
opposition of men of eminence. What the criticisms
of the past have been, such we may judge those of the
present are, and such we may imagine those of the
future will be. Our experience in recent years of
exploration, excavation and decipherment furnishes a
reasonable prospeCt that a continuation of the same
research will only serve to overturn all remaining
adverse references to Bible story, and to vindicate
the reliability of its many authors. And with such


an experience and such a prospedt we should note
all discrepancies between the sacred and the profane
accounts, and allow the two to remain side by side
until a reconciliation has been effected; We should
not allow ourselves to be enticed to accept every
allegation of fraud levelled against the Bible. It has
repelled so many attacks upon its veracity, as to
greatly strengthen our confidence in it. So many
inaccuracies have become incontestable fadts, that its
final triumph, with the discomfiture of all who
shall take up arms against it, should be a foregone
conclusion with us. We are not called upon to
repudiate the word of God at once diredtly a scientific
man, from observed fadts, frames a conclusion which is
not in accordancewith his interpretation of that word.
His conclusion may easily be wrong, though his fadts
may be right enough; and his interpretation of the
Bible statement may be erroneous, though the state-
ment itself may be perfectly accurate. There ought
to be humility enough in science to preclude presump-
tion, and if there be not, there should be common
sense enough in us not to accord that presumption too
great a reverence.
Let us give the Bible time, and not be in too great
haste to abandon it. As Dr. Parker has said, “It has
shed off a good many measles, and sloughed off a good
deal of scarlet fever, and come up out of many a
struggle.” Just give the Bible time. We should
not allow the antiquity of the documents in the
Bible to diminish, in any way, the credibility of their
authors ; nor the fadt that they compiled sacred history
rather than profane. On the other hand, both circum-
stances should favor their credibility. The earlier they
lived the more likely is their account of events which
happened earlier still to be corredt; for they drank of
the stream nearer its source, and therefore had a purer
draught. And surely, if a man is writing to inculcate
morality and piety, truth and honesty, his endeavor to
speak the truth will be quite as sincere as his who
writes for amusement, for money, or for fame. If, in


some point, Herodotus and Isaiah diverge, why should
we conclude at once in favor of Herodotus and a
gainst Isaiah ? Why should not Isaiah be right, and
the voluminous old Grecian astray ? We have seen
that where Heredotus did differ from Isaiah, there he
differed from Nabonidos, and from Cyrus, and from
the truth. And why should it not be the same on any
other point, or with any other profane historian ? I
have not the slightest doubt, that if, in any other
particular, the famous old Grecian and the Hebrew
prophet are at variance, time will prove Isaiah to have
spoken the truth to the uttermost.
The interests involved in the complete accuracy of
the Bible are too lofty and too profound to permit of
an easy resignation of our faith in its divine origin
and its historic truth. Its influence over our social,
moral and religious life is so potent when its truth is
acknowledged and obeyed; and so potent for good, that
we should defend it to the last till it can be defended
no longer. Personally, I have an implicit confidence in
its divine origin and in its practical inerrancy. I hail
with pleasure every fresh consignment of tablets and
inscriptions from the buried cities of the East ; for I
am strong in faith that they will serve to substantiate
every item in the Hebrew records, and that each fresh
discovery in oriental archaeology will corroborate them
in every important particular, and produce, if possible,
stronger faith in this marvellous and invaluable book.
“All flesh is only grass, and all the glory of man but
the flower of the grass ; the grass withereth, and the
flower thereof falleth away, but the word of the Lord
endureth for ever.”
Austral Publishing Company, 528 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne.




