







NEW EDITION, REVISED & ENLARGED.
RELIGION
WITHOUT
SUPERSTITION
HARTLEY WILLIAMS
I. THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY—The Deity of
Jesus Christ.
II. THE SON OF GOD—The Incarnation.
III. THE INSPIRATION OF THE Bible—Miracles.
IV. THE DOCTRINES OF THE ATONEMENT AND
ADVENT.
V. A PURE.FAITH—“GOD.”
PRICE ONE SHILLING.




Religion Without
Superstition
BY
HARTLEY WILLIAMS
THIRD EDITION, REVISED
“ He who begins by loving Christianity better than Truth, will proceed by loving
his own sect or church better thanJChristianity, and end in loving himself better
than all.”— Coleridge.
“If inquiry shakes for a time the belief that is rested only upon prejudice, it
finally settles it on the broader and £more solid basis of conviction.”— White's
Bampton Lectures.
George robertson & company
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
1885




INTRODUCTION.
The scheme of this work is, first to discuss one by one the
cardinal and fundamental doctrines of Popular Christianity
—such as those of “the Trinity,” “the Deity of Jesus,”
“the Actual and Very Sonship of Jesus to God,” “the
Incarnation,” “the Inspiration of the Bible,” “the Atone-
ment,” and “the Advent;” to endeavour to satisfy the
reader that these doctrines are mere crude superstitions,
and that their effect is to disfigure and obscure pure and
true religion. This portion of the scheme is contained in
the four earlier parts. Secondly, to demonstrate that when
these misconceptions have been cleared away, the residue
left is pure Theism, and that the Theistic is the purest as
well as the only rational and scientific form of belief. If
the reader should, while perusing any of the first four parts,
form the opinion that I have written with the object of
throwing discredit upon Religion , a glance over the first few
pages of the last part, will, I feel sure, satisfy him that such
an opinion is both hasty and erroneous.




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
I think there can be but little doubt that there exist in
the present day a considerable number of persons who have
either thrown off religion altogether on account of the
incredibilities attaching to popular theology, or who know
not what to believe by reason of the pressing and ever-
increasing doubts with which their intelligences are
assailed. If it be possible to reclaim the former from
atheism or agnosticism, or to make the path to God plainer
for the latter, no effort ought to be spared, no labour can be
too great. Impressed by this feeling, I have ventured on
the task of endeavouring, by disentangling religion from its
superstitions, to prove to the one class that they can hold and
maintain a pure, simple, rational, religious faith inde-
pendently of those incredibilities which are mainly and
primarily responsible for the existence of the atheist, and of
endeavouring to solve and remove for the latter the doubts
which perplex their minds, and which oppress them in their
efforts to seek, through the gloom and the mists which
surround them, the pure and unfading light of truth. This
most serious and difficult task I shall, under the blessing of
God, hope to perform, not by means of abstruse and subtle


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Preface to the First Edition - - - vii
Preface to the Third Edition - - - xm
Dr. Moorhouse at St. Paul’s - - - xv “*
A Reply to Dr. Moorhouse and Recent Criti-
cisms ----- xxiii
Addendum - - - - - " - xli
I. —the Doctrine of the Trinity—The Deity
of Jesus Christ - - - - 1
ll.—The Son of God—The Incarnation - - 26
111. The inspiration of the Bible—Miracles - 44
IV. The Doctrines of the Atonement and
Advent - - - - - - 69
V.—A Pure Faith —“God” - - - - 7 8


arguments such as metaphysicians love to use, but by the
instrumentality of facts, and of plain inferences fairly and
legitimately drawn from facts, set forth in language which I
hope may be popular, clear, and simple. I have no hesita-
tion in expressing the opinion that the chief impediments
and obstacles to what may justly be regarded as a pure,
warm, and simple faith in that “Power” or “Supreme
Will ” which, for want of a better definition, we call “ God,”
are the multifarious doctrines, the diverse dogmas of diverse
churches, the many and various creeds of those numerous
religious sects who—each claiming Biblical authority for its
own doctrines,* but denouncing, as superstitious or unscrip-
* One sect, in support of a particular dogma, insists upon an abso-
lutely literal interpretation of Scripture, and vetoes the application of
reason; in support of another, takes the most extensive liberties with
the language of the Bible even when the language is unambiguous ; in
support of a third, for which no Biblical authority can be found, or
which may even be said to be opposed to the authority of Scripture,
calls in the aid of that reason, the use of which, in regard to other dogmas,
it absolutely interdicts. Not to multiply instances : the Roman Catholic
Church insists upon the sacrament of extreme unction and its efficacy, upon
the authority of a verse to be found in the epistle of St. James which
says, “Is any man sick among you, let him bring in the priests of the
Church and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name
of the Lord ” (James v. 14) ; creates the doctrine of purgatory because
reason , it is said, revolts at the idea of an erring child being consigned
to eternal flames with a hardened criminal, because to have hell only
for the wicked and heaven for the good would be inconsistent with the
justice of God; and insists upon the doctrine of transubstantiation
because the literal reading of the 14th chapter of Mark demands it. The
Church Oi England and other Protestant sects —not agreeing with tran-
substantiation, which they argue is cannibalistic—reject the literal
reading of Mark xiv., and read the words as if “ the sign of ” or “ symbol
of” were in the text, which they are not. So with baptism. Having only
two sacraments, of which baptism is one , the Church of England insists
upon the necessity and regenerating efficacy of infant baptism- The


tural, those peculiar to its neighbour—all range themselves
under the banner of Christianity ; and the incredibilities at-
taching not to the Christian faith, but to the Christian faith
as we are expected to accept it, originating in the tendency
and desire of the early Christians (in common with Bud-
dhists and other religious sects of the world) to magnify the
founder of a good, pure, and ennobling faith, after his death,
into a God ; for that purpose necessitating the creation
of a supernatural origin—of miraculous works—producing
reports and narratives coloured by the imagination and
exaggerated by the religious enthusiasm of the narrator.
Is it a matter for surprise that as the Christian following
increased and years rolled on, and churches became estab-
lished, the superstitions, so created, gathered force, became
more wide-spread, added to, fostered, and supported by the
manufacture and enunciation of doctrines and dogmas
unknown to the faith of the founder of Christianity, untrace-
ab'le in the religion of Jesus? It is these creations—these
doctrines, and these dogmas which for century after
century have been building up barrier upon barrier against
our knowledge and understanding of “ The Supreme,” which
have for so long oppressed and obscured our belief in God—
that I shall endeavour to show are discredited, unworthy of
belief, unsupported by legitimate evidence, opposed to
reason. If this prove to be the case it is our plain and
Baptists reject it as unscriptural, but insist upon adult baptism and
total immersion as the only scriptural doctrine. The Society of
Friends or Quakers rejects both as unscriptural, with some force, on the
ground that John the Baptist declared “/indeed baptize you with
water , but he that cometh after me shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost and with fire.”


obvious duty to reject them all ; by rejecting them we shall
not only lose nothing but we shall secure a bright, pure,
rational faith—a faith rendered ten thousand times stronger
by reason of its purification from superstition and corrup-
tion—a faith which is the faith of all others, to be clung to,
cherished and maintained as long as man exists—belief,
trust in, and love for the All-loving, All-righteous, All-wise,
Universal Spirit called God.
I therefore ask those who honestly desire to ascertain
truth, to lay aside, for the time being at any rate, that
which they have been taught by others to believe—to
struggle to teach themselves , to think for themselves, to
apply the pure light of reason to the investigation of a
subject, which, on account of the momentous interests
involved in it, is entitled to at least the same amount ol
consideration and thought as that which we devote to the
business of everyday life : unless, indeed, the consideration
and examination of the matters which I propose to discuss
are approached under these conditions, examination and
consideration are useless. To those who have a firm
religious faith, even though it be clouded by superstition
and oppressed by dogma—to those who are content with-
out question to imbibe as truth what they are taught by
others, to bind themselves as to their form of belief by
creeds in the formation of which recent centuries have had
neither voice nor part —to those who fear that by using
that most precious gift of God, their reason, for the
purpose of endeavouring to find truth, they may discover
that many of the fundamental doctrines of the faith which
they profess form no part of a revelation from God, but are


merely the creation and imposition of man, this work is
not addressed. To the doubter who is trying to grope his
way to the light, but cannot; to the Atheist, who believes
in nothing, neither in a Supreme Power, nor in a future life,
I tender the perusal and consideration of this volume.
The result, I trust, may be a perception, followed in due
course by that reflection which may lead to conviction,
that the incredibilities and superstitions of the popular
theology, its dogmas and its doctrines, are clearly separable
from, and totally unnecessary to, a rational belief in that
One Almighty Power whose grand attributes of universal,
inexhaustible, infinite love, power, justice, mercy, and
wisdom have been clouded and obscured to man’s mental
vision by “Incarnations,” “Atonements,” “Trinities,”
“ Intercessions and Mediations,” “ Justifications by faith,”
“ Sacraments.” I believe that when the Christian faith
has been passed through the retort of reason, the residuum
will be found to be that clear, pure, simple faith, which,
offering no insult to, is in accord with our intelligence—
opposed to no scientific truth or universal law, and which
but for that tendency to magnify with its attendant results,
to which I have already alluded, might now be, and would
probably have been, the almost universal belief of the
civilized world. I believe a reaction is at length setting
in against dogmatic Theology. Truth, as it always must,
is gradually beginning to prevail over superstition. What
is opposed to reason, the man who fearlessly uses God’s
best gift refuses to credit; what is in accordance with
reason, and not opposed to universal law, he ungrudgingly
accepts. The sincere and pure Theist is none the less


Christian, because, while trying to lead the same pure,
unselfish, blameless, and noble life that Jesus led, he
declines to accept the doctrine of his deity. The Chris-
tian Theist, who regards Jesus as man, considers, and
rightly from his point of view, that it is within his power to
attain to the life of, and to follow the example of, Christ.
The Trinitarian, who holds Jesus to be God, can have no
such reasonable expectation, no such rational hope. The
former can rationally regard the life of Jesus with warm
admiration, with earnest respect, with sincere gratitude.
The latter detracts largely, if not wholly, from the merits
of that life by holding Jesus to be God.
I have no doubt that, in the course of dealing with the
various doctrines forming the subject of this work I
may at times unconsciously reproduce in my own words
without the usual and customary signs of acknowledgment,
the ideas of others, whose writings I may have read or
whose words I may have heard. In that not improbable
event I feel sure the concession will be made to me of not
having so erred wittingly, and indulgence extended to me,
on account of the pressure upon my time by other duties,
for doubtless many imperfections in the treatment of those
matters which I now proceed to discuss.
HARTLEY WILLIAMS.
Melbourne, February , 1885.


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.
In the comparatively short space of eight weeks my little
work has run through two editions. Notwithstanding its
defects, its circulation has been much more rapid and ex-
tensive than I could in reason have anticipated. I do not
flatter myself that its success has been owing to my having
enunciated a new religious belief. Without doubt most, if
not all, of the views which I have propounded have been
previously set forth by other and abler men at greater length,
and in a more elaborated form. But Ido believe that those
who are commencing to think for themselves upon the subjects
I have ventured to discuss have been glad to have had the
opportunity of reference to a work which dealt with each
subject separately in consecutive order, in plain and simple
language, and in a concise and argumentative form. lam
now informed that many persons of moderate means, who
have been desirous of possessing my work not only for
perusal but also for retention for reference, have been
deterred from purchasing by the price at which the First and
Second Editions were sold. This has influenced me to offer
to the public an edition of the same work, with a substantial
addition in the shape of a reply to Dr. Moorhouse and
other critics, and with a few alterations and corrections, at a
popular price.
My reply to th zprincipal criticisms passed upon me and my
little work must necessarily, having regard to the time at my
disposal, be somewhat brief, but, though brief, I trust clear


and to the point; and I venture to believe that a careful
perusal of this reply, in conjunction with an examination of
the original work, will be found both interesting and in-
structive. I wish I could have left myself out of the con-
troversy, but as Dr. Moorhouse has been pleased to attack
me personally, and my numerous readers through me, I
must unwillingly reply to that attack, but only to the extent
to which it may be necessary to do so for the vindication
of myself and my readers —not to him, but to the thinking
public. Of the attacks made upon me personally by the
Rev. Doctor’s satellites I shall take no notice. Upon the
answers attempted to be given to the destructive portion of
my work by two of them—the Rev. D. Berry, in his
“ Judgment without Evidence,” and the Rev. J. Abernethy,
in “ Disentangling a Creed ” —I purpose, after dealing with
the Doctor, to make a few, though very few, observations.
And in order that the reader may satisfy himself that in my
reply I fight fair—that I do not, in other words, take per se
isolated passages of the Rev. Doctor’s address upon my work
to his congregation, and thus give them a complexion which
they would not have if taken in connection with the sub-
stance of his address—l have inserted his discourse as
reported (and the accuracy of the report has not been
questioned from any quarter), so that the reader may form
his own judgment upon this point, the necessity of observing
which is often, I regret to say, not recognized, and especially
by ecclesiastical controversialists. This course will be
equally advantageous to myself, for it will also serve the
purpose of lt fixing ” my opponent to his actual utterances
at the time of delivery.* But before proceeding to deal with
* It is singular how many letters we see in the press, signed “ J. Mel-
bourne,” stating that he has not uttered the views which he has been
understood to have expressed, or that he is “ conducting an argument,”
and has not yet finished.


criticisms, I desire to remove, if it be necessary, a few
erroneous impressions that may have been created both with
respect to my work and myself by the mud-throwers of the
self-styled orthodox, by the expressed, but I believe in-
nocently mistaken, opinions of cursory readers, and by the
deliberate misrepresentations of others—(i) I have been
charged with blaspheming God; (2) with having attempted
to disparage the life and character of Jesus ; (3) with having
stated that the Bible is a mere compound of filth, and that
it is mere filthy garbage.*
Dealing very briefly with each of these charges in order—
(l) Any ordinarily attentive reader will see at once that the
principal, if not the sole, object of my book was to free
“ God ” as much as possible from the mysteries and
obscurities with which the Church, or, in other words, the
priest, has surrounded Him ; to clear the way for, as far
as possible, an undistracted conception and thought of God ;
and, by removing the barriers and mysteries which the
mystic priest Paul and his successors built up and created
between God and man, to bring God nearer to man, who
might be thus enabled to give God his undivided love,
gratitude, and adoration.
(2) To repel this charge it is simply sufficient to reiterate
* I have also been charged with having denied the existence of
God, and of a future state or life, but it is not worth while taking
any notice of such palpable misrepresentations. I have had the
pleasure of receiving constantly during the last six weeks tracts of
the following description : ‘ ‘ Thou fool, this night thy soul shall
be required of thee” (the word “this” being twice underlined—
this tract was sent to me no less than four times, but so far has
been falsified by the event) ; “ The fool hath said in his heart
there is no God ” (granting that I am a fool, I never said anything of
tne kind. I need hardly say that these delicate attentions have had no
effect on me, for, as a friend remarked to me, “ The persons who sent
those tracts are not dynamiters, but fools.”


here, without alteration or addition, the statement I made
in the preface to the First Edition :
“ The sincere and pure Theist is none the less Christian,
because, while trying to lead the same pure, unselfish, and
noble life that Jesus led, he declines to accept the doctrine
of his deity. The Christian Theist, who regards Jesus as
man , considers, and rightly from his point of view, that it is
within his power to attain to the life of, and to follow the
example of, Christ. The Trinitarians, who hold Jesus to be
God, can have no such reasonable expectation, no such
rational hope. The former can rationally regard the life of
Jesus with warm admiration, with earnest respect, with
sincere gratitude. The latter detracts largely, if not wholly,
from the merits of that life by holding Jesus to be God.”
(3) I regret exceedingly to be compelled to state that
this is nothing less than a false and malevolent misrepresen-
tation. What I stated was that there are pages upon pages
and chapter upon chapter of the Old Testament containing
such filthy stories that no father or mother worthy of the
name would ever dream of reading them to, or of wittingly
allowing them to be read by, son or daughter. I did not
state, nor did I even intend to imply, that these stories were
recorded for the purpose of exciting or gratifying impure
passions. My observation was not, and is not, applied 'to
the whole of the Old Testament, nor to any part of the
New. On the contrary, I conceded that which Buckle and
many able scholars decline to allow—viz., “ that we
can collect from the Bible a purer, more beautiful, and more
advanced ethical code than is to be obtained from any
other book or books.” This charge is a fair sample of the
spirit which pervades that party which has driven the Rev.
Charles Strong from his church, and which seeks to drive
him from the colony. This shows the depths to which it
is capable of resorting for the purpose of vilifying those
who will not bend the knee to, or swallow the dogmas of,


ecclesiastical authority. For it was by the organ of that
party that this false charge was made.* To test the truth of
the statement I did make let any father or mother (if one
can be found to do so) of a family make the experiment I
refer to.
In bringing this preface to a conclusion I can assure the
reader that I endeavoured to treat the subjects I dealt
with in a reverent, and not in a flippant, spirit. I believe
it will be conceded by unprejudiced persons, who have
done me the honour of attentively reading my little work,
that I have not failed in this respect. It is quite possible
that, owing to the sincerity of my convictions and the
earnestness of my purpose, I may have in some places
expressed myself both too plainly and too strongly ?
and thus unnecessarily have hurt the feelings of, or
given offence to, others. If this be the case I can
assure the reader that I have not so erred wittingly
I am painfully conscious of the fact that when I feel
strongly upon a subject, and honestly believe my views
upon it to be right and just, having within me the fear
of no man except myself, I do occasionally express myself
both too plainly and too strongly. But perhaps, after all, this
plain speaking is more manly than, and may be more prefer-
able to, the system adopted by many of enveloping what
they state in clouds of words and grandiloquent phrases,
serviceable for no other purpose than to obscure and render
uncertain their meaning, and to furnish loopholes for retreat
or escape.
HARTLEY WILLIAMS.
Melbourne, April. , 1885.
b
* I regret to have to add that since the above was in print Dr.
Moorhouse, sitting in his study with my book before him, has, not in
the pulpit, but in a statement deliberately written for publication in the
press, twice repeated, though in even more sweeping terms, this false
charge.


THE BISHOP OF MELBOURNE AT ST PAUL’S.
(Reprinted from the Melbourne “Argus," 30 th March; 1885 .)
Yesterday forenoon the Bishop of Melbourne, Dr. Moor-
house, preached to a large congregation at St. Paul’s Pro-
Cathedral.
The Bishop took for his text the words of the 41st verse
of the 19th chapter of the Gospel according to St. Luke—
“ And when He was come near He beheld the city and
wept over it.” He said—The season calls us to solemn
meditation upon the passion of our Lord. What caused
that passion ? It will be my effort to show you this week that
it was at bottom the ever-deepening impression made upon
our Lord’s holy consciousness of the extent of human sin.
If we are to take as a revelation a certain theological pam-
phlet recently published in this city, and which I am told is
popular amongst certain of its thoughtless inhabitants, no
subject of meditation could just now be more profitable to
us. The inspiration of that pamphlet is a shallow optimism
that shuts its eyes to pain in nature and sin in man. It
recognizes, indeed, the fact that law means a law-maker, and
that order means a mind which designed and preserves the
order. But having done that, it thinks it has done all that
can be expected from it. If the question be further asked,
What is the moral inspiration and general effect of the law ?
it thinks it enough to point to the bird singing in the hedge
and the cloud stained by the sunset. But what if we point
to the hawk striking down that bird and the forked light-
ning leaping from the bosom of that cloud and striking
down the good man passing beneath it? What if, with the
poet laureate, we point to all nature “ red in beak and claw
if we urge, with John Stuart Mill, that nature is guilty of all
the crimes for which men are punished; if, with some of
the deepest philosophers of our own time, men like
Schopenhauer and Leopardi, we produce the facts of nature


and of human life which led! them to cry in anguish of
heart that this is the worst possible of all conceivable
worlds ? What answer do we get to such questions from
our little pamphlet, which professes to solve all the mys-
teries of being in a score of pages ? None whatever. And
what if, going further —what if, advancing into the sphere of
human freedom, we point to sin everywhere ravaging and
degrading human life, staining the best and slaying the
worst, ruining families, subverting empires, destroying
civilizations, what answer do we get about its meaning, its
origin, and its remedy ? Absolutely none. Sin is a thing
to be lightly lamented or absolutely ignored. And if certain
ancient books show themselves to care something about the
awful phenomenon, to care enough about it to name it, to
denounce it, to scourge it, with terrible punishments, in the
name of a righteous God, we must call those books indecent
for their plain speaking and savage for their fierce denun-
ciation. Advantage must be taken of the plain speaking of
the primitive times in which they were written, and of their
rude forms of thought, due to an early stage of mental and
moral development, to heap upon them terms of contumely
and abuse. Contrary to all the canons of intelligent criti-
cism, no account must be taken either of the gradual
development of religious ideals in the course of a long and
changeful history, or of the peculiar moral conceptions,
forms of thought, and methods of expression due to the
surroundings of each age ; but all must be judged according
to the rigid rule of a blind, feeble optimism, which has
developed itself nineteen centuries after the birth of Christ.
I recognize all the imperfections of form which cling to
these old records, and all the defect of knowledge, in-
sufficiency of moral perception, which they disclose ; all the
roughness, plainness, and oriental exuberance of their modes
of expression ; and yet, for all that I find in them what I do
not find in the optimistic critic —a real determination to face
the facts of human life, and to find a remedial solution for
“ the painful riddle of the earth.” Suppose I had before
me for solution the darkest historical problem which has
ever been set before the intellect of man—how it could be


consistent with the existence of a Divine Providence that
the mighty edifice of the Roman Empire should be suffered
to be overthrown with such awful loss and suffering to man-
kind ! I see this empire grow from small beginnings till it
embraces all the nations of the civilized world in the arms
of its dominions. It binds them together in an all but per-
fect civil organization, covers them with the segis of a just
and wise law, stimulates their industry, advances their cul-
ture, multiplies their comforts, and laps them in the blessed
tranquillity of “ the Roman peace.” A little while, and I
see this splendid edifice of empire and civilization growing
infirm, its laws losing their authority, its administrators their
energy, its subjects their content. The eternal city begins
to doubt its own eternity, its armies flee before half-naked
barbarians, fire and sword desolate its fruitful provinces,
peace and plenty are succeeded by famine, misery, and
slaughter ; and when at length its Gothic conquerors have
finished their work, leaving no living soul in Rome, there is
darkness in the earth instead of knowledge, anarchy instead
of order, misery instead of happiness. What produced this
change? What brought this ruin? What consummated
this misery ? Why did God suffer this mighty construction
of man’s mind and will to be thrown down ? Why did He
rend it to pieces, and scatter the dust of its stones to the
winds amid wailing and lamentation of suffering millions ?
What answer has the modern optimist to such a question as
this ? The birds sang and the clouds glowed equally when
Rome was in her glory and when she was in flames. But
what comfort or satisfaction in such a fact as that ?
But now turn to the old book, which is so much despised,
and ask of it that same question ; and though its seers may
be no scientists, and may speak to you in rugged tones and
phrases, they will give you an answer which you see in a
moment goes to the heart of the whole mystery. God
loves man, they will tell you, and seeks his happiness ; but
then happiness can only come to such a being as man
through righteousness. Conduct is two-thirds of his life.
If, then, he tries to build his life upon wrong, upon pleasure,
sensuality, selfishness, for his own sake, that life, however


gay and glittering, must be torn to pieces. Righteousness
is more than palaces, more than splendour, more even than
art and science. To righteousness, then, man must be
brought back at any cost. If Israel sinned he must be
passed through the iron furnace of captivity. If Assyria or
Egypt sinned, and would persist in sinning, they must be
shattered to pieces; and so must Rome, and so must
France, and so must’every nation, no matter how fair its
climate, or how great its treasures, which persists in a
careless, sensual, selfish life. Man only can be made happy
through holiness. His will is himself, and unless his will
be unto righteousness he must suffer. That is the answer
which the old book gives, and having given that answer it
sets itself with noble earnestness to solve the resulting
practical problem : How can man’s will be made
righteous ? How can man be induced—for God cannot
compel a free creature —how can man be induced to choose
righteousness 1 So our shallow optimist’s answer seems
easy. “ Tell him to be righteous. Tell him to repent of
his evil ways, and all that he has done.” That is an absurd
delusion. The whole history of our race gives it the
lie. Man knows it is best to be righteous, but unaided
he would not be so ; cannot be so. That is a fact written
in letters of fire across every page of our past. But
if God loves man, and knows that His creature can only
become happy by becoming righteous, ought He not to do
something to make him so? Granting that God cannot
compel him to be righteous without depriving him of the
capacity for virtue, still, will He not find some way, perhaps
out of the reach of our conception, of drawing men back to
righteousness ? Again you must not go to the modern
optimist, but to the Old Book, for an answer, and, strange
to say, you will find that Book giving you for answer pre-
cisely what the optimist most despises. The Book tells you
that God gave His own blessed Son to come down in the midst
of our sin, to feel its full horror, to encounter its full force,
and through His own unparalleled sufferings to overcome it;
that so overcoming it He has melted the hard hearts of
sinners, has encouraged their hopelessness, and by the aid


of His all-tender spirit of love has stimulated their efforts,
which end in victory. Of course, to the optimist who sees
no sin to be overcome, or none but such as man himself
could overcome, there appears to have been no need of such
succour. If men could repent without the aid of the Divine
Son of God, there was no need for the incarnation. If they
could reconcile themselves to God by their own efforts, there
was no need for an atonement; and, certainly, if there was no
need for these mighty miracles of mercy, their actual occur-
rence is incredible. Therefore, by the very nature of his
own shallow philosophy, the optimist must become a
scoffing unbeliever. We see it again made evident in our
own time that to such men the wisdom of God is foolish-
ness. But, ah, brethren ! we shall see it proved again and
again in our own time that the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men.
Despite the proud swellings of the fleshly mind—boastful, of
course, in comparison to its shallowness —the one great
question for the human mind is precisely this: How can
man become what he knows he should be, and in his own
strength he cannot be, the righteous and obedient child of his
Heavenly Father ? Now, there may be mystery in the Incar-
nation and Atonement, but it is precisely in that mystery
that the answer to this question is found. The Christ has
mastered sin, and will enable you to master it. Christ has
become what you ought to be, and He will enable you to
become like Himself.


A REPLY TO DR. MOORHOUSE AND RECENT
CRITICISMS.
Notwithstanding tfre assurance conveyed to me by the
Rev. Abemethy, in his review of my work, that I have
“a reasonable amount of leisure to devote to such studies as
may attract my taste,” I regret that, during the last twelve
months at any rate, the reverse of this statement has been
the fact. What little leisure I have at my disposal I purpose
to devote to Dr. Moorhouse, and if, after having dealt with
him, there should be any surplus, that surplus shall be at the
disposal of the smaller guns (if I may so style them without
offence), “ the Rev. Berry ” and “ the Rev. Abemethy.”
Let me at once state, in a few lines, the principal argu-
ment of my treatise —viz., that there is an obligation cast
upon those who demand that others shall accept as credible
what is supernatural to furnish those others with reasonable
evidence (but evidence it must be) in support of the truth of
the supernatural fact or proposition, belief in which is
demanded. This being the argument, my next step was to
ascertain whether that obligation had been, or was capable of
being, performed in respect of all or any one of the doctrines
dealt with in either the destructive or constructive portion of
my work. This inquiry led me to the conclusion not only
that there is no such reasonable evidence —nor, in fact, any
evidence at all, properly so called —in support of the truth
of any one of the doctrines discussed in parts i., ii., iii.,
and iv., but that what is pointed to as evidence is, when
examined, in some instances actually opposed to the propo-
sition enunciated; in others of so contradictory, inconsistent,
flimsy, and incredible a description as to throw more


discredit upon the supernatural fact sought to be affirmed
than would be caused by a total absence of evidence.
After arriving at this conclusion I proceeded to reject as
not substantiated the doctrines discussed in parts i., ii., iii.,
and iv., and then considered what affirmation of the super-
natural remained. This lat once found to be the affirma-
tion of God. To this I applied the same test, with the
result that I satisfied myself that, in support of the affirma-
tion of an Intelligent Will or Mind at the back of creation,
and in support of that affirmation of the supernatural only ,
was there such evidence as would justify its being acted
upon by a reasonable man. That evidence is supplied by
the (to my mind) unmistakable indicia of design, or of
intelligent contrivance, in Nature. Not in Nature dwarfed
by limiting our contemplation of her to this small planet—as
was most unmistakably, and, if he will allow me to say so,
erroneously done by Dr. Moorhouse in his recent discourse
—but in the immeasurably grander, more glorious, and
apparently limitless Nature of The Universe. Not only by
what we see and observe for ourselves, but also by those
vaster and grander truths which science has revealed to us,
are we almost forced to the belief that there must be at the
back of all creation a Superhuman Mind and Power.
I therefore, by a process of reason , upon evidence, estab-
lished—as I venture to think—the affirmation of a “God”
as a scietitific fact. I became convinced that though I
could maintain no rational belief in Incarnations, Advents,
Trinities, and Miracles, reason and evidence demonstrated
to me the existence of a Superhuman Intelligence. Having
thus ascertained a “ God,” I found that, on sweeping away
those fabrics which rested merely upon credulity and
superstition, and not upon evidence, there was presented to
the mind a loftier, more just, and more ennobling concep-
tion of God than that which is commonly entertained by


the orthodox, maimed and mutilated, as it necessarily must
be, by connecting with God such doctrines as the Incarna-
tion and the Atonement.
Now, this is all that, within the space of my little work,
and under pressure as to time, I was concerned to do, viz.,
—to establish (i) the affirmation of a God; (2) a not
unworthy, though far. from complete, conception of Him.
To put it in other words, I desired to demonstrate to
doubters that, after rejecting what I ventured to call the
crude superstitions entertained by the orthodox , we could still
have not only a conception of a “ God,” but a more
exalted and rational conception of Him than is held by
the exponents of the doctrines I have mentioned. Though
not absent from my mind, it will thus be apparent that
it was not a necessary part of my task to reconcile with
the existence of an Omnipotent Beneficent God those
occurrences in Nature or in humanity which appear
to clash fully and every whit as much with the Om-
nipotent and Beneficent God of Dr. Moorhouse as with
the God of my conception. I was engaged in dealing
with Ecclesiastical doctrines and dogmas, and I succeeded,
as I believe, in getting rid of doctrines, notably that of
the Atonement, which, in my opinion, are utterly irre-
concilable with either Omnipotence or perfect Beneficence.
Without these incongruities, a conception of an Omnis-
cient, Omnipotent, and Beneficent God is far more rational,
and far more feasible, than with them ; and these are the
incongruities that in my little work I endeavoured—and
I have some grounds for believing, successfully—to excise.
As other persons besides Dr. Moorhouse have read Mill’s
“ Essay on Nature,” I was fully aware of the argument
against the conception of an Omnipotent and perfectly
Beneficent God deducible from the destructive work of
Nature and the spectacle of misery, vice, and ignorance


pervading humanity. But the existence of this destroying
work and of the presence of misery and evil is a fact—
it is not a superstition; and the argument deduced from
the fact against Omnipotence and Beneficence, not only
does not receive the support of the Church or the orthodox,
but, as a rule, both shut their ears to it. To deal with this
argument, it is apparent, therefore, did not come within the
design or object of my work, either in its destructive or
constructive portion.
Further, if the argument against Omnipotence and
Beneficence deduced from the existence of misery and
crime in humanity, and from the destroying powers of
Nature, as appertaining to our planet, be insuperable, then
it applies with quite as much force to Dr. Moorhouse’s
conception of God, beset, as it is, by other incongruities, as
to mine, and in that case, until he has succeeded in
squaring the circle he should not expect me to do so. If,
however, it be not insuperable, has Dr. Moorhouse given
any satisfactory rational answer to it ? The consideration
of this question leads me from the more general review of
his discourse, which I have so far indulged in, to a more
particular examination of it, in the course of which I think
I shall be able to show that he has given no intelligible
rational answer to the argument whatever; and that the
explanation he does attempt to give is not only based on
the most astounding assumptions, but throws additional
difficulties in the way of a belief in the Omnipotence,
Omniscience, and perfect Benevolence of the Creator.
When 1 have completed this task I shall proceed, as I have
7ioiv been challenged to do so (though, as far as the object
and design of my work is concerned, this does not, as I have
stated, fall within its scope), to give the best rational, answer
to Mill’s argument that I can ; and even though the reader
may think at its close that the answer is not completely


satisfactory or conclusive, I do not doubt but that he will at
any rate admit that the effect of my solution is at any rate
greatly to diminish the force of what, all must acknowledge,
is an argument not easily capable of being completely and
conclusively refuted.
While I write I have Dr. Moorhouse’s discourse before
me, and what at once-strikes me in connection with it, as in
fact with many of his discourses, is that I have already seen
and read the matter, or substance of it, in the works of one
or more authors of more or less repute. A large portion of
the discourse in question is undoubtedly a combination of
John Stuart Mill and Matthew Arnold, with a rhetorical effort
(such as the Doctor dearly loves) relating to the rise and
fall of the Roman Empire, and to the sacking of Rome by
the Goths, but the substance of which is strangely familiar
to me. However this may be, he commences with three
assertions regarding my work and myself, utterly immaterial,
but which, as he has broached them, I may as well dispose of
at once—(i) that the work is popular (this I do not object to);
(2) but only among the thoughtless of the inhabitants of the city
of Melbourne; (3) that the writer is a shallow optimist.
Now, I have always been under the impression that
“ thoughtless persons ” are such as do not think upon, or
are utterly indifferent to, the truth or falsehood (for
example’s sake) of such subjects as I have discussed. Primct
facie, only those persons who either think upon these
matters for themselves, or are beginning to think upon them
for themselves , are likely to be interested in the examination
of such a work. With all deference to Dr. Moorhouse, I
should feel disposed to say that to the credulous of his con-
gregation—who, having no belief (in the proper sense of the
word) of their own, accept as their belief the belief of
another (be he priest or layman), and who abstain from
reading or reasoning upon these subjects from the con-


sciousness that the fabric on which each rests is so insecure
that the very breath of reason may blow it down —the
vituperative and semi-abusive epithet “ thoughtless ” is far
more applicable. But in addition to my readers being
“thoughtless,” lam “a shallow optimist.” Dr. Moorhouse
is seemingly so pleased with the sound of this phrase that
he applies it to me, roundly speaking, half a score of times
in the course of his discourse. But what justification has
Dr. Moorhouse for this assertion ? Surely the fact of my
not having dealt with an argument which did not necessarily
fall within the scope, design, or object of the work he pro-
fessed to be criticising, affords no sufficient reason—a
work in which I emphatically state that no man, orthodox or
otherwise, can have a complete conception of God; that
finite man’s conception of Infinite God must necessarily be
partial and defective; and yet Dr. Moorhouse is constrained
to admit that my omission, under the circumstances I
have stated, to deal with the argument of the pessimist is
his sole ground for designating me repeatedly to his audience
as a shallow optimist. But take the other view for the
moment, and assume that an obligation did devolve upon
me—when exposing superstitions and endeavouring to
establish upon a scientific basis a conception, admittedly
partial and defective, of a God —of dealing with an argu-
ment which, it is alleged, affects not the belief in the
existence of a God, but of a God who is Omnipotent,
Omniscient, and perfectly Beneficent, what then ? The
argument, if insuperable, affects precisely to the same
degree those attributes of the God of Dr. Moorhouse’s con-
ception ; and if not insuperable, I think I shall be able to
show not only that the Rev. Doctor who has trotted out
this argument of the pessimist is unable to give as satisfactory
an answer to it as the shallow optimist, but that in his
discourse he has signally and egregiously failed to give


any answer to it whatever, though he endeavours to give
one founded on the Atonement, which has merely the effect
of causing the argument to press with redoubled force.
Dr. Moorhouse must be aware that assertion is not argu-
ment —neither is abuse. His criticism, quantum valeat ,
would have been quite as forcible without “ calling names,”
as we used to say at school, for vituperative assertion or
declamation is generally only resorted to when the exigencies
of the speaker’s or writer’s case drive him to its use.*
To proceed, passing over in the discourse some minor
misconceptions, I trust unintentional, the preacher makes
the statement that my little pamphlet “ professes to solve
all the mysteries of being in a score of pages.” This
statement must either be one of his ordinary rhetorical
flourishes, or he cannot have perused my pamphlet with
even the commonest attention. I may safely leave it to
speak for itself upon this point at any rate. Then, after a
few more rhetorical periods, for the substance of which I
can refer the reader to Mill’s essay on “ Nature,” this
charge is made against me, that I either lightly lament sin,
or absolutely ignore it. Well, I admit I cannot refute this
charge except by a denial that anything even tending to
* I think it would disturb even the self-satisfaction of Dr. Moorhouse
were he to know the numbers and names of those persons within the
pale of both his own and the Scotch churches who have been
“thoughtless” enough not only to read my work, but to assure me,
many by letter, many in person, of their thorough agreement with me
in nearly all my views, and who have thanked me for what they have
been good enough to call my courage and manliness in having published
them, and for the reverent tone which characterized the publication.
And it is certainly amusing that so feeble and shallow a work should
not only have excited the commotion it has in the clerical dove-cot, but
should also necessitate such Herculean efforts as have been employed
to endeavour to neutralize its effect. People do not ordinarily break
flies upon wheels.


give colour for such a charge is anywhere to be found
in my work. Then, having got the steam up (I am
sure Dr. Moorhouse, when he recalls his discourse, will
excuse the expression), he makes this extraordinary state-
ment, that “ because certain ancient books show themselves
to care something about sin, to care enough about it to
name it, to denounce it, to scourge it, with terrible punish-
ments, in the name of a righteous God, these books are
called indecent* for their plain speaking, and savage for
their fierce denunciation.” These are pretty words. But
as the Rev. Doctor is not in his pulpit now, where he is
accustomed to have it all his own way, I must in sheer
amazement ask where I have called these ancient books
indecent for their plain speaking about sin , or savage for
their fierce denunciation of sin ? and, further, where I call
them so because they show themselves to care something
about sin, to care enough about it to denounce it, to
scourge it, &c. ? and further let me ask where, in the
instances I cite—except, perhaps, in those taken from
Isaiah, and in which the expressions used are put into the
mouth of the Almighty —is there the slightest trace of this
grand and exalted performance? Really this repeated
recourse to the -plan of putting into an opponent’s mouth
statements which he never made, for the purpose of having
the sublime gratification of refuting those statements, leads
me to suspect that the worthy Doctor is not altogether
innocent of that trick of oratory vulgarly described as
setting up a nine-pin for the pleasure of knocking it down
again, f
* As to this, see p. xvi. of my preface to the present edition,
f This, it will be seen, before I have finished with the Doctor, is
not only a very favourite trick of his, but that to practise it with more
telling effect he not unfrequently goes the length of inventing statements
for his opponent and then demolishing them (to his own satisfaction).


Let us test his accuracy and fairness here by taking one
or two of the instances I adduced in support of—not what
the Doctor makes me say, but of what I actually did say.
Will he oblige me by explaining how the disgusting narrative
contained in Genesis xix. 30-38 can be twisted into any
condemnation of sin ? what word of reproof is contained in
the chapter from end to end for the grossly indecent acts
there recorded ? and in what possible way the narrative, or
effect of the narrative, could have been affected had this
portion of the chapter been omitted ? Or, as to the other
class to which I referred, will he be good enough also to
explain, if he can, how the instances of cruelty and
savagery which I give from 2 Samuel xii. 31, when
David (with whom the Lord was) destroys all the cities
of the children of Ammon and tortures their inhabitants
to death “by putting them under saws and harrows of
iron, and under axes of iron, and by making them pass
through the brick kiln and from Leviticus xx. 27, in which
is contained the ferocious enactment that “every man or
woman that hath a familiar spirit or that is a wizard shall
be put to death, and shall be stoned with stones,” can
possibly be regarded as denunciations of sin ? or how I can
be fairly charged with having called either the one instance
or the other indecent or savage because of their fierce
denunciation of sin ? Let my reader search in these or in
any other of the instances cited in my book for anything
approaching to “denouncing or scourging these acts or
sins with terrible punishments.” My critic then proceeds
to excuse the writers of the old books for their defective
knowledge, so apparent upon the pages of many of their
narratives, on account of the rude and primitive age at
which they lived. lam quite prepared to fully allow the
validity of the plea ; but I thought these writers were all
inspired by God to write what they did write, and I


do not suppose God would inspire them to make mistakes.
I certainly hardly expected this admission from a priest
of the Church, but I conjecture that in the torrent of
his words the effect of the admission upon my argument
as to the non-inspiration of the writers of these old books
must have been lost sight of.* After this slip we come
to those magnificent periods about the Roman Empire
and Rome, to which I have already referred; and then,
I am really thankful to say, we come at last to that
portion of the discourse which affects to give the answer
and the source of the answer to the argument, for not having
dealt with which the unfortunate author of “ Religion
without Superstition” has been by this, as we have so far seen,
strangely inaccurate dignitary of the priesthood, denounced
as a shallow optimist.
“ If,” says the preacher, “ you want the answer, and the
full answer, turn to the Old Book, and it will give you an
answer which goes to the heart of the whole mystery.
Happiness can only come to man through righteousness.
Conduct is two-thirds of life. Man can only be made
happy through holiness. His will is himself, and unless
his will be unto righteousness he must suffer. That (trium-
phantly) is which the Old Book gives.” Now, to
begin with (if I may be pardoned for saying so to so fashion-
able a preacher), this is not original. Anyone who has read
Matthew Arnold’s “Literature and Dogma” with the most
ordinary attention will at once perceive that we have
been here simply regaled, second-hand, with unadulterated
Matthew Arnold. But, passing this by, I think I shall be
able— not to make assertions or assumptions without proof,
but to prove two things, either of which ought to be sufficient
to show that pulpit platitudes like these will not bear
* See the meaning of “ inspiration” in any average dictionary.


examination, though no doubt considered “ beautiful and
sweet” by those who, not having much strength of mind of
their own, are eager to be credulous. For, first, I shall
prove that the full and complete answer is no answer at
all: secondly, that if it be an answer, it was known and
advocated long before our Bible existed, and that the gradual
development of more exalted rules of right conduct (which
is the true meaning of righteousness), in regard to the
relations that should exist between man and man, is the
natural result of the advance of education, civilization,
and refinement.
What conceivable answer does the Old Book give to the
argument against God’s omnipotence and perfect beneficence
drawn from the destroying powers of Nature? How can
the righteousness of man, as that is stated to be the answer,
in any possible way affect that argument, or how can it
save man from Nature’s destructive agencies or even
mitigate their effect ? It is my critic who has trotted out
this argument: has he laid this portion of the spectre that
he has raised ? How, pray, can even a perfectly righteous
man avert the ravages of a hurricane, or of a tidal wave, or
of an inundation, or the calamities attendant upon the
failure of a rice crop in India, or of a water famine in
Australia ? Or, if the permitted existence of these destruc-
tive agencies implies limited power or beneficence in God,
how can man’s righteousness, unless it do away with the
facts, affect the argument deducible from those facts?
Where in the Old Book will we find the antidote for these
ravages, or the method for arresting these calamities? For
the wholesale and indiscriminate destruction of righteous
and unrighteous alike by cholera, or by explosions of fire-
damp, bringing misery and dire distress upon the widows
and children of both the righteous and unrighteous, of what
avail is righteousness, the answer to the argument deducible
c


from these experiences of Nature’s powers, that, our
Preacher tells us, the Old Book gives? How does it, I
ask again, make God any one whit more or less potent or
beneficent than He may be entitled to be considered ? If
I also may use the expression, and this be not the sheer
nonsense of pulpit claptrap, what is it but the shallowest and
feeblest of all shallow and feeble optimisms ?—what but cruel
mockery of the bitterness of life ? Then, does this pretty
fancy answer even the other portion of the argument—that
drawn from the misery, and ignorance, and vice that we see
in the world, not attributable to the destructive agencies of
Nature ? Certainly not in the sense in which it was intended
by the preacher his congregation should understand the
term “ righteousness ” as gathered from the Old Testa-
ment.* What panacea will that kind of righteousness
prove to the unselfish, loving, rightly-conducted, and
blameless mother, who, without fire or food, sees her babe
and her little ones perishing before her eyes with cold and
hunger ? Or how does her blameless life affect the argu-
ment deducible from the existence of her own and her
children’s misery ?
It is obvious, then, that what is so dogmatically stated to
be the answer cannot be regarded as bearing the semblance of
an answer to so much of the argument against an Omni-
potent and perfectly Beneficent God as is drawn from our
experiences of the effects of the destructive agencies of
Nature, and which, though it may partly answer so much of
the argument as is drawn from the existence of vice, most
imperfectly and insufficiently answers so much of it as is
* It is perfectly clear that throughout his discourse the term “ Old
Book” is applied by Dr. Moorhouse to the “ Old Testament,” except
in one instance, where inadvertently, apparently, he towards the close
of his discourse applies it to the “ New.”


deduced from the existence of misery not caused by vice,
or of ignorance.
But, to proceed, our preacher, having fulminated this as the
answer, which he modestly says goes to the heart of the whole
mystery, which he asserts the Old Book gives, and which
his whole discourse clearly implies I did not give, forgetting
logic (but priests are* as a rule, bad logicians, though
many of them are good rhetoricians, and rhetoric is favour-
able to assumptions), exclaims: But “how is this to be done?
—how can man’s will be made righteous ? —how can man be
induced, for God cannot compel a free creature —how can
man be induced to choose righteousness ? Our shallow
optimist answers, ‘Tell him to be righteous; tell him to
repent of his evil ways and all that he has done.’” But, as
we are not in church, may I venture to mention that I just
now understood our preacher to state that this is the answer
which the Old Book gives, but which I did not give. How-
ever, letting this curiosity in the way of conducting a so-called
argument pass, after what fashion does this magnificent
rhetorician proceed to solve the problem, as he calls it, of
“ how man can be induced to become righteous ” ? He begins
by asserting that man is a free agent, with a capacity for virtue
that is, with a capacity for becoming righteous. These
assertions —for they are nothing more—l shall not quarrel
with, for lam willing to accept them as correct. But what
is the next step towards giving us a rational and convincing
solution of the problem—Man, being a free agent and
having a capacity for virtue, though “he knows it is best to be
righteous, unaided he cannot be so. That is a fact writtten
in letters of fire across every page of our past.” Passing by
“ the letters of fire ” business and the crops of assertions and
assumptions that spring up in this sentence, as well as in
almost every other sentence of the discourse, I may admit
that to a certain extent, and in a certain sense of the word


“ unaided,” this assertion may be (I do not say it is) correct.
But, taking the word in the sense in which Dr. Moorhouse
uses it, he proceeds to state that the free agent, man, with
the capacity for becoming righteous, has been aided to become
righteous by God.
This fact (?), and the mode by which man has been so
aided, you will find, he says, in the New Testament ;* but
from the modern optimist you will get neither the one or
the other. The New Testament, he says, establishes the
fact when it tells us that “ God gave his own blessed Son to
come down in the midst of our sin to feel its full horror, and
through his own sufferings to overcome it.” Now, of course,
there is the liberal twofold assumption here —(i) That the
fact is so stated in that part of the New Testament where, if
anywhere, we should expect to find it, namely, in that portion
which professes to detail to us the teachings and sayings of
Jesus, the four Gospels ; (2) that because it is so stated, there-
fore it is a fact. I pass over both these assumptions for the
obvious and sufficient reason that the second depends upon
the question whether the doctrine of plenary inspiration of
the Bible be sustainable or not, a question with which my
work has, though not fully, yet sufficiently dealt; and in the
first, namely, that God sent His own actual and very Son,
who, according to this doctrine, existed with Him in heaven
from everlasting, down to this earth for the specific purpose
stated so authoritatively by the preacher, is involved two
other assumptions of fact—(l) The Incarnation; (2) the
Atonement.f Assumption, therefore, is not only piled upon
assumption, but when tested we find assumptions, concealed,
within assumptions, expressed ; certainly a most rosy way of
* See note to p. xxxiv.
t As to the doctrines of the inspiration of the Bible, miracles, the
Incarnation, and the Atonement, I refer the reader to the parts of my
work dealing with these doctrines.


establishing propositions and conducting an argument (?) so
called. This mode, which seems to be such a favourite with
the Rev. Doctor, is vulgarly known as that of “ jumping ”
the position. However, I will now leave this part of the
discourse by reminding the reader of this one fact , that if
God did send His own actual and very Son, pre-existent
with Him, down to earth for the specific purpose alleged;
in other words, if that was the Son’s express mission from
heaven to earth, then, according to those portions of the
New Testament (and, of course, always excluding Paulism)
to which I have referred, the Son remained strangely
reticent upon the subject of the purpose for which alone he
is said to have been sent.
Let us now proceed to consider the mode by which our
preacher states man has been aided to become righteous,
and which mode he states we shall also find in the New
Testament. “By overcoming sin Christ has melted the
hard heart of sinners, has encouraged their hopelessness,
and has stimulated their efforts, which end in victory. If
men could repent without the aid of the Divine Son of God,
there was no need for the Incarnation. If they could
reconcile themselves to God by their own effoits, there was
no need for an Atonement.” lam weary of pointing out
assumptions, so will pass all others by, and will confine my-
self to endeavouring to unravel what I understand the
preacher to be here propounding. 1 o enable man, who
being a free agent had the capacity to become righteous, to
be righteous, it was necessary to furnish him with an example
who could lead a righteous life, and who would show man
that sin could and ought to be resisted and overcome.
Hence the necessity for the Incarnation. But if God be
omnipotent, why “ the necessity ’ for the Incarnation or for
the sending down God’s Son at allt and how does it happen
that the Jews and Unitarians, who lead at any rate as pure


and good lives as those of orthodox Christians, are capable
of doing so, seeing they do not believe in the Deity of
Jesus, nor in his Incarnation, nor in the Atonement, nor in
the Trinity, nor in his being the actual and very Son of
God, nor in the New Testament?* This (if we forget
the argument of the pessimist against the Omnipotence and
perfect Beneficence of God which the preacher is supposed
to be giving the complete answer to, all this time) may sound
plausible; f but after our preacher has by this means enabled
man, who without it had the capacity to become righteous,
to be righteous, our expounder suddenly dogmatizes to
this effect: No matter how closely or perfectly man, stimu-
lated by, followed the example set before him—no matter
how righteous he became, he still had to be reconciled to
God on account of his sins, and for that purpose a human
sacrifice —the sacrifice of the example—the Atonement was
necessary. And this is supposed to be another argument in
* It is singular that since the above was in the press our logical (?)
preacher, in Part 111. of his prepared reply to my little work, published
by him in the Daily Telegraph, uses the following argument for the
Bible being the inspired word of God : —“ Look at the Jews !If ever a
people were made by a book, the Jews have been made by the Bible
(query, at what period of Jewish history was the Bible, or—so as not
to take the little advantages of the Doctor that, in his extremities, he
takes of me—the Old Testament, compiled ?) Look at the strong faith
of the Jews, at their pure homes, at their vitality, &c.” What, Dr.
Moorhouse, without an Incarnation—without an Atonement ? Really,
this is supreme—without even their belief in Jesus as a Divine example.
How bad logicians, even when they are not in the pulpit, but in their
own study, sometimes cut the throat of one argument in the effort to
establish another.
+ The reader will observe that, according to the views expressed in
my work, not only is the life of the Son of Joseph and Mary, and of all
good, noble, and pure men, such an example, but these lives have this-
further advantage, that, not being Divine (except in the sense that every
righteous and pure life is Divine), they are capable of being followed.


favour of (let the reader weigh these words) an Omnipotent
and perfectly Beneficent God.
That an Omnipotent , Omniscient , and Beneficent God
could not furnish man with an example of a righteous life
able to resist and overcome sin without sending into the
womb of a newly married woman, and yet a virgin, His
own actual and very Son at a comparatively recent period
of man’s history, and, notwithstanding His absolute bene-
ficence, should have left countless millions of the human
race without an example necessary, so it is said, to enable
them to be righteous for thousands of years, are proposi-
tions that so shock reason, and are so inconsistent with
facts, as to make us pause with amazement when we
consider the argument they are put forth to meet. But
the proposition stated as to the necessity for the Atone-
ment—for the sacrifice of the Example is so monstrous,
so diametrically and absolutely opposed to all notions
of justice, beneficence, or omnipotence, that it requires
merely to be stated to be at once rejected as not
only incredible, but absolutely derogatory to any worthy
conception of God —it was necessary, to satisfy Gods
attribute of justice, that His only Son should be sacrificed in
order to enable God to become reconciled to man, to
whom He had given the capacity for righteousness, and to
whom He had given a righteous example, which man had
followed. An Omnipotent God could not become reconciled
to man without this terrible rite. A perfectly Beneficent
and Just God would not be satisfied with the righteous life
of a righteous man. And as with the Incarnation so with
the Atonement, this precious and essential step also not
taken until after countless millions of God's creatures had
been allowed to live and die in sin, when it would have
been as easy (to say nothing of justice or mercy) for God
to have taken both these essential steps at a time when the


whole human race —all His children, and not a small
minority—would have experienced their beneficial effects.
And as to the poor Jews and Unitarians, what is to become
of them ? They have the capacity to become righteous, but
cannot be so. Nor can they be reconciled to God on account
of their sins. Oh Paulism, what art thou answerable for? And
how does Dr. Moorhouse conclude : —“ No doubt there may
be mystery in the Incarnation and in the Atonement, but it
is precisely in that mystery that the answer to the question
is found.” The same old story —“These are mysteries
hence the necessity for the priest. The laity cannot under-
stand these mysteries of the Atonement and of the Incarna-
tion, and of the necessity for Trinities. Can we not
sympathize with the unfortunate congregation who, at the
end of such a discourse as I have analyzed, and the object
of which was, I cannot say to demonstrate to, but to tell
them not only that both the Incarnation and Atonement
were necessary to enable man to lead a righteous life—but
also that in those doctrines lay the complete answer to the
argument drawn from the calamities of Nature and the ills
of humanity against the omnipotence and beneficence of
God —are told “ it is of no use your trying to reason upon
these doctrines—they are mysteries. Be content to accept
what I tell you : I may understand them, you cannot.”
But now leaving this complete and full and satisfactory
answer, to what source or origin does the Book, old or new
(again, of course, excluding Paulism), trace the existence of
evil, and by what means does the Book, old or new,
endeavour not to aid but to compel man to be righteous ?
The origin and author of evil, according to the Book , is “ the
Devil; ” the means, according to the Book, by which man
is to be induced to resist the Devil and made righteous is
the fear of torment in God’s place of punishment, “Hell.”
This is what the Book says unmistakably. Not to multiply


instances, take as to “ the Devil ” the statements contained
in the Gospels as to the Devil taking Jesus to the top of the
Temple, and asking him to throw himself down; and
again to the top of a mountain near Jerusalem, and show-
ing him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of
time; and as to “Hell,” take the description given by
Jesus to his disciples ©f what would take place on the day
of judgment, first, as regards the righteous; secondly, as
regards the wicked —Matthew xxv. 34—46 (the king send-
ing them into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
angels); and the description of the rich man tormented in
flames —Luke xvi. 23-28. Though this is what the Book,
and what that portion of the Book called the New Testa-
ment, in the Gospels, says, I am well aware that in conse-
quence of most men and women of the present day having
declined any longer to accept upon these points what has
been the belief of the orthodox Christian undoubtedly up
to the commencement of the present century simply
because it was stated in the Bible, Dr. Moorhouse, and
certain others of the priesthood (but not many), now say
that the Hell mentioned in the Bible is nothing like what
you and I would understand it to he from the Bible; and
so with “ the Devil/’ As men and women have outgrown
these superstitions, this is very good policy, no doubt, on
the part of the Rev. Doctor, and those of his subordinates
who follow his lead; but, may I ask, are we to take what
the Bible says, or what Dr. Moorhouse says it says, or what
Dr. Moorhouse’s coadjutors who do not agree with him
say, or what the Churches and the whole of orthodox
Christianity has said for i,7°° years? Perhaps as men and
women progress in becoming less subservient to the
priesthood, and in thinking more for themselves, they will
outgrow a few more of those doctrines which I have
ventured to class with the orthodox “ Devil ’’ and “ Hell ’


as crude superstitions. Then we shall probably have
further glosses, to the effect that the Incarnation and Atone-
ment are not to be taken as literal facts, but as represent-
ing, the one, the divine goodness of God incarnated in the
man Jesus, the other, the reconciliation that takes place
between God and man by the leading of a blameless,,
righteous life. It is not always well to go for a solution
of a problem to the Book*
This being what the Book does say as to the origin
of evil, and as to the means by which men are to be
deterred from sin and made righteous, I may now leave
both Dr. Moorhouse and the Book, and proceed—as I have
been challenged to do it, and not as being a necessary part
of the design of my work —to attempt, not confidently but
diffidently, to give an outline of what I think may be an
answer to the admittedly very weighty argument, not against
the existence of a God or of a Superhuman Intelligent Will
(be it remembered), but against the omnipotence of that God
or Will, deduced from the calamities caused by the agencies
of Nature, and from the misery, vice, and ignorance affect-
ing humanity.
To go into what I conceive may be the solution of this
real problem at any length or in detail is quite out of the
question, having regard to the time and space at my dis-
posal—to do so would be a work in itself; but the outline I
propose to give will perhaps sufficiently disclose the nature
of what may be the answer to the argument, and will enable
the reader to form some opinion of its adequacy and
force.
* According to popular Christianity, too, as Mill says, “ The Good
Creator is paid the bad compliment of having been the maker of
the Devil, and of being at all times able to crush and annihilate
him and his evil deeds and counsels, which, nevertheless, he does
not do. ”


Mill in one of his essays on Religion, that on “ Theism,”*
lays down this proposition —“ There is one conception of
Theism which is radically inconsistent with the most general
truths that have been made known to us by scientific
investigation, that is, the conception of a God governing
the world by acts of variable will. There is another con-
ception of Theism w.hich is consistent —that other is the
conception of a God governing the world by invariable
laws.” As this proposition is now generally accepted as
correct, being based upon the truths that science has de-
monstrated, I may fairly utilize it for my purpose. Next, man
has implanted in him a continuous capacity for the improve-
ment both of himself and of his fellow-men, and of Nature
so far as our earth is concerned ; and as we have reason to
believe man will continue to exist for an indefinite time,
he has that capacity to an indefinite extent, that is, to an
extent co-extensive with his existence as man. To put the
earlier proposition in perhaps a more familiar shape, we
have the strongest evidence from experience of the existence
of a law of progress —evolution or development affecting
both man and nature—and the evidence from experience
likewise satisfies us that this law of progress or development
is an invariable law. We may therefore take this law to be
one of the invariable laws by which God governs the world.
Now, it is apparent that God must have made man a free
agent, and given him this continuous capacity for improve-
ment (even Dr. Moorhouse admits this) for some good
purpose. If this be so, then does not that proposition, if
established, taken in conjunction with the other, if es-
tablished, that the law of progress, evolution, and develop-
ment is one of the invariable laws by which God governs the
world, suggest a conception of God not inconsistent with
* Three essays on Religion—Nature, Utility of Religion, and Theism,
by John Stuart Mill.


the attribute of either Omnipotence or Beneficence? He is
governing the universe by invariable laws. He creates
matter and man in accordance with these laws ; both pro-
gress, develop, and mature in accordance with these laws;
God having given to both the capacity for so doing—and to
man the further capacity for further improving and develop-
ing matter. This view is not only not inconsistent with
man being a free agent, subject to that one law, but it
supplies the purpose for which the capacity for improve-
ment, admitted to have been given to man, was given.
That both man and Nature have progressed and
developed, and that they continue to do so; and, further,
that man has done, and can do much, not only to develop
Nature, but to avert the destructive effect of Nature’s
agencies, a mental survey of what has taken place during the
last 3,000 years, and a comparison of the state of both our
earth and man as existing at the present day, with what the
state of both was even a few hundred years ago, will clearly
demonstrate. We must not, therefore, limit our consideration
of this subject either by the present condition of humanity
or the present conditions of Nature. Again, to judge of
the nature of the Universe by that portion of it appertaining
to our small planet (as Dr. Moorhouse does) partakes
of the nature of arguing from a particular instance to a
universal conclusion. If, then, man, with an indefinite
existence before him, qua man and with an indefinite
capacity for improving both himself and much of that
nature which surrounds him, continues to make the most of
this inevitable and apparently universal law of, and capacity
for progress, is it altogether improbable that a period may
arrive when causes of calamities may either cease and die
out, or their otherwise disastrous effects become capable of
being averted (just as we see now many of those effects
being by the increasing skill and knowledge of


man), and when vice, and ignorance, and misery, with their
respective causes, may become relegated to the past?
Experience and science appear to support all these pro-
positions. If so, even with our limited knowledge and con-
ception of God (which, as I have ventured to state in that
part of my work relating to the affirmation of a God, will,
no doubt, enlarge with our progressive mental development
and knowledge), the conception of an Omnipotent God,
working by invariable but wise laws for a Beneficent pur-
pose or end, is certainly neither unreasonable nor unwar-
rantable. I protest against that lugubrious pessimism
(which, strange to say, always comes to the front at the
season of the year called “ Lent ”) pointing with the finger
of despair to the miserable and woe-begone state of our
earth and its inhabitants.
If the certain proof that we have from the experience of
the past and the present of the progressive development of
order and knowledge, of social development, of a diminishing
ratio of vice and misery amongst, and of increasing good-
will towards, our fellow-men tends to cheer and encourage
us not to whine and wail and wrap ourselves up in trying
to secure our own salvation, but to help, by practical means,
our fellow-man ; to make practical efforts to raise him from
misery into comfort; from ignorance, by education, to
knowledge; and by means of knowledge, civilization, and
comfort from vice to virtue, shall we be called feeble
optimists because we entertain the hope, and possess the
courage, and enjoy the incentive to action that that proof
gives us ? Will bewailing and preaching mystic doctrines,
propounding problems, and giving irrational, illogical, and
impracticable solutions to fashionable audiences, who, tickled
with the fine language and big words of the rhetorician,
think it sounds all right, make bad better ! What has
averted in the past, and averts in the present, in many lands,


the disastrous effects of nature’s destructive agencies—of
inundations, of food famine, of water famine—what has
diminished the peril of destruction from the forked light-
ning, from the explosion of fire-damp in the mine, from
invasions of cholera and small-pox—what enables the
mariner to foretell, and, if cautious and skilful, to avoid,
the track of the cyclone, but the progressive practical
discoveries and energy and industry of man ? Does not
this fact, at any rate, diminish the force of the argument
against the omnipotence and beneficence of God ?Of
what benefit have incarnations and atonements or the Old
Book been for these purposes ? Which the more efficacious
for raising humanity from ignorance to knowledge—pulpit
utterances or the State school ? for the furtherance of com-
fort and cleanliness, model lodging-houses or a belief in
miracles ?
Is the existence of all the vice and ignorance and misery
on this earth to be urged as an argument against the omni-
potence and beneficence of the Creator ? How much of it
is attributable to man’s own acts of omission or commission,
to man’s defective laws ? How much of the agony and
bloody history of past, though comparatively recent, times
was owing to ferocious ecclesiastical laws ? In the name of
religion, and for its sake, what horrors have been perpe-
trated for centuries upon centuries ! Hecatombs of slain
—the fagot—the torture chamber—the bloody Inquisition
—the cruel laws against heresy and witchcraft, the creations
of ecclesiastical superstition. And what has made our
present condition so immeasurably better ?—what has caused
those laws, those superstitions, and that long night of error,
with all its crime and misery , to pass away for ever ? The
Church?—the priest? No! Civilization and education,
with its handmaids, reason and knowledge. So, at no very
distant period, in its turn, by means of better laws, more


advanced knowledge, and fuller practical recognition of
man’s duty to man, will much of the misery, vice, and
ignorance of the present day also pass away : and the
verdict of distant ages will further attest the truth of the
proposition not only that God works, as He always has
worked, by invariable laws, but also that under one of those
laws humanity has ever been and continues to be progres-
sive, perhaps, towards a perfect end. But I must stay my
hand. The outline of the answer that I promised to give
I have given—crudely, no doubt; perhaps incompletely.
Such as it is, which is the more rational and practical
answer, quantum valeat , Dr. Moorhouse’s or the writer s ?
Is that given by the preacher sufficient ?—is it any answer
at all? If no answer can be given to the argument against
omnipotence and perfect beneficence, then it is for Dr.
Moorhouse to find the solution of the problem that he has
borrowed for the occasion from John Stuart Mill. Ido
not, in that event, pretend to be capable of squaring the
circle. If an answer can be given, then, for the same
reason, it is Dr. Moorhouse’s duty to supply it; certainly
not mine. But, even so, it is possible the reader may think
I have gone considerably nearer to the solution of the
problem than its propounder.
I can, I am sorry to say, only devote a very few words
to the Rev. Abernethy and the Rev. Berry. The former
gentleman has written very—and I am sorry to say exceptionally
—courteously about me, for which I thank him ; and if I
have hurt his feelings by my plain speaking, as I seem to
have done, all I can say is I am sincerely sorry for having
done so. Perhaps the best way to deal with both these critics,
for I have no time to do more, is to give the reader one or
two specimens of their so-called answers to my work, and
then charitably to leave them. The Rev. Berry writes a
pamphlet, the title of which I cannot understand, called


“ Judgment without Evidence.” Inasmuch as the first four
portions of my work destroy for want of evidence the
doctrines there dealt with, and the onus rests on me to
produce some evidence in support of the last only—
“ the affirmation of God ” —the title cannot, I think, be
intended to be descriptive of my work, but of the writer’s
own belief upon those doctrines which he asserts to be
the distinctive doctrines of Christianity. If he had added
the word “popular” or “ orthodox” to “Christianity,” I
should have quite agreed with him. Upon the question of
the deity of Jesus he says, one “ must either regard him as
man, or in an inscrutable sense as God.” (This is not unlike
his ecclesiastical superior’s “mysteries”) But in spite of
the inscrutability he cites in support of the deity of Jesus
the text with which the reader will find I amply dealt at p.
15 of my work, “ I and my Father are one,” and urges in
support of it, meaning unity of essence, the fact that when
Jesus said this the Jews took up stones to kill him.
To take a second specimen. The rev. critic, in dealing
with the “ Incarnation,” recognizes the difficulty of making
Jesus an heir of the house of David, without making him the
son of Joseph. How does he get out of it? By stating
that it was necessary to consider Jesus as the son of Joseph
for the purpose of giving him a legal position, to give him
the legal status of an heir of the house of David. How
Jesus could attain this legal status without being the son of
Joseph is certainly both “ inscrutable ” and a “ mystery ”to
me. Surely the rev. gentleman cannot mean that in order
* The first and second meanings of “mystery,” applied by Dr.
Moorhouse to the doctrines of the Incarnation and Atonement, are—(i)
“ Something secret—unknown or not revealed”; (2) “ Something very
obscure, incomprehensible, an enigma.” Paul was very fond of this
word “mystery;” “inscrutable” means “what cannot be searched
out,” “above or past comprehension.”


to make people believe that Jesus was the heir of the house
of David, a false representation was made that he was the
son of Joseph. If this be his meaning, then we are not
only, as far off from the legal status as ever, but we have the
perpetration of a fraud in addition.
I must give this riddle up, and pass on to one more
specimen, which is eminently characteristic of the cloth to
which the critic belongs. He takes up the doctrine of the
“Advent” and boldly states that, when Jesus makes the
famous declaration as to what is called the “ Advent,” con-
tained in Matthewxxiv., concluding, “Verily I say unto you,
this generation shall not pass away till all these things be
fulfilled,” Jesus did not mean “this generation” in its
ordinary meaning at all; but used “ generation ”in quite a
different sense. Who told the critic so we are not informed.
He admits that Paul and Peter and John and James all
understood the words “ this generation ” in their ordinary
meaning, and made preparations and gave warnings
accordingly. But, of course, this is nothing ; some way
must be found out of this difficulty, otherwise the statement
Jesus made has been falsified by the event, so he sails by
rules of construction, and simultaneously extinguishes Paul,
Peter, John, and James. To make matters clearer, he says
in effect, “Jesus did not use the word generation in its
ordinary sense, because he tells the disciples that he did not
know the day or the hour when he would come, that only
God knew that.” In my simplicity I should have thought
that the reason advanced proved that Jesus meant what he
said, namely—“ I shall come in this generation, but on what
day or on what hour I cannot tell you, only God can do
that.” I wonder whether this might fairly be considered as
an argument against the co-equality of Jesus with God ? I
suppose not ; for, no doubt, when he said I shall come
in this generation he was speaking as God, but when he
d


said he did not know the day or the hour, as man.
Referring the reader to pp. 75 and 76 of my work as to
this doctrine and its non-fulfilment, I must now leave Mr.
Berry, and give the reader one or two examples of the
effort of my courteous critic, the Rev. Abernethy.
His chief concern is with “ the Trinity,” and he cites
verses from the Bible, which he says clearly point to
nothing else but a Trinity in Heaven. These are his
authorities—Genesis i. 26, “Let us make man;’’ Genesis
xi. 7, “ Let us go down ; ” Genesis xviii. 1 and 2, “ When
God went down to talk to Abraham, He appeared to
Abraham, at the door of his tent, in the form of three men”
Then the critic refers to the frequent visits of angels as
recorded in the Bible, and says these angels were “ The
Angel of God’s presence,” and further that we are bound to
conclude that this angel was “ the Son of God,” “ the
brightness of the Father’s glory, and the express image of
his person.” Need Igo further? I thought, at any rate, if
Genesis was not disowned, it would have been kept in the
background. But no ! when the tower of Babel is being
built, because an omniscient God, requiring to see what the
men who were building it were doing, says, “ Let us go
down,” and, though being omnipotent , for fear that they
might build it too high, and so get up to Heaven, says,
“Go to, let us go down and confound their language, so
that they may not understand one another ” —this is Biblical
evidence of a Trinity. According to this, not only was
David a trinity, but so is Queen Victoria, and so are many
authors, including the writer. As to the statement of the
energetic Angel, or angels, who was or were continually
ascending and descending for all kinds of extraordinary
purposes, being the “ Son of God,” I think the less said the
better. This amiable critic concludes by inviting me to
accept the Bible as true, and then announces that if I will


only do this he will be able to prove everything to my
satisfaction. I fear he would not even then. But so as to
deal fairly with both, I should add that the Rev. Berry, in a
conclusion which is really the key not only to his pamphlet
but also to the evident flutter among the clergy occasioned
by my book, gives my readers and myself this beseeching
invitation, viz., if we are-puzzled over these “inscrutabilities”
and “ mysteries,” to come to him, and he will explain them
all to us in the same satisfactory way as he has explained
the non-fulfilment of the Advent.*
After I had reached this point, Dr. Moorhouse further
delivered himself to his congregation, upon the subject of
“ The Resurrection.” In so doing, he did not refer either
to my work or myself in express terms, but as he made the
observation that while many persons of the day sought to
impeach the credibility of miracles, no one had ever
succeeded in shaking the evidence on which the crowning
miracle of all, “ the Resurrection,” rests, at the risk of
somewhat wearying the reader I have deemed it advisable
to make a few very brief observations upon miracles —upon
the miracle of the Resurrection—and upon the attitude
Dr. Moorhouse assumes both as regards the one and the
* The Rev. Abernethy does not evidently consider that I have dealt
with all the doctrines I have designated “superstitious” on the assump-
tion that the Bible is the inspired Word of God ; and he is fair enough,
and careful and accurate enough, to treat me as not conceding that point.
Since the above was in print Dr. Moorhouse, as I shall show, has
deliberately stated, not in the pulpit, but in a written reply carefully
prepared in his own study with my book before him, that I attempt to
destroy all those doctrines on the assumption that the Bible is the
inspired Word of God ; and then he, in the coolest and airiest manner
possible, proceeds on that basis to cite texts in support of each doctrine,
though I expressly stated in my book at the commencement of Part 11.
that I can no longer make that concession. This is evidently the
favourite “ nine-pin ” method of argument again.


other. Taking the last first, it must be evident to every
observant person that ever since the head of the Anglican
denomination has been amongst us, he has never ventured
to deal specifically with those occurrences narrated in the
Bible which we have all been told to regard as miracles,
and which in the Bible itself are stated to be miracles. I
do not say Dr. Moorhouse has never, in a vague and
shadowy way, and with hands of velvet, dealt with the
subject of miracles, but I say this, that he has shrunk
distinctly from singling out any one miracle from the Old
Book, or any one out of very many from the New, and
dealing with such miracle fairly and squarely. Of course I
am aware that he has dealt with the Incarnation (after the
fashion of the deliverance we have just been discussing),
and also with the Resurrection (as in the deliverance now
under treatment), and I am also aware that these are both
in the proper sense of the term “ miracles ” ; but lam at
present referring to the class of miracles with which the
Old and New Books abound, and which are popularly
described as miracles. Now, I venture, without claiming
to be a prophet, to predict that if Dr. Moorhouse should
ever venture to deal not generally but specifically with any
portions of ray book, the two portions of all others that he
will to a certainty skim over, as if he were skating on the
thinnest part of thin ice, will be those relating to specific
miracles, and to the doctrine of the Advent. For he knows
he can not in the present day deal seriatim with the one, and
that it is good policy not to draw his hearers’ attention too
closely to the nature and description of the performances
or incidents stated to be miraculous; and he also knows
that to deal with the other (the Advent) he will have to
commence by distorting the words of Jesus, and end by that,
which to Dr. Moorhouse would be the most cruel blow of
all, namely, by coming into direct conflict with Paul, to say


nothing of the other apostles. And yet, whoever he be
that endeavours to support this doctrine must pursue both
these courses, otherwise the declaration of Jesus has been
falsified by the event.* But to return to our “ miracles ”
as these occurrences are admittedly antecedent improbabilities ,
consequently requiring satisfactory proof before those to
whom they are submitted for acceptance as credible can
so accept them, the nature of the proof (so called) in
support of each occurrence has to be, and should be,
critically examined. For an examination of this description
I cannot at present afford the time, but referring my reader
to my work, and earnestly requesting him to read the
account of the miracles I there enumerate, in the Bible
itself\ and passing over those features which so seriously
affect not only the credibility of the fact, but also of the
statement of the fact—that is to say, the narration by a
person, whose individuality is to say the least doubtful, of
what he has been told another person has done, and that
narration in its turn passing through a variety of hands,
translators and transcribers and compilers, before it was
presented in its present shape—l proceed to very briefly
draw, and that is all, the reader’s attention to five or six of
the narrations of these antecedent improbabilities, damaged,
as the credit attaching to each must necessarily be, not only
by the inherent gross improbability of the occurrence itself,
* Since the above was written Dr. Moorhouse has prepared a
carefully written reply (so he calls it) to my work, and on perusing
his production, to my satisfaction, I find that, both as regards the
subject of “Miracles” and “The Advent,” he has pursued the very
course I have predicted, namely, passed over both in the airiest and
lightest manner possible. Very prudent, Dr. Moorhouse. Query?—
Can this be the reason why he set his chaplain, poor Mr. Berry, to work
upon ‘ ‘ The Advent, ” and also why he inspired him to state that he
‘ ‘ must have his miracles, because no religion was worth having without
miracles ” ?


but also by the existence of those features affecting the
narration to which I have in passing directed the reader’s
attention, in the hope that my so doing may incite him
to study the subject of miracles for himself. Let us take,
therefore, by way of example, the following five or six
only:—The resurrection from death unto life of the
Shunammite’s son by Elisha, rests upon the unsupported
testimony of the writer of the second book of Kings. So
with the miracle of Elisha causing, for the paltriest of
purposes, the iron axe to swim in Jordan (2 Kings vi.). So
with the feat, performed by both Elisha and Elijah in turn,
of parting the waters of a flowing river, for the purpose of
enabling them to cross, by a blow of Elijah’s mantle; and
the great miracle of Elijah being, while alive, translated in
the view of Elisha from earth to heaven in a chariot of fire
drawn by horses of fire, detailed in 2 Kings ii. Similarly
unsupported is Joshua’s feat of causing the sun and moon
to stand still in the valley of Ajalon to enable him to finish
his work of carnage (if he had caused the earth to stand
still it would have been more scientific); and the same may
be said of u the plagues of Egypt ” —the turning all the
rivers of Egypt into blood, and covering the whole land of
Egypt, except the particular spot where the Israelites were,
with a pall of thick darkness for three days and nights,
the light of the sun and moon being focussed on to the
one small spot. So with the turning the water into wine at
the marriage feast by Jesus, which is recorded only by John
(or by whoever wrote that comparatively recent Gospel),
though the writer states that all the disciples were there,
and a host of other witnesses. And what is still more
extraordinary is, that the greatest miracle ever said to have
been performed by Jesus, namely, that of raising Lazarus to
life after he had been dead four days, and corruption had
set in, is only recorded by one person, that one person,


singular to say, being again the writer of that late Gospel,
and this though that great miracle was also performed in the
presence of a crowd of witnesses. To finish our instances
with a pleasant one, let the merest tyro in astronomy
consider the pretty tale of the star in the East, with its
sudden appearance, actual movements, sudden halt, and
complete indifference to all astronomic laws, narrated
only by Matthew, unnoticed by Mark and John, and
expressly ignored by Luke. Now, bearing in mind the
fact that each of these occurrences is an antecedent
improbability of the highest degree; that each is deposed to
by only one witness, though scores were present, and the
discredited way in which the narrative of the one comes to
us; that they all of them involve suspensions of laws of
Nature, many of them the throwing the kosmos into disorder
for hours or days, is it any wonder that Dr, Moorhouse,
who declines to pray for rain, glides so swiftly and silently
over all the so-called popular miracles ? He feels himself in
this embarrassing position, he must either accept all or none.
If he rejects even one it is fatal to the credibility of not
only all the rest, but also to the reliance to be placed
upon Biblical statements, and a fatal blow is at once
dealt to Biblical inspiration. Where can he draw the line ?
and if he should draw the line, what enables him to draw
it at any particular miracle or miracles, or to reject the
account of one miracle and accept that of another, or
to accept as credible one part of the Bible and to reject
as incredible another ? Leaving, now, popular miracles,
and Dr. Moorhouse’s truly pitiable attitude as regards them,
let us proceed to consider his attitude in respect of that
which he declares to be the crowning miracle of all, and,
though very briefly, the real difficulties in the way of a
rational acceptance of this antecedent improbability.
It is obvious, to start with, that if the statements of all or


any of the few miracles I have just instanced be rejected as
incredible, that result must necessarily irretrievably damage
the statements as to the Resurrection, for they are then
contained in that source which we have found to be already,
in numerous instances, totally unreliable. But, apart from
this, let us examine the fashion after which our preacher pro-
ceeds to establish “ the Resurrection.” (We have already
seen the style of reasoning (?) by which he has endeavoured
to establish the Incarnation and the Atonement.) He pro-
ceeds chiefly by a negative process of the most extra-
ordinary character. He does not on this occasion put
arguments or statements into his opponent’s mouth, and
then proceed to demolish them (which I have already
referred to as the “ nine-pin ” method); nor does he, on this
occasion, “jump” the position to so marked an extent by
assertion and assumption—and in these respects he is
undoubtedly, pro hac vice , improving, as I am very glad to
note —but he breaks fresh ground and resorts to another
rhetorical trick (if I may use the expression without offence),
and that is this : He enumerates a number of more or less
obsolete arguments which have been from time to time urged
against “ the Resurrection,” arrays these with a great show
of words before his audience, and then, after by so doing
leaving them in their simplicity under the impression that
these are all the arguments available against the doctrine
he is endeavouring to establish, proceeds to endeavour to
answer those arguments; and when he has done so to his
own satisfaction, and has capped his negation with a verse
or two out of Revelation, of all books in the Bible, he turns
to his audience with an air of triumph and says, “ There,
behold your Resurrection, un fait accompli ! see Jesus the
Christ standing there between God and man, &c.” Now
this is, as I have said before, a very easy way of dealing with
the actual difficulties in the way of establishing what is


claimed to be a fact; and though Dr. Moorhouse’s faithful
chaplain, poor Mr. Berry, has been put forward to make a
show for those doctrines which his superior officer thinks it
safer to keep clear of, and, inspired by our preacher, states,
“ I must have my miracles—a religion without miracles is
not worthy of the name of religion I must have my
miracles and I must have my Resurrection,” I think
rational men would be more satisfied if, instead of dealing with
an array of more or less obsolete arguments, Dr. Moorhouse
had examined the evidence , and the nature of the evidence,
which he says is producible, and which he is bound to pro-
duce in support of his affirmation of this or any other ante-
cedent improbability.*
Now, what, apart from the discredited way in which it
comes to us (utterly worthless as regards, the source from
which we get it, if we have found that source giving us
incredible statements upon matters ejusdem generis ), are
a few of the features of what the Church is pleased to
call the evidence in support of the Resurrection ? If
those features appear to the reader to throw discredit
upon that which those who affirm it are bound to sustain by
satisfactory evidence, then I assert it is those points of
difficulties (to say nothing of innumerable others which
Dr. Moorhouse has not touched upon, and which time
precludes me from stating) that Dr. Moorhouse should have
cleared away, if he could, to the satisfaction of his hearers;
if he could not, he was of course again very politic in the
course he took. I can only instance what I refer to: (i).
Some of Jesus’s own disciples, especially those who saw
him first, and who ought to have known his every feature,
* It is an undoubted fact that the Church of Rome has more so-
called evidence in support of those miracles which Protestants treat
with scorn and contempt than can be adduced in support of Biblical
miracles.


if on his resurrection he maintained a physical form, failed
to recognize him. (2) The faithful women —who, according
to one account, were the first to see him, but, according
to another, were not —not only failed to recognize him,
but mistook him for the “gardener.” (3) A totally
different account, and differing substantially in material
details, is given by each Evangelist of a scene which, if it
occurred, must have been photographed upon the minds of
all who witnessed it. (4) The contradictory and irrecon-
cilable statements as to who were or were not the witnesses
of the scene—John, as usual, contradicting all the others.
(5) The extraordinary account given in the Acts of the
Apostles, chapter i., of the ascension to heaven —Jesus
gradually, within the vision of the disciples, who were
gazing steadfastly after him, ascending up through the air
from earth to heaven, until he gradually disappeared into
a cloud. It would be interesting to know how a physical
body could do this; and if, in the alternative, Jesus
ascended .as a spirit, how the disciples managed to watch
him disappearing into the cloud. (6) Luke represents that
the ascension took place on the same day that Jesus rose
from the tomb. In Acts (i. 3) it is stated that Jesus remained
forty days on earth between his ascension and resurrection.
(7) Dr. Moorhouse’s “stand-by” Paul,* who never
saw Jesus in his life, except in that extraordinary vision to
which I refer in my work (p., 63 and note) —gives a version
instructive for comparison in 1 Corinthians xv. 4-7.
(8) In Matthew xii. 40 Jesus is reported to have stated
that “As Jonah was three days and three nights in the
whale’s belly, so would he (Jesus) have to be three
* I will venture to state that if Dr. Moorhouse be ever driven to
cite texts upon doctrinal points, he will cite from John, and Paul's
letters, five times as many texts as he will cite from the whole of the rest
of the Bible taken together.


days and three nights in the heart of the earth.” Jesus
was not, according to any account, three days and
three nights in the tomb, or anything like it; for, taking
the account which allows of the longest period of time, he
was only in the tomb thirty hours.* (9) The alleged
resurrection of Jesus was that of a material body, as he is
stated to have eaten and walked and done other physical
acts after he rose from the grave. No mention is made of
any change from material to immaterial or spiritual; if none
took place he must have ascended as a physical body, after
the fashion of Elijah; if a change did take place, when ?
and why is there no mention of so important an occur-
rence ?
These and some other singular features of the story
briefly referred to at page 60 of my work, are a few
of the difficulties which beset the person who affirms
that this occurrence, antecedently improbable as it is in
the highest degree, is to be accepted as credible, on
the ground that the evidence (?) in support of it is of so
satisfactory a nature as to justify a reasonable man in acting
upon it. But Dr. Moorhouse, who has the art of the
rhetorician, and is an adept at light and shade, keeps all
the above points (and there are scores of others quite as
full of difficulty) most astutely in the shade. If he does
touch upon them, he does so in the most delicate way
possible; while he brings out into the full light feeble and
obsolete arguments against a case which he has failed to
establish upon the only ground upon which any case can be
established—namely, that of clear and satisfactory evidence-
* jy Jesus did, therefore, state what he is reported in Matthew xii.
40 to have stated, he not only made another prediction which, like that
relating to the Advent, was falsified by the event, but he must also have
believed the story of Jonah and the whale, as to which let the reader
read critically this extraordinary story, as narrated in Jonah.


Then it is said, if we do not believe in the resurrection
of Jesus, we must give up all belief in a future life. Was
there ever such a fallacy propounded as this ? Are so-
called orthodox Christians the only inhabitants of this
world, or are there other denominations and other nations
who, without the shadow of a belief in the resurrection of
Jesus, have a firm belief in a future life? And if it be
said that without the resurrection of Jesus there is no
instance of man having conquered death and the grave, I
ask, what of Elisha, who raised from death to life the
Shunammite’s son ? of Elijah, who soared from earth to
heaven in his lifetime ? of Enoch, who was translated ?
Finally, what is the authority upon the alleged fact of the
Resurrection with which the preacher closes his address ?
Revelation i. 17, 18 —“I am the First and the Last: lam
He that liveth and was dead, and behold I am alive for
evermore, and have the keys of hell and of death.” This
is the book of which Mill says—“ It contains no intelligible
prophecy except that relating to the city of the seven hills,
which prediction remains to this hour unaccomplished ; ”
and of the writer of which another critic says he must
either have been a religious maniac or a victim to morphia.
When the Rev. Abernethy trots out Genesis to support the
Trinity, and Dr. Moorhouse, Revelation, to support the
Resurrection, I think it certainly is high time the laity
should begin to study these matters for themselves. If the
reader is not of ray opinion about Revelation, I only ask
him or her to do one thing, and that is to read it through,
and then consider the value of that portion of the evidence
with which in a torrent of oratory the preacher, who has so
astutely shut his eyes to the difficulties of his position,
closes his elaborate attempt to establish the fact of the
Resurrection.


ADDENDUM.
After my reply to Dr. Moorhouse’s oral deliverances was
in print, I was astonished to find in the columns of a
paper which represents the views, and, for the purpose of so
doing, resorts to the method, adopted by that virulent
section of our community so unenviably known as “ Strong’s
persecutors,”—and whom, and whom only, I have ventured
to characterize as the ultra good, —the first portion of a
written answer (so called) to the statements contained in
my work. As I consumed the only two leisure days at
my disposal during my very short Easter recess in replying
to Dr. Moorhouse’s oral deliverances, and as my time
will be hereafter, up to Christmas at any rate, fully
occupied by other duties, I fear it is now out of my power
to find time to, in any degree fully , expose the unfair
and evasive, and absolutely misleading, nature of this his
latest attempt. His oral deliverances, which I have clearly
shown, I think, to be abounding in unfounded assumptions,
vague generalities, pretty platitudes, and, if it be not con-
sidered impertinent to say so of so great a man, rhetorical
claptrap, may have some pretension in places to argument.
His latest performance has none, being evidently not so
much for the. purpose of endeavouring to convince the
thoughtful as to placate that extremely good and charitable
section to whom I have referred, and to whose organ the
Rev. Doctor of late has been addressing so many communica-
tions. But owing to the opportune time for himself, and
inopportune time for me, which he has selected for
its production, I am forced to limit myself to exposing its
shallow and evasive nature and the artifices—including
that, I deeply regret to say, of undoubted misrepresentation ,


I hope and believe the result only of gross carelessness —to
which the author has resorted, by drawing attention to
several marked instances of what I here assert to be the
fact, though unfortunately I am forced to do so in a short
and hurried form. I am, however, quite satisfied of this,
that the instances I can and shall give of misstatements,
misrepresentations—disingenuous argument —and of false
issues raised for the single purpose of evading real issues, in
all of which Dr. Moorhouse’s production abounds, will, and
ought to, stamp it in the mind of every unprejudiced reader
as utterly worthless, and as deliberately misleading. What
is the first thing that must strike us in connection with it—
surely that both the tone and the style of this so-called
answer, and the questionable methods of attack so frequently
resorted to in it, are not what any of us would have expected
from the Dr. Moorhouse of a few months ago. The tone is
virulent, full of temper, and abusive. The style reminds us of
that of a New York penny journal, and the methods resorted
to are such as to out-Herod the methods adopted by the
paper and its party (to whose order this answer has clearly
been written) in its and their persecution and misrepresenta-
tion of all those who venture to differ from their narrow-
minded views upon doctrinal subjects. I cannot refrain
from stating my feeling of sorrow at seeing Dr. Moorhouse
being made the tool and ally of such a faction, for evil
communications must corrupt good manners; and I also
much fear that “ Noscitur a sociis ” is another maxim, the
application of which will cling to Dr. Moorhouse for some
considerable time. Again, how is it that, simultaneously
with his connection with his new allies, we observe Dr.
Moorhouse to be rapidly and suddenly harking back,
retracing his steps with quick and lengthy strides ? What
has become of his broad-minded self? Where has that other
self gone to ? Why, after four years of almost silence,


broken occasionally by vague and passing references upon
questions like the Atonement and the Incarnation, have we
been suddenly regaled with wordy deliverances and exposi-
tions of the nature of those I have been discussing ?
The change has been so sudden, and of so marked a
character, that I am daily dreading to see that my quondam
broad-minded friend (if he will allow me to call him so) has
resuscitated that old serpent—the devil; and hell.
If such should be the case what joy there would be in a
certain camp. And really there is some ground for my
dread when we find Dr. Moorhouse citing in fervid tones,
as an authority for the resurrection, the Book of Revelation.
A glance at chapter xx. will render my meaning at once
apparent. But now let us take the answer, so far as I have
time to review it, for the purpose of ascertaining whether
the assertions I have made can be verified by its contents.
How does the author start? With the amusing and
convenient assumption that as the Rev. Berry* and the
Rev. Abernethy have already answered me, his (the
Doctor’s) statement is merely supplementary. He therefore
evidently considers that the answers of those rev. gentle-
men to my book are sound in substance, and, if he
judges the quality of their criticisms from the light of
* I have it on undoubted authority that that crushing work, “ Judg.
ment Without Evidence,” was inspired by Dr. Moorhouse. Hence,
no doubt, his calling it in aid at the commencement of his reply. But
apart from this there is intrinsic evidence in the work itself that its
creation occupied their joint efforts for six days. They had to rest the
seventh, bewailing the fact that they had had only six days for the
production of so great a work. Dr. Moorhouse’s first deliverance
throws considerable light upon the fact of his assistance in, or inspira-
tion of, this remarkable production ; so does Mr. Berry s note at the
foot of p. 18 of “Judgment without Evidence,” where he states that
a friend has pointed out to him that he is unconsciously a second
De Quincey.


his own, I am not surprised at this conclusion. But I
must ask the reader to form his own conclusion of their
quality from the unfortunately necessarily few specimens
I have been able to give him of the so-called criticisms of
each of these worthy clerics. If these may afford us a
gauge by which we may test what the Rev. Doctor
considers sound argument, we need not be surprised at the
result of the analysis of the arguments contained in the
addresses of the head of the Anglican section of the
priesthood. That the assumption is “ convenient,” the
observations I have made in my reply—as to the attitude of
Dr. Moorhouse upon “Miracles” and the “Advent,” and
the fairy tales or legends of the Bible—clearly demonstrate.
But to proceed to the heart of this so-called answer.
Almost immediately following upon this comfortable assur-
ance appears the most extraordinary misrepresentation of a
fact, due, I trust, only to gross carelessness, or to the process
known as skimming a book, to endeavour to find a slip
serviceable for attack. Dr. Moorhouse gravely asserts
that I state in my book that on the assumption that the
Bible is the word of God, I undertake to prove that there
is no authority in it for the doctrines of the Incarnation or
the Atonement. And in the next sentence he goes on
to imply that I make the same statement on the same
assumption in regard to the “ Advent.” Now, not
only is this not the fact, but the very contrary is the
fact; and if Dr. Moorhouse had not skimmed my
book for the purpose, not of answering its strong points,
but for the purpose of evading them; if, in other
words, he had read my book with the commoiiest atten-
tion, he could not have fallen into this most damaging
error. For, after I had concluded the very first portion of
the book I distinctly stated that for the purposes of dis-
cussing “the actual and very sonship of Jesus to God,”


the “ Incarnation and subsequent doctrines, I should not
and did not assume that the Bible was the revealed Word of
public place upon a writer who starts a reply by absolutely
misleading his readers upon so essential and material a
point ? This misrepresentation is so glaring that I am, at
times, disposed to think Dr. Moorhouse cannot have read
my book, yet I fain would think that, unless temper had
got completely the upper hand of him, he would never have
made the charges he has against me upon mere information
or guesswork. In my work I assume that the Bible is the
inspired word of God for the purposes of Part 1., in other
words I undertake to prove that on that assumption the
doctrine of the Trinity is not fairly deducible from the
Bible, but I expressly and clearly state that I proceed on no
such assumption in discussing the doctrines discussed in
Parts 11., 111., and IV. But, having made this terrible
blunder, Dr. Moorhouse of course proceeds as if I had
proceeded on that assumption, and cites a number of texts
to show that I cannot maintain my position on that basis;
but, as that is not my basis, of course his labour is merely
that of beating the air. Now, this is a misrepresentation
(and a misrepresentation on a most material point) made by
Dr. Moorhouse not in the heat of a platform utterance, but
in a written statement prepared in his own study and,
presumably with my work before him. Why, what did the
Rev. Mr. Abernethy say in his criticism upon me ? “ if Mr.
Justice Williams would only admit the inspiration of the
Bible, &c.”—this criticism was published days before Dr.
Moorhouse prepared his answer, and was referred to in the
public press. Did this escape his observation also ? But
not content with this, in the very same part, my hot-headed
and culpably careless opponent proceeds to use rather
strong and hard language, and states that not only “is


it not true ” that the title of “ Saviour ” is never given
to Christ, but that “it is the very opposite of truth f
which means, of course, that I am a liar. As I have
nowhere stated that the title “Saviour” is never given to
Christ in the Bible (see pp. 17 and 18), surely I would be
warranted upon such wholesale misstatements as these, made
in writing for the purpose of publication, were I so inclined,
in flinging back this charge of want of veracity upon one, who
has made against me so grave an accusation without founda-
tion. But I will not do so, for I prefer to think, and Ido
think , that these terribly misleading blunders are due to
nothing more than hot-headed haste and gross carelessness
on the part of their originator. What I have stated is that
the title “ Redeemer ” is nowhere applied to Jesus in the
New Testament; but wherever the title is used in the
Bible, always to God (pp. 17 and 18), and that the title
“Saviour” is frequently applied to God (p. 18). I never
stated, and purposely avoided stating what would not
be the fact, that the title “ Saviour ” is nowhere in the
Bible applied to Christ.
But I emphatically re-assert, and challenge contradiction
upon the statements —(1) That the title “ Saviour ”is
frequently applied to God in the Bible (p. 18); (2) That it
is never applied to God in the Church, but invariably to
Jesus; (3) That the title 11 Redeemer" is invariably applied
to God in the Bible (p. 19) never to Jesus ; (4) but always
to Jesus and never to God in the Church. Let us pass on,
however, to another serious misrepresentation of the actual
fact: the more serious because though it has been more
than once pointed out to be false, it has been and is
deliberately persisted in, and why? Because my detractors
feel that if they can only by reiteration of this false charge
induce the public to believe that I have denounced the
whole Bible to be a mass of indecency and filth, my credit


as a fair and honest critic would be, and most deservedly be,
irretrievably damaged. That is why it has been so sys-
tematically persisted in ; but surely the Dr, Moorhouse of
the last few years would not knowingly lend himself to so
mean and contemptible a mode of damaging the credit of
even such a one as myself. Again, I have therefore to ask
myself the question, .seeing misstatement piled upon mis-
statement, and facts stated in my work absolutely inverted,
has the writer of this answer, even though he has prepared
it in the solitude of his study, ever read my work ? Let
me ask all my readers to turn to p. 44 of my book, and
read the first dozen lines only of Part 111., and then to p.
55 of the same part. Surely that ought to be (but it will
not be) sufficient to stifle this false charge for ever. With
“ Buckle ” stating what appears in the “ extract ” at the
heading of the part, with Mill stating that “ much of what is
supposed to be peculiar to the Gospels is equalled in the
Meditations of Marcus Antoninus,” in what spirit did I
make the statement I refer to as to the purity and beauty of
the moral teaching of the Bible? Is it not abundantly
clear to all, but those, who cherish this lie (because it is
their only serviceable weapon against my attack upon the
superstitions of the churches), that what I state at p. 55 refers
only to portions of the Old Testament, unhappily in my
opinion far too numerous. Can any of my readers account
for a person in the position of Dr. Moorhouse, not once, but
twice in the public press, and in a prepared statement
charging me with having stated that the Bible was “ all
indecency, howling, and bloodthirstiness and again “ men
and women who have lived on the Bible, who was right, the
man who dares to say that it is all indecency and blood-
thirstiness, or the man who found it full of kind blessings ?”
There are other misstatements and other misrepresen-
tations in this lamentable production which I must need pass


by, but if in the limited time at my disposal I can place my
hand upon such damaging blots, and such material mis-
statements as these, to what conclusion are we forced as to
the amount of reliance to be placed upon either the accuracy
of, or the fair treatment of, either his subject or his oppo-
nent by the author?
Now, so that none of my assertions may be without proof,
leaving misrepresentations and misstatements, let us take a
few instances of what I have designated to be disingenuous
attempts to evade answering the real and substantial points
of my attack upon the dogmas and doctrines of the popular
creed. To take as mild an instance as I can find, first:
How does Dr. Moorhouse meet what he chooses to call my
“ absurd and audacious statement ” (with how much weight
the reader is now in a position to judge) that the title
“Redeemer” is never applied to Jesus in the Bible? By
inability to cite one single verse out of the whole Bible in
which that title has ever been so applied; but does he
admit this ? No. That would be ingenuous. Then how
does he dispose of that point ? By citing a number of
texts, not even from the Gospels, but from the letters of
Paul, and to prove what? That Paul speaks of Jesus as
having worked “redemption ” for us. This is the nearest he
can get to proving what he undertakes to prove, namely,
that the title “ Redeemer ” which is, admittedly, continually
applied to God in the Bible, is also applied to Jesus.
I need hardly say that I am thankful that I am not in
this instance charged with having done anything more
heinous than the making an “ absurd and audacious state-
ment,” and this attempted disproof of my statement is
brought in as an instance of how “Judge Williams nods
far too often.” Passing on, how does this accurate critic
deal with the attack I have made upon the doctrine of
the Advent (see pp. 75, 76, and 77 of my work) ? In the


airiest way, with his usual adroitness in the manipulation of
light and shade, by stating, “ I make no mention of that
part of his work relating to the Advent, as it is too insignifi-
cant even to deserve notice.” Certainly, this is a charming
way of getting rid of an unpalatable subject. If the shallow
optimist had recourse to this style of argument (?) what a
psean would be chanted in the camp of the enemy ; but why
not notice it ? Simply for the reasons I have already given
in my reply, to which I must refer the reader, and which
were the undoubted cause of poor Mr. Berry being put up
to distort the words of Jesus and to come into collision
(which would never do for Dr. Moorhouse) with whom ?
The great stand-by Paul; and not only with Paul, but also
with Peter and James and John. And as Dr. Moorhouse
and all the orders of the Hierachy have to thank Paul—
certainly not Jesus —for their dignified positions and grades,
this would be an ungrateful course to pursue, to say the
least of it.
My unfortunate and contemptible little work also makes a
marked attack upon “ popular miracles.” How does the
author of this singular answer deal with this attack ? Does
he deal with it at all ? Let the reader look for himself and
see. If not, why not ? For the reasons which I have
stated in my reply (to which I hope the reader will turn),
and no other. If one recorded miracle be so absolutely in-
credible that it cannot be accepted, or if even though not
absolutely incredible, the flimsy statement of one witness,
of doubtful identity, passed down to us by various channels
and through many hands, be not considered satisfactory
evidence on which to rest our belief in that which is prima
facie improbable, the credibility of the source from which
all miracles come is not only seriously damaged, but the
Bible must cease to be regarded as the Word of God. But
as I must pass on, I must ask my readers upon this point to


refer to that part of my reply dealing with “ miracles ” and
the “ Resurrection,” and also to Part 111. of the original
work.
Take, now, the “Incarnation,” which I state at p. 31 to
be “ the key and corner stone of the doctrine of the
Divinity of Jesus, as the actual and very son of God,” and
which I mainly attack upon the ground of absence of evi-
dence, and of the nature of that which is stated to be
evidence of that most extraordinary event. Does Dr.
Moorhouse attempt to answer the case I make. If he
should say he did so in his address to his congregation,
which I have already reviewed, I reply by asking the
reader to turn to it and see if he can find a word in it
dealing with either the want of evidence, or the peculiar
nature of that which is stated to be the evidence. -He
contents himself, passing completely by—(light and shade
again)—all the difficulties in the way of this great impro-
bability, with stating an incarnation was necessary, and
therefore it must be accepted as a fact. No doubt, to
make Jesus out to be the actual and very son of God, and
not the legitimate son of Joseph and his newly-married wife
Mary, the creation of an incarnation was an absolute neces-
sity. Leaving, however, the “ Incarnation ” and “ the
actual and very sonship of Jesus to God,” let us see how
this “ elaborate addition to controversial literature ” as the
journal in which it appeared describes it, deals with the
question of the Bible being the inspired word of God; a
doctrine which I attack at some length in Part 111. Does
he answer any one of my points of attack ? Does he touch
the point of the gross incredibility of the numerous specific
miracles which I mentioned in my work, or of those to
which I have referred in my reply ? or does he even allude
to those fables and legends which, if true, are derogatory
to the attributes of an intelligent God ? If he had even


dealt with one miracle —say Jonah- —who was in the whale s
belly alive for three days and three nights, and who was
afterwards deposited by the whale, directed by God, on dry
land ( especially as Jesus in Matthew xii. 40, describes
this occurrence as if he believed it, saying he must also
be three days and three nights in the heart of our little
planet which he was not) jor with one fable—the Tower
of Babel, which men, by commencing to build on a
plain to try and climb up into heaven, brought God down
from heaven to see what they were about, being after waids
brought down again to prevent them going on with their
work by confounding their language—it would have been •
something. But not a word either upon miracles or upon
what I term the fables or legends of the Bible. Surely an
answer to an attack made upon those grounds should have
been attempted to have been met; for if the statements
in the Bible of these miracles and fabulous stories cannot
be accepted as credible, what becomes of the doctrine
that the Bible is the inspired word of God ?
Does our author attempt to answer my objections at all
upon this point ? Yes, in one, and only one, way, by
endeavouring to show that many of these statements
were those of crude ignorant minds, and by reproaching
me for making no allowance for their want of enlighten-
ment and the dark ages in which they lived (see his first
address to his congregation). Very good; but if they
were inspired these facts ought to have made no difference,
because the meaning of divine inspiration is that God, by
His spirit, enables His chosen agent to state that which
without the inspiration the agent could not have stated,
or, indeed, could have known nothing about. And in this
way, also, Dr. Moorhouse endeavours to account for
the ’ indecent (I do not say inserted purposely because
they are indecent, or inserted for an unworthy or im-


proper motive, bat actually indecent) and utterly useless
stories in the Old Testament, for David’s prayer, ex-
pressed in the Psalms, that “ the righteous may wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked,” and again that God will
not allow the wicked to come into his righteousness,” and
for all kinds of cruel threats put into the Almighty’s mouth,
and for tne frequent occasions on which the sanction and
approval of Almighty God are claimed for all kinds of
horrible deeds. Let it be so. Account for all these
peculiarities in this way; but what then becomes of
inspiration? For what possible object, for instance, could
that very disgusting story have been narrated in Genesis
xix. 30-38 ? Surely it is a monstrously incredible fabulous
tale inserted by an ignorant, credulous writer, to try and
account for the origin of the Moabites and Ammonites.
To talk about it being “ a scourging and a fierce denunciation
of sin is sheer nonsense ; what word of condemnation is
there in this dirty fable from first to last? and, in the
same chapter, Lot s poor wife, the best of the family, is
by a just and merciful God turned into a pillar of salt
for having, with a woman’s curiosity, turned round to
have a look at blazing Sodom and Gomorrah.
“But,” says Dr. Moorhouse, completely ignoring the
difficulty caused by his plea of ignorance on behalf of the
inspired writers of the inspired volume, “ look at the Jews,
there is evidence of the fact of the inspiration of the Bible
—look at their pure loving homes and lives.” I quite
agree as to the fact stated in regard to the Jews; but how
this fits in with the effect the Incarnation, and the Atone-
ment, and trinities, and the Divinity of Jesus are supposed
to have had upon the whole human race is a puzzle.*
But letting that pass, and also the fact that this view
* See my reply, p. xxxviii. and note.


necessarily leaves the New Testament with all Paul's
doctrines out in the cold, is the Koran—are the Vedas, the
Buddhist Scriptures, and other Bibles of the human race
inspired ? For the believers in those Bibles not only out-
number the believers in the Christian Bible by millions,
but as thousands of them, adhering as closely as they can
to the beautiful morality impressed upon the pages of their
Scriptures, lead strictly moral, righteous lives, and as they
all believe their Bibles to be inspired, this argument —if it
be an argument in support of the inspiration of the Old
Testament—must by parity of reasoning be also an argu-
ment in favour of the inspiration of the Buddhist Scriptures.
Now, I must once more ask my readers (assuming them to
be possessed of the actual contents of my book), is this
production of Dr. Moorhouse’s, with all its preparation,
elaboration, adjectives, and cross headings, any answer at
all to the case put forward in my work against the Incarna-
tion, the actual and very Sonship of Jesus to God, the
Inspiration of the Bible, Miracles, the Advent, or even the
Trinity ? Is it not a beautifully perfect specimen of what
I admit Dr. Moorhouse is second to none at, the judicious
and politic use of light and shade ? We certainly are
treated to lengthy disquisitions on “ The Principles of
Modern Criticism,” “The Moral Condition of the Old
World,” “The True Object of the Mosaic Law,” “The
Mosaic a Preparation for a Higher Law,” and on various
other subjects ; but this is what many people would call
mere fringe or padding, but which to me looks a very little
like the old familiar trick of “ the red herring drawn across
the trail.”
I have now, very hurriedly, I admit, reviewed, as far as
time will permit, this “ singularly complete and conclusive
answer.” I have demonstrated that it contains misre-
presentation and misstatement piled upon misrepresenta-


tion and misstatement, that by means of these their author
endeavours to prove that I have stated what is false, that
advantage is taken of these gross blunders for the purpose
of founding arguments based upon them, consequently
worse than worthless—that disingenuous answers are put
forward to statements characterized as audacious an d
absurd, but which the answer (?) made shows to be both
true and unanswerable; that the real and actual points of
my attack upon each and all of the doctrines discussed in
my work have been artfully, and skilfully, and purposely
evaded ; and that in lieu thereof this master of light and
shade has been amusing himself and playing with his
readers in discussing false and immaterial issues. I ask
the reader to make what allowance he can for the very
great pressure under which I have written this “ addendum.”
But I do believe, that taking it in connection with my reply,
he will find the result of a fair and careful consideration of
both to be destructive, not only to Dr. Moorhouse’s
addresses, but also to that answer which, after an elaborate
preparation, has been produced in the columns of a Mel-
bourne daily paper day after day, stamped with blunders
and misconceptions of so monstrous a description as not
only to render all the labour bestowed upon it worthless,
because they show it to be unreliable, but as would in
the case of any ordinary author almost justify the belief
that they had been purposely made. One more point
let me very briefly direct my reader’s attention to : I
ventured to make, amongst others, a prediction in my reply
to the effect that if Dr. Moorhouse ever took to citing texts
against me, whether as to statements I had made, or, as has
been proved to be the case more generally, statements I
had not made, I felt assured the citations would be
found to nearly all come from Paul's letters, and the
Gospel according to John. Have I proved to be right in


this prediction also? And though there is an overwhelming
mass of authority in favour of the generally accepted view,
that the Gospel according to John was not only not written
by John, but was also written at a considerably later date
than the other three Gospels, I may be excused, perhaps,
for stating what the closest and most accurate reasoner of
the present century —Jjohn Stuart Mill —has written upon
this subject : “ What could be added and interpolated by a
disciple we may see in the mystical parts of the Gospel of St.
John, matter imported from Philo and the Alexandrian Plato-
nists, and put into the mouth of Jesus in long speeches about
himself, such as the other Gospels contain not the slightest
vestige of, though pretended to have been delivered on
occasions of the deepest interest and when his principal
followers were all present .” T. his is that Gospel in which
is also contained the sole record of the miracle of turning
the water into wine, and of the great miracle of the raising
of Lazarus; a Gospel the origin and source of which
cannot be mistaken by any average student of the writings
of Plato.
Let me now conclude with a few general observations.
Dr. Moorhouse has thought fit to describe me as standing
on tiptoe trying to look over the head of st. Paul. I will
do him the favour of admitting that I do endeavour to look
over the head of St. Paul, and the doctrines for which Paulism
is responsible, to the precept and practice of Jesus to him
“ whose holy work was doing good.” And I may, perhaps,
be pardoned for suggesting to my opponent that he is in
deadly peril of looking over the head not, indeed, of Paul,
but of Jesus to Paul. The Rev. Doctor has also humanely
warned me to stand on my guard, as I am dealing with
opponents whose knuckles and fists are hard, and who can
deal hard blows. While thanking him for the warning, I feel
that, judged by the sample he has given us, it is, as far as he


is concerned, needless. In fact, it must be abundantly clear
to the reader that what my opponent considers to be his
most severe blows are blows below the belt. But let me, in
return for his consideration, give him a hint (prolonging his
metaphor), that on future occasions he would do better not
to altogether neglect his guard, for he has laid himself
terribly open to severe punishment on this occasion. That
I have not attacked him to the extent it was plainly open
for me to do, is partly owing to the fact that I have no per-
sonal ill-will to my opponent, but chiefly for the reason that
I am honestly doing my best to advance the cause of truth,
and to establish in the God whom I honour that intelligent
and reasonable belief, in maintaining and acting upon which
it appears to me we do Him loyal service. Consequently
I do not desire merely for the sake of making an exhibition
of an opponent, or of conducting a vigorous and slashing
attack, to say a word that may have the effect of damaging
that grand cause or that reverent object. It must be obvi-
ous that if the abuse and adjectives, useless and immaterial
matter, misrepresentations, misconceptions and arguments
based on texts cited upon matter misrepresented or miscon-
ceived, were erased from this, Dr, Moorhouse’s latest answer,
the residuum, of what could be considered pertinent and sub-
stantial, would, I fear, be very small. I am sure my reverend
friend is not proud of his recent effort. I cannot but believe
he regrets it. I hope he is still with the party of pro-
gress, and that his retrogression has been more that of the
lips than the heart, 1 believe, as lam sure all will do who
read ray book through attentively and with calm minds, that
in his heart he gives me credit for being sincere and earnest.
He cannot, I think, mean that because I call a story, which
is filthy, filthy, that I therefore use the language of “ Hounds-
ditch and Billingsgate.” I admit that, to preserve the beauty
and morality of much of the Bible teaching, I wish to


“Bowdlerise,”* that is, to purify, the Bible from silly legends
and fables and from revolting narratives, serving no useful
purpose ; but is my honest desire to do so to be construed
into an offence? I have no doubt that I may in some
quarters have given offence by plain speaking—if I have
I am sorry for having given the offence; but if that which
I honestly believe to be the truth be within me, and ought,
according to the best judgment I am able to form upon the
matter, to be boldly and publicly stated, it must come out,
and when I am so compelled to bring it out, I like to
bring it out “fair and square.”
I had here intended to conclude, but observing, at the
last moment, in consequence of a bad habit I have, of
reading both sides of the question, a letter in the Daily
Telegraph , written by a gentleman who is notable for his
broad, charitable, liberal views, “ Mr. Andrew Harper,”
I think I may as well, on the principle of ex uno disce
omnes , point out the style of argument in which he
indulges. In this choice epistle he makes three points
against my book, all taken from what he describes to be
the “ very clever and amusing pamphlet” of the Rev. Mr.
Berry, and what does the reader think these points are?
(i) That I omit the word “wife” in connection with
Manoah, the text reading “Manoah,” instead of “ Manoah’s
wife.” (2) That by palpable error the reference to the
days of ancient Greece and Rome (in which there is
not one syllable about “ writers,” as stated by this
very accurate and particular gentleman) is placed before
the reference to the patriarchs. (3) That I state the
Mahommedan religion is older than the Christian, a state-
ment which I have not made (I refer the reader to p. 86
* A Melbourne daily journal charged me (not unfairly) with
endeavouring to “ Bowdlerise ” the Bible. This is why I use that
particular expression.


of my work). In charity to Mr. Harper’s clever and
amusing friend, Mr. Berry, I had refrained from pointing
out to my readers the advantage taken by Mr. Berry of these
two miserable slips, of which both these gentlemen make so
much, and who, not contented with arguments (?) of this
wretched description, cap them with a misstatement. After
these three crushing blows, Mr. Andrew Harper proceeds
in the most amusing manner to excuse Dr. Moorhouse for
not having answered me on that which has been so widely
advertised as “ a full and complete answer ” upon the
question of “the Trinity;” and how does he excuse Dr.
Moorhouse ? By stating that “it would have been simply
absurd to discuss the subject of Trinitarianism with such a
writer.” Well may Dr. Moorhouse, when this evasion is
pointed out, in addition to those already enumerated, exclaim
—“ Save me from such a friend ! ”
What slips or errors of the description Messrs. Berry and
Harper make so much of have to do with the doctrine of
“ the Trinity,” or any other doctrine, or with the tone and
style of Dr. Moorhouse’s answer, we are not informed.
However, for lack of argument, on the principle that every
little helps, they must again be dragged in somehow. This
argumentative and original letter is certainly an unique
specimen of the mental calibre of its writer, and a pretty fair
test of the quality of the material for attack at that writer’s
disposal. For no one would, I presume, do him the
injustice to suppose that he used his worst and feeblest
weapons.
For his benefit I subjoin a list of the names which occur
to me at the moment, of a few “ thoughtless ” men who not
only held “ absurd ” notions upon the doctrine of “ The
Trinity,” but also upon many of the other doctrines which
I have discussed, who were, in fact, either Theists or Uni-
tarians ; from any point of view most undoubted Anti-


Trinitarians. The names are all of men of the present
century.
Rev. Dr. Martineau
Rev. Dr. Priestly
Rev. Theodore Parker
Rev. Dr. Channing
Rev. Stopford Brooke
James Freeman Clarke
Pro. Francis William
Newman
Charles Dickens
Erasmus Darwin
Charles Darwin
Barry Cornwall
Dr. W. B. Carpenter
Professor Carpenter
Sir Charles Lyell
Sir John Lubbock
Longfellow
Emerson
Oliver Wendell Holmes
Cullen Bryant
James Russell Lowell
Whittier
Bret Harte
Sir John Bowring
Professor Morgan
Mr. Justice Talfourd
Sir William
(late C. J. Victoria)
Gilbert a’Beckett
Joseph Chamberlain
Chief Tustice Hanson
(S.A.)
The following may also fairly, judging from their writ-
ings, be classed as Unitarian or Theistic, or in any event
as most undoubtedly anti-Trinitarian :
Thomas Carlyle
Victor Hugo
Dr. Draper
Matthew Arnold
Professor Tyndall
Professor Huxley
Charles Lamb
Abraham Lincoln
James Garfield
Professor Jowett
Max Muller
Bishop Colenso.
And however John Stuart Mill and Herbert Spencer may-
be classed, they are most indubitably, not only thorough-
going anti-Trinitarians, but absolute disbelievers in those
doctrines which I have been audacious enough to denounce
as crude superstitions.
Now, if I may be allowed the choice, I think I would
rather share, even though it be in an humble degree, the
opinions of such men as those whose names I have just


given, than those of Mr. Andrew Harper and his paper.
And it is because I have a bright firm faith, founded upon
reason, in a Beneficent God, governing, not our little earth,
but the Universe, by invariable laws framed for a good end,
that I do not share in those desponding views of humanity
which have so recently been enunciated by promin nt
members of the orthodox Church—views which, T trust,
are not characteristic of popular Christianity, which may
be attributable to the depressing condition of the Lenten
spiritual atmosphere, and which I am glad to say have no
part in a Theistic or Unitarian belief. If to trust in the
goodness of God, and to entertain a not unreasonable
belief in the continuing progress and improvement of
humanity, constitute me a feeble optimist, then, I can only
say, I prefer such optimism to that miserable, selfish
pessimism which, folding its hands and turning up its eyes,
contents itself with bewailing the existence of vice, ignor-
ance, and misery, and suggesting imaginary doctrinal and
ecclesiastical remedies; instead of occupying its time
in applying and developing those wholesome practical
remedies which mankind are now beginning more fully
to enjoy, and by their improved and improving condition
to demonstrate the highly beneficial effect.
NOTE.
Critics, opponents, and detractors can now have the field
to themselves for some considerable time. They can,
therefore, unchecked, run down again, if it so pleases them,
the gamut of misrepresentation and misstatement. When
I do publish again, which will not be for two or three years
at any rate, it will be for the purpose of producing a com-
plete and elaborate and, I hope, fully matured work,
dealing with each of those subjects upon which I have
merely at present sketched my views.


RELIGION WITHOUT SUPERSTITION.
“ By Education most have been misled,
So they believe because they so were bred.
The Priest continues what the nurse began,
And thus the child imposes on the man. ” — Dryden.
Part I
THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY—THE DEITY
OF JESUS CHRIST.
“Doctrinal questions seem unsusceptible of general agreement, not
from the abundance, but, from the want of premises. The
arguments by which different sects defend their tenets, consist
mainly of texts of Scripture which must be susceptible of various
interpretations, since they actually receive various interpretations.
The Trinitarians think that the eternal co-existence of God the
Father and God the Son is the Scriptural doctrine. The Arians
think the Begetter must have existed before the Begotten. The
Latin Church believes that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the
Father and the Son. The Greek Church believes that the Holy
Spirit proceeds only from the Father. Each of these opinions
has been supported by hundreds of learned, conscientious, and
diligent inquirers; each has been adopted by millions of enthu-
siastic votaries ; each has been propagated by violence and resisted
by endurance ; each has had its doctors, its persecutors, and its
martyrs.”— Edinburgh Review.
The Doctrine of the Trinity is the fundamental doctrine
of all the numerous sects professing the Christian faith,
with the exception, I believe, of only two—the Christian
Unitarians and the Moravians. The former repudiate
the doctrine—hence their designation. The latter neither
2


affirm it or deny it. It has therefore been well called
the trade mark of the Christian churches, and it is
the doctrine of all others to which they most tena-
ciously cling. Their prayer books —their hymn books
—their liturgies—their creeds—their articles—their con-
fessions of faith are stocked with it. It is to be found
passim in all the implements of their faith, except in
the Bible. The sayings of Jesus ex relatione (after his
death) the disciples, as set forth in the four primary
books of the New Testament —the four Gospels —are not
only silent as to this doctrine, but are absolutely incon-
sistent with it, and expressly disaffirm it. This may
appear to be, and no doubt is, a startling proposition to
those who have never honestly inquired into this matter for
themselves. I venture to think, however, that I shall be
able satisfactorily to prove that—even assuming, for the
sake of the argument, that the Bible is the inspired revela-
tion of God (which, it will be allowed, is making a very
liberal concession to the exponents of the doctrine) —not
only is there no authority in the Bible for the doctrine,
except an interpolated verse or two which have been
proved to be forgeries, perpetrated for the express purpose of
creating authority, but that the authority of the Bible, and
the reported sayings of Jesus, are both inconsistent with it,
and directly opposed to it. Further, that the doctrine is
polytheistic—idolatrous—unintelligible—impossible. The
most succinct and accurate statement of it, as held
by the Church of Rome, the Church of England, and
other Protestant denominations, is that “ the Godhead
consists of three distinct and separate persons, each one of
whom is God —God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost —that all three are co-eternal and co-equal—
and that all three are One God.” If authority be asked for
this, I need only refer to Article I. of the Articles of the


Church of England, the Liturgies of the Churches of
England and Rome, and the Creed of St. Athanasius.*
My first proposition then is this :
“ Assuming the Bible to be the inspired revelation
of God, the doctrine of the Trinity is not supported
by it, and, further, the authority of both the old
and new covenants is inconsistent with it and
opposed to it.”
To establish this I intend to prove—
(l) That according to the Bible there is only one God,
and that beside Him there is no other God; in
other words, that the religion of the Bible is
monotheistic, and in this respect resembling that
of the Jews and Unitarians.
(2) That there is no mention of God the Sonf in the
Bible, nor does Jesus state that he is either God
the Son or the God; but on the other hand
expressly disclaims the title.
(3) That there is no mention of God the Holy Ghost
in the Bible ; or, so as not to lay myself open to
the charge of playing with words, of God the Spirit
or God the Holy Spirit, nor is the Ghost—or the
Spirit, ever called God in the Bible.
* It may be noted, in passing, that the Churches all call the third God
and person of the Trinity the Holy Ghost—or God, the Holy Ghost ;
not the Spirit or the Holy Spirit. The word that is used in that
which is termed the original, is the word rendered Spirit, and in the
original the word rendered Spirit is frequently used by itself. Without
the prefix of any adjective, the word “Ghost,” it will be observed,
could not well be used. It would hardly do to say God the Ghost, or
the Ghost of God, so the translators having adopted the word “Ghost,”
as carrying with it a more mystic sound, were forced to add an adjective
in places where no adjective existed in the original, and then found that
there was only one adjective that could be euphoniously added to
Ghost, viz.—Holy.
+ This must not of course be confounded with the expression Son of God.


(4) That Jesus himself distinctly denies the doctrine
of co-equality with God or the Father.
(5) That the doctrine of co-eternity with God or the
Father cannot be reconciled with the statements
of Scripture.
The satisfactory affirmation of 1, of 2, or of 3, it will be
readily seen, must be fatal to the doctrine of the Trinity—
so indeed of 4 or 5 to the doctrine as taught and set forth
in the services of, and as promulgated and maintained by,
the churches.
“ According to the Bible there is only one God, and
beside Him there is no other God.”
Before commencing to cite passages from Scripture, I
desire to present to the reader’s mind two not unimpor-
tant probabilities, as they appear to me to be, supporting
this branch of the proposition. The first is this—lf the
Bible be, as for the purpose of discussing this doctrine I am
assuming it to be, the inspired revelation of God—and if
God was not the only God; if there existed such a system
in heaven as either a Duality or Trinity of the Godhead;
if there were three distinct persons in heaven, God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, and yet all
one God —is it not highly incredible that the God who
walked and talked with Adam and Abraham and others
of the patriarchs ; who spoke to Moses out of a burning
bush and afterwards face to face ; who was unceasingly
in communication with judges and prophets throughout
the whole of the Old Testament, oftentimes upon
trivial subjects, at other times upon matters of more
or less importance, should not only have made no mention
or suggestion whatever of God the Son, or of the fact of the
existence of a Son—or of God the Holy Ghost—or of the
Holy Ghost, or of the Spirit as being anything distinct
or separate from God Himself, but should also have, time


after time, distinctly and unequivocally declared that He
and He alone was God, and that beside Him was no
other God? Secondly, if any such system did exist in
heaven, would it not be reasonable to suppose that Jesus
would have made some mention of so notable a system
to those disciples with whom he was continually dis-
cussing God —his nature —the arrangements of Heaven—
his and their relation to God—the form of prayer to
be used when addressing God ? But he does nothing
of the kind. Would it be unreasonable to expect that,
assuming the existence of a triumvirate in Heaven, Jesus
in the new revelation, as it is called, should have stated
the fact of its existence and the nature of its func-
tions in clear and unmistakable terms? But he not only
neither hints nor states it, but his sayings and teachings are
directly opposed to the existence of either Trinity or
Duality. To put it shortly, we have God throughout the Old
Testament constantly revealing Himself and His attributes
to man, demanding of man a clear, unequivocal, and empha-
tic recognition of Him as the only true God, breathing no
suggestion of this fundamental doctrine of the churches.
Then we have Jesus in the New Testament taking God’s
place and continuing the process of revelation which God
had been so long engaged in, and we find Jesus teaching his
own chosen band of disciples pure monotheism, repudiating
the doctrines of co-equality and co-eternity on the part of
himself or of any one else with the Father, and maintaining
and upholding the perfect and absolute Unity of God.
I now proceed to refer to a few of the vast number of
texts that may be found in both the Old and New Testa-
ments or covenants, establishing the affirmative of this
branch of the proposition, concluding the references by
citing and dealing with the texts that Trinitarians place
reliance upon as establishing the doctrine of the Trinity.


Those passages claimed as supporting a duality, or the
Deity of Jesus, I shall refer to and deal with when discuss-
ing the next branch of the proposition.
Deut. iv. 39. —The Lord he is God in heaven above,
and upon the earth beneath. There is none else.*
Deut. vi. 4. —Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is
one Lord. (Or, literally, Jehovah our Lord is one
Jehovah.)
2 Sam. vii. 22. —For there is none like thee, neither
is there any God beside thee.
1 Kings viii. 60. — That the people may know that the
Lord is God, and that there is none else.
1 Chron. xvii. 20. —O Lord, there is none like thee,
neither is there any God beside thee.
2 Kings xix. 19. —O Lord our God, save us out of
his hand, that all the earth may know that thou
art the Lord God, even thou only.
Isa. xliii. 10, 11. — Before me there was no God formed ;
neither shall there be after me. /, even /, am the
Lord , and beside me there is no Saviour.
Isa. xliv. B.— ls there a God beside me 1 Yea, there is
no God ; I know not any.
Hosea xiii. 4. —I am the Lord thy God, and thou
shalt know no God but me. For there is no
Saviour beside me.
Matt. xix. 17. —Why callest thou me good? There is
none good but one , that is God.
Mark xii. 32. —There is one God, and there is none
other but He.
John xvii. 3. —This is life eternal, that they might
* Throughout this work , for the sake of brevity, I frequently omit
either portions of verses or words which occur in the passages cited.
But in no single instance will it be found that the omission affects even
in the slightest degree the sense of the quotation.


know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ,
whom thou hast sent.
i Cor. viii. 4. —There is none other God but one.
James ii. 19. —Thou believest that there is one God —
thou doest well.
There is no text in the Old Testament to which Trini-
tarians can refer, as either expressly or by implication,
establishing the doctrine of the Trinity, and I believe there
are only two in the four Gospels and in those Epistles which
are alleged to have been written by the disciples, to which
they do or can refer. One of these—if it were not a forgery,
as has been clearly proved—is certainly —assuming that
the Bible is the inspired revelation of God —an express
authority; the other —it is argued—is so by necessary
implication. I now proceed to deal with both. The first
is the verse which is known as “the three heavenly witnesses
—“ There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one” 1
John v. 7. Most unfortunately for the exponents of the
doctrine, this verse, which is the only express authority
in the whole Bible for the Trinity, is an interpolation in,
and falsification of, the epistle of so gross a character, that
even the orthodox committee who performed the labour of
revising the New Testament have, in the revised edition,
without word or comment, omitted this admittedly spurious
verse. It has been ascertained that, “out of 113 extant
Greek manuscripts containing the First Epistle of John, 112
do not contain the text. It only exists in one, and that
one is of date the twelfth century.” In other words, this
remarkable text makes its first appearance 1,200 years after
Jesus Christ, and is little more than 600 years old.* Why,
* It is somewhat singular, as showing the ignorance that prevails
upon questions affecting religion, that though, in a letter recently
addressed by Dean Slattery, of Geelong, to the Argus, attacking


it may be asked, was this forgery committed, except for the
express purpose of creating, if possible, a distinct Biblical
authority (none existing) for the doctrine of the Trinity ?
The second and only other text is the verse— 1 “ Go ye, there-
fore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them
into [see revised version] the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost”—Matt, xxviii. 19. This
verse, it is contended, by necessary implication establishes
tne same doctrine. Does it ? In the first place, the verse,
it will be observed, is absolutely silent as to the deity of
either the Son or the Spirit —also, as to the attributes of
either the Son or the Spirit, as to who or what they are; in
short, gives us no information whatever about them. Taken
per se, it does not, and cannot, establish the Trinity of the
Godhead (and it is only that doctrine that I am at present
concerned with), and there is no other passage supporting
the Trinity which the verse I am criticising can be taken in
connection with, except that which has been rejected as a
forgery.
But, independently of this view, this is one of those verses
which may be and is capable of various interpretations. The
Trinitarians, in reading it, start by assuming that which they
have no right to assume, viz., that the Son is God and the Spirit
is God, and, after making this tolerably large assumption,
proceed to spell the verse out as evidence of the Trinity. If
Jesus Christ ever made use of these words* (and in accord-
Bishop Moorhouse for, as the Dean alleged, evading in his lectures the
doctrine of the Trinity and that of the Deity of Jesus, this text was
cited and the strongest reliance placed upon it, no one who entered
into the controversy ever questioned the genuineness or authority of
the verse.
* For the purposes of the argument, I am assuming that Jesus did
utter the words attributed to him in this verse, and did pronounce them
after his death ; but it is considered highly improbable that Jesus, after
his death and just before his ascension, should have used the words


ance with what I have already stated I am bound to assume
that he did), a natural and reasonable construction of the
verse, without doing that violence to it with which the
attributed to him. It is considered far more probable that before his
death he may have used words to his disciples of some such import,
exhorting them to persuade men to love and worship God, to follow his
(Christ’s) precepts, to become his disciples, and to become, by leading
good and pure lives, imbued and clothed with the Spirit of God. Of
course, it must be borne in mind that it was many years after the death
of Jesus, and after, as it is alleged, he ascended into heaven, that these
words were attributed to him by the evangelist Matthew; and it is note
worthy that all the three other evangelists—Mark, Luke, and John —are
absolutely silent about any such last solemn command and injunction as
“to baptize into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.” Referring to this verse, Mr. Matthew Arnold, in his well-known
work, “ Literature and Dogma,” makes the following observations:—
“ This first creed (the Apostles’ Creed) is founded on a supposed final charge
from Jesus to His Apostles—‘Go ye and teach all nations, baptizing
them into the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.’ We
have already remarked the difference in character between the narrative,
in the Gospels, of what happened before Christ’s death and the narrative
of what happened after it. For all words of Jesus placed after his
death the internal evidence becomes pre-eminently important. He
may well have said words attributed to him, but not then. So the
speech to Thomas : ‘ Because thou hast seen me, thou has believed ;
blessed are they who have not seen and yet have believed,’ may quite
well have been a speech of Jesus, uttered on some occasion during his
life, and then transferred to the story of the days after his resurrection.
On the other hand, again, the prophecy of the details of Peter’s death
is almost certainly an addition after the event, because it is not at all in
the manner of Jesus. So, too, it is extremely improbable that Jesus
should have ever charged his apostles to ‘ baptize all nations in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost;’ it is by far too
systematic, and what people are fond of calling an anachronism. It is
not the least like what Jesus was in the habit of saying, and it is just
like what would be attributed to him as baptism and its formulas grew
in importance. The genuine charge of Jesus to his disciples was almost
certainly—‘As my Father sent me, even so send I you.’ So that our
three creeds , and with them the whole of our so-called orthodox theology ,
are founded upon words which Jesus , in all probability , never uttered."


Trinitarians I think may be fairly charged, is, that the dis-
ciples were told by Jesus Christ to go forth and baptize (in what
way, or by what mode, is not stated, or whether infants are
to be made disciples by the process) all persons into the
name of God, as their Father and God, into his (Jesus
Christ’s) own name as followers and disciples of his (the
words, it will be observed, are “ make disciples of all
nations ”), and into the name of the Spirit of God, as being
part and parcel of the God. Indeed, many learned and
celebrated Trinitarian writers attribute some such meaning
as this to the verse. Parkhurst says—“To be baptized
into the name is to be baptized into the faith or confession,
or in token of one’s faith;” and Blomfield says—“To be
baptized into the name of any one is to be bound to observe
the religious observances instituted by him.”
Having now dealt with the only genuine verse which
can, even by a strained construction, be said to alhide
to the doctrine of the Trinity , I will now conclude this
branch of my proposition with an extract relative to this
verse from a small work called “ Texts and Margins ” :
—“The evangelist’s words are usually regarded as an
allusion to the doctrine of the Trinity. It will be reasonable
so to understand them, if that doctrine were anywhere else
to be found distinctly taught as a doctrine of the new
religion. But there is no instance in which it is so, and it is
incredible that the Teacher, at the very moment of his
departure from the earth, in the last words which he
addressed to his disciples, should now suddenly speak to
them in these terms of a mysterious doctrme so inconsistent
with their own ancient monotheistic faith , and for which he
had not in any way prepared their minds. It is remarkable
that all the four Gospels are equally destitute of traces of
this great ecclesiastical doctrine, which, indeed, is known
historically to have been the growth of a long subsequent age.


Of this statement the reader who will only take the trouble
to examine the Gospels for himself will find abundant
evidence—abundant evidence, that is to say, in the plain
fact that the doctrine of the Trinity is nowhere in the
Gospels to be seen, either expressly stated or even
obscurely alluded to. This is equally true of the rest of the
New Testament.”
“ There is no mention of God the Son in the Bible—
nor does Jesus state that he is either God the Son
or the God, but disclaims the title.”
In dealing with this branch of my proposition, I must,
from the very terms of it, necessarily deal also with the
question of the Deity of Jesus, but again, before citing and
distinguishing texts bearing upon the subject, I desire very
briefly to draw the reader’s attention to the two probabilities
arising from the internal evidence of the Bible against the
existence of a Trinity, for the purpose of applying them, also,
to the initial consideration of this further proposition. If God
the Son was begotten of the Father from everlasting—not
ma de —reigned in heaven as God from everlasting, sitting on
the right hand of the Father, having a distinct personality
from the Father —why should there be absolute silence upon
his existence throughout the whole of the inspired revelation
of God contained in the Old Testament ? How comes it
that we find declaration after declaration in the inspired
volume absolutely inconsistent with and opposed to any such
notion as a duality of the Godhead ? And why, if God
omitted during so many hundreds of years to mention so
important a circumstance, did not Jesus Christ, assuming
him to be the inspired messenger of God —a fortiori if he
were the Son of God in the sense contended for by the
so-called orthodox —tell his chosen few in clear and unmis-
takable terms that he was also the God—that he reigned in
heaven with God as God —that he was God the Son—


co-eternal and co-equal with God the Father —that there
were (if not three) two who reigned in heaven as Gods, the
Father and He, the Son, distinct persons, but one God ?If
such were the fact, having regard to all that he is alleged
to have told or did tell the disciples about the Father, the
nature of God, and of the kingdom of Heaven, the omission
seems well-nigh incredible. Independently of this, however,
I think I shall be able satisfactorily to show that Jesus
personally disclaimed the title —that he taught pure Unita-
rianism, and that he repudiated in express terms the
attribute of co-equality with the Father. I proceed, as
before, to cite passages in support, concluding also, as before,
with examining and dealing with those texts contained in
the Gospels and those Epistles written by the disciples which
are chiefly relied upon as establishing the doctrine of the
duality of the Godhead and of the Deity of Jesus.
I commence by asserting that which is at last now gene-
rally admitted, that nowhere in the Bible is the term 6 dede
(the God) ever applied to Jesus, either by himself or by
any of- his reporters. That term is throughout the Bible
applied exclusively to the Father. This it will be con-
ceded, is to start with a highly significant fact.
The Lord’s Prayer, as it is called —Matthew vi. 9
and following verses—“ Our Father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come.” Jesus
is, in the chapter cited, specially instructing his disciples
how to pray, and what form of prayer to use, and whom
to pray to. Verse 6, “ When thou hast shut thy door
pray to thy Father which is in secret.” This is claimed
to be Jesus’ own special prayer, framed by him for the
use of his followers. In it there is not only no mention
of God the Son, but it is prefaced by an explicit injunction
to the disciples to pray to the Father. Hallowed be The
Father’s name—The Father’s kingdom come—The Father’s


will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Jesus’
prayer is one of the very few prayers in the services
of the various Christian churches which contain no
mention whatever of any one else except the
Father. Why, then, it may be asked, do the so-called
Christian churches not adhere to the mode and form of
prayer prescribed by their founder ? Do they pretend to
derive from the sayings and teachings of Jesus any authority
for the following “Oh God the Son , Redeemer *of the
world, have mercy upon us, miserable sinners ‘“ Oh God
the Holy Ghost,” &c.—“ Oh holy, blessed and glorious
Trinity, three persons,” &c.—and for the string of prayers
that the morning and evening services of the Church of
England, and of other so-called Christian churches, contain
addressed to Jesus—“ Oh Christ, hear us !”—“ Christ have
mercy upon us!”— {t From our enemies defend us, oh
Christ!”—“Graciously hear us, oh Christ! Graciously
hear us, oh Lord Christ !” and for the continual use of the
expression, “ Through our blessed Lord and Saviour , Jesus
Christ”?
To continue the citation of texts :
Matt. xix. 17. —Why callest thou me good ? There is
none good but one —that is the God (6 6eoq).
Mark xiii. 32. —Of that day or hour knoweth no
* Not only, therefore, do the Christian churches clearly disobey the
commandment of Jesus as to the mode and manner of prayer, and as
to addressing prayer to the Father ; but they also continually give to
Jesus, for the purpose of carrying out their doctrine of atonement , and
never to the Father, those titles which belong to the Father and not to
Jesus. I shall prove hereafter that the word Redeemer which, in
practice , is applied to Jesus and not to the Father, is throughout
the Bible invariably applied to the Father, and never to Jesus,
either by himself or by anyone else, and that the word Saviour is
continually used in connection with “ The God, i.e., with the o 9eog.
This may appear startling, but it will be found to be the fact.


one—not even the angels in heaven, neither the
Soft, but the Father .
John xx. 17. —I ascend unto my Father, and your
Father; and my God, and your God.
John v. 19. —The Son can do nothing of himself (if this
verse be read with that of Mark xiii. 32 and John
xiv. 28 it will be seen that Jesus clearly repudiates
the notion of co-equality with the Father).
John xvii. 3. —This is life eternal, that they should
know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ,
whom Thou hast sent (drawing, it will be seen, a
marked distinction between the Father as the
only true God, and Jesus as His messenger).
John xiv. 28. —My Father is greater than I.
Luke x. 22. —All things are delivered to me of my
Father.
Luke xxiii. 46. —Father, into Thy hands I commend
my spirit.
Mark xv. 34. —My God, my God, why hast Thou
forsaken (or forgotten) me ?
John v. 30. —I can of my own self do nothing; I seek
not my own will but the will of the Father which
hath sent me.
1 Cor. iii. 23. —Ye are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s.
1 Cor. viii. 6. —To us there is but one God, the Father,
of whom are all things.
1 Cor. xi. 3. —The head of every man is Christ, and
the head of Christ is God.*
1 Tim. ii. 5. — There is one God, and one mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.
Mark xii. 32, 33, 34. —Well, Master, thou hast said
the truth, for there is one God, and there is none
other but He.
* In this and all similar passages the expression in the Greek version
is 6 Qebg, which, as will be observed, has not been faithfully translated.


evidently interpolated to support the doctrine of the Deity
of Jesus, just in the same way as “the three heavenly
witnesses ” were interpolated to support the doctrine of the
Trinity. It has been actually omitted in the recently revised
version of the New Testament with this marginal note—“ The
word God (in the verse) rests on no sufficient ancient
evidence ;” and Bishop Marsh, a Trinitarian, makes this re-
markable comment upon the verse, “ This reading (God mani-
fested) is found at first hand in not a single ancient version ,
except the Arabic—which is of very doubtful authority.”
So, again, with the verse in i John iii. 16, “Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because He laid down his life
for us,” also cited and strongly relied upon as proving
the Deity of Jesus. The important words “of God” are
likewise a dishonest rendering of the Greek for the same
purpose. The faithful translation of the Greek runs—
“ Hereby perceive we love, because He (Christ) laid down
his life for us.” The revised version has also been forced to
omit these words, but on this occasion, as with “ the three
heavenly witnesses,” in silence and with no marginal note.
The 19th verse of Matthew xxviii., “ Go ye, therefore, and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”* This I have
already dealt with at p. 8, to which the reader is referred.
So with the three heavenly witnesses, p. 7. Then it is
said that the titles, Redeemer and Saviour, alleged to be
applied to Jesus in the New Testament show that he
was God. Bearing in mind that it is the Deity only of
Jesus that is at present being discussed, it is difficult to
follow the contention. But I may state, once for all, that the
title Redeemer is never applied to Jesus throughout the
whole of the New Testament, but is in the Old applied to
3
* This is the text as it stands in the old version, not in the revised.


the one true and only God of the Old Testament, and to the
Father in the New. And as to the title Saviour, it is
frequently and continually applied to the God of the Old
Testament in the Old Testament, and to the Father in the
New. Even in that much perverted verse, x Tim. iv. xo,
“ We trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all
men, especially of those that believe,” the expression is
clearly used in reference to the God the Father, though it is
usually misquoted as referring to Jesus. To support the
statement I have made, I cite, as to Saviour, the following—
-2 Sam. xxii. 2, 3. —The Lord is my rock, and my
fortress, and my deliverer, the God of my rock,
lie is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my
refuge, my Saviour.
Isa. xliii. 3. —I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of
Israel, thy Saviour.
Isa. xliii. ix. —I, even I, am the Lord; and beside
me there is no Saviour.
Isa. xlv. 15. —Oh God of Israel, the Saviour.
Isa. lx. 16.—1 the Lord am thy Saviour.
St. Jude closes his epistle—Now unto him that is able
to keep you from falling, to the only wise God our
Saviour be glory.
1 Tim. i. 1. —Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the
commandment of God our Saviour , and of the
Lord Jesus Christ, which is our Hope.
(St. Paul here draws a marked distinction between the
God as our Saviour, and Jesus as our hope ; and in the
next verse between the Father as the God, and Jesus as our
Lord or Master.)
As to “ Redeemer,” there is no warrant whatever to be
found in Scripture for applying to Jesus this title, which, in
practice, is invariably applied to Jesus, and never to God,
never to the Father. Throughout the Bible, both in the


Old and New Testament, it is invariably applied to God,
and to Him alone.
Isa. lxiii. 16.—“ Doubtless Thou art our Father,
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not, Thou, oh Lord, art our Father,
our Redeemer. Thy name is from everlasting.”
Isa. xlvii. 4. —“ As for our Redeemer , the Lord of
Hosts is His name, the Holy One of Israel.”
Psalm xix. 14. —“ Let the words of my mouth, and
the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in Thy
sight, oh Lord, my strength and my Redeemer .”
Psalm lxxviii. 35. —“ They remembered that God was
their Rock, and the High God their Redeemer .”
Isa. lx. 16.—“1, the Lord, am thy Saviour and thy
Redeemer
There is one other passage in Scripture which is claimed
as proving that Jesus was God “In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God.” (John i. 1.) And the 14th verse of the same
chapter, “ And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us.” These two verses constitute the famous
Logos doctrine,* and have given rise to an infinite
variety of interpretations. Most of the orthodox, as they
are called, say that “The Word,” in verses 1 and 14,
means Jesus; and that the expression “was made flesh,”
in verse 14, refers to the incarnation of Jesus in the
womb of Mary. Taking the Gospel of St. John by itself
—in other words, without the account of the incarnation
contained in St. Matthew and St. Luke—no one would
* The reader will, of course, bear in mind that, so far, I am
assuming that the Bible is the inspired revelation of God, and that I
am endeavouring to show that so treating it the Trinity of the
Godhead, the Duality of the Godhead, the Deity of Christ, &c.,
are doctrines not only not warranted by, but opposed to Scripture.


ever have thought of such an interpretation. There are,
however, even some orthodox divines, amongst them the
famous Dr. Liddon, who, in speaking of the Logos,
construe it to mean “ the Thought of God,” and as
being something not either external to or independent of
the one God. (See Liddon’s “ Bampton Lectures.”) This
doctrine, the Logos, clearly existed before the date of
Christ, and long before the Gospel of St. John was written,
and was a product of the early Greek philosophy. By the
Greek philosophy of the day, it was regarded as something
distinct from God, or by some as a second God ; but
(according to the best authorities) there can be little doubt
but that the true conception of it by Greek philosophy
was that of the power, or force, or energy of God acting in
the creation of the world and in His communication with
man. In this view it clearly resembles the view held by
Dr. Liddon, and throws considerable light on the manner
in which John used it in the verses I am now dealing
with. John, taking the Logos doctrine from the Greek
philosophy, as expressing the thought of God , or the
manifestation of God , or the energy of God, proceeded to
add that which the Greek philosophy did not state, “ that
the word was made flesh,” thereby intending to convey the
meaning that, as Jesus was a messenger from God, revealing
God and His attributes to man —the thought of God, or
the manifestation of God, became flesh in Jesus. In other
words, as put by the writer of “Texts and Margins,”
“God revealed Himself to man in or through Him (Jesus)
that declared Him.” It appears to me that, having regard
to the origin of the doctrine, and to the facts (i) that the
interpretation sought to be put upon it is irreconcilable
with the numerous texts to which I have drawn the reader’s
attention; (2) that such interpretation is entirely opposed
to the plain meaning of the words put by John himself


into the mouth of Jesus in John xvii. 3 —“ And this is life
eternal that they might know Thee, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent ” (in which it will be
seen the words “ the only true God,” are applied by Jesus,
according to John, to the Father only) ; (3) that the
Logos doctrine is merely inserted by way of preface to
John’s Gospel, and -not in the Gospel itself,—the view
I have endeavoured to present is not only natural
and rational, but also harmonious with the declarations
of Scripture, of Jesus himself, and of the very Gospel in
which the Logos is introduced. It will be further observed,
if the first fourteen verses of the chapter be read, that the
statements made as to the Word, that the Word “ was, in
the beginning, with God,”—“ all things were made by Him,
and without Him was not anything made that was made,
clearly bear out the same view of “ the energy,” or “ thought
of God,” while to regard these expressions as referring to
Jesus, would make Jesus co-equal and co-eternal with God,
which, though regarded as essential to the Deity of Jesus,
are incompatible with Biblical teaching. To deal with the
dogma of the co-equality of Jesus with God first, it may be
sufficiently refuted by reference to the few following texts,
though many of the texts I have already cited also bear
upon the same point:—
Mark xiii. 32. —Of that day or hour knoweth no
one —not even the angels in heaven; neither the
Son, but the Father.
John v. 19. —The Son can do nothing of himself.
John xiv. 28. — My Father is greater than /.
Matt. xxvi. 39.— 0 h !My Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not as I
will, but as thou wilt.
1 Cor. xi. 3. —The head of Christ is God.
Lastly, as to the co-existence or co-eternity of Christ with


God, I cannot place the refutation of this doctrine before
the reader more clearly than by citing for his perusal the
following, from the pen of Dr. Adam Clarke: —“I trust I may
be permitted to say, with all due respect for those who differ
from me, that the doctrine of the Eternal Sonship of Christ
is in my opinion anti-scriptural and highly dangerous. This
doctrine I reject, for the following reasons —i. I have not
been able to find any express declaration in the Scriptures
concerning it. 2. If Christ be the Son of God, as to his
divine nature, then he cannot be eternal, for Son implies a
Father, and Father implies a reference to Son preceding in
time, if not in nature too. Father and Son imply the idea of
generation, and generation implies a time in which it was
effected, and time also antecedent to such generation. 3. If
Christ be the Son of God, as to his divine nature, then the
Father is of necessity prior, consequently superior to him.
4. If this divine nature were begotten of the Father , then it
must be in time, i.e. , there was a period in which it did not
exist, and a period when it began to exist. This destroys the
eternity of our Lord, and robs him at once of his Godhead.
5. To say that he was begotten from all eternity is, in my
opinion, absurd; and the phrase Eternal Son is a positive
self-contradiction. Eternity is that which has had no
beginning, nor stands in any reference to time. Son supposes
time, generation, and Father
I now come to the last branch of the proposition which 1
enunciated at the commencement of this discussion—
“ That the distinct personal existence of and deity of
the Holy Ghost, or Holy Spirit, or the Spirit, is un-
scriptural.” It appears to me to be absolute waste of
labour to cite passages from Scripture to prove tlrat the
Spirit is throughout the Bible regarded as mainly a spiritual
emanation from the Father, as part of, or as that Spirit which
is the God. There is no authority whatever for the doctrine


either that the Spirit is a distinct person, or that the Spirit is
also God, for the doxology “Glory be to the Father and to
the Son and to the Holy Ghost,” or for the prayer in the
Litany, “ Oh, God the Holy Ghost.” We are told that
the whole nature of God is spiritual —that God is a
spirit, and therefore the advent, as it is called, ot
the Spirit, or the coming of the Holy Ghost, can and
must mean nothing more than the presence of God
within our spiritual selves. Probably, to the necessity of
supporting this doctrine also, may be in part attributable
the detected interpolation of the verse “ the three heavenly
witnesses.”
I have now to the best of my ability performed the major
portion of the work which I undertook to perform. In so
doing, I have made to the Trinitarians and the so-called
orthodox the very liberal, and no doubt to many minds, the
very startling, concession of the Bible being the inspired
revelation of God; and though I do not pretend to have
cited all the texts that could be cited in support of
what I have advanced, or to have dealt with or examined
all of those which may be said to be susceptible of a
contrary interpretation, I believe I have fairly cited,
examined, and dealt with all the principal passages
of Scripture on the one side and on the other.
Nor have I done more than merely illustrate by a few
instances the numerous cases in which Trinitarian trans-
lators, with the view no doubt of committing pious frauds,
have inserted a verse or words not existing in the so-called
originals, and which by a strange coincidence were, before the
detection of the falsification, or imposture—the forlorn hope
of the doctrines of the Trinity, and of the Deity of the Holy
Ghost, and the principal authority for the Deity of Jesus.
We find then the teaching of the whole of the Old
Testament to be distinctly and unequivocally opposed to
either a duality or a trinity. We have the four Gospels,


which have always been regarded as the kernel of the New
Testament, inasmuch as they profess to narrate to us the
very teachings and sayings of Jesus, clearly designating the
Father as the only living and true God —as the only fitting
object of prayer and worship—as sharing co-equality and
co-eternity with neither Son nor Spirit. To the same effect
we have even the Gospel of Paul, the author of much
not to be found in the religion of Jesus, the introducer
of the metaphysical doctrines of the atonement, justifica-
tion by faith, and imputed righteousness. If, then, there be
no sufficient authority for “God the Holy Ghost” the
doctrine of the Trinity perishes, and the Trinitarians, who
constitute the great mass of the Christian churches, must
dwindle into Dualitarians ; and if, in addition, there be no
sufficient authority for God the Son, then the doctrine of
duality also vanishes, and Monotheism or Unitarianism must
prevail—but the position as deduced from the Bible is, as I
have endeavoured to point out, a very much higher and a
very much more forcible one than that of “insufficient
authorityit is that of positive express declaration by both
revelations, accepting them as such, that there is only one
living and true God, that neither before Him nor after Him,
or beside Him has there been or is there any other God—
that He alone is supreme—He alone is eternal.
Now placing the Bible, and the notion of its being the
inspired revelation of God, on the one side for the
moment, freeing one’s mind from the atmosphere of early train-
ing, and reasoning just as one would on matters of every-
day life, what is the reader’s honest opinion of this doctrine
of the Trinity? Is it not that of the Unitarian, when he
declared “ The doctrine of the Trinity is not of God, but of
man—the creation of man —purely the invention of man.
It is as inconceivable in idea as it is impossible in fact
Hallam says, in reference to the dogmatic teachings of the


Churches upon this point (and well may he say so with
such a sample as the Athanasian creed before his mind),
;< The doctrine of the Trinity is that which Theologians call
inscrutable, , but which they do not fail to define and analyze
with the most confident dogmatism.” Without question
early Christianity was far more free from paganism and
from the taint of superstition than the Christianity of our
own time. Its purity has become corrupted, its simplicity
has become obscured in the same way and by the same
means, as the purity has been sullied, and the simplicity has
been lost, of that Gospel which, 500 years before the birth
of Jesus, was preached by Buddha, the Gospel of humanity
and of good will toward men —the Gospel of purity, and
charity, and peace. Many far more ancient religions than
Christianity had and still have their Trinities, among which
will be found the Logos as the third person of the Trinity
of the Platonic creed, and Christos as the thiid person of
that of the Gnostics. That this is not mere assertion
appears from the list of Trinities which I subjoin, taken
from that compiled by Mr. Arthur Lillie in his recent
work, entitled “ The Popular Life of Buddha .
Religion.
Rig-Veda
Manu
Buddhism
Zoroastrianism -
Egypt
Old Greece
Plato
Woden
Cabbala -
Gnostics, and 1
perhaps Es- >
senes - )
China
Babylonia
Father.
Varuna
Brahma
Buddha
Tervan Akarene
Amen-tha
The Serpent
‘ ‘ Father ”
“ All-Father ”
Eusoph
Abraxas
Yu
Bel
Mother.
Aditi
Maya
Prajna or Dhar-
ma
Ardvi Cura
Neith
Ceres
Mother, or
Nurse
Frigga
Sophia
Sophia
Yang
Melissa
God-man.
Mitra
Brahma
Sangha
Ahura Masda
(Ormuzd
Osiris
Bacchus
“ Logos ”
Woden
‘ ‘ Logos ”
Gnosis, or
“ Christos ”
Taiki
Tammuz


Part II.
THE SON OF GOD—THE INCARNATION.
“ Reason is the only faculty we have wherewith to judge concerning-
anything—even Revelation itself; for if it contain clear immoralities
or contradictions, either of these would prove it false.”— Butler's
Analogy of Religion.
“When Evidence is presented to our mind, Belief is not a voluntary,
but a necessary consequence ; so that it is quite impossible that the
mmd should believe otherwise than as evidence is or is not
discerned. ”
In the preceding part I have dealt with the doctrine of the
Trinity, and of the Deity of Jesus, God the Son as dis-
tinguished from the Son of God, and have endeavoured to
prove, I trust successfully, that the teachings of those books
which are claimed as the authority, and only authority in
such matters, not only do not support, but are distinctly
opposed to these two fundamental and principal doctrines
of the Christian Churches. And so confident am I as to
this, that, for the purpose of my argument, I fearlessly, upon
these two points, conceded and assumed that the Bible was
the inspired revelation of God. I now proceed to discuss
another subject, one perhaps not so weighty as either of
the two preceding, but yet of great moment; and in its
discussion is necessarily involved a consideration of the
doctrine of the incarnation. But neither in this, nor any
subsequent part of this work, do I bind or limit myself by any
such concession or assumption as I have heretofore made;
though even were I to again make the concession (so far as
regards Jesus being the Son of God), I think I should be
able to show that the weight of the four Gospels {in which,


if anywhere, we should expect to find this doctrine clear! y
expressed and set forth) does not sustain it in the sense in
which it is entertained by the orthodox, viz., that Jesus is
the actual and very Son of God, and that God is the
actual Father of Jesus; but that the fair and rational
interpretation of the four Gospels leads us to the conclusion
that Jesus neither describes himself as, nor was , nor is the Son of
God in any other sense than that in which every good man
or every good woman is a son* or daughter.of that God
whom Jesus is reported to have described as the Father
of his disciples as well as of himself—“ I ascend unto my
Father and your Father , and to my God and your God.”—
John xx. 17. I shall not, therefore, refrain from referring
freely to the four Gospels to bear out the view I pro-
pound, and to negative the contrary; but as in discussing
the actual and very sonship of Jesus, there is neces-
sarily involved the subject of his incarnation, I shall
have to deal with both on broad and general grounds,
as well as on the basis of Scripture. In so doing I am
forced to criticise portions of the narrative given by
Matthew and Luke ; I cannot, therefore, make the same
unqualified concession of plenary inspiration of the Bible.
I shall endeavour to show —(1) that the weight of the
four Gospels does not sustain the doctrine of the actual
and very sonship of Jesus ; (2) that the doctiine is opposed
to reason and to all natural law; (3) that the doctrine of
the incarnation is supported by no evidence whatever, and
that the so-called evidence contained at the commencement
of the narratives of Matthew and Luke is completely un-
trustworthy j (4) that this doctrine also is opposed to all
natural law—that it is impossible in fact, revolting, and ut-
terly incredible; and the affirmation I make is—that Jesus
* 1 John hi. 1, 2. —“Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it
doth not yet appear what we shall be.


was the actual and very son of Joseph and Mary; but by
reason of his love for God and devotion to his service, and in
that sense alone, the Son of God. In reference to these pro-
positions, before proceeding more particularly to discuss
them, I desire to draw attention once more to the argument
of probability as affecting the first of the propositions, and
to the paramount importance of the third proposition. I
once more ask—ls it unreasonable to suppose that, if Jesus
was and is the actual and very Son of God from everlasting,
God would not, in His numerous so-called revelations or
communications made to man during a period extending
over hundreds of years, have made some mention of the ex-
istence of an only Son—and would not only not have
remained silent upon so important and momentous a topic,
but would not have misled His chosen people by declarations
and revelations which state, and of necessity imply, the sole
and undivided existence of God ? Further, independently
of this, is it unreasonable to suppose that Jesus, if he were
the actual and very Son of God, would have told his chosen
few—the disciples—this momentous fact, hitherto so inex-
plicably unrevealed, in unequivocal and unmistakable
terms ? But what is it we do find ? that admittedly the
whole human race for long ages remained in total ignorance
of any suspicion, even, of the alleged existence of the only
Son of God, and so remained up to a comparatively recent
period of the world’s history; then was formed under the
leadership of Jesus, known to have been born from the
body of Mary, that small sect who, on account of their
Master’s extraordinary sanctity, desired to regard him as,
and to make him, divine, and who, after his death, anxious
to give him a divine origin, and to raise him to divine
honours, attributed to him sayings and doings which
might have the effect of holding him forth as being of
divine or supernatural origin.


To carry into effect the yearning desire of those chosen
and faithful few to have their Master and Teacher regarded
as Divine, it became absolutely necessary for them to
create for him who was known to be born from the body
of Mary, the wife of Joseph, the carpenter —and whose life
as well as that of his mother and reputed father were well
and intimately known to their kinsmen and friends, as well
as to the inhabitants of the village of Bethlehem and the
little town of Nazareth, and the dwellers in those parts —
a supernatural origin. The notion that he was the son of
Mary by Joseph (by man) must be done away with —the
fact that he was born from Mary’s body and that Mary
was the wife of Joseph, the carpenter, could not be gainsaid
—but the birth from Mary’s body must be attributed to a
supernatural conception by Mary. For the purpose of the
birth of Jesus God, or the Holy Ghost, was his father and
the husband of Mary; for the purpose of the birth of his
numerous brothers and sisters Joseph, the carpenter, was
their father and Mary’s husband.
It must here again be borne in mind that it was not till
many years after Jesus’ death that we have any trace of the
putting forth of the miraculous conception, as far as Jesus
was concerned; but, long before the birth of Jesus, in the East,
in which Christianity and all the principal religions of the
world have been cradled and founded, the doctrine of
miraculous conception, in regard to the founder of another
sect —a sect which embraces one-third of the whole civilized
world —was one known to hundreds of thousands. The con-
ception of Buddha, who was born many hundreds of years
before Jesus, and who was alleged to be pre-existent in
heaven , was no whit less miraculous. Queen Maya,
whose mind was virginal , conceived him supernaturally,
the future Buddha having entered through her right side;
and in a dream or vision she was made conscious of the


honour that had been accorded to her. She also was on a
journey at the time of her expected labour. The moment
of her conception was heralded by a salutation of angels, and
after the birth of Buddha he was also presented in a temple,
there being this difference between the conception of Queen
Maya and that of Mary that the body of the former was trans-
parent during her pregnancy, and she was thus enabled to
see the child in her womb.* But to return to the efforts of
the then small Christian sect. The making God, or God
the Holy Ghost, Jesus’ father and qua Jesus the husband of
Mary, placed those who desired to deify Jesus in this diffi-
culty, that unless Jesus was also descended from the house
and lineage of David they could not propound him to the
world as the Jewish Messiah, and as fulfilling the declara-
tions of the ancient prophets and seers of Israel. Thus, to
fulfil their desire they made the Holy Ghost his father and
the husband of Mary ; to fulfil prophecy, so called, they made
Joseph, the carpenter, his father and the husband of Mary.
Having thus, to a certain extent, introduced the subject
of the incarnation of Jesus I propose to take the third and
* I am indebted for this information to a work I have already
referred to, and the most recent of its kind, entitled “ The Popular
Life of Buddha,” by Mr. Arthur Lillie. Marred as it is, no doubt
to a slight extent, by a little too much hitting at Dr. Rhys Davids it is,
I believe, acknowledged to be one of the most accurate and authentic
works we have as to the origin and nature of the religion of
Buddha, and will, I think, well repay perusal. lam well aware that
some orthodox ecclesiastics have endeavoured to show, in regard to the
Buddhism of Ceylon (which is regarded by most Eastern scholars as of a
more recent date than the true Buddhism founded by Buddha) that
it and its doctrines were borrowed from Christianity, and not Christianity
and its doctrines from Buddhism (see pamphlet “Buddhism in Relation
to Christianity,” by the Rev. R. Collins, late of Ceylon) but Professor
Seydel, after a most elaborate inquiry and review, is evidently of
opinion that Christianity has borrowed from Buddhism, and, according
to Mr. Arthur Lillie, this must have been the case.


fourth propositions first for the obvious reason that, bearing
in mind what I have already said, the whole foundation,
the key, and corner stone of the doctrine of the divinity of
Jesus, as the actual and very Son of God, all turn and hinge
upon the answer to the question, whether this doctrine of
the incarnation be truth or fable. If it be truth then the
strong presumption is that Jesus had a divine origin j if it
be fable then the absolute and irresistible necessity for the
creation of the fable shows that without the fable (the
incarnation) Jesus was the child, born according to the law
of nature , of Mary and Joseph, her husband, and, in that
respect, no way differing from any one of his brothers—James,
and Joses, and Simon, and Judas —or his sisters. To answer
this question we ought, first of all, to ascertain, if possible,
on what evidence (if evidence it can be called) this doctrine
rests, what is the nature of the evidence, and what are the
probabilities and improbabilities attaching to both the
evidence and the doctrine. Bearing in mind that super-
natural births and miraculous conceptions were not unknown
in the East, at any rate at the time when after the death of
Jesus the disciples became desirous of deifying him, what
are the statements (which the orthodox are pleased to call
evidence) to be found in the four Gospels or four narratives
of the life of Jesus? The only two evangelists who make
any mention of this all and most important fact (so to term it
for the present) are Matthew and Luke. They each only
mention it once—and that by way of preface to their narra-
tive (like the Logos of John); neither of them ever afterwards
refer to it again. If it was ever, in fact, reported by either
of them and not afterwards added by way of preface by
copyists (who made no scruple of altering ancient texts and
inserting spurious verses, as has been already shown) it was
reported merely on hearsay. Mark, whose narrative or
biography is generally supposed to have been the earliest in


honour that had been accorded to her. She also was on a
journey at the time of her expected labour. The moment
of her conception was heralded by a salutation of angels, and
after the birth of Buddha he was also presented in a temple ,
there being this difference between the conception of Queen
Maya and that of Mary that the body of the former was trans-
parent during her pregnancy, and she was thus enabled to
see the child in her womb.* But to return to the efforts of
the then small Christian sect. The making God, or God
the Holy Ghost, Jesus’ father and qua Jesus the husband of
Mary, placed those who desired to deify Jesus in this diffi-
culty, that unless Jesus was also descended from the house
and lineage of David they could not propound him to the
world as the Jewish Messiah, and as fulfilling the declara-
tions of the ancient prophets and seers of Israel. Thus, to
fulfil their desire they made the Holy Ghost his father and
the husband of Mary ; to fulfil prophecy, so called, they made
Joseph, the carpenter, his father and the husband of Mary.
Having thus, to a certain extent, introduced the subject
of the incarnation of Jesus I propose to take the third and
* I am indebted for this information to a work I have already
referred to, and the most recent of its kind, entitled “ The Popular
Life of Buddha,” by Mr. Arthur Lillie. Marred as it is, no doubt
to a slight extent, by a little too much hitting at Dr. Rhys Davids it is,
I believe, acknowledged to be one of the most accurate and authentic
works we have as to the origin and nature of the religion of
Buddha, and will, I think, well repay perusal. lam well aware that
some orthodox ecclesiastics have endeavoured to show, in regard to the
Buddhism of Ceylon (which is regarded by most Eastern scholars as of a
more recent date than the true Buddhism founded by Buddha) that
it and its doctrines were borrowed from Christianity, and not Christianity
and its doctrines from Buddhism (see pamphlet “Buddhism in Relation
to Christianity,” by the Rev. R. Collins, late of Ceylon) but Professor
Seydel, after a most elaborate inquiry and review, is evidently of
opinion that Christianity has borrowed from Buddhism, and, according
to Mr. Arthur Lillie, this must have been the case.


fourth propositions first for the obvious reason that, bearing
in mind what I have already said, the whole foundation,
the key, and corner stone of the doctrine of the divinity of
Jesus, as the actual and very Son of God, all turn and hinge
upon the answer to the question, whether this doctrine of
the incarnation be truth or fable. If it be truth then the
strong presumption is that Jesus had a divine origin ; if it
be fable then the absolute and irresistible necessity for the
creation of the fable shows that without the fable (the
incarnation) Jesus was the child, born according to the law
of nature , of Mary and Joseph, her husband, and, in that
respect, no way differing from any one of his brothers —James,
and Joses, and Simon, and Judas —or his sisters. To answer
this question we ought, first of all, to ascertain, if possible,
on what evidence (if evidence it can be called) this doctrine
rests, what is the nature of the evidence, and what are the
probabilities and improbabilities attaching to both the
evidence and the doctrine. Bearing in mind that super-
natural births and miraculous conceptions were not unknown
in the East, at any rate at the time when after the death of
Jesus the disciples became desirous of deifying him, what
are the statements (which the orthodox are pleased to call
evidence) to be found in the four Gospels or four narratives
of the life of Jesus? The only two evangelists who make
any mention of this all and most important fact (so to term it
for the present) are Matthew and Luke. They each only
mention it once —and that by way of preface to their narra-
tive (like the Logos of John); neither of them ever afterwards
refer to it again. If it was ever, in fact, reported by either
of them and not afterwards added by way of preface by
copyists (who made no scruple of altering ancient texts and
inserting spurious verses, as has been already shown) it was
reported merely on hearsay. Mark, whose narrative or
biography is generally supposed to have been the earliest in


point of date, makes no mention whatever of this extra-
ordinary and most essential event, nor does the beloved
disciple John, nor does Luke in the Acts of the Apostles,
commonly supposed to be his production. This is the
whole of the so-called evidence. Copied hearsay statements
alleged to have been inserted by two only of the evangelists,
in the preface to their books, not in the books themselves—
with the possibility or probability of the prefaces having
been inserted by others after the books were written—never
mentioned by either of them in the books themselves or in
Luke’s other work, the Acts of the Apostles, utterly and
entirely ignored by Mark, the supposed first biographer,
and also by the beloved disciple John. Such is the
evidence, and the whole evidence on which this prima facie ,
unnatural, incredible, and impossible doctrine rests.
But if the so-called evidence be merely copied reported
hearsay (even conceding it to be hearsay reported by
Matthew and Luke) it is not evidence properly so-called,
nor does it bear any legitimate resemblance whatever to
evidence. But let us call it evidence; then what is the
nature of the evidence, and what are the probabilities and im-
probabilities attaching to both the evidence and the doctrine ?
The whole of Matthew’s alleged reported hearsay account
is contained in the eight last verses of the first chapter
(which certainly reads like a preface to the book), and there
only. It is contained in the very chapter which, in order
to connect Jesus with the house and lineage of David,
traces the descent of Joseph (who, according to the doctrine,
was not the father of Jesus) up to Abraham and through
David, .* Further, the writer (whoever he was), having taken
* It is worthy of observation that Matthew so constructs his genealogy
as to be capable of being divided into three equal parts of fourteen
generations each. This is curious, to say the least of it. It is also
extraordinary that Matthew, between David and Joseph, the husband


the greatest care in the first 17 verses to prove that Joseph
was a lineal descendant of David, for a very obvious purpose,
and after stating that “Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of
Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ,” pro-
ceeds in the next eight verses to state that Mary was
pregnant by the Holy Ghost while she was merely engaged
to Joseph, and before he married her; that Joseph seeing
her in this state desired not to marry her, but was com-
manded by an angel of God in a dream to marry her; that
he then at once became her husband, but knew her not till
after Jesus was born (see verse 25), clearly implying that,
after the birth of Jesus, Mary and Joseph occupied the
ordinary relation of husband and wife, and disposing of the
doctrine of the perpetual virginity of Mary, so tenaciously
clung to by both Protestant and Romish churches, and which
is not merely an assumption without a syllable in the four
gospels to support it, but is directly opposed to the necessary
intendment of the verse last cited. If the very summary
account given in the last eight verses be correct, then Jesus
was and could be neither the son of Joseph, nor the son of
or descendant of David, nor man, nor the son of man. In
that view, the whole of the first 17 verses are unnecessary
and misleading, and Jesus had only one earthly parent, Mary,
and was the son of woman (not of man), and was no con-
nection of the house of David whatsoever. Can anyone,
short of an ecclesiastical metaphysician, reconcile the two
parts of this chapter; and if he can, and accepts the
statement contained in the last eight verses, how can he
reconcile the necessary and logical conclusion to which he
is forced by accepting that statement with the ofi-repeated
passages, to which I shall presently refer, not contained in
the prefaces to, but in the very gospels themselves, and not
of Mary, reckons only twenty-five ancestors, while Hike enumerates
forty, thirty-eight of whom Matthew never mentions.


in two but in all of them, in which Jesus calls himself, and is
described as, a man , and the son of man —as the carpenter’s
son, in which Mary herself describes Joseph to Jesus as his
father —in which Joseph and Mary are described as his
father and mother; and James, and Jonas, and Simon, and
Judas, as his brothers? But so as not to dwell at too great
length upon the very summary account in the preface to
Matthew, let us also very briefly examine that which is the
only other, contained in the preface to Luke. He begins by
a preface to a preface, in which he makes the remarkable
statement that, in consequence of so many persons having
begun to write biographies of Jesus, he thought it was well
to let Theophilus have his (Luke’s) own account, so that he
(Theophilus) might not be misled, but know the certainty of
these things which he had been told to believe (verses 1-4).
Luke then proceeds to inform Theophilus of two miracu-
lous conceptions, telling very nearly the same story about
the conception of Elisabeth and the birth of John as about
the conception of Mary and the birth of Jesus. Shortly :
both Elisabeth and Zacharias were long past the age, the
one of child-bearing, the other of begetting, and in addition
to this Elisabeth was barren ; but the angel “ Gabriel ”
came from the presence of God and appeared to Zacharias,
told him that Elisabeth would bear a son in her old age,
that he was to call him John, that John would be full of
the Holy Ghost when in his mother’s womb, and finally
struck Zacharias dumb for not believing all this. Then, six
months after, “ Gabriel ” again leaves God’s presence, and
visits this time Mary (not Joseph, as Matthew has it),
and tells her that she shall be pregnant by the Holy Ghost
of a child to be called Jesus, and also tells her what God
had done to her cousin Elisabeth, concluding with a state-
ment referring to Elisabeth, “ for with God nothing shall be
impossible ” (verse 37). Mary then goes to see Elisabeth,


salutes her, the babe leaps in Elisabeth’s womb at the salu-
tation, and Elisabeth is also filled with the Holy Ghost.
With the exception of the three songs of Elisabeth, Mary,
and Zacharias—to which it is unnecessary to refer—and the
extraordinary statement of the angel “ Gabriel ” contained
in verse 32, the above is substantially Luke’s account. By
verse 32 Gabriel is stated to have told Mary, on the occa-
sion of his visit to her, that “ the Lord God would give
to Jesus the throne of his father , David ” —again clearly
showing that the narrators, whoever they were, of the
accounts in Matthew and Luke were trying to perform an
impossibility—to give Jesus a divine origin, conceived of a
virgin by the Holy Ghost, and yet to connect him with
David by making Joseph the natural father of Jesus. In the
only two narratives of this event, therefore, we have the
same irreconcilable contradiction, and we further have, in
the narrative in Luke, that which is not mentioned by any-
one else, the extraordinary feature of a double miraculous
conception, by Elisabeth and Mary, within six months of
one another —both preceded by visits from, and conversa-
tions with, the angel Gabriel, who came twice for the
express purpose, from God’s presence, at an interval of
six months —both accompanied with miraculous manifesta-
tions. None of the other evangelists think it worth while to
mention either of these startling and stupendous miracles,
nor does Jesus ever refer even to either of them. Luke
alone mentions one. Luke and Matthew only mention the
other, in a sort of preface to their books, in a very summary
way, and never refer to the matter again ; their accounts,
derived as they are from hearsay, are not only widely
different, but the statement of each is self-contradictory.
This being the evidence, and the intrinsic nature of the
evidence, is the theory that Joseph was the natural father of
Jesus more reconcilable with what is contained in the four


gospels than that of the impregnation of the virgin by the
Holy Ghost? If Gabriel was stating what was true in
Luke i. 32, Joseph must have been the natural father of
Jesus; so also, if any sense or meaning is to be given to
the genealogy set out in Matthew i., and to the statement
contained in verse 16. But, in addition to this, I shall
now proceed to examine some passages in the/our gospels,
for the purpose of showing that, read in an ordinary and
natural sense, and giving the words contained in them
their ordinary and legitimate meaning, these passages
clearly and unmistakably point to the conclusion that Jesus
was the actual and very child of Joseph and Mary.
In Luke ii. 48, Mary is reported to have said to Jesus —
Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us ? behold, thy
father (Joseph) and I have sought thee sorrowing.
Luke ii. 27 —And when the parents brought in the child
Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law.
Luke iv. 22 —And all bare witness, and wondered and
said, Is not this Joseph's son ?
John vi. 42 —Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose
father and mother we know ?
Matt. xii. 46 —While he yet talked, his mother and his
brethren stood without, desiring to speak with
him.
Matt. xiii. 55, 56 —Is not this the carpenter's son ?is not
his mother called Mary? and his brethren— James,
and Joses, and Simon, and Judas —and his sisters
are they not all with us ?
So in Mark vi. 3 —Is not this the carpenter ,* the son
of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of
Juda, and Simon? and are not his sisters here
with us ?
* According to Jewish custom there can be little doubt but that
Joseph brought up Jesus to his own trad e—that of a carpenter.


The above are sufficient to show that in all the four
Gospels Jesus is spoken of and described as the actual and
very son of Joseph and Mary ; that in all of them Joseph
is described as his natural father, and his brothers byname
and his sisters as his actual brothers and sisters in the
ordinary acceptation of the term. But it is sought to
neutralize the force of the passage in Luke ii. 48, by the
answer of Jesus in the following verse, 49 —“Wist ye not
that I must be about my Father’s business?” But Jesus
was here in his ascetic sanctity clearly drawing the
distinction between his earthly and natural father Joseph,
and the spiritual fatherhood of God. It is his own mother , at
any rate, who is addressing him, when she says, “ Why
hast thou thus dealt with us, thy father and / have sought
thee sorrowing,” and Jesus’s reply, in effect, is, “ I have
now devoted myself to the service of my heavenly Father.
My duty to you, my earthly parents, must now be
subservient to my duty to Him.” He is evidently, in verse
49, calling God his Father in the same sense in which He
uses it when he is alleged to have said to the disciples.
“ I go to my Father, and your Father, and to my God and
your God.” * In similar manner it is sought to neutralize
the force of Matthew xiii. 55, and Mark vi. 3, by asserting
(for it is nothing better than assertion) that “ brethren ” and
“sisters” in these verses do not mean brothers and sisters,
but merely “ relations.” Is there, however, any reason for
so liberal and free an interpretation ? Those who knew
Jesus and his family, mother, father, brothers, and sisters
well, were speaking in terms of contempt of the family of
foseph and Mary, not of the families of other parents, and
in Matthew xii. 47, Jesus, just in the same way as he,
* It will be seen, on reference to the list of Trinities on p. 25, ante,
that “ The Father ” or “ All-Father,” was not unknown to other creeds
as the first person of the Trinity.


in Lul- e li. 49, calls God his Father, calls the disciples his
mother and his brethren , evidently referring to the disciples
as his spiritual mother and brethren , in contradistinction to
his actual mother and brothers, who were at the time
“ standing without desiring to speak with him.” Now
what is the conclusion we, as persons of ordinary common-
sense, not as metaphysicians, are forced to by a fair,
impartial, rational consideration of the foregoing—surely to
one at least of these —(1) that these narratives of an
incarnation (not unknown in the East) have been affixed to
the commencement of the two Gospels by someone,
other than the writer, after they had been written; (2) or
that the writers of the two Gospels were reporting a legend
which they had heard rumoured, and for which there could
be and was no foundation; or (3) that, for the purpose of,
after his death, endeavouring to deify their Master and the
founder of their sect, they either invented the story or
borrowed it from a more ancient creed, and applied it
to Jesus, no mention of it having been made in the lifetime
of Jesus, and no allusion to it having been ever made by
him. The evidence in support of this doctrine is not
evidence in any legitimate sense of the word. It is the
merest hearsay of the flimsiest and most meagre description,
reported, it is at least doubtful by whom, years after the
death of Jesus, and then by only two persons and never
mentioned by either of them again; ignored by the remainder
of the disciples; opposed to and contradicted by the
numerous passages in the four Gospels which I have cited,
and others which I have not; inconsistent with the
declaration of “ Gabriel,” that Jesus should sit on the throne
of his father David (which, by the way, he never did, never
has done, and never will do, and is an evident reference to
the temporal king, whom the Jewish prophets declared
would come to collect and rule over Israel); inconsistent


with Jesus being of the house and lineage of David;
inconsistent with his being man, or the son of man (as he
declared himself to be, and was declared by others to be,
as I shall presently show) ; self-contradictory and irrecon-
cilable as narrated by Matthew; and as narrated by Luke
not only self-contradictory but widely differing * I think
we may safely and profitably dismiss the fable of the
incarnation in the same way as we may dismiss the anti-
Scriptural doctrine of the perpetual f virginity of Mary.
Now, if the doctrine of the incarnation of Jesus be
rejected, he remains incontestably the child of Joseph and
Mary, born in the ordinary way and begot by the ordinary
means; the corner stone of his divine nature is swept away,
and the whole fabric falls with it. But, assuming the reports
to be correct, what is Jesus alleged to say of himself?—“Ye
seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I
have heard of God,” John viii. 4° '■> Mso, in Matt. xvi. 13
“Whom do men say that /, the son of man , am?” also,
in speaking of himself in Matt. viii. 20 The Son of
Man hath not where to lay his head.” But so as not to
* In addition to the various important discrepancies in the only two
accounts we are possessed of, attention may be called to the not important
but striking omissions in that of Matthew as compared with that of Luke,
and to the fact that in the one the angel is said to have appeared to
Joseph in a dream; in the other, Joseph is quite ignored, and the
archangel “Gabriel ” is made to appear in propria persona to Mary.
f Though the following is the Mass of the Conception appertaining
to the Church of Rome, the doctrine of the perpetual viiginity of
Vlary is maintained also by the Protestant churches, notwithstanding
the last verse of the narrative in Matthew, and the fact of the existence
of other sons and daughters of Joseph and Mary, and their actual
marriage :-Mass of the Conception : “Rejoice, O Virgin Mary, thou
alone hast destroyed all heresies ; who didst believe the words of
Gabriel the Archangel. Whilst a virgin thou didst bring forth Him
that was God and man; and after childbirth didst remain a pure
virgin. O, Mother of God, intercede for us !


weary the reader with a multiplicity of texts, I may state that
it has been computed that, in the new covenant alone, Jesus
describes himself, and is described no less than forty times as
a man, eighty times as the son of man (neither of which
could he be consistently with the doctrine of the incar-
nation), and fifty-six times as “ the sent” (or messenger) of
God. He also, no doubt, very frequently is said to have
described himself, and is described, as the Son of God ;
but this term, I venture to submit, if used, was used merely
to carry out the distinctive feature or attribute of the God
whom Jesus preached—“the Father of us all,” “to your
Father and my Father;” and, in the same sense as
that in which he alludes to his disciples, “Behold my
mother and my brethren .” These are my brothers, not
those who. stand without desiring to speak to me;
because these, my disciples, are also sons of God, and
God is their Father, as he is my Father. Again : “ Whoso-
ever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and
sister, and mother.” From a Religious point of view, Jesus
evidently regarded God as his Father* and himself as God’s
Son, much in the same sense as that in which Paul, in
Roman viii. 14, writes—“ For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God they are the sons of God; ” and in which it
is so clearly used in 1 John iii. 1,2 —“ Beloved, now are
we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what
we shall be.” When the Jews took up stones to stone
him, Jesus said to them—Do ye not know that it is
said of mere men in Scripture, “I said ye are gods.”
If that can be said of men by your law, which cannot
be broken, how am I blaspheming when I say not that
I am God, but merely the son of God? But we find
the terms “ God,” “son of God,” “first-born of God,” “only
* See note on p. 25 ante , as to the Father, or All-Father, being the
first Person of the Trinities of other creeds.


begotten Son,” used frequently in Scripture in relation to
man. Psalm lxxxii.—“ I have said ye are gods, and all of
you are children of the Most High Exodus iv. 16—“ And
thou (Moses) shalt be to him (Aaron) instead of God
Exodus vii. i —“ And the Lord said to Moses, see, I have
made thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron shall be thy pro-
phet.” God is described as Israel’s Father, Ephraim
as “ the first-born ” of God, and Isaac as “ the only
begotten son ” of Abraham, though his elder brother was
living. Jesus was a Jew, and had been for many years
studying the Jewish Scriptures and the declarations of the
Jewish prophets; had been meditating upon the falling
away of his nation from the God of Righteousness, and the
veiling and obscuring of God in the traditions and cere-
monies, rites, doctrines, and dogmas of the Jewish priest-
hood ; and as he had brought himself, so he desired to
bring first his disciples, and then by their means others,
into the same relation to God as that of a child to a loving
parent. The question of the High Priest and the answer of
Jesus —“Art Thou the Christ, the Son of the living God?”
“ Thou hast said,” are said to be opposed to this view. I
do not think they are, as it may be allowed that Jesus
undoubtedly regarded himself as the Son of God in the light
which I have suggested, and considered that that was the
spiritual relation existing between himself and the Father,
and desired that others should hold the same. spiritual
relation towards God. In short, it is tolerably clear that
this is the sense in which he used the expression, apart
from its being the only mode by which his declarations of
himself, as the Son of God, can be read consistently with
his oft-repeated declarations of himself as “ man” and
“ the son of man.”
Lastly, the doctrines of “ the incarnation,” and also of
“the very and actual son of God,” are opposed to all


natural law, as well as to reason. It would not, of course,
for obvious reasons, do for me to enter at all fully or
minutely into this delicate aspect of the question. But,
shortly and generally, God being admittedly an immaterial
spirit, and the Holy Ghost or the Spirit being merely
another name for that spirit called God —in other words in
no way separate from or independent of God —a material
Christ, or Christ in the flesh, never could have been
begotten; and, if Jesus existed with God from everlasting,
he could only have existed as an immaterial spirit also;
and, if so, it is difficult to conceive how spirit could
become flesh—or immateriality become materiality—or the
infinite become finite—be conceived by and be in the womb
of a woman for the natural duration of time—eat and
drink—grow in stature and also in learning—fast and weep
—sweat —become hungry and thirsty—fear and shrink from
pain (“Oh, my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me !”) —cry out in despair (“ My God, my God, why hast
Thou forsaken me ?”) —be moved by anger —affected with the
prejudices of his nation —or be ignorant of astronomic laws.
Divested of his incarnation —of his Deity—of his actual
and very sonship to God, what have we left ?—a noble,
heroic, unselfish, self-denying, pure, God-loving, humane
man an exemplar who, being human, we may all
hope to succeed in following—who merits all praise, all
respect, all esteem, and love, and admiration for that, being
human , he led so pure, so blameless, so noble and unselfish
a pfe—in whose doctrines and teachings there were, as
Theodore Parker so justly remarks, many misconceptions—
such as those of an eternal hell, a God angry against, and
revengeful upon, all who should sin or not accept the teach-
ings of His messenger, a distinct absolutely evil Devil, and
an immediate and speedy end of the world —but which,
notwithstanding these errors, were beautified by his sublime


faith in God and by his profound humanity. So viewed,
Jesus no longer obscures or disfigures our conception of a
loving, just, wise, and merciful God —of that Father whom
Jesus declared to be the only true God, and whom alone he
told and instructed his disciples to join with him in address-
ing as “ Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be Thy
name ” * —who preached a gospel which, I regret to say, is
not practised by many of those who profess a Christianity
which is not the Christianity of Jesus —the gospel of a pure
life of love and charity, and goodwill to all around us —of
works of humanityt—of direct communion with an almighty
and loving Father. The Christianity of to-day is not the
Christianity of Jesus, but it is the Christianity of Jesus
corrupted by paganism and superstition.
* It is said by an eminent Jevvish Rabbi to be a fact (and so I believe
it to be) that, if portions of the ancient Jewish prayers (with which, no
doubt, Jesus was perfectly well acquainted) were collected together,
they would produce the Lord’s Prayer.
+ Matthew xxv. 34-46. What must be the awful fate of nine-tenths
of the Christian Church if the test specified by Jesus as being the test
of a true Christian were to be strictly applied ?—of what avail then
would be church-goings and genuflexions and justifications by faith,
adorations of Jesus, sacrament of the last supper, baptismal regenera-
tion, imputed righteousness, atonements for original sin ?


Part III.
“Reason is the only faculty we have wherewith to judge concerning any-
thing— even Revelation itself.' 1 ' Bishop Butler’s Analogy of
Religion.
“ That the system of morals professed in the New Testament contained
no maxim which had not been previously enunciated, and that
some of the most beautiful passages in the apostolic writings are
quotations from pagan authors, is well known to every scholar.
To assert that Christianity communicated to man moral truths
previously unknown, argues, on the part of the asserter, either gross
ignorance, or else wilful fraud.”— Buckle.
THE INSPIRATION OF THE BIBLE—MIRACLES.
“ Credulity is the disease of feeble intellect, and ill regulated minds.
Believing everything, and investigating nothing , the mind accumu-
lates errors, till its overgrown faith overmasters its untutored
reason. ” — Brewster.
In dealing with the subject of u the Inspiration of the
Bible,” I do not intend to dispute that we can collect from
the Bible, a pure, beautiful, and advanced code or system
of ethics ; but as we can do the same from the works of
Confucius, from the Talmud, or from the Buddhist Scrip-
tures, it may be said lam not conceding much. I will,
therefore, go a step further, and willingly and sincerely con-
cede, though the point is strongly controverted and stoutly
denied by critical scholars, as is apparent from the quota-
tion above, that we can collect from the Christian Bible, a
purer, more beautiful, and more advanced ethical code, than
is to be obtained from any other book or books. So con-
ceding, what is the sequence—that the Bible is the Revelation


of God, or that the founder of the code or system had a
purer and more enlightened perception of ethics than his
predecessors or contemporaries ? I think this question may
be safely left to answer itself; nor do I intend in the dis-
cussion of this subject to avail myself of fine points of
difference, contradiction, and variance,between one portion of
Scripture and another —such as the ingenuity and industry
of scholars and critics have shown to exist in bewildering
abundance throughout both the Old and the New Covenant,
nor of those many glaring anachronisms and manifest
violations of all natural law which men of letters and
of science have detected in Holy Writ, and laid bare;
nor do I intend to resort to any process of subtle
argument, nor to make any display of scholastic knowledge,
nor to indulge in learned disquisitions. What I purpose to
do is, first, to consider what the Bible, or the so-called Word
of God, actually is - what it in fact represents—and then to
affirm and prove that neither from the standpoint of the Old
Testament, or from that of the New, or from that of both,
can the Bible be that which the orthodox so dearly love to
call it —the inspired volume —the Word of God —the Reve-
lation of God.
In carrying out my purpose, I hope to express myself in
clear and simple language—to take for the purpose of
illustration or inference facts and statements as they stand
recorded in the Bible —to give to ordinary and well-known
expressions their ordinary meaning, and all I require from
the reader is a small modicum of common sense, the appli-
cation of reason in its most elementary and simple form, the
banishment of credulity for the moment and a consideration
and examination of the Bible, precisely in the same way and
with the same feeling as that with which he would approach
the consideration and examination of any other book.
There are two classes of the orthodox who on this subject of


the inspiration of the Bible each propounds a distinct,
separate, and intelligible view. One class, and that the
larger, declares the whole Bible to be the inspired Revelation
of God; the other makes the same declaration, but in respect
of a portion only of the Bible—the New Testament—making
neither affirmation nor disaffirmation in respect of the Old.
With these two classes, and their separate views, there is no
difficulty in discussing the point at issue, because the position
each takes up is distinct and intelligible. But there is a
third class of the orthodox with whom it is almost impossible
to discuss this question satisfactorily, and that class is the
one which I describe by the term “ the ecclesiastical school
of metaphysicians.”
The reason why it is almost impossible to meet them in
argument upon this, or indeed any other theological doctrine,
dogma, or tenet, is that you never can tell what exactly is
the position they do take up—what their affirmation is ; and
when, having at length succeeded in pinning them to a
particular proposition—as to inspiration or any other doc-
trine—you proceed to apply a crucial test, they change and
rechange front with an agility that renders the chance of
arriving at any tangible or definite result absolutely hope-
less. Violating rules of construction and of interpretation
with the most amusing (if it were not exasperating) sang
froid to maintain some favourite view or tenet of their
own, they give to passages, expressions, and words
meanings which no one possessing only common sense, and
not being a metaphysician, would ever dream of imputing.
Then they say, “if you would only read Scripture as we
do, and interpret it in a way that would never have
occurred to you or to any other person who is not a meta-
physician to interpret it, you would find that there are no
contradictions, or glaring improbabilities, or absurdities, or
impossibilities in the Bible; and, indeed, by frequent


twisting and straining, and backing and filling, and
change of front, you will find it to be all harmonious ;
that words do not mean what they are ordinarily supposed
to mean, but something totally different; and that to
be a metaphysician you must apply different rules of
interpretation to the same words, in different parts of the
Bible, whenever the result of not so doing might be
damaging to the particular views we enunciate.” According
to this school, therefore, the Revelation of God is not the
Scripture as you and I read it, or as ninety-nine out of every
hundred men of ordinary intelligence would understand it,
but is that (and that alone) which the mind of a meta-
physician can evolve from it. If then we are not, for the
purpose of understanding this book, to give to plain words
their plain meaning—as would be the rule in the consider-
ation of any other book —or are only to be permitted to do
so in one place, and not in another —just as the portion to
be considered happens to (or not to) fit—we may not feel
indisposed to think that the absolute and never-varying
interpretation of the Bible by the Church of Rome, and the
acceptation of the dogma that that interpretation is the only
true and correct interpretation, were preferable to being left
to the mercy of the fancies of the ecclesiastical metaphysical
school. However, whether the members of the school
affirm that the whole or only a portion of the Bible is the
Revelation of God—and, as I understand it, some affirm the
one, some the other—they are all agreed in ignoring any
fixed rule or principle of interpretation; their golden rule
apparently being to adopt those interpretations which best
satisfy the exigency of the particular position for the time
being. Now, for the purpose of proving that lam not here
dealing unfairly with this school, or exaggerating in any
degree the difficulty of grappling with them in argument, or
of bringing them to a point, let me illustrate what I mean,


by that which will most readily make it plain, by a few out
of many instances.*
Take the Old Testament first. As the account of the
Creation given in the first three chapters of Genesis, cannot
now be accepted as it stands by any one except those whose
belief is like that of the pious old woman, who, when asked,
“Do you believe that a whale swallowed Jonah ?” replied,
“ Believe it! to be sure I do; is it not printed in the Bible?
If the Bible told me that Jonah swallowed the whale, I should
believe it,” —the version given with so much circumstan-
tiality has been stated to be not a fable or legend, , but an
allegory. In other words, because it contains contradictions
so obvious—absurdities so great—causes and results so
impossible, which even the theory as to “day” not meaning
“day” could not soften or remove—no fact recorded as a fact
in any one of these three chapters is to be taken as such, but
yet the account is not mythical , it is only allegorical.
Passing by the flood, which was of such a nature that “ all the
mountains that were under the whole heaven were covered by
it,” and which is also explained away, and yet is not a legend
or fable, we come to the story of the tower of Babel, in
Genesis xi., which has been a source of much perplexity to
the orthodox, because to take it as it stands renders it
irreconcilable with the notion of God being either omnipo-
tent or omniscient. Consequently, none of the facts there again
recorded are facts ; the account is purely allegorical, and it
is not a fable or legend invented to account for variety of
language. Again, the narrative of Balaam smiting his ass,
* I would ask the reader to read for himself critically the passages to
which I refer as they stand in the Bible. Either to refer to the
passages at length here, or to criticise fully the interpretations put upon
them, would occupy more time than is at my disposal, to say nothing of
space. Nor can I attempt to do more than pass in review, in the
briefest possible manner, a few out of a multitude of instances.


its lengthy remonstrance with him, and the angel barring
the prophet’s road, is said by some to be no statement of
fact but merely a parable, by others to be purely typical, the
ass and its remonstrances being typical of the conscience of
a man desiring to do what is evil. With the account con-
tained in Joshua x., the school have also much difficulty but
yet they are equal to the occasion. The moon did not
actually stand still in the valley of Ajalon, nor the sun upon
Gibeon; Joshua did pray to the Lord to suspend the
heavenly bodies in their courses, and then imagined the
movements were arrested. This is one of the many
attempted explanations of this remarkable occurrence.
The account in 2nd Kings of Elijah and Elisha each in
turn smiting Jordan with Elijah’s mantle, arresting the flow-
ing course of the river, dividing its waters; of Elijah being
taken up to heaven in a chariot of fire, drawn by horses of
fire; and of Elisha seeing all this, is also, according to the
school, allegorical—it was merely a spiritual vision that
Elisha saw.
Passing by scores of similar instances that occur in the
Old Testament, at almost every step, I proceed to take a
few instances in the New. “The Star in the East” that
suddenly appeared, guided the wise men, and then halted
over “where the young child was,” has now dwindled
away into a luminous body like the pillar of fire that,
according to the Old Testament, guided the Israelites by
night in their wanderings. It is no longer a star, but a
luminous body, according to some so bright that it could
be seen, and so served as a guide both by night and day;
according to others the wise men only followed it by
night, rested during the day, and then followed it by
night again.
In dealing with the alleged temptations of Jesus in the
wilderness, it was his Divine nature that enabled him to
5


subsist for forty days without eating anything, and without
feeling hungry, it was only when the forty days were over he
began, as man, to feel hungry. This view it will be seen re-
duces the temptation to a very small point of time. It is not
till the forty days are over that he becomes “ an hungered” ;
then the devil comes to him, tempts him, and not succeeding
goes away, and then immediately Angels come and minister
to Jesus. The showing by the devil to Jesus, from the top
of a small hill near Jerusalem, all the kingdoms of the world
in a moment of time, is explained by the assertion that this
alludes to his spiritual vision, and that it does not mean
that Jesus actually saw all the kingdoms of the world in a
moment of time with his eyes. The statement of Jesus in
Matthew xxiv. as to his coming again before the then
generation should have passed away does not mean that he
will so come ; “ generation ” being merely used figuratively,
but when he does come he is still to come in the clouds of
heaven, and with great glory, sounds of trumpets, rushing of
winds, and mourning of tribes, for all this has not yet been
falsified by the event.
When Jesus retires from Jerusalem for fear of being
killed, and on another occasion when he hides himself
from the Jews, he does both as man; but when he refuses
to leave, and fearless of his enemies, who are going about
to kill him, calmly proceeds with his work for “his hour
was not yet come,” this is by virtue, again, of his Divine,
nature j so when Jesus says “ I and the Father are one,
he is speaking as God of unity of essence, but when
he prays to God, concerning the disciples, that they
may be one even as we are one,” he is not alluding to
unity of essence, but to unity of purpose, of design, of
communion. The palpably absurd exaggeration at the
end of John is endeavoured to be softened into a hyper-
bolic statement, not inconsistent with its being part of


an inspired Gospel, and all the numerous and reiterated
statements of Jesus contained in the New Testatment as to
“hell” and “hell fire ,” “tormented in this flame,” “ ever-
lasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels,” “ place of
torment,” “ the fire that never shall be quenched,” &c., &c.,
do not bear the meaning that until the last century had
been attributed to them by all the Christian churches, and
which is still attributed to them by those who do not belong
to the metaphysical school, but are said to merely refer to
Gehenna, or the Valley of Hinnora, which is supposed to
have been the name of a locality near Jerusalem , where all
the filth and refuse of the city was consumed in fires which,
as a rule, were kept burning. Therefore, in addition to the
question which, after each amazing interpretation, rises to
the lips—Who told these free and dashing Biblical critics
that this or that was the meaning ? we may also, in our
simplicity, exclaim —Then we are not to take as the Reve-
lation of God either what is written in the Bible nor what
has been accepted for t,Boo years as the meaning of the
Bible, but we are to accept, as the Revelation of God, the
new-fangled interpretations which, during the last half
century, have been given to it by a particular class of the
community. When Jesus, in the garden of Gethsemane,
goes apart from the disciples and prays, three times over, the
same prayer to God, within a short period of time, doing
that which he told his disciples not to do—“ use not vain
repetitions , as the heathen do,” for the reason that “ your
heavenly Father knoweth what things ye have need of before
ye ask Him,” he is so praying as man; so when he is hungry,
or afraid, or is learning, or is in pain, or is being circum-
cised and observing other Jewish rites, or sweats, or is thirsty
—all this is as man ; but when he walks on the sea, stills
the tempest, is transfigured with Moses and Elias before the
eyes of the disciples, and holds a conversation with them at


the same time (Matthew xvii.), raises Lazarus, turns the
water into wine—all this is as God. The Bible, it is true,
does not say so in respect of either the one class of acts or
of the other, but that is of small moment to the school, they
are quite capable of supplementing the Revelation of God
wherever it may be either insufficient or not as clear as
they would wish it to be so far as regards their own particular
views. Now, it seems to me that all this frittering away of
the plain words and meaning of Scripture, these endeavours
to twist and distort and hack at what is written because, as
written, the orthodox controversialist feels he cannot
sustain it, clearly show, in so far as the metaphysical school
is concerned (though the other two classes whom I have
mentioned are not affected by this view) that the Scripture,
as written, is only to be taken as the Revelation of God in
those portions where they say it may be so taken, and
where they say it cannot be so taken there the interpreta-
tion they put upon it is to be taken as the Revelation of
God.
Such methods as these, though they may reflect credit
upon the ingenuity of their originators, cannot fail to cause
the greatest discredit to fall upon the very doctrine which it
is sought to uphold. They do more to impair the doctrine
than all the attacks of the agnostics have succeeded in
doing. If the school, or we, or anyone else, are or is at
liberty to prune this away and that away, and to keep this
or keep that, just as it suits, where is the limit ? and what is
to be the standard ? If this be so it is evident that the
only clear and intelligible course to pursue is that pursued
by the two classes mentioned who, both refusing to leave to
the arbitrament of man what portions of either Testament is
or is not inspired, boldly maintain, the one, that the whole
Bible as it stands , the other, that the New Testament as
it stands, is the Inspired Revelation of God.


Having now, I think, said enough to show that the
position taken up by class number three, the ecclesiastical
metaphysical school, is not only untenable, but absolutely
suicidal, I proceed to deal with the view maintained as to
the absolute inspiration of the whole Bible, and also with
the same view as regards the New Testament only. First,
then, I propose very briefly to consider what is the Bible ?
what does it purport to be ?—what does it in fact represent ?
The term “ Bible,” like the term “ Testament,” comparatively
speaking, is of late origin. The more correct term to
describe the Old and New Testaments by is that of “ the
Books.” The name “Bible” (which, no doubt, like the “ Holy
Ghost,” as the effect of early training, has a sentimental and
somewhat mystic effect upon people’s minds) is simply a
corruption of the Greek term signifying “ the Books.” By
far the larger portion of the first book (the Old Testament),
passing by its account of the order of creation, in which it
contradicts the teaching of both astronomy and geology,
purports to be and is nothing more nor less than a history
(in which, as in many histories, truth and fiction are strangely
mingled up) of the origin, rise, progress, and religion
(including religious rites and ordinances) of the Jewish
nation. The books, of which Moses was until recently
supposed to have been the author, are now known to have
been “the production of centuries;”* “the prophecies
gathered under the name of Isaiah to have proceeded from
several different hands ; “ the visions of Daniel to have been
seen not in Babylon, but in Palestine.” We have in the
Old Testament merely an imperfect collection—the work of
centuries—of scattered writings. “ The earliest translators
of these writings felt themselves free to make important
alterations in their text, or worked upon manuscripts varying
* The quotations and information I make use of here are from the
writings of Professor Carpenter.


from those on which our text is founded. Ignorant copyists
have been left to blunder over words they did not under-
stand, and perplexed interpreters have had to make guesses
where exact knowledge was impossible.’’
The second book (the New Testament) purports to be,
and no doubt is, a history of the origin, rise, progress, and
religion of Christianity and the Christian sect. The writings
of which this book was composed were also made at
different times and by different hands. “ The fourth gospel,
that of John, from any point of view, was written considerably
later than the other three.” In addition to the four gospels
and epistles (or letters) and book of Revelation contained
in the second book (or New Testament) “ were other
gospels, other letters, other books of apocalyptic glory. The
preface to St. Luke tells us that many had taken in hand to
tell the same story, and many of these other gospels, and
letters, and books, the Christian collection once contained. Do
the writers of these books, which we now have in our New
Testament collection, ever speak of themselves as combining
to produce an authoritative exposition. Most of their
productions are addressed to single individuals. Narratives
of such significance as the gospel of Luke, and the book of
Acts, were written for the benefit of one Theophilus, and
some of St. Paul’s epistles are to Timothy and Titus. Round
the person of Jesus had gathered a number of stories, gra-
dually wrought into shape by pious imagination, in which the
words and deeds of the Master appear more or less distorted
as they are seen through the medium of an erring memory—
an unfounded expectation —a misconception of prophecy—a
delusive hope.” After the death of Jesus, those friends and
followers who had been with him in his lifetime, “ as their
numbers began to thin, felt the need of recording their
impressions” of Him and His sayings and discourses. As
time went on, further writings were made, and letters written.


By degrees they were collected, and when collected weie
known under the Latin name of ‘ Testament.’ ” Even at
that date the Testament so formed did not contain the
epistle to the Hebrews, the epistle of James, or the Book of
Revelation. “It was left for the African clergy at a council
held at Carthage in a.d. 397 (nearly 400 years after the
birth of Jesus) to fix, perhaps under the influence of
Augustine, the limits of the New Testament as it has ever
since remained.” This, then (allowing for brevity), is the
history of the origin, formation, and production of the first
and second books of the Old and New Testament; this
their purport, and this in fact what they each represent.
But before going farther let me, without having recourse to
the Old Testament, ask how can it be said that the New
Testament so formed, so produced, is the inspired Reve-
lation of God? Which Testament (for there have been
four or five) ? Which portion of which Testament ? Is the
one we now have, compiled as it was 400 years after Jesus,
the inspired Revelation of God ? Then, how comes it that
we have in that compilation books and letters which were
rejected in others nearer to the time of Jesus ? And, again,
by what authority did the council of the African clergy, in
397, issue their compilation to the Christian world as inspired
Revelation ?
In addition to these aspects, let us consider, at any rate
as regards the first book or Old Testament, the nature and
character of the writings we find contained in it, and
ascertain if the doctrine of inspiration is not falsified by the
internal evidence of the book itself. I assert, without fear
of contradiction, that no English author has ever ventuied
to put into a book a tenth part of the filth that is to be
found scattered throughout the Old Testament.* In schools
where the Bible is read and learned, it is a well-known fact
* I do not intend to imply that this has been done for an unworthy
or improper motive. — See Preface to yd edition.


that idle and prurient-minded boys spend a considerable
portion of their time in looking up and gloating over all
those filthy stories with which the Old Testament teems.
Theie are pages upon pages, and chapter upon chapter, that
no father or mother, worthy of the name, would ever dream
of reading to, or wittingly allowing a son or daughter to
read. Yet because, ever since Christianity has had a Bible,
the Old Testament has formed the major portion of it, chil-
dren are trained up to consider that as the Revelation of the
Almighty which they are not allowed to and do not read,
except by stealth, and which any adult even would be
ashamed to be caught reading by others. Then, again, a
further considerable portion of the Old Testament is of the
most blood-thirsty, cruel, and brutal description, and so
diffused are the narratives of immorality and indecency,
of vengeance, blood-thirstiness, and cruelty throughout the
Old Testament, that if you keep on rejecting the chapter or
book in which they appear, the result will be that you will
not have much left. Of course, to do so would be at once to
admit that for century after century all Christianity has been
accepting and taking as God’s Revelation that which is not ,
and would deal a most fatal blow to the whole doctrine of
the inspiration of the Bible, which, as far as evidence is
concerned, rests solely on the fact that the Bible has been
accepted as the inspired Word of God by Christianity for so
many hundreds of years. But if even one portion of that
which has been so accepted is to be now rejected, the whole
value of that evidence vanishes. I make the assertion “rests
solely,” not unmindful of the passage in 2 Tim. 3-16, the
champion verse of the orthodox upon this matter of inspira-
tion—“ all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness.” Passing by the fact that this
verse as it stands is another palpable mis-translation, what
does it amount to ? Nothing more than a statement made


by the man Paul, in a letter to Timothy, that the writings of
the Old Testament were inspired by God (for the New
Testament was not brought together until long after this).
It is one of those many doctrines which were enunciated by
the man Paul, but which were never enunciated by Jesus —
such as justification by faith, imputed righteousness, original,
sin. The fallible man Paul saying in a letter to Timothy that
the Scriptures (even if the term as here used can be said to
include both Old and New) were inspired, does not make
them so; and when the value of the assertion is tested by the
internal evidence of the Old Testament, and by the views
both as to Old and New which are suggested in this part for
the reader’s consideration, I think it will be found that
Paul’s belief upon this point rests upon no better foundation
than that of the so-called orthodox Christian. It is, however,
necessary, in order to show that I make no idle assertion,
to give a few instances, from the multitude at my disposal, of
each class of those characteristics of the Old Testament to
which I have referred. The first class I shall, for reasons
sufficiently obvious, only indicate by chapter and verse :
Genesis xix. 4-12, and again 31-38 —anything more revolting
than the description contained in 31-38 it is hardly possible
to conceive ; nor than that contained in 2 Samuel xiii. 1-18,
to say nothing of the extraordinary nature of the reply made
by Tamar in verse 16 ; Genesis xxx. 1-24 ; Genesis xxxviii. ;
Leviticus xv. 16-33; Deuteronomy xxii. 13-30; Judges xix.
22-30; 2 Samuel xi.; 2 Samuel xiii.; and for an extraordinary
mixture of piety and immorality, I refer the reader to
Genesis xxx.
The cruelty, bloodthirstiness, and vengeance impressed
upon the pages of the Old Testament may be illus-
trated by references to Exodus xxi. 24 —“ Life for life,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot, burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe


for stripe;” Leviticus xx., from verse i to 21; also,
verse 27 —“A man also or woman that hath a familiar
spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death;
they shall stone them with stones;” Numbers xxv. —
“And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the
people and hang them up before the Lord, that my fierce
anger may be turned away from Israel;” Judges v.; Judges
xi., verses 29 to 45, where Jephthah, in consideration of
God delivering the children of Ammon into his hands,
promises to offer to him, as a burnt offering, the first of
whatever kind that might meet him on his return, with the
result that he makes a burnt offering to God of his only
daughter; 2 Samuel xii., verse 31, where David (with whom
the Lord was) destroys all the cities of the children of
Ammon, and tortures their inhabitants to death “ by putting
them under saws and under harrows of iron, and under
axes of iron, and by making them pass through the brick-
kiln ;” and so throughout Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, 1 and 2 Samuel, Judges,
1 and 2 Kings, and 1 and 2 Chronicles, there is one
continual description of acts of wholesale and indiscriminate
butchery of men, women, and children ; of horrible tortures,
by mutilation or otherwise; of God’s approval of these
horrible acts; of His granting, by both natural and
supernatural means, facilities for their commission ;of
filthy and unnecessary details (as a sample, the description
of a fat king’s, Eglon, dirt running out from his bowels
after Ehud had plunged a dagger into him, and the fat had
closed over it) ; of a fierce, passionate, angry, vengeful,
furious, and cruel God. Nor does all this stop with the
thirteen books I have mentioned (constituting, as they do,
the greater portion of the Old Testament). Even in those
Psalms of David, which are continually read and sung in
all Christian churches, are contained frequent and violent


imprecations upon and uncharitable wishes towards all our
enemies, and appeals to God to enable us to fulfil our
desire upon them. David certainly (even so far as his
character is disclosed in the Psalms, and that is undoubtedly
the best part of it), did not either preach or practice that
gospel of humanity and goodwill which Jesus is alleged to
have both preached and practised. Again, all through the
books of the prophets is the same idea of an angry, jealous,
furious, and vindictive God clearly perceptible. The
prophet Isaiah, in chapter iii., verse 16, putting such words
as these into God’s mouth—“ Thus saith the Lord,
Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with
stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing
as they go ; therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the
crown of their heads, and He will discover their secret
parts." And then, according to the same prophet, the Lord
also goes on to say how He will take away their bracelets
and bonnets, and mufflers, and earrings, and mantles, and
pins, and veils; and how, instead of making them smell
sweet, he will make them stink. In another chapter He
(God) tells the same prophet to “ Make the heart of the
people fat and their ears heavy, and make them shut their
eyes, lest they see with their eyes and hear with their ears,
and understand with their heart, and be converted and
healed.” “Then, said I [the prophet Isaiah], how long ,
Lord ?” and the Lord said, “ Until the cities be wasted
without inhabitant , and the houses without man, and the
land be utterly desolate.” Indeed, throughout the remainder
of the book of Isaiah, and throughout those of the other
prophets, there is an almost unbroken series of bowlings
and ravings ; of pourings out of all the vials of God’s wrath
and anger; of fierce threats of annihilation and desolation,
and of horrors of every description (see the 16th chapter of
Jeremiah, of which it may fairly be said ex uno disce omnes).


It appears to me almost of necessity that those who
so inconsiderately declare the Old Testament to be the
inspired revelation of God, can have no approximately
right conception of God. Otherwise I cannot for one moment
imagine that they would so blaspheme God (by which I
mean derogate from His glorious attributes) by attributing
to Him, who is the God “ whose peace passeth all under-
standing,” who is eminently the God of love and of goodwill
toward men, to whom the most acceptable of all religions
must be that of practical humanity ; who is merciful; who
is the God of purity, truth, charity, and justice—such
attributes as those depicted on the pages of the Old
Testament. Surely it is plainly manifest that those books
constituting the first book of the Bible were written by men
whose ideas and notions of God were purely anthropo-
morphic, and who had the crudest conception of what God
was and is.
During the period of the later prophets that debased
and debasing conception became more purified and more
enlightened, and with the teaching and preaching of Jesus
it became still more purified, still more enlightened ; and I
venture to think that during the progress of the last century
a still purer and more enlightened conception of God has
been present to the mind of everyone who has been honestly
seeking for truth, and that with each succeeding generation
more and more exalted and perfect will that conception
become.
So far we have been discussing a portion only of the
internal evidence, as opposed to inspiration, of the Old
Testament. I propose now to briefly review other portions
of the internal evidence of the Bible as affecting the theory
of the inspiration of both Old and New Testament, and
particularly of the latter. For I make this further assertion,
that the intermingling of what is fabulous and legendary—


of so-called miracles —is, throughout both books, so manifest,
the contradictions and errors so great, the improbabilities
so forcible, that no sane thinking man or woman can
accept either the Old or the New Testament (much less
both) as the inspired revelation of God. By way of the
most cursory illustration, take the account of the six days
of creation, with lightness and darkness on the first day,
and yet no moon, or sun, or stars till the fourth day, and
with all its other vulgar errors and misconceptions; Eve
made out of one of Adam’s ribs as a full-grown woman,
and married to him almost immediately (this is absolutely
more extraordinary than the incarnation of Jesus)— the
Serpent and the Fall —the Flood, which covered the tops
of the highest mountains under heaven—the Ark, with its
extraordinary population—the ingenious legend about the
Tower of Babel, by way of accounting for diversity of
language, but at the same time making God neither all-
wise, nor all-seing, nor all-powerful —the story of Balaam’s
ass —of Samson, whose strength was in his hair, disappear-
ing when his hair was cut off and growing again as his hair
grew —the version of the plagues of Egypt the passage of
the Red Sea God speaking to Moses out of the bush
which was on fine* but was not consumed the sun and
the moon standing still at Joshua’s command the miracu-
lous conceptions t of Sarah (see the account in Genesis xviii.,
where God comes down, apparently in the form of a
*lt is worthy of notice the significance that is attached to fire all
through the Old Testament. It is to be kept always burning on the
altar. Leviticus vi. 13.—“ The fire shall ever be burning upon the
altar : it shall iiever go out ” ; God in the bush on fire ; God in fire on
Mount Sinai; Elijah ascending in a chariot of fire drawn by horses of
fire, and calling down fire from Heaven to consume the captains of
fifties; and so on throughout the Old Testament.
f It may be observed how singularly these conceptions resemble those
of Elisabeth and Mary, as described by Luke.


Trinity, to Abraham and Sarah, and talks and eats with
them) and others of the patriarchs’ wives who were barren—
the miraculous conception of Manoah’s wife, who was barren,
and to whom the angel of the Lord appeared, and who,
after revealing the fact of her coming conception, went up
to Heaven in a flame of fire (Judges xiii.) —the bringing to
life* by Elisha of the dead son of the Shunammite—the
parting by Elijah, and subsequently by Elisha, of the flowing
waters of Jordan the immortality tof Elijah and his
ascent into Heaven in a chariot of fire drawn by horses of
fire—the finding of an iron axe-head by Elisha, which was
lost by a man who was in sore grief, because it was
borrowed, and the causing it to swim in the Jordan
(2 Kings vi.) ; also, in the same chapter, Elisha’s defeat of
the bands of the King of Syria by smiting them with blind-
ness, Elisha being also surrounded with horses and chariots
of fite —Moses’s interview with God on Mount Sinai,
together with his forty days’:]; fast there—the witch of Endor
raising the spirit § of Samuel to interview Saul—and in the
later book of prophecy, the book of Daniel, we have
accounts of three men cast bound into burning fiery fur-
naces, and walking about unhurt in the furnace with a
fourth who was not cast in—of a man who was turned into
a beast for years, and eat grass, and then resumed human
shape —of miraculous writings on walls —of lions who
refused to eat Daniel, because God protected him, but
allowed helpless and innocent women and children to be
* This equals the greatest miracle that is alleged to have been per-
formed by Jesus —“ the raising of Lazarus.”
+ Elijah therefore never dies :he was translated to heaven. It is a
question whether this be not a more wonderful occurrence than the
resurrection —it certainly is as described.
I Not unlike the forty days, in the wilderness, of Jesus.
§ A medium evidently employed to interview the spirit world.


mangled and devoured by the same lions before ever they
came to the bottom of the den (Daniel vi. 24).
Passing to the New Testament we have the miraculous
conceptions of Elisabeth and Mary, resembling in all
respects the miraculous conceptions of Manoah’s wife and
others in the Old Testament; the extraordinarily ridiculous
and impossible phenomenon of the star in the east, and
the temptations of Jesus by Satan —all of which I have
already sufficiently discussed ; the opening of the heavens,
the descent of the Holy Ghost in the form of a
dove upon Jesus after he had been baptized by
John, and the voice from heaven saying “ Thou art
My beloved Son,” the transfiguration of Jesus, and
Moses, and Elias, when they all talked together in the
hearing of the disciples, and who addressed Jesus while he
was being transfigured, again followed by a voice from
heaven saying “this is My beloved Son;” the story of
his resurrection after his death upon the cross; the
miracles of raising Lazarus from the dead after cor-
ruption had set in, of turning water into wine, of walk-
ing upon the sea, of stilling the tempest; the miracles
of the loaves; the sending the devil out of a maniac into
2,000 pigs, which immediately all drowned themselves in the
sea; the sudden conversion of Paul* with its accompani-
* We have no less than four accounts of this remarkable event, of
which not two are alike. One from Luke, in Acts ix., a second in
Acts xxii., a third in Acts xxvi., and a fourth from Paul in his Epistle
to the Galatians, chapter i. It would make this note too lengthy to
refer to the various discrepancies and contradictions in the four
accounts —when critically examined they are very striking; but, for
example, in Acts ix., it is stated that Paul’s companions heard the voice
speaking. In Acts xxii. 9 this is flatly contradicted. In Acts xxii,
10 it is stated that Jesus, when speaking to Paul from heaven, after
quoting the passage from Euripides and Eschylus, told Paul, in answer
to his question, ‘ ‘ What shall I do, Lord ? ” to go to Damascus and get


ments of the supernatural light and the voice of Jesus, from
heaven, quoting a passage from the Greek plays “ it is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks.”
Now, all these events which I have mentioned are, it will
be observed, absolute suspensions and violations of the
regular and otherwise unvarying course of nature, and what
is still more extraordinary, we can find a parallel for nearly
every one of them in the Old Testament. Further, most of
them are alleged to have taken place in the presence of a
large number of persons, often of multitudes, yet as to
much the larger portion of these events we have not more
than two witnesses—as to many of them (like that of the
turning the water into wine) only one —and where there is
more than one the two do not agree, two or more of the
four evangelists even being often absolutely silent upon the
most important and remarkable events in the life of Jesus.
Why this most striking paucity of, or rather absence of,
witnesses ? Why do those who are said to have been eye-
witnesses testify to matters of minor importance and omit all
mention of the more important ? Why these discrepancies ?
If the writers were inspired, surely they must have been
inspired to describe correctly and truthfully. That there is
this striking paucity of testimony—that there are these
startling omissions, contradictions and discrepancies as to
event after event in the life of Jesus anyone who feels
disposed to take the trouble of comparing the narratives
contained in the four Gospels, will readily perceive—
his instructions there from the disciples as to what he was to do, but
in Acts xxvi. this again is contradicted, for it is there stated that the
voice from heaven gave him instructions in full on the spot (see verses
16, 17, and 18). Again in Acts it is stated that Paul was instructed by
the disciples at Damascus in his calling, but Paul takes great pains in
his Epistle to the Galatians to distinctly repudiate this, and yet Luke,
who is credited with being the writer of the Acts, was one of the
inspired evangelists.


notably as regards the more important events of Jesus’ life,
such as the incarnation, transfiguration, and his appearing
after his resurrection; and the various alleged miracles,
such as the raising of Lazarus (the most important one of
all), the turning the water into wine, the miraculous
loaves; but even in minor matters these inspired writers
are also hopelessly at variance. Where Mark and Luke
describe one blind man only as being cured, Matthew
describes two. Luke describes the cure as having taken
place when Jesus was going into Jericho; Matthew and
Mark, who differ as to the number, disagree with Luke as
to the time and place, and describe the cure as having been
effected by Jesus when he was leaving the city. For the
purpose of the delivery of the address called the Sermon
on the Mount, Matthew makes Jesus ascend a mountain
and sit on its top during the delivery. Luke states that
Jesus delivered the sermon on the plain , and came down
for that purpose, and that he stood while delivering it.
So as to the time of the important event of Jesus’
crucifixion. One evangelist gives it as the third hour,
another at the sixth, and another as the ninth.
In the last chapter of his Gospel, Matthew, in describing
the still more important event of the resurrection,* says,
“ Behold, there was a great earthquake; for the angel (one)
of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled
back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. Mark, Luke,
and John differ from Matthew, and all four differ from each
other. Three of them do not mention the rolling back of
the stone, or the more remarkable event of the earthquake.
6
* It may be noted in reference to the appearance of Jesus after the
resurrection, that Mary Magdalene did not know him when she saw
him, but took him for the gardener; that he appeared in another
forni to the two disciples, who were travelling to Emmaus, who had
supper with Jesus there, but also did not know him.


Mark says the angel (one) was within the sepulchre, and
sitting on the right side. Luke states there were two
angels, both standing; while John says they were both
(two) sitting, one at the head and the other at the feet.
Again, as to the women who are alleged to have been pre-
sent during the occurrence, John only mentions one —Mary
Magdalene; Matthew two —Mary Magdalene and the other
Mary; Mark three —the two Marys and Salome. Luke
magnifies the number considerably—the two Marys, Joanna,
and “ certain others with them.” On far stronger evidence
(if evidence it can be called) than that which supports any
of the events or miracles to which I have been alluding,
the Roman Catholic Church propound to the world their
miracles, and yet the Protestant section of Christianity
reject them as incredulous; why? Because they involve a
violation or suspension of unvarying natural laws; because
such things do not happen, and because reason refuses to
give credence to them. In the presence of scores of people
at the marriage feast at Cana, Jesus performs the miracle
of turning the water into wine; and yet only one person
bears testimony to that extraordinary performance, and in
a statement, if written by John at all, written by him very
many years after the death of Jesus. When Jesus walks
on the sea, we must suppose by virtue of his divine nature,
he would have passed the disciples, missed the ship, had
they not called out to him. Those who can believe such
things as these also believe that Elisha made the axe-head
swim in Jordan; divided the flowing waters of Jordan with
a stroke of Elijah’s coat; raised the dead child of the
Shunammite, and, like Jesus with the loaves and fishes,
multiplied the widow’s oil; that Elijah called down fire
from heaven to consume the captains of fifties ; also parted
the waters of Jordan, and, in his life, ascended to heaven in
a chariot of fire; that the sun and moon stood still at the


command of Joshua; that angels came down from heaven
and talked and ate with the patriarchs, and their wives
and concubines, in the same way as in the New Testament
they are said to have come down to, and talked with,
Joseph and Zacharias, Elisabeth and Mary.
Surely, none who read, and reason upon, and criticise the
Bible in precisely the same way as they are entitled to do any
other book, for the legitimate purpose of ascertaining
whether it is that which it is said or represented to be, on
what evidence it rests, and what is the nature of the evidence,
external and internal, can for one moment give credence to
these stories —creations of imagination or of superstition,
fables, or legends, or fancies, contradicting as they do all
nature’s laws, those laws being the unvarying laws of God.
The reason why such a large number of Christians attach
weight to these narrations is simply because they are contained
in that which is now called the Bible, but which should
more properly be called “the Books.” They assume, without
inquiry, that whatever is in the Bible must be true. The
followers of Confucius, the Buddhists, the Zoroastrians, the
Mahommedans, also assume that whatever is in their
Bibles is true. The orthodox Christian questions the
right of any or of all of these vast religious sects so
to do, and throws ridicule upon their belief, and taking
it for granted that his Bible is the only true Bible, and that
all the other Bibles of the world are mere works of fiction,
affects to look with contempt upon these poor, benighted
pagans. But the Bibles of these poor pagans are records
of far greater antiquity than that of the Christian, and the
supernatural events, miracles, and visions recorded in them
are supported by quite as much evidence (let us so call it
for the moment) as that on which we are asked to credit
the supernatural events, miracles, and visions of the
Christian Bible. Such assumptions as these are really


nothing more than that of the old woman who was quite
prepared to believe that Jonah swallowed the whale had it
only been so printed in the Bible. Because people have
been told so they are content to imagine (I cannot legiti-
mately use the word believe) that the Bible is the inspired
revelation of God, without any reasonable or reasoning
inquiry into the truth or otherwise of the statement made to
them, “ There is much in the Bible that is beautiful and
true, but, alas, there is also much that no man in his
reason can accept.” If, then, the doctrines of (i) the
Trinity, of (2) the Deity of Jesus, of (3) Jesus being the
actual and very Son of God, of (4) the Inspiration of the
Bible, all disappear, it may be asked, what is there left?
What knowledge or belief can we have of or in a God ?
With the fall of these doctrines would not the purifying and
ennobling influence of religion, would not religion itself also
fall? To all of these questions I shall be able, I trust, to
give complete and satisfactory answers when I come to
discuss “A Pure Faith and God.”


Part IV.
•‘lf an offence come out of the Truth , better is it that the offence
come than the Truth be concealed.”— -Jero?ne.
THE ATONEMENT*—THE ADVENT.
“The doctrine of sacrifice or vicarious punishment is the most universal,
and yet the most absurd of all religious tenets that ever entered
into the mind of man. That there should be any manner of
connection between the miseries of one being, and the guilt of
another; or that the punishing the innocent and excusing the
guilty should be a mark of God’s detestation of sin; or that two
acts of the highest injustice should make one act of justice, is so
fundamentally wrong, so diametrically opposed to common sense,
and to all our ideas of justice, that it is astonishing that so many
should either believe it themselves, or impose it upon others.”
In discussing the subject of the atonement, I shall endeavour,
first to give the popular definition of what an atonement is;
and then, secondly, proceed to give that which is more
* I had just reached this point in my manuscript, when, through the
kindness of a friend, I became possessed of two works, one “A Discourse
of Matters Pertaining to Religion,” by Theodore Parker, the other “The
Religion of Evolution,” by Savage. For some reasons I regret that I
did not obtain the former at an earlier date, as it deals most ably
with both the subjects last discussed—” The Inspiration of the Bible
and Miracles.” However, I have decided to leave my manuscript
upon these and prior subjects as it stands, unaltered, a course which,
perhaps, may be more satisfactory to the reader. But, conscious of
many imperfections in my treatment of them, I gladly refer the reader
to the work by Theodore Parker. The other work, “ The Religion of
Evolution,” I utilize to some considerable extent in the discussion of the
doctrine of the atonement, and in dealing with the subject of “God.”
It is a most charming and fascinating work, and will amply repay


to our present purpose, a definition of the three different
views of the Christian doctrine of atonement, which have
been maintained by the Christian Church. The popular
notion of an atonement is the doing of some act, by which
one person who has been estranged from another, by the
commission of some fault or injury, is reconciled to that
other. This, in addition to being the popular notion of
atonement, appears to me to be its true definition. What is
more, the only atonement, for which there is Scriptural
authority, falls within and satisfies this very definition. When
one does a cruel or an unjust act, to say nothing of the
commission of graver offences, one sins against what is
good—in other words, against God—and is therefore
estranged from God; and, supposing the person who com-
mits the offence not to be callous or indifferent to the
doing of what is wrong, he feels dissatisfied with himself,
and longs to be reconciled again to the good that is in him
that is, God. Then what says Scripture upon this point:
“ Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and
sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the Lord ? Behold ! to
obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of
rams.” David, in the Psalms, says : “For Thou desirest
not sacrifice, else would I give it; Thou delightest not in
burnt-offering. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit ;
a broken and a contrite heart , O God, Thou wilt not
despise.” And Micah, one of the later prophets, states
that what God demands is not an offering of rams, but to
perusal, if for no other end than this, for its demonstration of the fact
that science is the handmaid, and scientific truths are the most powerful
allies, of pure religion. I also take this opportunity of acknowledging
my indebtedness, for many of the quotations I have availed myself of,
and for facilities I have enjoyed in the way of textual reference, to the
industry and research of the editor of a work called “ The Unity,
Duality, and Trinity of the Godhead,” virtually a report of an eccle-
siastical discussion upon these points.


“Do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God.”
This is the way by which man who sins is to remove the
estrangement, and to reconcile, not God to him, but him-
self to God. This is the atonement of humanity. Humanity
by its own acts creates the estrangement. God is never
estranged from man 3 the man who sins estranges himselt
from God, and he can remove that estrangement, and
reconcile himself to the good that is in him, by acting
righteously. No doubt in this sense there may be atone-
ment 3 and it appears to me that it is only in this sense
such a doctrine as that of atonement can rationally be
maintained. But, unfortunately, this is not the orthodox
Christian’s view of the doctrine 3 nor is it that of the
Christian churches. And it is their view, or rather their
views, which I now purpose to examine, and to show that
they are erroneous, derogatory to an all-just, all-merciful, all-
loving, and omnipotent God, and that not one of them form
any part of the religion of Jesus. Now, what are those
views ? As at present maintained they are two 3 as they
have been maintained, three. The first and original doc
trine of the atonement was created long after the death of
Jesus, and as a sort of corollary to, or necessary sequence
of, the doctrine of the fall. Man had fallen, and thereby
became obnoxious to death. But for the Fall he would have
been immortal. As another result of the I all he was under
Satan’s power, and when death supervened would go to
hell, and be there tormented by Satan and his angels,
unless some atonement were made from him. This atone-
ment was the sacrifice of Jesus—in other words, Jesus was
to die, go down to hell, and be tormented by Satan as a
substitute for the rest of the human race, and thus pur-
chase their delivery from Satan. But by degrees this
doctrine of “ the Fall ” has become almost altogether
abandoned, chiefly for the reason that it has been proved


to be absolutely untrue. Man, instead of falling, has been
century by century progressing in all that is good and
ennobling, and though still far from perfect, will continue to
progress. With the decay of the doctrine of “ the Fall ”
this view of the doctrine of the atonement also disappeared.
Then, later, the view was propounded that Jesus was
not sacrificed as a ransom to be paid to Satan for giving
up his claim to torture and fry the human race, but to
appease the wrath of an angry God. This view held sway
amongst oithodox Christians and the Christian churches for
some considerable time, and, unfortunately, still obtains
amongst many of the hell-fire and devil school; but it has
also in its turn, to a very considerable extent, given way to a
third view, which, I think, must from its terms be the pro-
duct of the metaphysical school, but which may fairly be
said to be the now generally accepted view of the doctrine
of the atonement. As I understand this latest development
of the doctrine, it is tnis : That God, who is absolutely
righteous, and pure, and just, could not, without derogating
from these attributes, or at any rate, from that of perfect
justice, forgive man for sin unless some voluntary sacrificial
victim could be found for the purpose of expiating the sins
which man had committed; that thus God’s attribute of
perfect justice would remain unblemished, for by this form
of expiation it would be shown to the world that man
could not disobey the laws of God—or, in other words,
commit sin—without a satisfaction having to be rendered to
the necessary requirements and demands of the absolute
and perfect justice of God. This view has certainly a very
metaphysical flavour, and was evidently resorted to in order
to maintain that doctrine of the atonement (which had so
frequently changed its aspect), in some form or another. Now,
assuming there is Scriptural authority for the doctrine, which
of the three is the Scriptural doctrine ?—why all these


changes and transformations ?—and why has each change
made with the progress of years, of civilization, and of the
free use of reason, resulted in an atonement of a milder hue
than its predecessor? I shall presently show that not a
syllable of authority can be found throughout the whole of
the doctrines and teachings of Jesus for this last or for any
one of these views; but, before doing so, let me ask the
question, is not even this comparatively mild and very
ingenious view absolutely derogatory to an Infinitely Just,
All-loving, All-merciful, and Omnipotent God ?
Can we conceive that the God who is ever ready to for-
give and receive the prodigal, who rejoiceth more over one
sinner that repenteth than over ninety-nine just persons who
need no repentance, who forgives the woman taken in
adultery, in the very act, with the kindly words “ Go, and sin
no more," who declares by His prophets that He wants no
victim, no sacrifice—that a contrite heart, the doing justly,
righteously, and mercifully, is the only sacrifice He requires,
refused and was unable to forgive His children for their errors
until a voluntarily living victim was found to satisfy the
draconian demands of His justice. Surely such a God could
never win our love , could not be Omnipotent , could not be
All-love, could not be All-merciful. Through all three views
runs, it will be seen, the idea of propitiation by sacrifice, and
this idea not given expression to, be it remembered, till
many years after the death of Jesus, was really nothing less
than a relapse into a remnant of the old Jewish system of
sacrifice, or of the more ancient barbaric or pagan notion
extending as far back as the Homeric days, of propitiating
an angry or offended Deity by the sacrifice of an animal, or,
in some countries, of a human being. At first Christianity was
happily free from it, but by degrees this corruption crept
into it and became incorporated with it, like those of the
Trinity and the Deity of Jesus. Let us, however, for a moment


adopt the third and latest view, that Jesus voluntarily offered
himself to God as a satisfying victim, and came down to
earth from heaven for that purpose, to perform the sacrifice.
Then this most extraordinary and singular fact stares us in
the face, that all through the various histories of the sayings
and teachings of Jesus there is not one word to be found
either directly or indirectly bearing upon this the most striking,
startling, and important part of his mission, or to sustain
any one of the three progressive developments of this
doctrine, so strangely and significantly savouring of ancient
sacrificial rites. This was according to all and each of the
views the grand central object of Jesus’s mission. This is
the message the Almighty God has sent him to deliver, and
he forgets all about it. Can we then, I ask, accept any one
of these transformations of the creation of a later age? If
we cannot, then we must reject absolutely the doctrine of
the atonement as propounded by the Christian Church, and
we are brought to that and only that doctrine of atonement
with which I opened this discussion, a doctrine which is
in accordance with the declarations of Scripture, and, what
is more, in accordance with reason and common sense.*
* The word atonement nowhere occurs now in the New Testament.
It occurred once in the authorized version in Romans v. n, but in the
revised version it has been omitted and the word reconciliation substituted.
So, as pointed out by the writer of “ Texts and Margins,” the words “ for
Christ's sake ” have now also disappeared; and the passage of the
authorized version in Romans iii. 25, “whom God hath set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his Mood," now reads, “ Whom God hath
set forth by his blood [i. e. , by his death) to be a propitiation through
faith.” Perhaps it was these two expressions of Pazd in his letter to the
Romans which has suggested the various doctrines of the atonement.
Paul, as I have already pointed out, not Jesus, has been the originator
of many doctrines not to be found in the teachings of Jesus. It is
important to bear this in mind, for the religion of Paul, which is to a
great extent metaphysical, mystical, and visionary, is no more like the
religion of Jesus, which is practical humazzity, than the Christianity of
our own day resembles the Christianity of Jesus.


In discussing the doctrine of “ The Advent ” a very few
words will suffice: the declaration alleged to have been
made upon the subject by Jesus has been falsified by the
event. That declaration is contained at length in Matthew
xxiv., of which verses 29, 30, 31, and 34, are as follows :
“ Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the
sun be darkened and the moon shall not give her light, and
the stars * shall fall from heaven , and the powers of the
heavens shall be shaken; and then shall appear the sign
of the Son of Man in heaven ; and then shall all the tribes
of the earth mourn and they shall see the Son of Man
coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory :
and he shall send forth his angels with a great sound of a
trumpet , and they shall gather together his elect from the
four winds. Verily I say unto you this generation shall not
pass till all these things be fulfilled .” If, therefore, this
* Viewed as an inspired volume the astronomical errors in the Bible
are certainly surprising, but viewing the Old Testament as merely a
history of the Jewish nation and their religion, and the New as a
history of the founding and growth and religion of the Christian sect,
compiled by man, these errors merely represent the standard of
astronomical knowledge attained at the dates the first and second books
were written. Evidently in the passage cited, and which is reported as
the declaration of Jesus, the stars are regarded as very small bodies as
compared even with our earth and moon, and the idea is that when all
the laws of nature are to be thrown into disorder by the advent, the stars
are to drop like fireworks out of heaven on to earth. Considering that
most of, if not all, the stars we see with the naked eye are larger than
our sun the fireworks would certainly be on rather a large scale. The
passage cited evidently refers to the stars in the same way as they are
alluded to in the work of creation, in Genesis i.—“ He made the stars
also,” the creation of the stars being thrown in as a mere nothing after
the description of the creation of the sun and the comparatively diminu-
tive moon. The same errors are apparent in Joshua telling not the
earth (which he ought to have told) to stand still, but the sun and the
moon ; in the description of the star in the east, and in the notion that the
earth was fixed, “ setting it fast forever so that it could not be moved.”


declaration was made by Jesus, it clearly intimates (that is
if we take plain, ordinary words in their plain, ordinary
meaning) that the end of all things and the advent were to
take place within the lifetime of the first Christian genera-
tion. Of course orthodoxy is ready with an interpretation
of and an explanation for this passage. But, unfortunately
for orthodoxy and the ecclesiastical metaphysical school,
neither St. Paul, nor St. Peter, nor St. John, nor St. James
agree with them, but evidently take the declaration in its
plain and obvious meaning. For instance, St. Paul, in
1 Thessalonians iv. 15, r 6, 17, writes—“ We which
are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not
prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord Himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in
Christ shall rise first; then , we, which are alive and remain shall
be caught up together with them (the dead) in the clouds to
meet the Lord in the air.” It is clear, therefore, that the
only advent of which mention is made in the New
Testament has not come to pass though the time mentioned
for the occurrence has long since elapsed; and, even without
taking into consideration the time limit fixed by Jesus,
and so distinctly referred to by Paul, the statement is in
itself utterly incredible, for how could Jesus, assuming him
to be the Deity and a spirit—unless, indeed, he were to go
through the process of a second incarnation in a virgin’s
womb —be seen by all the tribes of the earth, coming on clouds ,
with shouts and the noise of trumpets. Matthew Arnold, in
“ Literature and Dogma,” upon this doctrine of the advent,
makes amongst others the following observations : —“ The
mistake of imagining that the world was to end, as St. Paul
announces, within the lifetime of the first Christian genera-
tion, is palpable. But the reporters of Jesus make him
announcing just the same thing, ‘This generation shall not


pass away, &c.’ Popular theology can put a plain satisfac-
tory sense upon this, but, as usual , through that process
described by Butler (Bishop Butler) by which anything can
he made to mean anything ; and from this sort of process
the human mind is now beginning to shrink.” With this
extract I think I may now leave the further consideration of
the doctrines of the atonement and the advent to the reader,
without proceeding to examine the retrospective propitiatory
effect of the one upon those millions who had died during
the thousands of years of the habitable world’s history,
before the birth of Jesus, as compared with its prospective
propitiatory effect upon the millions of future generations; or
as to the other (the advent), what is to become of the
millions who are dead, but who are not the elect of Christ;
for the dead who are Christ’s elect are to rise first, and then
those of the elect who are alive at the time are to be caught
up into the air with the elect dead. But to the millions upon
millions of the non-elect (including all Jews, infidels, and
heretics) who are dead the pageant of the trump, and the
shout, and of the stars dropping out of heaven, is apparently
wholly lost; while all the other millions of the non-elect
who are living , and who are called the Tribes , are to mourn
and weep.


part V.
A PURE FAITH—“GOD.”
“ Time erases the fictions of unfounded opinions ; but confirms the
judgments which are in accordance with truth.”— Cicero .
It may, no doubt, have somewhat surprised my readers
that I did not discuss the subject of the inspiration of the
Bible first , and thus enable myself to take up a very much
more advantageous position for my attack upon the doctrines
of the Trinity, and of the Deity of Jesus. My reason for
not so doing was the conviction I held that I should be
able, even after yielding to the supporters of those doctrines
the most advantageous standpoint they could take, that of
the inspiration of the Bible, to prove by weapons out of
their own armoury, that both doctrines are untenable. I
now venture to hope that, qua those doctrines, my con-
viction was not ill-founded, and I also venture the further
hope, that my endeavours to show that no rational man can
accept the doctrines of the actual and very sonship of Jesus
to God, the incarnation, the inspiration of the Bible, the
atonement, and the advent have not been altogether
unsuccessful. The many minor doctrines of the so-called
popular orthodoxy it would be both tedious and unneces-
sary to discuss, for the fall of the base, necessitates that of
the superstructure. For the purpose of this discussion I
shall therefore assume that I have satisfied the reader that
the doctrines I have mentioned are either the creations of
superstition, the inventions of imagination or sentiment,
or of priestcraft, that they are corrupt excrescences on
pure religion, which I am now justified in lopping off.


When these corruptions are removed and put out
of sight, the way is at length clear. There is nothing
now to distract our attention from that bright goal
to which we are rapidly approaching. The obstructions
to our view have been removed; the mists have been
dispelled —the gloom and the darkness have taken flight.
Breathing freely the untainted air of pure truth, throwing off
all our shackles, leaving for ever all our weary doubts, we at
length find true rest and true peace. The light fills our mental
vision with bright hope. For us, no longer bewildered by
complex and devious tracks, there remains but one smooth,
straight, plain, beautiful path leading us to an ever-growing and
more perfect knowledge of that God who, no longer standing
aloof, requires not to be approached by mediators and inter-
cessors —by Christs and Virgin Marys ; who is in constant
and loving communion with all His children —the goal of
all their hopes—their home—their perfect rest; whose
infinite attributes of love, mercy, justice, truth, power, purity,
and wisdom may now be presented to our minds invested
with a grandeur, beauty, and majesty that hitherto have been
blurred, blotted, dimmed, and impaired by doctrines which—
inconsonant with even our finite notions of love, mercy, and
justice—are destructive of the infinite attributes of the
Eternal. The tempest of doubt and the billows of super-
stition have disappeared ; we are now on the calm,
blissful sea of pure theistic belief—refreshing, and invigor-
ating in its simplicity—warm and glowing in its absolute
unclouded devotion to, love for, and perfect trust in God
alone—proclaimed by in instinct-
accredited by reason—fortified by science, and hailing the
growth of all knowledge, the development of reason, the
discoveries and researches of science as its most wel-
come allies. For, leaving the field of “no evi-
dence,” credulity, and superstition, we find it within


our power to establish upon evidence this belief, as a
scientific truth. And what is it, but a progressive
stage or evolution of the ancient monotheistic faith,
before it became corrupted by paganism the faith
that early Christianity again, in the person of Jesus,
purified and preached, but which in its turn likewise
became corrupted by the rites, doctrines, and subtleties
of the priest ? As Macaulay has justly observed,
“ Christianity conquered paganism, but paganism infected
Christianity; the rites of the Pantheon passed into her
worship, and the subtleties of the Academy into her
creed.” It is this infection that has tended so much
to obscure and paralyze the Christian’s mental vision
of that Supreme Will whom Jesus preached, and to whom
alone he instructed his nearest friends and followers to
pray. But this belief is that monotheistic faith and
more, for just as the Theism of Jesus is more enlightened
and purer, and more attractive and more rational, than that
of Israel, so, I venture to assert, is the Theism of to-day more
enlightened, purer, more attractive, and more rational than
even that of Jesus. For the devil—the angry God—the
God to be feared —the eternal hell—torture and torment
for all but for the elect—an immediate advent or speedy
end of the world, with all its paraphernalia of suns turned
into blood, moons into darkness, trumpets, clouds, and shouts,
to say nothing of Incarnations and Trinities and Atonements
—are no part of the theistic belief of to-day. As knowledge
increases, men begin to use their reason more, and by using
their reason more become more independent, more self-
reliant, more enlightened; and the surety of man’s conception
and knowledge of God and of His truth becoming, century by
century, less imperfect, points to a Theism in the future cor-
respondingly purer, more rational, and more sublime. But
the orthodox Christian will say, as he has often said before,


pure Theism cannot be the whole truth, because it is so cold
and lifeless , and the doctrines of orthodox Christianity are
so sweet, so beautiful, and so warm. And he will further
say, if you adopt Theism you must adopt the Bible, because
without the Bible you could not have that knowledge of
God which you claim to have. I will, therefore, proceed to
discuss and deal with both these positions, observing that when
I come to discuss the latter I will also deal with that which
forms the second subject of this part —“ God.”
Taking first, then, the charge made against Theism of being
cold and lifeless, and the claim made for the orthodoxdoctrines
of being sweet, and beautiful, and warm; let me ask the
reader, bearing in mind what I have already endeavoured
(very inadequately, I feel) to say as to the beauty, and
sympathy, and warmth of the theistic form of belief, to ask
himself the question whether the conception of a God to
whom he can always go freely and without fear, feeling
sure of a ready welcome, lovingly, and with perfect trust
with whom he can always be in constant, direct, and
immediate communion—who requires no access to him
through others , the observance of no formalities, the pro-
fession of no creed, of no form of belief, the holding of
no doctrine —to whom man is responsible, not for his belief
or professions, but only for his actions—who is the God of
peace that passeth all understanding—who will recompense
man with happiness for every good work, act, or thought—
who being infinite is infinitely just, wise, merciful, loving,
and pure—who, viewed by the light of Theism, has never
done or sanctioned that which can even be suggested as
inconsonant with these endearing attributes, can be a cold
and lifeless conception ? This is part (for we can only
know part of what God is) of the one picture, now let us look
upon the other. A God who stands aloof—to whom our
prayers have to be filtered through others, a Christ or a
7


Virgin Mary, or through both—who could not receive the
penitent or accept the offering of a contrite heart without
first satisfying His attribute of infinite justice by the bloody
sacrifice of His only Son—who, consistently with His attri-
bute of infinite purity, impregnates a material virgin,
resulting in her conception of a material son—who is
divided into three distinct persons for some purposes, but
is only one for others—who being a spirit begot a son—who
is a jealous God, and visits upon innocent children the
sins of their fathers. Passing by devils and hells, and places
of punishment and torment —the narrow path, with its few
frequenters, leading to life, and the broad path, with its
multitude of passengers, going to destruction —and all the
impurities and horrors, blasphemies and absurdities, which
may fairly be classed as part and parcel of the orthodox
Christian faith as at any rate held by a very large majority,
is that conception sweet, beautiful, and warm ? What is
sweet?—God saying: However penitent you may be, however
good your actions may be, you must not approach Me except
through Christ; unless you believe that he is divine, let
your life be as perfect as it may, it is all of no avail ? What
is beautiful ?—God’s only Son voluntarily offering himself as a
victim for a bloody sacrifice, because God was unable to
satisfy His attribute of outraged justice in any other way?
or the contemplation of Jesus in the womb of a woman for
the natural period of pregnancy, and then brought forth with
all the natural concomitants of a natural delivery ? And
what, apart from the doctrine of hell-fire and the devil,
is there warm in all this, unless by want of warmth is meant
that the theistic belief is too pure , too simple , and too spiritual
—that it does not appeal enough to the senses —that man is
too material for such a spiritual conception—that to bring
man into any sort of relation with God you must have some
sort of go-between or link, half-human, -half-divine, a God-man


or God-woman ? If this be what is meant by warmth, while
I deny that it is warmth, I firmly believe that feeling to. be
the fons et origo of all the marvellous doctrines, just as it is
the cause of all the rites and ceremonies, that we now find
to be prevalent in so very large a number of the Christian
churches.
So much for the coldness and lifelessness of the one
conception, and for the sweetness, beauty, and simplicity of
the other; but, before finally leaving this branch of the
subject, I desire to draw attentive consideration to that
which I am assured must be a cause for regret, if not pam,
to all who truly love and honour God, and that is not only the
tendency to make Jesus, but the fact that Jesus is made, in all
the churches of orthodox Christianity, to supersede that God
whom those very churches profess to love and honour as the
Father. Just as the Virgin Mary in fact, though not in profes-
sion, absorbs the greater portion of the love, adoration, and
gratitude of the Roman Catholic, so to Jesus is given, in
reality, the greater portion of the love, adoration, and
gratitude of the orthodox Protestant. In the services of
the Christian churches the prayers to the Son of God,
to Christ, to the Son of David, to Christ the Redeemer
of the world, to Christ the Saviour of the world, are
not only frequent, but are the subject of much repe-
tition ;* and the first object that meets the eye on
* The following are a few specimens from the service of the Church
of England :
“ Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us !”
“ O Christ, hear us !”
“ Christ, have mercy upon us !”
“ Son of David (for this purpose Joseph is, of course, Jesus’ father)
have mercy upon us!” . .
“From our enemies defend us, 0 Christ! Mercifully forgive the
sins of thy people 1 ”


entering a place of worship is a colossal picture of the
sacrificial victim. The natural and necessary effect of all
this is to thrust the God into the shade, to bring Jesus into
the light, to impress upon those who worship in those
churches the feeling that Jesus is their natural Help,
Protector, and Saviour, and to obscure, mystify, and
derogate from the conception of God. And if Ibe asked
how it is that a theistic belief has not been more generally
adopted, I answer —first, because men are only just com-
mencing to dare to use their reason in reference to religious
belief —they are only just beginning to learn to walk by
themselves ; and, secondly, because of the opposition of, and
the efforts of, church and minister and priest. Viewed as
bodies, churches, ministers, and priests feel and know that,
as far as they are concerned, Theism is too pure and too
simple a form of belief—that it is too plain and too easy—
that it is not sufficiently complicated or mysterious. They
feel and know that with such a belief prevailing the authority
of the church they represent would rapidly disappear ; that
all those doctrines which now require so much explanation ,
and all those rites and ceremonies which create the neces-
sity for priest and minister, would for ever vanish. I regret
to be forced to say that I believe the church cherishes and
nurses the superstitious and the mysterious ; but as surely
“Graciously hear us, 0 Christl (and, as if that was not enough)
Graciously hear us, 0 Lord Christ /”
“O God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy upon us,
miserable sinners.”
“ The exceeding great love of our only Saviour, Jesus Christ.”
“ O Lord, the only begotten Son, Jesus Christ; O Lord God, Lamb
of God, Son of the Father, that takest away the sins of the world, have
mercy upon us. Thou that takest away the sins of the world, have
mercy upon us. Thou that takest away the sins of the world, receive
our prayer. Thou that sittest at the right hand of God the Father,
have mercy upon us.”


as the truths of reason must in the end prevail, so surely
will theistic belief become, before long, the belief of all
thinking men. *
Then as to the second position —“ If you adopt Theism
you must adopt the Bible, because without the Bible you
could not have that knowledge of God which you now
claim to have.” To start with, this is not only mere assertion
and assumption, but unverifiable assertion and assumption,
and contrary to the fact. Had there been no Bible, man
would have had just the same knowledge of God as he
now possesses. That conception of God which has its
birth in nature and in instinct took its place in man’s heart
and mind ages before the birth of Jesus, or that of a Bible
in any shape or form ' } and with the increase of man s
knowledge of nature, and of man’s reasoning powers, so did
that conception become enlarged and beautified. How
did ancient Israel, amongst some unworthy and derogatory
anthropomorphic notions of God, become, without the Bible,
possessed of so many that were grand in their simplicity
and beautiful in their conception ?—those outpourings of
Israel’s heart and life towards God which have been so
graphically and touchingly described by Matthew Arnold ?+
* In the description of the temptations of Buddha by Edwin Arnold in
bis “Light of Asia,” the reader will find these lines
“ And third came she who gives dark creeds their power,
Sillabat-paramasa, sorceress,
Draped fair in many lands as lowly Faith,
But ever juggling souls with rites and prayers ;
The keeper of those keys which lock up Hells
And open Heavens. ‘ Wilt thou dare,’ she said,
‘ Put by our sacred books, dethrone our gods,
Unpeople all the temples, shaking down
That law which feeds the priests and props the realms ? ’
But Buddha answered, ‘What thou bidd’st me keep
Is form which passes, but the free Truth stands.’”
f In his “ Literature and Dogma.”


How did those ancient and vast religious sects, in com-
parison with whose antiquity Christianity is but the creation
of yesterday, and with whose teeming millions the followers
of Christianity are but as a handful, without the Bible get
such lofty and spiritual conceptions of God as these * :
“He is the principle of Goodness and Truth; the Eternal
Source of sunshine and light; the Centre of all that
exists; the Creator of all things; the Sovereign
Intelligence; the All-seeing; the Just Judge.”
“ God appears in the best thought, in the truest speech,
in the sincerest action. Through His pure spirit He
giveth health, prosperity, devotion, and eternity to
the universe. He is the Father of all.”
“ Communicate to me the least name of God, and I will
return to thee His greatest.”
“ Recognize the mark of God in every place. The world
is the image of God.”
“ Human thought and knowledge combined can only
spell the first letter of Thy Love.”
“ Thou pure and perfect God ! Thine is the world’s
beauty and dominion. Thy beauty transcends the
sun, and Thy Completeness the universe of forms.
I call Thee not high, nor low; —recognizing no limit
to Thy being. Thou art highest, Thou art deepest,
Thou art the essence of all being. How can I know
Thee, who art beyond the vision of reason ? Being
so concealed, Thou art the more revealed to the eye
of the heart. The world were an empty tablet if Thou
had’st not written thereon Thine Eternal Thought.”
“ I am that which has been, which is, and which will be,
and no one has yet lifted the veil which covers me.”
* These represent the Persian, Egyptian, Hindoo, Buddhist, Grecian,
and Arabian conceptions of God, and are extracted from a volume'
entitled “ Sacred Scriptures of the World.”


“ Thou art the Mind that understandeth all things ; Thou
art the Good that doeth all things ; Thou art the
Father that maketh all things ; Thou art Thyself.”
“ There is one supreme mind, which transcends all other
intelligences. Moving, it cannot be shaken; dis-
tant, yet it is near. It pervades the system of
worlds, and is yet infinitely beyond it.”
“He exists by Himself; He is All in all, because all is
in Him. The Ganges flows—it is God. The ocean
roars —it is God. The cloud that thunders, the
lightning that flashes —is God. As from all eternity
the universe existed in the spirit of God, so to-day
all that exists is in His image.”
“There is only One God, omnipotent, eternal, omni-
present. He is the Great soul, of which all others
are but parts.”
“ God dwells with him who embraces all things with his
love.”
“O Thou Eternal One; Thou Perfection of Time; Thou
Truest Truth; Thou changeless Essence of all
change ; Thou most Excellent Radiance of Mercy,
I take refuge in Thee.”
“ We will sing that eternal, wise, all-perfect Love, which
brought order out of chaos.”
“ God is, by nature, the Father of men; and the best
men He calls His sons.”
“ God is the light of the heavens, and of the earth.”
“Thou art the Eternal One, in whom all order is
centred.”
How is it that we have, after the lapse of only a few
hundred years, a far more enlightened, elevating, and larger
conception of God than the early Christians or Jews had
t p an that which the Bible does or can teach us ? It only
requires the most cursory reflection upon the origin and


gradual growth of the conception of God to enable any
thinking man to answer these questions. And during that
period of gradual growth and development ever and anon
would there arise some soul-stirred glowing King, or so-
called prophet, priest, or leader of the people—like a Con-
fucius or a Buddha, a Moses, a David, or a Jesus —who
proclaimed a nobler and a purer, a less material and less
anthropomorphic, God than had been known before.
Without discussing the evolution of God —so ably dealt
with in that work (“ The Religion of Evolution ”)
to which I have previously referred, and premising that
the idea of a God was an idea that has obtained, in
one shape or another, amongst nearly every nation,
civilized or uncivilized, of the world, let me ask the
reader to reflect for a moment upon the ideas ot
God in the days of the patriarchs—the God who
walked, and sat down, and talked, and eat, and drank
with them ; then to the God of the people of Israel,
who was a God of war, “ the Lord mighty in battle,' ”
but who did not mix so freely with, nor perlorm in person
such material acts among, Israel, as was His custom with the
patriarchs—who, in fact, at that date ceased to appear in
person save only to Moses,* and to him on very rare
occasions ; then to the far more enlightened God of the
prophets, the God who is a “ just God and a Saviour,”
“ the High God their Redeemer,” who requires man only
“ to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
* According to Exodus xxxiii. 23, God on one occasion appeared to
Moses in person, placing His hand over Moses’ eyes, so that he
should not see God’s face as He passed him, but removing the hand
after passing, and allowing Moses to see His (God’s) hinder parts, the
conception of God being evidently that of a “ magnified non-natural
man. ”


with thy God ; * of whom the Hebrew psalmist says, “ A
broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise; ”
and of whom Samuel said, “ Behold, to obey is better than
sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams; ” who during
the whole period embraced by the prophets never appears
in person, but only in visions; then to the God of Jesus and
the early Christians, who began to cease appearing even in
visions, except on very rare occasions, but communicated by
means of angelic visits ; and then to the growing and more
enlightened conception that most earnest thinking men and
women have at the present day—a conception which, with
the increase of knowledge, and with the further revelations
of nature and of nature’s laws, will assuredly become more
enlightened still. In other words, to put it shortly, as man’s
knowledge of and acquaintance with nature and nature’s
laws progress, and as civilization and humanity advance,
so has the conception of God become more exalted
and enlarg'd, more ennobled and more sublime. But
now we know only part of God —we know more than
we did—just as our forefathers knew more than their
ancestors; but all that we do know only constitutes a
part. And this, if borne in mind, should, I think, mitigate
the contempt with which many regard Matthew Arnold’s
definition of God, “ the Eternal Power, not ourselves, that
makes for righteousness,” and should also mitigate the
contempt with which that writer apparently regards the
definitions of “ God,” by some Unitarians, as “ the great
First Cause,” “the Supreme Will,” “the great Superintending
Power of the Universe,” “the Moral and Intelligent
Governor of the Universe ; ” for all these, including Matthew
Arnold’s, represent merely the attempts of man’s finite mind
to define so much of an infinite God as his finite knowledge
permits man to do. And, indeed, in the very discussion
of this subject, I am well aware that the use of the pronoun


“ he,” as applied to God, may well be cavilled at as carrying
the idea of personality ; so may the use of the term “ God,”
as carrying no definition of what I mean by “ God.” I
admit all this ; but I have used, and continue to use, these
expressions simply for the sake of convenience.
Matthew Arnold’s definition, “ the Eternal Power, not
ourselves, that endures for righteousness ,” may well represent
a part of what God is; so may the expressions “the Supreme
Will,” “the Great First Cause,” and the others I have
referred to. The pure Theist conceives God to represent in
Himself (if I may use this word again for convenience sake)
the best of all that is known to the finite mind of man to be
best , but also a great deal more and beyond that, because
that which is best finitely with man is best infinitely with
God; and of this, of course, man can have no conception or
knowledge. Each man’s conception of God varies, and
must vary, and each man’s conception of God must neces-
sarily be imperfect or partial. It is, therefore, impossible
to lay down any definition of God which will even satisfy
man’s conception of God. How then can finite mind lay
down any definition which will satisfy those infinite attributes
of which we have only finite knowledge ? And the strongest
minded of us can only by great and continuous effort avoid
somewhat analogous personal conceptions of God to those
which we have so plentifully placed before us both in the
Old and New Testaments, like Isaiah’s God in white raiment
sitting on a throne. It is all very well to be told in the New
Testament by the writer of St. John’s gospel, whoever he
may have been, that “ God is a spirit.” This also, in its
turn, may no doubt be accepted as a partially correct defi-
nition of God, or as a definition of part of God; but in scores
of other places in the New Testament appears the personal
conception of God—often even in the very discourses attri-
buted to Jesus. All these and similar attempts to define what


we mean by “God” are merely man-phrases , for being men we
must and can only speak as men—man making the best and
fullest affirmation of God that he can according to his con
ception of God. In fact, the position as to definitions of
God cannot be well put better than in the following words
of a celebrated Unitarian minister*No sane and reverent
man disputes that there are depths and heights m God from
all recognition of which the limitations of our faculties
absolutely cut us off, but that need not stand in the way of
our recognizing such elements in Him as have som t faint
correspondence in ourselves.” Now, I stated at the outset
of this discussion that belief in a God—that is, a theistic
relief is one which originates in instinct, is proclaimed by
nature, is accredited by reason, and becomes fortified by the
discoveries of science. Therefore, not to lay myself open,
if possible, to the charge of making assertions for the purpose
of avoiding argument or proof, I desire, without going too
much into detail, to place before the reader the more general
grounds on which these propositions are based. _ Though
attempts have been made to prove the contrary, it is still,
generally speaking, a truism that in almost every tribe
and every nation, civilized or uncivilized, prevails the
notion of, and belief in, that power or force which we call
u Q o d » a belief which may fairly be called an instinctive
belief in the sense that it was not in the first instance derived
from man or from the teaching of man. How then did this
notion or belief originate ? I think it is clear it originated
in and from the teachings of nature. In the movement of
the wave —in the river stream —in the wind—in the thunder
in the woods, and forests, and mountain peaks in the
earthquake, the sun, and the stars remotest nations saw
and acknowledged, though often under many forms, that
power which we call “ God.” And as time progressed, and
* The Rev. R. A. Armstrong.


man studied nature more and learnt more from her, and
began to ponder and think upon what he saw around him,
man began to entertain less crude conceptions of that which
motion, noise, light, height, and density first presented to
his mind. He began to be conscious that there was some
one master mind to whom these, and man himself, all owed
their origin. This stage of man’s knowledge and belief is
that which is represented by the legend of the creation
contained in Genesis. That account is plainly the effort of
man to give speech to his then conception of what he had
so far learnt from nature. Very crude, no doubt, still that
of “ a magnified non-natural man ” —very terrible and wrath-
ful—revengeful, requiring to be appeased by bloody sacrifices
—rejoicing in destruction ; but yet not much more crude,
perhaps, than was man’s then knowledge of nature.
In later years, amongst the first Christians, Jesus illus-
trated his conception of God, as a God who is tender,
merciful, and loving, from nature. It was during the soli-
tude of his studies, when preparing for the preaching of that
Gospel which he began to promulgate when thirty years of
age, that he learnt those lessons about God from nature :
u Consider the lilies : they toil not, neither do they spin.”
“ Behold the fowls of the air: they sow not, neither do they
reap.” And whence does man now get his conception of
God as a God of love —Infinite—Omnipotent—All-wise—
Just —Unchangeable—Omnipresent, save, in great measure,
from his study and knowledge of nature and the laws which
pervade nature—from the penetration of her secrets and the
unfolding of her mysteries by science—from the revelation of
her beauties—from the rythmic and mystic order of her unity
-—from the wonderful, but even faint, knowledge that he now
possesses of time and space ? Surely the God who works
in nature, even as we know it now, must be a God of love
—unchangeable, all-wise, omnipotent, pervading all things,


all space, all time. Does not the beauty of all things that
are lovely or sublime proclaim that God. is love ? To use
the beautiful and poetic language of another*—“ The voices
of the rosebud in the hedge, of the stream that gurgles down
the shadowy vale, of the mountain peak that throws back from
its snowy crest the roseate light of the declining sun, of the
clouds themselves that canopy the great orb’s bed, of the
silent stars that converse together in the night, of the little
birds that make air tremulous with song, of the mighty music
that sobs and swells and crashes down the cathedral aisle;
the voices of all these carry knowledge to the awakened heart
of man that Love is the law by which all things move—the
pulse of the overruling Will, the method of the purpose which
holds time and space together, the texture of that righteous-
ness towards which the Eternal Purpose shapes the sum
of force.”
Then, has not our conception of God been not only en-
larged, but rendered more enlightened and more sublime, in
proportion as nature unfolded her wondrous self to the inde-
fatigable and searching eye of science? When man, not so
very long ago, concluded that the earth was fixed, that it
was a flat surface, that the sun and the stars revolved round
it to give it light; that our earth, and what we saw with our
eyes, was the universe, could their conception of the creative
power of such a universe be as enlarged, as lofty and
sublime, as that of the God of the universe which astronomy
has revealed, and is revealing to us day by day? To take
nothing else, the very idea of “ space ” and distances that
astronomy has given us fills the mind with wonder and with
awe, clothing nature with a sublimity, a majesty, and. a
beauty which, otherwise, we had never known; and so with
« time,” as read by the researches of geology, proving, as they
do, that what was until recently regarded as the creation
* The Rev. R. A. Armstrong.


of a few thousand years dates back from millions, if not
thousands of millions, of years. Surely, as Savage observes,
“Science has heightened infinitely the objects of religion,
giving us a grander God, a nobler humanity, a more
magnificent universe as the theatre for human action. It
has destroyed the superstitions, the crudities, the false-
hoods, the misconceptions of men concerning religion—for
example, the doctrines of astrology, of demoniacal pos-
session, of witchcraft; the doctrine of the material resur-
rection of the body, of a material hell under the surface
of the ground, and many such others, science has utterly
destroyed.” But science has done far more than this.
Science has shown us that there exists throughout space,
—throughout the vast limitless universe—motion, order,
beauty ; that there is behind all motion, all order, all beauty,
a force that produces the motion, the order, and the beauty.
This, that science calls force, religion calls God. Even ii
we accept the theory (I use the word advisedly, for, as yet,
I do not think this can claim to be a scientific truth) ol
scientific astronomy that the universe as it is known to us
was originally mere nebulous matter or fluid—fire, mist, or
gaseous fluid—what was the force or will that created the
nebulous matter, created the system in accordance with
which were evolved suns and planets ? Science revealing to
us a grander universe than was ever known before, an unity
of law, an unity of order and motion, the manifestations of
some secret force or will pervading all space and all time :
can we, knowing this and feeling this, truly say that science
has not exalted our conception of that Supreme, that Mighty
Will or Force ?
Thus, not only do the more recent discoveries of science,
like the needle to the pole, point to an all-pervading hidden
life or secret force in the unfolding universe, but the reason
of every man, who uses his reason fairly, shows him a God.


For, to put it no higher than this, which is equivalent to
putting it at the lowest, the presumption that fairly (I will not
even say necessarily) arises from all these facts and scientific
truths, to which I have but cursorily referred, is that there
exists throughout space, and has existed throughout all time,
some force—some life—some will—some power—some
master mind—some cause —such as theology calls, and we,
for the sake of convenience, call “ God.” Let any fair thinking
man turn this over in his mind, and then ask himself the
question, Is not this at any rate a presumption arising from
what I know,* from what I see about me in nature, from the
truths which science has revealed to me? I think the question
will get from reason an affirmative response. Now, if this
* Mr. Savage, in his work, “ The Religion of Evolution,” makes the
following very trenchant observations upon scientific truths as opposed
to what are asserted to be religious truths : —“ Science is nothing more
nor less than the arranged, organized, definite, verifiable knowledge of
the world. That is, anything concerning man ; concerning human
society ; concerning the earth ; concerning the animals that inhabit the
earth, the grasses, the herbs, the flowers, that spring out of its soil;
concerning the clouds that sweep through the air ; concerning the
atmosphere itself; concerning the sun and the stars. Anything that we
know and can prove about any of these things is science. It is real
science when it can be verified, and when it is not somebody’s guess or
supposition. Now, there are a great many things that are simply
believed, a great many theories that are called hypotheses. They are
assumed as the working implements of science. They are not science
until they are established. Things that are proved, and that can be
proved again, are science. And here is one grand advantage that scientific
truth has over any other — that which is true in science is true everywhere,
and it is true always. But the reason that religion is so disputed, that
it is so bandied about, that it is so fought against, is, that theology has
sought to identify with religion a hundred or a thousand things that no
man on earth can prove. Many of the asserted truths of religion have
been heretofore ‘all in the air’—truths that nobody could touch—
nobody could feel—nobody could see —nobody could prove; so that
you could accept them if you wished to, but you could not make it a
rational necessity for another man to accept them.”


be so —if this be merely a presumption (and it might, it
seems to me, be fairly placed higher in the category of proof)
—then the onus is clearly cast on those who disaffirm
the existence of what we are designating God to adduce
some proof to rebut that presumption ; and until that be
done, and up to the present it has not been done, nor do I
well see how it ever can be done, the presumption (which is
really a scientific presumption) according to all laws of
evidence is quite sufficient to act upon, and, if sufficient to
act upon, amply sufficient to justify our belief in a God,
whose temple is the universe, and to whom we should accord
the worship, not of lips or doctrines, or creeds or forms,
ceremonies or professions, but of living practical humanity,
of faithful, active, pure, unselfish lives.
But in addition to all these indicia furnished by nature
and science, establishing substantial premises from which
reason may fairly and legitimately infer the existence of a
God, there is also the view that has been so eloquently
dwelt upon by Matthew Arnold : the consciousness that
each one has of there being some power within himself,
but which is not of himself, working for righteousness. This
differs from the scientific view that I have touched upon in
tins respect, that the one proves God, by the other we are
said to feel God.* This other is popularly called conscience;
by Matthew Arnold, “ the power, not ourselves, that endures
or works for righteousness and what both really mean, and
are, is very clearly stated by a celebrated Unitarian minister
in the following words :—“ When I contemplate one action,
* As the object of this part of my work is to demonstrate that, in the
marks of design in nature, and in the truths established by science, we
have evidence of a God which entitles us to form a worthy conception
of Him, I do not attach much weight to this latter view, which is by
very many close reasoners said to be the result of civilization and
education.


a deception, a deed of violence or injustice, an imperious
prohibition, uncaused by me, asserts itself within me. When I
shrink from some other, a self-sacrifice, a renunciation, —an
urgent exhortation pronounces itself in my soul. When I
have given way to passion, rebuke from somewhere, which
I cannot put aside, stings me to the quick. When I have
striven against evil promptings, crushed them out of me, and
turned to do the right , a voice of approval makes music in me.
These utterances are not mine. They supervene upon me.
They check the current of ray own personal propulsion, or
swell its volume, and add motive to its force. They are not
mine. They are speech to me. The command, the pro-
hibition, the approval, the rebuke, so strongly bear the mark
of communication from some other than ourself, that all ages
have so interpreted them. They have ever been felt to be
the uttterance of a law and its sanctions, not of the man’s
own making. Whence then ? Some have striven to show
that their authority is but that of the community of men
made strong by the agreement of many generations. But
who that writhes in remorse, who that has the song of a glad
conscience in him, does not know that it is from a higher
source than man ? From whom then ? Irresistible impulse
replies ‘ from God.”’ Nature and science therefore furnish
us with external evidence of the existence of a God. This
last view furnishes us with internal evidence, as regards our-
selves, of the same fact. Sweeping away, therefore, all the
superstitions and misconceptions which encumber and
discredit religion, and which obscure and derogate from the
glorious attributes of God, we are left alone with that God,
of whose existence I have endeavoured to satisfy my readers
we are entitled to hold a reasonable belief. That belief is
pure Theism, which I now venture to assert is the only pure
faith, the only rational religious belief. “To love Justice,
Purity, Goodness, Holiness, Charity, Truth, is to love God;
8


to love them is to live them. It implies abhorrence of evil;
a desire and effort to be as perfect as God, to tolerate no
wrong action, wrong thought, or wrong feeling; to make
the heart right, the head right, the hand right; to serve
God, not with the lips only, but the life; not only in Jeru-
salem and Gerizim, but everywhere; not by saying, ‘ Lord,
Lord,’ ‘Save us, good Lord,’ but by doing God's will. The
love of God implies a love which is strongest at times of
trouble, which never fails when humanity goes stooping and
feeble, weeping its tears of blood ; a love which annihilates
temptation, and in the hour of agony brings as it were an
angel from the sky; an absolute trust in God, a brave un-
concern for the morrow, so long as the day’s duties are faith-
fully done. It is a love of goodness and religion for their own
sake , not for the bribe of heaven or the dread of hell. It
implies a reunion of man and God, till we think God’s
thought, and will God’s will, and so have God abiding in us,
and become one with Him.” Is this cold ? And yet Theodore
Parker was an Unitarian.
George Robertson and Company, Printers, Melbourne.










