

THE
FREEDOM OF THE SEAS.
BY
The Hon. BERNHARD R. WISE, K.C.,
Agent-General for New South Wales in London.
Printed in Great Britain,
LONDON:
DARLING & SON, LIMITED.
1915.




/23 -
e.c
sth October 1915.
AU communications
to he addressed to
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR NEW SOUTH WALES.
Telegraphic Address: “ALICUJUS,CANNON, LONDON.”
Telephone No.: CITY 2337 (3 lines)
Dear Mr .Robertson, •
I enclose you a reprint of two letters to one
of the New York daily papers which the British Government have
thought worth reprinting. The pamphlets are not generally on sale.
Please accept the copy herewith from me.
Yours very truly,
YvywvU*
Mr.Rober^tson,
Messrs Angus & Robertson Ltd.,
Castlereagh Street,
Sydney ,N.S.W»


THE
FREEDOM OF THE SEAS.
BY
The Hon. BERNHARD R. WISE, K.C.,
Agent-General for New South Wales in Lomiofi
LONDON;
DARLING & SON, LIMITED.
1915.


THE FREEDOM OF THE SEAS.
BY THE HON. BERNHARD R. WISE, K.C.,
Agent-General for New South Wales in London,
CONTRABAND.
Australians, whose island continent depends for all except bare
subsistence upon the safety of ocean communications, naturally
takes a special interest in the efforts of President Wilson to
maintain “ The Freedom of the Seas.” A citizen of the Com-
monwealth passes from its Eastern to its Western side by a sea
voyage of six days’ duration, while to travel from Sydney to
London, by the shortest route* will occupy a month. “ The
Freedom of the Seas ” necessarily, therefore, touches us more
intimately than it touches (say) the farmers of the middle States;
and we are forced to give special attention to the principles and
practice which this phrase embodies. Pules and conventions,
which to Americans are a subject of more or less academic
interest, are to Australians the conditions of their national exist-
ence; and, therefore, it may not be inappropriate that an
Australian lawyer should discuss in an American journal some
of the restraints which a state of war necessarily imposes upon
the over-sea communications of neutral nations.
The Meaning oe the Phrase.
Since error proverbially “ lurks in generalities,” it will be well
to begin with a definition. Clearly there must be some limitation
on the “ Freedom of the Seas,” or this would become not “ Free-
dom ” but “ License.” No one, for instance, could invoke this
maxim to justify piracy; but all would agree that a pirate ship
upon the high seas could properly be sunk or captured. This,
then, is the first limitation on the unrestricted right to use the
seas, viz., that this use be for a purpose which is lawful. Other
minor limitations on the right of an individual to use the high
seas have been imposed by all nations in the interest of safe
navigation, but these do not concern the present enquiry. We
start, then, with this maxim, to which Englishmen adhere no
less firmly than Americans: “That all persons may go to and
fro upon the high seas without let or hindrance, while they are
engaged upon their lawful business ”; and the same rule applies
to lawful trade.
In times of peace, it is substantially true that all commerce and
travel are lawful; and, therefore, the free movement of passengers
and goods should not be interfered with. But this is not the rule
in time of war; because the practice and consent of all civilized
nations give a belligerent certain clearly defined rights to inter-
fere with the commerce and travel of neutrals. In a word, war,
ipso facto , limits the rights of neutrals to an unrestricted use of


ocean highways, and makes unlawful commerce and travel which
were lawful in times of peace. But, according to our definition,
the maxim of the “ freedom of the seas ” only applies to busi-
ness which is lawful, and, therefore, cannot be invoked to justify
travel or business which, by the practice of nations, has become
unlawful. Thus the question for us is not “ Whether England
has interfered with the Freedom of the Seas,” but “ Whether her
interference has gone beyond the recognised right of a bellige-
rent?” There may be also a subsidiary question, namely,
“ Whether, if she has pressed her rights too far, the circumstances
did not justify her? ” The answer to which will depend upon
the further question, “ Whether, in breaking the letter of the
law, she has not preserved its spirit?”
The principle having been defined, its application may now
be considered under the two headings “ Contraband ” and
“ Blockade.”
The Nature of Contraband.
In a judgment, which expresses also the law of England,
Chief Justice Chase (of the Supreme Court of the United States)
recognised two classes of contraband goods, viz. ; —■
Articles, from their nature particularly adapted and primarily
used for warlike purposes, which are “ absolute ” contraband,
and :
Articles, capable of being used for warlike purposes, though not
exclusively so used, which are “ conditional ” contraband, and :
All merchandise ” (he said) “ may be divided info three
classes. The first consists of articles manufactured and
primarily used for military purposes in time of war; the
second of articles which might be used for purposes of war
or peace, according to circumstances; and the third of
articles exclusively used for peaceful purposes. Merchandise
of the first class destined to a belligerent country, or to
places occupied by the Army or Navy of a belligerent, was
always contraband. Merchandise of the second class was
contraband only when destined to the military or naval use
of a belligerent; while merchandise of the third class was
not contraband at all, although it was liable to seizure
and condemnation in a Prize Court, for breach of a
blockade.”*
The distinction, which is drawn by the learned Chief Justice,
between Absolute and Conditional contraband is of practical
importance, because Absolute contraband is liable to seizure and
condemnation in a Prize Court, without proof that it was intended
to be used by the enemy in military operations. Conditional
contraband, upon the other hand, can only be condemned after
proof has been given that it was destined for the enemies’ naval
and military forces, or for a place of naval or military equip-
ment. f If, as happens frequently, it is uncertain whether goods,
which have been declared “ conditional contraband,” will be
* (The Peterhnff.\ 5 Wall, p. 58.)
f (See “ TheJonye Maryaretha l Chris. Robinson, p. 189.)


used by the enemy for military purposes, the English practice
is to purchase them from the neutral owner at the fair market
price. Compensation may be given also for loss occasioned by
the seizure of the neutral ship.
Contraband and Neutral Eights.
Two conclusions should be clear from the preceding argu-
ment: first, that, unless a belligerent might capture contraband
in neutral vessels, there would be no meaning in the word
Neutrality; and secondly, that, judged by the test of cer-
tainty, which should be the mark of every law, the definition of
Contraband is defective. This, however, lies in the nature
of things and not in the bad faith of belligerents, because it is
impossible to predicate of any article of commerce, that it will
never come to possess a military value. This is illustrated in a
striking manner by the proposals of the international lawyers,
who framed in 1909 a code of war rules known as “ The Declara-
tion of London,” which Great Britain never ratified. One of
these* contained a list of IT groups of articles which were “not
to be declared contraband of war.” On this list were cotton,t
wool, rubber, and metallic ores; and the reason given for exclud-
ing these and the other-named articles was that “ none of these
were susceptible of use in war.”
Nevertheless, a belligerent may not wantonly extend his list of
contraband so as to destroy the trade of neutrals, but must
exercise his right in good faith and with a due regard to the
recognised rules and principles of International Law.
Thus, when Eussia, in 1904, included in her list of Abso-
lute contraband every article which could be used for war-like
purposes, both Great Britain and the United States announced
that they would not recognise any decision of the Russian Prize
Courts which ignored the distinction between Absolute and
Conditional contraband. The despatch of Mr. Secretary Hayj;
remains the authoritative utterance on this subject. It may be
summarised as follows:
“ The true criteria for determining what constitutes contra-
band are warlike nature, use and destination. These criteria
have been arrived at by the common consent of the civilised
world after centuries of conflict. The logical results of the
Russian doctrine would be to destroy completely all neutral
commerce with the non-combatant population of Japan, to
obviate the necessity of blockade, and to obliterate all distinc-
* (Chapter 11., Rule 28.)
f Cotton, it will be remembered, was made contraband by the North in the
War of Secession, because (as Mr. Bayard wrote in 1886) “Cotton was, to
the Confederacy, as much a munition of war as powder and ball, because it
furnished the chief means of obtaining these indispensables of war.” Owing to
this declaration, the cotton trade of Lancashire was paralysed; and for two years
the cotton-mill operatives lived on public charity. England, however, never
questioned the right of the North to make cotton contraband.
X Secretary of State in President Roosevelt’s administration.


tion between commerce in contraband and non-contraband
goods.”
These views were supported by Great Britain; and Russia, after
consulting Professor Martens, issued new instructions which
recognised the distinction between Absolute and Conditional
contraband.
Yet, in spite of this precedent, it must be admitted that the
law of contraband, in so far as it affects the freedom of the seas,
must present itself in different aspects to belligerents and neutrals.
There will be always, too, some nations, which have a power on
land wholly disproportionate to that which they can exercise at
sea; and which, indeed, may have no means of self-defence except
sea power : ...
“ Such a nation ” (as Mr. Hall has pointed out in his
work on “The laws of Neutrals”) “will have a marked
inclination to extend the list of contraband articles; while
other nations, which rely chiefly upon military power, will
care more to keep open channels for receiving supplies in
time of war, than to preserve the right, which they may be
unable to use, of denying them to the enemy.”
Nothing can be easier or more gratifying to the instincts of
benevolence, than to give away what one does not possess; and it
would be the cheapest generosity for a belligerent, whose warships
had all been sunk, or bottled up, to surrender its right to take
contraband from neutral vessels. In short, the rules as to
contraband may seem vague, but they have worked well, as
such rules do work, when they regulate the relations of honourable
men. Certainly the two maritime powers, England and the
United States, are in accord about them.
PART II.
BLOCKADE.
It will be noticed that in the passages already quoted, both
Chief Justice Chase and Mr. Secretary Hay speak of a
“ Blockade,” and recognise that, while a belligerent may not, at
will, unreasonably extend his list of contraband, he may pro-
hibit all trade between neutrals and his enemy by of a
blockade. This right to prevent access to an enemy port is the
maritime analogue of a land-siege, and the most effective measure
of constraint wdiich is possessed by a maritime power. It is not
surprising, therefore, that military powers, the strength of which
is on land, should have endeavoured consistently to limit its
effective operation. Neutrals also have a strong interest in
regulating its operation.
Accordingly, International Law—which, it must be remem-
bered, is only an expression of the general practice and consent
of civilised nations —has defined the conditions, under which a
blockade may be established and maintained. Two of these
conditions concern us here. The one is that “ a blockade must be
effective;” the other; “ that it must not discriminate in favour of
5994 * A 2


one neutral as against another.” The British blockade of
Germany is said to he obnoxious to both these rules.
The doctrine that a blockade must he “ effective,” which is
applied by the Prize Courts both of England and America,
requires that it be maintained by a force sufficient to render
ingress or egress to and from the blockaded port really dangerous,
or, in other words, that no vessel can run the blockade without a
substantial risk of capture. In the days of sail, the blockading
squadron kept in sight of the blockaded port; but such pro-
pinquity could not he required in these days of steam, submarines,
and wireless telegraphy. In the words of an authority, “ Inter-
national Law is not a stagnant body of ancient usage, hut rather
a living body of customs, which preserve their validity by con-
forming to the progress of the world.” The effectiveness of a
blockade must be, in each case, a question of fact, to he determined
by evidence and with regard to all the circumstances.*
The doctrine of the Continuous Voyage.
Modern conditions have modified the practice of blockades in
another important respect. In the wars of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, heavy goods were transported almost
entirely by water along canals or rivers. Railways either did
not exist or were not developed into connecting systems; conse-
quently it was not practicable to land at a neutral port any large
quantity of goods, which were intended for the use of a belli-
gerent, Wow, however, the place of landing may he many miles
distant from the ultimate destination of the goods, and the osten-
sible destination of a neutral port is no guarantee that the
ultimate destination of a cargo is not the country of a belligerent.
These new conditions were beginning to make themselves felt
during the War of Secession, and were first considered by the
Supreme Court of the United States in the well-known case of
“ The Springbok.”
“ The Springbok,” a British ship on a voyage from London to
Nassau, was seized by a United States cruiser and sent in for
adjudication, upon the grounds that she was carrying contraband
and intended to break the blockade by allowing the cargo to he
transhipped at Nassau and sent thence into the Southern States.
The Supreme Court held that the evidence showed that the cargo
was not intended for Nassau, but was intended to be transhipped
there and thence carried on to rebel ports in violation of the
blockade. The voyage was,_ therefore, both in law and according
to the intention of the parties, but one voyage—from London to
blockaded ports—and the cargo was liable to be captured
during any part of the voyage.t Decisions of the Supreme
Court to the same effect were given in the cases of “ The
Bermuda,”* “ The Stephen Hart,”§ and “ The Peterhoff.”||
*See decision of the Supreme Court in The OUnde Rodrigues , 174 U.S .
p. 610.
t (5 Wall, p. 1). t (3 Wall, 315).
§ ( 3 Wall, 559). I (5 Wall, 28):


Great Britain at first protested against tliese decisions and
made them the subject of a claim before the American Claims’
Commission, which was appointed under the Treaty of 1871.
Her claim for the value of the confiscated cargo was unanimously
rejected; and, during the Boer War, England officially accepted
the doctrine of the United States Supreme Court by arresting
German vessels on the ground that cargo which they were carry-
ing to Delagoa Bay was intended, in fact, to be sent, via the
Portuguese Railway, to the Boers.
The official view of Great Britain is expressed quite clearly
by Lord Salisbury,* and is thus summarised by the editor of the
1909 edition of “ Hall’s International Law.”
“ The true view is, as Her Majesty’s Government believe,
correctly stated in paragraph 813 of Professor Bluntschli’s
‘ Droit International Codifie ’ :
“ ‘ If the ships or goods are consigned to a neutral
port, only in order to facilitate (pour niieux veuir en
aide) their delivery to the enemy, they will be contra-
band of war and their seizure will be justified.’ ”
The editor of Mr. Hall’s work points out that the doctrine of
continuous voyage was applied to contraband also by the Italian
Prize Court in 1897.
Sir Edward Grey’s Contention.
If the foregoing argument has been followed, it will be hard
to find a valid answer to the contention in Sir Edward Grey’s
despatch to Mr. Page of July 23rd, 1915, which is in these
words :
“ The difficulties which imposed on the United States the
necessity of re-shaping some of the old rules relating to
blockades and contraband, are somewhat akin to those with
which the Allies are now faced in dealing with the trade of
their enemy. Adjacent to Germany are various neutral
countries, which afford her convenient opportunities for
carrying on her trade with foreign countries. Her own terri-
tories are covered by a network of railways and waterways,
which enable her commerce to pass as conveniently through
ports in such neutral countries as through her own. A
blockade, limited to enemy ports, would leave open routes by
which every kind of German commerce could pass almost as
easily as through the ports in her own territory. Rotterdam
is, indeed, the nearest outlet for some of the industrial
districts of Germany.”
England, however, puts forward no claim to interfere with
goods which are bond fide destined for the use or consumption of
the neutral State, but only with the commerce of the enemy
passing through neutral States, Sir Edward Grey’s despatch
continues:
“If a blockade can only become effective by extending
it to enemy commerce passing through neutral ports, such
* Parliamentary Papers, Africa, No. 1, 1900.


an extension is defensible and in accordance with principles
which have met with general acceptance.”
And this, as the case of “ The Springbok ” shows, is the estab-
lished doctrine of the Supreme Court of the United States from
which- Americans are now being bidden to depart in the interests
of the sinkers of the “ Lusitania.”
Ihe enormous increases in the imports of war material into
Sweden, Holland and Denmark, the figures of which have been
published already, demonstrate that Germany was drawing her
supplies from these neutral countries.
Discrimination.
Itemains to be considered the charge that England’s blockade
discriminates in favour of Holland and the Scandinavian States
as . against America. This has been already so admirably dealt
w ith by Mr. Balfour that little can be added to his answer. It is
true that England cannot stop the trade of Germany and Holland,
Denmark, and Scandinavia, as she can stop the trade of Germany
and Spain or the United States. But as Mr. Balfour says “ This
is not the result of a deliberate policy but of a geographical acci-
dent. It is not due to any desire to favour Scandinavian exporters
as compared with American exporters; and in practice, it will
have no such effect. They are not, nor to any important extent,
can they be competing rivals in the German markets.”
further, England has proved her desire to minimise the injury
to American commerce by permitting the import of her goods
into these neutral countries under a sufficient guarantee that they
will not be re-exported to the enemy. It will be interesting to
learn, when the war is over, how many neutral ships have been
. ca Ptured by German cruisers while carrying these permitted
rmpoits. Nor must it be forgotten (although Heaven forbid that
England should ever justify herself by German example), that
our Orders in Council were an answer to a German declaration of
blockade.
In the words of Mr. Balfour: “ Put shortly the case is this :
Ihe Germans declare they will sink every merchant ship which
they believe to be British without regard to life, without regard to
the ownership of the cargo, without any assurance that the vessel is
not neutral, and without even the pretence of a legal investigation.
The British reply that, if these are to be the methods of warfare
employed by the enemy, the Allies will retaliate by enforcing a
blockade designed to prevent all foreign goods from entering Ger-
many and all German goods from going abroad. We may not
be within the letter of the law of blockade, but can it be said
■with truth that we offend against its spirit? ”
The Blockade and Foodstuffs.
Ihe final appeal of the Germans to the sympathies of the
United States is on behalf of their women and children, whom


(as they allege) England’s blockade deprives of food. This appeal
comes strangely from the poisoners of the desert wells in South
Africa and from those who refuse food to the starving Belgians.
But let that pass. Let us examine the contention on its own
demerits.
We may concede that, in the accepted British view, the with-
holding of provisions from an enemy’s people is, as a rule, un-
justifiable. England wages war, not with women, children, or
non-combatants, but only with the armed forces of the enemy.
But no rule of law or morality compels her to assist her enemies;
and, when once it becomes clear that the importation of food-
stuffs or of any other article of commerce is in fact contributing
to the greater efficiency of the enemy’s armed forces, then these
things become rightly liable to seizure, or—which is the same
thing—may rightly be prevented from reaching the enemy’s
hands. In every case, the question must be one of fact, to be
proved by evidence. For example, in the Napoleonic wars,
England put an embargo on the export of coffee, which is the
national beverage of the French; and thus, in the opinion of
Professor Rose, who is the best historian of the Napoleonic period,
greatly stimulated that general desire for peace which proved
ultimately fatal to her Emperor’s ambitions.
Similarly, it is the nature of the present war which justifies
the British effort to exclude wheat from Germany.
Germany boasts that her armies are “ The Nation in Arms,”
and that every German male is an actual or potential combatant.
And it is beyond doubt that the present war is a war, not of
campaigns, but of exhaustion, in which victory will go to the
Power which can keep its forces longest in the field in superior
strength. This is to say that every male citizen, who is fit for
service in the last resort must be called into the ranks; and thus
the quantum of labour available for civil purposes will be steadily
reduced.
The consequence of this organisation of a whole people for
war is that it becomes difficult, if not impossible, to draw a
line of demarcation between combatants and non-combatants.
The Professors who, after experimenting for three years, devised
the means of using poisonous gas, which is now the favourite
weapon of the Germans, are surely not less “ combatants ” than
the simple soldier who fights with gun and bayonet.
The power of Germany to supply herself with food from her
own resources also must be taken into account in judging
England’s action. England notoriously depends upon her im-
ports of wheat to keep alive her people. Germany, on the con-
trary, supplies herself with food from her own resources. It is
true that she produces only 70 per cent, of her wheat; but wheat
is a luxury with Germans, whose staple grain is rye, and not a
necessity of life as it is in England. To say that England by
prohibiting the imports of wheat is starving non-combatants in
Germany, is to ignore the facts. The great majority of German
non-combatants can live now exactly as they lived before the war
»—upon grain which is produced in Germany,


Suppose the situation were reversed, and that Germany could
import whatever foodstuffs she desired, one result would be that
none of the civilians—all of whom, it must be remembered, in the
last resort, must be called into the fighting field—need devote
their energies to tilling the soil or gathering the harvest. All
the wants of the nation could be supplied by importation from
the United States, and the fighting forces of Germany would be
increased by thousands of soldiers.
To urge these simple considerations, implies no want of sym-
pathy with the sufferings of German non-combatants; but where
the grievance is greatest, sympathy is most apt to be misleading.
The German people may be suffering from want of food—
although this is not proved yet—but they have the remedy in
their own hands. Let enough men be withdrawn from the
fighting forces to cultivate the fields of Germany as they were
cultivated in time of peace and German non-combatants will have
no lack of food; but while Germany turns her cultivators of the
soil into soldiers, she has neither a legal nor a moral right to
demand that England shall supply her with the products, which
these soldiers would have produced, if they had continued at
work in their fields.
