

pCTH POm
o^-
3 014 <4
ftoa O
QXJ i: ENSLAN L>.
ACTS AND REGULATIONS
RELATING TO THE
WASTE LANDS
OF THE
COLONY OF QUEENSLAND,
TOGETHER WITH
AN EXPLANATORY DIGEST OF “THE LAND ACT OF 1876."
BRISBANE;
AUTHORITY : J. C. BEAL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
1877.




QUEENSLAND. 1
ACTS AND REGULATIONS
RELATING TO THE
WASTE LAJSTDS
OE THE
COLONY OF QUEENSLAND,
TOGETHER WITH
AN EXPLANATORY DIGEST OP “ THE LAND ACT OF 1876.”’
BRISBANE:
AUTHORITY : J. C. BEAL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
1877.




PREFACE.
In consequence of recent alterations in the Land Laws, it has been
deemed desirable to republish all the Acts and Regulations relating to
the sale and occupation of the public lands of the Colony in a collected
form, so that the whole series may be accessible to the public in
a shape that will enable any person who maj r require information on
special points to obtain it without the delay and inconvenience of
being obliged to search the Government Gazette or the Statute Rook
for what is required.
An explanatory digest, slightly amended, of the Land Act of
1876, which has been written and published by Mr. W. H. Traill, has
been included in this pamphlet, and will furnish useful information to
persons desirous of selecting land in this Colony. In this portion of
the pamphlet will be found particulars of the lauds now open to
selection.
A very copious Index, arranged alphabetically, is appended to
this pamphlet, which, under the headings of the several Acts of
Parliament, will furnish particulars of the procedure, in almost every
•transaction under their provisions, in which the public are interested.
Depaetment of Public Lands,
Reisbane, 2nd May, 1877.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
MO. CONTENTS, PAG*.
1 Inteoductoby Statement and Digest 7
2 “ The Cbown Lands Alienation Act op 1876” ... 25
3 Regulations 73
4 Insteuctions to Commissionees 102
5 Land Agents’ Distbicts 106
6 Notices 116
7 “ The Settled Distbicts Pastobal Leases Act of 1876” 118
8 “ The Pastobal Leases Act of 1869 ” 123
9 Regulations 144
10 “ The Mineeal Lands Act of 1872” 164
11 Regulations..: 173
12 “The Westebn Railway Act” 186
13 “The Railway Reseeyes Act” 190
» '


.STtlsi'i noo r io


EXPLANATION
OF THE
CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1876.
. :i! ■; ' i IO • ■ 1 <“■
♦
The following explanation of the Land Act of 1876 departs
somewhat out of the beaten track, and the arrangement of the points,
successively considered, deviates very widely from that adopted in the
Act. The endeavor has been to follow what would naturally arise in
the mind of an intending selector in the same succession, and with that
view we commence with—
I. —What lands are available.
ll.—Who may select.
111. —How they may select.
IV. —What they will have to pay.
Y.—What conditions they must observe.
I.—WHAT LANDS ABE AVAIL OLE.
The following are the areas open to conditional purchase selection
within each of the so-called Settled Districts of the colony, under
“ The Grown Lands Alienation Act of 1868,” at the time of its
repeal: —
Settled District. Land Agent’s District. • Acres.
E. Moreton ... ... ... Brisbane... ;;; ... 340,800
„ ... ut Beenleigh • ..; ... 158,720
W. Moreton ... .;. Ipswich ... ..; ... 486,181
„ ... ;.. Helidon ;;; . ... 267,120
„ ... ;;; NanangO;;; ... ... 81,044
Darling Downs Toowoomba ... ... 138,120
Warwick-” ... ... 146,400
„ Dalby 129,180
Wide Bay and Burnett ... Maryborough .... ... 742,640
„ „ ... Gympie ... 1,157,175
„ „ .;. Bundaberg ... ... 580,500
Port Curtis ... ... ... Bockhampton ... ... 1,576,300
„ Gladstone ... ... 1,137,261
„ ... ... St. Lawrence ■.’.*. ... 236,749
Kennedy V.*. Matkay "* ... 160,000
„ ... Bowen v.‘. ... ... 650,000
„ ... Townsville V.V ... 1,376,800
„ .., Cardwell** ‘.*.*. ... 69,826
Cook" ... ■;.*. Cairns *** ... 2,110,000
j, ... *;.*. Cook town' ‘.V. ... 4,640,000
„ ~ ..7 (Not included in any
Land Agent’s District) 8,947,000
Burke Normanton ... ... 4,367,640
Total „ 29,489,456


The above have been proclaimed open to selection under “ The Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1876,” at an upset price of ss. per acre; and
the maximum area allowed to be selected is fixed at 5,120 acres. The
lands south of Cape Tribulation, in the Cairns district, are, however,
classed at 10s. per acre; and the maximum allowed to be selected is
limited to 1,280 acres. This course is adopted in order to prevent the
monopoly of large areas of lands suitable for the cultivation of sugar.
Also, the upset price of lands within the railway reserves —of which
there is an uualienated area of 90,000 acres —is fixed at 10s. per acre.
In addition to the above, there are the unselected lands within
homestead areas, proclaimed under “ The Homestead Act of 1872.”
These lands are open to selection under the Act of 1876 at various
upset prices, as proclaimed on the Ist March, 1877.
The gross area open in each of the Land Agents’ districts is as
follows :
Brisbane 90,190 acres.
Ipswich ... ... ... ... ... 92,550 „
Helidon 50,000 „
Toowoomba ... 6,578
Warwick 22,100
Dalby 6,240 „
Bundaberg ... 27.020 „
Eockhampton 56,150 ~
St. Lawrence 11,497 „
Gladstone ... ... ... ... ... 48.650 „
48.650
Gympie 26,000
... ... ... ~, ...
Cardwell 49,920 „
Mackay ... ... 31,000 „
Stanthorpe ... ... 53,620 „
Eoma ... ... 11,810 „
Goondiwindi ... ... ... ... 14,000 „
Total 597,325
There are also the unselected country lands within the following
town reserves, viz.:—
Condamine* 25.000 acres.
Clermont ... ... ... ... ... 235,000 „
Goondiwindi ... 9,160 „
St. George 21,000 „
Surat* ... ... 9,000 „
Springsure 23.000 „
Eoma* ... 12.600 „
Gayndah . 14,000 „
u aj iiuau • • • M , ••• ••• ••• i
Pikedale ... ... 29,400 „
Stanthorpe ... ... 20,000 „
Total ... ... 398,160 „
Which are also open under the Act of 1876 at 10s. per acre; maximum
area allowed to be selected, 2,560 acres.
• Within Western Bail way Reserve.


Nanango
413,520 acres
Gympie
Maryborough
327,840 „
103,740 „
Bundaberg ...
303,310 „
Stanthorpe ...
753,600 „
Total
1,902,010 „
The three classes of lands above specified are as follows :
1. The lands open to general selection at
the time of the repeal of Act of 1868,
and now open under Act of 1876 ... 29,489,453 acres.
2. Unselected lands in the homestead
areas, proclaimed under “ Homestead
Act of 1872,” and now open to selec-
tion under Act of 1876
597,325
3. Unselected country lands with town
reserves
398,160
30,484,941
This area of 30,484,941 acres includes all the lands which, under
the provisions of the Act of 1876, continue to be open to selection
without special proclamation, further than declaring the upset price
and maximum area allowed to be selected, which has been done by
various proclamations on the Ist March last.
Lands declared open to selection under “ The Grown Lands Alienation
Act 0/1876.”
The lands proclaimed for the first time open to conditional selec-
tion under the Act of 1876, are the lands resumed from runs in the
Unsettled Districts of Darling Downs and Burnett, and the Settled
District of Wide Bay and Burnett, comprised within the Land Agents’
districts of Maryborough, Gympie, and Bundaberg.
The following areas were declared open to conditional selection in
the Land Agents’ districts hereunder specified on the 17th April,
1877:
The upset price of these lands is fixed at 10s. per acre, and the
maximum area allowed to be selected is 5,120 acres.
Portions of the lands resumed from runs in the Settled Districts
of Moreton, Darling Downs, and Wide Bay and Burnett, have been set


apart as homesteads, and were also proclaimed open, to selection in
April. The areas in each district are as follows :
Land Agents’ District. Acres.
Brisbane ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,900
. Ipswich ... ... ... ... ... ••• 200,840
Helidon ... ... ... ... ... ... 46,700
Nanango ... ... ... ... ... ... 33,000
Warwick ... ... ... ... ... ... 52,800
Toowoomba ... ... ... ... ... ... 103,800
Dalby... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 63,800
Gyrapie ... ... ... ... ... ••• 93,120
Maryborough ... ... ... ... ... 73,750
Bundaberg ... ... ... ... ... 123,140
Total "... 833,850
These lands are proclaimed open at-different upset prices, accord-
ing to the situation and character of the land. In the Darling Downs
district the upsets range from 10s. to 40s. per acre; in West Moreton,
from 15s. to 255.; in East Moreton, from 10s. to 155.; in Wide Bay
and Burnett, the price is fixed at 10s.
Recapitulation.
Lands open to selection at time of repeal of Act of 1868.
Acres.
Conditional Selection ... ... 29,489,456
Homested Areas ... ... ... ... 597,325
Town Reserves ... 398,160
30,484.941
Lands proclaimed for the frst time under the Act of 1876.
Conditional Selection ... ... ... ... 1,902,010
Homestead Areas ... 833,850 ~
2.735,860
. :,■)
Total area open to selection 33,220,801
The expression “ Country Lands ” occurs in the preceding, and
it may be as well to explain what it meant.
Section 9 makes the following distinctions: —
Town Lands. —All lands which have been heretofore, or shall
hereafter be, proclaimed as town lands.
Suburban Lands.—All lands within two miles, in a straight line,
from any town lands. ’ i : /C
Country Lands.—All other lands.
lI.—WHO MAY SELECT.
Anyone —male or female —who is at least eighteen years of age,
and does not already hold lands under lease.


Excepting married women, aliens, persons not resident in Queens-
land, agents, servants or trustees for any other person with respect to
such land, and individuals who may have entered into any agreement
to hand over the land to others (sec. 27).
Also, lessees of land under conditional purchase, under the Act
of 1868, who hold less than the maximum allowed by this new Act,
may make up the difference from land adjoining their selections under
the Act of 1868 (sec. 23-4).
The boundaries of the combined selections must, however, be such
as would be allowed for a single selection (sec. 24),
Either homestead or conditional selectors under the Acts of 1868
and 1876, or who have personally resided on their selections for a year,
may make up their area to the maximum permitted by the new Act
by taking up one additional conditional selection (sec. 25). In this
case the land need not adjoin the former holding.
Homestead selectors under previous Acts or this Act may make
up their area to the maximum permitted for homesteads under section
50 of this Act, from adjoining lands only, hut homestead selectors in
homestead areas cannot apply for conditional purchase selections under
section 24 of the Act, nor can a person hold both a homestead and a
conditional purchase within a homestead area at the same time. A
selector can only hold one selection except under the provisions of
sections 24 or 25 of the Act.
lII.—HOW PERSONS MAY SELECT.
There are five different ways in which selections can be obtained.
(a.) A selector may obtain, by conditional purchase, not more
than 5,120 acres, and not less than 40 acres. But the Act
provides that in any district the maximum area one selector
can secure may be limited by proclamation to less than
5,120 acres, but not to less than 610 acres (sec. 23).
(b.) By conditional purchase, within a homestead area (sec. 38.)
A special condition is attached to conditional selections within
homestead areas —viz., the selector must himself reside on the land
continuously till the condition of residence shall have been accom-
plished (sec. 38, sub-sec. 2). Respecting this subject of fulfilment of
conditions, it shall be treated fully in its proper place.
(c.) By simple homestead selection.
A homestead may be taken up anywhere where land is open for
selection (sec. 39). Outside a homestead area, the extent which may
be selected is 160 acres (sec. 40). In case of two or more applications
—conditional and homestead —being lodged simultaneously, the home-
stead will be reckoned to have been first received, and will take
precedence (sec. 17). No minimum appears to be fixed by the Act.
A homestead selector not within a homestead area can select adjoining
land so as to bring up his area to 160 acres.


{d.) By homestead selection within a homestead area.
The greatest area a homestead selector can acquire within a home-
stead area is SO acres {sec. 4u). He can take less if he chooses. In
fact the Act appears to fix no minimum, so that a man can take a
single acre if he likes. An applicant for a homestead must make a
declaration that he or she is the head of a family or 18 years of age,
and selects for himself or herself. Persons who already hold home-
steads under previous Acts may select adjoining lands within a home-
stead area, but the old and the new selection must not together include
more than 80 acres {sec. 41-30).
Persons selecting a homestead under this Act may select a second
of adjoining land in a homestead area, so long as the two combined do
not exceed 80 acres {sec. 41-50).
Ho person will be permitted to hold two detached homesteads
{sec. 50).
Residence on the original homestead selection will suffice for the
additional adjoining homestead (sec. 50).
(e.) Selection by Volunteers’ Land Orders.
Such selections may be made within homestead areas.
Volunteers can select 50 acres country lands or 10 acres suburban.
The land so selected will not be subject to any conditions of
residence or of improvement {sec. 37).
But if the same land be simultaneously applied for as homestead
or conditional purchases, these latter shall have precedence {reg. 15).
Proceedings in connection with Applications to Select.
Porms of application can be obtained at any Land Office.
The declaration attached to forms of application must be signed
and sworn before a magistrate by the applicant himself.
The form of application must be lodged in duplicate.
The application may be lodged either by the selector in person, or
by his duly constituted attorney. Either one or the other must sign
the Register of Applications.
To constitute a duly constituted attorney, a regular form of
power of attorney will be required. Such power may contain authority
to withdraw and receive refundment.
Every application form must contain a clear description of the
locality and boundaries of the laud applied for, and also state whether
it is surveyed or unsurveyed {sec. 17).
One-tenth part of the upset price, together with the survey fee,
must be handed to the Land Agent at the same time as the applica-
tion {sec. 17).
On surveyed lands, one-half the sum of the separate survey fees
on each portion will be charged, unless the amount should be less than
the regular scale (reg. 6).
Applications will have precedence (except as per next paragraphs)
according to the time of their receipt {sec. 17).


If two or more applicants are present at the time of opening
of the Land Agent’s Office, their applications will be considered to be
simultaneous. But Homestead applications will be considered prior
to Conditional applications, and Volunteer Land Order applications
will be considered to be later than either (sec. 17, reg. 15).
At the Land Couet, when the applications come on for con-
sideration, the applicant or his attorney must be present or the appli-
cation will be rejected, and a fine of 20s. deducted from the deposit
when same is refunded (regs. 3 and 4).
Simultaneous applications for the same land will be settled by
auction at the court sitting. The bidding will be started at one-tenth
the upset price at which the land was proclaimed opened (sec. 17,
reg. 7).
Simultaneous applications, not for the whole but for parts of the
same laud, will be dealt with by first offering the area comprised in the
greatest number of applications and then the area comprised in the
next greatest number, and so on as often as may be necessary to
determine the rights of the several applicants (reg. 8).
The advance at each bid must be not less than one half-penny per
acre per annum (reg. 9).
The successful bidder will have to pay at once the balance on
account of higher rent.
In case of any dispute, or of the successful bidder failing to pay
the difference in price, the land will be re-submitted to auction, and in
the latter case it will be among the other applicants (reg. 7).
The Commissioner may examine, on oath, any applicant or other
person before dealing with an application (sec. 12, reg. 5).
The Commissioner will declare the acceptance or rejection of
application in open court (sec. 12, reg. 2).
Withdrawals of applications on the grounds of the description not
including the land intended, may, on application to the Commissioner,
be allowed at the option of the Minister; and if approved, the rent
deposited less 20 per cent., and the survey fee will be refunded, unless
the Government, has been put to expense in carrying out the survey
(reg. 10).
The Land Agents will give receipts for all moneys paid in by
applicants (reg. 21).
IV—WHAT SELECTORS WILL HAVE TO PAY.
(a.) On simple Conditional Selection.
(A) On Conditional Selections within a Homestead Area,
(c.) On Simple Homesteads.
(d.) On Homesteads within a Homestead Area.
(e.) For Survey.
(f.) For Deed of Grant.
(g.) For Road Closure.
(h.) For Improvements.


In all cases when two or more applications for any land are lodged
at the same time, an application for it as a homestead will have priority
over an application fora conditional purchase (sec. 17).
If two or more homestead applications, or two or more conditional
purchase applications, be made at the same time, then the homestead
selectors will have to bid against one another, commencing at the
upset price fixed by the Act or by proclamation, and wdioever offers
the largest payment per annum will get the land. Conditional pur-
chasers will, in like case, have to compete among themselves in the
same way (sec. 17).
(a.) Payment on simple Conditional Selection.
(A) Payment on a Conditional Selection in a Homestead Area.
In these two cases the requirements with respect to payments will
be identical.
The price per acre will be fixed by proclamation when the land is
thrown open, and will not be less than five shillings per acre (sec. 15).
Every application must be accompanied by one-tenth part of the
upset price, together with the survey fee.
If there should be competition for the land, and the price be run
up by auction by the applicants, the highest bidder shall at once pay
for the first year whatever extra amount he may have bid (sec. 17,
reg. 7).
There will be ten annual payments, each equal to the first year’s
payment, but as will be seen when we treat of conditions, under certain
circumstances the last seven instalments may be paid in a lump at the
end of the third year (sec. 28, suh-secs. 1,2, 3, and 7).
(c.) Payments on Simple Homesteads.
(d.) Payments on Homesteads within a Homestead Area.
In these two cases also the mode of payment will be identical.
There will be five annual payments at the rate of 6d. per acre, or
at such higher rate as shall have been bid at auction.
Thus, if there has been no competition, a homestead selector gets
his land for half-a-crown an acre in five sixpenny payments; but if
another applicant for a homestead has lodged a simultaneous appli-
cation, and run up the price at auction, he may have to pay a higher
rent.
On all classes of selections, the second and subsequent year’s
rents will have to be paid on or before the 31st March following the
date of selection, and such second payment will be proportionate to
the number of clear months intervening between a year after the date
of selection and the 31st of March then next succeeding (sec. 42,
re - 1 )* .
A list of the rents payable on selections is published as early in
March as possible in each year. This will supply every necessary
information.


(<?.) For Surveys.
The fees for survey, which must in all cases be paid at the time
of application, in cash, are as follow :
£ d.
Under 1 acre ... 012 0
1 acre and under 5 acres ... 0 18 0
5 acres and under 10 acres ... ... ... 1 12 0
10 acres and under 15 acres ... ... ... 1 18 0
15 acres and under 20acres ... 2 4 0
20 acres and under 30 acres ... 2 12 0
30 acres and under 40 acres ... ... ... 2 18 0
40 acres and under 60 acres ... ... ... 3 8 0
60 acres and under 80 acres ... ... ... 3 16 0
80 acres and under 120 acres ... ... ... 412 0
120 acres and under 160 acres ... 5 4 0
160 acres and under 240 acres ... 5 16 0
240 acres and under 320 acres ... ... ... 6 4 0
320 acres and under 48C acres ... ... ... 7 0 0
480 acres and under 640 acres ... 7 18 0
640 acres ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 0 0
and for every 640, or part of 640, after the first 640 acres, £4 addi-
tional {sec. 17, reg. 24, schedule Q).
(f) For Deed of Grant.
This is a payment not required until the selector desires to secure
the fee-simple.
Deed fees will have to be paid before the preparation of the deed,
together with contribution to the assurance fund under the Heal
Property Act of 1861 {sec. 81).
The contributions under the Eeal Property Act (Schedule E.)
are: —
For every certificate of title or registration
abstract ... ... ... £1 0 0
For every certificate of title issued to proprietor
for balance of land left upon a transfer of
portion of the land included under a former
grant or certificate of title ... 010 0
The deed fees payable on making application for a deed of grant
will be—
£ s. d.
Not exceeding 50 acres 1 2 6
Not exceeding 100 acres ... ... ... ... 1 1 0
Not exceeding 500 acres ... ... 1 15 0
Not exceeding 1,000 acres 2 10 0
and for every additional 240 acres or part of 240 after the first 1,000
acres, £1 {sec. 81, reg. 16).
(y.) For Closure of Eoads.
A fee of £1 must accompany applications for closure of roads
{reg. 16).


(A.) For Improvements.
Selectors will have to pay at tlie time of application the value of
improvements upon the land according to their own estimate, and
any further sum determined by appraisement will have to be paid
within sixty days of the value having been arrived at. In the case of
lands held under the provisions of *‘ The Settled Districts Pastoral
Leases Act of 1876 ” the selector is required to pay the value of the
improvements, as settled by arbitration, to the pastoral lessee of the
run ( sec. 22, reg. 12).
Y.—WHAT CONDITIONS SELECTORS MUST OBSERVE.
Under this heading we will first dispose of such conditions as
must be observed at the time of selection, and by all classes of
selectors alike, except volunteers selecting with their land orders.
In lodging an application to select, persons must make a
declaration before a justice of the peace that they are of the full age
of eighteen years; that they select the laud for their own use, and
not as trustee for any other person; and that they are properly
entitled to select such land in addition to their previous holding
{secs. 27-41).
Frontage. —Land selected before survey, and having frontage to
any main road or watercourse, shall not have greater frontage than —
for selections not exceeding 160 acres, half the depth of such lands ;
exceeding 160 acres but not 320 acres, two-thirds of the depth;
exceeding 320 acres, whole depth {sec. 18).
Shape of Selection. —The boundaries of selections, where not
fronting roads or natural features, must be right-angled, and run
north, south, east, and west —unless the Survey Department have
adopted some other general bearing for that portion of the country
where the selection is situated {sec. 18).
Survey. —lf the Government surveyor shall not have surveyed
a selection within three months from the date of the selection being
approved, the selector may apply to have his survey fee repaid by the
Land Agent, and if the survey is not made fourteen days after that, he
may employ a licensed surveyor to make the survey. On approval of
the completed survey, the fee will be refunded (sec. 19).
Existing Improvements. —Selectors will have to pay for any
improvements which may be on the land at the time of selection.
The value may be fixed by agreement, or, failing agreement, by arbi-
tration (secs. 22-82, regs. 12, 22-3, and sub-sections 8 and 9, of
sec. 4 of “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leasts Act of 187o”_).
CoNHITIONS AFTER SELECTION.
On Conditional Purchases.
We can deal with both simple conditional purchases and conditional
purchases in a homestead area together by first simply noting the one
only distinction as regards conditions, w hich we have already pointed
out.


On a Conditional Purchase in a Homestead Area.
The selector may h imself continuously and honestly reside, and no
substitute or bailiff will be allowed (sec. 38).
On a Simple Conditional Purchase.
The selector must provide for continuous and bond fide residence,
but such residence may be performed either by himself or by bailiff,
only such bailiff must be truly in the selector’s employment, and not
in the employment of any other person in connection with occupation
of the land, and must also be himself a person who would be com-
petent to make a conditional selection under the Act. Further, the
agreement of such bailiff, to serve the lessee, must be in writing, and a
copy registered in the office of the Land Commissioner (sec. 28, sub-
section 4, rep. 11),
This point having been disposed of, the remaining conditions apply
equally to both descriptions of Conditional Purchases,
Improvements. —During the term of the lease—that is, ten
years—the selector must spend, in substantial and permanent improve-
ments on the land, a sum equal to the whole of the purchase money;
only he need not spend more than ten shillings per acre (sec. 28, sub-
sec. 6).
Thus, supposing land were opened to selection at five shillings per
acre, and was run up at auction by competing selectors to seven
shillings and sixpence per acre, the person who secured it at that
price would have to spend in improvements a sum equal to seven
shillings and sixpence per acre. Bay there were 1,000 acres in the
selection, he would have to spend 1,000 times 7s. 6d.—that is, £375.
But if the land were run up to 15s. per acre, he would not have to
spend in improvements 1,000 times 15s. but only 1,000 times 10s. —
that is to say, £5OO.
Briefly, should the selection be obtained at anything less than ten
shillings per acre, the selector would only have to spend in improve-
ments as much as the land cost; but no matter how much more than
ten shillings per acre he bad to pay for the land he would only have to
spend ten shillings per acre in improvements.
What will be Accepted as Improvements. —The Act states
very clearly what will be allowed to pass as improvements, viz., houses
of all kinds, whether residences, stores, stables, or barns, &c.; yards,
fences, wells, and other water storage, clearing, cultivation, plantation
of trees or artificial grasses, ring-barking ; and “ any building, erec-
tion, construction, or appliance, being a fixture” (sec. 1).
Certificates, Transfers, and Mortgages.
Certificates. —Any time after three years from confirmation, if
the lessee shall prove to the satisfaction of the Commissioner in open
court that he has resided up to the present time, and has already
expended the full amount required in the whole ten years for improve-
ments, he can obtain a certificate of fulfilment of conditions (sec. 28,
sub-sec. 7).


A selector who intends to apply for a certificate must give notice
to the Commissioner ten clear days before the court sitting at which
the application will be made, and must also give notice in each local
paper in the district. The application will be heard in open court,
and evidence on oath taken if necessary for or against its being
granted. The decision will also be announced in open court (sec. 51,
reg. 13).
When he has obtained such certificate, if he chooses to pay up the
balance of his rents in a lump sum, together with the deed and
assurance fees, and can prove that up to the time of quaking such
payment he has continued to observe the conditions of residence, he can
claim his deed of grant, and be from that moment free from all
conditions, and absolute owner of the land (sec. 28, sub-sec. 8).
Transfer. —If, however, after obtaining his certificate he does
not care to pay up, but wants to transfer the land, he can, by paying
a fee of ten shillings, transfer it, provided the Minister for Lands
approves. But he can only transfer to some person who would him-
self be competent to take up a conditional purchase (vide ll.—Who
May Select), and the person to whom the selection is transferred will
have to continue to perform the condition of residence instead of the
original selector (sec. 28, sub-sec. 9),
Mortgage. —After the certificate is obtained there is another
way in Avhich the selector may transfer, namely, to a mortgagee, or to
any person as a trustee of a marriage or other family settlement
After such a transfer the Act (section 32) says the conditions of occu-
pation (residence) may be performed by the mortgagor —that is. the
original selector —or by the persons beneficially interested in the land
under the settlement, or by any of them, as the case may be (sec. 32).
This section is not very clear, so it is given word for word.
Death of a Selector. —Should the selector die during the
currency of the lease, his heir will not be held down to conditions
except payment, but can Only transfer or sell the land to a person
who could himself take up a conditional purchase. And such second
person, on getting a transfer of the land, will have to fulfil the con-
ditions of residence and improvement, just as if he had been the
original selector (sec. 31).
Insolvency and Debt. —Conditional purchases under this Act
are not liable to seizure for debt, except in case the selector becomes
insolvent. In such case the trustee in insolvency, can within two
years from the insolvency, on proving that the conditions have been
fulfilled, pay up the balances of rents and deed fee, and obtain a grant
(secs. 31—35).
Expiration of Term. —Finally, if a selector chooses to spread
the fulfilment of conditions over the whole ten years, he must, within
six months after the ten years have expired, proved his right to a
certificate, and he can then take out his deed of grant.


Conditions which must be Fulfilled by Homestead
Selectors. —There is no distinction made in this manner betwixt
simple homesteads and homesteads within a homestead area. The
following conditions apply to both: —
Residence must be maintained personally, continuously, and
bond fide, for five years (sec. 43).
Improvements must be effected to the value of ten shillings per
acre. The description of improvements already given
applies to homesteads (sec. 43).
Death. —ln the case of the death of a homestead selector, the
land will pass to his heir by will; or if he has made no will, to his
widow; if no widow, to his children in equal shares; and if no
children, to his next of kin (sec. 45).
Such successor may, within two years after the original selector’s
death, sell the land, and in the meantime will not be required to
observe any conditions (sec. 45).
The purchaser can pay up the balance of rents and take out a
grant without fulfilling any conditions (sec. 45).
But if the land is not sold within two years from the death of the
selector, the heir, or successor, or one of them, will have to reside
{sec. 46).
Transfers or Mortgages. —There is no provision in the Act for
anything of the sort with regard to homesteads.
Insolvency and Debt. —ln no case can a homestead be taken
in execution, or pass to a trustee in insolvency during the currency
of the five years (sec. 40)
Forfeiture. —lf the lessee of a conditional purchase fails to get
his certificate by the end of his term, or such other time as the Com-
missioner may allow, he will forfeit both land and improvement (sec.
28, sub-sec. 11).
But this is not the only way he may subject himself to forfeiture.
If any selector, conditional or homestearl, fail to pay his rent at the
proper time in any year (31st March) he forfeits his selection, but
may recover it by paying up the rent and a fine of one-tenth more
before the 30th of June following. Even after that the Governor-in-
Council may reinstate him, subject to any penalty which he may think
proper to charge (sec. 28, sub-sec. 2, sec. 42).
Failure to comply with the conditions of occupation or residence
for six months will, if proved, render a selection liable to forfeiture.
(sec. 28, sub-sec. 5, sec. 47).
No forfeiture, except for non-payment of rent will be declared
until after a written notice has been served (personally, or by post)
upon the selector; and such notice will state the alleged cause of
forfeiture, and call upon the selector to show cause against it at the
next court sitting (sec. 52).
Sales by Auction. —The Act empowers the Government to offer
anv unalienated lands for sale by auction (sec. 53).


Town lots are to be offered, as near as possible, in lots o£ from
one rood to one acre; suburban lands within a mile from town lots,
one acre to eight acres; suburban lands over one mile from town lots
40 acres to 160 acres; and country lands in lots of from 40 acres to
640 acres {sec. 54).
The time and place of sale, and also the upset price —which will
not be less than, for town lands £8 per acre, for suburban lauds £1
per acre, and for country lands 10s. per acre, but may be higher —
shall be proclaimed not less than four weeks, and not more than three
months before the sale {sec. 55-6).
The Minister can withdraw lots any time prior to the sale (sec. 55).
Special conditions may be attached to the sale of any particular
lot (sec. 55).
.As each lot is sold, the name of the purchaser shall be announced,
and thereupon the buyer will have to deposit one-fifth of the purchase
money (sec. 58).
The balance of the purchase money, together with value of im-
provements, if any, and the deed and survey fee, must be paid to the
Land Agent within a month, otherwise the deposit will be forfeited,
and the bidder will have no further claim to the land (sec. 59).
The Government may direct that the value of improvements be
paid to their owner direct (sec. 61).
Country lands which shall have been offered at auction, and not
bid for, will be open to selection by purchase, at the upset price (sec.
62).
In proclaiming lands for sale, the Government may make the last
clause apply also to any town or suburban lands (sec. 63).
Special Grants. —Any lands which have fallen in, or may fall in,
to the State through any exchange, want of heirs, or forfeiture for
felony, &c., may be granted in fee-simple, after notice of intention to
grant has been advertised for two months in the Government Gazette ,
to any intended heir, &c., or to any person making discovery of such
escheat or forfeiture (sec. 64).
Roads. —Unnecessary roads may be closed on application, after
due notice has been given in the Government Gazette, and if the
Minister thinks proper, in local papers, and after a similar notice has
been conspicuously posted on the road to be closed, at the nearest
Police Office, Land Office, and Post Office, for not less than two, or
more than six months. A fee of £1 must accompany the application
to close (sec. 65, rey. 18).
If the application be for permanent closure, the owner or owners of
the adjoining lands will receive rateably their proportion of the land in
the road in fee-simple if the closure be approved, on payment at such
rate as the Government think reasonable, not being less than the
original upset price of such adjoining lands (sec. 66).
If the application be for temporary closure, adjoining owners will
receive licenses to occupy rateably at Is. per acre yearly instead of fee-
simple.


Such license will be forfeited on failure to pay the rent, or may
be cancelled after six months’ notice given to the licensees by the
Government (sec. 66).
Sales without Competition.— These are provided for in two
cases. First, where persons in a new town or village have made
improvements and make application within twelve months of the pro-
clamation of the first sale within such town or village. In such case
the owners of the improvements may, if the Government consent,
purchase the allotments upon which they stand, at the upset price or
at a higher fair value. Secondly, in cases where a means of approach
to any holding is wanting, or where any portion of land is too small
for public sale, or where buildings on lands already alienated may have
extended over Crown Lands adjoining, the holder of adjoining land
may be permitted to purchase such lands without competition at a
price fixed by the authorities (secs. 67-68).
Re-puechase oe Exchange. —The Government are empowered
to acquire by purchase or exchange any land required for public or
other purposes, paying also for improvements (sec. 69).
Leases foe Special Pueposes may be granted in areas not
exceeding 5 acres. Eor instance, for wharves, ship-slips, baths, water
or gas-works, &c. (sec. 70).
The term of lease shall not exceed twenty-one years, and the
annual rent not less than £1 per acre. Such leases may be cancelled
after six months’ notice, and on payment of the value of improve-
ments.
Coal Mining Licenses may be granted on Reserves on such
terms as the Government may see fit to require (sec. 71).
Commons. —Any unsold lands may be proclaimed a common on a
petition by not less than thirty freeholders resident in any township
for lands adjoining to be so dealt with, provided that no counter-
petition more numerously signed be received by the Government
within sixty days after the first shall have been notified in the
Government Gazette (sec. 72).
A commonage shall in no case exceed 20 square miles, and may
be less of area. Any part of a common may be sold, and the Gov-
ernment may add on an area equal to the portion sold (secs. 73-4).
The Governor in Council may make commonage regulations
subject to the conditions (sec. 75).
1. That commonage rights shall belong only to residents in the
town or district to which the common is attached.
2. Depasturage of sheep and of male animals over six months
old prohibited except under special conditions.
3. Payment to be made for cattle not less than 2s. per head
yearly, and no one person to run more than twenty head on
the same common.
Non.—For further particulars re Commons, vide the “Commons Regulations,” page 85 of this
pamphlet.


But lona fide travellers —who shall proceed at least four miles in
one direction daily, unless detained by floods—may depasture their
horses, bullocks, or other stock on a commonage.
A commonage attached to a municipality may be placed under
the control of the council, who may make regulations, subject to above
conditions (sec. 7 6).
Timber. Licenses, &c. —Licenses may be granted by any Land
Commissioner for a year or less, empowering persons to cut and take
timber, dig and remove gravel, stone, earth, bricks, shells, or other
material, from any Crown lands, whether under pastoral lease or not.
But licensees shall not work within two miles of any head station,
except by consent of the owner.
Any pastoral lessee may object to the granting of any license,
and the Government will decide to grant or withhold.
Any pastoral lessee may, by written notice to any licensee, restrict
him from working in any specified area on a run not exceeding 1,000
acres. Licensee may appeal to the Commissioner, but unless that
officer shall have given his decision in favor of the licensee, the latter
must observe the restriction for a month. If he disregards it during
that time, or such longer time as the Commissioner shall decide that
the restriction shall have force, he renders himself liable to a penalty
not exceeding £2O (sec. 77).
Reserves. —Reserves may be set apart by the Government for
any public purpose, and may be placed under the charge of trustees,
who may make bye-laws for the management of such trust (sec. 6).
Rescindment of Reservations. —The Government may, by
proclamation, rescind any reservation of Crown lands as town lands,
suburban lands, or as reserves, and from the date of such proclama-
tion the lands affected shall be deemed country lands. But if any
lands shall have been sold as town lands within any area so dealt with,
all water reserves and streets or roads shall be still reserved. The
streets or roads may, however be subsequently closed and sold in the
regular way (sec. 83).
Surveys —Will be effected by duly licensed surveyors only.
Negligence in executing a survey, or any false statement or false
measurement, will render surveyors liable to cancellation of their
license.
The fees for survey of selections to be paid at the time applica-
tion is made to select are given at pages 15, 61, and 85.
Appraisement and Arbitration. —In case of questions 'in
dispute between any selector and the Minister, which are not provided
for in the Act itself, a single arbitrator or appraiser will suffice if all
parties agree to abide by his sole decision. Otherwise either party
may appoint his own appraiser or arbitrator, and give notice to the
other party. If the other party fails to appoint an arbitrator or
[Note.— For further particulars re Timber Licenses, &c., see “ Regulations,” page 91 of this pamphlet.


appraiser on his behalf within thirty days of receiving such notice, the
single arbitrator shall have power to determine the matter alone
(sec. 82, Reg. 22).
Opening or Hoads. —Within ten years from the date of applica-
tion to select any land the Government may open any necessary road
through it, giving the holder of the land resumed £2 for every £1 he
shall have paid for the actual area taken from him, and also paying the
value of improvements (to be arrived at by arbitration).
When such a road is opened through enclosed land the Govern-
ment will have to fence off the road with a fence equally serviceable
with the one enclosing the land.
Until such fencing has been effected and notice has been given in
the Government Gazette that the amount of compensation for land
resumed has been paid to the land owner, or lies for him at the
Treasury, no final proclamation opening the road shall issue {sec. 84).
Fencing—The provisions of the Fencing Act of 18C1 are made
to apply to all lands selected under this Act, and after confirmation
such lands will be considered for the purpose of the Fencing Act to
be alienated, and the selector reckoned the owner of the land
{sec. 85).
Impounding. —No stock shall be impounded from any selection
under this Act, or under the Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868,
unless the selection be securely fenced {sec. 86.)
Entry to Work for Metallic Ores may be made by any
person, who shall, however, pay the occupant for the actual damage
done, which shall be fixed by arbitration {sec. 87).
Crown Bailiffs may be appointed to prevent intrusion, trespass,
and encroachment, to watch the fulfilment of conditions, to recover
rents, and to take possession of forfeited lands, &c. {sec. 89).
Trespass. —Persons in unauthorised occupation of any Crown
lands, or of any selection which may have become forfeited, may be
summonsed on the information of Land Commissioner, Land Agent,
Hanger, a Bailiff of Crown Lands, or Police Constable, before any two
justices, who may issue a warrant for ejectment.
Persons not claiming under a subsisting lease or license, and
occupying any Crown lauds, reserves, &c., are liable, on conviction, to
a penalty for a first offence £5, for a second offence £lO, and for any
subsequent offence £2O {secs. 90-91).
Land Commissioners, Land Agents, and Licensed Surveyors
are prohibited from purchasing land with which they have had official
dealings, subject to a penalty of £IOO, recoverable by any persons
who may sue for same in the Supreme or nearest District Courts
{sec. 92).
Boundary Marks must not be removed or obliterated; offender
will be guilty of a misdemeanor {sec. 93).
Actions against Commissioners or officials must be undertaken
within twelve months of the occurrence of their cause, and notice must
be given to the defendant a month before commencement of such


action. I£ sufficient compensation be tendered before the commence-
ment of action, or paid into Court with costs, the plaintiff cannot
recover other damages (sec. 94).
Appeal is permitted from justices’ decision on any point under
this Act to the nearest District Court, whose decision shall be final
(sec. 95).
Regulations, which must be proclaimed, may be made by the
Governor in Council, and persons offending against any regulation
will be liable to a fine of £5 on conviction, and if the regulation relate
to any public park or reserve the offender may be arrested and fined
£lO (secs. 97-8).
Perjurt. —False declarations will be considered perjury (sec. 99).
Fraud or Evasion for the Acquisition oe Land. —Imprison-
ment for not more than two years, and land forfeited. Further, all
contracts or agreements entered into with the view of evading the Act,
are void both at law and equity, and cannot be maintained (secs. 2 1,100).
There are, however, a few sections appended which affect holders
of conditional purchases under the Act of 1868, by assimilating their
tenure to conditional purchasers under this new Act. These are as
follows (sec. 103) :
1. Any time after three years subsequent to date of selection,
the lessee of a conditional purchase, under the Act of 1868,
may obtain a certificate, on giving proof that he had fulfilled
the conditions of occupation and improvement, and can then,
by paying up balances of rent, obtain a deed of grant.
2. Li case of such a selection passing to any person by the
death of a selector, or by operation of land, it can be dealt
with as though it were a selection under the new Act (vide
Death of a Selector).
3. In case of a selector’s insolvency, the trustee can complete
the fulfilment of conditions, and, by paying up the balances
within four years after the adjudication of insolvency, obtain
the deed of grant.
4. Forfeiture for non-payment of rent may be rescinded even
after the period laid down in the Act of 1868, and the
Government may require such penalty as they may see fit.


CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OP 1876.
40 VICTORIA, No. 15.
40 Victoria, No. 15. An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws
relating to the Alienation of Grown Lands. [Assented to 29th
November, 1876.]
Preamble.
TT7HEEEAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend
* * the laws relating to the alienation of Crown lands
Be it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by
and with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland in
Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same
as follows —
Introductory.
Interpretation.
1. The following terms shall for the purposes of this
Act unless the context otherwise indicate have the
several meanings set against them respectively that is
to say—
“ Crown Lands.”
“ Crown Lands ” —All lands vested in Her Majesty
which are not dedicated to any public purpose
and which are not for the time being subject to
any deed of grant lease contract promise or
engagement made by or on behalf of Her Majesty
and all lands comprised in any pastoral lease
which are by law subject for the time being to
reservation selection or alienation
“ Minister.”
“Minister”—The Secretary for Public Lands or
other Minister who for the time being performs
the duties of Secretary for Public Lands


“ Commissioner.”
“ Commissioner” —The Land Commissioner ap-
pointed under the provisions of this Act for the
district wherein the land in question is situated
“ Conditional Purchase.”
“ Conditional Purchase The mode of acquiring
land by purchase upon condition defined by this
Act not being hy way of homestead selection
“ Conditional Purchaser.”
“ Conditional Purchaser ” —The lessee for the time
being of land held under conditional purchase
“ Selection.”
“ Selection The making of an application to
select or theland selected as thecontext may require
“ Conditional Selection.”
“ Conditional Selection”—Land held under condi-
tional purchase
“ Selector.”
“ Selector”—The person entitled for the time being
to any land selected whether by conditional pur-
chase or as a homestead
u Improvements,” 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 2.
Improvements ” —Any head-station house store
stable hut woolshed sheep-pen drafting-yard barn
stockyard fence well dam reservoir tank trough
artificial watercourse or watering-place garden
clearing ring-barking of trees cultivation or
plantation of trees shrubs or artificial grasses or
any building erection construction or appliance
being a fixture for the working or management
of a run farm grazing-farm or plantation or of
any sheep cattle or horses depastured thereon or
for maintaining or increasing the pastoral or
agricultural capabilities thereof
“ Prescribed.”
“ Prescribed ” —Prescribed by regulations made
under this Act.


Repeal of existing Acts and regulations saving existing rights.
2. Prom and after the commencement of this Act
the several Acts specified in the first Schedule hereto and
all rules and regulations made thereunder respectively
shall be and are hereby repealed saving always all rights
claims penalties and liabilities already accrued or in-
curred and in existence.
Provided that for the purpose of dealing with lands
heretofore applied for selected or leased under any of the
said repealed Acts the Governor in Council may continue
to appoint Commissioners and other officers and do or
cause to be done all sucli things as may be necessary
for carrying out and completing all contracts agreements
or forfeitures which have been made under or arise from
such applications in the same manner as if the said Acts
had not been repealed.
And provided further that all lands now held subject
to the provisions of the said repealed Acts or any of them
shall continue to be subject to the provisions thereof
until the same shall have been granted in fee-simple or
the leases thereof or other existing title shall become
determined.
Section 9 of 39 Vic. No. 7 to be construed as if passed alter this Act.
3. The ninth section of 44 The Western Hallway Act ”
shall hereafter he read and construed as if that Act had
been passed immediately after the commencement of
this Act
And as if the fourth subsection of the said ninth
section had been as follows that is to say—“ Under the
“ provisions of the laws in force for the time being
44 relating to the selection of land in Homestead
“ Areas ”
And as if the words 44 A Homestead Area under the
44 provisions of 4 The Homestead Areas Act of 1872
in the seventh subsection of the said ninth section con-
tained had been “A Homestead Area under the provisions
44 of 4 The Crown Lands Alleviation Act of 1876’ ”


And except as by the said ninth section of the said
Act and this section is provided this Act shall not extend
or apply to the Western Railway Reserve created by the
said Act.
Application of Act to whole colony.
Except as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall
so far as the same are respectively applicable extend and
apply to the whole Colony of Queensland.
Governor may grant in fee-simple or for any less estate.
4. The Governor in Council may in the name of Her
Majesty and under and subject to the provisions of this
Act grant and alienate in fee simple or for any less estate
any waste lands of the Crown within the Colony of
Queensland.
Every such grant or alienation shall be made in such
form as shall from time to time be deemed expedient
by the Governor in Council and being so made shall be
valid and effectual to convey to and vest in the person
therein named the lands described in the deed or instru-
ment of alienation for such estate or interest as shall
be set forth in such deed or instrument.
Every such grant or alienation shall be made subject
to such reservations and conditions as are authorised by
the laws under which the right thereto shall have been
acquired and subject to no other reservations or conditions.
Governor may proclaim counties parishes towns villages or township reserves.
31 Vic. c. 46 ss. 20,18, 2.
5. The Governor in Council may divide into counties
any Crown lands not already included in any county
and divide any county already existing or so to be created
into parishes where such parishes are not already defined
and may distinguish such counties and parishes
respectively by names and proclaim the same and the
boundaries thereof respectively and after such proclama-
tion the lands comprised within such counties and
parishes respectively shall thenceforward be recognised
by such names as counties and parishes respectively.


The Governor in Council may also from time
to time by proclamation set apart any Crown lands
as sites for towns or villages and may in like manner
set apart or reserve any Crown lands as township
reserves.
Power to reserve lands from sale for public purposes. Ib. s. 21.
6. The Governor in Council may from time to time
grant in trust or by proclamation reserve either tem-
porarily or permanently any Crown lands which in
his opinion are or may he required for quays landing
places tramways railways railway stations roads bridges
ferries canals or other internal communications or for
the approaches or other purposes necessarily appertain-
ing to any such works or for reservoirs, aqueducts or
watercourses or for the use or benefit of the aboriginal
inhabitants of the colony or for the sites of markets
abattoirs public baths or washhouses mechanics’ institutes
schools of arts libraries museums or other institutions
for public non-scholastic instruction public gardens or
experimental farms and parks agricultural and horti-
cultural societies grammar schools State schools hospitals
asylums infirmaries establishments for the relief of
indigent persons lock-ups police stations or police
paddocks gaols places for the interment of the dead
or for the recreation convenience health or amusement
of the people or for any other purpose of public defence
safety utility convenience or enjoyment or for other-
wise facilitating the improvement and settlement of
the colony or for any special purpose which may he
approved by resolution of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly.
Trustees of public lands. 36 Vic. c. 20 s. 15.—Trustees may make bye-laws. Ib. s. 16.
7. The Governor in Council may by proclamation and
without issuing any deed of grant place any lands
reserved either temporarily or permanently for any such
purpose under the control of trustees and may by like


proclamation declare the style or title of such trustees
and the trusts of any land placed under their control and
may empower them to make hye-laws for carrying out
the objects of the trust.
Trustees shall be deemed to be owners in law or equity. 11. s. 17.
8. Tor the purposes of any suit action or proceed-
ing in any court of law or equity it shall be sufficient
to describe such trustees by such style or title without
naming any of them and in any indictment or informa-
tion it shall be sufficient to describe them by such style
or title as owners of any property real or personal and
they may by such style or title sue and be sued and
they shall for the purposes of any such suit action or
proceeding he deemed to be the absolute owners of the
land placed under their control and no such suit action
or proceeding shall abate by reason of the death removal
or retirement of any such trustee.
Classification of Crown Lands
Crown land to be classed as town suburban and country lands. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 2.
9. All Crown lands shall for the purposes of this Act
be divided as follows —
Town lands—which shall comprise all lands which
have been heretofore or hereafter may be pro-
claimed as town lands
Suburban lands—which shall comprise all lands
within a distance of two miles in a straight line
from any town and lands
Country lands —which shall comprise all lands not
being town lands or suburban lands.
Land Commissioners and Land Agents.
Commissioners and land agents to be appointed. Ib. ss. 3, 32.
10. The Governor in Council may appoint Land
Commissioners and land agents and define the districts
within which they are to perform such duties as may be
necessary for carrying the provisions of this Act into effect.


Land Commissioner to hold a court once in each month. Ib. s. 4.
11. The Minister shall by notice in the Gazette fix
a day in each month on which the Commissioner shall
hold an open court at which all applications shall he
considered and approved or rejected or otherwise dealt
with and at which all such other matters as are by this
Act declared to be within the cognizance of the Com-
missioner and required to be dealt with in open court shall
be dealt with.
Commissioner’s decision.
12. The Commissioner shall have power to hear and
determine any question relating to the granting or refusal
of any application to select raised at any such court and
to enquire into any objection thereto either on public or
private grounds and to examine witnesses on oath in
relation thereto and from time to time to postpone any
application or the hearing or decision of any question
or objection
The Commissioner shall also have power for the
purposes of any inquiry held under the provisions of this
Act to summon any persons as witnesses and to examine
them upon oath and for such purposes shall have the
sameppo r ers and authorities as any two justices of the
peace in petty sessions have in respect of olfences punish-
able on summary conviction Any party to any such
inquiry may be represented by his counsel attorney or
agent.
11. s. 5,
The decision on every such enquiry shall be pro
nounced in open court.
lb. ss. 5, 51.
Provided that no decision of a Commissioner shall
except in the case of certificates of performance of con-
ditions be final until confirmed by tlie Minister.


General Conditions applicable to Selections by Conditional
Purchase and Homesteads.
What lands open to selection under this Act.
13. All Crown lands which immediately before the
commencement of this Act were open to selection by
conditional purchase under the provisions of “ The
Crown Lands Alienation Ad of 1868” shall unless and
until the Governor in Council shall otherwise declare by
proclamation he open to selection by conditional purchase
under this Act
All Crown lands which shall at the commencement
of this Act have been proclaimed as Homestead Areas
under the provisions of “The Homestead Areas x\ct of
1872” shall unless and until the Governor in Council
shall otherwise declare by proclamation he set apart as
Homestead Areas under the provisions of this Act and
he open to selection in accordance with such provisions.
Governor may proclaim lands open to selection.
14. The Governor in Council may by proclamation
declare any country lands open to selection under the
provisions of this Act and may by like proclamation
withdraw any such lands from being so open.
Every such first-mentioned proclamation shall name
a day (not being less than four weeks after the date of
the proclamation) on and after which the land will he
so open And on and after the day so notified the land
shall he open to selection accordingly
Except as by the last preceding section is provided
no Crown lands shall he open to selection until they
shall have been proclaimed by the Governor in Council
to be so open.
Price of land by conditional purchase.
15. The Governor in Council shall by proclamation
specify the upset price per acre at which any lands shall
he open to selection by conditional purchase Provided
that such upset price shall not he less than five shillings
jier acre.


Land agent to keep application book.— ll. ss. 6 7.
16. Every land agent shall keep a register in which
he shall enter all applications to select land by con-
ditional purchase or as homesteads in the consecutive
order of their receipt and the day and hour on which
they were lodged and each applicant shall himself or by
his duly constituted attorney sign his name to such
entry And when any such application is approved or
rejected or otherwise dealt with the Commissioner shall
make a memorandum of such approval or rejection
opposite the entry of the application in the register and
such register shall he open to public inspection during
office hours.
Selections to be lodged by the applicant personally and shall pay first annual
payment and cost of survey.— lb. ss. 6 46.
17. Every person desirous of selecting Crown lands
by conditional purchase or as a homestead shall lodge
with the land agent for the district an application in the
prescribed form and shall himself or by his duly consti-
tuted attorney sign the entry of his application in the
register of applications.
Every such application shall give a clear description
of the locality and boundaries ot the land applied for
and shall state whether it is already surveyed or is
unsurveyed
Every such application shall he accompanied by the
full amount in cash of one-tenth part of the upset price
together with the survey fee
Such applications shall take priority according to
the order of their being lodged with the land agent
Provided that if two or more applicants shall be
present at the time of opening the land agent’s office the
applications lodged by them shall be deemed to be lodged
at the same time And provided further that any appli-
cation for any land as a homestead shall have priority over
any application for the same land by conditional purchase
lodged at the same time.


If more than one application land to be offered at auction amongst applicants.
When two or more applications for the same land
are lodged at the same time the Commissioner shall at
the time appointed for considering them cause the land
to he offered by auction at an annual rent to the several
applicants and to no other persons and that one of the
applicants who shall make the highest hid for the land
and shall forthwith pay the amount of the first year’s
rent to the land agent shall be declared the successful
applicant And the annual rent payable by him in
respect of the land shall be the amount so hid by him
instead of the sum which would otherwise be payable as
hereinafter provided.
Proportion of frontage in respect to such boundaries.— lb. s. 50.
18. Subject to such general regulations concerning
surveys roads or the prevention of a monopoly of per-
manent water or otherwise as may be made under this
Act Crown land selected before survey and having
frontage to any watercourse or main road shall not have
a greater breadth of frontage thereto than —
Where the area does not exceed one hundred and
sixty acres half the depth of such land—
Where the area exceeds one hundred and sixty acres
but is not greater than three hundred and twenty
acres two-thirds of the depth—
Where the area exceeds three hundr ed and twenty
acres the whole depth
The boundaries not having frontage to roads or
natural features shall he rectangular and be directed to
the cardinal points unless any other general hearing shall
he adopted for that portion of country.
Selector may employ a licensed surveyor if survey is not made -within three months.
Ih. s. 49.
19. If any selection of unsurveyed lands shall not be
surveyed by the Minister within three months from the
date of the selection being approved by the Commissioner


the selector may apply to the land agent for a refund-
ment of the survey fee and if the survey be not made
within fourteen days from the date of such application
may employ a licensed surveyor to effect the survey at
the cost of such selector and on such survey being made
and approved by the Surveyor-General the survey fee
shall be refunded to the selector.
Notice of confirmation by Secretary for Lands to be given to selector.
20. When any land selected as aforesaid shall have
been surveyed the Minister shall if all the conditions and
provisions of this Act have been complied with confirm
the approval of the Commissioner and notice of such
confirmation shall be given to the selector which notice
shall specify the conditions of rent occupation and im-
provement to be fulfilled by him and the consequences
of non-fulfilment thereof.
No minor or married woman to be lessee. Ib. s. 54.
21. No person shall except by operation of law
become the holder of any land under conditional pur-
chase or as a homestead who is under the age of eighteen
years or who is a married woman not having obtained a
decree for judicial separation or an order binding in
Queensland, protecting her separate property or who is
not a natural-born or naturalized subject of Her Majesty
or who does not reside in Queensland or who is in respect
of such land or any part thereof an agent or a servant of
or a trustee for any other person or who has entered
into any agreement express or implied to permit any
other person to acquire such land by purchase or
otherwise.
And all land applied for by way of conditional pur-
chase or as a homestead shall be for the bond fide use
occupation and benefit of the applicant in his own
proper person and not as the agent servant or trustee
of any other person.


Proviso in case of breach of conditions.
If any person shall in violation of any of the pro-
visions of this section become the holder of any land
under this Act the Governor in Council may declare
such land to be forfeited and on proclamation of such
forfeiture all the right title and interest of the selector
and of every transferee in and to such land and all
moneys paid in respect thereof with all improvements
thereon shall be absolutely forfeited and shall revert to
the Crown.
And all contracts agreements and securities made
entered into or given with the intent or which (if the
same were valid) would have the effect of violating any
of the provisions of this Act and all contracts and agree-
ments relating to land selected under the provisions of
this Act made and entered into before or during condi-
tional occupation to take effect on the fulfilment of
conditions or on the issue of a grant in fee-simple shall
be and are hereby declared to be illegal and absolutely
void both at law and in equity.
Payment for improvements.
22. If there shall be upon any land selected under
this Act by conditional purchase or as a homestead any
improvements the value of which shall not be payable
by law to the former occupier of the land the selector
shall pay the value of such improvements to the land
agent within sixty days from the date when the value
thereof shall have been determined
Such value shall be determined by agreement
between the selector and the Commissioner and in case
of their not agreeing the value shall be determined by
O O •-
arbitration
In the event of any such improvements not being
improvements in respect of which any right of pre-
emption has been exercised under “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 186 b” or compensation has been paid
under “The Homestead Areas Act q/'1872” having been


made by a former pastoral lessee or selector of the
same land the value thereof when paid by the selector shall
be paid over to such former pastoral lessee or selector.
Conditional Purchase
Area for conditional selections.
23. The total area which may be selected or held
by any one person at the same time under conditional
purchase shall not be more than five thousand one
hundred and twenty acres nor shall the area of any land
so selected be less than forty acres Provided that
the Governor in Council may by proclamation limit the
area which may be selected or held under conditional
purchase by any one person at the same time within
any district specified in the proclamation to any area
less than five thousand one hundred and twenty but not
less than six hundred and forty acres.
Limits to conditional purchases by conditional purchasers under previous Acts.
If any conditional purchaser under this Act shall
also be the holder of lands under conditional purchase
under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” the
total area he may hold at any one time as a conditional
selection under this Act shall not together with the area
he so holds under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of
1868” exceed the maximum area allowed under this
Act to be held as a conditional selection.
Holder of less area than maximum allowed may make additional selection of
adjoining land. 31 Vic. c. 46. s. 55.
24. Subject to the provisions of the last preceding
section any person who is the holder under conditional
purchase of land under the provisions of “ The Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” or this Act the area
whereof is less than five thousand one hundred and
twenty acres may become the conditional purchaser of
any adjoining vacant Crown land the area whereof


together with that of the previous selection does not
exceed five thousand one hundred and twenty acres
Provided that the external boundaries of the two
selections taken together be such as are allowed in the
case of ordinary selections.
Selector need occupy on one only.
In the case last aforesaid the two several selections
so held by the same person shall so long as they are
both held by him under conditional purchase he deemed
for the purpose of the condition of occupation herein-
after mentioned to he the same selection.
Additional selections allowed.
25. Any person who is the holder under the said
tc Crown Lands Alienation Act o/ > 1868” or this Act of a
homestead or of a conditional selection and who shall
have personally resided thereon for one year may make
one other selection by conditional purchase of any
Crown lands open to conditional purchase Provided
that the maximum area of land allowed to he held
under conditional purchase he not exceeded.
Otherwise one selection only allowed.
26. Except as aforesaid or as hereinafter expressly
provided no person shall at the same time hold more
than one parcel of land under conditional purchase.
Conditional selector to make declaration before a magistrate.
27. Every person applying to select land by
conditional purchase shall make a declaration before
a justice of the peace that he is of the full age of
eighteen years and resides in Queensland and that he
selects the land for his own use and not as the agent
or trustee for any other person and that such land
conjointly with any other land then held by him as a
conditional selection under this Act does not exceed
the maximum area allowed under this Act for a condi-


tional selection and if he be also a holder of lands
under conditional purchase under “ The Grown Lands
Alienation Act of 1868 ” that the total of the land so
held in addition to that for which he applies under this
Act does not exceed such maximum area.
Lease to be issuer! to applicant.— Vide 31 Yic. c. 46 s. 51.
28. When any application to select land by way of
conditional purchase shall have been apjiroved and con-
firmed by the Minister the selector shall be entitled
to a lease thereof under and subject to the conditions
and provisions following and to all other the con-
ditions and provisions of this Act that is to say—
Term of lease to be ten years.
(1.) The term of the lease shall he for ten years
computed from the first day of January or first
day of July nearest to the date of the application
Rent.
(2.) The annual rent reserved under the lease shall
he one-tenth part of the upset price for every
acre or fraction of an acre comprised therein or
such larger sum as may have been bid at auction
under the provisions hereinbefore contained in
that behalf
Time for payment.
(3.) The second and all subsequent years’ rents
shall he paid to the land agent on or before the
thirty-first day of March in each year of the
term of the lease for which the rent is due
and in default of such payment the lease shall
he forfeited and the land selected and all improve-
ments thereon shall revert to Her Majesty
Forfeiture may be defeated by payment of rent and fine within ninety days of
original rent day.
Provided that the lessee may defeat such for-
feiture for non-payment of rent by paying to the
land agent in cash on or before the thirtieth day of


June next ensuing a sum equal to tlie annual
rent together with an additional sum equal to
one-tenth part thereof by way of penalty hut in
default ol such payment of rent and penalty
on or before the thirtieth day of June the lease
shall he absolutely forfeited and the said lessee
and any person claiming under him shall he
deemed a trespasser upon Crown land and liable
to be removed therefrom as such under the
provisions of this Act but the title of the said
lessee may nevertheless be reinstated by the
Governor in Council on such terms in addition
to the penalty as he may see fit to impose.
Occupation necessary.
(4.) The lessee shall occupy the land continuously
and bond fide during the term of the lease
Quality of occupation.
Such occupation shall be by the continuous and
bond fide residence on the land of the lessee
himself or some other person who would himself
he competent to become a conditional purchaser
under this Act and who is in the actual and
bond fide employment of the lessee and is not
in the employment of any other person for any
purpose connected with the use or occupation of
the land
Agreement for occupation by servant must be registered.
Every agreement for the employment of a
person by the lessee to reside on the land
shall he in writing signed by the parties or their
agents and shall be in duplicate And one copy
thereof shall he registered in the office of the
Commissioner
The residence of any person so employed under
an unregistered agreement shall he deemed null
and void.


Forfeiture for non-occupation.
(5.) If at any time during the currency of the
lease it shall be proved to the satisfaction of
the Commissioner that the lessee has failed in
regard to the performance of the condition of
occupation during a period of six months it shall
he lawful for the Governor in Council to declare
the lease absolutely forfeited and vacated and
thereupon the land comprised therein and all
improvements thereon shall revert to Iler Ma-
jesty
Conditions of improvement.
(6.) The lessee shall during the term of the lease
expend in substantial and permanent improve-
ments on the land a sum equal to the amount of
the whole of the purchase money thereof but so
that in no case shall such sum exceed the rate
of ten shillings per acre of such land
On proof of fulfilment of conditions lessee may obtain certificate thereof.
(7.) If at any time after the expiration of three
years from the commencement of the term the
lessee shall prove to the satisfaction of the Com-
missioner in open court that he has up to that
time fulfilled the condition of occupation and has
fulfilled the condition of improvement herein-
before specified with respect to such land the
Commissioner shall issue to the lessee a certifi-
cate that the conditions aforesaid have been duly
fulfilled
After certificate lessee may acquire fee-simple on payment of balance of rents.
(8.) If at any time after the lessee has obtained
such certificate from the Commissioner he shall
pay to the land agent a sum equal to the aggre-
gate amount of the annual rents which would
become due during the unexpired portion of the
term of the lease together with the amount of


the deed fee and shall prove to the satisfaction
of the Commissioner in open court that he has
continued up to the time of such payment to
fulfil the condition of occupation hereinbefore
specified such lessee shall thereupon be entitled
to a deed of grant of the land in fee-simple
In the meanwhile continued occupation necessary.
Until such payment shall be made the lessee
shall continue to perform the aforesaid condition
of occupation.
Conditions tinder which transfer may be effected.
(9.) No lease shall he transferred or assigned until
the original lessee has obtained such certificate
from the Commissioner
But after the issue of such certificate the lessee
may upon payment of a fee of ten shillings
transfer the land to any other person who would
he competent to select the same land by way of
conditional purchase under the provisions of this
Act and such transferee shall continue to fulfil
all and every condition in regard to the land in
the same manner as the original selector Pro-
vided that no such transfer shall take effect
until it has been approved by the Minister and
registered
Eight to grant at expiration of term.
(10.) If the lessee not having previously obtained
such certificate shall after he has made payment
of the tenth year’s rent prove to the satisfaction
of the Commissioner in open court that he has
fulfilled the conditions of occupation and im-
provement hereinbefore specified the Commis-
sioner shall issue to the lessee a certificate that
such conditions have been fulfilled and the lessee
shall thereupon he entitled to a deed of grant of
the land in fee-simple on payment of the deed fee


If conditions not fulfilled during term land to revert to the Crown.
(11.) If the lessee shall not within six months after
the expiration of the term of the lease or such
further time as may he allowed by the commis-
sioner have made proof to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner in open court that he has duly
fulfilled during the term of the lease the con-
ditions of occupation and improvement herein-
before specified then the right and title of the
lessee to the land shall absolutely cease and
determine and the lessee shall not have any claim
whatsoever to any renewed lease or any priority
of claim to purchase the land and all improve-
ments thereon shall revert to Her Majesty.
Condition of occupation dispensed with in certain cases. 39 Vic. c. 10 s. 3.
29. Whenever any selector of any land under the
provisions of the said “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of
1868 ” or this Act who resides personally and hond fide
thereon or any owner in fee of any land which if it
had not been alienated from the Crown would be country
land who resides personally and bond fide thereon shall
have selected by way of conditional purchase any other
country lands within a distance of fifteen miles from
his said residence he shall in such case but for so long
only as he shall continuously and bond fide reside on
either portion of land he exempt from the condition of
occupation in respect of the other
Provided that such exemption shall not extend to any
selections of greater area in the aggregate than one
thousand two hundred and eighty acres inclusive in the
case of a lessee of the selection whereon he so resides.
Not to extend to homestead areas.
30. The provisions of the last preceding section shall
not extend to homestead areas.


In case of death selection may be transferred.
31. Notwithstanding anything in this Act contained
any person to whom any land held under conditional
purchase shall pass hy will or by operation of law shall
he entitled to deal with the same in the same manner
and to the same extent as any other land passing to him
hy will or hy operation of law Provided that the
transferee of any such person must be a person who
would he competent to select the same land under the
provisions of this Act And such transferee shall
continue to fulfil the conditions of occupation and
improvement as prescribed hy this Act.
After issue of certificate land may be mortgaged or settled in trust.
32. Notwithstanding anything in this Act contained
any lessee who has obtained a certificate of fulfilment
of conditions may with the approval of the Minister
transfer the lease hy way of mortgage to secure the
repayment of advances bond fide made hy the trans-
feree to the lessee after the issue of the certificate or
may with the like approval transfer the lease to any
person or persons as a trustee or trustees of a marriage
or other family settlement.
When a lease is transferred hy way of mortgage
or family settlement as aforesaid the conditions of
occupation prescribed by this Act may be performed hy the
mortgagor or the persons beneficially interested in the land
under the settlement or any of them as the case may he.
Land to be deemed personal property in case of death.
33. Any land held under conditional purchase under
this Act and the right to a grant on fulfilment of con-
ditions shall in the event of the death of the conditional
purchaser intestate he deemed to be personal property
and shall pass to his personal representative.
Provision in case of future insolvency.—39 Vic. c. 10 s. 2.
34. Whenever the estate or interest of any lessee of
lands held under conditional purchase under the provi-
sions of this Act shall pass hy operation of law to any


trustee under the provisions of any laws for the time
being in force relating to insolvency such trustee shall
upon proof being made to the satisfaction of the Governor
in Council within two years from the date of adjudica-
tion that the several conditions required by this Act
have been performed in respect of such land by the
lessee or such trustee or partly performed by the lessee
and completed by such trustee and upon payment of
the balance of the ten years rent and deed fee he entitled
to a deed of grant of such land in fee simple.
Conditional purchases not liable for debt. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 60.
35. No lands held under this Act under conditional
purchase shall in any event except the insolvency of the
selector he liable to be taken in execution or otherwise
made liable to the satisfaction of any debt or debts until
the issue of a deed of grant thereof in fee simple.
Homestead Areas.
Certain lands to be set apart as Homestead Areas.
36. Whenever the term of the lease of any run
within that part of the colony described in the second
Schedule to this Act shall have expired by effluxion of
time or shall have become determined by forfeiture or
otherwise and whenever the whole or any part of the
land comprised in any such run shall have been resumed
from lease under the provisions of the tenth section
of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” the
lands comprised in such run or so resumed as the
case may he shall he and the same are hereby set apart
as Homestead Areas.
The Governor in Council may by proclamation define
and set apart any other country lands as Homestead
Areas.
37. Lands within Homestead Areas may he selected
by members of the Volunteer Force of Queensland to
the extent authorised by the certificates issued to them


under the provisions of the ninety-eighth section of
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” and the
land so selected shall not he subject to any conditions
of residence or improvement.
Conditions as to selection of lands witliin Homestead Areas.
38. Country lands within Homestead Areas shall
not be open to selection by conditional purchase except
under and subject to the restrictions and provisions next
hereinafter contained that is to say —
(1.) The maximum area of land that may he
acquired by any person by conditional purchase
in a Homestead Area shall he one thousand two
hundred and eighty acres or such lesser area not
being less than one hundred and twenty acres
as may he declared by the Governor in Council
by proclamation
(2.) The condition of occupation shall be performed
by the continuous and bond fide residence on
the land of the lessee himself
Except as aforesaid all the provisions of this Act
relating to the selection of land by conditional purchase
and to land so selected shall extend and he applicable to
land so selected in Homestead Areas.
Iloynesteads.
Land open for conditional purchase also open to selection as homesteads
39. All lands which may he open to selection by
conditional purchase whether in a Homestead Area or
elsewhere shall also he open to selection as homesteads.
Area allowed for homesteads.—3l Vic. c. 46 ss. 71 75.
40. The total area which may he selected or acquired
by the same person as a homestead in a Homestead
Area shall he eighty acres and in any other place shall
he one hundred and sixty acres And no person shall
except as hereinafter provided make more than one
selectica of land as a homestead.


Applicant to make declaration.—39 Yic. c. 10 s. 5.
41. Every person applying to select a homestead
shall make a declaration before a justice of the peace
that he is the head of a family or is of the full age of
eighteen years and that he selects the land for his own
use and occupation and not as the agent or trustee for
any other person and that such intended selection is
the only homestead selection which he holds or has
held under this Act or any of the Acts hereby repealed
or that it adjoins his previous homestead selection either
under this Act or “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act
of 1868” or “ The Homestead Areas Act of 1872” in
which case he shall also declare that such intended
selection conjointly with his previous selection does not
exceed a total area of eighty acres or one hundred and
sixty acres as the case may be.
Annual payments in respect of homesteads. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 73.
42. Every homestead selector shall for the term of
five years make an annual payment at the rate of six-
pence per acre or fraction of an acre or such larger sum
as may have been bid at auction under the provisions
hereinbefore contained.
The first payment shall be made to the land agent at
the time of making the application and the subsequent
annual payments shall be made to the land agent on
the thirty-first day of March in each ensuing year and
in default of such payment the land selected together
with all improvements thereon shall be forfeited and
revert to the Crown Provided that such forfeiture may
be defeated if on or before the thirtieth day of June
next ensuing there shall be paid to the land agent a
sum equal to the payment due on the thirty-first day of
March together with an additional sum equal to one-
tenth part thereof by way of penalty but in default of
such payment on or before the thirtieth day of June the
land shall be absolutely forfeited and the selector and
any person claiming under him shall be deemed a


trespasser upon Crown land and liable to be removed
therefrom as such under the provisions of this Act but
the title of the said selector may nevertheless be rein-
stated by the Governor in Council on such terms in
addition to the penalty as he may see fit to impose.
Selector to reside continuously for five years. Ibid.
43. Every homestead selector shall continuously and
bond fide reside on the land during the whole of the said
term of five years and shall during the said term expend
a sum at the rate of ten shillings per acre in substantial
and permanent improvements on the land.
On proof of fulfilment of conditions selector to be entitled to grant.
44.' If after the expiration of the said term of five
years the homestead selector shall prove in open court
to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that he has
fulfilled the conditions in the last preceding section
mentioned the Commissioner shall issue to such selector
a certificate that the conditions aforesaid have been duly
fulfilled and thereupon the selector shall be entitled to a
deed of grant of the said land in fee-simple on payment
of the deed fee.
Provision in case of death of selector. Ibid,
45. In the case of the death of a homestead selector
after his application and before the expiration of the
time limited for making proof of the performance of
conditions all his right title and interest in the said land
shall pass to the persons following that is to say—
(l.) If the selector have made a will to the persons
to whom the same shall thereby be given
(2.) If the selector die intestate to his widow (if
any) for her own use and if he leave no widow
then to his personal representatives for the benefit
of all his children (if any) in equal shares and if
he leave no children then for the benefit of his
next of kin according to the Statutes for the
distribution of personal estate


And the person to whom such right title or interest
shall pass under the provisions of this section may at
any time within two years after the death of the selector
and without being liable in the meantime to the per-
formance of any conditions other than the payment of
the annual instalments sell the said land for the benefit
of the persons beneficially entitled thereto
Upon any such sale the purchaser shall upon pay-
ment of the annual instalments then remaining unpaid
and the deed fee he entitled to a deed of grant of the
land in fee simple.
Prevision in case land not sold after selector’s death.
46. If at the expiration of the said period of two
years the land shall not have been sold the conditions of
residence and improvement hereinbefore contained shall
apply to the same as if the selector were alive save that
in such case the residence upon the land of any one
of the persons beneficially interested therein shall be
sufficient.
Forfeiture for non-residence. Ib. s. 70.
47. If at any time during the currency of the said
term of five years it shall be proved to the satisfaction
of the Commissioner that the selector has failed in
regard to the performance of the condition of residence
during the period of six months it shall be lawful for
the Governor in Council to declare the land forfeited
and thereupon the land and all improvements thereon
shall revert to Her Majesty.
If conditions not fulfilled during term land to revert to the Crown.
48. If the selector shall not within six months after
the expiration of the said term of five years or such
further time as may he allowed by the Commissioner
have made proof to the satisfaction of the Commis-
sioner in open court that he has duly fulfilled during
the said term the conditions of residence and improve-
ment hereinbefore specified then the right and title of


the selector to the land shall absolutely cease and
determine and he shall not have any claim whatsoever
to purchase the land and all improvements thereon shall
revert to Her Majesty.
Homestead not liable to debt. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 74.
49. No homestead selection shall during the said
period of five years either in the case of the insolvency
of the selector or in any other event whatsoever pass to
the trustee of his estate or he liable to be taken in
execution or otherwise made liable to the satisfaction of
any debt of the selector.
Homestead selectors under previous Acts may select conterminous lands only.
50. Where any person shall have selected a home-
stead under “ The Groton Lands Alienation Act 0/AB6B ”
or “ The Homestead Areas Act of 1872 ” or this Act
the area of which shall be less than one hundred and
sixty acres he may select so much of any vacant Crown
land adjoining his selection as shall not together with such
previous selection exceed an area of eighty acres or one
hundred and sixty acres according as the selection shall
he within or not within a homestead area hut so that the
external boundaries of the combined selections shall not
be other than would be allowed for one original homestead
selection under this Act and it shall be sufficient that the
condition of continuous residence be performed on any
part of the combined homestead selections Provided that
in no case shall any person hold two separate homesteads.
Certificates and Forfeitures.
Applications for certificates of performance of conditions to be made in open court.
51. Applications for certificates of performance of
conditions shall be made to the Commissioner who shall
in open court hear the same and any evidence adduced
on oath in support thereof or in opposition thereto
and shall in open court give his decision as to the
granting or withholding of the issue of the certificate.


Notice of every such application shall he given to
such commissioner at least ten clear days before the
court sitting at which the application is to he made
and notification of every such intended application shall
he posted conspicuously in the land agent’s office at
least a week prior to such court sitting.
Notice of intended forfeiture of conditional or homestead selection to be given.
52. No forfeiture of any conditional or homestead
selection for any cause other than the non-payment of
rent shall be declared until after a notice in writing
shall have been served upon the conditional purchaser
or homestead selector either personally or by posting
the same addressed to him at the selection.
Every such notice shall specify the alleged cause
of forfeiture and shall call upon the conditional purchaser
or homestead selector to show cause against it at the
next court sitting held after the expiration of thirty days
from the service of the* notice A copy of such notice
shall he published in the Government Gazette and the
nearest local newspaper three weeks at the least before
the sitting of the court at which cause is to be shown.
The Commissioner shall at such court sitting hear in
open court such evidence as shall be adduced by the
conditional purchaser or homestead selector or his agent
by way of showing cause against the forfeiture and shall
report thereon in writing to the Minister.
Sales hy Auction
Governor may cause lands to be surveyed. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 83.
53. It shall he lawful for the Governor in Council to
cause any town suburban or country lands to be offered
for unconditional sale hy public auction and to cause
maps of such lands to he prepared which maps shall
show and specify the counties parishes or towns in which
the lands are situated and all reserves intended to be
made in accordance with the provisions of this Act and


the boundaries and areas of the lands intended to he
sold and shall also show the lengths and bearings of all
boundary lines comprised therein and such maps shall
he deposited as public maps in the office of the Surveyor-
General.
Classes of land to be stated. Ib. ss. 84, 85.
54. All such lands shall be distinguished as town
suburban or country lots according to their respective
positions and shall be offered as nearly as may be in
areas according to the following scale—
Town lands in allotments of from one rood to one acre
Suburban lands within one mile from town lands in
lots of from one acre to eighty acres
Suburban lands over one mile from town lands in lots
of from forty acres to one hundred and sixty acres
Country lands in lots of from forty acres to six
hundred and forty acres.
Proclamation of land for sale. Ib. ss. 86, 90.
55. The place and time of sale shall be notified by
proclamation published in the Gazette not less than four
weeks or more than three months prior to the day of
sale and such proclamation shall specify the numbers
of the lots and the area and upset price of each lot
Provided that any or all of the lots may be withdrawn
from sale by the Minister at any time prior to the same
being actually offered for sale and bid for
Special conditions may be imposed.
The proclamation may impose any special conditions
with respect to the sale of any specified lot or lots and
may add the value of improvements on the land to the
upset price.
Upset price. Ib. s. 87.
56. The upset price shall not be less than —
Eight pounds per acre for town lands
One pound per acre for suburban lands and
Ten shillings per acre for country lands
Provided that the upset price may be fixed at any larger
sum.


Conditions to be read. Ih. s. 92,
57. The land agent or auctioneer shall before the
commencement of the sale read the terms and conditions
of sale and all persons bidding at the sale shall be bound
by the terms and conditions so read.
Deposit to be made. Ih. s. 93.
58. The highest bidding for each lot together with
the name of the purchaser shall be announced by the
auctioneer or land agent before proceeding to offer the
next lot and the purchaser shall thereupon pay a deposit
of one-fifth of the purchase money.
Payment of residue. Ih. s. 94.
59. The balance of the purchase money and the
value of the improvements (if any has been added to
the upset price) together with the deed fee and survey
fee as fixed by this Act shall be paid to the land agent
at his office within one calendar month from the date of
the sale and upon such payment being duly made the
purchaser shall be entitled to a deed of grant of the land
in fee-simple.
Forfeiture of deposit upon failure to pay balance. Ih. s. 95.
60. If the balance of the purchase money with the
value of the improvements deed fee and survey fee be
not paid to the land agent within one calendar month
from the day of the sale the deposit shall be absolutely
forfeited and the depositor shall have no further claim
to the land on account thereof.
Value of improvements may be paid to owner or occupant.
61. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council by
the proclamation to direct that the value of any im-
provements on any lot shall be paid to the owner or
occupant of such improvements at the time of the sale
and in such case it shall be sufficient that the purchaser
instead of paying the value of the improvements to the
land agent produce to the land agent a receipt in full
for such value signed by such owner or occupant.


Country lots offered at auction and not sold may be purchased by selection.—
lb. s. 96.
62. Any country lands which shall have been offered
for sale at auction and not hid for and not withdrawn
from sale either before or after offer at auction shall
from and after the day following such offering for sale
he open to purchase by selection by the first applicant
on payment to the land agent of the full upset price
together with the deed fee and survey fee and any
further sum which may have been fixed as the value of
improvements on the land.
Proclamation of sale may notify town and suburban land open to selection and not
bid for.—36 Vic. c. 20 s. 18.
63. In any proclamation of lands for sale by auction
the Governor in Council may specially declare that any
town or suburban lands mentioned in the proclamation
which shall not be bid for or withdrawn from sale either
before or after offer at auction shall be open to pur-
chase by selection by the first applicant at the upset
price And in every such case all such lands shall be
open to purchase accordingly subject to the same con-
ditions as hereinbefore set forth in the case of country
lands.
Special Grants.
Powers to grant in case of escheat &c.—3l Vic. c. 46 s. 26.
64. In any case in which Her Majesty has become
or may hereafter become entitled to any land either by
escheat for want of heirs or by reason of any forfeiture
for treason felony or otherwise or by reason that the
same has upon inquisition been found to have been
granted or otherwise vested unto the use of or in trust
for any alien or aliens it shall be lawful for the Governor
on behalf of Her Majesty to grant such land in fee
simple or for any less estate to any person for the pur-
pose of restoring the same to any of the family of the
person in whom or for whose benefit the same had been
vested or of carrying into effect any intended grant


conveyance or devise of such last-mentioned person in
relation to such land or of rewarding any person making
discovery of such escheat or forfeiture or of Her Ma-
jesty’s right and title thereto Provided that before any
land under escheat is granted as aforesaid notice of the
intended grant shall he advertised for two consecutive
months in the Gazette .
Application for closing unnecessary roads.— lb. ss. 27, 28.
65. It shall be lawful for the owner or owners of any
purchased lands adjoining a road which is required for
access to such lands only and is not otherwise required
for public use or convenience to make application in
writing to the Minister that such road may be closed
either permanently or temporarily.
On the receipt of such application the Minister shall
cause notice thereof to he inserted in the Gazette and
in such local newspapers if any as he may think ad-
visable and also conspicuously posted on the road to be
closed and at the nearest Land office Police office and
Post office for a period of not less than two nor more
than six calendar months consecutively.
Consequent alienation. — lb. s. 29.
66. At the expiration of such period the Governor in
Council may approve of such application with or without
modification.
If the application is for the permanent closure of
the road and is approved without modification the
Governor in Council may order the closure of the road
upon payment of such price as he may think reasonable
(not being less than the original upset price of such
adjoining lands) in which case upon payment of such
price together with the deed fee a deed of grant in fee
simple of the soil of such road shall be issued to the
owner or rateably to the several owners of such adjoining
lands or as they may request in the same manner as if
such road had been purchased by him or them at auction
under the provisions hereinbefore contained.


Or temporary enclosure only may be authorized.
If the application is for the temporary closure of
the road and is approved or if the application being
for the permanent closure of the road the Governor
in Council shall approve of a temporary closure thereof
only the Minister shall issue to the applicant a license
in the prescribed form authorising him and his suc-
cessors in the occupation of such adjoining lands to
enclose the road and keep it enclosed for so long as he
or they shall pay the yearly rent of one shilling per
annum for every acre or part of an acre of the land
comprised therein which rent shall he payable in advance
at the Treasury on the first day of January in every year.
Property vested in licensee.
During the currency of the license the holder thereof
shall be deemed the lessee of the land comprised therein.
Forfeiture for non-payment of licensee fee.
If the annual license-fee shall not he paid when due
the license shall he forfeited but the licensee may at any
time within ninety days thereafter defeat such forfeiture
by payment of the rent together with an additional sum
equal to one-fourth part thereof by way of penalty but
in default of such payment of rent and penalty within
such period of ninety days the license shall be absolutely
forfeited.
Power to cancel license.
If at any time it shall appear to the Governor in
Council expedient to re-open any road in respect of
which any such license shall have been issued it shall he
lawful for the Governor in Council to cancel such license
upon giving six months’ clear notice to the holder
thereof and upon such cancellation the road so enclosed
shall again become open as a public highway.
Sale in consideration of improvements. — 11. s. 30.
67. Upon application made within twelve months
after the proclamation in the Gazette of the first sale of
any town land situated within any new city town village


or reserve within which improvements are situated it
shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to sell and
srrant the allotment or allotments containing such im-
O # .
provements to the owner of such improvements without
competition at its fair value in an unimproved state not
being less than the minimum upset price of such lands
as defined by this Act.
Sales without competition in special eases.— lb. a. 31.
68. In cases in which there may he no convenient
way of access to any portion of Crown land or in which
any portion may be insufficient in area for pubi c sale
or in which a portion of Crown land may lie between land
already granted and a street or road which forms or
should form the way of approach to such granted land
or in which buildings erected on lands already granted
may have extended over Crown lands or in any other
cases of a like kind the Governor in Council may sell
and grant such lands to Ihe holder or holders of the
adjoining lands without competition and at a price
to be determined by the Minister or other officer duly
authorised in that behalf.
Power to purchase or exchange.
69. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council
to acquire any land of any tenure which may be required
for any purpose either by way of purchase or by grant-
ing any Crown land in fee simple or for any less estate
in lieu of such land And in any such case the value
of the land so acquired or granted and of any improve-
ments thereon respectively shall be determined by arbi-
tration.
Governor may grant leases for special purposes. — lb. s. 69.
70. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council
to grant leases of any portion of land not exceeding five
acres to any person for the erection of wharves store-
houses slips for building or repairing vessels baths
v orks fer supplying water or gas to any town or any
special purpose of a like kind


Provided that the term of lease shall not in any
case exceed twenty-one years and that it shall be a
condition that such lease may at any time be cancelled
on giving six months’ notice and payment of the value
of the improvements and that the annual rent shall in
no case be less than one pound per acre.
Licenses to mine for coal.
71. The Governor in Council may grant licenses to
mine for coal on temporary or permanent reserves on
such terms as to securing the surface license fees
royalties or otherwise as he shall see fit.
Commons.
Conditions upon -which commons may be proclaimed.—3l Vic. c. 46 s. 78.
72. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council
to proclaim any unsold land as a common upon the
following conditions—
(l.) That a petition signed by not less than thirty
freeholders resident within any township or
agricultural district praying for the proclamation
of a common adjoining thereto shall have been
presented to the Governor in Council
(2.) That after the said petition shall have been
notified in the Gazette for a period of sixty
days no counter petition shall have been
presented signed by a larger number of free-
holders resident within the said township or
district.
Extent of common.— ll. s. 79.
73. Every such common shall be proportioned to
the number and wants of the freeholders resident in the
said township or district but shall in no case exceed
twenty square miles.
Crown to retain commonages.— ll. s. 80.—Commonages may be extended.
74. Notwithstanding the proclamation the fee-
simple of all common lands shall he deemed to be vested
in the Crown and unalienated and nothing herein


contained shall prevent the sale of any land comprised
in any common Provided that it shall be lawful for
the Governor in Council to extend any common to an
extent equal to the area of the land which may he so
sold therein.
Governor in Council maj make regulations for management of commons.— li. s. 81.
75. The Governor in Council may make regulations
for the management of any common or commons and
for giving effect to commonage rights subject however
to the following conditions—
That commonage rights shall appertain solely to
residents in such townships or districts
That the depasturing of sheep and entire male
animals exceeding six months old except under
special conditions shall he prohibited
That payment he made for the depasturing of cattle
at a rate not less than two shillings per head per
annum and that in no case shall any one person
he allowed to run more than twenty head on the
same common.
But nothing herein contained shall prevent bond
fide travellers from depasturing their bullocks horses
or other stock on any common Provided that no
person travelling with stock shall he deemed a bond
fide traveller who shall not proceed four miles in one
direction during every twenty-four hours unless delayed
by floods.
Commons may be placed under municipal councils.—34 Vic. c. 13 s. 3.
76. In the case of any common proclaimed for the
use of the inhabitants of a municipality the Governor
in Council may place such common under the control of
the council of such municipality and may authorize
the council to make regulations subject to the condi-
tions aforesaid for the management thereof and the
giving effect to commonage rights therein.


Licenses to Cut Timber.
Licenses to cut timber &c. may be granted—Reasonable objection may be entertained.
—li. s. 100.
77. The Governor in Council may authorise the
Commissioner or any Court of Petty Sessions to issue
licenses for any term not exceeding one year to enter any
Crown lands whether under pastoral lease or not and to
cut and take therefrom any timber and to dig for and
remove any gravel stone brick earth shells or other
material hut not within two miles of any head station
unless by the consent of the lessee The fee fixed for such
license shall be paid in advance
Any pastoral lessee may make any reasonable
objection to the granting of any such license and the
granting or withholding of such license after any
objection shall have been made to the Commissioner or
Court of Petty Sessions shall be determined by the
Governor in Council.
Any pastoral lessee may by notice in writing to that
effect given to any such licensee restrict him from
exercising his rights as such licensee in any specified
area on the run to be mt ntioned in such notice and not
exceeding one thousand acres and such licensee may
within the period of one month thereafter appeal to the
Commissioner or nearest Court of Petty Sessions who
shall determine whether the restriction shall continue in
force and for how long a time and if such licensee shall
during such period of one month or at any time there-
after during the continuance of such restriction exercise
the right of a licensee within the area affected thereby
he shall for every such offence be liable to a penalty not
exceeding twenty pounds.
Persons authorised by Government not to be obstructed by pastoral lessees in
cutting timber &c. — lb. s. 101.
78. Except as provided in the last preceding section
pastoral lessees under this Act shall not have the power


to restrict other persons duly authorised by the Governor
in Council either fro in cutting or removing timber or
material for building or other purposes or from searching
for or removing any metal or mineral within the run.
Surveys and Deed Fees.
Licensed surveyors.
79. For the purpose of effecting surveys under the
provisions of this Act the Surveyor-General may issue
licenses to such surveyors as may on examination prove
to be duly qualified Provided that if any such surveyor
shall wilfully neglect the proper execution of the surveys
on which he may be employed or shall make any false
statement or misrepresentation in regard to any land
surveyed or the measurement thereof his license may be
suspended or cancelled.
Cost of surrej. — lb. sched. H.
80. Every person acquiring Crown lands under the
provisions of this Act by purchase selection or lease not
being a lease for pastoral purposes shall pay the cost of
survey according to the following scale—
£ s. d.
under 60 acres ... ... ... 3 8 0
60 acres and under 80 acres ... 3 16 0
80 „ „ 120 „ ... 4 12 0
120 „ „ 160 „ ...540
160 „ „ 240 „ ... 5 16 0
240 „ „ 320 „ ...640
320 „ „ 480 „ ...7 0 0
480 „ „ 640 „ ... 7 18 0
640 „ ...800
and for every six hundred and forty acres or part of six
hundred and forty acres after the first six hundred and
forty acres four pounds.


Fees charged on deed of grant. — lb . soiled. I.
81. Upon the issue of any Deed of Grant in fee-simple
the following fees shall he paid which shall include the
contribution to the assurance fund under the provisions
of “ The Beal Property Act of 1861 ”
£ s. d.
Not exceeding 50 acres... ... ... 1 2 6
„ 100 1 10 0
„ 560 „ .; 1 15 0
„ 1,000 2 10 0
and for every two hundred and forty acres or part of two
hundred and forty acres above one thousand acres one
pound.
Appraisement and Arbitration.
Mode of appraisement or arbitration.— lh. s. 102.
82. Whenever it shall become necessary under the
provisions of this Act to fix or ascertain any price value
or sum of money or to settle any question or other
matter not otherwise provided for by this Act the
Minister and the claimant in matters concerning the
rights of the Crown and each of the respective parties
interested in any other case may concur in the appoint-
ment of a single appraiser or arbitrator as the case may
require and failing such concurrence it shall be lawful
for either party of his own accord or at the request of
the other to appoint an appraiser or arbitrator as the
case may require and upon such appointment to give
notice thereof to the other party or parties And if the
other party or parties or any of them shall not within
thirty days after such notice appoint an appraiser or
arbitrator the appraiser or arbitrator first appointed
together with such other appraisers or arbitrators (if
any) as shall have been duly appointed within that time
shall have power to determine the matter alone And in
any of the cases aforesaid the matter in question shall
be inquired into and determined by such single appraiser
or arbitrator or such appraisers or arbitrators or their
umpire.


General Provisions.
Power to rescind proclamation of town or suburban lands.—33 Vic. No. 8, s s. 1, 2, 3, 4.
83. The Governor in Council may by proclamation
rescind either in whole or in part any reservation of any
Crown lands as town lands or suburban lands or as
reserves for public purposes.
Prom the date of any such rescinding proclamation
the unalienated town lands and suburban lands respect-
ively aifected thereby shall be deemed country lands as
if the original reservation had not been made.
Water reserves and streets to be preserved in certain cases.
If any lands have been sold as town lands under any
proclamation so rescinded all reserves for water within
the township shall be still reserved and the streets and
roads within the township shall be kept as roads but
may be closed and sold to the adjoining owners in like
manner as other roads may be closed and sold.
Resumption of roads.—3l Vic. c. 46 s. 51 subs. 10.
84. If within the ten years next succeeding the date
of any application to select any land either by con-
ditional purchase or as a homestead it shall be deemed
necessary to open any public road through the same it
shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to proclaim
a public road not more than two chains wide through
such land.
In such case the holder of the land shall be entitled
to compensation for the land taken for such road at the
rate of twice the sum which shall have been paid to Her
Majesty in respect of the area so proclaimed together
with the value of the improvements thereon such value
to be determined by arbitration.
Provided that where any such road shall be pro-
claimed through enclosed lands the Minister shall fence
off the road from the adjacent enclosed lands with a


fence equally serviceable with the fence within which
the land is otherwise enclosed hut such fence shall after
its erection be maintained at the cost of the owner or
occupant of the adjacent land.
Provided further that no such road shall be finally
proclaimed open for public use until the foregoing
condition of fencing has been complied with and notice
shall have been given in the Gazette that the amount
of compensation aforesaid has been duly paid or that
the person entitled thereto can receive the amount at
the Treasury.
“Fencing Act ” to apply to con litional or homestead selections. — Ih. s. 17.
85. The provisions of “ The Fencing Act of 1861 ”
shall apply to all lands held under conditional purchase
or as homesteads and tor the purposes of that Act land
selected under this Act shall be considered as alienated
when the application to select shall have been confirmed
by the Minister and the selector thereof shall for such
purposes be considered the owner from the time of such
confirmation.
Stock not to he impounded from unfenced selections.
86. No stock shall be impounded from any selection
held under this Act or under “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1868” unless the same shall be
securely fenced.
Right of entry to work minerals. — 11. s. 51 subs. 4.
87. Any person authorised in that behalf by the
Governor in Council may enter on any part of the lands
included in any conditional selection or homestead and
dig and remove therefrom any gold or other metal or
metallic ore Provided that any person so entering the
land and removing any such minerals shall pay to the
lawful occupant a sum equal to the amount of the actual
damage which he shall sustain therelrom and the amount
of such damage shall be determined by arbitration as
provided by this Act.


Forfeitures to be proclaim' cl by Governor.
88. Every forfeiture of land for breach of any of the
provisions of this Act or for non-payment of any moneys
required to he paid by this Act or breach of any con-
dition imposed by this Act shall be proclaimed in the
Gazette and the Governor in Council may cause such
land to be notified as open for selection or direct it to
be sold by auction in fee-simple.
Power to appoint Crown bailiffs.—Their duties. —31 Vic. c. 46 s. 116.
89. The Governor in Council may from time to time
appoint a sufficient number of persons to be rangers or
bailiffs of Crown lands and every such ranger or bailiff
may and shall during his continuance in office do on
behalf of Her Majesty or on behalf of the Governor or
the Minister in respect of any Crown lands all necessary
acts for preventing intrusion encroachment or trespass
thereon and may enter upon any Crown land or lands
held under conditional purchase or as homesteads and
view the same and observe the manner of the performance
of conditions thereon and may do all such acts as may
he necessary for recovering any rent or other sums
payable in respect thereof or for taking and recovering
possession of any lands in case of forfeiture or for such
other purpose as any bailiff lawfully appointed may by
law do in respect of any lands of his employer.
Proceeding against trespassers. — lb. s. 117.
90. Whenever any person is in unauthorised occupa-
tion of any Crown lands or is in possession thereof under
color of any lease issued under Ihe provisions of this Act
which shall have become forfeited it shall be lawful for
any Commissioner land agent ranger or bailiff of Crown
lauds or police constable to prefer to any justice an
information in writing setting forth such occupation and
such j ustice shall thereupon issue his summons for the
appearance before any two justices at a place and time
to be therein specified of the person against whom any


such complaint is made and the justices if on hearing
the case they are satisfied of the truth of the complaint
shall issue under their hands a warrant to dispossess and
remove such person from such Crown lands and to take
possession of the same on behalf of Her Majesty and any
constable to whom any such warrant shall be directed shall
forthwith execute the same according to the tenor and
exigency thereof.
Penalties for trespassing.
91. Any person unless lawfully claiming under a
subsisting lease or license or otherwise under this Act
who shall be found occupying any Crown lands or land
granted reserved or dedicated for public purposes either
by residing or by erecting any hut or building thereon
or by clearing digging up enclosing or cultivating any
part thereof or cutting or removing timber otherwise
than firewood not for sale thereon shall be liable on
conviction to a penalty not exceeding five pounds for
the first offence and not exceeding ten pounds for the
second offence and not exceeding twenty pounds for the
third or any subsequent offence Provided that no
information shall be laid for any second or subsequent
offence until thirty clear days shall have elapsed from
the date of the previous conviction.
No land commissioner land agent ar licensed surveyor may purchase land in respect
of which he may be employed.— lb. s. 110.
92. If any Commissioner land agent or licensed
surveyor or any district surveyor directly or indirectly
purchase any land declared open for selection in any
proclamation in which he is named or being land
respecting which he acts as Commissioner or land
or in the survey of which lands he may have been
concerned he shall thereby forfeit his office or license as
the case may be and shall also forfeit the sum of one
hundred pounds with full costs of suit which may he
recovered by any person who may sue for the same
in the Supreme Court or in the nearest district court.


Removal of boundary mark to be a misdemeanor. — lb. s. 118.
93. If any person shall wilfully obliterate remove
or deface any boundary mark which shall have been
lawfully made or erected by or under the direction of
any Commissioner licensed surveyor land agent ranger
or bailiff of Crown lands arbitrator valuer or other person
such person so offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Limitation of actions. — lb. s. 120.
94. All actions or other proceedings unless under-
taken on behalf of the Crown against any Commissioner
land agent ranger or bailiff of Crown lands or other
officer acting under the provisions of this Act for any-
thing wrongfully done under or against the provisions
of this Act shall be commenced within twelve months
after the matter complained of was committed and not
otherwise And notice in writing of any such action
or proceeding and of the cause thereof shall be given
to the defendant one month at least before the com-
mencement of such action or proceeding And the
plaintiff in any such action shall not recover if tender
of sufficient amends shall have been made before the
commencement of such action or if a sufficient sum of
money shall have been paid into court after such com-
mencement by or on behalf of the defendant together
with costs incurred up to that time And if a verdict
shall pass for the defendant or the plaintiff shall become
nonsuit or discontinue his action or proceeding or if upon
demurrer or otherwise judgment shall be given against
the plaintiff the defendant shall recover from the plaintiff
his full costs as between attorney and client and have
the like remedy for the same as any defendant has by
law against his plaintiff in similar cases.
Appeal from justices to the nearest district court. — lb. s. 121.
95. It shall be lawful for any person who shall
feel himself aggrieved by the conviction or decision
of any justice or justices under any of the provisions
of this Act to appeal therefrom to the district court


nearest to the place where such conviction or decision
shall have been given and the execution consequent
upon the conviction or decision so appealed from shall
he suspended on the appellant with two or more sufficient
sureties entering before such justice or justices into a
bond or recognizance to Her Majesty in the sum of
fifty pounds which bond or recognizance the said justice
or justices are hereby authorised to take and the obligee
by such bond or recognizance shall he bound to
prosecute such appeal to conclusion and to be forth-
coming to abide the determination of the said court and
to pay such costs if any as the said court shall award
against him and such court is hereby authorised and
required to hear and determine the matter of the said
appeal and in any such matter the decision of such court
shall he final and conclusive to all intents and purposes
whatsoever.
No proceedings under this Act to be removable by certiorari. — Tb 8. 122.
96. ]N T o order or other proceeding made or taken by
any justices or any district court touching or concerning
the conviction of any offenders or touching or con-
cerning any other matter or thing arising out of the
provisions of this Act shall he liable to be quashed
or vacated for want of form only or he removed or
removable by certiorari or any writ or process whatso-
ever into the Supreme Court.
Governor in Council may establish regu'ations.
97. The Governor in Council may from time to time
make alter or rescind all such regulations and establish
such forms as may be required for the due carrying out
of the provisions of this Act.
Regulations to be proclaimed.— Tb. s. 124.
98. All such regulations shall be proclaimed and
every person who shall knowingly and wilfully offend
against any such regulations shall on conviction thereof
forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding five pounds for
each such offence


And every person wlio shall offend against any such
regulation relating to any public park or reserve and
after being warned by any ranger or bailiff of Crown
lands park-keeper or police constable shall not desist
from so offending may be thereupon apprehended by
such ranger bailiff park-keeper or constable and taken
before some justice of the peace and shall be liable on
conviction to forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding
ten pounds.
False declarations under this Act to be deemed perjury.— lb. s. 126.
99. Any person who shall wilfully make a false
statement in any declaration made in pursuance of this
Act or the regulations to be made thereunder shall be
guilty of perjury.
Punishment for fraud or evasion &c. — lb. s. 127.
100. Any person who shall fraudulently evade or
attempt to evade any of the provisions of this Act or
otherwise commit any fraud thereon for the acquisition
of land shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on con-
viction thereof shall be liable to he imprisoned and
kept to hard labor for a period of not more than
two years.
Land so acquired to be forfeited to the Crown. — lb. s. 123.
101. Lands acquired by any evasion of or fraud upon
the provisions of this Act shall be forfeited to the
Crown.
Punishment of person dealing with land fraudulently acquired.— lb. s. 129.
102. Any person who shall convey transfer demise
assign or become assignee of any land acquired or held
by any fraud upon the provisions of this Act knowing
the same to have been so acquired or held shall he
guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall
be adjudge! to be imprisoned with or without hard


labor for not more tlian twelve calendar months and to
forfeit all his interest (if any) in the land so acquired to
Her Majesty.
Additional privileges to selectors under 31 Vic. c. 46.
103. With respect to conditional selections under
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” the follow*
ing provisions shall have effect —
(1.) If at any time after the expiration of three
years from the date of selection the lessee shall
prove to the satisfaction of the Commissioner
that he has up to that time fulfilled the condition
of residence prescribed by the said Act and has
also fulfilled the conditions of improvement appli-
cable to the land as prescribed by the said Act
then the Commissioner shall issue a certificate
that the conditions aforesaid have been duly
fulfilled and the said lessee shall be entitled to a
deed of grant in fee simple on payment of the
balance of the ten years’ rent
(2.) Notwithstanding anything in the said Act
contained any person to whom any land held
under conditional purchase shall pass or shall
heretofore have passed by will or by operation of
law shall be entitled to deal with the same in
the same manner and to the same extent as any
other land passing to him by will or by operation
of law Provided that the transferree of any such
person must be a person who would be competent
to select the same land under the provisions of
this Act And such transferree shall continue to
fulfil the conditions of residence and improve-
ment as prescribed by the said Act
(3.) Whenever the estate or interest of any lessee
of lands held under conditional purchase shall
pass or shall heretofore have passed by operation
of law to any trustee under the provisions of any
laws for the time being in force relating to insol-


vency such trustee shall upon proof being made
to the satisfaction of the Governor in Council
within four years from the date of adjudication
that the several conditions required hy the said
Act have been performed in respect of such land
hy the lessee or such trustee or partly performed
by the lessee and completed hy such trustee and
upon payment of the balance of the ten years’
rent and deed fee he entitled to a deed of grant
of such land in fee simple
(4.) Whenever any selection has become absolutely
forfeited for non-payment of rent within ninety
days of the day on which the rent shall have
fallen due and it has been ordered by the
Governor in Council that such forfeiture he
rescinded such rescission is hereby declared to
have the effect of defeating such forfeiture
(5.) Whenever any selection shall before the
passing of this Act have become or shall
hereafter become forfeited for non-payment of
rent the Governor in Council may if he see fit
on payment of the penalty and on such other
terms as shall appear to he just rescind such
forfeiture.
Commencement of Act.
104. This Act shall commence and take effect on
the first day of March one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-seven.
Short title.
105. This Act shall he styled and may he cited as
“ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”


CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1870.
THE PIPtST SCHEDULE.
Year and Number of Act.
Title of Act.
An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws
relating to the Alienation of Crown Lands
An Act to Amend the Laws relating to Town
and Suburban Lands
An Act to Authorise and Regulate the Subdivi-
sion of Pastoral Leases in the Settled Districts
of the Colony-
An Act to Amend “ The Crown Lauds Aliena-
tion Act of 1808 ”
An Act for the Establishment of Areas for
Homestead and Immigrants’ Selections and
to Amend “ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1868”
An Act to Amend the Law relating to the
Alienation of Crown Lands
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
Settled District of Daelihg Downs.
Commencing on the Main Dividing Range at Maryland and
bounded thence by Herrics’ R-ange and the range separating the Conda-
mine from the Macintyre Weir and Moonie Rivers to the head of
Wilkie’s Creek thence by the watershed separating the Condamiue
River from Wilkie’s Creek to their junction thence by the Condamine
River to the junction of Georanga Creek thence by that creek to its
head in the Main Dividing Range thence by that range south-easterly
and south-westerly to Maryland the point of commencement.


Queensland, ") P r °cl a m a ti°n by His Excellency William "Wellington
to wit. 5 Caiens, Esquire, Companion of the Most Distinguished
(1.5.) Order of St. Michael and St. George, Governor and
W. W. Caiens, Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Governor. Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, William Wellington
Caiens, Esquire, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Execu-
tive Council, do, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that the
following Regulations have been established under the provisions of “ The
Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 ” and all other Acts enabling in that
behalf.
REGULATIONS.
Second payment on selections.
1. The second payment on conditional purchase and homestead selec-
tions shall be made on or before the 31st day of March following the date of
application; and the said payment, together with the first year’s rent, shall
cover the period between the date of application and the 31st day of March
next after the expiration of one year from the date of the application. The
second payment on each selection will, therefore, be proportionate to the
number of clear months intervening between the expiration of the twelve
months from date of application and the following 31st day of March.
Land Commissioner to declare the acceptance or rejection of applications
in open court.
2. The land commissioner shall declare in open court his acceptance
or rejection of each application for a conditional purchase or homestead,
in the order in which the applications were made. In the case of rejected
applications, he will return the deposit of first year’s rent and survey fee to
the applicant, by giving him a cheque for the amount initialled by the land
agent.
Applicants to attend at land court.
3. Applicants for conditional purchases or homesteads, or their duly
authorised agents, will be required to appear at the land court when their
applications are dealt with by the land commissioner.
Non-appearance at land court.
4. In the case of an applicant failing to appear at the land court as
prescribed in the preceding clause, his application will be rejected, and a
penalty of twenty shillings will be exacted for such non-appearance.
This amount will be deducted from the moneys lodged with the land agent
on account of rent and survey fee, when refundment of the same is made
to the applicant.
Commissioner may examine witnesses.
5. If the commissioner thinks it necessary, he shall require the applicant
or any other person to be examined on oath, before dealing with the appli-
cation.


6. In cases where surveyed lands are open to selection by lease, after
having been lirst submitted to auction, and not sold or withdrawn, and two
or more conterminous portions shall be selected by one person, the survey fee
payable on such selection shall be computed at the rate of one-half of the
amount of the aggregate fees chargeable on each single portion included in
the selection as aforesaid: provided that in no case shall a lesser amount be
charged than the rate specified in the 80th section of the Act.
Lands applied for simultaneously to he offered at auction.
7. In the case of simultaneous applications for the same land, the land
commissioner, when the applications are dealt with at the land court, shall
declare who are the simultaneous applicants, and thereupon he will submit
the land to be competed for at auction amongst the said applicants then
present, at one-tenth of the upset price per acre at which the land may be
proclaimed open to selection; and the applicant bidding the highest
amount per acre shall be declared the successful applicant, and shall
forthwith pay to the land agent the balance due on account of the higher
rent. In the event of there being any dispute in regard to the bidding,
the land commissioner may re-submit the land to competition; if the highest
bidder decline or fail to pay the balance on account of higher rent on demand,
the land commissioner shall cause the land to be re-submitted to competition
amongst the other applicants.
j Proceedings when applications are partially for the same land.
8. When two or more simultaneous applications are only partially for
the same land, the commissioner shall offer the area which is comprised in
the greatest number of such applications at auction amongst the several
applicants therefor, and then the area comprised in the next greatest number,
and so on, as often as may be necessary to determine the rights of the
several applicants. Except as aforesaid the provisions of the last pre-
ceding regulation shall apply to such cases.
Advance at each hid not less than one halfpenny per acre per annum.
9. When simultaneous applications are submitted to competition, the
advance at each bid shall not be less than one halfpenny per acre per annum.
Permission to withdraw selections in certain cases.
10. In cases where applicants for conditional purchases or homesteads are
desirous of withdrawing their applications in consequence of the land des-
cribed therein not being that intended to be selected, they may make an
application to the land commissioner to be allowed to withdraw as aforesaid ;
and the commissioner, on receipt of such application, shall forward the
same, with his report, for the consideration of the Minister. In the event
of the application being approved, a refundment of the deposit of the first
year’s rent, less twenty per cent, and the survey fee (if no expense has
been incurred by the Government), will be made to the applicant.


Agreement for occupation by servant must he registered within one month.
11. One copy of every agreement for tlie employment of a person by a
conditional purchaser to reside on his selection, as prescribed in sub-section
4 of section 28 of the Act, must be registered in the office of the commissioner
of the district in which the selection is situated, within one month from
date of the signing of the agreement; failing which, and until the agreement
is registered, the residence on the selection of any person than the selector
shall be deemed null and void.
Selection of improved land.
12. "Where improvements are included in land applied for, either as a
conditional purchase or as a homestead, such lands not being held under the
provisions of “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1876,” the
applicant must specify in his application the nature of such improvements,
and his estimate of their value, the amount of which he will be required to
pay to the land agent at the time of application ; and any further sum which
may be finally determined upon by appraisement must be paid within sixty
days from the date of the award, or the selection will not be confirmed.
Applications for certificates of fulfilment of conditions to he notified in local
papers prior to sitting of commissioner s court.
13. Notice of every application for a certificate of fulfilment of conditions
shall be published twice in each local paper (if there be any), in the land
agent’s district in which,the selection for which the certificate is sought is
situated, in addition to the publicity prescribed in section 51 of the Act,
such publication to be at least ten days prior to the date of the sitting of the
commissioner’s court.
Lands comprised in selections withdrawn or cancelled before confirmation,
not available for re-selection until notice is given.
14. When any application for a conditional purchase, or homestead
selection, is withdrawn under the 10th clause of these regulations, or
otherwise cancelled, before confirmation by the Minister, notice will be
given by the land commissioner of the district, fixing a day on which the
land will be open to re-selection, not being less than a month from the date
of the notice; and such notice shall be posted in the office ot the land
agent for the district in which the land is situated, and shall also be inserted
in the local papers three times before the date on which the land will be open.
No application to select the land before the day appointed will be enter-
tained or approved.
Selection in virtue of volunteer land orders.
15. When applications to select land by virtue of volunteer land orders
issued under the 98th section of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of
1868,” are made simultaneously with applications for the same land as con-
ditional purchases or homesteads, the applications in virtue of such land
orders shall be postponed to such other applications.
Fees to he paid before preparation if deeds of grant.
16. Before the preparation of any deed of grant of land is authorised,
all charges and fees due thereon must be paid, together with the contribution
to the assurance fund, under the provisions of “ The Beal Property Act of
1861,” as prescribed in section 81 of the Act.


Notice of withdrawal of lands from lease to he forwarded to pastoral lessee.
17. Upon confirmation by the Minister of a selection comprising land
held under the provisions of “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of
1876,” being notified to the land commissioner, that officer shall cause the
land agent to forward a notice in the form M in the schedule annexed, to
the pastoral lessee.
A fee of one pound to he pa id with applications to close roads.
18. The sum of one pound sterling must be forwarded with all appli-
cations to close roads, either permanently or temporarily, for the purpose of
defraying the expense of inquiry and advertising.
Temporary closure of roads.
19. Six months’ rent only shall be demanded in advance in cases where
the temporary closure of roads is approved during the six months ending the
31st of December. In all cases a full year’s rent must be paid on the follow-
ing Ist day of January.
Gold fields.
20. Application to select lands comprised within any portion of a pro-
claimed gold field will not be entertained or approved unless the land on the
gold field has been specially declared open to selection.
Receipts to he given by land agents.
21. On receipt of any moneys payable under the provisions of the Act,
the land agent shall give the depositor a receipt for the same, and shall,
within seven days thereafter, forward a duplicate thereof to the Auditor-
General, and every such receipt shall be in such form as the Auditor
General shall direct.
Appointment of Arbitrator for the Government.
22. In all cases of arbitration under the Act, the arbitrator on the
part of the Government shall be appointed by the Minister for Lands.
Form to he used in appraisements or arbitrations.
23. The forms 11, I, K, L, M, shall be the forms used in conducting
appraisements or arbitrations under the Act.
Payment of survey fees.
24. All survey fees chargeable on selections under the Act, must bo paid
to the land agent in cash.
Form of deed of grant.
,i p 2 The form contained in schedule Pof these regulations, shall be
the form of deed of grant issued under the provisions of the Act.


Forms to he used.
26. The following forms shall be those used for the purposes of the Act
and these regulations.
, FORMS.
' A,
“ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Application by to Lease Lands before Survey.
Received this day of , at o’clock.
, Land Agent,
at
,187 .
I, * , do hereby state my desire to become the lessee of the Crown
lands described in the Schedule annexed, which are now open to selection under
the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 •” and I hereby
tender the sum of pounds shillings and pence as the
first year’s rent, together with the survey fee.f I declare that I ant of the full age
of eighteen years, that I reside in Queensland, and that I select the land for
my own use and not as the agent or trustee for ally Other person. And I further
declare that the said land, conjointly with all other land now held by me as
a conditional selection, under the said Act, or under “ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1868,” does not exceed five thousand one hundred and twenty (5,120)
acres. And I further declare that I apply for the said portion in order that
I may use the same, and that I have not entered into any agreement to sell, demise,
or mortgage the said portion.
Signature.
Declared before me, at , this day of
,187 .
J.P.
Highest
Bid Annual
per acre Kent,
per annum.
Deposit of
first year’s
rent.
Area of Land Applied for.
£ a. d.
£ i. d. £ i. d.
Eoods.
Perches,
Value of Improvements
Received from the sum of pounds shillings
pence as the rent of the above land and survey fee.
Land Agent.
* When there are improvements, insert the estimated value, except in cases of lands resume
from Buns held under “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1876.’’
t Insert the Christian and Surname at full length.
Schedule to Application.
Date of Proclamation.
County or district ' .
Area
Desckxption.


“ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Application 1 by to Lease Lands after Survey.
Received this day of j 186 at o clock.
, Land Agent,
; < . at
J* , do hereby state my desire to become tbe lessee of the Crown
lands described in the Schedule annexed, which are now open to selection under
the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 j” and I hereby
tender the sum of pounds shillings and pence as the
first year’s rent, together with the survey fee.f I declare that lam of the full age
of eighteen years, that I reside in Queensland, and that I select the land for
my own use and not as the agent or trustee for any other person. And I further
declare that the said land, conjointly with all other land now held by me as a
conditional selection under the said Act, or under “ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1868,” does not exceed five thousand one hundred and twenty (5,120)
acres. And I further declare that I apply for the said portion in order that
I may use the same, and that I have not entered into any agreement to sell, demise,
or mortgage the said portion.
Signature.
Declared before me, at , this day of
, 187 .
J.P.
Highest
Deposit of Bid
first year’s per acre
rent. per annum.
Annual
Rent.
Area of Land Applied for.
£ s. d.
Perches.
Acres.
Roods.
Value of Improvements
Received from the sum of pounds shillings
pence as the rent of the above land and survey fee.
Land Agent.
* When there are improvements, insert the estimated value, except in cases of lands
resumed from Runs held under “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1876.
t Insert the Christian and Surname at full length.
Schedule to Application
No. of lot or lots
Date of Proclamation...
Date when offered for sale by auction
No. of acres in each lot
County... ... ' ...
Parish or place ... ...
No. of portion... 1 ...
Total number of acres in selection


Date when offered for sale ...
No. of acres in the lot
County... ... ,,,
Parish or place
No. of portion... ... ... ...
Upset price
“ Crown Lands Alienation Act pf 1876.”
Application by to Select Crown Lands.
Land Agent.
Received this day of 187 ,at o’clock.
District
, 187
I,* off am desirous of purchasing the portion of Crown
lands hereunder described, which is now open to selection without competition,
haying been previously offered for sale, and not bid for, and I hereby tender the
sum of pounds shillings and pence as the
price thereof, including the fee on the deed.
No. of lot at previous sale
Date of Proclamation ... ... ...
(Applicant’s Signature)
Survey fee
Deed fee
Assurance fee
The Agent for the sale of Crown lands.
shillings
Received from the sum of pounds
and pence, as the price of the land above described.
Agent for the sale of Crown lands at
• Insert the Christian and Surname at full length,
t Nearest Post Town. ; ~~~
j Offered for sale and not bid for and the deposit forfeited, as the case may he).
D.
“ CrowrCLands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Conditional Purchase.
Application by to Lease adjoining Lands.
Received this day of 187
, Laud Agent
at
I, , do hereby state my desire to become the lessee of the Crown
lands (adjoining my selection No. ) as described in the Schedule annexed
which are now open to selection under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1876 j” and I hereby tender the sum of pounds


shillings and pence as the first year’s rent, together with the survey fee.
I declare that I am of the full age of eighteen years, that I reside in Queensland,
and that I select the land for my own use and not as the agent or trustee for any
other person, and that the said land conjointly with all other land held by me as a
conditional selection under the said Act or “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act
of 1868 ” does not exceed five thousand one hundred and twenty (5,120) acres.
And, I further declare that I apply for the said portion in order that I may use the
same, and that I have not entered into any agreement to sell, demise, or mortgage
the said land.
(Signature.)
Declared before me, at , this day of
, 187 .
J.P.
Deposit of
first Year’s
Rent.
Highest Bid Ammal
per acre Rent,
per annum.
Area of land Applied for.
Acres.
Perches.
£ s. d.
£ s. d. £ b. d.
Roods.
Received from the sum of pounds
shillings and
, Land Agent.
pence as the rent of the above land and survey fee.
Schedule to Application.
Date of Proclamation
County or district
Area
Description
“ Crotvn Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Application to Select a Homestead.
Received this day of ,18 ,at o’clock ,
Land Agent, District of
I, , do hereby state my desire to become the lessee of the Crown
lands described in the schedule annexed, which are now open to selection without
competition, as a homestead under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act of 1876,” and I hereby tender the sum of pounds shillings
and pence, as the first year’s rent, together with the survey fee,
; and I do solemnly declare that I am* and that I apply
for such lands for my own use and occupation, and not as the agent or trustee for
any other person, and that the selection I now apply for is the only homestead
selection I have made under this or any other Act in force in the Colony of Queens-
land, and that I apply for the land for ,the purpose of actual settlement and culti-
vation ; and I further declare that I have not entered into any agreement to sell,
demise, or mortgage the said lands.
(Signature.)
Declared before me, at , this day of 18
J.P.
♦ Of the full age of 18 years, or the head of a family, as the case may he.


Deposit of
first Year’s
Highest Bid
per acre
per annum.
Annual
Kent.
A*ea of Laud Applied for.
£ i. d.
£ s. d.
£ a. d.
Koods.
Torches.
shillings and
Received from the sum of pounds
pence, as rent of the land above described, and survey fee.
Land Agent.
Schedule to Application.
Date of Proclamation
County or district
Area
Description
“ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 187fi-
Application to Select Land adjoining a Homestead.
Received this day of ,18 , at
day of ,18 , at o’clock.
, Land Agent, District of
I, j do hereby state my desire to become the lessee of the Crown lands
(adjoining my previous Homestead selection No. ) as described in the
Schedule annexed, which are now open to selection without competition as a
Homestead under the provisions of “ The Croton Lands Alienation Act o/1876 ;
and I hereby tender the sum of pounds shillings and
pence as the first year’s rent, together with the survey fee. And Ido solemnly
declare that I am* and that I apply for such lands for my own use and
occupation, and not as the agent or trustee of any other person, and that the selection
X now apply for conjointly with my previous selection hereinbefore specified does
not exceed a total area of f acres; and I further declare that I have not
entered into any agreement to sell, demise, or mortgage the said lands.
(Signature.)
Declared before me, at , this day of , 18
J.P.
Deposit of Highest Bid
first year’s per acre per
rent. Annum.
Annual
Kent.
Area of Land Applied for.
£ s. d.
£ 8. d.
Roods.
Perches.
£ s. d.
Received from the sum of pounds
pence, as rent of the land above described, and survey fee.
shillings and
Land Agent.
* Of the full age of 18 years, or the head of a family, as the case may he.
fln a Homestead area, 80 acres; outside a Homestead area, 160 acres.


Schedule to Application.
Date of Proclamation
County or district
Area
Description
Form of declaration to accompany applications for Conditional Purchases made in
pursuance of section 25 of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
I, the holder and occupant of the land comprised in selection No.
District, do hereby solemnly declare that I have resided continuously on the
above-mentioned selection for a period of one year, viz.: —From day of
18 , to day of inclusive ; and I make this
solemn declaration, conscientiously believing the same to he true, and by virtue of
the provisions of an Act made and passed in the thirty-first year of the reign
of Her present Majesty, intituled “ The Oaths Act of 1867.”
Declared before me, a.t this
day of 187 .
J.P.
Appointment of Appraiser or Arbitrator on behalf of the Crown, under the Act
40 Victoria, No. 15.
Whereas by the 102nd clause of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,”
it is provided that in all cases of appraisement or arbitration under the said Act,
the arbitrator on behalf of the Crown shall be appointed by the Minister: Now
therefore, I, being the Secretary for Public Lands, do hereby appoint
to act as arbitrator on behalf of the Crown in the matter of
Given under my hand, at , this day of , 18
(Signature)
Secretary for Public Lands.
Appointment of Appraiser or Arbitrator under the Act 40 Victoria, No. 15.
I, in accordance with the provisions of “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1876,” do hereby appoint to act as arbitrator on
my behalf, in the matter of
Given under my hand, at this day of
18 .
(Signature)
Signed by the said this day of 18 ,
in the presence of
(Signature)
J.P.
Appointment of Umpire under the Act 40 Victoria, No. 15
We, the undersigned, acting on behalf of
and on behalf of # under the provisions of “ The Crotvn Lands
Alienation Act of 1876,” do hereby certify that we have appointed
to act as umpire in the matter of
Given under our hands, at thi day of
18 .
(Signature)
(Signature)
* The Crown or one of the parties in the arbitration.


Concurrence in the Appointment of a single Appraiser or Arbitrator.
In pursuance of the provisions of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,”
we, the undersigned, do hereby concur in the appointment of to act
as a single* in the matter of ; and we agree to accept
his award as final, and to be bound by his decision.
Given under our hands, this day of 18 .
(Signature.)
(Signature.)
* Appraiser or Arbitrator.
Declaration to be made by Arbitrator or Umpire.
In the matter of
I } do solemnly and sincerely declare, that
I am not, directly or indirectly, interested in the matter referred to me ; and that I
will faithfully, honestly, and to the best of my skill and ability, hear and
determine the matter referred to me, under the provisions of “ The Croton Lands
Alienation Act of 1876.”
(Signature)
Made and subscribed, this day of ,18 ,in the presence
of
J.P.
Transfer of Lease under “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Know all men by these presents, That
, Lessee of the Crown lands hereunder described :
Land Agent’s District
Selection No.
County of
Parish of
Portion No.
Number of acres.
And now held by under the provisions of “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act o/1876” (40 Vic., No. 15), do hereby transfer and assign all
right, title, and interest in the said land, and in the lease thereof, to
and heirs, executors, and administrators, and
hereby request that this transfer may be registered in the office of the Secretary
for Public Lands accordingly.
In witness whereof have hereunto se
Hand and Seal, this day of 187
Signature of )
Transferror )
Signed, sealed, and delivered by the
said (
in my presence. )
A fee of ten shillings must be paid on every transfer of a lease. . ■. „ „ .
Separate forms of application must be filled up and duly signed for each le se to be transferred.
The lease must be sent in with the application to transfer, that such transfer may be noted
thereon.


€4 GENERAL REGULATIONS UNDER ACT OF 1876.
. o.
Land Cottet, >
Distbict. >
To of
in the Colony of Queensland.
Whereas it hath been made to appear to me, the Land Commissioner for. tl e
District of , that you arc likely to give material evident e
upon an inquiry to be held under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,”
in respect of
These are, therefore, to require you and each of you to be and appear before
me, on the day of , at o’clock
in the noon, at in the said colony, to testify what you
shall know concerning the matter of the said inquiry. Herein fail not.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at this day of
in the year of our Lord, 187 .
(L.3.)
P.
Queensland. • -
No.
County
Parish
Date of Purchase
Area
Yictoeia, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, and so forth :
To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting :
Whereas, in conformity with the laws and regulations in force for the
alienation of Crown lands in our territory of Queensland,*
and in further consideration of the quit-rent hereinafter reserved, we, with the
advice of our Executive Council of Queensland, have granted, and for us,
our heirs and successors, do hereby grant unto the said
h heirs and assigns, subject to the several and respective reservations hereinafter
mentioned, all that piece or parcel of land in our said territory, containing by
admeasurement be the same more or less, situated in the county of
and parish of with all the rights and appurtenances
whatsoever thereto belonging : To hold unto the said h
heirs and assigns for ever, yielding and paying therefor yearly unto us, our heirs and
successors, the quit-rent of one peppercorn for ever, if demanded; but subject,
nevertheless to the several conditions and reservations contained and declared in
the laws of our said Territory in that behalf. In testimony whereof w r e have
caused this Our grant to be sealed with the Seal of Our said Territory.
Witness, &c.
*A. 8., of on the day of 18 , made application to select the
land hereinafter described by conditional purchase, and, his application having been duly approved
and confirmed, a lease of the said land for the term of ten years was afterwards issued to him,
reserving an annual rent of . And whereas the said A. B. has since become entitled to a
deed of grant in fee simple of the said land : Now know ye that in consideration of the premises,
Or, A. 8., of on the day of 18 , made application to select the
land hereinafter described as a Homestead, and his application was duly approved and confirmed.
And whereas the said A. B. has since become entitled to a deed of grant in fee simple of the said
land : Now know ye that in consideration of tjie premises,
Or, A. 8., of , has become the purchaser, at auction, of the land hereinafter described,
for the sum of sterling: Now know ye that in consideration of the said sum for us and
on our behalf well and truly paid into the Treasury of our said Territory before these presents are
issued,
Or, A. 8., of has become the purchaser, by unconditional selection, of the land
hereinafter described, for the sum of sterling : Now know ye that in consideration
of the said sum for us and on our behalf well and truly paid into the Treasury of our said
Territory before these presents are issued,


Under 1 acre
... 0
12
0
1 acre and under
5
acres
... o
18
0
5 „
10
)f
... 1
12
0
10 „
33
15
33
... 1
18
0
15 „
33
20
3)
2
4
0
20 „
30
33
2
12
0
30 „
)y
40
33
... 2
18
0
40 „
60
33
... 3
8
0
60 „
80
33
... 3
16
0
80 „
})
120
33
... 4
12
0
120 „
33
160
33
... 5
4
0
160 „
33
240
33
... 5
16
0
240 „
33
320
33
... 6
4
0
320 „
480
33
... 7
0
0
430 „
„
640
33
... 7
18
0
Schedule of Fees to he paid hy Selectors an I Purchasers, to defray the Cost of
Survey.
£ s. d.
640 „
And for every additional 610 acres, or
8 0 0
part of 640 acres after
the firsb 640 acres ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 0 0
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
first day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-seven, and in the fortieth year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
Go© Save the Queen !
Queensland, \ Proclamation by His Excellency William Wellington
to wit. ) Cairns, Esquire, Companion of the Most Distinguished
(1.5.) Order of St, Michael and St. George, Governor and
W. W. Cairns, Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Governor. Dependencies.
IN pursuance of section seventy-five of “ The Crown Land o Alienation
Act of 1876,” I, William Wellington Cairns, Esquire, the Governor
aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive Council, do, by this my
Proclamation, notify and proclaim that the following Regulations with
respect to Commons, which have been, or may hereafter be proclaimed for
the use of any Township or Agricultural District, have been established
under the provisions of the said Act.
REGULATIONS.
Commissioners to enforce Regulations.
1. The Land Commissioners shall, under the direction of the Minister
for Lands, have full power to enforce these Regulations uithin their respective
districts.


Map showing boundaries of Common to he exhibited.
2. Every Land Commissioner shall, when directed by the Minister
for Lands, mark out or cause to be marked out, any lands which shall be
petitioned for or proclaimed as a common within his district, and shall
prepare, or cause to be prepared, a plan of such lands showing the boundaries
thereof; and a copy of such plan shall be deposited in the office of the said
commissioner as well as in the office of each land agent for such district,
and also in the office of the Surveyor-General, and such plan shall be acces-
sible for reference by any person, within such hours as the offices of the
said Land Commissioner, land agent, or Surveyor-General are usually open :
In the case of commons proclaimed before the date of the publication of
these Regulations, these Regulations shall apply in like manner as if they
had been made and published before such commons were so proclaimed.
Appointment of Inspector of Cattle.
3. Every Land Commissioner shall, whenever the Minister for Lands
shall so instruct him, appoint some person to be an inspector of the cattle or
stock depastured within or upon any common within his district, at such
rate of remuneration as the Minister may direct.
Duties of Inspector.
4. The duties of such inspector shall be as follows :
(1.) The said inspector shall require the owner of cattle to enter in a
book kept by the said inspector for the purpose the full par-
ticulars of —
(a) The name, residence, and occupation of the owner or owners
thereof.
( b) The description and brands of all cattle proposed to be depastured
on the common.
And until such particulars have been fully complied with, he may
refuse to allow such cattle to be depastured.
(2.) Such registry being completed, the said inspector may, and is
hereby empowered to permit the depasturage of cattle, subject to
the following conditions
(a) No owner shall be allowed to run more than twenty (20) head of
cattle on any single common proclaimed under the Act.
(5) 13y the term “ cattle ” is meant mares, geldings, colts, fillies,
asses, mules, cows, oxen, heifers, steers, and calves ; but such
term shall not apply to entire male animals more than six
months old.
(c) Payment must be made for cattle at the rate of two shillings
per head per annum, and all payments must be made half-yearly
in advance.
(c?) In case of default in payment as aforesaid, all cattle in respect
of which such default shall be made shall be dealt with as if
trespassing on the said common, or, at the option of the in-
spector, may be removed at once therefrom.
Residents entitled to depasture.
5. Every resident in any township or agricultural district for which a
common shall be proclaimed under the Act shall, on compliance with
these regulations, and on payment of the fees prescribed, be entitled to
depasture such cattle or stock as are permitted by these Regulations.


Payment of Fees to Commissioner.
6. The inspector shall, within one week of the receipt of any of the
fees or payments herein prescribed, pay the same over to the Land Com-
missioner, and the receipt of the commissioner shall be a full and sufficient
discharge for any such payment; and the commissioner shall account for
the receipt of all such moneys as public moneys under the provisions of
“ The Audit Act of 1874.”
Returns to he furnished by the Inspector.
7. The inspector shall prepare and furnish to the commissioner of the
district, twice in every year, that is to say, on the 30th day of June and
the 31st day of December in each year, a detailed return of all moneys
received by him under these regulations, and of all cattle, stock, or sheep
depastured, together with the names, residences, and occupations of the
persons owning or claiming to own any such cattle, stock, or sheep.
Unregistered cattle may he impounded.
8. Any cattle, stock, or sheep found on any common, which shall
not have been registered, shall be deemed to be trespassing, and shall be
liable to be impounded and dealt with in all respects as prescribed by “ The
Impounding Act of 1863,” or any other Act to regulate the impounding
of cattle, which may during the existence of these Regulations be in force
in the colony,
Rond fide Travellers may depasture Stock.
9. These Regulations shall not affect sheep or cattle or stock, within
the following provisions of the Act, viz.:—“Nothing herein contained
shall prevent bond fide travellers from depasturing their bullocks, horses,
or other stock on any common: Provided also that no person travelling
with stock shall be deemed a bond fide traveller who shall not proceed four
miles in one direction during every twenty-four hours unless delayed by
floods.”
No mustering allowed without notice to the Inspector.
10. No person shall be allowed to muster cattle or stock which shall
be on any common, saving milking cows and their calves, or to drive any
such cattle or stock, unless he first give two clear days’ notice in writing
to the inspector of his intention so to do. Nor shall any notice be valid to
that effect, unless signed by the owner or duly authorised agent of the
owner of such cattle or stock, and delivered at the office of the inspector
during office hours, by or on behalf of such owner or agent.
Penalty for illegally depasturing.
11. Any person depasturing or attempting to depasture cattle, stock,
or sheep upon any common without having conformed to these Regulations,
or who shall commit any breach of the last preceding clause, shall be
subject to a penalty not exceeding £5 for every such offence.
Repasturing of Sheep may be alloived by Minister of Lands.
12. On application by any owner or driver of sheep for leave to
depasture the same on a common, the Land Commissioner for the district
shall forthwith report to the Minister lor Lands the nature and particulars of
such application; and until the Minister for Lands shall have decided
thereon, as well as upon the rates to be charged for such depasturage, no such


sheep shall be allowed to depasture on any common : Provided that all
applications to depasture sheep must be made to the Commissioner tor the
district, and not to any Municipal Council or trustees under whose control
the common may have been placed. Provided further that no such applica-
tion shall be decided upon by the Minister for Lands until after fourteen
days’ notice thereof shall have been published in the Gazette, and in at
least one local newspaper nearest to the common in which such sheep are
intended to be depastured; and all such advertisements shall be made by
and at the cost of the applicant, who shall, if required, furnish proof thereof
to the Minister.
Trustees may be appointed in certain cases.
13. In cases where commons are proclaimed under the Act for the
benefit of towns not possessing Municipal Institutions, or for agricultural
districts, the management of such commons may, subject to the approval
of the Minister of Lands, be vested in trustees, not less than five in number,
who shall be appointed in manner hereinafter provided, and such
trustees shall have and perform all the powers and duties which, under
and by virtue of these Regulations, the Land Commissioners have or
are required to perform : Provided always that such trustees shall be liable
in all respects to account to the Minister for all acts and proceedings done
by them in respect of such management in the same manner as such com-
missioners are now or may hereafter be liable so to account.
Election of Trustees.
14. Trustees for the management of commons shall be elected
annually at such times as the Minister may appoint for the first election;
but each subsequent election of trustees shall be held on some day to be
appointed by the retiring trustees during the month preceding the expiration
of the twelve months during which such retiring trustees hold office.
Election of first Trustees.
15. The first trustees shall be elected by the resident freeholders in the
town or agricultural district, at a meeting convened for the purpose by a
person acting under the instructions of the Minister, who will also act as
chairman and returning officer, and every subsequent election shall be
convened by the retiring trustees. The election to be conducted by ballot or
open voting, as may be determined by resolution of the meeting, which will
also decide as to the number of trustees to be elected.
Declaration to he made by Trustees.
16. After such election, each of the trustees elected shall make a declara-
tion in the form in Schedule C, undertaking to act in accordance with
the provisions of these Regulations, and binding himself to obey all lawful
instructions issued by the Minister consistent therewith ; and the returning
officer shall forward such declarations, together with a return stating the
names, occupations, and residences of the trustees so elected, to the
Minister, whose confirmation shall have the effect of vesting in such trustees
the management of the common in respect of which they shall have been
elected.
Appointments to be notified in Government Gazette.
17. The appointment of trustees will be notified in the Government
Gazette under the hand of the Minister.


Trustees may he discharged from their office for neglect of duty.
18. In case any such trustee or trustees shall, in the opinion of the
Minister, fail to act in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations,
or to obey any lawful instructions issued by the Minister consistent there-
with, he or they shall be liable to be discharged from the office and duties
of such trusteeship by the Governor in Council, who shall have the power
to appoint successors to any trustees so discharged.
Vacancies may he filled.
19. In the event of any vacancy occurring by death or resignation,
the remaining trustees shall be empowered to nominate a person to fill the
vacancy : Provided that, if more than one vacancy occurs at the same time,
trustees shall be elected to fill such vacancies by the resident freeholders,
in meeting to be convened as hereinbefore provided.
Trustees to apply fees jor commonage purposes.
20. When the management of a common is vested in trustees, the fees
received for the depasturage of cattle or sheep thereon shall be applied
by the trustees towards the expenses of management and the general
improvement of the common.
Power to malce rules or hye-laws.
21. The trustees shall have power to make rules or bye-laws not incon-
sistent with these Regulations, with respect to their own proceedings,
appointment of a chairman, and the arrangements necessary to carry the
Regulations into effect: Provided that such rules or bye-laws shall be in all
cases confirmed by the Minister and published in the Gazette before they
shall have any force.
Forms,
22. The forms to be employed in the different notices and registries
under these Regulations, shall be in accordance with those set out in the
Schedules hereto.
'ft
ft
© 3
as
&
d
o
rt
ft
©
©
O
p 9 .
O & m
£ ©'d
ft 73 P
•gn|
I 0
p
SCHEDULE A,
n of Inspector's li
ft oj rrt
8 . .5* g
§ . 'S
ua u o
o cj O (O
ft w u as
%n ° 's
g § g
3 rt O
!< fi 3
li
p«g &
r. ©
o fl
o 0.2
H **
P
c 3 ©
O >
P 2
& ®
CS y_4
°
O 4->
©
ts *2
p^
Form of Inspector's Registry.
©
©
d
©
s
m
*
u
i
|
©


SCHEDULE B.
Form of Application to depasture Sheep,
The Land Commissioner for the district of
Sir,
I beg to apply to you for permission to depasture on the common of the
of subject to the the following sheep: —
Rams
Ewes
Wethers
Lambs
Store Sheep.
The circumstances under which I make the application are as follows :
(Here state the circumstances.)
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
G.H.
Eepoet.
I recommend that the application be (not) complied with, on the following
conditions (for the following reasons) ; (state conditions or reasons).
E.F.,
Land Commissioner for the District
The Minister for Lands, Brisbane,
SCHEDDLE C.
I, , do sincerely and solemnly declare that I will, to the best of my
ability, act as a trustee of the common proclaimed under the 72nd
clause of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876,” in accordance with the
provisions of the Commonage Regulations of , and that I
will bind myself to obey all lawful instructions issued by the Minister for Lands,
consistent with the said Act and Regulations.
(Signature) J.F.
Declared before me, this day of 18
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane,
this first day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-seven, and in the fortieth year of
Her Majesty’s reign.
Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
God Save the Queeit !


Queensland, 7 Proclamation by His Excellency William Wellington
to wit. 5 Caiens, Esquire, Companion of the Most Distinguished
(1.5.) Order of St. Michael and St. George, Governor and
W. W. Caiens, Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Governor. Dependencies.
IN pursuance of the power in me vested, I, William Wellington
Caiens, Esquire, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of th®
Executive Council, do, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that
the following Regulations, relative to the cutting and removal of timber,
and to the removal of stone, gravel, brick-earth, shells, or other materials
from Crown Lands, have been established under the provisions of “ The
Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
REGULATIONS.
TIMBER LICENSES.
Application for licenses to he made to Land Commissioners.
1. Applications for licenses to cut timber on Crown lands must be
addressed in the form A to the Land Commissioner for the district, and
lodged with the land agent, together with the fees, as hereinafter provided.
On receipt of each application, the Land Commissioner will exercise a full
discretion as to the granting or refusal of the license applied for, according
to the merits of each ease.
The commissioner or other officer to attend at convenient points of his
district, if required.
2. The commissioner will, if necessary, attend periodically at convenient
points in his district, within an easy accessible distance of all persons who
are engaged in cutting timber on Crown lands, for the purpose of receiving
applications and issuing licenses ; and such arrangements will be duly
notified in the Gazette and nearest local paper.
Licenses when issued not to he transferable.
3. On application for a timber license as aforesaid, if there be no
objection, the commissioner is empowered to grant a license to the applicant
in the form C, which will not entitle any person but the actual holder to
any privilege whatever ; the license is not transferable.
Separate licenses for each person.
4. A separate license must be taken out by each person actually
employed in felling, cutting, sawing, splitting, or removing timber from
Crown lands, whether live or dead timber, underwood, or roots cut for
sale as fuel.
Lessees may cut timber for certain purposes without license.
5. The lessee, or licensed occupant of Crown lands, is permitted to
cut any timber growing thereon for domestic uses, as firewood, fencing, Ac.,
but not for sale cr barter.


92 TIMBER REGULATIONS UNDER ACT OF 1876.
.0 : 1 ■ ; to / u ■::, ;
Licenses.
6. Licenses shall be of two kinds—one empowering the holder to cut
cedar, pine, and hardwood ; the other for hardwood alone.
Fee charged on licenses.
7. The fee chargeable on a cedar and pine license, which must be paid to
the land agent previously to the issue of the license, shall be £5 ; the fee for
hardwood license, £3, to be paid in like manner.
Terms of licenses.
8. The licenses will ordinarily be in force from the date of issue to the
31st day of December then next ensuing; but licenses may be granted at
any time available to the end of the current quarter or half-year, for which
one-quarter or one-half only of the above-mentioned fee will be charged
respectively.
Land Agents to account.
9. The sums so paid to the land agents are to be accounted for and paid
over in the same manner as other public moneys passing through their hands.
Operation of licenses.
10. Licenses will only be operative within the land agent’s district
for which they are issued.
A quarterly return of applications to he forwarded to Lands Department.
11. A return (in the form B) of all applications granted or refused is to
be forwarded quarterly by the land agents to the Department of Public
Lands. A return will be published in the Gazette from time to time of all
timber licenses issued.
Licenses to extend to land under pastoral lease in certain cases.
12. Licenses will extend not only to vacant Crown lands, but also to lands
under pastoral lease, subject to the restrictions contained in “ The Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1876 ” and “ The Pastoral Lucases Act of 1869.”
Lands held under special timber license are excepted from the operation of
ordinary timber licenses.
No timber to he cut within two miles of a head station.
13. No timber shall be cut within two miles of any head station, or
within an enclosure of less extent than one thousand acres, except with
the special consent of the lessee or superintendent of the run.
Lessees make objections to licenses being granted.
14. The lessee of a run may notify in writing to the commissioner any
reasonable objection to any timber license being granted; and the commis-
sioner shall furnish a report upon every such objection to the Minister for
Lands, for the determination of the Governor in Council.
Timber licenses not to extend to toicn, timber , and other reserves, Sfc., except
in special cases.
15. Timber licenses will not extend to town, timber, or other reserves,
or to lands surveyed for sale, except under special authority in each case.


License to he exhibited when demanded. 3
16. Every person holding a license to cut timber must exhibit such
license whenever he is called upon to do so, to the commissioner or any
officer of the Government authorised in that behalf, or any bailiff or ranger
of Crown lands, or police constable, as well as to the occupier of any
run upon which he is cutting timber, or to the agent such occupier. Auy
person refusing to produce his license when called upon to do so, in pursuance
of this regulation, will be considered as unlicensed, and will be prosecuted
accordingly.
Timber to be removed.
17. All timber must be removed within twelve months from the time
when cut; otherwise it will be liable to be seized, forfeited, and sold on
behalf of the Crown, notwithstanding that it was cut under the authority of
a license: pine timber must be removed within three months after it has
been cut, else it may be seized and sold as aforesaid.
Timber to be branded.
18. All timber which has been cut under any license issued by virtue
of these Regulations must be branded by the licensee with the initial letter
of his surname; else it will be liable to be seized, forfeited, and sold on
behalf of the Crown.
Timber cut without license may be seized.
19. The Land Commissioner of the district, or other officer duly
appointed to act in that behalf, may seize any timber cut by unlicensed
persons, and any cut timber lying on Crown lands which he may have canse
to believe has been cut by a person not duly authorised to cut the same;
but in case a right to such timber shall be asserted within fourteen days
after the notice to be presently mentioned, and shall be established to the
satisfaction of the commissioner or officer seizing the same, it shall be
restored to the claimant.
Sale thereof after due notice.
20. All such timber when seized shall be marked with the broad-arrow
and alter due notice of the seizure thereof, by a writing to be posted up at
the principal place of petty sessions in the district, shall, in case no
claimant shall appear and establish his claim within fourteen days therefrom
be there sold; such timber having been previously removed thither, or sold
for delivery on the spot, as may be most expedient, and subject to suce
conditions of removal as may be specified at the time of such sale.
Proceeds of seizure , how dealt with.
21. In the event of any timber being seized and sold as afoi’esaid, the
Minister may direct that a proportion of the proceeds of the sale of timber
so seized, not exceeding one-half thereof, be paid to the commissioner, ranger,
or other officer through whose agency or information the seizure was made ;
the balance of the proceeds being accounted for and paid over in the
same manner as other public moneys.
Withdrawal of lands from operation of timber licenses.
22. The Minister for Lands may at any time, by notification in the
Gazette, exclude any specified portion of land from the operation of
timber licenses, or may prohibit, by notification as aforesaid, the cuttin
and removing of any particular kind of timber from any such specifiee
portion of and.


The cutting of certain kinds of timber prohibited.
23. The cutting or removal of timber consisting of the undermentioned
trees is strictly prohibited, that is to say
Bunya Bunya— Araucaria JSidwillii.
Queensland Nut— Afacadamia Ternifolia.
Turpentine— Eucalyptus M icrocorys.
Pea Bean — Synocarpa Laurifoha.
But this prohibition does not extend to Bunya Bunya trees when standing
or growing on Crown lands within the limits of a proclaimed gold field.
The Land Commissioner of the district may also except timber reserved
for shade or ornament from the operation of timber licenses.
Cedar of less diameter than two feet not to be cut.
24. Cedar trees of a diameter less than two feet shall not be cut down
under any circumstances, either by licensees or any other persons.
LICENSES TO REMOVE STONE, GRAVEL, ERICK, EARTH, SHELLS,
OR OTHER MATERIAL FROM CROWN LANDS.
Licenses to dig and remove stone, gravel, Sfc., restricted to particular
localities.
25. Licenses to dig and remove stone, gravel, brick, earth, shells, or
other similar material, will be issued in the form D, in the same manner
as timber licenses, but will be restricted to the particular locality described
in the license.
Form of application.
26. Applications for such licenses must be in the form E, and must
contain a description of the locality in which the license is to be used.
. Fees charged for licenses.
27. The fee chargeable lor a license to dig for and remove any gravel,
stone, brick, earth, shells, or other material from off Crown lands shall
be £8 per annum, and the license fee to be paid by persons engaged in
making bricks shall be £4 per annum, chargeable on each mould.
License to he subject to the same general regulations as timber licenses.
28. In all other particulars, these licenses will be subject to the regula-
tions applicable to timber licenses.
Employees’ Licenses.
Form of application.
29. Applications for employers’ licenses to cut timber on Crown land B
are to be addressed, in the form F, to the Land Commissioner for the
district where the license is to be used.
Conditions of employer s license,
30. The conditions of an employer’s license are as follows: —That
the licensee shall endorse on the license the name of such person as he may
desire to employ; and the person w T hose name is so endorsed thereon will
be authorised to cut timber from Crown lands in the same manner as the
holder of a personal license under these Regulations.


Employer may change the persons employed by him.
31. Whenever the licensee desires to change the person employed by
him, he shall erase the former name, and enter the new name, and
countersign the entry.
Licenses to he subject to the same general regulations as timber licenses.
32. In all other respects, employers’ licenses will be subject to the
regulations applicable to timber licenses.
Special Timber Licenses.
Application for licenses to be made to District Land Commissioner.
33. Application for special licenses to cut and remove timber from
Crown lands must be made to the Land Commissioner for the district,
in the f®rm H. The application shall contain a clear and sufficient de-
scription of the boundaries of the land over which the applicant desires to
exercise the exclusive right of cutting timber, and shall also be accompanied
by a diagram from actual survey, showing the boundaries of the land
applied for, as marked on the ground by a licensed surveyor.
License to be paid at time of application ••
34. A license fee of (£l5) fifteen pounds for each square mile must b®
paid by the applicant for a special timber license, at the time of lodging
- his application ; and if it shall appear that the issue of a license is unobjec
tionable, the Land Commissioner, after having submitted the application*
with his report, for the approval of the Minister for Lands, will, on receiving
such approval, grant the license.
Land Commissioner may amend boundaries.
35. It shall be competent for the Land Commissioner to amend the
description of boundaries, or the area to be inserted in the license, or to
exclude any land which it may appear expedient to withhold from license.
Rights of holders of special licenses.
36. A special timber license will entitle the holder thereof to the exclusive
right to cut and remove timber from the lands comprised in such license:
Provided that the rights of lessees forj pastoral purposes shall not be inter-
fered with, and that timber required for public works may be removed by
any person duly authorised.
Personal authorities for employ of labor.
37. The holder of a special license will receive personal authorities for
(3) three men for each square mile comprised in the special license; and if
he shall desire to employ a larger number of men, he must obtain additional
authorities, and shall pay a further j,um of five pounds (£5) for each
additional man.
Penalties for refusal to produce authority.
38. The holder of a special license shall endorse on each personal
authority the name of the person employed by him thereunder in cutting
or removing timber from the land comprised in his license; and such
authority shall be produced by the person so authorised to the Land Com-


missioner or other person authorised in that behalf, or ranger or bailiff of
Crown lands, or any police constable, whenever it may be required; and
an}' person refusing to produce such authority to cut limber shall be deemed
to be unlicensed and unauthorised, and liable to the penalties prescribed
by law.
Duration of license.
39. Special licenses will be in force during the current year ending
on the 3lst day of December; but if issued after the 30th day of June, only
one-half the fees shall be charged.
Reneioal of license.
40. Special licenses may be renewed for each succeeding year, on
application, accompanied by the full amount of license fee, being lodged
with the Land Commissioner, not less than one month prior to the expiration
of the current year of the license ; but a renewal of a special license may be
refused, if it shall appear expedient that the land should be withheld from
special license, or that any objection exists as to the character of the
licensee.
Transfer of license.
41. Special licenses may be transferred on application to the Minister*
through the Land Commissioner, and payment of a fee of one pound (£l.)
Lands held under special timber licenses not available for selection,
42. Lands comprised within a special timber license shall not be avail'
able for conditional purchase or homestead selection under “ The Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Timber cross-cut by ordinary timber licensees before issue of special licenses
may be removed.
43. When any portion of land is included in a special timber license
under these Regulations, all timber which has been fallen thereon, and cross-
cut into lengths ready for removal by the holder of an ordinary license,
may be removed by such person within three months if pine timber, and
within twelve months if hardwood or cedar timber, provided that he con-
tinues to hold a license ; but all timber which has only been fallen and not
cross-cut into proper lengths prior to the issue of the special license, will be
deemed to be the property of the holder of the special timber license.
Lands may be excluded from operation of special licenses.
44. The Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, may
exclude any district or portion of country from the operation of special
licenses to cut and remove timber.
General.
Existing licenses to continue in force.
45. All existing licenses shall continue to be in force, subject to the
conditions imposed by these Regulations.


SCHEDULES
Application for a License to cut Timber* including cedar and pine vsood, on
Crown lands.
I, hereby make application to cut timber*
including cedar and pine wood, on the vacant Crown lands in the district
of for the ending 187 .
We, the undersigned, beg leave to recommend the above-named
as a fit and proper person to hold the license applied for.
To the Land Commissioner at
• The word “ not ” to be inserted, as the case may require.
lodged ’ with
LLeturn of all
Agent at
the
Applications for Timber c
, from the
day of 18
other Licenses
the Land
18 , to
day of'
, both inclusive.
Amount of
Tee received in
Description of License, whether
general, or for hardwood only,
or for stone, brick, earth, &c.
Whether
Granted or
Defused.
Grounds
Applicant’s
Name.
Refusal.
each case.
Signature of
and Land
Land Commissioner |
Agent )
Queensland.
License to cut Timber* including cedar and pine wood , on Croivn
■ Lands.
Whereas , of , appears to me, the Land
Commissioner for the District of , to be a fit and proper
person to hold a license to cut timber,* including cedar and pine wood,
growing on the waste lands of the Crown, situated in the district of >
in the Colony of Queensland ; and whereas the stipulated fee of
pounds bas been duly paid for such license for the period of
months, into the hands of the Land Agent, as hereunder acknowledged by him:
Now I, the Land Commissioner aforesaid, do hereby, in pursuance of the regulations
in that behalf made, bearing date the Ist day of March, 1877, authorise the said
to fell, cut, saw, split, and remove any timber,*
including cedar and pine wood, growing on waste lands of the Crown in the said
district of • This license to be in force for the space of
calendar months from the 18 , and no longer.
Excepting always from the operation of this license the trees known as the Dunya
* The word “not” to be inserted, as the case may require.


Bunya, Queensland Nut, Turpentine, and Pea Bean and all timber growing or
standing upon Crown lands within a distance of two miles of a surveyed railway line,
or from any Timber or other Government Reserve. Provided always that this
exception shall not apply to the Bunya Bunya tree when growing or standing upon
Crown lands included within the boundaries of a proclaimed gold field.
Given under my hand, this day of
one thousand eight hundred and
Land Commissioner.
£ : :
Received the sum of as the fee of the above license.
Land Agent.
'Endorsement.
Clauses 13 and 15 of the Regulations for Timber Licenses, established on
the Ist March, 1877.
Clause 13. —No timber shall be cut within two miles of any head station, or
within an enclosure of less extent than one thousand acres, except with the special
consent of the lessee or superintendent of the rim.
Clause 15. —Timber licenses will not extend to town, timber, or other reserves,
or to lands surveyed for sale, except under special authority in each case.
Queensland.
License to dig and remove* from Crown Lands.
Whereas , of , appears to me,
the Land Commissioner for the District of , to be a fit and
proper person to hold a license to dig and remove* from Crown
lands in the district of , in the Colony of Queensland ; and
whereas the stipulated fee of pounds has been duly paid for such
license for the period of months, into the hands of the Land
Agent, as hereunder acknowledged by him: Now I, the Land Commissioner as
aforesaid, do hereby, in pursuance of the Regulations in that behalf made, bearing
date the Ist day of March, 1877, authorise the said to dig and
remove any* from the Crown lands particularly described
in the annexed schedule. This license is to be in force for the space of
calendar months from the day of ,18 ,
and no longer.
Given under my hand, this day of
one thousand eight hundred and
£ : :
Land Commissioner.
Received the sum of pounds, as the fee of the above
license.
Land Agent.
Schedule.
Licensee:
Nature of material to be dug and removed under this license:
Districts:
Description of the locality in which this license is to be used:
* State whether stone, brick, earth, gravel, shells, or other material, as the case may be.


Application for a License to dig and remove* from Crown Lands i n
the district of
I, of , hereby apply for a license to dig
and remove* from the under described Crown landsf
for the ending the 187 .
\_Sig nature of Applicant.']
The Laud Commissioner at
* State whether stone, brick, earth, gravel, shells, or other material, as the case may be.
t Describe the locality within which the license is to be used.
Application for Employer's License to cut Timber on Crown Lands.
I, , of , do hereby apply that an
Employer’s License to cut and remove timber* including
cedar and pine wood, from the vacant Crown lands in the district of
for the ending ,18 , may be isstted to me, in accordance with the
Regulations.
Given under my hand, this day of ,
To the Land Commissioner at
* The word “ not ” to be inserted as the case may require.
Queensland.
Employer's Lice nse to cut Timber on Crown Lands.
Whereas , of , appears to me, the Land
Commissioner of the district of to be a fit and proper person to hold
an Employer’s License to cut and remove timber* including cedar and
pine wood, from the vacant Crown lands in the district of ; and
whereas the stipulated fee of pounds has been duly paid for such
license into the hands of the Laud Agent, as hereunder acknowledged by him:
Now I, the Land Commissioner aforesaid, do hereby authorise the said
to employ the person whose name may be endorsed here under by the said licensee,
to cut and remove any timber* including cedar and pine wood, growing on
the vacant Crown lands in the said district of , from the date hereof, until
the , and no longer. Excepting always from the operation
of this license the trees known as the JBunya Bunya, the Queensland Nut, the
Turpentine, and the Pea Bean, and all timber growing or standing upon Crown
lands within a distance of two miles of a surveyed railway line or from any Timber
or other Government Reserve. Provided always that this exception shall not apply
to tlie Bunya Bunya tree when growing or standing upon Crown lauds included
within the boundaries of a proclaimed gold field.
Give under my hand, this day of one
thousand eight hundred and
Land Commissioner.
£ : :
Received the sum of pounds as the fee of the above license.
Land Agent.
Name oe Person Employed
* The word “not” to be inserted, as the case may require.


Endorsement.
Clauses 13 and 15 of the Regulations for Timber Licenses established on
the Ist March, 1877.
Clause 13.—N0 timber shall bo’cut -within two miles of any head station, or with-
in an enclosure of less extent than one thousand acres, except with the special
consent of the lessee or superintendent of the run.
Clause 15.—Timber licenses will not extend to town, timber, or other reserves,
or to lands surveyed for sale, except under special authority in each case.
Application for Special License to cut Timber on Crown Lands.
X of , do hereby apply for a Special
License to cut and remove timber from the lands described in the schedule hereto
annexed, and do also request that personal authorities to employ
men thereon may be issued to me, in accordance with the existing Regulations.
Given under my hand, this day of 18 .
The Land Commissioner,
Schedule.
District of
Area in square miles :
Pescription of boundarie
District of
No.
Special License to cut and remove Timber from Crown Lands.
This is to certify that , of is duly licensed to cut
and remove timber from the lands described in the schedule hereto annexed, from
the to the 31st day of December, 18 ,in accordance with
the Regulations governing special timber licenses.
Given under my hand, this day of 18 .
Land Commissioner.
Schedule.
District of
Area in square miles :
Description of boundaries:


District of
Personal authority to cut Timber under a Special Timber License.
This is to certify that , of , being the holder of
Special Timber License No. , is authorised to employ the person whose
name is endorsed hereon, to cut and remove timber from the lands comprised in
the said license, from the day of to the
day of 18
Given under my hand, this
day of
Land Commissioner.
Description of land included in license.
The name of the person employed by the holder of the special license is to be written below;
and if the person employed be changed, the new name is to be written under the previous
one, as the last name will only be recognised.
Name of Person Employed :
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
first day of March, in the } r ear of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-seven, and in the fortieth year of He
Majesty’s reign.
Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
God Save the Queen !


INSTRUCTIONS TO COMMISSIONERS.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 24th February, 1877.
Sis,
As “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 ” will come into
operation on the Ist proximo, it is desirable that the Land Commissioners
and Land Agents should be made acquainted with the particular points in
which its provisions differ from those of the Act of 1868 ; I have therefore
subjoined, under the several headings, which it is desirable to advert to, the
necessary instructions for your guidance, which I trust will supply all that is
required for working the Act.
Registration of Applications.
1. The procedure in regard to the lodgment and acceptance of applica-
tions will mainly continue the same as heretofore. There will be an
Application-book, called in the Act “The Begister of Applications, in
which the applicant or his duly constituted attorney will require to sign his
name, for the purpose of establishing his right of priority over any subse-
quent application. The book used as a Begister of Selections under the Act
of 1868 (and supplied by the Audit Office), in which all payments are
entered, is to bo used for the entries under the new Act, —a strong line being
drawn below the last entry under the Act of 1868, and the words “The
Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 ” being written immediately above
the first entry under the last-mentioned Act. The numbers of the selections
under the Act of 1876 will follow the last number under the Act of 1868, in
consecutive order ; as, I believe, it will be found more convenient to have a
continuous series of numbers in each district, than to commence a new series
under each Act. A Begister of the Bailiffs on each selection, which can be
posted up from the agreements required to be lodged under the provisions of
sub-section 4 of section 28, will also require to be kept for the purpose of
reference when the selectors apply for their certificates.
Lands open to Selection.
2. The only lands open to selection under the Act on the Ist March,
when the Act of 1876 comes into operation, are —Ist. The unsettled country
lands in the Settled Districts; 2nd. The unselected lands within Homestead
Areas ; and 3rd. The unselected country lands within Town Beserves open
respectively to selection under the Act of 1868 at the time of its repeal. The
upset prices and maximum areas allowed to be selected of these several
classes of land will be proclaimed on the Ist March, and the information
contained therein will be communicated to you by wire before that date, so
that you may be able to receive applications on the day the new Act comes
into operation.


Portions of the lands resumed from runs during’ the last session of
Parliament will also be declared open to selection at dates which will be
specified in the proclamations. Further information in regard to these lands
will be conveyed to you from time to time.
Selections under Act of 1876.
3. Persons who hold selections under the Act of 1868 may make applica-
tions for adjoining land subject to the restriction as regards boundaries
contained in the Act, and provided also that the maximum area of 5,120 acres
is not exceeded. Selectors, however, who have resided personally on their
selections, whether under the Acts of 1868 or 1876, for a year, may make
another selection subject to the maximum area as above not being exceeded.
In such cases the declaration in accordance with Form G in the regulations
must be made by the applicant and be attached to the application. With
these exceptions, no person can hold more than one selection under the Act
of 1876.
Date of Proclamation must he affixed to each Application to select.
4. As the upset price and maximum area allowed to be selected of all
land open to selection under the Act requires to be proclaimed, it will be
necessary to give the date of proclamation on all applications to select, in
order that a proper check may be established on the work of the Land
Agents. This will only apply to conditional purchases, as the upset price of
Homesteads is fixed by the Act and will not be affected by any proclamation
of upset prices, whether]within or outside Homestead areas.
Simultaneous Applications.
5. When there are simultaneous applications to select the same land, it
will be necessary to offer the land at auction amongst the applicants, when
the applications are dealt with at the Land Court. In the 7th and Bth
sections of the general regulations under the Act you will find the procedure
defined. When the applications comprise the same land there will be no
difficulty in dealing with them ; bub in cases where numerous applications
overlap, it will require great care on your part to ascertain the particular
areas which wdll require to be competed for,—the principle of the Act being
that only that land which is applied for simultaneously should be submitted
to auction. This is manifestly fair, as there may Le instances in which a
small selection overlaps a very large one, and under such circumstances it
Would not be equitable to require the applicant for the larger area to compete
for the remainder of the land included in his selection, for which he is the
only applicant.
In dealing with applications which overlap each other to a small extent,
you will endeavor to adjust, if possible, the boundaries, without prejudice to
the interests of any of the selectors, with the view of securing to each a
definite area, and so get rid of the necessity of submitting the land to
competition ; but this will not authorise you to ignore the rights of any of
the selectors, nor to take such action as will prove detrimental to the revenue.
When an applicant acquires the title to the land included in an overlap
by competition, the rent of the selection will be raised proportionately to the
area competed for, the balance of the land being leased at the upset price
fixed by the proclamation.


You will perceive that Homestead Selectors are entitled to priority over
Conditional Purchase Selectors when they are simultaneous applicants.
When Homestead Selectors are themselves simultaneous applicants, the land
will require to be submitted to auction in the same way as in the case of
Conditional Purchases.
Notice of Withdrawal to he forwarded to Pastoral Lessee.
6. In the case of lands resumed from runs, subject to the provisions of
“The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases Act of 1876,” you will cause the
Land Agent to forward a notification of withdrawal (a supply of which
be sent to you) to the Lessee of the Run, as prescribed in sections 6 and 7 of
that Act.
Lmprovements on Lands selected.
7. When improvements are upon lands open to selection, you will
proceed according to the usage adopted under the Act of 1868, unless the
lands have been resumed subject to “The Settled Districts Pastoral Pleases
Act of 1876,” as in the case of the resumptions to be proclaimed on the Ist
March, or the runs hitherto resumed, as per margin, when you will adopt the
course prescribed in sub-sections 8,9, and 10 of section 4 of that Act, to
which I beg to draw your attention.
In the case of arbitrations for the purpose of determining the value of
improvements or otherwise, under “ The Settled Districts Pastoral Leases
Act of 1876,” the forms to be used are similar to the forms H, K, L, M in
the general regulations, with the substitution of the title of the above Act
instead of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
Business in connection with Selections under Act of 1868.
8. Any business requiring to be transacted in connection with selections
under the Act of 1868, in the case of applications for certificates or otherwise,
may be dealt with at your monthly courts, gazetted under the new Act. A
notification to that effect will appear in the Gazette.
Timber Licenses.
9. The timber regulations established under the Act of 1876 provide for
the issue of licenses by the Land Commissioner instead of by the flenches of
Magistrates. The regulations sufficiently define the duties which devolve
n n •/ 1111
upon you in regard thereto, and I would suggest that you should lose no
time in acquainting yourself with the nature of the work placed in your
hands, so that no inconvenience will be experienced by the public, and also,
that by giving a careful attention to this branch of your duties, the land
revenue may be increased. In a separate letter I have drawn attention to
this subject, and have solicited suggestions which your local knowledge may
enable you to supply.
Bailiff of Crown Lands.
10. It is proposed to place the Bailiffs of Crown lands more under your
control and supervision than they have hitherto been. These officers will
therefore in all cases receive their instructions and forward their reports
through you. This will be understood as referring to the general conduct
of business, and will not preclude the Minister from directing the bailiff,
should occasion arise, front executing any order he may give him.


Powers of two Justices.
11. You will observe that by the Act 3 r ou are empowered to exercise the
same powers and authority as any two J usticcs of the Peace. This will not
entitle you to deal with any cases out of your jurisdiction as Land Commis-
sioner, but is for the purpose of placing you in the position of being able to
enforce the attendance of witnesses, and to uphold order in your Court. A
form of summons is supplied in the Regulations which is to be used when the
attendance of witnesses is required.
12. In conclusion, I have to request that you will read the Act and the
Regulations attentively, and also examine the several forms, so that you may
be able to supply all necessary information respecting the Act to any person
making inquiries on the subject. Supplies of these forms will be forwarded
as soon as they are printed, as well as maps showing the resumed lands which
it is proposed to declare open to selection in April.
I also forward copies of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876”
and “ Settled Districts Pastoral Lands Act of 1876,” together with drafts of
the Regulations which will be proclaimed on the Ist of March.
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient Servant,
W. ALCOCX TULLY,
Under-Secretary.


Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, Ist March, 1877.
HIS Excellency the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council'
has been pleased to approve of the following descriptions of the
boundaries of the districts assigned to the Land Agents under the provisions
of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876.”
JOHN DOUGLAS.
BRISBANE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the mouth of the Logan River, and bounded thence by
that river westerly and southerly to the south-west corner of portion 186,
parish of Moffatt; then by the south boundary of that portion bearing east
thirty-four chains seventy-five links ; then by the west boundary of portion
191 bearing south fourteen chains ; then by a line bearing east to the water-
shed separating the Logan River from the. Albert River; then by said
watershed southerly about sixty chains ; then by a line bearing east crossing
the Albert River at the north boundary of portion 4a, parish of Wickham,
to the watershed separating the Albert River from Pimpama Creek and
other waters; then by said watershed southerly to the range separating
the Logan River from the Tweed, Richmond, and Clarence Rivers ; then by
said range westerly ; then by the watershed separating Teviot Brook from
the Logan River, and the watershed separating Teviot Brook from Crow’s
Creek, to the junction of said creeks; then by Teviot Brook to the junction of
Moolooman Creek, and by that creek upwards to Mount Flinders; then by
the Mount Flinders Range to the head of Woogaroo Creek, and by that
creek to its confluence with the Brisbane River; then by a spur range to
D’Aquilar’s Range, and by that range to the northern watershed of the
Maroochydorc River, and by that watershed to the sea-coast; then by the
sea-coast and shore of Moreton Bay southerly to the Logan River, the point
of commencement.
BEENLEIGH LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the mouth of the Logan River, and bounded thence by
that river westerly and southerly to the south-west corner of portion No.
186, parish of Moffatt; then by the south boundary of that portion bearing
east thirty-four chains seventy-five links ; then by the west boundary of
portion 191 bearing south fourteen chains ; then by a line bearing east to the
watershed separating the Logan River from the Albert River; then by said
watershed southerly about sixty chains ; then by a line bearing east cross-
ing the Albert River at the north boundary of portion 4a, parish of Wick-
ham, and terminating at the watershed separating the Albert River from
Pimpama Creek and other waters ; then by said watershed southerly to the
south boundary of Queensland; then by said boundary easterly to Point
Danger ; and thence by the sea-coast and shore of Moreton Bay northerly
to the point of commencement.
IPSWICH LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the junction of Woogaroo Creek with the Brisbane
River, and bounded thence by that creek' upwards to its head in Mount
Flinders Range, and by that range to Mount Flinders; then by Moolooman
Creek downwards to its junction with Teviot Brook, and by that brook to
the junction of Crow’s Creek; then by the watershed separating Teviot


Brook from Crow’s Creek and the Logan River southerly to the range sepa-
rating Teviot Brook and the Bremer River from the Clarence River; then
by said range westerly; then by the Great Dividing Range northerly to
where it junctions with the Mistake Mountains ; then by those mountains
and the watershed between Laidley and Blackfellows’ Creeks northerly to the
head of Sandy Creek; then by that creek downwards to the Southern and
Western Railway; then by that railway north-westerly to the south-east
corner of portion 79, parish of Gatton ; then by the eastern boundaries of
portions 79, 77, and 76, in said parish, to Lockyer’s Creek ; then by that
creek upwards to the boundary between the parishes of Lockyer and
Clarendon; then by that boundary, being the western boundaries of por-
tions 211, 196, 194, 193, 181, 183, 177, 176, 174, 171, and 170, parish of
Clarendon, and by a line north crossing Buaraba Creek to the range sepa-
rating Buaraba Creek from Esk or Sandy Creek ; then by that range
westerly and the range forming the boundary between Eskdale or heads of
Cressbrook and Mount Esk, Cressbrook and Colinton Runs, northerly to
Nukinenda Creek ; then by that creek downwards to its junction with Emu
Creek, and by that creek upwards to the junction of Googa Googa Creek;
then by a spur range to Blackbutt Range, and by that range northerly to
Cooyar Creek, between the confluence of Paradise ai\d Taromeo Creeks ;
then by Cooyar Creek upwards to the junction of Taromeo Creek ; then by
the watershed separating Paradise from Oaky Creek north-westerly to the
Main Dividing Range; then by that range'and the range separating the
waters flowing into the Mary River from those of the Brisbane River
northerly and easterly to D’Aguilar’s Range, and by that range southerly
and a spur range to the confluence of Woogaroo Creek with the Brisbane
River, the point of commencement.
HELIDON LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on Lockycr’s Creek where the boundary between the
parishes of Clarendon and Lockyer intersects the creek, then by that
houndar3 r , being the western boundaries of portions 211, 196, 194, 193, 184,
183, 177, 176, 174, 171, 170, parish of Clarendon, and by a line north
crossing Buaraba Creek to the range separating Buaraba Creek from Esk or
Sandy Creek ; then by that range westerly, and by the range
boundary betw’een Eskdale or heads of Cressbrook and Mount Esk,
Cressbrook and Colinton Runs, northerly to Nukinenda Creek; then by
that creek downwards to its junction with hmu Creek, and by that creek
upwards to its junction with Googa Googa Creek ; then by a spur range to
Blackbutt Range, and by that range and the range forming the south-east
watershed of Cooyar Creek, south-westerly to the Main Dividing Range;
then by that range southerly to the northern boundary of the Toowoomba
Agricultural Reserve; then by the northern, eastern, and southern boun-
daries of that reserve, and the eastern boundary of Drayton Town Reserve
southerly to the Main Range, and by the Main Dividing Range south-
easterly to where it junctions with the Mistake Mountains ; then by those
mountains and the watershed between Laidley and Blackfellows Creeks
northerly to the head of Sandy Creek ; then by that creek downwards
to the Southern and Western Railway ; then by that railway north-westerly
to the south-east corner of portion 79, parish of Gatton ; then by the
eastern boundaries of portions 79, 77, and 76 in said parish to Lockyer s
Creek ; then by that creek upwards to the boundary between the parishes of
Bockyer aud Clarendon, the point of commencement.


TOOWOOMBA LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on Lie Main Range, and bounded on the north-west and
west by the north-western and western boundaries of Rosalie Plains Run ;
thence by part of the southern boundary of same run easterly, by the
eastern boundary of Jondaryan Run, the northern boundary of Prairie East
Run, the eastern boundary of Prairie West Run southerly, by part of the
south-west boundary of same north-westerly, by the south boundary of
Cecil Plains Run westerly to the Condamine River, by the Condainine
River upwards to the south-east corner of selection 115 D.R. ; by the
southern boundary of that selection and a line in continuation westerly
to the range separating Condamine River waters from those of the
Macintyrc River; by that range southerly to the south corner of Tumma-
ville Ten Years’Lease; thence by the south-east boundary of that lease
north-easterly to the south boundary of P.P. 4; by part of the south and
west boundaries of that portion west and north to Condamine River ; by that
river upwards to the west corner of W.R. 96; by the north-west boundary
of that selection north-easterly to the north branch of Condamine River;
thence by the north branch and by the Condamine River upwards to the con-
fluence of King’s Creek; by King’s Creek upwards to north-east corner
of portion 1, parish of King’s Creek ; thence by part of the east boundary of
that portion south and by the northern and eastern boundaries of P.P. 80,
48, 49; by the southern boundaries of 90, 91, 92, 101, 102, 103, parish of
Stephens ; by the east boundary of 103; by the south boundaries of 75,
72, 71, 68, 118, 122, 123,131,132, parish of Elphiustone, easterly to Warwick
Railway ; by that railway northerly to the north-west corner of portion
186, parish of Allora; by the northern boundaries of 186, 201, 200, 199,
198, 197, 196, 195, and by a lino cast to the south-east corner of portion
545, parish of Clifton; thence by the south-east boundaries of selections
307, 86, 290, 305 W.R. to the cast corner of 305; thence by the water-
shed between King’s and Dalrymplc Creeks easterly to the Main Range;
on the east by the Main Range northerly by the eastern boundary of the
Drayton Town Reserve, the southern, eastern, and northern boundaries of
the Toowoomba Agricultural Reserve, easterly, northerly, and westerly to
the Main Range ; and thence by the Main Range northerly to the point
of commencement.
DALBY LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the head of Goorangah Creek, and bounded thence on
the north-east and north by the Main Range northerly and westerly to the
range dividing Charley’s Creek from Dogwood Creek ; on the west by that
range southerly to the junction of Charley’s Creek with the Condamine
River; thence by a line south-easterly to the head of Kogan Creek ; thence
by the range dividing the Condamine waters from the Moonie and Weir
Rivers waters southerly to the southern boundary of Cecil Plains Run; by
that boundary easterly, being a line along the southern boundaries of selec-
tions 120, 115 D.R., to the Condamine River; by the Condamine River
downwards and by the south boundary of Cecil Plains Ten Years’ Lease
east to the south-west boundary of Prairie West Run ; by part of the
west boundary of that run south-easterly by the east boundary of same run
north by the north-east boundary of Prairie East Run; by the east boun-
dary of Jondaryan Run north to the south boundary of llosalie Plains
Run; by the south boundary of that run westerly and by the west and
north-west boundaries of same rur. norther!}’- and north-easterly to the Main
Range ; and by the Main Range nerth-westerjy to point of commencement.


WARWICK LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the Main Range at Maryland, and bounded on the south
by Herrie’s Range and the range separating the Condamine River vraters
from those falling into the Macintyre River westerly and northerly to the
south corner of Tummaville Ten Tears’ Lease; thence by the south-east
boundary of that lease north-easterly to the south boundary of P.P. 4; by
part of the south and west boundaries of that portion west and north to the
Condamine River; by that river upwards to the west corner of W.R. 96;
by the north-west boundary of that selection north-easterly to the north
branch of Condamine River ; thence by the north branch and by the Con-
damine River upwards to the confluence of King’s Creek; by that^ creek
upwards to the north-east corner of portion 1, parish of King’s Creek ;
thence by part of the cast boundary of that portion south, and by the
northern and eastern boundaries of P.P. 80, 48, 49, by the southern
boundai’ics of portions 90, 91, 92, 101, 102, 103, parish of Stephens ; by
the east boundary of 103, by the south boundaries of 75, 72, 71, 68, 118,
122, 123, 131, 132, parish of Elphinstone, easterly to the Warwick Railway ;
by that railway northerly to the north-west corner of portion 186, parish
ofAllora; by the northern boundaries of portions 186,201,200, 199, 198,
197, 196, 195, and by aline east to the south-east_ corner of portion 545,
parish of Clifton ; thence by the south-east boundaries of selections 307, 86,
290, 305, W.R., to the east corner of 305; thence by the watershed
between King’s and Dalrymple Creeks easterly to the Main Range ; and on
the east and south-east by the Main Range southerly and south-westerly to
Maryland, the point of commencement.
GYMPIE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the shore of Wide Bay, and bounded on the north
by a line bearing west to the south boundary of Tiaro Town Reserve ; thence
by a line bearing west to the Mary River; by that river upwards to
Munna Creek ; by that creek upwards to a point where the spur range
forming the north-east boundary of Teebar Ten Years’ Lease meets
that creek near the south-west corner of mineral selection 1310; thence
by that spur range north-westerly to the range separating the Mary River
from the Burnett River; on the west by that range southerly ; on the south
by the range separating the Mary River from Brisbane River easterly to
the head of Maroochydore River; thence by the northern watershed of that
river to the sea-coast; and on the east by the sea-coast to the point of com-
mencement.
MARYBOROUGH LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the shore of Wide Bay and bounded on the south by a
line bearing west to the south boundary of Tiaro Town Reserve ; thence by a
line west to the Mary River; by that river upwards to Munna Creek; by
that creek upwards to a point where the spur range forming the north-east
boundary of Teebar Ten Years’ Lease meets that creek near the south-west
corner of mineral selection 1310; thence by that spur range north-westerly
to the range separaiing the Mary River from the Burnett River ; on the west
by that range and by a spur range forming the eastern watershed of
Legilbo Creek to the junction of that creek with Burnett River; thence
by a line bearing east 31 degrees north about 1840 chains to the south-
west corner of C. West’s selection No. 503; thence north 6472 links.


thence west 40 chains to the south-west corner of W. Quinn’s selection, No.
491; thence north ICO chains to north-west corner of A. H. Wilson’s selec-
tion No. 511 on the right bank of Gregory River; thence by that river
downwards to Burrum River ; by the Burrum River downwards to the sea-
coast, and by the sea-coast southerly to the point of commencement.
BUNDABERG LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the left bank of the Gregory River, opposite the north-
west corner of Andrew Heron Wilson’s selection, No. 511, Maryborough
District; thence south one hundred and sixty chains to the south-west corner
of William Quinn’s selection, No. 491; thence east forty chains ; thence
south sixty-four chains and seventy-two links to the south-west corner of
Charles West’s selection, No. 503; thence south fifty-nine degrees west
about one thousand eight hundred and forty chains to the mouth of
Degilbo Creek ; thence by a line north-west to the range separating the
waters of the Burnett River from those falling into the Rolan River;
thence westerly, northerly, and easterly, by the range forming the northern
watershed of the Rolan River to Double Sloping Hummock ; thence by the
north-western watershed of the Littabella Creek north-easterly about eight
hundred chains in a straight line to the Coast Reserve ; thence by the Coast
Reserve northerly to Baffle Creek ; thence by Baffle Creek downwards to
the sea-coast, and by the sea-coast easterly to the Burrum River; thence
westerly by the Burrum River upwards to the confluence of the Gregory
River, and by the left bank of that river up to the point of commencement.
GAYJSDAH LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the Great Dividing Range, at the head of Boondooma
Creek, and bounded thence by the northern boundary of Boondooma Run
easterly to the Boyne River; thence by that river to the confluence of
Stuart’s River; thence by the spur range forming the northern boundary
of Erosion Run easterly to the watershed between Stuart’s River and
Barambah Creek; by that watershed and a spur ridge to the confluence of
Barambah and Boonara Creeks; thence by a spur range forming the
northern boundaries of Boonimba and Boonbyjan Runs easterly to the
watershed separating the Mary River waters from those of the Burnett River;
then by said watershed and the eastern watershed of Degilbo Creek northerly
to the Burnett River at the confluence of Degilbo Creek and Burnett River;
thence by the Burnett River upwards to a point bearing west from the
intersection of the Gayndah and Maryborough Road by the west boundary
of Degilbo Run ; thence by a line west to the western watershed of Reid s
Creek; then by said watershed and a spur ridge to the confluence of
Rawbeile Creek and Burnett River; then by the eastern watershed of
that creek northerly ; then by the watershed separating Rawbeile Creek
from Rroombit Creek ; then by the watershed separating Burnett River
from Dawson River southerly to the Great Dividing Range, and by said
range southerly and easterly to the point of commencement.
ROCKHAMPTON LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at a tree marked broad-arrow JP, situate at the edge of
the mangroves on the bank of a small tributary of Raglan Creek, and
bounded thence by said creek southerly to its head in the Mount Larcom
Range ; then by said range and the range separating Raglan Creek from the
Calliope and Don Rivers westerly ; then by a line bearing south-west crossing


the Don River at a tree marked X in circle and situate about one hundred
and five chains below the junction of Manton’s Creek, and terminating at
the range separating the Don River from Gerrard’s Creek; then by the said
range easterly about one hundred and forty chains ; then by a line bearing
south three and a-half degrees west about thirteen and a-half miles crossing
Gerrard’s, Smoky, and Bell’s Creeks ; then by a line bearing west-south-west
crossing the Callide and Kroombit Creeks and the Lillies Waterhole to the
range separating Kroombit Creek from the Dawson River; then by said
range northerly and by a line west crossing the Don River at a point about
three-quarters of a mile below selection 462 RR, being the boundary of
Callingal Run, to Mount Spencer Range ; by that range northerly to Mount
Spencer; then by the western waterhole of Gogango Creek to its junction
with the Fitzroy" River; thence by a line bearing north-west to the range
separating the Mackenzie River from tributaries of the Fitzroy River below
Gogango Creek ; thence by said range and the range separating the Mac-
kenzie and Isaac Rivers from waters flowing easterly to the sea, northerly
to the head of Granite Creek ; thence by that creek downwards to its junction
with the River Styx; thence by the loft bank of that river downwards to
the sea-coast.
GLADSTONE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT,
Commencing at a tree marked broad-arrow JP, situate at the edge of
the mangroves on the bank of a small creek to Raglan Creek, and
bounded thence by said creek southerly to its head in the Mount Larcom
Range; then by said range and the range separating Raglan Creek from
the Calliope and Don Rivers westerly ; then by a line bearing south-west,
crossing the Don River at a tree marked X in circle, about one hundred and
five chains below the junction of Manton’s Creek, and terminating at the
range separating the Don River from Gerrard’s Creek ; then by said range
easterly about one hundred and forty chains; then by a line bearing south
three and a-half degrees west about thirteen and a-half miles; then by a line
bearing west-south-west crossing the Callide and Kroombit Creeks and the
Lillies Waterhole to the range separating Kroombit Creek from the Dawson
River; thence by said range southerly; then by the range separating
Kroombit Creek, the Boyne River,.and Baffle Creek from the Burnett River
and Kolan Creek easterly to Double Sloping Hummock; thence by the
north-western watershed of Littabella Creek north-easterly about eight hun-
dred chains in a. straight line to the Coast Reserve ; thence by the Coast
Reserve northerly to Baffle Creek ; thence by that creek to the sea-coast;
thence by the sea-coast north-westerly to the point of commencement,
including'the islands adjacent thereto.
ST. LAWRENCE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the junction of Granite Creek with the Styx River, and
bounded on the south by Granite Creek westerly to the range separating the
waters of the Isaac River from those flowing direct to the coast; thence by
said range northerly to Long Hill; thence by a spur range to Cape Palmers-
ton ; thence by the sea-coast southerly to the mouth of the River Styx;
and thence by the left bank of that river upwards to the point of commence-
ment.


MACKAY LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at Cape Palmerston, and bounded tliencc on the south
by a spur x-ange westerly to Long Hill ; thence by a line bearing north-
west to a point thirty miles in a direct line to the sea-coast; thence by a
line parallel to the sea-coast, at a distance of thirty miles ; on the north by
a line bearing north-east to Mount Hector, and thence again on the north
by a line bearing north-cast to the Andromache River near its source, and
by that river downwards to its confluence with O’Connell River, and by
that river downwards to the north-west extreme of Repulse Bay; and on
the east bj r the sea-coast southerly to the point of commencement.
BOWEN LAND DISTRICT.
Commencing on the sea-coast, between Cape Bowling Green and Cape
Cleveland, at the mouth of the Houghton River, and bounded thence on tlxo
north-west by the Houghton River upwards ; on the south-west by a line
parallel to and distant from the sea-coast thirty miles south-easterly ; on the
south-east by a line bearing north-east to Mount Hector, and thence again
on the south-east by a line bearing north-east to the Andromache River
near its source, and by that river downwards to its confluence with the
O’Connell River, and by that river downwards to the north-west extreme
of Repulse Bay; and thence on the east and north-east by the sea-coast
northerly and north-westerly to the point of commencement.
TOWNSVILLE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the sea-coast, between Cape Bowling Green and Cape
Cleveland, at the mouth of the Houghton River, and bounded thence on tlxe
south-east by the Houghton River upwards; on the west and north-west by
a line parallel to the sea-coast at a distance of thirty miles therefrom, and
bearing north-westerly ; on the north by the nineteenth parallel of south
latitude, bearing true east to the shore of Halifax Bay ; and on the east and
north-east by the sea-coast south-easterly to the point of commencement.
CARDWELL LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the shore of Halifax Bay, and bounded on the south
by the nineteentlx parallel of south latitude bearing true west; on the west
by a line bearing northerly parallel to the sea-coast, and distant thirty miles
therefrom; on the north by the northern watershed of the Mackay River
easterly to Tam O’Shanter Point; and on the east by the sea-coast to the
point of commencement.
NORMANTON LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT,
Commencing on the shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria at Point Fitz-
maurice, and bounded thence on the north by a line east to the south-western
watershed of the Gilbert River, and by that watershed to a point thirty
miles in a direct line from the nearest part of the said shore ; on the east
and south by a line parallel to the shore, and distant thirty miles therefrom,
to the 138th parallel ot east longitude, which is also the boundary of the
Colony of Queensland, and by that parallel to the shore of the Gulf of
Carpentaria; thence by the shore to the point of commencement.


CAIRNS LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Comraencinglat Tam O’Shanter’s Point, and bounded thence by the
northern watershed of Mackay River westerly to a point distant thirty miles
from the sea-coast; thence by a line parallel to and distant thirty miles from
the sea-coast northerly, and by a line cast to Cape Tribulation ; and' on the
cast by the sea-coast southerly to the point of commencement.
TENNINGERING LAND AGENT'S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the left bank of Sunday Creek at a point about twenty-
five chains south and twenty chains west of a tree marked 8 on the survey of
that creek, and bounded thence on the south by a west line crossing Sunday
Creek and passing through a spot five miles south of the south corner of
section No. 10 of the town of Tenningering eight miles ; thence on the west
by a north line to the watershed forming the southern boundary of the Settled
District of Wide Bay and Burnett; thence on the north by that boundary
easterly to a point north of a tree marked broad-arrow over P over XIII on
the Perry River; thence on the east by a south line passing through the
last-mentioned marked tree to a point east of [starting point; and thence
again on the south by a west line seven miles to Sunday Creek, die point of
commencement, —inclusive of two thousand five hundred and sixty acres,
reserved by Notice dated 24th November, 1871 (vide Government Gazette of
1871, page 1750), and thirty square miles reserved by proclamation dated
2nd November, 1874 (vide Government Gazette of 1874, page 2132).
CLERMONT LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at a point about two miles above the confluence of Douglas
and Sandy Creeks, and bounded thence by Douglas Creek downwards to
Sandy Creek, and by Sandy Creek downwards, in all about seven and three-
quarter miles, bearing south 59 degrees east from starting point; thence on
south-east by a line bearing south 43 degrees west, about three miles forty
chains, being part of the north-west boundary of Slateford Run and same
line continued to Theresa Creek; by that creek downwards to the junction
of Tomahawk Creek; by the last creek upwards to a point on left bank,
about half-a-mile above a hill called Langton Edge ; thence on the south-
west by a line bearing north-west crossing Theresa Creek to a point distant
four hundred and twenty-five chains from Theresa Creek ; thence by a line
north-east to the southern watershed of Douglas Creek ; by that watershed
westerly; on the west by the watershed separating Douglas and Sand} r
Creeks"from Logan Creek and other waters northerly; on the north by the
northern watershed of Sancty Creek easterly afad southerly; and. by a line
east crossing Bath Creek to the junction of Apsley and Woltang Creeks;
then by a line east five miles; on the east by a line southerly to the north-
west corner of Langton Station paddock, No. 1, then by the western fence
of said paddock southerly, then by the northern fence of Langton Station
paddock, No. 2, bearing west, crossing Sandy Creek to the eastern boundary
of Clermont and Copperfield Municipality; by said boundary south to
Douglas Creek, and thence by Douglas Creek to point of commencement.
SPRING SURE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the confluence of Theresa Creek with the Nogoa River,
and bounded thence on the north by a line bearing west to the western
watershed of the Nogoa River ; on the west by that watershed southerly t?


the Great Dividing Range ; on the south by that range easterly to Expe-
dition Range ; on the east by Expedition Range northerly to a point bearing
east from the confluence of the Comet and Mackenzie Rivers ; thence by a
line west to that confluence, and by the Mackenzie River upwards to the
point of commencement.
ROMA LIND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the Main Dividing Range at the junction of a spur
range dividing Charley’s Creek from Dogwood Creek, and bounded thence
by that spur range southerly to the confluence of Charley’s Creek with the
Condaminc River; thence by a line south-easterly to the head of Kogan
Creek ; thence by the range dividing the Condamine River waters from those
of the Moonie and Weir Rivers southerly to where it is intersected by the
east boundary of the Western Railway Reserve; thence by that eastern
boundary southerly to the south-east corner of that reserve; thence by the
southern boundary of same westerly, by the western boundar}' of same
northerly, by the northern boundary of same easterly to the Main Dividing
Range near the head of Dogwood Creek ; and thence by the Main Dividing
Range easterly to the point of commencement, —excluding the Land Agents’
Districts of Surat and Condamine.
ST. GEORGE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at a point on the summit of the range forming the water-
shed between the Moonie and Balonne Rivers, and bounded thence on the
cast by a south line to the north-east corner of Black’s Camp Run, and by
the eastern boundaries of said run and of Ungabilla and Pooloon Runs ;
then by the north boundary of Wagganba Run East to the north-east
corner; thence by the east boundaries of Wagganba. Lower Teelba, East
Teelba, and Brigalow Scrub Runs to the Moonie River at a tree marked
broad-arrow over DDM, and by a continuation of said line south following
the east boundaries of Brigalow Scrub, Ula Ula, and North Guradla Runs
to the north boundary of Gurardera Run ; thence by that boundary east one
mile to east corner of said run, and by a south line to Barwan River at a
tree marked broad-arrow over DDWM; on the south by the Barwan or
Macintyre River downwards to the 29th parallel of south latitude, and by that
parallel true west to the watershed between the Warrego River and Mun-
gullala Creek ; thence on the west by that watershed northerly to a point
west from Drysdale Bonds, in the Maranoa River; thence on the north
by an cast line crossing the Mungullala and Wallam Creeks to the Maranoa
River; thence easterly crossing Balonne River at the Douay Station to the
dividing range between the Balonne and Moonie Rivers, and by that range
to the point of commencement.
SURAT LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on the left bank of Balonne River at the confluence of a
small creek bearing north 80 degrees west, and distant about seventy-two
chains from the late commissioner’s residence, and bounded thence on the
west by a line bearing south one hundred and forty chains; on the south by a
line bearing cast one hundred and thirty chains ; thence by a line bearing
south-east about three miles thirty chains ; thence by a line bearing north-
east five miles; thence by a line bearing north-west four miles sixty chains to
the Balonne River, opposite the south-east corner of Yambugle Run ; and


thence by the Balonne Hirer downwards to the north-east corner of the original
Surat Town Reserve; thence on the north-east by a line north-west one
mile seventy-five chains; on the north-west by a line south-west two miles
seventeen chains to the south-west boundary of Yambugle Run; and on
the south-west by a line south-east along that boundary to the Balonne
River at the point of commencement.
GOONDIWINDI LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the confluence of Maclntyre Brook with Dumaresq
River, and bounded thence on the east by a line bearing north to the
range dividing the waters of Macintyre Brook from those of the Weir River ;
thence by that range northerly to the head of Cotnmoron Creek; thence
by a spur range forming the southern watershed of Western Creek to the con-
fluence of said creek with Weir River ; thence by a line bearing north to the
range dividing the waters of the Weir River from those of the Moonie
River ; on the north-west by said watershed in a south-west direction to the
twenty-ninth parallel of south latitude; on the south by said parallel of
latitude east to the Barwan River; and thence by the Barwan or Dumaresq
River upwards to the point of commencement.
STANTHORPE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the confluence of Macintyre Brook with Dumaresq River,
and bounded thence on the west by a line north to the range separating
Macintyre Brook from Commoron Creek, by that range north-easterly ;
thence by the range separating the Condamine River from Macintyre Brook
south-easterly to the Great Dividing Range at Maryland; by the Great
Dividing Range southerly, and by a spur range forming the northern water-
shed of Tenterfield Creek to the confluence of that creek with the Severn
River ; thence by the Severn or Dumaresq River downwards to point
of commencement.
CONDAMINE LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at the junction of the Caliguel Lagoons Creek with the
Condamine River, and bounded on the south by an east line seven hundred
and twenty-six chains sixty-nine links, crossing the above-named creek; on
the east by a north line five hundred and sixty-five chains sixty-nine links
crossing Gooloomallee and Rocky Creeks ; on the north by a west line five
hundred and forty-two chains sixty-nine links crossing the Condamine
River ; on the west by a south line to the left bank of that river; and then
by the said left bank of the Condamine River to the point of commencement.
COOKTCWN LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing at Cape Tribulation, and bounded on the south by a line west
to the boundary of the settled districts ; thence by that boundary, which is
a line parallel to the sea-coast, and distant thirty miles therefrom, northerly
to a point west from Cape Sidmouth ; thence by aline east to the sea-coast,
and thence by the sea-coast to the point of commencement.
NANANGO LAND AGENT’S DISTRICT.
Commencing on theMaiuDividingßange at the hcadof Boondooma Creek,
and bounded thence by the northern boundary of Boondooma Run easterly
to the Boyne River; thence by that river to the confluence of Stuart’s River ;


thence by the spur range forming the northern boundary of Proston
Run easterly to the watershed between Stuart’s River and Earambah Creek,
by that watershed and by a spur range to the confluence of Earambah and
Eoonara Creeks; thence by a spur range forming the northern boundaries
of Boonimba and Boonbyjan Runs easterly to the range dividing the Mary
River waters from those of the Burnett River; thence by that range
southerly to the range dividing the Brisbane River waters from those of
the Burnett River; thence by that range south-westerly to the spur range
separating Paradise and Oaky Creeks south-easterly to Cooyar Creek, oppo-
site the confluence of Taromeo Creek ; thence by Cooyar Creek downwards
about one mile in a direct line to the termination of Blackbutt Range, being
the north-east boundary of Taromeo Run ; thence by that range southerly,
and by the range forming the south-east watershed of Cooyar Creek, south-
westerly, to the Main Range, and by the Main Range northerly to the
point of commencement.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 16th March, 1877.
NOTICE TO SELECTORS.
It is hereby notified, for general information, that Homesteads mat be
SELECTED ON ANY CeOWN LaNDS OPEN EOK SELECTION AT OD. PEE ACBE PEE
ANNUM FOE FIVE YEAES.
Eighty acres may be selected on these terms within any homestead
area, irrespective of the price fixed for conditional selection within those
areas.
Outside homestead areas, one hundred and sixty acres may be selected
on the same terms, namely—at 6d. per acre per annum for five years.
Homestead Selectors are entitled to prioeity ovee conditional
selectoes, whether ■within or outside homestead areas.
They may have to compete at auction among themselves for such
portions as overlap ; but the conditional selector cannot compete with them.
It is considered expedient to give publicity to this notification, because
the high upset prices in some cases fixed upon laud to be conditionally
selected in homestead areas have been represented as prohibitory against
homestead selection.
It is necessary, therefore, in order to correct these misrepresentations,
that the provisions of the Land Act in this respect should be understood.
The homestead selector has the right of priority of selection on any
Crown lands open for selection. He pays no more and no less than 2s. 6d.
per acre in five annual payments, subject to competition when the appli-
cations for the same land are simultaneous.
JOHN DOUGLAS,
Secretary for Public Lands.


Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 2nd May, 1877.
NOTICE.
•
With the view of facilitating the transaction of business at the Land Offices
throughout the colony, it is hereby notified that instructions have been
issued to the officers in charge, to the effect that every possible assistance is
to be given freely and to persons applying for land, or seeking
information on matters connected with the working of the Land Acts—even
to the extent of filling up forms of application, transfers, and other docu-
ments, for illiterate persons, if there is time at the officer’s disposal; and
that any Land Agent, or other officer, refusing to supply information, or
receiving and appropriating fees for clerical assistance to his own use, on the
matter being reported will be severely dealt with.
For the convenience, however, of persons requiring copies of plans,
arrangements have been made by which, on application to the District Land
Commissioner, and on payment of a fee to be estimated by that officer, a
tracing or copy of the plan required will be prepared and furnished to the
individual requiring the same.
JOHN DOUGLAS.
PROCLAMATION.
By Kis Excellency Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy, Knight Commander of
r n the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St.
, -o v' , George, Companion of the Most Honourable Order of
r . ’ the Bath, Governor and Commander-in-Chicf of the
Colony of Queensland and its Dependencies.
In pursuance of the power in me vested, I, Sir Arthur Edward
Kennedy, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive Council,
do, by this my Proclamation, notify and proclaim that clause twenty-seven of
the Regulations proclaimed on the Ist day of March, 1877, relative to the
cutting and removal of timber, and to the removal of stone, gravel, brick-
earth, shells, or other materials, from Crown Lands, is hereby cancelled, and
that the following Regulation has been established, under the provisions of
“ The Crotvn Lands Alienation Act of 1876,” in lieu thereof.
Regulation.
The fee chargeable for a license to dig for and remove any gravel, stone,
brick-earth, shells, or other material from off Crown Lands shall be £5 per
annum, and the license fee to be paid by persons engaged in making bricks
shall be £4 per annum, chargeable on each mould.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
twenty-sixth day of July, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-seven, and in the
forty-first year of Her Majesty’s reign.
Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS,
God Save the Queen !


SETTLED DISTRICTS PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1576
40 VICTORIA, No. 16.
40 Tictohia, No. 10. An Act to provide for the Leasing of Runs in the
Settled Districts of the Colony. [Assented to 29th. November, 1870.]
Preamble.
WHEREAS the terms of the leases of the runs in those parts of the
colony described in “ The Croton Lands Alienation Act of 1808 ” as
“ The Settled Districts ” will shortly expire and the said leases are liable to
be determined in the meantime by resumption And whereas it is desirable
that provision should be made for dealing with the lands comprised in the
said leases at the expiration or sooner determination thereof Be it therefore
enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland
in Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows—
Interpretation.
1. For the purposes of this Act the term “ improvements ” shall mean
and include any head-station house store stable hut woolshed sheep-pen
drafting-yard barn stockyard fence well dam reservoir tank trough artificial
watercourse or watering-place garden clearing cultivation or plantation of
trees shrubs or artificial grasses or any building erection construction or
appliance being a fixture for the working or management of a run or of any
sheep cattle or horses depastured thereon or for maintaining or increasing the
pastoral or agricultural capabilities thereof And the term “ Minister ” shall
mean the Secretary for Public Lands or other Minister who for the time
being performs the duties of the Secretary for Public Lands.
Runs in settled districts may he leased at the expiration of existing or future
leases.
2. "Whenever the term of the lease of any run in those parts of the
colony described in “The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” as “The
Settled Districts ” shall have expired by effluxion of time or shall have
become determined by forfeiture and whenever the term of any lease of any
run issued under the provisions next hereinafter contained shall have expired
by effluxion of time forfeiture or otherwise the Governor in Council may
from time to time cause any such run or any part thereof to be offered for
lease for pastoral purposes by public auction for a term not exceeding five
years.
Upset price.
3. In any such case the sale shall be held at the land agent’s office
nearest to the run and the upset price shall not be less than two pounds per
square mile per annum and the highest amount bid at auction shall be the
annual rent of the run for the said term.


Conditions of lease.
4. The Governor in Council shall issue to the purchaser a lease of the
run for the said term subject to the conditions following that is to say —
Commencement.
(1.) The term of the lease shall be from the first day of January or first
day of July next following the date of sale
Liability to reservation and sale.
(2.) During the term of the lease the lands demised shall be subject
alienation under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being
relating to the alienation of Crown lands and shall be liable to be
withdrawn from the lease by such alienation or by reservation for any
public purpose
In which case rent to be reduced.
(3.) If during any year any part of the land shall be withdrawn from the
lease in manner hereinbefore provided the lessee shall in the ensuing
years be entitled to a remission of rent equal to twice the proportion
of rent due for the area withdrawn from the lease Provided that in
no case shall the rent of the remainder of the land be thereby reduced
to less than one pound per square mile
Date for payment of rent — Forfeiture.
(4.) The amount of the first year’s rent shall bo paid to the Land A gent
at the time of sale and the subsequent years’ rent shall be payable at
the Treasury in Brisbane on the thirtieth day of September in
year and in default of such payment the lease shall be forfeited and
the land and all improvements thereon shall revert to the Crown
Provided that the lessee may defeat such forfeiture for non-payment
of rent by paying at the Treasury in cash on or before the thirty-first
day of December following a sum equal to the annual rent together
with an additional sum equal to one-tenth part thereof by way of
penalty but in default of such payment of rent and penalty on or
before such thirty-first day of December the lease shall be absolutely
forfeited and the lessee and any person claiming under him shall bo
deemed a trespasser upon Crown land and bo liable to bo removed
therefrom as such
Time of withdrawal by sale or selection.
(5.) When any land comprised in any such lease shall be proclaimed fo r
sale by auction or as open to selection such proclamation or the offer
for sale by auction shall not withdraw the land from the lease but the
withdrawal from the lease shall take effect on the actual sale or
selection which may be made from time to time pursuant to such
proclamation


Notice of withdrawal to he given.
(6.) When any part of the land is withdrawn from the lease by sale
selection or reservation as aforesaid the boundaries ot the land so
withdrawn except where defined by natural features or the external
limits of the lease shall be defined and marked on the ground by
survey and notice of such withdrawal having been so made shall be
sent by the land agent to the lessee or person in charge of the land on
his behalf at the principal place of residence on the land comprised in
the lease or in case neither the lessee nor any person in charge of the
land can be found such notice of withdrawal shall be published twice
in the nearest convenient newspaper Provided that all notices of
reservation for any public purpose shall be issued by the Minister and
the substance thereof shall be published in the Gazette
Form of notice.
(7.) Every such notice of withdrawal shall set forth the area of the land
resumed and a description thereof.
Claims for improvements.
(8.) Any lessee or his agent may within sixty days after the notice of
withdrawal remove from the land comprised therein any part of his
improvements in respect of which no pre-emptive right has been
exercised under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act q/1868 or may
within the like time lodge with the land agent for the district a
written statement of his claim for compensation for the value of such
improvements not so removed accompanied by a schedule of the items
of improvement and the value claimed for each but in default of such
notice of his claim being given to the land agent within sixty days
from the notice of withdrawal the lessee shall be deemed to have
abandoned all right to compensation for the value of such improve-
ments
Time of 'payment.
(9.) When a lessee being entitled so to do shall claim compensation as
hereinbefore provided for the value of improvements on land with-
drawn from his lease by being selected either by conditional purchase
or as a homestead or sold by auction or subsequent selection the
selector or purchaser snail within sixty days after notification of such
claim to him pay the value of the improvements to the lessee or
require that the value be determined by arbitration and such selector
or purchaser shall pay the lessee the amount awarded by the arbitra-
tors or umpire within sixty days from the date of the award and in
default of such payment he shall forfeit all right to occupy the land
and the selection or purchase shall have no effect
Case of claim against the Crown.
(10.) When any such lessee being so'entitled shall claim compensation for
the value of improvements situate on land withdrawn from his lease
for any public purpose the Minister may within sixty days after
receipt of the claim agree to the same or offer a less sum and if the
lessee fail to notify his acceptance of such lesser sum within thirty


days the Minister shall cause the claim to be determined by arbitra-
tion Provided that if the amount of compensation as agreed to by
the Minister and the lessee or determined by arbitration be not paid
or tendered to the lessee within six months from the date of the
agreement or award the withdrawal shall cease to have any effect
Transfer of leases.
(II.) Any such lease may be transferred on application to the Minister
and payment of a transfer fee of twenty-one shillings
No claim for improvements after term.
(12.) Upon the expiration of the term of the lease the lessee shall have no
right or claim to any renewal thereof or to any compensation for the
value of improvements on the land. Provided that if the value of any
improvements made by any lessee not being improvements in respect
of which any right of pre-emption has been exercised or compensation
paid shall at any time thereafter be paid by any purchaser or selector
such value shall when received be paid over to the lessee by whom
the same were made.
Sale at auction of leases of forfeited and vacated runs. 33 Vic. c. 10 s. 27.
o. All runs leased under the foregoing provisions of this Act which may
be forfeited or vacated during the currency of the lease thereof may be
offered for sale by public auction for the residue of the term of the lease
computed from the nearest first day of January or first day of July The
upset price shall be not less than twenty shillings per square mile according
to the estimated area and the highest amount bid shall be the annual rent to
be paid for the remainder of the term of the lease.
Provisions in case of resumption of the whole of a run in the Settled Districts.
6. Whenever the whole of the land comprised in any existing lease of
any run in the said “ Settled Districts ” shall have been heretofore or shall
be hereafter resumed from lease under the provisions of the tenth section of
the said “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” the following consequences
shall ensue that is to say—
(1.) The land comprised in the lease and so resumed shall be subject to
alienation under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being
relating to the alienation of Crown lands and shall be liable to be
withdrawn from the lease by such alienation or by reservation for any
public purpose
(2.) All the provisions of the fourth section of this Act relating to the
withdrawal of land from the leases therein mentioned shall extend and
apply to the land so resumed and the lessees thereof
(3.) Except as aforesaid the lease of the run shall be deemed to be still
subsisting and unaffected by such resumption.
Lessee to he entitled to six months to remove his stock.
7. At the expiration of any lease by effluxion of time the lessee shall be
entitled to remain in possession of the run for the period of six months for
the purpose of removing his stock therefrom.


Mode of appraisement or arbitration. 31 Vic. c. 46 s. 102.
8. Whenever it shall become necessary under the provisions of this Act
to fix or ascertain any price value or sum of money by arbitration the
Minister and the claimant in matters concerning the rights of the Crown and
each of the respective parties interested in any other case may concur in the
appointment of a single appraiser or arbitrator as the case may require and
failing such concurrence it shall be lawful for either party of his own accord
or at the request of the other to appoint an appraiser or arbitrator as the
case may require and upon such appointment to give notice thereof to the
other party or parties And if the other party or parties or any of them
shall not within thirty days after such notice appoint an appraiser or arbi-
trator the appraiser or arbitrator first appointed together with such other
appraisers or arbitrators (if any) as shall have been duly appointed within
that time shall have power to determine the matter alone And in any of
the cases aforesaid the matter in question shall be inquired into and deter-
mined by such single appraiser or arbitrator or such appraisers or arbitrators
or their umpire.
9. This Act shall bo styled and may be cited as “ The Settled Districts
Pastoral Leases Act of 1876.”


PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1889.
33 VICTORIA, No. 10.
33 Victoria, No. 10. An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Laws relating
to the Pastoral Occupation of Crown Lands in the Unsettled Districts.
[Assented to 14th September, 1869.]
Preamble.
BE it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the
advice and consent ot the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly
of Queensland in this present Parliament assembled and by the authority of
the same as follows :
Preliminary.
Repeal of existing Acts Bfc.
1. The several Orders in Council and Acts specified in the schedule A
annexed hereto and all other Acts it any inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act shall be and the same are hereby repealed saying always all rights
claims and liabilities already accrued or incurred and in existence Provided
always that no action suit or proceeding civil or criminal in any court of law
or equity already commenced shall abate or be prejudiced or hindered by
anything heroin contained but that all such actions suits and proceeding
shall continue to their lawful termination as if this Act had not been passed.
Application of Act.
2. The provisions of this Act shall apply to the unsettled districts only.
Lnterprelation clause.
3. The following terms within inverted commas shall for the purposes
of this Act except where the context otherwise indicate bear the meanings
set against them separately—
“ Crown lauds ’’—All lands vested in Her Majesty which have not been
dedicated to any public purpose or which have not been granted or
lawfully contracted to be granted to any person in fee simple or for
any less estate and all lands which at the time of the passing of this
Act shall not be subject to any contract promise or engagement made
by or on behalf of Her Majesty and all lands which at the time of the
passing of this Act may have become or which after the passing of
this Act may have become forfeited by reason of any breach in the
conditions on which the same have been granted or contracted to be
granted
“ Eun”—Any portion of Crown lands comprised in any license to depasture
or lease for pastoral purposes granted or applied for under the pro-
visions of the Acts Orders in Council and Eegulations referred to in
schedule A to this Act or any of them or under the provisions of this


“ Unsettled Districts ” —All Crown lands which at the time of the passing
of this Act or at any time hereafter shall not have been brought within
the settled districts as defined by “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act
0/I868”
“ Governor ” and “ Govei’nor in Council ” shall be held indifferently to
mean the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council
“ Lease and License ” shall respectively include every lease or license of
Crown lands for pastoral purposes whether issued under the provisions
of the Acts Orders or .Regulations referred to in section one of this
Act or any of them or issued under the provisions of this Act
“ Lessee and Licensee ” shall respectively mean the lawful holder of any
such lease or promise of lease or license whether as original lessee or
licensee or the lawful assignee of any such lease or license
“ Commissioner ” shall mean and include any commissioner of Crown lands
or acting-commissioner or other officer duly appointed under the
provisions of this Act for the performance of similar duties
“ Improvements ” —Permanent buildings reservoirs wells dams and fencing.
Commissioners to he appointed.
4. The Governor may from time to time appoint fit and proper persons
to be commissioners of Crown lauds and such commissioners shall execute
the provisions of this Act in such districts as may be assigned to them
respectively Provided that the Governor shall define and declare the duties
of such commissioners in regulations to be made for that purpose pursuant
to the provisions of the seventy-sixth section of this Act Provided also that
the Governor may appoint from time to time suitable persons as acting-
commissioners of Crown lands for any particular districts and similarly
define and limit their duties either subject to the approval of the Secretary
for Lands or not so as may be necessary.
New leases to he issued on surrender of existing leases.
6. Lessees of runs in the unsettled districts holding under the Order in.
Council dated the ninth day of March one thousand eight hundred and forty-
seven or “ The Unoccupied Crown Lands Occupation Act of 1860” “ The
Tenders for Crown Lands Act of 1860 ” or “ The Pastoral Teases Act of
1863 ” or any other Act may on application to the Secretary for Lands in the
form contained in schedule I surrender their existing leases or promises of
lease and obtain new leases under the provisions of this Act Provided that
such application shall be made before the Ist day of January one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-one
Term of lease.
6. Such new leases shall be for a term of twenty-one years from the first
day of July oue thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine.
The annual rent chargeable on such new leases shall be as follows—
Leases under Order in Council.
(1) Where the surrendered lease was held under the Order in Council
aforesaid the rent for the first seven years of the term of lease
shall be equal to the rent payable under said Order in Council
together with the assessment chargeable under “ The Increased
Rent and Assessment Act of 1858” on the thirtieth September
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine


Leases under 24 Viet. 12 24 Viet. 15 27 Viet. 17 and 28 Viet. 20
(2) Where the surrendered lease lias been held under “ The Tenders for
Crown Lands Act of 1860 ” “ The Unoccupied Crown Lands
Occupation Act of 1860 ” “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1863 ” or
“ The Pastoral Assessment Act of 1864 ” the rent for the first
seven years of the term of the new lease shall be equal to the rent
payable under the surrendered lease on the thirtieth September
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine. Provided that the
said rent shall in no case exceed the amount payable under the
second period of the surrendered lease
Pent from eighth to fourteenth year.
(3) During the seven years from the eighth to the fourteenth year
inclusive of the term of lease the annual rent shall be equal to the
annual rent for the first seven years with the addition of one-tenth
part thereof
Pent from fifteenth to twenty-first year ,
(4) During the seven years from the fifteenth to the twenty-first year
inclusive the annual rent shall be equal to the annual rent charge-
able on the preceding seven years of the term of lease with the
addition of one-tenth part thereof.
New Leases.
Leases for twenty-one years.
7. It shall be lawful for the Governor to grant leases for pastoral
purposes of Crown lands within the unsettled districts for any term not
exceeding twenty-one years subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth.
Mode of obtaining run.
8. If any person be desirous of obtaining a run he shall make application
in writing to the commissioner of the district in which such run is situated
for a license to occupy the same for one year from the granting of such
license and shall at the same time of making such application pay to the
commissioner a sum of five shillings per square mile on the estimated area
of the run and shall accompany his-application with a declaration to the effect
that he has occupied the said run with stock to an extent equal to one-fourth
of the number of sheep or equivalent number of cattle which such run shall
by this Act be deemed to be capable of carrying and if the said commissioner
shall be satisfied that the provisions of this Act have been complied with
and that the land is open for license he shall grant to the applicant a license
in the form mentioned in schedule Cof this Act But if the commissioner be
aware that the land applied for is wholly or in part already under authorized
occupation or reserved for any special purpose he may refuse a license and
such issue or refusal shall be recorded in the register of applications for
licenses.
Additional fee to he paid if commissioner estimates area to exceed that
stated in the application.
9. Provided that if the said commissioner shall estimate the area of the
lands applied for to be greater than that on which the fee shall have been
paid then a further sum of five shillings for every square mile estimated'by
him to be in excess of the area paid for shall bo paid into the hands of the
said commissioner within ninety days from the date of notice by the said


commissioner that the said further sum is due and in default of such
payment the license together with the fee paid thereon shall be forfeited
Provided that such further sum shall not exceed the amount of five years’ rent
or license Provided that if the area on survey shall be found to be less than
that estimated by the commissioner then the Government shall refund to the
lessee all rents paid by him for country not contained in his lease Provided
that such refundment shall be limited to the amount paid during the pre-
ceding five years Provided also that if it shall subsequently be ascertained
that such license included lands previously granted or was obtained by
means of any false representation the same shall be cancelled.
Description of runs to he given on application for license.
10. All applications for licenses shall be in the form contained in
schedule B of this Act and shall contain clear descriptions of the runs
applied for and the boundaries thereof and the marks or natural features
by which such boundaries are indicated so as nearly as may be to describe
the run according to the provisions of section eleven of this Act Provided
that it shall he lawful for the commissioner or other officer duly authorized
to amend any such description and to insert such amended description either
in the license or in the lease to be applied for and granted as hereinafter
provided as well as in the book to be kept by the commissioner as herein-
after mentioned.
Area of runs.
11. Each run shall consist of not less than twenty-five square miles nor
more than one hundred square miles and shall be of rectangular form in
which the external lines shall run east and west and north and south and
the length of each run shall be as nearly as may be equal to the width
subject however to such deviations as the general features of the country
and the adoption of natural boundaries may require but in no case shall the
extreme length of any run exceed three times the mean width thereof and
subject also to the exclusion of water necessary to the beneficial occupation
of adjoining lands Provided that in computing the area of any run it shall
be competent for the local commissioner to exclude any portion which may
be unavailable for pastoral purposes Provided that the portion so excluded
shall in no case exceed half the area comprehended within the external
boundaries.
Applications to he entered in a hook to he kept hy the commissioner.
12. Every such application shall be entered in a book to be kept by the
commissioner of the district for that purpose every such entry shall contain
a description of the run applied for and shall be then and there signed by
the applicant or his authorized agent and such book shall be open for
inspection by all persons on demand and on payment of a fee of two shillings
and sixpence Provided always that it shall not be lawful for any commis-
sioner or assistant commissioner to sign the said book as agent for any
applicant.
When applications may he made.
13. Applications for runs as aforesaid may be made and shall be received
at the usual office of the district commissioner on all days except Sundays
and such other days as the Governor with the advice aforesaid shall declare
in any regulation to be issued under this Act between the hours of ten
o’clock in the forenoon and four o’clock in the afternoon and at no other
time or place and all applications made on the same day between those hours
shall be considered as having been made at the same time.


If applications made at same time licenses to he regulated hy occupation.
14. If two or more persons occupy the same country and shall apply
for it at the same time preference shall be given and a license issued to each
applicant for such blocks of the said country as he shall by actual survey be
found to be entitled to by virtue of having been the first to occupy the
same with stock.
Area to he divided ratahly between persons occupying at the same time.
15. If two or more such persons applying at the same time shall be
found to have stocked at the same time the country for which they apply
and that the runs applied for are identical or partly so or should their
boundaries be found to clash the commissioner shall when necessary adjust
the boundaries and divide the country fairly between the applicants if the
same be sufficient for all but should the number of blocks so applied for be
insufficient for all the parties and none be willing to withdraw their appli-
cation each block shall then be submitted separately to competition among
the said applicants only and the license to occupy issued in all cases to the
highest bidder.
Upset price of license.
16. The upset price at which a license shall be offered to competition
under the last preceding section shall be five shillings per square mile on the
estimated area and the highest amount bid shall be the license fee for the
term of one year from the day of sale but such amount shall in no way affect
the amount of rent to be charged on any lease of the said run which may be
subsequently granted to the licensee.
Occupation fee to he refunded if license refused or cancelled.
17. In all cases where a license is refused or cancelled the Government
shall on demand refund the occupation fee.
Return of licenses to he published.
18. A return of all licenses granted under this Act shall not less than
once in six months be published in the Government Gazette together with the
descriptions given in such licenses.
Leases may he granted on application.
19. Any holder of a license may at any time prior to the expiration of
the year for which his license has been granted apply in the form given in
schedule D of this Act to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands through
the district commissioner for a lease of the run comprised in such license and
a lease of the same at the rent hereinafter specified shall be granted to such
holder for a period of twenty-one years subject to the following conditions.
Rent to he paid.—Amount of rent during first seven years—Amount of rent
during residue of term.
20. The lessee of every run shall during the continuance of his lease pay
a yearly rent for the same as hereinafter mentioned and such yearly rent
shall be payable at the Treasury in Brisbane on the thirtieth day of September
in each year and at the rates following —i irst the rent to be paid for each
run during the first seven years of any lease of the same shall be a sum of
five shillings per square mile according to an estimate of the area of such run


to be made by the commissioner and by the party applying and in the event
of their not agreeing by an umpire to be appointed as hereinafter provided
Secondly the rent payable in respect of such lease for the succeeding period
of seven years from the eighth to the fourteenth year inclusive shall be at
the annual rate of ten shillings per square mile and for the seven years from
the fifteenth to the twenty-first year inclusive at the rate of fifteen shillings
per square mile Provided that the Governor or lessee may during the
currency of the seventh or fourteenth years of the term of lease require that
the annual rent for the ensuing seven years shall be determined by appraise-
ment as hereinafter provided and when such appraisement shall be required
by the Governor it shall be by notice in the Government Gazette under the
hand of the Secretary for Lands and when the lessee shall require such
appraisement it shall be by notice to the Secretary for Lands in the form in
the schedule P to this Act and such lessee shall at the same time jay into
the Treasury in Brisbane a sum of five pounds to cover the cost of such
appraisement on the part of the Government Provided also that in no case
shall the rent for the seven years from the eighth to the fourteenth year
inclusive be less than seven shilliugs or more than fifteen shillings per square
mile and during the seven years from the fifteenth to the twenty-first year the
rent shall not be less than twelve shillings or more than twenty-five shillings
per square mile of the available area but such available area shall in no case
bo computed at less than one-half the gross area of the run.
Date of lease.
21. The term of every such lease shall be computed from the first day
of July next after the expiration of the license in virtue of which the lease
is granted.
If lease not applied for runs to he dealt with as forfeited or vacant r uns.
22. If any licensee of a run shall omit or neglect to apply for a lease of
the same within the time specified in this Act and according to the provisions
thereof or shall fail to lawfully obtain a lease of the same or shall fail to keep
up the amount of stock required to be on the run at the time of obtaining the
license such run shall be dealt with as a forfeited or vacated run.
Defined capability of runs.
23. Every run shall be deemed to be capable of carrying at least one
hundred sheep or twenty head of cattle per square mile.
Lessee may register contiguous runs not exceeding 200 square miles as a
consolidated run and place the stock on any part thereof.
24. Where a licensee or lessee shall have two or more runs adjoining
each other not exceeding in the aggregate two hundred square miles he may
apply to the commissioner to register the same as a consolidated run and after
such registration it shall be sufficient that the amount of stock required to
be maintained on the several runs be depastured on any part of the consoli-
dated run.
Power to subdivide runs.
25. Any person holding by license or lease a run of not loss than fifty
square miles may apply to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to have
such run divided into two or more runs and to have the rent payable for such
original run allotted in due portions to the new runs respectively and such
application shall be granted with consent of the Governor in Council if n O .


good reason appear to the contrary Provided always that no subdivision of
an original run shall bo of less extent than twenty-five square miles and that
the aggregate of the new rents shall not be less than the entire amount of
the original rent Provided also that a fee of ten pounds shall be paid into
the Treasury at Brisbane and a receipt for the amount of such fee shall be
lodged with every such application.
Lease will he forfeited if stock he not maintained thereon.
26. If the lessee of a run shall fail to keep the same stocked to at least
one-fourth part of the grazing capabilities thereof as defined by the twenty-
third section of this Act unless prevented by unavoidable natural causes the
lease shall be thereby forfeited.
Sale at auction of leases of forfeited and vacated runs.
27. All runs whether leased under this Act or any of the hereinbefore
repealed Acts or Orders in Council which may be forfeited or vacated during
the currency of the lease thereof shall be offered for sale by public auction
for the residue of the term of the lease computed from the nearest first day
of July The upset price shall not be less than five shillings per square mile
according to the estimated area and the highest amount bid shall be the
annual rent to be paid for the remainder of the term of lease.
If not sold may he offered at a lower upset price.
28. Any such lease if unsold may be once again put up for sale in like
manner and if not then sold the Governor with the advice aforesaid may
reduce the minimum upset rent to such sum as may be deemed just and
reasonable and the same shall be again submitted for sale as aforesaid at such
reduced upset price.
Time and place of payment of rent.
29. The amount of the first year’s rent shall be paid to the land agent at
the time of sale and in each succeeding year the rent shall be paid into the
Treasury 7 in Brisbane on or before the thirtieth day of September.
Tuns purchased at auction to he stocked within six months.
30. If the purchaser of the remainder of a lease shall fail to stock the
run within six months from the day of sale to the extent of one-fourth part
of its grazing capabilities as defined-in the twenty-third section of this Act or
shall not thereafter maintain that amount of stock thereon unless prevented
by unavoidable natural causes the lease may be cancelled.
Ujstwatehed Runs.
Power to apply for special license for unwatered run.
31. If any person be desirious of obtaining a run no part of which shall
be at the date of application within five miles in a straight line from any per-
manent water he shall make a special application for a license to occupy the
same for one year as an unwatered run without any condition of compulsory
stocking the same.
Mode of application.
32. Such application shall be in the form in the schedule G to this Act
addressed to the commissioner of the district in which such run is situated
and such application shall contain a description of the run and the boundaries
and other particulars concerning the same and the area and general directions
of the external lines shall be governed by the same rules and regulations as
if the run were of the ordinary character.


Occupation fee.
33. In lieu of the license fee payable upon ordinary applications for runs
there shall be payable an occupation fee on every application for a license for
an unwatered run as also on every application for a renewal of such license
under the provisions hereinafter contained after the rate of three shillings per
square mile.
Particulars to accompany application.
34. Every application for any such original license shall be accompanied
by a statutory declaration verifying the truth of the statements contained in
such application to be made by the applicant or his authorized agent and also
by the occupation fee as specified in the last preceding sections but it shall
not be necessary to make any declaration as to the occupation of any such
unwatered run with cattle or sheep prior to the issue of a license to occupy
the same.
Application to he entered.
35. Every such application shall be entered by the commissioner in an
application book to be kept for the purpose in the same manner as an ordi-
nary application with such alterations in the entry as may be necessary.
Proceedings of commissioner thereon.
36. On the receipt of any such application the commissioner or some
other person duly authorized in that behalf shall when necessary personally
examine the run and satisfy himself as to the absence of permanent water and
if there be only one applicant for the run in question and if there is no good
ground for withholding a license the commissioner shall proceed to issue the
same accordingly in such form as shall be provided by regulations as afore-
said.
Provisions in case of applications clashing.
37. If two or more persons shall apply under these provisions for the
same run or for runs comprising the same country preference shall be given
and a license issued to the one who first lodged bis application with all
necessary accompaniments But if no difference in point of time exist having
reference to the provisions of section fourteen of this Act the commissioner
shall endeavour to divide the country applied for and adjust the boundaries
to the satisfaction of both or all the applicants failing in such endeavour the
blocks shall be submitted to competition amongst the applicants alone and
the one who on the spot offers and pays down the highest premium in cash
independently of the occupation fee as hereinbefore provided shall be the
successful applicant.
Power to renew licenses.
38. The licensee of any unwatered run may prior to the expiration of his
license apply to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands through the district
commissioner for a renewal of such license for another year and in case such
licensee shall prove to the satisfaction of the said chief commissioner that he
has made reasonable efforts to establish permanent water on the run for
which he holds such license and has failed from the inclemency of the weather
or other sufficient cause without any default on his part such licensee shall be
entitled to the renewal applied for on his paying into the Treasury a sum
equivalent to the occupation fee originally paid by him for such run and upon
such payment it shall be lawful for the said chief commissioner to renew such
license accordingly Provided always that such renewal shall not in any
case be repeated more than twice in respect of the same run and that the
renewal fee be paid prior to the expiration of tbe current license during which
the application for renewal was made.


Unwatered runs to he generally subject to same rule as others.
39. Except as herein specially provided or as may be hereafter provided
by any regulations as aforesaid unwatered runs shall be governed and dealt
with and be subject to the same regulations as other runs and on the applica-
tion for any lease of an unwatered run prior to the expiration of the license
or renewed license as the case may be the same requirements shall be
demanded and insisted on both as to stocking and otherwise as if the license
had been one of the ordinary character instead of a special one under these
provisions.
Renewal of Leases within the Unsettled Districts.
Power to grant renewal of leases.
40. It shall be lawful for the Governor on the expiration of any existing
lease or promise of lease to grant to the holder thereof a renewed lease for
fourteen years of the land held by him or such portion thereof as shall not
be required to be resumed for sale or otherwise lawfully withdrawn for
merely pastoral occupation.
Power to lessee to apply for renewal.
41. It shall be lawful for the lessee of any run at any time not less than
three months prior to the expiration of his lease to apply to the Chief Com-
missioner of Crown Lands for a renewed lease of the run or runs comprised
in such lease and such renewed lease shall be granted to him for the term of
fourteen years from the first day of July nearest the expiration of his former
lease of such run or runs or of such portion thereof as it may not seem
to be expedient to resume subject to the following conditions.
Lessee to pay annual rent.
42. The lessee of every run under such renewed lease shall during the
continuance of such lease pay a yearly rent for the same as hereinafter pro-
vided such rent to be payable at the Treasury in Brisbane on the thirtieth
day of September in each year.
Mode of estimating rent under renewed leases. —Governor or lessee may
require the rent to he fixed hy arbitration. —Lessee requiring appraise-
ment to pay £5 costs. —Limitation of the amount of rent.
43. For the first four years of such renewed lease tbe annual rent shall
be equal to rent for the last year of the expired term with the addition of
one-tenth part thereof Provided that in the ease of expired leases or runs
which have been held under the Order in Council the rent shall be computed
as including both the annual rent charged under the Order in Council and
the annual assessment under “ The Lncreased Rent and Assessment Act of
1858 ” and for the five years from the fifth to the ninth year of such renewed
lease the annual rent shall be equal to the amount of annual rent for the first
four years with tbe addition of one-tenth part thereof and for the five years
from the tenth to the fourteenth year the annual rent shall be equal to the
amount of the annual rent for the preceding five years together with the
addition of one-tenth part thereof Provided that the Governor or the lessee
may during the last year of the expired lease or the currency of the fourth
or ninth years of the renewed lease demand that the rent for the succeeding
term of four years or five years and five years respectively shall be deter-
mined by arbitration and where such arbitration shall be required by the


Governor it shall be by notice published in the Government Gazette under
the hand of the Secretary for Lands and when the lessee demands such
arbitration it shall be by notice in the form contained in the schedule F to
this Act delivered at the office of the Secretary for Lands in Brisbane and
such notification shall be accompanied by a sum of five pounds to cover the
costs of such appraisement on the part of the Government Provided that
in no case shall the annual rent be appraised at less than one pound per
square mile or more than four pounds per square mile on the available area
not being less than one-half of the gross area of the run.
Rent in special cases.
44. When neither the Governor or the lessee shall require the rent of a
run to be appraised in the fourth or ninth year of the term of lease the
increased rent for the ensuing period of five years shall be computed in
reference to the actual rent for the last year of the previous period whether
such previous rent has been determined by appraisement or otherwise.
Renewed leases subject to same conditions as original.
45. In all other respects than hereinbefore specified or to be specified in
any regulations to be lawfully made for the working of this Act all renewed
leases shall be liable to the same general conditions as original leases.
Akeitbation’.
Commissioner to act as arbitrator for the Crown.
46. All arbitrations and appraisements under this Act shall be con-
ducted as follows—
Commissioner to be arbitrator unless another appointed.
(1.) The Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district shall act as arbi-
trator for the Crown unless the Governor shall appoint a special
arbitrator
Lessee to appoint arbitrator on his behalf.
(2.) The lessee or licensee shall nominate an arbitrator to act on his behalf
and in the case of disputed boundaiues where the matter at issue is
between the lessees of adjacent runs such lessee shall nominate his
arbitrator and such nomination shall be in writing in such form as
may be required by regulations issued under this Act
Appointment of umpire.
(3.) Before proceeding to determine any matter the arbitrators shall pro-
ceed to the appointment of an umpire to decide in case the arbitrators
fail to agree to an award
Lessee failing to appoint arbitrator commissioner to make appointment.
(4.) If a lessee or licensee shall fail to appoint an arbitrator to act on his
behalf within two months from the time of being required by the
commissioner to make such appointment such commissioner may
appoint an arbitrator to act on behalf of such lessee or licensee and
the award of such arbitrator shall be valid and effectual as though he
had been appointed by the lessee or licensee for whom he acts


Arbitrators failing to appoint umpire Governor may nominate.
(5.) If the arbitrators fail to agree in the appointment of an umpire
within two months from the date of their appointment then the Gov-
ernor may nominate and appoint the umpire Provided that no paid
servant of the Government shall be such umpire
Proceedings not to stop on failure to agree on umpire.
<6.) Notwithstanding that arbitrators may fail in the agreement to appoint
an umpire they may on formal record of such disagreement proceed
to consider the matter at issue and make an award without waiting
the appointment of an umpire by the Governor
Umpire to decide if atcard delayed for six months.
(7.) If the arbitrators shall fall to make an award within six months from
the date of their appointment the Secretary for Lands may require
that the matter at issue shall be referred to the umpire for his
decision
j ßeference to umpire may he on special points.
(8.) Arbitrators failing to agree to an award may refer either the whole
matter to the umpire or only such points as they cannot agree upon or
the amounts offered on the one part and demanded on the other part
and the award of the umpire shall be limited to the points submitted
or the amount of rent to be determined and shall not in any case
exceed the limits offered by the one arbitrator or demanded by the
other.
Aieards to he published.
47. The material substance of every award by arbitrators or an umpire
shall be published in the Government Gazette within three months Provided
that if within three months from such publication it shall appear that there
are valid objections thereto the Governor may by notice published in the
Government Gazette declare such award to be void and of no effect and shall
require that the matter be again referred to arbitration.
Certain qoersons disqualified to act as arbitrators or umpire.
48. No lessee or licensee shall appoint as an arbitrator on his behalf
any person who has any pecuniary interest in the award sought nor any
person in the paid employ of such lessee or licensee nor shall the Chief
Commissioner of Crown Lands in any case be appointed as an umpire.
Costs.
49. Each party to an arbitration shall pay his own costs in regard to the
arbitrator acting on his behalf and the costs incurred by the umpire shal be
borne equally.
Genebal Conditions.
Penalty for non-payment of rent.
50. If default be made by any lessee in the payment of any rent the
lease shall be forfeited but the lessee shall be permitted to defeat the forfeiture
and prevent its becoming absolute by payment within ninety days from the
date of the original rent day of the full annual rent with the addition of a
sum equal to one-fourth part thereof by way of penalty but unless the whole
of the said yearly rent together with such penalty as aforesaid shall be paid
within the term of ninety days counting from the original rent day inclusive
the lease shall be absolutely forfeited.


Rates to he paid pending assessment hy arbitration.
51. "When the rent of a run has been required to be determined by
appraisement the lessee shall until the appraisement has been completed
continue to pay into the Treasury in Brisbane on the thirtieth day of
September in each year the amount of annual rent which would have been
due under the provisions of this Act if no such appraisement had been
demanded or required and when the amount of rent has been determined by
appraisement the lessee shall on the next thirtieth day of September pay into
the Treasury any arrears of rent or be allowed a remission of rent to adjust
the balance due to the Treasury or lessee as the case may be.
Transfers of leases.
52. Licenses and leases of runs ihay be transferred on application to the
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands Provided that before the transfer is
registered the lessee or licensee shall pay into the hands of the said chief
commissioner or other officer duly appointed to receive the same a transfer
fee of one pound and one shilling for every such run and returns of such
transfers shall be published from time to time.
Accepted tender Sfc. equivalent to lease in certain proceedings.
53. As against all parties but Her Majesty and her successors or those
lawfully claiming under her or them in any action suit or other proceeding
civil or criminal for the recovery of possession or damages for trespass or the
infliction of any fine or penalty in relation to any run of which a lease from
the Crown shall not be in force it shall be lawful for any person claiming such
run under any accepted tender license or promise or contract for a lease
made or issued by the Crown or any of its agents lawfully _ authorized to
plead and put in evidence such accepted tender license or promise or contract
for lease which for the purpose of any such action suit or proceeding shall
he received as equivalent to an actual and then present lease from the Crown.
Pre-emptive right over improved lands.
54. For the purpose of securing permanent improvements it shall be
lawful for the Governor to sell to the lessee of a run without competition at
the price of ten shillings per acre any portion of such run in one block not
being more nor less than two thousand five hundred and sixty acres and the
boundaries of any such block shall as nearly as the natural features of the
country and adjacent boundaries will admit be equilateral and rectangular.
Resumption of run in whole or in part.
55. The Governor in Council may by notification in the Government
Gazette resume from lease any portion of a run not exceeding in the whole two
thousand five hundred and sixty acres Provided that if it shall be deemed
expedient to resume any further portion or the whole of a run the Secretary
for Lands shall give six months’ notice of such intention in writing to the
lessee and after the expiration of said term shall lay before both Houses ot
Parliament a schedule of the lands to be resumed from lease and if the said
schedule shall not have been dissented from by resolutions passed by both
Houses of Parliament within sixty days during a session of Parliament the
said reservations shall take effect and the lessee of all land so reserved may
require that lands alienated or selected for sale in virtue of such reservations
shall be computed in deduction of the rent paid by such lessee and the
amount of rent to be remitted shall be determined by arbitration in reference
to the grazing capabilities of the said leasehold.


Grazing right over resumed 'portions and compensation for improvements.
56. Notwithstanding any notice of resumption the lessee shall have a
right to depasture on the resumed portion until the same shall be actually
alienated or otherwise disposed of by the Crown when the lessee shall be
entitled to claim and be paid by the Crown the value of his improvements
erected or made on the lands so alienated or disposed of such value to be
ascertained by arbitration under the provisions of this Act.
Compensation for fencing to he allowed in certain cases.
57. In respect to fencing payment shall be made by the Crown to the
lessee according to such valuation subject to a reduction of one-fourteenth
part of the value of the fence at its original cost for each and every clear year
that has elapsed from the date of the erection of the fence up to the four-
teenth year therefrom Provided further that no claim for compensation
shall be entertained or allowed for any fence which has been erected for a
period exceeding fourteen years on land alienated or disposed of as mentioned
in the preceding clause.
Description of leases to he published in the “ Gazette.”
58. Three months before the issue of any lease for pastoral purposes th e
Secretary for Public Lands shall publish in the Government Gazette the
description of the country proposed to be inserted in such lease and if any
person shall deem his interests prejudiced by the issue of such lease he shall
within three months from the publication of such description lodge a written
statement of his objections with the Secretary for Public Lands and shall at
the same time deposit a sum of five pounds in liquidation of the cost of inquir-
ing into the said objections and on the receipt of any such objection the
Secretary for Public Lands shall cause the matter at issue to be submitted to
arbitration as provided by this Act and the description of the boundaries to
be inserted in the lease shall be the boundaries awarded by the arbitrators or
umpires as the case may be unless the said award shall be declared void and
of no effect as provided by the forty-seventh section of the Act in which case
the matter shall be again dealt with as required by the said section and a lease
shall be issued in pursuance of the final award.
Description of leased lands.
59. In any license or lease it shall be sufficient if the land thereby
granted or demised be defined according to the best description of such land
and of the boundaries thereof which may have been procurable notwithstand-
ing that such description may not have been prepared after actual survey and
no license or lease shall be liable to be set aside by reason only of the imper-
fection of any such description so long as the land shall thereby be defined
with reasonable certainty.
Proviso for amendment of defective descriptions.
GO. Provided that if after the issue of any such lease it shall bo found on
survey or by mutual consent of the parties interested that the description of
the boundaries of the run therein contained does not describe with sufficient
certainty the lands thereby intended to be demised it shall be competent for
the Governor to cancel such lease by proclamation to that effect and there-
upon issue a fresh lease for the remainder of the term and embody therein an
amended description of the run.


Cost of survey to he paid by lessee hut not exceeding six shillings per square
mile.
61. If any runs which have been licensed or leased shall have been or
shall bo surveyed by the Government the cost of such survey not in any case
exceeding six shillings per square mile on the area comprised in the run shall
be defrayed by the licensee or lessee (as the case may be) and in default of
payment within six months from the date on which such payment shall have
been required by notice published in the Government Gazette the Governor
may cancel the licenses or leases of the runs for which the cost of survey has
not been paid Provided always that the cost of all surveys between adjoin-
ing runs required to be defrayed by the licensees or lessees of such runs
respectively shall be divided and apportioned according to the proportion the
dividing lines shall respectively bear to the areas of such runs respectively and
any licensee or lessee having paid any such cost of survey shall be entitled to
recover from the licensee or lessee of the adjoining run a fair proportion of
such cost accordingly.
Passage of stock.
02. Any person driving horses cattle or sheep along any road used for
the purpose ot travelling may depasture the same on any unenclosed Crown
lands wdthin the distance of one-half mile of such road notwithstanding any
lease of any such land for pastoral purposes Provided that unless prevented
by rain or flood such horses or cattle shall be moved at least eight miles and
such sheep at least six miles in one and the same direction within every suc-
cessive period of twenty-four hours and any person or persons driving horses
cattle or sheep and depasturing the same contrary to the provisions of this
clause shall forfeit and pay a sum not exceeding twenty pounds to be re-
covered before any two justices of the peace at any court of petty sessions
and for every subsequent offence shall forfeit a like sum Provided that no
information for any subsequent offence shall be laid until the expiration of
one week succeeding the filing of any preceding information.
Fencing Act to apply.
63. All Crown lands leased for pastoral purposes under this Act shall be
deemed land within the meaning of “ The Fencing Act of 1861 ” and any
lessee from the Crown for the time being of any such lands shall be deemed
the owner or occupier thereof within the meaning of the said Act The said
“ Fencing Act o/*lB6l ” shall apply to all such lands as aforesaid in the same
way as if the said Act had been passed concurrently with this Act Provided
that the lessee of Crown lands adjoining a run on which a boundary fence
may be erected shall be exempt from payment of his share of the cost
thereof so long as he does not in anyway avail himself of the advantage of
such fence as part of the fencing of his own run.
Proclamation of a goldfield shall not tcithdratv from lease.
64. If the whole or any part of a run be proclaimed as a goldfield it
shall not thereby be withdrawn from pastoral lease but the lessee may
continue to f ccupy the same and to depasture his stock thereon in common
with the holders of miners’ rights or business licenses who may be resident
on such goldfield subject to such regulations as may from time to time be
made by the Governor in Council respecting such common occupation
Provided that a reduction of rent be made in proportion to the decreased
carrying capacity of the run to the lessee to be assessed by arbitration.


Licenses to cut timber Sfc. may be granted Provided that any reasonable
objection 'may be entertained by Government.
65. The Governor may (subject to any regulations to bo made as
hereinafter enacted) authorize the commissioners or bench of magistrates to
issue licenses for any term not exceeding one year to enter any Crown lands
whether under lease or license or not and to cut and take therefrom any
timber and to dig for and remove any gravel stone brick-earth shells or other
material but not within two miles of any head station unless by consent
of the lessee Provided that the fee fixed for such license shall be paid in
advance Provided also that any lessee may make any reasonable objection
to the granting of such license and the granting or withholding of such
license after any objection shall have been made to the commissioner or
bench of magistrates shall be determined by the Governor Provided that
any lessee may by notice in writing to that effect given to any such licensee
restrict him or her from exercising his or her rights as such licensee in any
given spot to be mentioned in such notice for a period not exceeding one
month and such licensee may within such period appeal to the commissioner
or nearest bench of magistrates who shall have power respectively to decide
the matter in issue between the parties and such licensee shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding twenty pounds if after such notice given as aforesaid
or in the event of the matter in issue being decided against him he or she
shall exercise the right of a licensee and such penalty may be recovered
before any two justices of the peace in petty sessions.
Use of timber or material by lessees.
66. Lessees of runs shall be permitted to cut and use such timber and
material for building and other purposes as may be required by them as
tenants of their several lands.
llemoval of timber and material by other than lessees.
67. Except as provided in this Act lessees of runs shall not have power
to restrict other persons duly authorized by the Government either from
cutting or removing timber or material for building or other purposes or from
searching for any metal or mineral within the run leased.
Bight to enter on lands.
68. Nothing in this Act or in any license or lease granted thereunder
shall be held to prejudice or interrupt the right of the Governor or of any
officer duly authorized in that behalf by the Governor to go upon any lands
included in anj'- license or lease or to make any survey inspection or
examination of the same.
In case of dispute Governor may refer.
69. Whenever any dispute shall arise as to the boundaries of any runs
it shall be lawful for the Governor or the officer duly authorized to act in
that behalf to require tire same to be settled by arbitration and such
arbitration shall be carried out by arbitrators one to be appointed by each of
the lessees the boundaries of whose runs are in dispute and shall be in all
other respects conducted in the manner provided in this Act with respect to
the determination of the rent of such runs.


Declaration to he made.
70. Before any commissioner of Crown lands arbitrator appraiser or
umpire shall enter into the consideration of any matter referred to him he
shall in the presence of a justice of the peace make and subscribe the
following declaration that is to say —
“ I do solemnly and sincerely declare that I have
“ no pecuniary or other interest either directly or indirectly
“ in the matter in question that I will faithfully and honestly
“ and to the best of my skill and ability hear and determine
“ the matters referred to me under the provisions of 4 The
“ Pastoral Leases Act q/’1869.’
' 4 Made and subscribed in the presence of at
44 on the day of in the year
And such declaration shall be annexed to the award when made.
Removal of trespassers,
71. On information in writing preferred by any commissioner of Crown
lands or other person duly authorized in that behalf to any justice of the
peace setting forth that any person is in the unlawful occupation of any
Crown lands or land reserved or dedicated for any public purpose such
justice shall issue his summons for the appearance before any two justices of
the peace at a place and time therein specified of the persons so informed
against and at such time and place such justices on the appearance of such
person or on due proof of the service of such summons on him or at his usual
or last place of abode or business shall hear and inquire into the subject
matter of such information and on being satisfied of the truth thereof either
by the admission of the person informed against or on other evidence such
justices shall issue their warrant addressed to the sheriff or deputy sheriff or
commissioner of Crown lands or to any chief or district constable requiring
him forthwith to dispossess and remove such person from such land and to
take possession of the same on behalf of Her Majesty and the person to
whom such warrant is addressed shall forthwith carry the same into execu-
tion Provided that the lessee or manager of a run may in like manner lay
an information against any person who shall be in unlawful occupation of any
part of the land included in his license lease or promise of lease.
Penalties for trespassing.
72. Any person unless lawfully claiming under any subsisting lease or
license or otherwise under this Act who shall be found occupying anx Crown
lauds or land granted reserved or dedicated for public purposes either by
residing or by erecting any hut or building thereon o v by clearing digging
up enclosing or cultivating any part thereof or cutting timber otherwise
than firewood not f r sale thereon shall be liable on conviction to a penalty
not exceeding five pounds for the first offence and not exceeding ten pounds
for the second offence and not exceeding twenty pounds for the third or
any subsequent offence Provided that no information shall be laid for any
second or subsequent offence until thirty clear days shall have elapsed from
the date of the previous conviction.
Limitation of action.
73. All actions or other proceedings against any commissioner of Crown
lands or other officer acting under the provisions of this Act tor anything
wrongly done under or against the provisions of this Act shall bo com-
menced within twelve months after the matter complained of was committed


and not otherwise And notice in writing of any such action and of the
cause thereof shall be given to the defendant one month at least before the
commencement of the proceeding And in every such proceeding the
defendant may plead the general issue and give this Act and the special
matter in evidence at any trial to be had thereupon and no plaintiff shall
recover in any such proceeding if tender of sufficient amends shall have been
made before the same was commenced or if a sufficient sum of money shall
have been paid into court after such commencement by or on behalf of the
defendant together with costs incurred up to the time And if a verdict
shall pass for the defendant or the plaintiff shall become nonsuit or discon-
tinue such proceeding or if upon demurrer or otherwise judgment shall be
given against the plaintiff the defendant shall recover his full costs as between
attorney and client and have the like remedy for the same as any defendant
has by law in other cases.
No quashing for error nor certiorari.
74. No order judgment or proceeding made touching or concerning the
matters aforesaid or touching or concerning the conviction of any offender
against this Act shall be quashed or vacated for want of form only or be
removed or removable by certiorari into the Supreme Court.
Instruments under Act to be evidence.
75. Any lease or other instrument issued under this Act may be proved
in all legal proceedings by the production of a certified copy thereof signed
by the officer to be authorized for that purpose under any regulation made
as hereinafter enacted.
Penalty for false declaration.
76. Any person making a false declaration under this Act shall be
deemed guilty of perjury.
Governor may make regulations.
77. It shall be lawful for the Governor from time to time to make vary
and alter regulations respecting the forms of leases and licenses granted
under this Act and respecting all matters and things necessary to give effect
to the same and every such regulation shall be published in the Government
Gazette and when so published shall have the force of law Provided such
regulations are in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Regulations to he laid before Parliament.
78. A copy of all regulations made under the authority of this Act shall
be laid before the Parliament within fourteen days from the publication
thereof if the Parliament shall be then sitting and if the Parliament shall
not be then sitting then within fourteen days after the commencement of the
next session.
Short title.
79. This Act shall be entitled and may be cited as “ The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869.”


SCHEDULES.
The Orders in Council and Regulations issued under the Imperial Act 9 and 10
Victoria chapter 104.
Parliament of Queensland —
Pastoral Leases Act of 1863 ... ... ... 27 Vic. No. 17.
Aral the Regulations issued respectively thereunder.
.Application for license to occupy a new run of Crown lands in the Unsettled
Districts.
Received this
day of
o’clock
Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ”
do hereby apply for a license to occupy for one year the
Crown lands known as the run in the district of
which lands are particularly described in the annexed schedule and I herewith
tender the sum of five shillings for each square mile comprised within the area of
the said run and I also agree to pay any further fee at the same rate that may be
demanded for additional area found to exist after survey or other examination by
the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Given under hand this day of 18
The Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District of
Received from the sum of pounds shillings
sxewig the amount of occupation fee chargeable on the above application.
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Schedule to application for license.
Commissioner’s District;
Name of Rim:
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within boundaries
Deusription of the land hy reference to leading geographical features or marked or
determined boundary lines.


Queensland.
License No.
District of
License to occupy Crown lands for pastoral purposes for one year.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ”
I Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district of
do hereby authorize of to occupy for pastoral purposes
for the term of one year from the date hereof the land known as the
run in the district of and which lands are more particularly
described in the schedule annexed such occupation to be subject to the conditions
prescribed in the aforesaid Act.
Given under my hand this day of 18
Commissioner of Crown Lands for
the District.
Schedule to license to occupy Crown lands.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Run :
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within the boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marked ov
determined boundary lines.
Application for a lease of a licensed run of Crown lands in the Unsettled District ».
Received this day of 186 .
Commissioner of Crown Lands
District.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 w
of do hereby apply for a lease for twenty-
years of the run called in the district of which i»
particularly described in the annexed schedule and of which
is the licensed occupant in virtue of a license No. dated the
day of 186 and do hereby agree in the event of a lease
being issued and notified in the Government Gazette to pay forthwith into the
Colonial Treasury in Brisbane the amount of the first year’s rent.
Given under hand this day of 186


Schedule referred to in the foregoing application.
Commissioner’s District:
No. of License:
Date of License:
Name of Run :
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pasturage
Unavailable for pasturage
Total comprised within the boundaries
Description of the lands referred to and marked or determined boundary lines.
Application to have run appraised.
In pursuance of the provisions contained in “ The Pastoral Leases Act of
1869 ” I being the lessee of the run in the
district of do hereby require that the annual rent of the said run
chargeable from the year to the year of the lease be
determined by appraisement in the manner prescribed in “ The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869 ” and I do appoint to act as valuer on my
behalf'to appraise the rent to be annually paid during the above-mentioned period.
Given under my hand at
this day of
Signed by the said
day of
>• /
J.P. )
The Honourable the Secretary for Lands.
! Received from the sum of pounds being the amount
required by the above recited Act in liquidation of the cost of appraisement.
Colonial Treasurer.
Brisbane


“ Pastoral Leases Act of 1869.”
Application for license to occupy an unwatered run of Crown lands in the
Unsettled Districts.
Eeceived this day of 18 at o’clock.
Commissioner of Crown Lands District.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869” a#d
of the regulations published in pursuance thereof * off
do hereby apply for a license to occupy for one year as an unwatered run the Crown
lands known as in the district of
which lands are particularly described in the annexed schedule. And I hereby
certify that the whole of the said lands are more than five miles distant from any
permanent water.
Given under hand this day of 18
The Commissioner of Crown Lands District of
Schedule to application for license.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Run:
Estimated area:
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marked
or determined boundary lines.
SCHEDULE H.
“Pastoral Leases Act of 1869.”
License to occupy an unwatered run for one year.
License No.
District of
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” and
of the regulations published bv the Government in pursuance thereof I the
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district of
do hereby license of to occupy for pastoral purposes
for the term of one year from the date hereof the lands known as the unwatered
ran * in the district of and which lands are
particularly described in the schedule annexed such occupation to be subject to all
the conditions prescribed in the aforesaid Act and the regulations published in
pursuance thereof for the occupation of unwatered runs.
Given under my hand this day of 18 ,
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the District.
♦ State Christian and surname in full f State dlace of residence or nearest poet office.


Schedule to license to occupy Crown lands as an unwatered run.
Commissioner’s District:
Name o£ Run:
Square miles.
Estimat ed art a :
Available f ir pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within the boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marked
or determined boundary lines.
SCHEDULE I.
“ Pastoeae Leases Act op 1869.”
Application to surrender a lease of a run and to obtain a new lease for twenty.one
years.
District of
Name of run
I the undersigned claiming a lease under # the
run known as in the district of do hereby surrender
said* lease or promise of lease and apply for a new lease for twenty-one years in
accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869.”
Given under my hand at this day of 18 .
(Signature)
Signed by the said this
day of 18 in the presence >
of )
( Signature ) J.P.
• State the Order in Council or Act under which the run is held.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, Ist December, 1869.
“ PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.”
The Regulations hitherto in force under the provisions of the Act 27
Victoria, No. 17, having been repealed by the Aefc 13.3 Victoria, No. 10, except
a s regards existing contracts, His Excellency the Governor, with the advice
of the Executive Council, directs it to be notified that the following Regu-
lations have been established under the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869.”
By His Excellency’s Command,
JAMES TAYLOE.


Regulations.
Duties of Commissioners of Crown Lands.
1. The duties of the Commissioners of Crown Lands shall consist in
executing the provisions of this Act in the manner specified in the following
Regulations, and in such other instructions as they may, from time to time,
receive.
Surrender of leases under previous Acts.
2. Applications to surrender leases of runs under the provisions of the
fifth clause of the Act will require to be made on the form A, in the schedule
hereto annexed, and to bo forwarded to the Chief Commissioner of Crown
Lands’ Office, Brisbane, before the Ist day of January, 1871. A separate
application must be lodged for each run ; and where a lease has been issued,
the same will have to be returned.
Applications for licenses to he made to district commissioner.
3. Applications for licenses to occupy Crown lands for pastoral purposes,
in the unsettled districts, must be made to the commissioner for the district
in which the land is situate, and shall be in the form B in the schedule
hereto annexed.
Application to he accompanied hy cash, or Treasury receipts, and by
declaration of stocking.
4. Every such application shall be accompanied by a declaration, in the
form C, that the run has been stocked to the extent of, at least, twenty-five
sheep, or five head of cattle, for every square mile ; and also by an amount
in cash, or a Treasury receipt for a sum at the rate of five shillings for each
square mile of area contained in the run.
Receipts for license fees may he obtained at the Treasury.
5. Persons desiring to procure Treasury receipts for the amount of
license fees may obtain the same by paying any sum not less than £6 ss.
into the Treasury in Brisbane, when a receipt for the whole amount, or
receipts for separate portions thereof not less than £6 55., will be issued to
the applicant as he may desire.
Balance of Treasury receipts available for future applications.
6. In the case of a Treasury receipt being for a larger sum than is
required to meet the license fee of a run, the commissioner or recording clerk
will endorse thereon the amount expended and the balance remaining
available ; retaining a copy thereof to be attached to the application, and
returning the original to the holder.
Treasury receipt transferable by delivery.
7. Treasury receipts for license fees will be transferable by delivery, and
will be received from the holder by the commissioner, without reference to
the name of the person to whom the receipt was issued.
Receipts issued under previous Acts available under these regulations.
8. Treasury receipts for license fees issued under the Act twenty-sixth
Victoria, number eight, or Act twenty-seventh Victoria, number seventeen,
will be available for licenses under this Act.


Advertising license fee to he paid.
9. Before the issue of a license, the commissioner is empowered to
demand from the applicant the payment of fire shillings, to coyer the cost of
publishing the description in the Government Gazette , as provided for in the
eighteenth section of the Act, and to withhold the license until such payment
is made.
Applications for leases to he made within nine months,
10. Applications (in the form E, hereto annexed) for leases for twenty-
one years of runs held under annual licenses, must be lodged at the office of
the commissioner for the district within nine months from the date of the
license under which the run has been acquired.
Declaration of stocking required before issue of lease.
11. The licensee will also be required to produce to the commissioner a
declaration, in the form F, that the run has been stocked during the whole
term of the license.
Additional license fee to he paid when the area of run is found to he in excess.
12. If, after the issue of a license, it is ascertained that the run contains
a greater available area than that on which license fee has been paid, the
licensee will be required to pay the license fee of five shillings for each square
mile of additional available area ; and unless the same be paid to the district
commissioner within ninety days from the date of the notice that such further
payment is due, the license may be declared forfeited. Should, however, the
excess be found to exist during the currency of the lease, the arrears of back
rent chargeable on such excess within the limit prescribed in the ninth sec-
tion of the Act must, in all cases, be paid on demand, if the lessee desires to
retain the country.
When the area of a run is found to exceed 100 square miles, the excess to be
included in a separate lease.
13. Where, after the issue of a license or lease, a run shall be found to
contain a greater available area than one hundred square miles, it will be
optional for the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, to
declare in what manner the boundaries of the run shall be altered, so as to
exclude the area which may be in excess of one hundred square miles ; and
the area thus excluded irom the original run may be leased to the holder
thereof, on condition of paying all arrears of license fee or rent due or to
become due in respect thereof, or may offer the said excessive area to com-
petition by auction.
Term of lease of excess of area not to exceed original lease.
14. The period for which any such excess of area will be leased, after
separation from the original run, will be the same as the unexpired term of
the lease in which it was previously included.
Special conditions where the area is under 125 square miles.
15. Where the excess of available area over one hundred square miles is
less than twenty-five (25) square miles, such further portion of the one hun-
dred square miles as may be necessary to make up the said excess to twenty-
five square miles will be deducted from the original run ; but if such
deduction reduce the available area thereof to less than that on which rent
has been paid, the lessee shall have the option of taking the lease of the
separated run.


Applications for unwatcred runs.
16. Applications for unwatered runs must be made to the district com-
missioner in the form G in the schedule, accompanied by a declaration in the
form H, verifying the truth of the statement contained in the application ;
and also by an amount in cash, or a Treasury receipt for a sum at the rate
of three shillings per square mile of the area contained in the run.
Commissioner to satisfy himself as to absence of permanent water.
17. Before the issue of a license of an unwatered run, it will be neces-
sary for the commissioner to satisfy himself, by personal inspection or other-
wise, as to the country being destitute of permanent water ; and if any doubt
should exist respecting the character of the country applied for, he will be
authorized in withholding the issue of a license until the run is examined and
the true facts of the case ascertained. A fee of five shillings to cover the cost
of advertising the license in the Government Gazette must be paid to the
district commissioner previous to the issue of the license.
Renewal of licenses of unwatered runs.
18. Licensees of xmwatered runs may, prior to the expiration of their
licenses, apply to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands for a renewal of
such license for another year in tne form Gin the schedule. The application
will require to be forwarded through the district commissioner, accompanied
by an amount in cash, or a Treasury receipt equivalent to the occupation fee
originally paid, and also by a statement of the grounds on which the applica-
tion is based ; and if the said chief commissioner is satisfied that sufficient
cause is shown, he is authorized to renew such license accordingly, in the form
Jin the schedule ; but such renewal shall not in any case be repeated more
than twice in respect of the same run.
Notification of renetoals in the “ Gazette''
19. All renewals of licenses of unwatered runs granted by the Chief
Commissioner of Crown Lands are to be notified in the Government Gazette
from time to time at the cost of the applicant, for which a fee of five shillings
is to be charged.
Application for lease of an unwatered run.
20. Applications in the form E, hereto annexed, for leases for twenty-one
years, of country held under license as an unwatered run, must be lodged
with the district commissioner before the expiration of the license, or renewal
of license, as the case may be, accompanied by a declaration, in the form F,
that the country has been stocked at the time of such application.
What shall he deemed available country.
21, In computing the area of a run for the payment of license fees or
rent, no land shall be excluded, as unavailable, except absolutely barren
country or dense scrubs. All grass lauds, whether within accessible distance
from permanent water or otherwise, shall be deemed available country.
Registration of contiguous runs as “ consolidated runs.”
22. Where the holder of two or more contiguous runs, not exceeding in
the aggregate two hundred square miles, may desire to register the same as
a consolidated run, he shall make application to the district commissioner, in
the form K annexed hereto; and the commissioner, unless there be some
objection thereto, shall record the same in the register of the district office,
and such register shall be open to inspection by any person, on the payment
of two shillings and sixpence for each inspection.


Rules applicable to “ consolidated runs.”
23. Tlie following rules will be observed w r ith regard to the registration
of runs as “ consolidated runs” ;
The aggregate area of the several runs consolidated must not exceed two
hundred square miles in each case.
No fractional parts of runs can be included in a consolidated run.
The whole of the separate runs must be under lease or license to the same
lessee or licensee.
Contiguity of consolidated runs affected by transfers.
24. Where a series of runs have been registered as a consolidated run,
as being contiguous, if any one run be transferred, or withdrawn, and thereby
destroy the contiguity of the remainder, the consolidation of the whole ot
the runs will thereby terminate and cease to be operative.
Instruments of lease issued on application.
25. Instruments of lease for runs held under this or previous Acts will
be issued, on application to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, after the
expiration of the period required by notice in the Government Gazette, in
pursuance of the fifty-eighth section of the Act. On application for a lease,
a fee of ten shillings will require to be paid, to cover the cost of preparation
thereof.
Copy of instruments under Act to he evidence when certified to by proper
officer.
26. In pursuance of the provisions in the seventy-fifth section of the
Act, the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands is to be deemed the officer
authorized to certify to copies of leases or other instruments issued under
the same that may require to be proved in any legal proceedings. A charge
of half-a-crown will be made for each certificate, independently of the cost of
preparing the copy.
Tbansfebs of Runs.
Mode of application.
27. Holders of runs of which the leases have not been issued may have
their rights of lease transferred by an application addressed to the Chief
Commissioner of Crown Lands, and bearing the signaturc of the person
entitled to the lease, attested by a magistrate, or a commissioner of the
Supreme Court of Queensland, or a notary public. On such application
being recorded, the applicant will be debarred from all further claim to the
lease, the right to which will thenceforth become vested in the transferee.
Runs of insolvents, or of parties absent or deceased.
28. In the event of the licensee, lessee, or the holder of the promise of
lease of any run djdng, or being declared insolvent, or being absent from
the colon}', the notification of transfer of any such run may be made by his
legal representatives, or the representative of his estate ; but the application
must be accompanied by a certificate from the Crown solicitor of the
applicant’s power to sign the notification referred to.


Runs, leases of which have been issued.
29. In all cases where the leases of runs hare been issued, no notices of
transfer will be recorded unless the same are accompanied by the instruments
of lease, in order that the names of the proposed transferrees may be endorsed
thereon by the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Separate applications .
30. A separate application must be made for the recording of the
transfer of each run, in the form marked N.
Dues in arrear.
31. No notification of transfer of any run will be recorded, on which
any dues of the Crown are in arrear, or in respect to which the requirements
of the Pastoral Acts have not been complied with.
Fees.
32. A fee of one pound and one shilling sterling must in every case be
paid into the office of the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands prior to the
transfer being completed.
Forms.
33. The forms marked A to N are to be used for the purposes of this
Act, as specified in the above regulations.
SCHEDULES.
“PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.
Application to surrender a lease of a run, and to obtain a new lease for twenty-cne
years.
District of
Name of Run:
the undersigned claiming a lease under f
the run known as in the district of
do hereby surrender said lease or promise of lease, and apply for a new lease for
twenty-one years, in accordant;? with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act
of 1869.”
Given under hand at this day of 18 ,
( Signature )
Signed by the said this )
day of 18 in the presence of j
(Signature )
♦ I or we, as the case may be.
| State the Order in Council or Act under which the run is held.
Application for license to occupy a new run of Crown lands in the Unsettled
Districts.
Received this day of 18 ,at o’clock.
Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District.
In accordance with (he provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,”
(*) of (f) do hereby apply for a license to occupy for one year
(•) I or we. and state Christian and surname in full,
(t) State place of residence.


the Crown lands known as the run in the district of which lands
are particularly described in the annexed schedule, and I herewith tender the sum
of five shillings for each square mile comprised within the aiea of the said run, and
I also to pay any further fee at the same rate that may be demanded for
additional area found to exist after survey, or other examination by the com-
missioner of Crown lands. _
Given under hand this day of io •
The Commissioner of Crown Lands,
District of
Received from the sum of pounds shillings,
being the amount of occupation fee chargeable on the above application.
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Schedule to application for license.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Run :
Estimated area —
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marked or
determined boundary lines.
I , being the (*) of the run now applied for, called
in the’district of do solemnly declare that the said run
has been stocked by me to the extent of one-fourth of its grazing capabilities, as
defined by the twenty-third section of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869, ana
that the run continues to be so stocked to the present time with sheep
a ” d "" l0 - '
Declared before me at this day of 18 .
J .Jr.
(♦) Occupant or manager for such occupant.
Queensland.
License No.
License Date
District of
License to occupy a new run of Crown lands for pastoral purposes for one year.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,
J Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district of


do hereby authorize of to occupy for pastoral purposes for the
term ot one year from the date hereof, the land known as the Eun in the
“ of and which lands are more particularly described in the
aforesaid Act eXCd ! SUCh ° CCUpation to be sub J eefc to tlie conditions prescribed in the
Given under my hand, this
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the
day of
district.
Schedule to license to occupy a new run of Crown lands.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Eun:
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes ~
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within the boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marked or
determined boundary lines.
Application for a lease of a licensed run of Crown lands in the Unsettled Districts.
Eeceived this day of ,18 .
Commissioner of Crown Lands,
... . District.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,”
> (t) jdo hereby apply for a lease for twenty-
pne years, of the run called in the district of , which
particularly described in the annexed schedule, and of which (J)
the licensed occupant, in virtue of a license No. , dated the
. y of , 18 , and do hereby agree in the event of a lease being
Jj«ued and notified in the Government Gazette, to pay forthwith into the Colonial
•treasury, in Brisbane, the amount of the first year’s rent.
Given under hand this
day of
* I or «-e, and state Christian and surname in full.
+ State olac« of residence.
} I am, or we are.


Schedule referred io in the foregoing application.
Commissioner’s District :
No. of License :
Date of License :
Name of Run:
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pasturage
Unavailable for pasturage ... ..;
Total comprised within the boundaries
Description of the lands referred to, and marked or determined boundary lines.
Declaration to be made by the licensed occupant or lessee of a run [or his manager ]
that such, run has been stocked in accordance with “ The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869.”
I, , being the (*) 0
run called , in the district of >“°
solemnly declare that the said run has been stocked and continues to be stocked to
the extent of one-fourth of its grazing capabilities, according to the provisions ot
“ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” (33 Victoria, No. 10), from the
day of ,18 ,to the present time.
{Signature.)
day
Declared before me, at
of
J.P.
♦ License! occupant, or manager for such licensed occupant or lessee


“PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.”
Application for license to occupy an unwatered run of Crown lands in the Z nsetiled''
Districts.
Received this day of 18 ,at
o’clock.
Commissioner of Crown Lands, District.
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869, and of
the regulations published in pursuance thereof, {*) of (f)
do hereby apply for a license to occupy for one year, as an unwatered run, the Crown
lands known as , in the district of , which lands
are particularly described in the annexed schedule. And I hereby certify that the
whole of the said lands are more than five miles distant from any permanent water.
Given under hand this day of »18
The Commissioner of Crown Lands, District of
Received from the sum of • _ pounds
shillings, being the amount of occupation fee chargeable
on the above application.
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Schedule to application for license.
Commissioner’s district:
Name of Run:
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marked or
determined boundary lines.
• I or we, and state Christian and surname in full,
f State place of residence.


I, , being the applicant [or agent for such applicant] of
the unwatered run now applied for, called , in the
district of , do solemnly declare that the said run
contains no permanent water, and that no such water is existing on any vacant
Crown lands situated within a distance of five miles in a straight line from any
boundary of the said run.
{Signature.)
Declared before me at , )
this day of 18 .)
“PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.”
License to occupy an unwatered run for one year.
License Date
License IS«,.
District of
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,”
and of the regulations published by the Government in pursuance thereof, I
, the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the
district of , do hereby license
of , to occupy for pastoral purposes, for the term of one
year from the date hereof, the lands known as the unwatered run ,
in the district of , and which lands are particularly
described in the schedule annexed ; such occupation to be subject to all the con-
ditions prescribed in the aforesaid Act, and the regulations published in pursuance
thereof, for the occupation of unwatered runs.
Given under hand this day of ,18
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the
district.
Schedule to license to occupy Croton lands as an unwatered run.
Commissioner’s District;
Name of Run :
Estimated area—
Square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within the boundaries Ml


Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marlced
or determined boundary lines.
■ \ J.
“ PASTORAL LEASES ACT OE 1869.”
Renewal of license to occupy an unwatered run for one year.
License No.
License Date
District of
In accordance with the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869, and
of the regulations published hy the Government in pursuance thereof, I, ,
the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands for the colony of Queensland, do hereby
renew the license issued to , of , on , which
license expired on i and do hereby authorize the said to
occupy for pastoral purposes for the term of one year from the date hereof, the
lands known as the unwatered run ,in the district of _ >
and which lands are particularly described in the schedule annexed, such occupation
to be subject to all the conditions prescribed in the aforesaid Act, and the regulations
published in pursuance thereof, for the occupation of unwatered runs.
Given under my hand, at , this day of ,18 .
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Schedule to renewed license to occupy Crown lands as an unwatered run.
Commissioner’s District:
Name of Run :
Estimated area-
square miles.
Available for pastoral purposes...
Unavailable for pastoral purposes
Total area comprised within the boundaries
Description of the land by reference to leading geographical features or marlced
or determined boundary lines.


Application to register contiguous runs as a consolidated run.
Received this ,18 .
Commissioner.
I, , being the licensee or lessee of the contiguous runs
hereinafter mentioned, do hereby apply to register the same as a “ consolidated
run,” under the provisions of the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10.
Names of Runs.
Total aggregate area
my hand, this.
The Commissioner of Crown Lands for the District of
Application to have run appraised.
In pursuance of 2 the], provisions contained in “ The Pastoral Leases Act
of 1869,” I, 5, , being the lessee of the run, in the
district of , do hereby require that the annual rent of the said
run chargeable from the year to the year of the
lease be determined by appraisement in the manner prescribed in “ The Pastoral
Leases Act of 1869,” and I do appoint , of , to act as
valuer on my behalf, to appraise the rent to be annually paid during the above-
mentioned period. tic 211-
Given under my'hand [at , this day of , 18 .
( Signature )
Signed by the said , this day of 18 .
J.P.
The Honourable theJSecretary for Lands.


Received from t.li e sum of pounds, being tbe
mount required by the above recited Act in liquidation of the cost of appraisement.
Colonial Treasurer.
Brisban?, , 18
jDeclaration made by any arbitrator, appraiser, or umpire.
I , do solemnly and sincerely declare that I have no
pecuniary or other interest, either directly or indirectly, in the matter in question ;
that I will faithfully and honestly, and to the best of my skill and ability, hear and
determine the matters referred to me, under the provisions of “ The Pastoral
Leases Act of 1869.”
Made and subscribed this day of , 18 , in the
presence of
Sib,
* hereby notify to you that have assigned and transferred
to f of % , att right, title, and interest in and to the run
of Crown lands situate in the district of , and known as ,
now held hy under § from tbe Crown, and hereby
relinquish in favour of the said all and any the rights and privileges
of occupation or of pre-emption which may belong or accrue to as the
holder of a § of said run under the laws and regulations for the time
being.
As witness hand , at , this day of , in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
Signed by the said , in the presence of
J.P., or Commissioner of the Supreme Court of
Queensland, or Notary Public.
To the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, Brisbane.
• I or we.
t State Christian and surname in full.
+ State place of residence.
$ Whether under license, lease, or promise of lease.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 27th May, 1870.
REGULATION.
83 Yictoeia, No. 10.
Sale at auction of leases of forfeited or vacated runs.
In cases where forfeited or vacated runs, the boundaries of which have not
been defined by actual survey, shall be offered for sale by auction, in pur-
suance of the provisions contained in clause twenty-seven of the Act, the
right, title, and interest of the previous lessee in the unexpired term of the
lease will only be sold ; and the Government will not hold themselves
responsible for the correctness of the area or boundaries of any unsurveyed
run so offered.
By His Excellency’s Command,
J. MALBON THOMPSON.


Crown Lands Office,
Brisbane, 21st July, 1870.
Renewal of Pastoral Leases.
“ Pastoral Leases Act o/1869.”
It is hereby notified that applications under the provisions of the forty-
first section of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869” for renewed leases for
fourteen years of the runs in the unsettled districts, the current leases of
which will expire on and after the 31st December, 1870, may be addressed
to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, Brisbane, on forms to be obtained
at his office. These applications will require to be lodged not later than
three months prior to the expiration of the existing leases, as prescribed in
the said Act.
W. ALCOCK TULLY,
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, 2nd September, 1870.
His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council,
has been pleased to establish the following Regulations under the provisions
of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,” for regulating the proceedings of
valuers appraising the rent of runs during the terms of renewed leases for
pastoral purposes.
His Excellency’s Command,
J. MALBON THOMPSON.
Regulations.
1. The appointment of assessors and umpires for the purpose of valuing
runs and appraising the rents to be charged thereon, and also the mode of
procedure in conducting the appraisement so far as prescribed, shall be
carried out in accordance with the provisions of the 46th, 47th, 48th, and 49th
sections of the Act.
2. Before entering on any appraisement, the assessors and'umpire shall
each respectively make a declaration in the form set forth in the 70th section
of the Act, and in the schedule annexed, that they have no direct or indirect
pecuniary interest in the matter in question. These declarations will require
to be attached to the award in each appraisement.
3. After the requirements of the preceding clauses have been complied
with, the valuers shall proceed to procure such evidence as may be necessary
for the appraisement of the rent to be paid for the run during the term of
renewed lease, in the following manner: —
(a.) The gross area of the run shall be determined as nearly as practicable.
(6.) The proportion of the gross area which may be wholly unavailable for
pastoral purposes at all seasons of the year shall be estimated, but
such amount of unavailable area shall never be computed at more than
one-half the gross area of the run. The gross area, and the area
unavailable for pastoral purposes, shall be entered on the form B.


day of
,18 .
(Signature)
Signed by the said , this
of , 18 , in the presence of
(Signature)
day
J.P.
* I 'or we, as the case may require,
t State Christian and surname la lull.
} State Act or Order in Council.
B.
Certificate of vahation.
District of
Name of Ilun:
Claimant of Lease:
We, the tindersigned,
lessee of the run called
acting as valuer on behalf of the
, and
f, the Commissioner of Crown Lands acting on behalf of
(c.) The quantity of stock which the run is capable of depasturing in
average years shall be determined, and the number of sheep and cattle
shall be entered separately on the form B.
(d.) The grazing capabilities of the run having been determined, the
annual rent shall be computed at a rate ranging from one pound to
four pounds per square mile of the available area, according to its
capabilities for grazing stock ; but as every run, in pursuance of the
23rd section of the Act, is deemed capable of carrying at least one
hundred sheep or twenty head of cattle per square mile, this estimate
may be adopted as a standard for the guidance of the valuers, who
will thereby be enabled to determine the cases in which the minimum
rent allowed bj r the Act may be appraised.
( e .) Should the assessors deem that the special advantages of the run are
such that any further amount of rent should be charged, they are to
enter the amount thereof in the form B, and the total sum of such
valuation shall be the rent appraised.
4. The following forms shall be those used for the purposes of these
Regulations :
SCHEDULES.
33 VICTORIA , No. 10.
Application for a renewed let
renewed, lease.
District of
Name of Run
In pursuance of the fortieth and forty-first clauses of “ The Pastoral Leases Act
of 1869,” * , the undersigned, f , claiming a lease
under £ of the run
known as , in the district
of , do hereby apply for a renewed
lease thereof, for the term of fourteen years, subject to the provisions of the said
Act.
Given under my hand at , this


Special advantages of run ...
Total ... £
And we do accordingly appraise the rent at pounds
shillings and pence.
Given under our hands, this day of
18 .
(Signature)
(Signature)
C.
Appointment of umpire iy valuers.
District of
Name of Run :
the Crown, under the provisions of the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10, do hereby certify that
we assess the area, grazing capabilities, and special advntages of the run as.
follows :
Area of Run square miles.
Grazing capabilities — | Cattle
Appraised rental ... ... £
Claimant of Lease :
Wk, the undersigned, acting as valuer, on behalf of the-
lessee of the run called , and
the Commissioner of Crown Lands, acting on behalf of the Crown, under the pro-
visions of the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10, do hereby certify that we have appointed
to act as umpire in the appraisement of Ihe annual rent of
the said run.
Given under our hands, at this
day of ,18 .
(Signature)
(Signature)
Reference to umpire by valuers.
District of
Name of Run
Claimant of Lease :
We, the undersigned, acting as valuer on behalf of the
lessee of the run called , and , the
Commissioner of Crown Lands, acting on behalf of the Crown, under the provisions
of the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10, do hereby certify that we have appointed
to act as umpire in the appraisement of the annual rent of the said run,
and that having failed to agree to an appraisement of the rent for the reasons
stated in the accompanying documents, numbered respectively , do
accordingly refer the matter at issue for the decision of the said umpire.
The maximum rent agreed to by the valuer for the lessee being £
per annum, and the minimum rent claimed by the valuer on behalf of the Crown
being £ per annum
Given under our hands at , this
day of 1
(Signature)
(Signature)


Certificate of valuation ly umpire.
District of
Name of Run:
Claimant of Lease:
I, the undersigned, , having been appointed umpire to appraise
the rent of the run called , under the provisions of the Act 33
Victoria, No. 10, do hereby certify that I assess the area, grazing capabilities, and
special advantages of the said run as follows :
Area of run square miles.
Grazing capabilities— £ Cattle "" •
Appraised rental ... ... ... ... £
Special advantages of the run
Total £
And I do accordingly appraise the rent at
shillings and
pounds
pence per annum.
Given under my hand this
day of
Appointment of valuer by commissioner.
District of
Name of Run :
Claimant of Lease :
Whereas the lessee of the run named has failed to appoint
a valuer to appraise the rent to be paid for a renewed lease thereof, under the pro-
visions of the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10 : Now, therefore, I,
the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district of } do
appoint to act as valuer on behalf of the lessee of
the said run.
Given under my hand at , this
day of , 18 .
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Appointment of umpire by the Governor.
District of
Name of Run :
Claimant of Lease :
Whereas the lessee of the run called has applied for a
renewed lease thereof, under the provisions of the Act 33 Victoria, No. 10, and the
arbitrators appointed to assess the rent to be reserved under said lease have failed to
agree in the choice of an umpire : His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of
the Executive Council, has b( en pleased to appoint to
act as umpire in the appraisement of the rent of said run, in accordance with the-
provisions of the said Act.
By His Excellency’s Command,
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, , 18


Declaration of quantity of stock.
District of
Name of Run
Claimant of Lease:
J , being the manager for the lessee of the run called
, in the district of , do solemnly
and sincerely declare that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, the average
number of sheep and cattle depastured on the said run, during the period from the
to the has been
sheep and cattle.
(Signature)
Declared before me, this 7
day of > 18 . ) LP.
I.
Declaration made hy the arbitrator , appraiser, or umpire, in the assessment of
rent for the run or sections known as
I , do solemnly and sincerely declare, that I have no
pecuniary or other interest, either directly or indirectly, in the matter in question;
that I will faithfully and honestly, and to the best of my skill and ability, hear and
determine the matters referred to me, under the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases
Act of 1869.”
Made and subscribed this day 'i
of , 18 ,in the >
presence of ) J.V.
REGULATION.
Queensland, 7 Proclamation by His Excellency William Wellington
to wit. ) Caiens, Esquire, Companion of the Most Distinguished
(1.5.) Order of St. Michael and St. George, Governor and Com-
W. W. Caiens, mander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Governor. Dependencies.
In pursuance of the authority in me vested and in accordance with the
provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869, I, W illiam M ellington
Caiens, Esquire, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of the Executive
Council, do hereby notify and proclaim that the following Regulation,
governing the mode of serving N otices upon Lessees of Runs, has been
established under said Act.
Regulation.
Mode of serving notices upon lessees of runs.
All notices required or authorized to be given to lessees of runs, under
“ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,” may be served by posting the same in a
registered letter duly stamped, and addressed to the lessee of the run at the
run, or at the principal house on the station of which the run forms part, or
at the lessee’s usual place of residence or business within the colony.
Given under my hand and seal, at Government House, Rrisbane, this
twenty-fourth day of September, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-five, and in the thirty-ninth
year of Her Majesty’s reign.
Ry Command,
WILLIAM FRYAR.
God Save the Queen!


PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy, Knight Commander of
the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St.
[l.s] George, Companion of the Most Honourable Order of the
A. E. Kennedy, Bath, Administrator of the Government of the Colony of
Administrator. Queensland and its Dependencies.
In pursuance of the power in me vested, I, the Administrator aforesaid, with
the advice of the Executive Council, do, by this my Proclamation, notify and
proclaim that the following Regulation has been established under the pro-
visions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869.”
Regulation.
The lessee of any run who may apply to make pre-emptive selections,
under the provisions of section 54 of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869,”
shall, upon demand, pay a deposit of ten per centum of the purchase money,
and upon further demand, on completion of the survey of the boundaries of
the land selected, shall pay the balance of the purchase money, together with
the Deed, Survey, and Assurance Fees, prescribed by “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1876.” Provided that in the event of the said lessee
failing to pay the deposit or balance as aforesaid, within a period of one
month from the date of demand, this application to select shall lapse, and all
the expenses incurred in surveying the land applied for, or otherwise, in
consequence of the application, shall be deducted from the deposit made
thereon.
Given under my hand and seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
fourth day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-seven, and in the fortieth year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
Command,
JOHN DOUGLAS.
God Save the Queen


MINERAL LANDS ACT OF 1872.
36 VICTOR!® No. 15.
36 Yictoeia, No. 15. An Act to provide for the Alienation and Management
of Mineral Lands. [.Assented to 22nd August, 1872.]
Preamble.
BE it enacted by tlie Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the
advice and consent ot the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly
of Queensland in Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as
follows—•
PART I.
Regulating Sale of Mxneeal Lands Teansfees &c.
Power to sell.
1. The Governor may in the name and on behalf of Her Majesty sell
mineral lands to any applicant desirous of purchasing the same for mining
purposes other than for gold subject to the provisions of this Act and to the
regulations to be made in that behalf in manner hereinaltcr mentioned.
Mode of application.
2. Persons desirous of purchasing lauds for mining purposes other than
for gold may make application to the Secretary for Public Lands or any
person appointed by him for that purpose in the form in the annexed
schedule A.
Application must be accompanied by deposit.
3. The application must be accompanied by a deposit of five shillings per
acre and survey fee according to the scale contained in schedule H of “ Ihe
Crown Jjands Alienation Act of 1868.”
Area allowed.
4. The area of land included in any one purchase shall not exceed three
hundred and twenty acres nor be Jess than twenty acres except in the case of
surveyed lands where a surveyed portion may be purchased though ot less
area than twenty acres.
Poundaries of surveyed portions must be adhered to.
5. If any portion of surveyed lauds be included in an application the
whole of the surveyed portion must be taken by the applicant if it does not
exceed three hundred and twenty acres.


Rules as to frontage and boundaries.
6. In the case of unsurveyed lands where there are no natural features
to interfere the boundaries of lands applied for must be right lines directed
to the cardinal points and the length must not exceed twice the breadth
When selections front on a creek or watercourse the frontage allowed shall
be as follows viz. each twenty acres of the selection up to one hundred and
sixty acres shall have five chains frontage and in the case of selections con-
taining one hundred and sixty acres and upwards to three hundred and twenty
the frontage allowed shall not be greater than the depth.
Clear description required.
7. The application must contain a clear description sufficient to enable
the selection to be marked off approximately on the public maps in the
Surveyor-General’s Office.
Price.
8, The price of mineral lands shall be thirty shillings per acre.
Selections must he marked.
9. Every selection applied for must be marked at the centre of the por-
tion or where it has frontage to a creek at the centre of such frontage by a
marked tree or post at least three feet out of the ground and six inches in
diameter and a notice shall be affixed to such tree or post stating the name
of the selector the area to be applied for and the date when the land was
marked and such notice shall be maintained until the boundaries of the land
shall have been surveyed A statement that the marking has been duly
effected and a copy of such notice must accompany each application.
Rands within town sites not available.
10. No lands comprised within the boundaries of any proclaimed town
■ite or land reserved for public purposes will be sold for mining purposes.
Power to withdraw lands from operation of Act.
11. The Governor shall have power by proclamation to withdraw the
whole or any part of any district or tract of land Irom the operation of this
Act for the purpose of offering same at auction or for any other public purpose
mentioned in the twenty-first clause of “ The Croim Lands Alienation Act
of 1868 ” and the Secretary for Public Lands may decline to approve of any
application for mineral lands if the public interests render such a course
advisable.
Application may be granted as to part of land applied for.
12. The Secretary for Public Lands shall have power to approve of or
grant any application as to pan of the land specified therein if by reason of
prior application or otherwise the same cannot be granted as to the whole of
such land.
Government option surveying or requiring applicant to survey.
13. The Government shall have the option of surveying lands applied
for under this Act not previously surveyed or of requiring the applicant to
make arrangements for the same to be surveyed and on receipt of any appli-
cation for unsurveyed lands or as soon alter as possible the Secretary for
Public Lands shall signify to the applicant whether the Government will
undertake the survey of the lands applied for or not.


When land surveyed by applicant survey fee returned.
14, In cases where the Government elects not to undertake the survey
the amount of survey fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant.
Survey conducted according to rules of Surveyor-General’s Office.
15. In cases where the Secretary for Public Lands declines to undertake
the survey owing to the remoteness of the selection or for any other cause it
shall be lawful for the applicant to get the land surveyed by a surveyor
licensed under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act o/’1868” such survey
being conducted according to the rules established in the Surveyor-General’s
office and on completion thereof a diagram of the measured boundaries signed
by the surveyor shall be lodged at the office of the Surveyor General,
If applicant employs a licensed surveyor survey must be completed within six
months under pain of forfeiture.
16. In cases where the Secretary for Public Lands declines to undertake
the survey as aforesaid if within a period of six months from date of the noti-
fication of such election a survey under the last preceding clause is not com-
pleted and the diagram lodged as aforesaid the application shall be deemed to
have lapsed and the deposit paid thereon and all improvements on the land
shall be forfeited to the Crown unless a protection be granted as prescribed
by the next succeeding clause.
Protection granted in certain cases.
17. In cases where it shall be made to appear to the Secretary for Public
Lands that owing to the distance of any proposed selection from known or
surveyed country it is impracticable for the applicant to furnish a satisfactory
description thereof and that a long period must elapse before the same can be
surveyed it shall be lawful for the said secretary on proof that the land
applied for has been distinctly marked by the applicant along the boundaries
thereof at distances of not less than five chains from mark to mark to grant a
protection in the form in the schedule annexed marked B for a period not
exceeding one year.
Where protection is granted survey must be completed before the selection can
be approved.
18. In cases where a protection is granted as in the last preceding clause
if the applicant desires that the application be approved as hereinafter pro-
vided he must furnish a diagram of the selection from actual survey within the
period for which such protection is granted in default of which the applica-
tion will lapse at the expiration of such period and the deposit and all im-
provements will be forfeited to the Crown and it shall be lawful for the
Governor or anyone by him authorized in that behalf with such assistance as
may be necessary to enter into and upon such selection without legal process
of any kind.
Application approved.
19. On survey of a mineral selection if the Secretary for Public Lands
sees no objection or if the application contains only lands already surveyed
the same may be approved by him but no such approval shall take place
before survey.


Balance of purchase money and deed fee to he paid within twelve months from
approval.
20. Within twelve months from the date of such approval being signified
to the applicant by writing through the post office to his customary address
the balance of purchase money fixed as hereinbefore provided together with
the deed fee according to scale contained in schedule I of “ The Crown Bands
Alienation Act of 1868 ” must be paid into the Treasury otherwise the deposit
paid shall be forfeited and the land treated and considered as if no application
had been made for the same and it shall be lawful for the Governor or any-
one by him authorized in that behalf to make entry thereon and to forcibly
remove such applicant if necessary without legal process of any kind.
Deed of grant on proof of fulfilment of conditions if furnished within two years
from approval.
21. After the payment of the balance of purchase money and deed fee if
the applicant shall produce satisfactory evidence to the Secretary for Public
Lands that he has expended a sum equal to one pound per acre in bond fide
working the minerals on the land applied for a deed of grant in fee simple
shall issue for the same but if such evidence of expenditure as aforesaid be
not furnished to the Secretary for Public Lands within two years from the
date of the application being “ approved ” no grant shall issue and the land
shall thereby be and become forfeited and it shall be lawful for the Governor
or anyone by him authorized to make or cause to be made entry thereon and
to forcibly resume the same without legal process of any kind.
How priority to he determined.
22. Applications for mineral lands shall if otherwise correct take priority
according to the time of their receipt in the office of the Secretary for Public
Lands or such other office as he may appoint in any district to be notified
under his hand in the Government Gazette.
Simultaneous applications how dealt with.
23. In cases where two or more applications for mineral lands are
received at the same time the priority shall be decided by lot at a meeting of
the applicants or their agents summoned by the Secretary for Public Lands
at a time and place to be appointed by him for the purpose.
Transfers of mineral applications.
24. Applications for mineral lands after approval by the Secretary for
Public Lands may be transferred on payment of a fee of one pound and one
shilling together with stamp duty at the rate of fifteen shillings on every one
hundred pounds or fractional part of one hundred pounds paid as purchase or
consideration money in the transaction INo partial transfer of any mineral
application will be entertained and no transfer will be effectual until registered
in the office of the Secretary for Public Lands.
PAET 11.
Peovisions as to the Leasing of Mineeal Lands.
Leases may he granted.
25. Subject to the provisions of this Act and to any regulations to be
made thereunder the Governor in Council may in the name and on behalf of
Her Majesty grant to any applicant a lease of mineral lands for mining
purposes.


Term and area.
26. The term of any such lease shall not exceed ninety-nine years and
the area of the land thereby demised shall not be less than twenty nor more
than three hundred and twenty acres.
Application how made.
27. Every application for a mineral lease must be made in the form and
manner prescribed by the regulations in that behalf and must be accompanied
by a survey fee according to the scale contained in schedule II of “ The
Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” and a sum equal to the first year’s
rent.
Rent.
28. The rents reserved for mineral leases shall be five shillings per acre
per annum to be paid at such times from such dates and in such manner as
shall be prescribed by regulations to be made in that behalf.
Forfeiture for non-payment of rent.
29. If default be made by any lessee in payment of any rent the lease
shall be forfeited but the lessee shall be permitted to defeat the forfeiture by
payment within ninety days from the date of the original rent day of the full
annual rent with the addition of a sum equal to one-fourth part thereof by
way of penalty but unless the whole of the said yearly rent together with
such penalty as aforesaid shall be paid within the term of ninety days as
aforesaid the lease shall be absolutely forfeited and it shall be lawful for the
Governor or any person by him authorized in that behalf to make entry
thereon and with force if necessary to remove any person therefrom without
legal process of any kind. /
Forms of leases.
30. Leases issued under the authority of this Act may be in such form
and shall contain such covenants on the part of the lessee to work the lands
comprised therein and such covenants conditions and provisions generally
and such power of resumption and re-entry on the part of the Government
for non-payment of rent or non-performance of covenants as may be
prescribed by regulations.
Sections in Part I. applicable.
31. Sections five six seven nine ten eleven twelve thirteen fourteen
fifteen sixteen seventeen eighteen nineteen twenty-two and twenty-three of
this Act shall be applicable and applied as far as practicable to applications
for leases under this part of this Act.
Transfers of leases.
32. Applications for mineral lease after confirmation and mineral leases
after issue thereof may be transferred on payment of a fee of one pound one
shilling together with stamp duty at the rate of fifteen shillings on every one
hundred pounds or fractional part of one hundred pounds paid as purchase
or consideration money in the transaction No partial transfer will be
entertained and no transfer will be effectual until registered in the office of
the Secretary for Public Lands.


MINERAL LANDS ACT OF 1872.
PART 111.
Relating to Mining under Licenses,
Areas may he proclaimed.
38. The Governor in Council may by proclamation set apart any area or
areas in such proclamation defined wherein any person holding mining
licenses under this Act may mine for minerals other than gold under such
licenses only And any such proclamation may be altered or revoked at the
discretion of the Governor in Council.
Mining licenses.
34. It shall be lawful for the Secretary for Public Lands or any person
authorized by him to issue documents each of which shall be called a “ mining
license ” and shall be granted to any person applying for the same on payment
of the sum of ten shillings.
Pr i vileges of mining licenses.
35. Every such “ mining license ” shall be in force for the period of
twelve months from the date thereof and shall during the said period
authorize the holder to mine upon any area proclaimed under the preceding
section of this Act and to occupy (except as against Her Majesty) so much
of the lands in such proclaimed area as may be prescribed by the regulations
in that behalf and every such holder shall during the continuance of such
mining license be deemed in law to be the owner (except as against Her
Majesty only) of the claim which shall be occupied by virtue of such mining
license and during such continuance as aforesaid all minerals then being in
and upon the said claim shall (except as against Her Majesty) be deemed in
law to be the absolute personal property of such holder.
Regulations to he issued.
36. Such license shall be applied for and such claims shall be occupied'
in such manner and subject to such restrictions and limitations and conditions
as shall be prescribed by any regulations in that behalf.
PART IV.
Relating to Licenses to cut construct and use Races &c.
Licenses to cut and construct races dams tyc. may he grunted.
37. The Governor in Council may grant to any person for any term not
exceeding fifteen years subject to the provisions of this Act and to the
regulations in that behalf a license which shall authorize such person his
executors administrators and assigns (except as against Her Majesty) to cut
construct and use races drains dams and reservoirs through and upon any
Crown lands whether the same shall or shall not be demised or occupied by
virtue of this or any other Act and to deepen widen clean repair or otherwise -
improve any race drain dam or reservoir cut or constructed through or upon
any Crown lands and to take or divert water from any spring lake pool or
stream situated or flowing upon or through any such Crown lands in such
manner as shall be prescribed by such license and regulations in order to
supply water for the purposes of mining for any metal or mineral other than
gold to such person or any other person who may be engaged in any suck
mining and it shall be lawful for the person to whom any such license shall
be granted to take or divert water and the right conferred by such license
and the property and interest in any race dam or reservoir cut or constructed
by virtue thereof shall be deemed to be a chattel interest.


Same may he revolted.
38. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any time to revoke
any license granted under the preceding section on payment of such com-
pensation to the person entitled to the benefit thereof as shall be determined
by arbitration in manner directed by such regulations.
PART Y.
Relating to Teespassees and IJnatjthoeized Mining.
Unauthorized miners may he ejected.
39. Any person found working for minerals other than gold on Crown
lands may be forcibly ejected therefrom by any police officer Crown land
ranger or other person authorized by the Secretary for Public Lands Pro’
vided always that this provision shall not apply to bond fide prospectors.
Proceeding and penalty for mining or removing minerals without authority
from claims.
40. Any person found working for minerals or removing minerals or
mineral ores from the land claim or selection of any other person who is
personally or by his agents occupying the same whether such land claim or
selection be held in fee or on lease or under license or on or from any land
applied for to be purchased or licensed under this Act or under “ The Grown
Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” may be forcibly ejected by any police officer
ranger of Crown lands or other person appointed by the Secretary for
Public Lands and on conviction thereof shall forfeit and pay for any such
offence any sum not exceeding fifty pounds to be recovered in a summary
way before two justices.
Stealing minerals from claims larceny.
41. Any person taking or removing mineral ores from the land claim or
selection of any other person shall be deemed to have stolen the same and
any person receiving the same with knowledge of such facts shall be deemed
to have received the same knowing it to have been stolen.
PART YI.
Geneeal Peoyisions.
Rights of adjoining proprietors over boundary creek fc.
42. In cases where selections have been made under “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act o/’1868” or shall have been made under this Act with
frontage to one side only of any creek lagoon or watercourse it shall be
lawful for the Secretary for Public Lands or some commissioner appointed
by him to grant the selectors on either side the right to work dredge and
mine up to the middle of the main channel of such creek lagoon or water-
course and in the event of the selectors of lands on opposite sides thereof or
otherwise not being able to agree as to such middle any one of the said
selectors may demand that the question shall be decided by the commissioner
or person authorized to act in that behalf on payment of a fee of one pound


and the commissioner or such other person as aforesaid after having made
a personal examination of the channel as aforesaid shall give his decision
subject to appeal to the Secretary for Public Lands such decision being
recorded in a book to be kept for the purpose Provided always that where
such creek lagoon cr watercourse shall be of such a width as in the opinion
of the Secretary for Public Lands or such commissioner to justify the refusal
to permit the whole of the bed of the channel to be worked it shall be lawful
to refuse such permission Provided also that such permission shall be subject
to such restrictions and conditions as to the mode of working and otherwise
as the Secretary for Public Lands or such commissioner shall see fit.
Governor may establish regulations,
43. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council from time to time to
make and alter or rescind all necessary regulations and to establish such
forms as may be required for the due carrying out of the provisions of this
Act and whenever in this Act the word regulation is made use of or regula-
tions are referred to the same shall be construed and intended to be the
existing regulations for the time being under the authority of this section.
Secretary for Lands may depute powers.
44. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council by proclamation or in
any regulations made under this Act to confer on any commissioner or other
person to be appointed in that behalf all or any of the powers and duties by
this Act conferred upon or intended to be performed used or exercised by
the Secretary for Lands.
PART VII.
Repeal Clause and Short Title.
Repeal clause.
45. From and after the commencement of this Act section thirty-two of
the Act of the thirty-first of Victoria number forty-six shall be repealed
except as to any applications for mineral lands already made or any right
or title acquired or accrued thereunder or any remedy or proceedings in
respect thereof or anything done or commenced to be done thereunder which
may be dealt with and proceed as if this Act had not been passed.
Short title.
46. This Act may be cited for all purposes as “ The Mineral Lands Act
of 1872.”
SCHEDULES.
A.
Application to purchase mineral lands No.
Date of Receipt
Pursuant to the provisions of section of “ The Mineral Lands Act of
1872” and of the regulations established thereunder *
of do hereby apply to purchase without competition
acres „ roods and perches of land in the f
°f (and which lands are more particularly described in the schedule
annexed) for the purpose of mining for X and hereby tender
the sum of pounds shillings and pence
as the required deposit upon the purchase of the said land at the rate of live
♦I or we—all names in full t County or district.
+ Description of minerals to be dug for and worked.


shillings per Acre together with the surrey fee and I hereby declare that I have
marked the selection on the ground as prescribed.
Given under hand this
day of 18
(Signature)
Received from the sum of pounds
shillings and pence being the amount of the deposit on the purchase
as above prooosed and survey fee.
Treasurer.
Brisbane
Schedule to application to purchase mineral lands.
County or District
Description of Minerals
General Locality and Description of Boundaries
Signature of Applicant.
Note—in the description furnish the name of the river creek or road on which the land is
situated also its distance and direction from the nearest portion of private property of which
stats ths area and the original purchaser or grantee or distance and direction from nearest
crossing-place of creek or confluence of creeks or rivers or other determinate point.
Mineeal Lands Act of 1872.”
Protection Memorandum.
In pursuance of clause of “ The
Mineral Lands Act of 1872” a protection is
hereby granted for the mineral application as
per margin for a period of one year from the
date hereof during which period the land
Reg. No. of Selection
Area:
District
Name of Applicant:
For Mining:
X'VA ilAiUAlig ♦ O X § _
Boundaries marked as follows : comprised within the marked boundaries shall
not be available for selection as mineral land
by any other person Tills protection how-
ever will be of no avail if a larger area than
that applied for—(a reasonable allowance
being made for error in the absence of survey)
—is included within the marked boundary
lines.
Given under my hand this day of 18
Secretary for Public Lands.


GENERAL REGULATIONS.
Queensland, 1 Proclamation by the Most Honourable George Augustus
to wit. ) Constantine, Marquis of Normanby, Earl of Mulgravc,
Viscount Normanby, and Baron Mulgrave of Mulgravc, all in
the County of York, in the Peerage of the United Kingdom ;
(1.5.) and Baron Mulgrave of IS ew Loss, in the County of Wexford,
Noemanby, in the Peerage of Ireland ; a Member of Her Majesty’s Most
Governor. Honourable Privy Council; Governor andCommander-in-Chief
of the Colony of Queensland and its Dependencies.
In pursuance of the authority in me vested, and in accordance with the pro-
visions of “ The Mineral Lands Act of 1872,” I, Geoege Augustus Con-
stantine, Marquis of Normanby, the Governor aforesaid, with the advice of
the Executive Council, do hereby notify and proclaim that the following
General Regulations have been established under the said Act: —
G-eneeal Regulations.
Former regulations repealed.
1. All regulations hitherto in force relating to the alienation of mineral
lands are hereby repealed, and the following are subsituted for them :
Applications to Puechase Minebal Lands.
Mode of application.
2. Applications to purchase mineral lands must be made on the form A
in the schedule hereto annexed, and must be lodged at the office of the Min-
ister for Lands, except in districts where otherwise ordered, when the same
must be lodged at such land-agents’ or other offices as may be notified in
the Government Gazette, between the hours of ten and tlree, except on
Saturdays, when the hours will be from from ten to twelve. The applications
must be accompanied by a sum of five shillings per acre by way of deposit,
together with the survey fee, as per scale in schedule H of “ The Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1868.”
Mineral Leases,
Mode of application.
3. Applications for leases of mineral lands must be made on the form B
in the schedule annexed, and must be lodged at the office of the Secretary for
Lands, except in districts where otherwise ordered, when the same must bo
lodged at such land agents’ or other offices as may be notified in the
Government Gazette, between the hours specified in clause 2 of these
regulations. The applications must be accompanied by the first year’s rent
at the rate of five shillings per acre, and also the survey fee as per scale in
schedule H of “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868.”


Lease not to issuj until after survey.
No lease shall issue until after the boundaries of the selection are
surveyed, and the application is confirmed by the Secretary for Lands.
Date of leases.
Leases of mineral lands shall date from the first day of January or
July nearest to the date of application.
Annual payment of rent.
6. The rent chargeable on leases of mineral lands will be five shillings
per acre per annum, payable in advance to the land agent of the district in
which the lands are situated, on or before the second day of January in each
year.
Second payment on leases.
7. The second payment on all leases under the Act shall be made on or
before the 2nd day of January following the date of application ; and the
said payment, together with the first year’s rent, shall cover the period
between the date of application and the end of the following year. The
second payment on each lease will, therefore, be for the number of clear
months intervening between the expiration of the twelve months from date of
application and the following Ist day of January, at the rate of fivepence per
acre for each month of such period.
General Provisions applicable to Purchases and Leases of Mineral
Lands.
Applicant must sign Application Book.
8. Applications to purchase or lease mineral lands must be lodged at the
office appointed to receive them, by the applicant or his authorized agent, who
will be required to sign an application book to be kept for the purpose, at
the time of such lodgment—so that the order in which each application has been
received may be determined with certainty. No application forwarded
through the post will be registered until the applicant, or his agent, attends
at the office for the purpose of signing the application book.
Area allowed to he selected.
9 The area of land allowed to be included in any one selection shall not
exceed 320 acres, nor be less than 20 acres, except in the case of a surveyed
portion, which is available for selection though containing less than 20 acres.
Marking and posting of notices.
10. The marking of each selection, and posting of notice on the ground
as prescribed in the 9th section of the Act, will be strictly insisted on, and
any failure in respect thereof will invalidate the application.
The mineral proposed to he worked must he stated .
11. The nature of the mineral which it is proposed to work or mine
must be described in the application. In the event of there being any
wilful concealment in this respect, or if the applicant fail, on demand, to
grove that the land applied for contains minerals in a workable form, the
ecretary for Lands shall have the power to cancel the application at any
time after confirmation before the grant in fee simple is issued ; the deposit,
or first year’s rent, paid thereon—as the case may be—being thereupon
forfeited.


Simultaneous applications.
12. Where two or more applications for the same land are received at
the same time, priority shall be decided by lot at a meeting of the applicants
or their agents, summoned by the Secretary for Lands or the land agent at
a time and place to be appointed by him for the purpose.
Applicant to be informed within two months as to whether he will he called
upon to effect survey.
13. At any time within two months from date of applications to
purchase or lease mineral lands, the Secretary for Lands may signify to the
applicant, in pursuance of section 13 of the Act, that he will require him to
make arrangements for the survey of the application.
Tin lands not available for lease.
14. No applications to lease mineral lands containing alluvial deposits
of tin will be entertained.
Land in town or other reserves.
15. Lands comprised in town, water, or other reserves, whether pro-
claimed or otherwise, provided that instructions to reserve such lands have
been issued by the Secretary for Lands, or any commissioner, or other
officer acting under his authority, shall not be available for application. In
the case of applications for mineral lands within large town reserves, where
it is shown the public interests are not affected thereby, the Secretary for
Lands reserves the right of dealing with each case on its merits ; but no
title will accrue by reason of the receipt of the application at any land office.
Forfeited lands not open to selection.
16. Lands comprised in forfeited mineral selections or leases shall not
be available for re-selection by purchase or lease, until they are proclaimed
to be so by notification in the Government Gazette.
Applications open to inspection.
17. Applications to purchase- or lease mineral lands shall be open to
inspection by any person during office hours on payment of a fee of two
shillings and sixpence. This fee will entitle the person paying the same to
inspect three applications, which will be considered a “ search.” In the
event of his requiring further information, he must pay an additional fee for
each search.
Teansfee of Mineeal Applications and Leases.
Mode of transfer.
18. Applications to purchase or lease mineral lands, after confirmation
by the Minister for Lands, may be transferred, on payment of a fee of one
pound and one shilling, together with stamp duty at the rate of fifteen
shillings on every £lOO or fractional part of £lOO, paid as purchase or
consideration money in the transaction. Duty stamps should be affixed to
the transfer before lodgment in the office of the Minister for Lands. No
partial transfer, or transfer by way of mortgage, or upon trust, will be enter-
tained. The form of transfer contained in schedule C may be adopted.


Transfers of mineral leases.
19. In all cases where the leases of mineral lands have been issued, no
transfer will be recorded unless the same is accompanied by the instrument
of lease, in order that the names of the proposed transferrees may be endorsed
thereon.
Transfer to he signed by the registered holder.
20. Applications to transfer must bear the signature of the person in
whose name the mineral selection or lease is registered in the Secretary for
Lands’ (Mice, attested by a magistrate of the colony, or a commissioner of
the Supreme Court. On the transfer being registered, the transferror will
'be debarred from all further claims to the land.
Mineral lands belonging to an insolvent estate , or to persons absent or
deceased.
21. In the event of a selector or lessee of mineral land dying, or being
declared insolvent, or being absent from the colony, the transfer may be
made by his legal representative, or the representative of his estate ; but the
transfer must be accompanied by a certificate from the Crown Solicitor of
the applicant’s right to transfer.
Separate transfer for each application.
22. A separate transfer must be lodged for each mineral application or
Please.
Dues in arrear.
23. No transfer of any mineral selection or lease will be entertained
before confirmation of such selection or lease by the Secretary for Lands, or
on which any dues of the Crown are in arrear, or in respect to which the
conditions or requirements of the Act have not been complied with.
Statutory declaration of value may be demanded.
24. Before any transfer is recorded, should the Secretary for Lands
require it, a statutory declaration of the value received for the sale of the
transferror’s interest must be furnished, in order that the proper amount of
stamp duty to be paid on the application may be assessed ; and in the event
of there being no consideration, or a nominal consideration only, then the
stamp duty shall be assessed on the marketable value of the selection at the
time, a declaration by the applicant as to such value being required.


SCHEDULES.
Application to purchase mineral lands.
Date of Receipt:
No. of Application :
Pursuant to the provisions of section two of the Act of the Legislature of Queens-
land 36 Victoria No. 15, and of the Regulations established thereunder*
of do hereby apply to purchase without competition
acres roods and perches of land in the f of
(and which lands are more particularly described in the schedule annexed), for the
purpose of mining for X and hereby tender the sum of
pounds shillings and pence, as the required deposit upon
the purchase of the said land, at the rate of five shillings per acre, together with
the survey fee ; and hereby declare that have marked the selection
on the ground, as prescribed in section nine of the said Act.
Given under hand this day of 187
(Signature.)
Received from the sum of pounds shillings
and pence, being the amount of the deposit on the purchase as
above proposed, and survey fee.
Brisbane, 187 . Treasurer. §
Note. —In the description furnish the name of the river, creek, or road on which the land is
situated; also its distance and direction from the nearest portion of private property, of whic
state the area and the original purchaser or grantee, or distance and direction from nearest cross-
ing-place of creek or confluence of creeks or rivers, or other determinate point.
♦ I or we, all names in full. t County or district.
J Description of minerals to be dug for and worked.
£ Commissioner or land agent, as the case may be.
Schedule to application to purchase mineral lands.
County or District:
Area :
Description of Minerals:
General locality and description of boundaries :
(Signature of Applicant.)
Application to lease mineral lands under Act 36 Victoria No. 15.
Date of Receipt :
No. of Application:
Pursuant to the provisions of section twenty-seven of the Act of the Legislature
of Queensland, 36 Victoria No. 15, and of the Regulations established thereunder,
* of do hereby apply to lease acres
roods and perches of land in the f district of
(and which lands are more particularly described in the schedule annexed), for the
purpose of mining for X and hereby tender the sum of
* I or we, all names in full. f County or district.
J Description of minerals to be dug for and worked.


pounds shillings and pence as the first year’s
rent of the said land, at the rate of fire shillings per acre, together with the survey
fee ; and hereby declare that have marked the land applied for, as
prescribed in section nine of the said Act.
Given under hand this day of 187
Received from the sum of pounds shillings
and pence, being the amount of the first year’s rent of the land, as
above proposed, and survey fee.
Treasurer. *
Brisbane, 187
Note.—ln the description furnish the name of the river, creek, or road on which the land is
situated; also its distance and direction from the nearest portion of private property, of which
state the area, and the original purchaser or grantee, or distance and direction from nearest cross-
ing-place of creek or confluence of creeks or rivers, or other determinate point.
* Commissioner or land agent, as the case may be.
Schedule to application to lease mineral lands.
County or District:
Area:
Description of Minerals :
General locality and description of boundaries :
(Signature of Applicant.)
Transfer of mineral applications under Act 36 Victoria A o. 15.
Know all men by these presents, that * . of the Crown lands
hereunder described: —
Mineral f No. :
District:
County of
Parish of
Portion No.:
Number of Acres:
and now held by under the provisions of “ The Mineral Lands Act
of 1872,” in consideration of the sum of £ received by do
hereby transfer and assign all right, title, and interest in the said
land to heirs, executors, and administrators; and hereby
request that this transfer may be registered in the office of the Minister for Lands
accordingly.
* Conditional purchaser [or lessee, as the case may be].
+ Selection [or lease].


In witness whereof
have hereunto set
hand and seal , this
(Signature of Transferror)
Signed, sealed, and delivered by the said in my presence.
J.P. (or Commissioner of the Supreme Court).
A fee of one pound and one shilling must be paid on every transfer, together with stamp duty
at the rate of fifteen shillings on every £lOO, or any fractional part of £lOO, paid as purchase or
consideration money. Duty stamps must be affixed before lodgment of transfer. Separate forms
of transfer must be’filled up and duly signed for each selection to be transferred.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
thirty-first day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-two, and in the thirty-sixth year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
Command,
J. MALBON THOMPSON.
God Save the Queen!
DESCRIPTION OF MINERAL LAND.
Disteict of Daeling Downs South.
Commencing at the junction of Canal Creek with the Broadwater, and
bounded thence on the north by a line bearing east to the Condamine River;
thence by the Condamine River upwards to the confluence of Clifton Creek;
thence by the range dividing the waters of Clifton Creek from those of
Dalrymple Creek north-easterly to the Main Range ; on the east of the Main
Range southerly to the south boundary of the Colony of Queensland; on
the south-east and south-west by that boundary westerly to the confluence of
the Maclntyre Brook with the Macintyre or Dumaresq River; on the west
by a line north to the range dividing the waters of Macintyre Brook from
those falling into the Weir River; thence by that range north-easterly to
Mount Domville or Wilmeran ; thence by a spur range to the junction of
Broadwater with Canal Creek, the point of commencement.
There is an office for the transaction of business connected with mineral
lands at Stanthorpe, where there is also a commissioner stationed. The
duties of this officer are defined by the regulations.
All applications for mineral lands within the above district must be made
at the Stanthorpe office.
The Commissioner’s Court sitting at Stanthorpe, as prescribed in section
6 of the regulations, is held on the first Tuesday in every month.


Queensland, 7 Proclamation by The Most Honourable George Augus-
to wit. ) Ttrs Constantine, Marquis of Norman by, Earl of
Md grave, Yiscount Normanby, Baron Mulgrave of
Mulgrave, all in the County of York, in the Peerage of the
United Kingdom ; and Baron Mulgrave of New Ross, in the
(1.5.) County of Wexford, in the Peerage of Ireland; a Member
Normanbt, of Her Majesty’s Most Honourable Privy Council, Governor
Governor, and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Queensland and
its Dependencies.
In pursuance of the authority in me vested, and in accordance with the
provisions of “ The Mineral Lands Act of 18/2, I, George Augustus
Constantine, Marquis of Normanby, the Governor aforesaid, with the
advice of the Executive Council, do hereby notify and proclaim that the
Regulations with respect to the alienation of, or otherwise dealing with.
Mineral Lands within certain districts, proclaimed under my Hand and Seal
on the thirty-first day of October, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-
two, and twenty-first day of March, one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-three, shall be, and are, hereby rescinded, and that the following
Regulations arc established in lieu thereof;—
Regulations.
■Regulations to apply to such districts as may he notified hy Minister.
1. These regulations are to apply to such districts from such time and
during such periods as the Minister for Lands may, by notice in the
Govesmment Gazette, from time to time prescribe.
General Regulations applicable.
2. The general Regulations under the Act, proclaimed on 31st October’
1872, shall also apply to any district where these Regulations are in force 1
so far as they are not inconsistent therewith.
Commissioner may he appointed.
3. A Commissioner or other officer may be appointed to administer these
Regulations in any district.
Mode of application for mineral lands.
4. Applications to purchase or lease mineral lands must be made on the
forms in the schedule annexed to the general Regulations established under
the Act, proclaimed on the 31st October, 1872, and must be lodged at the
office of the Commissioner between the hours of ten and three, except on
Saturdays, when the hours will be from ten to twelve. The applications
must be accompanied by a payment of five shillings per acre by way ot
deposit, or first year’s rent, as the case may be, together with the survey fee,
as per scale in schedule H. in “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868.
Application must contain a clear description.
5. The application must contain a clear description sufficient to enahl®
the selection to be marked off on the plan in the Commissioner’s office.


Commissioner s monthly court.
6. The Commissioner will periodically hold an open court for the pur-
pose of giving his decisions as to the acceptance or rejection of applications,
the days of holding which will be notified in the Government Gazette and
local papers. Applicants or their agents are required to attend at this court,,
failing which, on their names being called, their applications will be rejected,
and the sum of one pound retained as a penalty out of the moneys lodged
with the applications.
At such court the Commissioner will hear objections and protests, if any,
and provisionally accept or reject any application; but no title will accrue to
the applicant until confirmation by the Secretary for Lands.
Duties of Commissioner.
7. The Commissioner is empowered to receive applications to purchase
or lease mineral lands, and cause them to be entered in the order ot their
receipt in an application book kept for that purpose, with the date and hour
of such receipt. ... ....
The Commissioner will examine the applications in the order in which
they are entered in the application book, and ascertain, by comparison with
the plans of the district, whether sufficient vacant land exists to satisfy each
application, or if it interferes with any existing claim, and will give his
decision as to the acceptance or rejection of each application at the next
sitting of the Commissioner’s Court.
The Commissioner is empowered (subject to appeal to the Secretary for
Lands) to reject any application, for any of the following reasons :
1. When the land has been already selected or reserved for public pur-
poses, or where it is desirable for the public good that the same
should be so reserved.
2. When the description contained in any application is insufficient to
indicate the land applied for.
After acceptance is publicly notified as aforesaid each application to purchase
or lease shall be duly entered in registers to be kept for the purpose.
The Commissioner will make arrangements for the survej' of all accepted
applications by a licensed surveyor approved by the Surveyor-General, and
on receipt of each plan, which must be in duplicate, he shall forward one
copy to the Surveyor-General, and retain the other for office use.
Commissioner may decide disputes.
8. The Commissioner shall have power (subject to appeal to the Minister
for Lands) to hear and decide upon, and to make any necessary order in any
dispute that may arise in any matter connected with the boundaries of
applications for mineral lands, pending survey.
Dcrmissory occupation license may he issued hy the Commissioner in certain
cases.
9. No title to any land applied for shall accrue to any applicant, or any
contract considered as created, until the Minister confirms the application ;
but if it is unobjectionable, and there is no dispute as to boundary, the
Commissioner may issue a permissory occupation license, pending confirma-
tion. which shall be in the form B, which shall be revocable at any time by
demand of possession, to be made by the Commissioner, and any right of
occupancy acquired thereunder shall, immediately on such demand, cease.


Mining Licenses.
Commissioners to issue licenses.
10. Tlie Commissioner is empowered to issue mining licenses under tlie
34th section of the Act to any persons, on payment of the sum of ten
shillings for each license, but such licenses shall only be available to the
holders within the area proclaimed under the 33rd section of the Act.
Mining licenses must he held hy all workers in claims.
11. A license issued under the Act will only authorize the person in
whose name it is granted to mine in any claim, and will not empower him to
employ any person in mining in his claim unless he is also the holder of a
mining license.
Size of claim under mining license.
12. The claim allowed to each holder of a mining license shall be a
block of land three chains square, each side being one hundred and ninety-
eight feet, which may include both sides of any river, creek, or watercourse,
provided the same are within the limits of the claim. A space of three feet
to be left between the boundaries of claims, unless amalgamated under
clause 19.
Claim to he properly pegged.
13. The holders of any claim shall, on pain of forfeiture, mark the
boundaries of such claims by driving in at each corner a substantial peg, to
stand at least two feet above the ground, which shall be kept at all times
clear of rubbish or soil during the occupation thereof; and any person,
unless authorized by the Commissioner to do so, who shall either remove,
injure, or destroy, or cover such peg, shall be liable to the penalty prescribed
in the second section of the Act 16 Yic., No. 15. In the case of claims
having a frontage to any river, creek, or watercourse, pegs must be driven at
each extremity of the frontage on the margin of the watercourse, in addition
to the pegs at the corners.
Marking off more ground than allowed.
14. Any miner marking off more ground than he is entitled to by these
Regulations, shall be liable to have the ground so marked off, pegged off at
either end, at the option of the disputant, upon same being proved to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner.
Claims must he worked.
15. Each claim must be worked within forty-eight hours after the bound-
aries are marked; otherwise such claims shall be deemed to be abandoned.
Claims to he continuously worked.
16. All claims, except when otherwise provided, shall, within forty-
eight hours after the boundaries are marked, be effectively and continuously
worked, and each claim shall be considered “ effectively and continuously
worked ” when six hours bond fide work is performed thereon, or in connec-
tion therewith, on every working day except Saturday.
Unworked claims.
17. Any claim remaining unworked and unregistered, or not being
worked in a bond fide manner for three clear ordinary working days, shall be
deemed to be abandoned.


Registration of claims.
18. Any miner who shall from illness be unable to work, or who shall
be in attendance at any court of justice, or whose absence from his claim is
rendered necessary by some urgent business, shall, on proof being afforded
to the Commissioner, be entitled to a written registry to the effect that such
claim is held in reserve for him, and a copy of such registry shall be posted
on every claim so reserved.
Claims may he amalgamated.
19. Any party holding contiguous claims not exceeding six in number will
be entitled to amalgamate their claims, and to work the same as one claim ;
but the number of men to be maintained in working the ground must be at
least equal to the number of claims amalgamated, otherwise the Commissioner
shall have power to cancel the amalgamation, or to amend it by reducing the
size of the claim. Provided that in special cases any number of claims may
be amalgamated, subject to the above condition as to number of men
employed, by permission of the Commissioner.
Commissioner may adjust claims ,
20. All claims held under mining licenses shall be subject to adjustment
by the Commissioner, who shall, if he see fit, mark the claims with pegs
bearing the Government broad-arrow brand ; and any person otherwise than
those duly authorized by the Commissioner to do so, who shall either remove
or destroy any such peg, shall be liable to the penalty prescribed in the
second section of the Act 16 Yic., No. 15.
General Provisions.
Construction of dams and races.
21. Holders of mineral claims under the purchasing, leasing, or licensing
sections of the Act, who may require to construct dams, races, or drains,
extending beyond the limits of their claims, will be required to notify the
same to the Commissioner, in writing, stating the nature and particulars of
such work, and the Commissioner shall thereupon notify the same to all
parties interested or affected by the carrying out and construction of the
works; and if objections be made, the Commissioner shall hear and decide
whether they be admissible or otherwise, and thereupon make such orders as
may be necessary to meet the requirements of the case, the action taken by
the Commissioner in all cases being subject to the approval of the Secretary
for Lands.
Commissioner may issue orders relative to working claims, Sfc.
22. For the purpose of carrying out the foregoing Regulations, the
Commissioner shall have power to make such orders, not inconsistent with
the Act or these Regulations, relative to the proper working of claims,
divisions of river or creek frontages, giving right of access to water as to him
shall appear expedient, and each such order shall be in writing, signed by
the Commissioner, and shall be duly served on the owner or occupier of any
claim to which it may apply. And any owner or occupier who shall neglect
to comply with such order, shall forfeit or pay for every such offence any
sum not exceeding £lO, to be recovered in a summary way before any two
justices. ' •


Trespassers may be prosecuted.
23. Any person working for minerals upon lands reserved for town or
other pm-poses, whether proclaimed or otherwise, who may have been forcibly
ejected therefrom, in pursuance of section 39 of the Act, or may have beeu
warned against working thereon by the Commissioner or other officer, may
be prosecuted for trespass on an information to be laid by the Commissioner,
if found working (unless duly authorized) within the same reserve at any
subsequent time after such forcible ejection or warning as aforesaid, and shall
be liable to the penalties prescribed in the seventy-second section of “ The
Pastoral Leases Act q/ 1 1869.”
SCHEDULE A.
Permissive Occupation License —“ Mineral Lands Act of 1872.
This is to certify that has permission to occupy the land
described below, and to carry on mining operations thereon.
This right is to protect the selection from intrusion or trespass, but gives no
title to the land beyond a permissive occupancy, which the undersigned may deter-
mine at any time by demand of possession.
Any dispute as" to boundary will he determined irrespective of the fact of the
issue of this permission, and the power is expressly reserved to the Secretary for
Lands to confirm or reject this application, as he may see fit, and the law allows.
DeSCBXPTION :
Given under my hand this day of
Commissioner.
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this
thirtieth day.of December, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and seventy-three, and in the thirty-
seventh year of Her Majesty’s reign.
Command,
C. cT. GEAHAM.
Gon Save the Queex !


Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, Ist May, 1877.
MINERAL LANDS.
It is hereby notified for general information that in cases where applicants
for Mineral Lands are desirous, before survey, of amending the boundaries
given in their applications, the amendments must be lodged at the Mineral
Lands offices of the districts in which the lands are situated.
JOHN DOUGLAS.
Offices foe the Receipt of Applications for Mineral Lands under
“The Mineral Lands Act of 1872.”
The Commissioner at Stanthorpe receives applications for mineral lands
within the District of Darling Downs South.
The Land agents at Beenleigh, Ipswich, Helidon, Toowoomba, Dalby,
Maryborough, Gympie, Gladstone, Rockhampton, Mackay, St. Lawrence,
Bowen, Townsville, Normanton, Clermont, Cairns, Cooktown, Nanango,
Cardwell, and Bundaberg (the latter for the portion of the district not
included in the police district of Tenningering), are authorized to receive
applications for mineral lands within their respective districts.
The Police Magistrates at Gayndah and Tenningering also receive appli-
cations for mineral lands within their respective districts.
Applications for mineral lands within the following Unsettled Pastoral
Districts are received by the officers hereunder mentioned
Maranoa District —Land Agent, Roma.
Leichhardt District —Land Agent, Rockhampton.
North Kennedy District —Land Agent, Townsville.
South Kennedy District —Land Agent, Bowen.
Warrego District—Commissioner of Crown Lands, Charleville.
Mitchell District —Commissioner of Crown Lands, Blackall
Burke District —Land Agent, Normanton.
Cook Unsettled District—Police Magistrate, Gilberton.
Applications for mineral lands situated in any district not specified
above should be lodged at the office of the Secretary for Public Lands at
Brisbane.


THE WESTERN RAILWAY ACT.
39 VICTORIA, No, 7.
"39 Yictobia, No. 7. An Act to Authorise the making of a Railway from
JDalhy to Roma and to provide Funds for the Construction of the same
by the Sale of Croton Lands. [Assented to 31st August, 1875.
Preamble.
WHEREAS the making of a Railway from Dalby to Roma would be of
great public advantage And whereas it is expedient that such
railway should be forthwith constructed and that funds for the construction
of the same should be provided by the sale of Crown lands Be it therefore
enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland
in Parliament assembled and by the authority of the same as follows—
Intbodxjctoey Peovisioxs.
Short title. — Commencement.
1. This Act may be cited for all purposes as “ The Western Railway
Act ” and shall commence and take effect on and from the passing thereof.
Interpretation of terms.
2. In the interpretation of this Act the following words within inverted
commas shall unless the context otherwise indicate have the meanings set
against them respectively—
“ Crown Lands ” —All lands vested in Her Majesty which have not been
dedicated to any public purpose and which have not been granted or
lawfully contracted to be granted to any person in fee simple or for
any less estate And all lands which at the time of the passing of this
Act may have become or which after the passing of this Act may
become forfeited by reason of any breach of the conditions on which
the same have been granted or contracted to be granted And also
all lands now or hereafter resumed from any lease under the provisions
of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” or any Act in force for the
time being regulating the resumption of lands from lease
“Run” —Any portion of Crown lands comprised in any license to
depasture or in any lease or promise of lease for pastoral purposes
“ Lease ” shall mean and include every lease or promise of lease or
license of Crown lands for pastoral purposes
“ Lessee ” shall mean the lawful holder of any such lease whether as the
original lessee or the lawful assignee of any such lease.


Establishment of Western Railway Reserve and Application
of Act thereto.
Creation of Western Railway Reserve.
3. All Crown lands situated within the ar<?a described in the schedule
hereto are hereby set apart as and declared to be a railway reserve under
the name of “ The Western Railway Reserve ” hereinafter called “ the said
reserve ” subject to be dealt with as hereinafter provided.
This Act to apply to Western Railway Reserve only.
4. The provisions of this Act shall apply to the said reserve only.
Lands under Pastoral Lease.
Effect of resumption of runs in the reserve.
5. Whenever the whole or any part of a run within the said reserve shall
be resumed from lease by virtue of the fifty-fifth section of “ The Pastoral
Leases Act of 1869 ” such resumption shall have the effect of withdrawing
from lease the lands so resumed to the extent next hereinafter provided but
not further or otherwise and the lessee shall have and be subject to the
following rights and liabilities that is to say—
(1.) The land resumed shall be subject to reservation for township-
reserves and public purposes under the provisions of the laws in
force for the time being relating to such reservation and shall also
be subject to selection and alienation under the provisions of this
Act
(2.) The lessee shall until such reservation selection or alienation be at
liberty to occupy the whole of the land so resumed and shall continue
to pay rent for so much thereof as shall not from time to time have
been so reserved selected or alienated
(3.) Upon such reservation selection or alienation his right to occupy
the land so reserved selected or alienated as the case may be shall
cease and determine and he shall be entitled to a reduction of rent
proportionate to the area from time to time so reserved selected or
alienated
(4.) The lessee shall have and may exercise the right of pre-emption-
conferred on him by the fifty-fourth section of the said Act over any
part of his run that shall not for the time being have been so reserved
or selected or have been proclaimed for sale by auction or as a
homestead area.
Operation of “ Pastoral Leases Act ” preserved in other respects.
6. Except as aforesaid nothing herein contained shall be held to abridge
or interfere with any rights that may be conferred on lessees by the said
“ Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” or to interfere with the operation of the said
Act within the said reserve except so far as the same shall be expressly
modified by this Act.
Alienation of Land in the Reserve.
Crown lands in reserve not to he dealt with except under this Act.
7. Crown lands in the said reserve shall not be leased or otherwise
alienated except in accordance with the provisions of this Act.


Section 16 of “ Crown Lands Alienation Act 0/1868 ” not to apply to reserve .
8. The provisions of the sixteenth section of “ The Crown Lands
Alienation Act 0/1868 ” shall not apply to lands within the said reserve.
Mode in which land may be alienated.
9. Crown lands in the said reserve may be leased and otherwise alienated
in any one or more of the modes following that is to say —
(1.) Under the provisions of “ The Mineral Lands Act of 1872 ” or any
other Act in force for the time being relating to mineral lands
(2.) Under the provisions of “ The Gold Fields Act of 1874 ” or any
other Act in force for the time being rel ating to gold fields
(3.) Under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being relating
to the sale of Crown lands by auction
(4.) Under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being relating
to the selection of homesteads
(5.) Under the provisions of “ The Pastoral Leases Act o/1869 ” or any
other law in force for the time being relating to the leasing of
Crown lands for pastoral purposes
(6.) And in township reserves under the provisions of the laws for the
time being in force relating to the alienation of land in such reserves
But subject nevertheless to the following conditions and modifications that
is to say—
(7.) All lands within two miles of the line of railway within the said
reserve except such part thereof as shall be reserved for township
reserves or public purposes shall be set apart as a Homestead area
under the provisions of “ The Homestead Areas Act of 1872 ”
(8.) The upset price of country lands offered for sale by auction shall
not be less than ten shillings per acre
(9.) The areas of country lots so offered may be increased to not more
than ten thousand acres and each lot so offered shall contain over
and above the advertised area thereof sufficient land for a road
three chains wide through any part of such lot which may be opened
by the Secretary for Public Works in any direction when required
and in no case shall more than twelve thousand acres be included in
any number of adjoining lots unless the same be surrounded by a
reserved road three chains wide.
Increase of license fees and rent of runs within reserve.
(10.) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in “ The
Pastoral Leases Act of 1869
The license fee payable on every application for a license of a
run within the said reserve shall be at the rate of ten shillings per
square mile of the estimated area of the run
And the rent to be paid in respect of every new lease of a run
within the said reserve acquired after the passing of this Act shall
during the first seven years of such lease be at the rate of ten
shillings per square mile according to the estimated area of the run
and during the second seven years at the rate of twenty shillings
per square mile and during the third seven years at the rate of
' thirty shillings per square mile subject to appraisement in the
manner prescribed by the twentieth section of the said Act but so
that in no case shall the rent during the second seven years be less
than fifteen or more than twenty-five shillings per square mile or
during the third seven years be less than twenty-five or more than
forty shillings per square mile of available area which shall not be
computed at less than one-half of the gross area of the run.


New leases to be subject to provisions of section 5.
10. Any leases of runs in the said reserve acquired after the passing of
this Act shall be subject to the provisions of the fifth section hereof.
Reserve not to be deemed a railway reserve under “ The Grown Lands Alien-
ation Act of 1868.”
11. The said reserve shall not nor shall any part thereof be deemed
to be a railway reserve within the meaning of “ The Crown Lands Alienation
Act o/ > 1868.”
Peg VISIONS FOE THE CoNSTETJCTION OF A RAILWAY WITHIN THE SAID
JReseeve feom Dalby to Roma.
Governor in Council may cause railway to be made from Dalby to Roma.
12. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any time after the
passing of this Act and in accordance with the provisions of the Act twenty-
seven Victoria number eight intituled “An Act to malce provision for the
Construction of Railways and for the regulation of the same ” as amended
by “ The Railway Act of 1864 ” and “ The Railway Amendment Act of
1872 ” to cause a line of railway with all proper works and conveniences
thereto to be made within the said reserve from Dalby to Roma.
Account to be kept in Treasury under name of “ The Western Railway
Account.”
13. There shall be kept in the Treasury a distinct and separate head of
The Trust Fund under the name of “ The Western Railway Account.”
Colonial Treasurer may advance two hundred and fifty thousand pounds out
of moneys to credit of Public Account to Western Railway Account.
14. It shall be lawful for the Colonial Treasurer under the warrant of
the Governor to pay and advance from time to time out of the moneys stand-
ing to the credit of the Public Account any sum or sums of money not
exceeding in the aggregate at any one time the sum of two hundred and
fifty thousand pounds to be placed to the credit of “ The Western Railway
Account ” and to be repaid in the manner hereinafter provided.
Disposal of moneys received on alienation of lands within reserve.
15. The moneys derived from the alienation of Crown lands within the
said reserve except rents of runs shall be applied in the first place in the
repayment of lire moneys advanced by the Colonial Treasurer under the
authority of the last preceding section together with interest thereon at the
rate of five pounds per centum per annum and after repayment thereof
together with interest shall be paid into the Treasury to the credit of “ The
Western Railway Account ” under such regulations as the Governor in
Council shall from time to time prescribe.
Moneys to be expended in construction of Western Railway.
16. The moneys from time to time standing to the credit of “ The
Western Railway Account” shall be applied and expended in the construction
of the said railway works and in the payment of all necessary expenses
incidental thereto.
SCHEDULE.
Definition of the Western Railway Reserve.
For the purpose of defining the limits of The Western Railway Reserve
created under this Act a straight line shall be drawn from Dalby to the town of
Roma and produced thence for a distance of fifty miles and the “ said straight line
shall be the base line of the said reserve which shall extend for fifty miles on each
side of the said base line.


THE RAILWAY RESERVES ACT.
41 VICTORIA, No. 11.
41 Victoria, No. 11. —An Act to set apart certain Lands as Railway
Reserves and to provide Funds for the Construction of Railways and to-
amend “ 'The Western Railway Act.”
[Assented to sth September, 1877.
Preamble.
WHEEEAS it is expedient that provision should be made for the future-
construction of .Railways in the Colony and that funds for the con-
struction of the same should be provided by the sale of Crown Lands within
the districts to be benefited by such Railways and whereas it is expedient
that the mode of alienation of Crown lands in all railway reserves including
“ The Western Railway Reserve” should be uniform Be it therefore enacted
by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and consent
of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of Queensland in Parlia-
ment assembled and by the authority of the same as follows —
Introductory Provisions.
Short title.
1. This Act may be cited for all purposes as “ The Railway Reserves
Act ” and shall commence and take effect on and from the passing thereol.
Commencement.
2. In the interpretation of this Act the following words within inverted
commas shall unless the context otherwise indicate have the meanings set
against them respectively—
Interpretation of terms.
“Crown Lands”—-All lands vested in Her Majesty which are not
dedicated to any public purpose and which are not for the time
being subject to any deed of grant lease contract promise or
engagement made by or on behalf of Her Majesty and all lands
comprised in any pastoral lease which are by law subject for the
time being to reservation selection or alienation
“Run”—Any portion of lands comprised in any license to depasture
or in any lease or promise of lease for pastoral purposes
“Lease” shall mean and include every lease or promise of lease or
license of Crown lands for pastoral purposes
“ Lessee” shall mean the lawful holder of any such lease whether as
the original lessee or the lawful assignee of any such lease.


Establishment of Railway Reserves and Application of Act thereto.
Creation of Railway reserves.
3. All Crown lands situated within the areas described in the schedule
hereto are hereby set apart as and declared to be Railway Reserves under
the names therein respectively stated and subject to be dealt with as
hereinafter provided.
Lands under Pastoeal Lease.
Effect of resumption of runs in the reserves.
4. Whenever the whole or any part of a run within the said reserves
shall have been heretofore or shall be hereafter resumed from lease by virtue
of the fifty-fifth section of “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” such
resumption shall have the effect of withdrawing from lease the lands so
resumed to the extent next hereinafter provided but not further or otherwise
and the lessee shall have and be subject to the following rights and liabilities
that is to say—
(1.) The land resumed shall be subject to reservation for township
reserves and public purposes under the provisions of the laws in
force for the time being relating to such reservation and shall also
be subject to selection and alienation under the provisions of this
Act
(2.) The lessee shall until such reservation selection or alienation be at
liberty to occupy the whole of the land so resumed and shall
continue to pay rent for so much thereof as shall not from time to
time have been so reserved selected or alienated
(3.) Upon such reservation selection or alienation his right to occupy
the land so reserved selected or alienated as the case may be shall
cease and determine and he shall be entitled to a reduction of rent
proportionate to the area from time to time so reserved selected or
alienated
(4.) The lessee shall have and may exercise the right of pre-emption
conferred on him by the fifty-fourth section of the said Ac* over
any part of his run that shall not for the time being have been so
reserved or selected or have been proclaimed for sale by auction
or open to selection by conditional purchase or as a homestead
area Provided that it shall be lawful for the lessee of two or
more runs adjoining to each other subject to the approval of the
Governor in Council to consolidate in one block the pre-emptive
selections which he may be entitled to make in respect of each of
the adjoining runs as aforesaid
(5.) Where a run comprises a larger area than twenty-five square
miles of available country upon which rent has been paid it shall
be lawful for the lessee to exercise his right of pre-emption to the
same extent and in the same manner as if the run had been sub-
divided into runs containing not less than twenty-five square miles
each and the area selected may with the approval of the Governor
in Council be consolidated in one block
The boundaries of all pre-emptive selections whether consoli-
dated or otherwise shall be surveyed subject to the provisions
contained in section fifty-four of the said Act.


One-half only of runs under 33 Vic. No. 10 to be taken.
5. Provided that not more than one-half part of ally run in the said
reserves held under “ The Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” shall be proclaimed
for sale or open for selection except as hereinafter provided
Puns may be consolidated.
In cases where one person or firm is the lessee of two or more such runs
adjoining each other he may within three months from the passing of this
Act apply to the Secretary for Public Lauds to have such runs consolidated
into one and thereafter they shall be considered for the purposes of this Act
as one run
Notification of division by the Secretary for Lands.
Before any lands comprised within any run in the said reserves held
under the said “ Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” are proclaimed for sale or
open for selection the Secretary for Public Lands shall notify to the lessee
which half of the run is to be liable to be so proclaimed and the division of the
run shall be as nearly as the natural features of the country will permit by a
straight line drawn so as to divide equally the pastoral land and permanent
water
Half cost survey to be paid by lessee.
Provided that when the boundaries of a run are unsurveyed or when a
further survey is required to enable the division to be carried out the lesse
of the run shall pay half the cost of such survey or further survey as the
case may be and in default of payment within six months from the date upon
which demand therefor shall be made in the Gazette the Governor may
declare the run for which the half cost of survey has not been paid forfeited
Further alienation to be made upon six months’ notice subject to dissent of
Parliament.
If it shall be deemed expedient to proclaim for sale or selection any
further portion of a run in the said reserves the Secretary for Public Lands
shall give six months’ notice in writing of the proposed proclamation to the
lessee and after the expiration of such notice a schedule of the lands proposed
to be proclaimed shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and if the
proposed proclamation shall not be dissented from by resolutions passed by
both Houses of Parliament within sixty days during a session ot Parliament
the lands comprised in such schedule may be so proclaimed accordingly.
Operation of “ Pastoral Leases Act ” preserved in other respects.
6. Except as aforesaid nothing herein contained shall be held to abridge
or interfere with any rights that may be conferred on lessees by the said
“ Pastoral Leases Act of 1869” to interfere with the operation of the said
Act within the said reserves except so far as the same is expressly modified
by this Act.
Alienation of Land in the Besebves.
Mode in which land may be alienated,
7. Crown lands in the said reserves may be leased and alienated under
the provisions of the Jaws for the time being in force relating to the leasing
and alienation of Crown Lands but subject nevertheless to the following
conditions and modifications that is to say—
(l.) All lands within two miles of any line of railway within the said
reserves except such part thereof as shall be reserved for township
reserves or public purposes shall be set apart as homestead areas
under “ The Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1876 ”


(2.) The areas of country lots offered for sale by auction may be
increased to not more than five thousand one hundred and twenty
acres and each lot so offered shall contain over and above the
advertised area thereof sufficient land for a road three chains wide
through any part of such lot which may be opened by the Secre-
tary for Public Works in any direction when required and in no
case shall more than twelve thousand acres be included in any
number of adjoining lots unless the same be surrounded by a
reserved road three chains wide.
New leases.
8. All lands comprised in any leases of runs in the said reserves acquired
after the passing of this Act shall be subject to reservation selection and
alienation in the same mauner as lands resumed from lease and the lessee
shall be subject to the same rights and liabilities as are hereinbefore declared
with respect to lands so resumed.
Provisions foe the Construction of Railways.
Governor in Council may cause railways to he made within the Reserved
Districts.
9. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any time after the
passing of this Act and in accordance with the pi'ovisions of the Act twenty-
seven Victoria number eight intituled “An Act to make provision for the
Construction of Railways and for the regulation of the same ” as amended by
“ The Railway Act o/' 1861 ” and “ The Railway Amendment Act q/’1872” to
cause lines of railway with all proper works and conveniences thereto to be
made within the said reserves.
Railway Accounts to he kept in Treasury.
10. There shall be kept in the Treasury distinct and separate heads of
The Trust Fund under the names of “ The Railway Account ” for such
Reserves respectively.
Colonial Treasurer may make advances out of moneys to credit of public
account to Railway Accounts.
11. It shall be lawful for the Colonial Treasurer under the warrant of
the Governor to pay and advance from time to time out of the moneys stand-
ing to the credit of the Public Account such sum or sums of money as may
be appropriated by Parliament for the construction of railways within the
said reserves respectively to be placed to the credit of the said Accounts and
to be repaid in the manner hereinafter provided.
Disposal of proceeds of lands alienated.
12. All moneys derived from the alienation of Crown lauds within the
said several reserves shall be placed to the credit of the said Accounts respec-
tively and shall be applied in manner following that is to say—
Firstly—ln payment of interest at the rate of five pounds per centum
per annum upon the moneys advanced by the Colonial Treasurer
under the authority of the last preceding section to such accounts
respectively


Secondly—ln the construction of railways within the said reserves
respectively in such manner and in such proportions as shall from
time to time be authorized by Parliament
Thirdly—ln the inpayment of the moneys so advanced by the Colonial
Treasurer to such accounts respectively
And any surplus remaining after such repayment shall remain at the
credit of the said Accounts and shall be appropriated in such manner as shall
from time to time be authorized by Parliament.
Alienation or Land —Westeen Railway Reseeve.
Mode of alienation.
13. Notwithstanding anything in “ The Western Hallway Act to the
contrary Crown lands in the Western Railway Reserve may be alienated
under the provisions of the laws in force for the time being relating to the
alienation of lands by conditional selection.
Provisions of Act as to pre-emption extended to the Western Railway Reserve.
14. In cases where one person or firm is the lessee of two or more
runs in the Western Railway Reserve adjoining each other he may within
three months from the passing of this Act apply to the Secretary for Land to
have such runs consolidated into one and thereafter they shall be considered
as one run and the lessee may if he has not theretofore exercised the same
exercise his pre-emptive right in the same manner as is provided by this Act.
THE SCHEDULE.
1. SOUTHERN EXTENSION RAILWAY RESERVE.
Commencing on the left bank of the Condamine River at the intersection
of the east boundary of Warwick Town Reserve first proclaimed thence by that
river upwards in a general north-easterly direction to the eastern boundary of
Darling Downs District thence by that boundary southerly to the south boundary
of the colony thence by the south boundary of the colony in a general westerly
direction to the junction of Macintyre Brook with the Severn River thence north-
easterly in a direct line to the south-east corner of the Western Railway Reserv)
thence by the south-eastern boundary ef that reserve north-easterly to a point due
west of the junction of North Branch with Condamine River thence east to that
junction thence by the left bank of North Branch and its continuation being the
left bank of Condamine River upwards to the intersection of the west boundary of
Warwick Town Reserve first proclaimed thence south by that west boundary east
by the south boundary and north by the cast boundary to the point of commence-
ment.
2. WIDE BAY AND BURNETT DISTRICTS RAILWAY RESERVE.
Commencing on the sea-coast at the mouth of the Kolan River and bounded
thence on the north by the northern watershed of the Rolan River westerly by the
northern watershed of the Burnett River and its tributaries westerly to the range
separating the Burnett River waters from the Dawson River waiters on the west by
that range southerly to the Great Dividing Range thence by the Great Dividing
Range south-easterly to the range separating the Burnett and Mary River waters
from those of the Brisbane River on the south by the last mentioned range and by
the northern watershed of the Mooroochydoro River easterly to the sea-coast and
on the east by the sea-coast northerly to the point of commencement and exclusive
of all lands comprised within the Western Railway Reserve.


3. CENTRAL DISTRICT RAILWAY RESERVE.
The area included within parallel lines distant fifty miles from and on each side
of a base line drawn in a straight line from a point on the Comet Rirer three miles
above its junction with the Mackenzie River north-westerly to Clermont town
reserve and produced thence for a distance of fifty miles.
4. KENNEDY RAILWAY RESERVE.
The area included within parallel lines distant fifty miles from and on each side
of a base line drawn in a straight line from Townsville south-westerly to Charters
Towers and produced thence for a distance of fifty miles.
dillES C. Real, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane.




1 < t /. i
INDEX.
<!■'. .. if! 1 • ' ilfti / , i Ml*r
"t ~I •■■ ■' 77 ■ ! ■ , ,7: i.; ir - 7 T”7 7T 7“ - ’ >
Subject. Page.
_ T _ ; ; “ 7
JO <■) ■ .. ■ wo o' :.7-o ■ f ■'hi . ■ i To • :\h; I
INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT AND DIGEST.
INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT AND DIGEST.
Action#—
Actions against Commissioner or other Officials, how pro-
ceeded with ... ... ... ... n ’.ii ... 23 94
Costs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 94
Notice in writing to be given to defendant ... ... ... 23 94
To be commenced within twelve months ... ... ... 23 94
, I .o'.,
Appeal—
Decision of District Court to be final ... ... ... 24 95
From Bench of Magistrates to District Court ... ... 24 95
Applications—
For certificates ... ... ... ... ... ••• Id 51
Simultaneous for the same land ... ... ... ••• 13 17
To close a Eoad ... ... ;.. ••• 20 65 reg.
18
To select a Conditional Purchase ... ... .... ... 12 17
To select a Homestead... ... ... ... ••• ••• 12 17
To select unsold country Lands ... ... ... ... 20 62
' Withdrawal of ... ... ... ... ... ••• 13 reg. 10
Appointments—
Bailiffs, Crown... ... ... ... ... ... 23 89
Bailiffs, Selectors’ ... 17 28 sub-
V sec. 4,
reg. 11
Arbitration and Appraisement—
Damage by holders of Licenses to dig, &c. ... ... ... 23 87
Respecting value of Improvements ... ... ... ... 16, 22 22, 82^
rr j. 22, 23,
&c.
Eoad opening 23 8*
Assurance Fund under “ Real Property Act ”
Vide “ Pees.”
Auction Sales —
Areas and classes of Lands to be offered ... ... ... 20 54
At Court sitting, in the case of simultaneous applications... 13, 14 I7^regs.
Deposit forfeited if balance not paid ... 20 60


Subject. Page. Clause
Governor may cause Lands to be offered ■*%.. ... ... 19 53
Proclamation of Lands to be offered ... ... ... 20 55
Purchaser to deposit one-fifth of price ... ... ... 20 58
Purchaser to pay balance, &c., within one month ... ... 20 59
Special Conditions may be imposed ... ... ... ... 20 55
Unsold Country Lands to be open to purchase by selection 20 62
Unsold Town or Suburban Lands may be made similarly
available 20 63
Upset Price ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 20 56
Value of Improvements to be paid to owner ... ... 20 61
Withdrawal of Lots from Sale ... ... ... ... 20 55
Award—
Arbitrators —vide “ Arbitration.”
District Court decision final ... ... ... ... ... 24 95
! 4.2 ... ... ... :■/>')
Bailiffs —
Agreements of Selectors’ Bailiffs must be registered ... 17 28 sub-
sec. 4,
reg. 11
Duties of Crown Bailiffs ... ... ... ... 23 89
Power to appoint Crown Bailiffs ... ... ... ... 23 89
Selectors’Bailiffs on Conditional Purchases... ... ... 17 28 sub-
sec. 4,
reg. 11
Boundaries —
Adjoining Selections by the same applicant... ... ... 11,12 24,50
Frontage in respect to boundaries ... ... ... ... 16 18
Removal of boundary marks, a misdemeanor ... ... 23 93
Cattle —
Fee for depasturage on Commons ... ... ... ... 21 75
Certificates — ; /.
Application for Certificates, how to be made ... ... 18 51,reg. 13
Obtainable on proof of fulfilment of conditions ... ... 17 28 sub-
sec. 7
Classification—
Into Town, Suburban, and Country Lands ... ... ... 10 9
Upset prices of above... ... ... ... ••• ... 20 56
Coal—
Licenses to mine ... ... ... ... ... 21 71
Commissioners —
Actions against... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 94
May issue certificates if satisfied ... ... ... ... 17,18 28 sub
sec. 7-10
Must not traffic in land ... ... ... ... ... 23 92
-• ‘-?i '■ Ir ■ 1 1.
Commons —
Commonage may be placed under Municipal Council ... 22 76
•! t Commonage Eights ... ... ... ••• ... ... 21 75
Depasturago of sheep and of male animals ... ... 21 75


Subject. Page
Extent of Commons ... ... ... ... ... ,21 73,74
Fees for depasturing ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 75
Government may make Regulations ... ... .f. 21 75
hiumber of Cattle allowed ... ... ... 21 75 com-
: / rog- 4
sub -reg.
2|(a)
Petitions for and against ... ... ... ... 21 72
Travellers’Stock to be allowed pasturage ... ... ... 22 75 com-
reg. 9
COMPENSATION—
Amends tendered by Land Commissioner, or other officer
in legal proceedings ... ... ... ... ... 24 94
No compensation for Improvements in case of forfeiture ... 19 28 sub-
sec. 11,48
To owners of Improvements on lands selected ... ... 16 22, 61
reg. 12
To Selectors, &c., for lauds resumed for roads ... ~.. 23 84
To Selectors, &c., for damage done by diggers, &c.... ... 23 87
Conditional Purchase, Simple—
Addition to previous selection ... ... 11 23, 25
Annual Payments —vide “ Rents.”
Applicant to make declaration as to competency, &c. ... 12, 16 27
Application to select made personally or by duly consti-
tuted attorney ... ... ... ... ... ... 12, 16 27
Area obtainable ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 23
Assurance Fund, Contribution to ... ... ... ... 15,18 81reg.l6
Auction between Selectors ... ... ... ... ... 13, 14 17 regs.
7-9
Boundaries of Selection ... ... ... ... ... 11 24
Certificates ... ... ... ..: ... ... ... 17 28 sub-
sec. 7, 51
reg. 13
Commissioner may examine on oath ... ... ... ... 13 12 reg. 5
Commissioner’s decision to be declared ... ... ... 13 12, reg. 2
Conditions to be observed before and after Selection ... 16, 17 18, 19,
27-41, &c.
Death of Selector ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 31
Deed of Grant ... , ... ... ... ... ... 15,18 28 sub-
sec. 8, 81
Deposits... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12, 14 17 regs.
7,8, &12
Description of boundaries ... ... .. ... ... 12 17
Exchange with Government ... ... ... ... ... 21 69
Existing Improvements ... ... .;. ... ... 16 22, 82,
regs. 12,
22,23,4 c.
Expiration of Term ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 28 sub-
sec. 10
Fine for non-appearance at Land Court ... ... ... 13 reg. 4
Forfeiture ... .;. ... ...-• , v v , ... 19 28 sub-
secs. 3,5,
and 11


Subject;. Page. Clause
Forms of Application... ... ... ... ... ... }2
Frontage ... ... ... ... •••, • ••_ 18
Holders under Act of 1868 can increase their Selections to
maximum under Act of 1876 ... ... ... ••• H 23,24
Improvement ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 17 28 sub-
sec. 6
Insolvency and debt ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 34, 35
Land Agent to give receipts ... ... ... ... ••• 18 Reg. 21
Land available ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 7-10 18, 14
Maximum and minimum ... ... ... ... ••• 8,9,11 23
Mortgage ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ,18 82
Occupation ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 17, 18, 28 sub-
sec. 4, 31,
32, reg.
11
One additional selection allowed after one year’s residence 11 25
Precedence of applications ... ... ... ... ••• 12 17
Precedence over Volunteer Land Order applications ... 13 17,reg.15
> Price ... ... ... 8-10, 14 8-10, 15
Priority of Homestead Selections ... ... ... ••• 13, 14 17reg.15
Register of applications to be signed ... 12 17
Re-purchase by G-ovemment ... ... ... 21 69
Residence ... ... ... ••• ... ••• ••• 17, 18 28 sub-
sec. 4,31,
32, reg,
11
Shape of Selection ... ... ... ... ... ••• H, 18 18, 24
Survey —vide “ Surveys.”
Survey fees on Surveyed lands ... ... ... ... 12 reg. 6
Transfers ... ... ... ... ... ••• 18 28, sub-
sco. 9, 31, 32
What lands are available for selection ... ... ... 7-10 13
Who may select ... ... ... ••• ••• .•■ 10, 11 21,25,27
Withdrawal of application 13 Reg. 10
Conditional Purchase in a Homestead Area —
Land available ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ■'.• 10, 11 38
Personal residence by Selector imperative 11,17 38, sub-
sec. 2
Precedence over selection by Volunteer Land Order ... 12, 13 17,reg.15
Other matters —vide “Conditional Purchase, Simple.”
Conditions to be observed by Selectors ... v ... ... 7, 16
Costs—
Actions against Land Commissioner or other officials ... 24 94
Country Lands —
Definition ... ... ... ... ••• ... ... 10
Land available for selection by Volunteers’ Land Orders ... 12 37
Lands passed at auction to be open to purchase by selection 20 62
Sales by Auction —vide “Auction.”
Unselected within Town Reserves available for conditional
purchase ... ... ... ... ... 8, 9


Exchange oe Re-puechase of Land by Goveenment
Expieation of Teem
False Declaeation


Subject. Page.
Fees —
Contribution to Assurance Fund ... 15 81, Reg.
16
For closure of roads ... ... ... ... ... 15, 20 65, Reg.
18
For deed of grant ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 81
For depasturing cattle on commons ... ... ... ... 21 75
For surveys ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 17, Reg.
24, Sche-
dule Q.
For transfers ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 18 28, sub-
sec. 9
Fencing--
Accepted as an improvement ... 17 1
Fencing Act to apply to all lands selected under this Act ... 23 85
Impounding not allowed off unfenced lands ... ... 23 86
Roads opened to be fenced by Government in some cases... 23 84
Fines —
Vide “ Penalties.”
- ■■ •; :wj :
Forfeiture—
Evidence to be heard in open Court ... ... 19 52
For Felony, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ••• 20 64
For Fraud .... .... ~,. ... .... .... ... 24 21,100
For non-fulfilment of Conditions ... ... ... ... 19 21,28,
sub-secs.
5 and 11,
42,47,48
For non-payment of Balances at Auction ... ... ... 20 60,Reg.7
For non-payment of Rent ... ... <•, ... ... 19 28, sub.
sec. 3,
42, 66
Of Licenses to enclose Roads—for non-payment of Rent ... 21 66
Written notice to be given to Selector ... ... ... 19 52
Forms of Application—
Where obtainable ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
-ti ... ... !;■)•! in S:i/f; fi ./-it!-i !• »• ii- no ■r»,ln » V!:!/.
Fraud or Evasion—
How punishable ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 21,101
Frontage—
Proportion allowed ..... .... ... ... ... ... 16 18
Fulfilment of Conditions—
Vide “ Certificates.”
>■ i I'.. ... T. ‘ . r.,\) v.r ■I/-.1 -i;. i. .n i-id . . r„.-:nn'.
Grants —
Expiration of Term ... ... ... .. ... ... 18 28, sub-
sec. 10
Fee-simple of Lands selected ... ... ... ... ... 18 28, sub-
sec. 8,34,
35,44,45


Subject. Page. Clause
of Act.
Fee-simple of Lands selected under Act of 1868 ... ... 24 103
Fees payable ... ... ... ... ... .. ... 15 81, Reg.
16
Grant of Roads closed... ... ... ... ... ... 20 66
Grants in Trust ... ... ..! ... ... ... 22 76
In case of Insolvency ... ... ... ... ... 18 34, 35
Power to grant in case of escheat or forfeiture ... ... 20 64
Sales without competition in special cases ... ... ... 21 67, 68
Special Grants ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 64
Volunteers’Land Orders ... ... ... ... ... 12 37
Homestead Aeeas—
Addition to Homesteads held under this or previous Acts... 12 41,50
Available for Conditional Purchases... ... ... ... 8-10 38
Homestead and Conditional Purchase Selections cannot be
held simultaneously within a Homestead Area ... 11
, Homestead Selections in Homestead Areas ... ... ... 12 40
Homestead Selector not permitted to make Conditional
Selection under section 24 ... ... ... ... 11
Personal residence by Conditional Selector essential ... 11,17 38, sub-
sec. 2
i JPrice 8,10,14
Residence on Homestead Selections ... ... ... ... 12,19 43,50
Volunteer Land Orders available in ... ... ... ... 12 37
Homestead Selections —
Addition to previous Homesteads ... ... ... ... 11,12 41,50
Annual payments —vide “ Rents.”
Applicant to make Declaration ... ... ... ... 12,16 41
Application to Select—personally or by attorney ... ... 12,16 41
Area obtainable ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 40
Assurance Fund ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 81, Reg.
16
Auction between Selectors ... ... ... ... ... 13,14 17, Regs.
7-9
Commissioner may examine on oath ... ... ... 13 12, Reg.
5
Commissioner’s decision t® be declared' ... ... ... 13 12, Reg.
2
Conditions to be observed—before and after Selection ... 16, 17
Death of Selector ... ... ... ... ... .„ 19 45
Deed of Grant ... ... ... ... 15 44, 81
Deposits ... ... ... . . ... ... ... 12,14 17, 42,
Regs. 7, 8
Description of Boundaries ... ... ... ... ... 12 17
Exchange with Government ... ... ... ... ... 21 69
Fine for non-appearance at Land Court ... ... ... 13 Reg. 4
Forfeiture ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19 42, 47
Forms of Application ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Frontage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 18
Improvements ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16,19 22,43
Reg. 12
Insolvency and Debt ... ... ... ... ... ~. 19 49
Land Agent to give Receipts ... ... ... ... ... 13 ( Reg. 21


Subject. 1 Page. Clause
Land available ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9-11 13,14,39
Mam'mum and minimum ... ... H 40
Mortgage ... 19
Occupation ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 19 43, 46
Precedence of Applications ... 12 17
Precedence over Conditional Purchases and Selections by
Volunteer Land Order ... ... ... ... ... 11-14 17, reg.
15
Price ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 8-10, 14 42
Register of Applications to be signed ... ... ... 12 17
Re-purcbase by Government 21 69
Residence obligatory ... 19 43
Selector can hold only one Selection except as provided
under Sections 24 and 25 ... ... ... ... H
Selector may also make a Conditional Purchase after one
year’s residence ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 25
Shape of Selection 16 18, 50
Survey —vide “Surveys.”
Survey Fees on Surveyed Lands ... ... ... ... 12 reg. 6
Transfers ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 19
Who may select ... ... ... ... ... ... 10, 11 41
Withdrawal of Application ... ... ... ... ... 13 reg. 10
Impounding—
Not permitted off unfenced Selections ... ... ... 23 86
Improved Lands —
Purchase of Improved Lands without Competition ... 21 67, 68
Selection of Improved Lands ... ... ... ... 16 22, reg,
12
Value of Improvements to be paid 16 reg.
Improvements—
Condition of Improvement ... ... ... ... ... 17, 19 28 sub-
sec. 6,43
Definition of ... ... ... ... ... .. ••• 17, 19 1
Forfeited for Non-fulfilment of Conditions ... ... ... 19 28 sub-
sec. 11
Payable by Government on re-purchase or exchange of Lands 21 69, 84
Payment for ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 16 22, reg.
12
Value of improvements on Auction Lands to be paid to
their owner 20 60
Insolvency and Debt ... ... 18, 19 34, 35,
49
Land Agents—
Actions against Land Agents ... ... ... ••• 23 94
Land Agents must give receipts ... ... ... ... 13 reg. 21
Prohibited from trafficking in Land ... ... ... ... 23 92
Land Commissioner —
Vide “ Commissioners.”


Subject. Page. C l a l is ?
of Act.
Land Orders—
Volunteers’ Land Orders —vide “Volunteers.”
<•1 .>,•».* j. f , ... .. ... ;u i !:;•*. :< j- i■ t. ’.i.l'. : u
Lands Available foe Selection ... i ... 7 13
B ... |>li«U 10, MM ;■ I (i. » ftoi t!) M(U > 1
Leases—
For special purposes 21 70
Lessees—
Pastoral Lessees may object to the Licenses to remove
Timber, &c. ... ... ... ... ... 22 77
Licensed Sue vetoes—
Actions against ... ... ... ..; ... ... 23 94
May be employed by Selectors ... ... ... ... 16 19
Must not traffic in Land ... ... ... ... ... 23 92
To be employed to survey Selections ... ... ... ... 16, 22 79
Wilful negligence or falsification —how punishable ... 22 79
■
Licenses—
Cancellation of Licenses ... ... ... ... .. 21, 22 66, 79
Restriction of Licenses ... ... ... ..; ... 22 77
To enclose Roads ... ... ... ... ... ... 20, 21 66
To mine Coal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 71
To remove Timber, Gravel, Stone, &c. 22 77
Mining—
For Coal 21 71
For other Metals ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 87
Mineral Lands—
Right of Entry to work for Metallic Ores ... ... ... 23 87
Misdemeanor—
Vide “ Fraud.”
Mortgage of Selection 18, 19 32
Opening of Roads ... ... 23 84
Ores—Entry to work for 23 87
Penalties—
For breach of Conditions —vide “Forfeiture.”
For breach of Regulations ... ... ... ... ... 24 98
For Fraud ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24 21, 100,
101
For non-appearance at Land Court ... ... ... ... 13 Reg. 4
For non-observance of restrictions by Holders of Timber
Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 77
For non-payment of Rent' —vide “ Forfeiture.”
For non-residence —vide “ Forfeiture.”
For removal of Boundary Marks ... ... ... ... 23 93
For trespass on Crown Lands 23 91


Subject. Page. Clause
For wilful misrepresentations, or false measurement by
Licensed Surveyors ... ... ... ... ... 22 79
For withdrawal of Application ... ... ... ... 13 Reg. 10
Incurred by Land Commissioners and other Officials, in
connection with the Purchase of Land ... ... ... 23 92
Perjury—
False Declaration, deemed Perjury 24 99
Price of Lands—
Conditional Purchases —vide “ Rents.”
Homesteads —vide “ Rents.”
Improved Lands ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 G 7
Included in closed Roads ... ... ... ... ... 20 66
In special cases ... ... ... ... ... ,J.. 21 68
Payable for Land resumed for Roads ... ... ... 23 84
Upset price of Lands open for Selection ... ... ... 8-10
I;’,"' , . • ■ .r ■ ; ■ i <.i r>: <'ij [,-,i -i ••> >.>--i:i‘ ill ■fl
Proclamations —
Declaring unsold Lands available for Purchase by Selection 20 63
Lands open to Selection ... ... ... ... ... 8-10 13,14
Of Commons ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 72
Of Sales by Auction ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 55
Opening Roads .. ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 84
Regulations to be proclaimed... ... ... ... ... 24 98
Rescinding Reservations ... ... ... ... ... 22 83
Reserves ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 56
Upset prices of Conditional Selections ... ... ... 9 15
Refundments —
In case of non-appearance at Land Court ... 13 regs. 3
and 4
Of Survey Fees in case of private Surveys ... ... ... 16 19
On Selections withdrawn by permission ... ... ... 13 reg. 10
Power of Attorney, containing authority to withdraw and
receive ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Regulations—
Made by the Grovernor, must be proclaimed ... ... 24 97,98
Penalty for breach of Regulations ..." ... ... ... 24 98
Rents —
List of Rents payable on Selections published ... ... 14
Of Homesteads ... ..; ... ... ... ... 14 42 reg. 1
On Conditional Purchases ... ... ... ... ... 14 15,17-27,
28, sub-
secs. 1-
3, and
7, reg.
7.
On enclosed Roads ... i.. ... ... ... ... 20 06
On special Leases ... ... .it ... ... ... 21 70
Second and subsequent years ... ... ... ... ... 14 42, reg. 1


Subject. Page.
Re-puechasb and Exchange of Lands 21 69
>•/■*/•lK'i f •:-)!•»•*! I "
Rescindment of Reservations 22 83
.... .. / ■ ,t ;! ;
Reserves—
Licenses to mine for Coal ... ... ... ... ... 21 71
May be granted in Trust ... ... ... ... .i. 22 . 6
Price of Conditional Selections in ... ... ... ... 8
Proclamation of Reserves ... ... ... ... ... 22 5
Rescindment of ... ... ... ... ... ... 22 83
Town Reserves —vide “ Town.”
Trespassers on Reserves .., ... ... ... ... 23 91
Unselected Country Lands, available for Conditional
Purchase ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 8-10
I •
Roads —
Alienation or Lease of cl >sed Roads ... ... ... 20 66
Closure of unnecessary Roads ... ... ..-. ~. 20 65, reg.
18
Compensation for Lands resumed for Roads ... ... 23 84
Fee to be lodged with application to close ... ... ... 15,20 65, reg.
18
New Roads through enclosed Lands to be fenced by Govern-
ment ... ... ... ,»• ... ... ... 23 84
Opening Roads through Selections ... ... ... ... 23 84
Runs—
Holders of Timber Licenses, &c., may enter upon ... ... 22 77
Sales—
By Auction —vide “ Auction.”
Without Competition ... ... ... ... ... i.. 21 67,68
Second and Subsequent Payments on Selections—
Vide “ Rents.”
-Li - ;-i::i• .-i11‘i I m film >') !• ■
Selection —
Conditions to be observed ..... .... ... U. 7,16
How Selection may be made ... ... ... ... ... 7,11
Shape of Selections ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 18
What Lands are available ... .., ... ... 7 13
What Selectors will have to pay ... ... 7,13-16
Who may select ... ... ... ... ... ... 7,10 23-25,27
Vide “ Conditional Purchase ” and “ Homestead Selec-
tions.”
Special Grants
vide “ Grants.”
Suburban Lands —
Available for selection by Volunteer Land Order ... ... 12 37
Definition of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 9
Sales by Auction —vide “ Auction.”
Upset price ... ... ... 1 ... .... ... 1 ‘.. ! . 201 1 56


_ , . . p Q(rn Clause
Subject. Page. Qf Act
SURVEYORS —
Vide “Licensed Surveyors.”
Surveys—
By Selectors in case of delays
Falsification or negligence in execution ... ... ... 22 79
Fees payable in cash ... ... ... ... 15,22 17, 19,
80, reg.
24, sell.
Q-
Licensed Surveyors to be employed ... ... ... ... 16,22 79
Of Selections ... ... ... ... ... ••• 18
Refundment of fees paid ... ... ... ••• 16 19
Timber Licenses —
Head stations to be approached 22 77
Licenses may be granted to remove Timber, Gravel, Stone,
&c. 22 77
Titles —
Vide “ Grants.”
Town Lands —
Definition of ... ... ... ... ... ••• 19 9
Sales by Auction —vide “ Auction.”
Upset price ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 20 56
Town Reserves —
Maximum and minimum 8
Proclamation of ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 22
Rescindment of ... ... ... ••• ••• 22 83
Unselected country lands, available for selection ... ... 8, 9
Transfers —
By will or inheritance ... ... ... ••• 18,19 31,45
Of Conditional Purchases ... ... ... ... ••• 18 28, sub-
sec. 9
Owing to Insolvency ... ... ... 18 34
M , V
Trespass—
On Crown Lands ... ... ... ... 23
Penalty ... ... ... ... ••• 23 91
Valuation op Improvements—
Vide “Arbitration.”
By Selector ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 22, reg.
J 12
Volunteers’ Land Orders —
Homesteads and Conditionals take precedence ... ... 12,13 17, reg.
15
Land selected not subject to conditions of residence, &c. ... 12 37
Where available ... ... ... ••• ••• 12 37
What Conditions Selectors must Observe ... ... 7,16


Subject. Page. Clause
What Lands ark available fob Selection ... 7 13
What Selectors will have to pax 7,13-16
Withdrawal op Applications—
Fine imposed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13 rcg. 10
Permitted in some instances ... •... ... ... ... J-3 reg. 10
Who may Select 7,10 23-25,27
“THE CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF 1876.”
Act —
Preamble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . r < f ,.. 25
Interpretation of Terms ... ... ... ... ~, ... 25
Repeal of existing Acts and Regulations subject to certain Provisoes 27, 72
Application of Act to whole Colony ... ... ... .... ... 28
Date of commencement of Act of 1876 ... ... ... ... 71
Short Title... ... ... ... .... ... ... .... ... 71
Actions —
Trustees considered as owners, in law or equity suits ... ... ... 30
Against Commissioner or other officials for trafficking in land ... 66
Actions against Commissioner, &c., how proceeded with ... ... 67
To be commenced within twelve mouths ... ... ... ... 67
Notice in writing to be given to defendant ... ... ... ... 67
Costs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67
No proceedings under this Act to be removable by Certiorari ... 68
Appeal—■ 1,,
Fi'om Bench of Magistrates to District Court... ... ... ... 67
Decision of District Court to be final ... ... ... ... ... 67
Applications—
Register of Applications to be kept by Land Agent ~. ... ... 33
Register to be signed by applicant ... ~t , ..., ... ... 33
Register open to public inspection ... ... ... ... ... 33
To select a Conditional purchase —vide “ Conditional Purchase.”
To select a Homestead —vide ‘‘Homestead Selections.”
Priority of applications ... ... ... ... ... ... v . 33
Simultaneous applications for same Land ... ... ... ... 34
To be decided upon by Commissioner in open Court ... .., ... 31
For refundment of Survey Fees... L. ... ... ... ~, 35
For certificate of performance of Conditions, how to be made ... 50
To select unsold country Lands ... ... ... ... ... ... 54
To close a road ... ... ... ... ... ... 55
For closure of road, to be published ... ... ... ... ... 55
Appointments—
Commissioners, Land Agents ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Bailiffs, Selectors’ ... ... ... ~. ... ... ... 40
Bailiffs and Rangers of Crown Lands ... ... ... ... ... 65


Subject, I Page.
Arbitration and Appraisement— ~ . ,
Respecting value of improvements ... ... ... ... ... 36,57,63
Respecting value of land exchanged with Government ... ... 57
Mode of appraisement or arbitration ... ... ... ... .... 62
Road opening ... ... ... ... .... ..... , .......1 63
Damage by holde r s of Licenses to dig, &c. ... ... ... ... 64
Assurance Fund—
Contribution under “ Real Property Act of 1861 ” ... ~. ... j 62
Auction Salks —
Auction Salks—
At Court sitting in (he-case of simultaneous applications ... ... 34
Payment of first year’s rent ... ... .1. ... ... 34
Governor may cause Lands to be surveyed and offered ... ... 51
Maps of Auction Lands to be made and lodged with Surveyor-General 52
Areas and classes of Lands to be offered ... ... ... ... 52
Proclamation of Lands to be offered ... ... ... ... ... 52
Withdrawal of Lots from sale ... ... ... ••• ... 52
Power to impose special Conditions of Sale by Proclamation ... 52
Upset price ... ... ... ••• ••• .•• ••• 52
'Value of improvements added to upset price ... ... ... ... 52
Terms and Conditions of Sale to be read by person conducting same 53
Purchaser to deposit one-fifth of price... ... ... ... ... 53
Balance of purchase money, &c ,to be paid within one month ... 53
Deposit forfeited upon failure to pay balance ... ... ... ... 53
Value of Improvements may by direction be paid to owner or occupant 53
Receipt for value of improvements to be produced to Land Agent ... 53
Unsold country lands to be open to purchase by selection ... ... 54
Unsold town, or suburban lands may be proclaimed similarly available 54
Award—
Arbitrators —vide “ Arbitration.”
District Court decisional, final ... ... ... ... ... ... 68
Bailiffs—
Selectors’ Bailiffs on conditional purchases .., ... ... ... 40
' Agreements of Selectors’Bailiffs must be registered ... ... . ... 40
Power to appoint Crown Bailiffs or Rangers ... ... ... ... 65
Duties of Crown Bailiffs ... ... ... ... ... ••• 65
Actions against .... ... ...,_ ... ... ... ... ... 67
Boundaries —
Frontage in respect to boundaries ... ... ... ... ... 34
Of adjoining selections by same applicant ... ... ... ... 38, 50
Removal of boundary marks, a misdemeanor ... ... ... ... 67
Cattle—
Number of cattle allowed to depasture on commons ... ... ... 59
Fee for depasturage on commons... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Entire animals not allowed on commons ... ... ... , 59
Certificates —
Obtainable on proof of fulfilment of conditions ... ... ... 41,42,48
Application lor certificates, how to be made ... ... ... ... 150


Notice of application to be posted in Land Agent’s office ... ... 51
Granted to selectors under Act of 1868... ... ... ... ... 70
Classification—
Into town, suburban, and country Lands ... ... ... ... 30
; Upset prices of above ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 52
SC ... .. ;
Coal — '•'<!.
Licenses to mine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
jn ,es . /w d
Commissioners—
Definition of term... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Appointment of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27, 30
To hold land courts ... ..< ... ... ... ... ... 31
Decision to be pronounced in open court ... ... ... ... 31, 50
Commissioner’s decision not final ... ... ... ... ... 31
To issue certificates if satisfied as to fulfilment of conditions... ... 41
May be authorised to issue timber licenses, &c. ... ... ... 60
Must not traffic in laud, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... 66
Actions against ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 67
Commons—
Governor may proclaim commons upon certain conditions ... ... 58
Petitions for and against... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
Extent of common ... ... ... ... ... ... i 58
Crown to retain fee-simple of Common Lands with power to sell ... 58
Commonages may be extended to the extent of any land sold therein 59
Governor may make regulations... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Commonage rights ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Depasturage of sheep and entire male animals prohibited ... ... ; 59
Fees for depasturing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
Number of cattle allowed to depasture ... ... ... ... 59
Travellers’ stock to be allowed pasturage ... ... ... ... 59
Common may be placed under Municipal Council ... ... ... 59
Municipal Council may be authorised to make regulations ... ... 59
Compensation—
To owners of improvements on lands selected ... ... ... ... 36
No compensation for improvements in case of forfeiture ... ... 43, 49
To selectors, &c., for land resumed for roads ... ... ... ... 63
To selectors, &c., for damage done by diggers, &c. ... ... ... 64
Conditional Purchase—
Interpretation ... ..» .... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Lands open to selection ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
Area obtainable ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
Maximum and minimum... ... ... ... ... 37
Who may select ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35, 38
No minor or married woman to be lessee ... ... ... ... 35
Application to select ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
Declaration before magistrate to be made by selector ... ... ... 38
Clear description of boundaries, etc., of selection required ... ... 33
Shape of selection ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34, 38


Subject. Page.
Frontage " 34
Applicant to sign register ...
Registry of application by Land Agent 33
Precedence of applications ... , 33
Priority of a homestead selection ... ... ••• ••• ••• 33
Price 3 *' 34
Deposits ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 33
Auction between selectors ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 34
Kent ‘
Survey ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 33 ’
Notice of confirmation by Secretary for Lands to be given to selector 35
Improvements existing at time of application ... ... ... ••• 36
Limits to Conditional Purchases by holders under previous Acts ... 37
Addition to previous selection allowed to holders of less than max-
imum area ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• •••
In the case of adjoining selections occupation on one only necessary 38
One additional selection allowed under certain provisions to holders
under this or previous Acts 38
Except as expressly provided, only one parcel of land to be held at
same time ... ... ... m. ••• •** ••• ••• 33
Issue of lease for ten years ••• 39
Date of lease ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• •••
Transfer of lease ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 4 2
Time for payment of rent ... ... ... ••• ••• 39
Penalty for non-payment of rent within prescribed time ... ... 39
Forfeiture ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 36,39,41
Reversal of forfeiture under certain conditions ... ... ... 39,40
Written notice of intended forfeiture to be given to lessee 51
Selector’s evidence re forfeiture to be heard in open Court and reported
to the minister ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 51.
Occupation necessary ... ... ... , ••• ••• ••• 40,44
Quality of occupation ... ... ... ... L ••• ••• 40
Agreement for occupation by servant must be registered ... ... 40
Conditions of improvement ... ... ... ... ••• 41,44
Land Commissioner’s certificate of fulfilment of conditions... ... 41,42,50
Notice to be given to Commissioner of intended application for cer-
tificate ... ... .., ... ••• ••• ••• •••
Notification of above to be posted in Land Agent’s Office ... ... 51
Land to revert to Crown if conditions not fulfilled during term ... 43
Condition of occupation dispensed with in certain cases ... ... 43
Deed of Grant ... ... ... ... ••• ‘ ••• ••• ••• 41, 42,
Death of selector... ... ... ... ••• ••• , ••• 44
Mortgage or Settlement in trust permitted after issue of certificate 44
Land deemed personal property in case of death ... , ... ... 44
Insolvency of lessee ... ... ••• ••• ••• 44
Conditional Purchases not liable for debt ... ... ... ... 45
Lands open to Conditional Purchase, also available for homestead
selection ... ... ... ... ••• ••• , y ••• 46
Exchange with, or re Purchase by Government ... ... ... 57
Crown Bailiff may enter upon selection ... ... ... ... 65
Conditional Pubchasee —
Interpretation ... 26


Subj act.
Conditional Selection—
Vide ‘‘Conditional Purchase.”
Interpretation
ii’rontd
Conditional Selection in a Homestead Abea—
Land available
Maximum and mimimum ... ...
Personal residence by selector imperative
Other matters —vide “ Conditional Purchase.”
40
43, 46
Conditional Selectors under Act of 1868—
Commissioner to giant certificate on proof of fulfilment of conditions
of residence and improvement
Transfers ... ... ... ...
70
70
Conditions to be fulfilled by transfcrree ... ... ... .... 70
Insolvency of selector .„ ... ... ... ... ... ... 71
Insolvency of selector .I.
Rescission of forfeiture ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71
Rescission of forfeiture ... ... ... ... ...
Governor may defeat forfeiture on payment of penalty, &c.
Deed of grant ... ... ... ... ...
Governor may defeat forfeiture on payment of penalty, &c. ... ... 71
Deed of grant ... ... ... 70, 71
ntky Lands—
Country Lands—
Definition of
May be proclaimed open to or withdrawn from selection
Definition of ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ~.... 30
May be proclaimed open to or withdrawn from selection ... ... 32
May b set apart as homestead areas
Governor may cause lands to be offered at auction ...
Areas of land to be offered at auction ...
Upset price... ... ...
Lots unsold at auction to be open to purchase by selection
May b set apart as homestead areas ... ... ... ... ... 45
Governor may cause lands to be offered at auction ... ... ... 51
Areas of land to be offered at auction ... j.. ... 52
Upset price... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53
Lots unsold at auction to be open to purchase by selection ... ... 54
Crown Bailiffs—
Vide “ Bailiffs.”
Crown Lands —
Interpretation
Classification of ... ... ... 1
What lands are open to selection under this Act
Licenses to remove timber, gravel, &c .--vide “ Licenses.’’
Unauthorised occupation...
Penalties for trespassing on ... ...
Cultivation —
Reckoned an improvement
' ... ... ■ if- i !•>.■'. ■■ .If, c , ’ ':•» Ilf;
Declaration —
Required to be made by conditional selector ...
Required to be made by homestead selector
False declaration to be deemed perjury
Deed of Grant —
Vide “ Grants.”
Deed Fee —vide “ Fees.”
Deposits—
First year’s rents on selections ...
Survey fees,..


Subject.
One-fifth of sum bid at auction
Forfeited upon failure to pay balances at auction
Diggers—
May enter on selections if authorised ...
Escheat —
Power to grant in case of escheat, &c. ...
False Declaration —
To be perjury ,
Fees—
For surveys ... ... ... ... •••
For transfer of lease
For deed of grant .. .
Eor depasturing cattle on commons
For licenses to remove timber, gravel, &c.
Contribution to Assurance Fund..,
For surveys ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 61
For transfer of lease ... ... ... ... ... ••• 42
For deed of grant ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 62
For depasturing cattle on commons ... ... ... ... ... 69
For licenses to remove timber, gravel, &c 60
Contribution to Assurance Fund... 62
Fee-Simple of Lands —
Vide “Grants.”
Fencing—
Accepted as an improvement ... ... ...
Roads opened to be fenced by Government in some cases
Fencing Act to apply to conditional and homestead selections
Stock not to be impounded off unfenced selections
Fines —
Vide “ Penalties.”
Forfeiture—
36, 43, 49
For non-fulfilment of conditions.
For fraud or evasion
36, 69
39, 47
For non-payment of rent,
Reversal of forfeiture
39, 40,
47, 57
41, 49
For non-occupation or residence...
Written notice of intended forfeiture to be given to selector ...
Selectors’ evidence in open Court against forfeiture ...
For non-payment of balances at auction
For felony, &c. ... ... ... ... ••• ••• •••
For non-payment of license fee on enclosed roads
Forfeitures to be proclaimed by Governor
Forfeited lands may be sold or opened to selection ...
In the case of officials purchasing land in respect of which they may
be employed
For breach of regulations
Interest in lands fraudulently acquired...
In the case of lands selected under Act of 1868
68, 69
69
Forms
r -84,89,
),97-101


Subject. Page.
Fraud—
How punishable ... ... 36,69
Frontage—
Proportion allowed 34
!' 1
Fulfilment op Conditions—
Vide “ Certificates.”
Grants—
Governor may grant in fee simple or less estate ... ... 28, 55, 57
Grants in trust ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Fee simple of lands selected ... ... ... ... ... 41,48,49
Obtainable on expiration of term of lease ... ... ... ... 42
In case of insolvency ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
Volunteers’ Land Orders ... . 46
Fees payable 42, 45,
48,49,
53, 54,
55, 63
Fee simple of lands purchased at auction ... ... ... ... 53
Power to grant in case of echeat, &c. ... ... ... ... ... 54
Notice of intended grant of land under escheat to be published in Gazette 55
Special grants ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 54
i Grant of roads closed ... ... ... ... ... ... ~. 55
Sales without competition in special cases ... ... ... ... 57
Lands exchanged with or purchased by Government ... ... ... 57
Fee simple of Lands selected under Act of 1868 ... ... ... 70, 71
Homestead Areas—
Certain Lands to be set apart as Homestead Areas ... ... ... 45,72
Settled District of Darling Downs a Homestead Area ... ... ... 72
Volunteers’Land Orders available in ... ... ... ~. ... 45
Personal residence on selection imperative ... 43,46
Additional separate selection in, not allowed to holders under this or
previous Acts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
Volunteers’ Land Orders selections not subject to conditions of
residence or improvement . ... ... ... ... ... 46
Available for conditional purchase subject to certain restrictions ... 46
Land open for conditional purchase also available for Homestead
Selection ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
Homestead Selections in Homestead Areas ... ... ... ... 46
Area allowed for Homesteads ... ... ... ... ... 46 f
in vl •: , • 1:;i( r,, Jr- ' ~, )■; I ;..
Homestead Selections —
Lands open to selection ... ... ... ... ... 32,46
Area allowed for Homesteads ... ... ... ... ... 46
Maximum and minimum ... ... .... i ... , ~, ... .46
Price ... , ... ... ... 47
Who may select 35,47
No minor or married woman to be lessee ... ... ... .. t 35
Application to select ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
Applicant to make declaration as to competency, &c. ... 47
; Shape of selection 34 ,50


Subject. Page.
Frontage ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• . . ••• 34
Clear description of boundaries, &c., of selection to be giveh... ... 33
Applicant to sign register 33
Registry of application by Land Agent... ... ... .... 33
Deposits ... ... ... ... ..•■ ••• ... ••• 33
Survey ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 33,61,
Precedence of applications ... ... ... ... ... ' ••• 33
Priority over Conditional Selections ... ... ... ... ... 33
Auction between Selectors ... ... ... ... ... 34
Notice of Confirmation by Secretary for Lands to be given to Selector 35
Improvements existing at time of application ... ~i * ... 36
Selector may also, under certain provisions, mate a Conditional
Purchase ... ... ... ••• • •• ••• 38
Except as specially provided, only one Selection of land as a Home-
stead permitted ... ••• ... ••• ... ... 46
First year’s Rent, how and when payable ... ... hi ... 47
Annual Payments, how and when to be made ... ... ... ... 47
Penalty for non-payment of Rent within prescribed time ... ... 47
Forfeiture... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 36,47,49
Reversal of Forfeiture under certain conditions ... ... ... 47
Written Notice of intended Forfeiture to be given to Lessee... ... 51
Selector’s Evidence re Forfeiture to be heard in open Court and repor-
ted to Minister ... ... ... ;.. ... ... 51
Residence imperative ..•<■ .«■ ..•» ••• ••• 48
Conditions of improvement ... ... ... ... ... 48,49
Land Commissioner’s Certificate of fulfilment Of Conditions ... 48,50
Notice to be given to Commissioner of intended application for Certifi-
v i' 1 • cate ~«• ... ... ••• ... ■■■ 50
Notification of intended application for Certificate to be posted in
Land Agent’s Office ... ... ... ... ... •• ■5O
Deed of Grant ... ... ... ...• - ... ... ... ' ... 48,49
Death of Selector, Provision in case of ... ... ... ... ... 48
Transmission of interest in case of death ... ... ... i.. 48
Provision in case land not sold after Selector’s death ... ... ... 49
Homestead not liable for debt ... ... ... ... ■■■ 50
Insolvency of Selector .„ ... ... ••• •••
Selectors under this or previous Acts may make an additional selection
from conterminous lands only ... ••• ■•'. ••• 50
Condition of Residence in the case of combined Homestead Selections 60
Exchange of land with Government ... ... ... ... ... 57
Crown Bailiff may enter upon Selection ... ... ... ... 65
Impounding—
Not permitted off unfenced Selections ... ... ... ... ... 64
a .r-: K ii.
Improved Lands —
Selection of improved lands ... ... ••• 1 ... ... '36
Yalue of Improvements to be paid .»»■ ... ... ,: ... 1 ;.. 36,53
Purchase of Improved Lands without competition ... ... ... 56
Impboviments— 1 ''
Interpretation ... ... ... .»» .»* ••• ... 26
Payment for ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ... ... j 36,53,5 4;
V I 58,63


INDEX. xxi
Lr. i.
Subject. j Page.
Forfeited for non-payment of rent ... ... ... ... ... 39,47
Forfeited for non-occupation or residence ... ... ... ... 41,49
Conditions of improvement ... ... ... ... ... ••• 41,48
Forfeited at expiration of term if conditions not fulfilled ... ... 43,50
Insolvency and Debt —
l ln the case of Conditional Selections ... ... ..i ' ... j 45
In the case of Homesteads ... ... ... ... ... ... 50
’ / f. I I/. 4i‘.
Land Agents—
Power to appoint ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ,80
Land Agent to keep Register of Applications ... ... 33
Must not traffic in lands in respect of which they are employed ... 66
Actions against Land Agents ... ... ... ... ... ... 67
° 5 • i <. 1/
Land Commissionbbs —
Vide “ Commissioners.”
•■•■■■>• j r. it.7. J
Land Orders—
Volunteers’Land Orders available within Homestead Areas ... ... 45
vi , ... _... ... _ _ i'-.'i- '■> - ,r ' f:
Leases—
Leases issued to Conditional Selectors after confirmation ... ... 39
Special Leases for particular purposes ... ... ... ... ... 57
Terra of Special Lease ... ... ... ... ... ••• 58
Cancellation of Special Lease after due notice and payment for
improvements ... ... ... “ ... ... ... 58
Annual Rent in the case of Special Leases ... ... ... ... 58
...
Lessees—
Compensation for improvements on lands selected ... ... ... 36
Pastoral Lessees may object to the Licenses to remove Timber, &c.,.. 60
Pastoral Lessees must not obstruct ... ... ... ... ... 60
-7 SIUWKI 1
Licensed Sttevetors —
May be employed by Selectors ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Licenses granted to duly qualified Surveyors ... ... ... ... 61
To be employed to execute surveys ... . ... ... ... ... 61
Wilful neglect or misrepresentation, &c. how punishable ... ... 61
Must not traffic in Land, in respect of which they may be employed 66
Forfeiture of License, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... 66
•
Licenses—
To enclose roads ... ... ... ... ... ... ... '56
Cancellation of Licenses ..» ... ... • ... ■ ... • • 56
To mine for coal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
To remove timber, gravel, Ac. ... ... ... ... ... ... 60
Restriction of Licensees ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60
Timber, &c., License Fees payable in advance ... 60
May be issued to duly qualified Surveyors ... ... .;. ... 61
Suspension or cancellation of Surveyor’s license ... ... ... | 61,66
Mineral Lands—
Right of entry upon selections to work minerals „. ... ... 64


Subject. i’ a g e -
Mining—
For coal “
For other metals ... 64
Minister—
Interpretation ... ... ••• ••• •••
Misdemeanor—
Removal of boundary marks '■> ■
Fraud, &c. ... *•'
Dealing with Land fraudulently acquired ... 6J
How punishable ... ... ... ••• ••• ' 69
’♦ \ ... ... .. ■<«;»*./. j'-lii:;. i: >.:\w V} is
Mortgage— .
Conditional Selection may be mortgaged after issue of certificate ... 44
I
Penalties —
For breach of conditions —vide “ Forfeiture.”
For fraud or evasion, &c.... ... ... ••• ••• ••• w
For non-payment of rent ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 39,47
For non-occupation or residence —vide “ Forfeiture.’
For non-payment of balances at auction —vide “ Forfeiture.
For non-payment of annual license fee on enclosed roads ... ... 56
For non-observance of restrictions by holders of timber licenses ... 60
For wilful neglect, &c., of Licensed Surveyors... ... ... ••• 61
For trespassing on Crown Lands ... ... ••• ••• 66
For the purchase of Land by any officer of the Crown, in respect of
which he may be employed ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 66
For removal of boundary marks... ... , ... ••• ••- ”7
For breach of Regulations * ••• 68, 69
For dealing with Land fraudulently acquired ... ... ••• 69
• I Urn !-l;T
Peejtjey—
False declarations deemed perjury * ••• 69
••• Si'ii . ■ /lit/.
Prescribed —
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ••• ••* ••• *6
Price oe Lands—
Conditional Purchases ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 62. 33
Homesteads ... ... ••• ••• ••• . ••• •••
Upset price of land offered at auction to be proclaimed ... ... 62
Land included in closed roads ... ... ... ••• ••• 65
In special cases ... ... ... ... ••• ••• «•*
Improved Lands ... ... ... ... ••• ••• •••
Payable for Land resumed for roads ... ... ••• ••• ••• 63
■
Proclamations — . ■
Counties, parishes, towns, villages, and township reserves ... ... 28
Reserves ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ■ 29
Opening Lands to selection ... ... ... ••• •••
Withdrawing Lands from selection ... ... ... ••• ••• 62
Of upset prices for Conditional Purchase ... ... ... ••• 32
Of forfeiture for breach of Conditions ... ... ... ... •••I 36


Subject. Page.
Limitation of area for Conditional Purchase ... 37
Homestead Areas ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 45
Limitation of Conditional Selection in Homestead Area ... ... 46
Of Sales by Auction ... ... ... ... ... ... 62
Respecting value of Improvements on Lands sold at Auction ... 53
Declaring unsold Lands open to purchase by Selection 54
Commons ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ®8
Rescinding Reservations ... ... ... ... ... ••• 63
Opening Roads ... ... ... . ... ... .... ... ”3
Forfeiture of Lands ... ... ... ... ... 65
Regulations to be proclaimed ... ... • 68
Punishments —
Vide “Penalties.”
PUECHASE—
Conditional Purchase —vide “ Conditional.”
Purchase of Land without competition in special cases 57
Puechasee—
Conditional Purchaser —vide “ Conditional.”
Ranoees oe Ceown Lands —
Power to appoint ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 65
Their duties ... ... ... ... ••• .•• ••• 65
Actions against ... ... ... «• ••• ••. 67
Refundments—
Of Survey Fees in case of private survey ... ... ... ... 35
Regulations—
Vide Index, pages 34 to 43.
Governor may make or rescind Regulations under this Act ... ... 68
Regulations to be proclaimed ... ... ... ... ••• 68
Penalty for breach of Regulations 68
Rents—
On Conditional Selections ... ... ... ••• 32-34,39
Of Homesteads ... ... ... ... ••• ••• .•• 33,34,47
Time for payment... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 39
Non-payment of Rent —vide “Forfeiture.”
On enclosed Roads ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 66
On special Leases 68
Repeal of Land Acts i
Reseetes—
Proclamation of ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 28, 29
May be granted in trust ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 29
Licenses to mine for Coal on Reserves ... ... ... ... • 58
Rescindment of ... ... ... ... 63
Water Reserves still continue after rescindment of Proclamation ... 63
Trespassers on Reserves ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 66
Penalty for breach of Regulations relating to Reserves, Ac. ... ... 69


Subject. j., : Ia SC.
Roads —
/Closure of unnecessary roads •••
Application for closure—to be advertised, Ac. ... 5o
Alienation or lease of closed roads ... ... ... .... ••• P"
Price of Land included in closed roads ... ... ... ... 55
Bents on enclosed roads ... ... ... ••• 56
During currency of License holder thereof deemed Lessee ... ... 56
Forfeiture for non-payment of annual license fee ... ... 56
Licensee may defeat forfeiture ... ... ... ... ••• ••• P”
Governor may after due notice cancel License . ... ... 56
Rescindment of proclamations—preservation of roads and streets ... 63
Resumption of land for roads through Selections ... ... ••• 63
Compensation for land so resumed •••, ”5
New roads through enclosed Lands to be fenced by Government ~. 64
Runs — „ c
Holders of Timber Licenses, &c., may enter upon —vide “ Lessees ... 60
To ... ... i, > i.i-1 >ijlli C‘ : l . ' !'■ i Mu-.l j- :y -imi 1 I
Sales —
By auction —vide “ Auction.” _ j
Provision for sale of Homestead Selection in case of Selector s
death ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• •••
Alienation of closed roads ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 5o
Without competition in special cases 57
O'? ... . ... mil
SCH.BPULES —
First Schedule —Repeal of Land Acts ... ... ... ■■■ "•*
Second Schedule—Settled District of Darling Downs 72
28
Selection —
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 26
Conditional Selection— vide “ Conditional.”
Homestead Selection —vide “ Homestead.”
Stock not to be impounded off unfenced selections ... ... ... 64
Selector —
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 2b
' ■■, _ . ....iij i.,i ,ii > |0 )
Lands —
, Definition of ... ... •••" ••• .
Governor may cause lands to bo offered at auction ... ... ... 51
Areas of land to be offered at auction ... ... ••• ... . ••• 52
' ... ... .lit) Crt
Upset price ... ... ... ... ••• ••• •• .
Unsold lots may be notified open to purchase by selection 54
_ h i .. i>/ < ■::, f : !
Surveyors—
Vide “Licensed Surveyors.”
Surveys—
Fees payable ... ..." ... \-r ••• ••• 53,53,
54,61
Of selections ... ..... ... ••• •••, ••• 54
By Selectors in case of delays ... ■ ■ ■ ■ 54
Refundment of fee if survey not effected within three months ... j 35


Subject. j Page.
Licensed Surveyors to be employed ... ... ... ••• 51
Falsification of ... ... • .■ ••• i 51
Temporart Reserves —
Vide “ Reserves.”
Timber Licenses —
Licenses may be granted to remove timber, gravel, &c. ... ... 60
Head Stations not to be approached within two miles... 60
Fees— vide “ Licenses.” j
Reasonable objection to granting of license may be entertained ' j 60
Restriction of Licensees .... ...... , ... ■■■ ~• •• ••• j,
Penalty for non-observance of restriction —vide “ Penalties.”
Pastoral Lessees not to obstruct i6O
vA
Titles—
Vide “ Grants.”
Town Lands —
Definition of ... ... • ••• ••• . • ~,’V ?9
Governor may cause lands to be submitted for sale by auction ... 51
Areas of land to be offered at auction ... ... ... 52
Upset price ... ... ••• ••• ••• •••
Unsold lots may be notified open to purchase by selection 54
Sale of land without competition in consideration of improvements 56
Township Reserves —
Vide “ Reserves.”
Transfers— [
Of Conditional Purchases ... ... ...
By will or inheritance ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 44,48
By way of mortgage or family settlement ... ... ... ... 44
Jn Insolvency ... ... ... ... • • • ••• - •
Of lands selected under Act of 1868 ... ... ... ... ... <6
1 :
Trespass—
On Crown Lands ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• i 40, 6o
Penalties for trespassing ... ...; ... ••• ...
Trustees — ... ,
Trustees of Public Lands ... ... ... ... •••
Trustees may make by-laws ... ... ... ... ... ••• 50
Trustees considered owners in law or equity suit ■■■■ i.i' ... ... 50
Valuation of Improvements—
Vide “ Arbitration.”
Value of Improvements—
Vide “ Improvements.”
!■" .. ... ... ’ ... .. 'rv'.-riPHtffn-rfMf : lo ui “rri',rf;r n! ; I
Volunteers’ Land Orders —
Where available ... ... ... ... -.i.u, ... ; -■ ••• 45
Land selected not subject to conditions of residence and improvement 46
Western Railwvt Act
Provisions relative to ninth section of above Act .... ... ... 27


Subject. Page.
'■{■•if) i i <>l 'I i /••/■III*' I I
REGULATIONS, NOTICES, AND INSTRUCTIONS, ISSUED
UNDER “ THE CROWN LANDS ALIENATION ACT OF
1876.”
Agreement foe Occupation by Servant must be registered within
ONE MONTH .4 75
Applicants to attend at Land Couet ... 73
Application rejected poe non-appearance at Land Couet ... 73
Appointment op Aebiteatoe poe the Government ... ... ... 76
■ -1 ii
Appraisement and Arbitration —
Appointment o£ Arbitrator ... ... ... ... ... ... *6
Forms to be used ... ... ... ... ... ... ... •••. 76
Respecting value of improvements ... ... ... ... ... 75
Assurance Fund —Contribution under “ The Real Property Act
op 1861” ... 75
Auction Sales —
Auction Sales —
Advance at each bid, not less than one halfpenny per acre per annum 74
Between selectors in the case of simultaneous applications ... ■».. 74
Bailiffs—
Agreements of Selectors’ Bailiffs must be registered within one month 75
' II H '. ’
Certificates—
Applications for, to be advertised , ... 75
Commissioners, Instructions to 102
Commissioner may examine Witnesses ... 73
Commissioner to declare Acceptance or Rejection of Applications 73
me.! I 'd*! lo - I-’, ■: j
Commonage Regulations—
Vide Index, pages 39 and 40.
Deed of Grant— :
Vide “Grants.”
Deposits—
Balance of higher rent bid at auction ... ... ... > ..v 74
Refundment in case of non-appearance ... ... ... ... ... 73
Refundment in case of withdrawn applications .... ... ... 74
Refundment on rejected applications ... ... ... ... ... 73
Value of Improvements on Land selected ... ... '... i ... 75
District Boundaries— ~ i >/
Vide “Land Agents’ Districts.”


INDEX.
xxvii.
Subject. Page.
Fees-*-
Payable with application to close roads ' 76
To be paid before preparation of Deed of Grant ... ... ... 75
Iff ... *■" '-••••!»>
Fines—
Vide “Penalties.”
Forfeiture fob non-payment of Balances at Auction 74
Fobm of Deed of Grant u. 76
Foems 77-84
Ml i ~ .. . ... • ■ jfuh| p;;N >.l
Fobms to be used in Appeaisements oe Aebiteations 76
...
Gold Fields, Selection in m 76
-nfio'*!) .id.
Grants — " 1 '
Fees payable ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 74
Form of deed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 76
Homestead Selections —
Vide “Notice to Selectors.”
Improved Lands —
Selection of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... i.. 75
Value of Improvements to be paid ... ... ... ... ... 75
•- ■ I
Impeovements, Payment foe ... 75
... . , ... ... .. ... ■ I'lil ctb- -i ,i i '
Insteuctions to Commissionees —
Bailiff of Crown Lands ... ... ..t ... ... ... ... 104
Business in connection with selections under Act of 1868 ... ... 104
Concluding instructions ... .... ..i. ... ... ... 105
Date of Proclamation must be affixed to each application to select ... 103
Improvements on Lands selected ... ... ... ... ... 104
Lands open to selection ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 102
Notice of withdrawal to be forwarded to Pastoral Lessee 104
Powers of two Justices ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 105
Registration of applications ... ... ... ... ... ... 102
Selections under Act of 1876 ... ... ... ... ... ... 103
Simultaneous applications ... ... ... ... 103
Timber Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 104
;• , >■■■' u ./!•: > ■! Mr -■!■■ ■'! ; : .. >■ n.,’
Land Agent to give Receipts 76
Land Agents’ Districts, Description of Boundaries —
Beenleigh ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 106
Bowen ... ... ... ... ... ... H 2
Brisbane ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 106
Bundaberg... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... HO
Cairns ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• H 3
Cardwell ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• t- ' H 2 i
Clermont ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• H 3


Gtympie ... ... ... ... ... ... ... A’ I.". 109
Helidon ... * 107
Ipswich ... ... ' .... U'J • ..i M -I- iX ... .-i. ! 106
Mackay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112
i Maryborough ... ... .... .... J ... A. A*. I 109
Nauango ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ! 115
Normanton.... ... ... ... \ 112*
Rockhampton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 110
Roma .... ... . ;.. . : i J.. ... ... ' ... ... ... 114
Springsure ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 113
Stanthorpe ... ... ... ... ; 1 ... ... 115
St. George ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... i 114
St. Lawrence ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11l
Surat ... ... ... ... ... ••• , ••• I
Tenningering ... ... ... 1 ; ... j 113
Toowoomba ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 108
Townsville ... ... ... ... ... ... : .7. ... i 112
Warwick ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
Land Commissioner—
Vide “Commissioner.”
4$
Land Orders —
Not available for payment of survey fees ... : ... ' ... 75
Volunteers’ selections ... ... ... ... ... ... 75
-a *OT^n. - ••u ) o r - r ■ vij- ;-
Lands applied tor simultaneously to be offered at Auction ..' 74
■lot ... tfOrti lu )o.L • rr..i ([;i// nni mi ani >■(, lo.'i
Lands comprised in Withdrawn or Cancelled Selections—How
dealt with ... ... ... .i. 75
lot ' !■•• -i I • ■ -
Non-appearance at Land Court ... 73
JOI ... l.'J ol Lvlfl.vrxoi ot I « lo ■■!)>/»'
Notice of Withdrawal of Lands from Lease to be forwarded
‘ to Pastoral Lessee ... ... ... H.. 76
;.<>[ ... ... ... ... ... ... lo •■■•. bun ’ cil-r-l
Notice respecting Transaction of Business at Land Offices ... 117
101 *'i*tmi.l rxljail
Notice to Selectors respecting Homesteads —
Area obtainable ... ... ... ... ;.i.i ■ uuflj t; ... I 116
Auction between Selectors ... ... ... ... ... ... j 116
Land available ... 7i ■ .;! ' 1 ••• ... j 116
Price .., .., • ... ... ... ... H 6
Priority over Conditional Selections ... ... ... ... ... I 116
Right of priority of Homestead Selection on any Crown I amis open
for Selection ... ... ... ... ... ... 116
}. I j 'hi: ' I
Payment of Survey Fees ... ... ... ... ... .., ... I 76


Subject. Page.
Penalty fob Non-appearance at Land Court ... 73
Penalty fob Withdbawal of Application ... ... ... ... 74
Permission to withdraw Selections in cebtain Cases ... ... 74
Proceedings when Applications aee pabtially fob the same
Land ... .., ... ... ... .... 74
Proclamation of General Regulations :.. ... ... ... ; 73
o<.jnnL.:qoCl tt/i ~ \rM.
Receipts to be given by Land Agents ... ... 1 ... 76
... U' iVlillj /. jo l-o'j 1, ■. ■■ ! :;’(( ■ loT
Refundments—
In ease of non-appearance of applicant ... ... ... ... 73
On Rejected Applications ... ... ... ... ... ... 73
On Selections Withdrawn by Permission ... 1 ... ... 74
( ' ... ... ... . . ... ... ... ■' 1 'jo «•»».* iiiiT
Rejected Applications—Refundmbnt of Deposit ... ... ... 73
Rents— : 11)
On Enclosed Roads ... ... ■ ... ... ... ... 76
Second Payments on Selections ... ... ... ... ... ... 73
' A * ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .1 ? Ot •lo*- Hul
Roads —Temporary Closure ... 76
Schedule of Survey Fees 85
Li .•■.■/of Il'.ifw ,‘jft.li:'.) jo . !-> ■( I! I triioijo ;oT
Second Payment on Selections ... ..... ... ... ... ... 73
.•>' . ill. 1 Vi I O .[ . : j j.. • . >;r i; ~ i
Selection in virtue of Volunteer Land Orders 75
>... ... .. ; - 'ii : - -ok |.,, •.j 1 il -it.’l o 1 f-i•; 1 1. 1
Selection of Improved Land 75
1 ■:■ VV! i / ([
Survey Fees—
On Conterminous Surveyed Portions ... ... ... ... ... 74 ■!
Payable in Cash ... ...- ... ... ... ... ... 76
Schedule of Fees..-*- ... ... i ... 85
Temporary Closure of Roads ... 1 ... ... 7 g
Timber Regulations—
Vide Index, pages 41 to 43.
»R .. ... ... ... ... ?'■ -t iv’) o: 1:1 11 1r 1 -jo ’a. 1 ; u I
Transaction of Business at Land Offices Assistance to
Public - ... n-r[
I’ ’ ••• lo "r ifii
Valuation of Improvements—
Vine “Appraisement,” &c.
By Selector ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 75
» • ... ... ... ... ... fi il’.’.ciii’l *1 «,.t ;..!
Volunteers’ Land Order Selections—Precedence of Conditionals
and Homesteads ; 75
i ' '.rorro : - imam ) -VVV


Subject. Page.
Withdrawal op Applications—
Fine imposed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 74
Permitted in some instances 74
Withdrawal of Lands from Lease —Notice to Pastoral Tenant 76
:
COMMONAGE REGULATIONS UNDER ACT OF 1876.
Application for Permission to Depasture Sheep—
Rate* for Depasturage ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87
To be made to Land Commissioner ... 88
To be published at Cost of Applicant 88
To be reported to Minister 88
Appointments—
Inspector of Cattle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86
Trustees of Commons ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 88,89
To be notified in Government Gazette 88
Cattle —
Definition of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 86
Number allowed to depasture ... ... ... ... ... ••• 86
Register to be kept ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 86
Unregistered —may be impounded off Commons 87
Commissioner — u
To appoint Inspector of Cattle, when directed ... ... ... 86
To enforce Regulations ... .... ... ... • 85
To mark out boundaries of Commons, prepare Plans, &c. ... ... 86
To receive Fees from Inspector and issue receipt ... ... ••• 87
To report Application for leave to depasture Sheep 87
Declaration by Trustees 88
- ; : ; / <•/ ,1 i : -
Duties of Inspector 86
l! (■•') lli •. -i t.: .
Election of Trustees ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 88
Fees for Depasturing ... ... .<• • v*.■ 86,87
Forms ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... n. ••• 89,90
.1.1 .ill I - .ill - .
Impounding of Unregistered Cattle ... 87
7 / P'i ,i ciO 'l/ ! T/ >B.i/i i• '• / i: :iT
Inspector of Cattle —
Appointment of ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 86
Duties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... **>i ... 86
Payment of Fees to Commissioner ... ... ... ... ... 87
Remuneration ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .86
Returns to be Furnished ... ... ... ... 87
■ j j' ; I ,1 '! •■' (i ; : 1 31' ( '• '/ ('I r»’/! .! H ''l Ji ■ i)lO fi/ / I :)• )/* J I i I
Land Commissioner —
Vide “ Commissioner.”


Subject. I Page.
Maps, showing Boundaries op Commons, to be Exhibited, Etc. ... 86
"1
Mustering, Notice Eequired 87
Hi .. r mi. *• .1 • in:; IV 1 ■!., lii.'iK.,, •! . : 'I < :j : til i i/.jll
Notice to be given of Intention to Muster Cattle 87
I ... y t )■; ; jj ,
Notice to be Published of Application for leave to Depasture
Sheep 88
Notification in “ Government Gazette ” of Appointment of Trus-
tees... ... 88
... . .. . . . . •’ >-i I' ' t li. '.MS : •
Number of Cattle allowed to Depasture 86
Payment of Fees to Commissioner 87
... ... . :i .jiu'i v\ a j- i ' 1
Penalty for Illegally Depasturing 87
Proclamation of Commonage Regulations 85
-■ 'Mi :. I I l'H ;
Register to be Kept of Cattle and their Owners 86
Residents entitled to Depasture 86
P* l ••• ••• •• ... ... .. ... HU Si ft
Returns to be Furnished by Inspector 87
, 1 cwriii- ■ // (to.■’//<!:ijll
Schedules 89,90
ll* r.v/i vin i, i' .1 ,i i, .• ><• i / • , :i t : .
Sheep, Dbpasturage of ... 87
•• ... r : i✓. ; --T l/ i. -. )or y.tti: 'Jtn / I
Travellers’ Stock may Depasture 87
- : ! i- ■■ ': .i ; • ■■ ■, •; ■
Trespassing Cattle, how dealt with 86
‘' ... ■ * i I . \ H ■ !i 1 51,. ..! l:l U. 1 . 1 . ,!■ I !
Trustees—
Election and appointment of ... ... ... ... ... ... 88,89
May be discharged for neglect of duty ... ... ... ... ... 89
Resignation or death of ... ... ... ... ... ... .*. 89
May make Rules or Bye-laws, &c. ... ... ... ... ... 89
To apply Fees for Commonage Purposes ... ... ... ... 89
Unregistered Cattle may be Impounded ... 87
Vacancies by Death or Resignation of Trustees 89
, .. . .'i'll - i toil -1 . III). I • I
TIMBER REGULATIONS UNDER ACT OF 1876.
Applications—
For Licenses to remove Stone, Gravel, &c. ... ... ... ... 94
For special Timber Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
For Timber Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91
For Timber Licenses (Employers’.)


Subject. Page.
Bean —
Vide “ Pea Bean.”
, j : -
Bunya Bunya, Getting of, Prohibited is Certain Localities ... 91
: i :■ 'i i.‘ cl r.' ii•• i o v tot :t HToZ
Cedars, Restriction as to size 94
■in r ;:I i f::< ■:.* 1 ■■ ■ c>! " u’; -, r
Commissioner or other Officer to attend for the Issue of Licenses 91
Employees’ Licenses—
Application to Commissioner ...... ... ..... ... ... ... 94
Conditions of Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 94
Employer may change the persons employed hy him 95
General Regulations, same as for Timber Licenses j 95
Existing Licenses to continue in Force ! 96
i ... ' v■w•■ i! v , [ jt.'i'-
Fees Chargeable j 92,117
j -■■■■ • ' I ■ ■ ■ .r: -, ; /
Forfeiture— I
Of Timber not remoyed within proper time ... ... ... ... 93
Of unbranded Timber ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... I 93
r i ■ n ’i
Forms 101
Hardwood and Softwood 92
...
Head Stations not to be approached within two miles 92
» ,/ . i .■. id • ■ ill •
Instruction to Commissioners ... ... ... ... ... ... 104
■ ■ : ' 1
Land Agent must account fob License Fees ... ... ... ... 92
I ... ... ... ... ... n . i Ti : T
Lessees may cut Timber foe certain purposes without License ... 91
Lessees may mare reasonable Objection to issue of Licenses ... 92
Licenses (Employers’) —
Vide “ Employers.”
Licenses—
Operation of ~, ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 92 f
Restricted to one District... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92
Separate License for each person... ... ... ... ... ... j 91
To be exhibited when demanded ... ... ... ... ... 93
To cut Timber—not transferable ... ... ... ... ... | 92
Term of License ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 92
To extend to Land under Pastoral Lease in certain cases ... ... 92
Two classes —vide “ Special Timber Licenses ” ... ... ~. 92
: • .i. ... ... .. . • • - i ) •• i. I j .
Licenses to Remove Stone, &c. —
Application ~, ~, ~, ~. ... v( :9*
Fees, as per amended Regulation in lieu of Clause 27 cancelled ..( 117
General Regulations —same as for Timber Licenses ... ... ... 94


Subject. Page.
No Timber to bb cut under License within two miles of a Head
Station ... 92
Nut—
Vide “Queensland Nut.”
Operation of Licenses ... 92
Pea Bean, cutting of —prohibited 94
Penalties—
For cutting timber without a license ... ... ... ... ... 93
For not branding timber... ... ... ... ... .... : ,98
For not removing timber... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
For refusal to produce timber license ... ... ... ... ... 93* 95
Proceeds of Seizure, how dealt with 93
!' T I !
Proclamation —
Regulation respecting fees for Licenses to remove gravel, stone, brick-
earth, &c. —in lieu of clause 27 cancelled 117
Timber Regulations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91
Queensland Nut, cutting of—prohibited 94
Return of Applications to be furnished quarterly 92
Reward for seizure of Timber cut without License 93
Sale of Timber cut without License 93
Schedules ; , 97-101
Seizure —
Of timber not removed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
Reward for seizure ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
Timber cut without a license ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
Unbranded timber ... ... • ... ... ... ... ... 93
Separate License for each Person 91
Special Timber Licenses —
Application to Commissioner ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
Boundaries to be described ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
Boundaries may be amended by Commissioner... ... ... ... 95
Duration of Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 96
Existing licenses ... ... ... .;. ... ... ... ... 96
Employ of labor ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
Fees payable on application ... ... ... ... ... ... 95
Lands under license not available for selection... ... ... ... 96
Lands may be excluded from license ... ... ... ... ... 96
Renewal of licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 96
Rights of licensees... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 95


Subject. Page.
Penalties for refusal to produce license ... - 95
Transfer of license ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 96
Timber removable... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 96
i • i L
Stone, Gravel, &c.—Licenses to Remove 94, 117
Surveyed Lands exempt from operation of Licenses 92
Terms of Licenses ... ... 92
Timber —
Cut without license, subject to seizure ... ... ... ... ... 93
Prohibited sorts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 94
To be branded ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
To be removed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
Vide “ Licenses.”
... ... ... .. ..!•I/■ . t ■ • ><■ .I.■ ' • (' If) -H )')■ :<'l
Town, Timber, and other Reserves—exempt from operation of
Licenses ;.. 92
Turpentine, Cutting of—prohibited ... ... ... 94
Mi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ■,. ; , f : ; .
Withdrawal of Lands from operation of Licenses 93
.. . ■ O
“SETTLED DISTRICTS PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1876.”
_^ CT
Preamble 118
Short title ..v ~v ~v ...• ‘... •.!. 122
Appointment of Arbitrators ... ... ... 122
Arbitration—
Respecting value of improvements on lands withdrawn from lease ... 120
Appointment of arbitrators and umpire ... ... ... ... 120, 122
.Arbitrator in certain cases to act for both parties ... ... ... 122
Notice of appointment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 122
Mode of appraisement or arbitration ... ... ... ... ~. 122
Payment of amount awarded ... ... ... ... ... ... 120, 121
Auction—
Vide “ Sales by Auction.”
Award—
Arbitrators’—ride “ Arbitration.”
Boundaries of Land withdrawn from Lease to be Defined ... 120
Claims for Improvements—
On lands withdrawn from lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 120
Notice to be given to Land Agent ... ... ... 1 ... ... 120
Payable by purchaser ... 120


Subject. Page.
Against the Crown—how dealt with .... ... ... ... 120
No claim after term of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Compensation—
To owners of improvements on lands withdrawn from lease ... ... 120, 121
No compensation in the absence of notification of claim ... ... 120
No claim for improvements after term of lease ... ... ... 121
Date of Lease —
Vide “ Leases.”
Expired Leases—
New lease of five years may be offered at auction ... ... ... 118
Fee foe Transfer of Lease 121
„ C N ,1 '
Fines —
Vide “ Penalties.”
Forfeited Eons—
Lease may be offered at auction ... ... ... ... ... ... 118
Term of lease ... ... ... ... ... ••• 118
Unexpired term of lease of forfeited or vacated Runs may be offered
for sale ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Date of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... I^l
Upset price ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Forfeiture —
For non-payment of rent... ... ... ... ... ... ••• HO
Forfeiture may be defeated ... ... , ... ... ... ... H 9
For non-payment of value of improvements ... ... ... 120
Improvements—
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 118
lorfeited for non-payment of rent ... ~.. ... ... HO
On lands withdrawn from lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 120
Notice of claim to be given to Land Agent ... ... ... ... 120
Payment by purchaser ... ... ... ~.. ... ... ... 120
Payment in the case of claim against the Crown ... ... ... 121
No claim for improvements after term of lease... ... ... ...- 121
T . .0 • :
Leases—
Euns may bo leased at expiration of existing leases ... ... ... H 8
Forfeited Runs may be offered for lease... ... ... .... ... H 8
Term of lease ... ... .’. ... ... ... ... ... H 8
Conditions of lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ~•• H 9
Date of lease ... ...’ ... ... ... »w <.. H 9
Liability to reservation and sale ... ... ... ... ... ... H 9
In which case rent to be reduced ... ... ... .... ... H 9
Limitation of the amount of rent for Euns sold at auction ... ... H 9
Time of withdrawal of land from lease by sale or selection ... ... H 9
Notice of withdrawal to be given ... ... 120
Form of notice ... ... ... ... , ... • 1?0
Claims for Improvements ... ... ... 120


Subject. Page.
Time of payment for Improvements ... ... ... ... ... 120
Case of claim against the Crown ... ... ... ... ... 120
Transfers ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 121
No claim for renewal of Lease or for improvements, after Term ... 121
Unexpired term of Lease of forfeited or vacated Runs may be offered
for Sale ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 121
Date of unexpired term of Lease ... ... ... ... ... 121
Upset price ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Rent ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 121
Resumption of whole Runs—provision in case of 121
Except as provided, Lease shall be deemed as still subsisting ... 121
Lessee entitled to Six Months to Remove Stock ... 121
Ministeb —
Interpretation 118
Notice —
To be given to Lessee of Withdrawal of Lands from Lease ... ~. 120
Notice to be published in Gazette ... ... 120
i
Payment fob Impbotements—
Vide “ Improvements.”
Payment op Rent—
Tide “ Rents.”
Penalties —
For non-payment of Rent within prescribed time ... ... ... 119
For failure to notify claim for Improvements ... ... ... ... 120
For failure to pay value of Improvements on Lands withdrawn from
Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 120
Renewal of Lease—
No claim for renewal after expiration of term ... ... ... ... 121
Rents —
Leases of Runs offered at Auction ... ... ... ... ... 118,121
Reduction of—in case of Reservation or Sale of Lands included in
Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 119
Limitation of the amount of Rent ... ... ... ... ... 119
Date for payment of Rent ... ... ... ... ... ... 119
Forfeiture for non-payment of Rent ... ... ... ... ... 119
Reversal of Forfeiture under certain conditions ... ... ... 119
Resumption—
Vide “ Withdrawal.”
Sales by Auction —
Leases of Runs at expiration of existing Leases ... ... ... 118
Forfeited Runs ~. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 118
Upset Price ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 118
Conditions of Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 119
Term of Lease ... ..." ..." ... ... ... ... ... 119


Subject. Page.
Liability of Lease to Reservation and Sale ... ... ... ... 119
Unexpircd Terms of Leases of forfeited or vacated Runs may be
offered ... ... ... ... ..., ... ... ... 121
Price ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Date of Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ~. 121
Stock—
To be Removed by Lessee within six months after expiration of Lease 121
Tenure—
Vide “ Leases.”
, : '
Transfer of Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Transfer fee ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
■ . .. m r ;,'iW in ■■ ■■ i ■ • • ' -i ■ ■ ■
Trespass on Crown Lands 119
r i
TTITDTP rv
Vide “ Arbitration.”
,«• .........• . ’ 'T > : " ; i *r- ■I v. f( • I Mi,'
Upset Price of Leases of Runs offered at Auction ... ... 118,121
Value of Improvements—
Vide “ Improvements.”
Withdrawal of Lands from Lkase —
By Sale or Selection ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 119
Land Resumed to be surveyed and defined in certain cases ... 120
Minister’s Notice of Withdrawal to be given to Lessee ... ... 120
Notice to set forth Area and Description of Land resumed ... ... 120
Claims for Improvements ... ... ... ... ... ... 120
Case of Claim against the Crown ... ... ... .... ... 120
Cancelled if Lessee’s Claim against the Crown not settled ... , ... 121
Resumption of the whole of a Run ... ... ... ... ... 121
Resumed Run subject to Alienation or Reservation ... ... ... 121
Provisions respecting withdrawal of Land under 4th Section of this
Act to apply ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121
Except as provided, Lease to be deemed as still subsisting ... ... 121
UL .Oil I ... !!! !” ... wT rioii.i.: ■ ■ '■)
Jg [ ... ~ ... hr 'll ;; ;
“THE PASTORAL LEASES ACT OF 1869.”
Act—
Repeal of existing Acts ... ... ... ... ... 123
Application of Act ... ... ... ... ... . ... ... 123
Short Title ... ... ... ... ... ... . ... ... 139
Actions —
Limitation of Action against Commissioner or other Government
Official ... ... ... y. ... , ... ... 139
Written Notice to be given to Defendant ... ... ... ... 139
Plaintiff may not recover if tender of sufficient amends, &c.,made by
Defendant ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 139


Subject. Page.
Costs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... • •• 139
No quashing for error nor certiorari ... ... ... ... ... 139
Instruments under Act to he evidence ... ... ... ... ••• 139
Application fob License of New Eun—
Application for License to be made to District Commissioner ... 125, 126,
145
When application may be made ... .;. ... ..." ••• 126
License Fees to be paid ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 125,145
Fees for advertising Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ••• 130, 146
Payment of Fees in cash or Treasury receipt ... ... ... ... 145
Declaration of Stocking ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 125, 145,
152
Boundaries of Eun to be described in Application ... ... ... 126
Registry of Application ... ... ... ».. • ... .1,26, j
Issue of License ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 125
Advertising License Fee to be paid ... ... ... ... ••• 146
Limitation of Area ... ... ... ... ... ••• 126
Additional License Fee in certain cases... ... ... ... ... 125,146,
If two Applications lodged simultaneously, Licenses to be regulated
. by occupation ... ... ... ... ••• _ ••• 127
Area to be divided ratably between persons occupying at same time... 127
Area applied for to be submitted to competition among opposing
Applicants in certain cases .. ... ... ... ••• ••• 127
Upset price of License ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 127
Forms to be used ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 140,141,
149,150
Application fob Lease of Nf.w Eun—
Application for Lease by Licensee ... .... ... .... ••• 127,146
Application to be made to Chief Commissioner of Crown Lauds ... 127
Declaration of Stocking to be made ... ... ... ... •• • 146
Forms to be used ... ... ... ... ... r . ... ••• 141,151,
Vide “ Ecnts and Leases.” 152
Application fob License of Unwatbbed Eun—
Power to apply for Special License, for one yeai*, of unwatered Eun 129
Stocking not compulsory,.. ...;' ... ... ••• • 129
Mode of Application ... ... ... ... ... ... ’ ... 129,147
Occupation Fee ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 130,147
Fee for advertising License ... ... ... ... ... ... 146
Declaration of character of country to be made ... ... ... 130,154
Application to be Registered' ... ... ... ... ... ••• 130
Inspection of country applied for by Commissioner ... ... ... 130,147
Issue of License ... ... ... ... .., , 130
Provision in case of Applications clashing ... .... ... ... 130
Power to renew Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ••• •• 130,147
Unwatered Euns to be generally subject to same Eules as others ... 131
Forms to be used ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 143,152,
153, 154,
155
Application fob Lease of an Unwatebed Eun —
Unwatered Euns to be generally subject to same Eules as others ... 131
Application for Lease to be lodged with District Commissioner ... 147


Declaration to be made ... ... ... ... ... ... V.. 147,152
Dorms to be used ... ... ... ... ... ... ' •••: d.i 141*151,
i ■. ) 152
Applications fob Renewal of Lease fob Fourteen Years —
Rower to grant renewal for fourteen years on expiration of existing
Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 'UI > * 131
Application for renewal, when and where to be made... . ... ... 131
Date of Lease- ... ... ... ... ... ••• ■ ••• 131
Vide “ Rents and Leases.”
Application to Surrender existing Lease and Renew fob Twenty-
one Yeaes—
Application to surrender and obtain renewal of Lease ... 1.. 124,145
Application to be made before 1 January, 1871 ... ... ••• 124
Application to be forwarded to Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands 145
Separate Application for each Run ... ... ... ... /.. 145
Lease, if issued, to be returned ... ... ... ... ... ... 145
Forms to be used ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 144,149
Vide “ Leases and Rents.”
• >■. V\
Appointments—
Vide “ Commissioners.”
Aebitbation—
Commissioner to act as Arbitrator for the Crown ... ... ... 132
Commissioner to be Arbitrator unless another appointed ... ... 132
Lessee to appoint Arbitrator on his behalf ... ... 132
Appointment of Umpire ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 132
Lessee failing to appoint Arbitrator, Commissioner to make appointment 132
Arbitrators failing to appoint Umpire, Governor may nominate ... 133
Proceedings not to stop on failure to agree on Umpire ... ... 133
Umpire to decide, if award delayed for six months ... ... ... 133
Reference to Umpire may be on special points... ... ... ■■■ 133
Aw-ards to be published ... ... ... ... ... ... 133
Certain persons disqualified to act as Arbitrators or Umpire ... ... 133
Costs ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 133
Appraisement of the Rent ... ... ... ... ... ... 158
Declaration to be made ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 138,162
Regulations re Proceedings of Valuers ... ... ... ... ... 158
Rates to be paid pending Assessment by Arbitration ... ... ... 134
In case of disputed boundaries, Governor may refer to Arbitration ... 137
i ! !.'.(< • ■ , ■
Areas of Runs—
Limitation of Areas ... ... .... ... ... ... ... 126
Uf*H l() fr;f lo <1 .t:l( (MIC •lUfl
Available Country—
What shall be deemed Available Country ... ... ... ... 147
Boundaries ... ... ... ... ..i ... ... ... 126
Capability of Runs 128
Certificate—
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to certify to copies of Leases
and other instruments under Act ... ... ... ... ... j 148


Subject. Page.
COMMISSIONER 8 —
Pouter to appoint ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 124
o; Duties of Commissioners... ... ... ... ... •••
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 124
■'Hfi ' » f'l c i!i ’li'i ‘i n : : : ' ■■ ■! :i. •■ ■ - r t or
Compensation—
Compensation for resumed Improvements > ... ... 135
Compensation for Fencing, in certain cases «. ••• 135
' . : i 1 . " •>■■■:” I
Consolidation—
Lessee may register contiguous Runs ... ... ... ... ... 128,147
Limitation of Area consolidated ... ... ... ... 128
Rules applicable to consolidated Runs ... ... ... ... 148
Contiguity of consolidated Runs affected by transfer ... ... ... 148
. I .1 , «!.•<■ ;:ii i: ) I- -i- n . in !■ ii! i ! ■ !-r ■ •) r; ; ;
Cbown Lands —
Interpretation 123
CM ,11.1 '• ■■( I . .1
Date of Lease —
Vide “ Leases.”
■■•Tvr !• ry ..m A,
DeCLAKATIONS — V
- . ■ i i Ki .1 L
False Declaration —
Penalty for false Declaration ... ... ... ••• 139
Fees —
Occupation Fee ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 130
Fee for advertising License ... ... ... ... ... ••• 146
Transfer Fee ... ... ... ... ... .. ••• ••• 134,149
Fee to cover cost of preparation of Lease ... ... ... ... 148
Survey Fees ... ... ;.. ... ... ... 136
License Fees ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 125, 145
a■, 3 . n ; f
Fencing—
Compensation for fencing, in certain cases ... ... ... ••• 135
“ The Fencing Act o) 1861 ” to apply 136
Foefeited Runs—
Lease forfeited if Stock not maintained on Run ... ... ... 129
Sale at auction of forfeited Leases ... ... ... ... ... 129
If Lease not sold when first offered, may be submitted at lower
upset price ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 129
Time and place of payment of Rent ... ... ... ... ... 129
Runs purchased at auction to be stocked within six months ... 129
If Lease not applied for, Run to be forfeited ... ... ... ... 128
Lease forfeited for non-payment of Rent ... ... ... ... 133
f 140 to
| 144, 149
Forms ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 1° 157»i
I 159 to
U 162


Subject.- [ Page.
Grazing Eight—
Grazing Right over resumed areas ... ... ... ... ... 135
Gold Fields —
Proclamation of a Gold Field shall not withdraw from Lease ... 136
Reduction of Rent to be made ... ... ... ... ... ... 136
Improvements—
Interpretation ... ... , ... ... ... ... ... ... 124
Compensation for improvements ... ... ... ... ... 135
• . ; '
Leases —
Surrender of existing Leases ... ... ... ... ... ... 124
Application to surrender, when to be made ... ... ... ... 124,145
Term of new Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... 124
Date of Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .., 124
Annual Rent on Runs which have been held under “ Order in
Council” ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 124
Annual Rent for first seven years on Runs held under 24 Vic., No.
12, 24 Vic., No. 15, 27 Vic., No. 17, 28 Vic., No. 20 ... ... 125
Rent from eighth to fourteenth year ... ... ... ... ... 125
Rent from fifteenth to twenty-first year ... ... ... ... 125
New Leases for twenty-one years ... ... ... ... ... 125
Leases granted to Licensees on application ... ... ... ... 127
Rent to be paid ... ... ... ... ... ... . v ... 127
Amount of Rent during first seven years ... ... ... ... 127
Amount of Rent during residue of term ... ... ... ... 127
Date of Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 128
Area in excess of 100 square miles, to be included in separate Lease 146
Term of Lease of excess of area ... ... ... ..* ... 146
Special conditions where area is under 125 square miles ... ... 146
If Lease not applied for, Runs to be dealt with as forfeited ... ... 128
Lease forfeited if stock not maintained on Run ... ... ... 129
Leases of forfeited Runs to be sold by auction ... ... ... 129, 157
Upset Price ... ... ... . ... ... ... ... ... 129
Time and place of payment of Rent ... ... ... ... ... 129,131
Renewal of Leases in Unsettled District ... ... ... ... 131
Power to grant renewal of Leases ... ... ... ... ... 131
Power to Lessee to apply for renewal ... ... ... ... ... 131,158
Term of Lease—Date of Lease... ... ... ... ... ... 131
Lessee to pay annual Rent ... ... ... ... ... 131
Mode of estimating Rent under renewed Lease ... ... ... 131
Governor or Lessee may require the Rent fixed by arbitration ... 131
Lessee requiring appraisement to pay £5 costs... ... ... ... 131
Limitation of the amount of Rent .j.^, ... ... ... ... 131
Rent in special cases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 132
Renewals ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 131,132,
158
Renewed Leases subject to same conditions as original ... ... 132
Description of Leases to be published in Gazette ... ... ... 135
Description of Leased Lands ..! ... ... ... ... ... 135
Proviso for amendment of defective descriptions ... ... ... 135
Instrument of Lease issued on application ... ... ... ... 148
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to certify to copies of Leases 148


Subject. Page.
Accepted tender, &c., equivalent to Lease in certain proceedings ... 134
Right to enter on Lands ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 187
Licenses to Occupy—
Commissioner to grant License ... ... ... ... 125,126
Duration of License ... ... ...■ ... ... ... 125
Licenses Registered ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 125
Return of Licenses to be published ... ... ... ... ... 127
Vide “ Application for License of a new Run.”
Special-License for an Unwatered Run ... ... ... ... ... 129
Duration of License ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 129
Power to renew Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 130,147
Notification of Renewal in Gazette ... ... ... ... ... 147
Vide “ Application for License of Unwatered Run.”
Licenses (Timber) —
Vide “ Timber Licenses.”
Notices—
Mode of serving Notices upon Lessees of Runs ... ... ... 162
Occupation Feb —
License Fee payable on application ... ... ... ... ... 125
Additional Fee in certain cases ... ... ... ... ... ... 125, 146
Occupation Fee refunded if License refused ... ... ... ... 127
Occupation Fee on Unwatered Run ... ... ... ... ... 130
Passage of Stock—•
Travelling Stock may Depasture within half-a-mile of Road ... 136
Distance to be travelled daily ... ... ... ... ... ... 136
Penalty for neglecting to travel prescribed distance ... ... ... 136
Pre-emptive Right—
Pre-emptive Right over Improved Lands ... ... ..r ... 134
Price of Land ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 134
Limitation of Area ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 134
Deposit of ten per cent, of Purchase Money to be made ... ... 163
Balance of Purchase Money and Fees on completion of Survey ... 163
Application to lapse if balance not paid within one month from date
of demand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 163
Refundment of Deposit, less expenses of Survey, &c.... ... ... 163
Refundments—
Occupation Fee to be refunded if License refused or cancelled ... 127
Refundment of back rents limited to five years’ payments ... ... 125
Reguuations—
Governor may make regulations... ... ... ... 139
Regulations to be laid before Parliament ... ... ... ... 139
Regulations ... ... ... ... ... "! ~. ... 145 to
163
Rents—
R ent payable on renewed Lease for twenty-one years ... ... ... 124
Rent payable on renewed Lease for fourteen years ... ... ... ' 131


Subject. Page.
Eenfc payable on new Lease for twenty-one years ... ... ... 127
Kent payable on Lease of an unwatered Run ... ... ... ... 131
Rents when and where payable ... ... ... ... ... ... 129
Mode of estimating Rent under renewed Leases ... ... ... 131
Governor or Lessee may require the rent to be fixed by Arbitration 131
Limitation of the amount of Rent ... ... ... ... ... 131
Rent in special cases .., ... ... ... ... ... ... 132
Penalty for non-payment of Rent ... ... ... ... ... 133
Resumption—
Resumption of a Run in whole or in part ... ... r . ... 134
Sale by Auction—
Forfeited and vacated Runs to be submitted to Auction ... r . 129
Upset Price ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 129
If not Sold when first offered, Price may be reduced ... ... ... 129
Vide “ Forfeited Runs.”
liJ I. 1) XI A Oil r« Ad J n/] AWI it! till I
Subdivision of Runs —
Power to subdivide Runs ... .., ... ... ... ... 128
Minimum Area allowable for one Run w. ... ... ... ... 129
‘ Fee to be paid ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 129
Treasury Receipt for Fee to be lodged with application to subdi-
vide ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 129
Surrender of Lease —
Vide “ Application to Surrender.”
StrRVET of Runs—
Cost of Survey to be paid by Licensee or Lessee ... ... ... 136
Cost not to exceed Six Shillings per square mile ... ... .... 136
In default of Payment within six months, Lease or License may be
cancelled ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 136
Cost of Survey of adjoining boundaries to be defrayed by respective
Lessees ... ... ... ~. ... ... ... ... 136 '
<■• -J ... .I ' ■ l!;;:: >
Timber Licenses—
Licenses to cut Timber may be granted ... ... ... ... ... 137
Pastoral Lessee may object to issue of License ... ... ..; 137
Regulations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91tol01,
Use of Timber or Material by Lessees ... ... ... ... ... 137
Removal of Timber and Material by other than Lessees ... ... 137
Transfer
Licenses and Leases of Runs may be transferred ... ... ... 134
Mode of Application ... ... ... ... 134,148
Runs of Insolvents or of Parties absent or deceased ... ... 148
Runs, Leases of which have been issued ... ... ... ... 149
Separate Applications ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 149
Dues in arrear ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 149
Fees 134,149
Forms ... ... ... ... ... ... ..; ... ... 149,157
■ ■ ■ • g ; . i'o.■ i , u> ir»i(<j-. tin uitt-xroh


Subject. Page.
Tbeasuey Receipts—
Receipts for License Fees may be obtained at the Treasury ... ... 145
Balance of Receipts available for future Application ... ... ... 145
Treasury Receipts transferable by delivery ... ... ... ... 145
Receipts issued under previous Acts available ... ... ... ... 145
Tbespass—
Removal of trespassers in illegal occupation of Crown Lands ... 138
Penalties for Trespassing...' ... ... ... ... ... ... 138
Umpieb—
Vide “ Arbitration.”
Valuation of Impeovemenis—
Vide “ Arbitration.”
• 1 ... ... I I
' • h « '
“THE MINERAL LANDS ACT OF 1872,” AND
REGULATIONS.
. Application must be accompanied by Deposit ... ... ... 164
Area allowed ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 164,174
Application may be granted as to part of Land applied for . ... 165
Application approved ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 166
Adjoining Proprietors ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 170
Application Book to be signed ... ... ... ... ... 174
Applications open to inspection ... ... , lf ... ... 175
Applicant informed whether he will have to effect Survey ... ... 175
Applications, at what Offices received ... ... ... ... ... 185
Application must contain clear description ... ... ... ... ... 180
Amended Descriptions, where lodged ... ... ... ... ... 185
Boundaries of surveyed Portions must be adhered to ... ... 164
Balance and Deed Fee, when payable ... ... ... ... ... 167
Claims —vide “ Licenses.”
Clear description required ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 165,180
Construction of Dams, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 183
COMMISSIONEES —
Appointed ... ... ... .., ... ... ... ... ... 180
Monthly Court ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 181
Duties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 181
Disputes decided ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 181
Issue of Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 181
Issue of Orders relative to working Claims ... ... ... ... 183
Adjustment of Claims ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 183
Deed of Grant, when issued ... ... .j. ... ... 167
Description of Mineral Lands ... ... ... ... ... ... 179
Dams and Races, construction of ... ... ... ... ... ... 183
Frontage, Rules as to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .>. 165
Forms ... ... ’ ' 171, 172,
177 to
179,184
Forfeited Lands not open to selection ... ... ... ... ... j 175
Government option of Surveying ... ... ... ... ... .... 165


Subject. Page
How Priority determined ... ... ... ... ... • ••• 167
If Applicant employs a Surveyor, when must Survey be completed ... 166
Inspection of Applications ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lands within Town Sites not available ... ... ... ••• ••• 160, 175
: 1 ■ > _
LEASBi—
Application, how made ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 168,173
Area ... .. ... ... ... ••• ••• •••
Date of Lease ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 1-74
Forfeiture for non-payment of Rent ... ... ... ... ... 168
Form of Lease ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 168
Leases may be granted ... ... ... ... ••• * ••• ••• 167
Leases when issued ... ... ••• ••• 174
No Tin Lands available for Lease ... ... ... ... ... 17®
Rent ... 168,174
Second Payments ... 17*
Sections 5,6, 7,9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, and 23 of
Act applicable ... ... ... ... ••• ... I®®
Term and Area ... ... ... ... ... •••*' ••• ••• 168
Transfers ... ... ... ... •••• 168
Licenses —
Areas may be proclaimed... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 169
Commissioner to issue Licenses ... ... ... ... ... 182
Claims must be marked ... ... ... ... ... ... 182
Claims may be amalgamated ... ... ... ... ... ... 183
Claims must be worked ... ... ... ... ... 182
Claims to be continuously worked ... ... ... ... ... 182
Commissioner may adjust Claims ... ... ... ... ... 183
Issue of Mining Licenses ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 169
Licenses must be held by all Workers of Claims ... ... ... 182
Marking off more ground than allowed ... ... ... ... 182
Privileges of Mining Licenses ... ... ... ... ... I*. 169
Regulations to be issued ... ... ... ... vii J.. 169
Registration of Claims ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 183
Size of Claims under Mining Licenses ... ... ... ... ... 182
Unworked Claims ... ... .... ... ••• ••• ••• I®2
Mode of Application ... ... ••• 164,173,
180
Marking and Posting Notices 174
Marking off more ground than allowed ... ... ... ... ... 182
Mineral to be worked, must be stated 174
Notices to be Posted ... ... ... ... ••• o- ■ ••• 174
Power to Sell ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• I®4
Price ... ... J®®
Power to withdraw Lands from operation of Act lb&
Protection granted in certain cases ... ... ... ... 166
Powers Deputed ... ... ••• ••• ••• 171
Permissory Occupation Licenses ... ... ... ... ... 181,184
Rules as to Frontage ... 16^
Races, Drains, Dams, &c., License to Cut ... ... ... ... ... 169, 170
Rights of adjoining Proprietors over Boundary Creeks ... ... ... 170
Regulations may be Established ... ... ... ... ... ••• 171


Subject. Page.
Repeal Clause ... ... ... ... ... ... ... : ~. 171
Repeal of former Regulations... ... ... ... ... ... ... 173
Regulations (General) applicable ... ... ... ... ... ~. 18Q
Selection must be Marked ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 165
Survey, how Conducted ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 166
Simultaneous Applications, how dealt with ... ... ... ... ... 167,175
Special Regulations, to what District applicable ... ... ... ... 160
Survey Fee returned when Applicant surveys ... ... ... ... 166
Trespassers and Unauthorised Mining ... ... ... ... ... 170,^184
Tin Lands not Available for Lease ... ... ... ' ... ... ... 175
.'1 . i .... -.(
Transfers— •
Fee and Stamp Duty ... ... ... ... ... 167,168
Mode of Transfer ... .... ... ..1. ••• 175
Transfer of Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 176
To be Signed by Holder .... ... ... ... ~. 176
Insolvent Estate or Persons Absent ... ... ... ... ... 176
Separate Transfer for each Selection .... .... ... ... 176
Dues in Arrear ... ..* .... ... ... ~. ■,176
Consideration to be Verified ... ... ... ... 176
Unauthorised Mining ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 170,184
Withdrawal of Lands... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 165
When Land Surveyed by Applicant, Survey Fee returned... ... ... 166
When Protection granted, Survey when must be completed j .., ... 166
Working of Claims ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ■ 182,183
' ' .7.’ - .'7 ,
■ ■'l : <// ,; l: n
“THE WESTERN RAILWAY ACT.”
'-I ... . : i 1 ' - 1
Act—<
Preamble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 186
Short Title 186
Commencement ... ... ... ... ... .*. ... ... 186
Interpretation of Terms ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 186
Application to Western Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... 187
Alienation of Land in the Reserve--
Lands resumed from Lease subject to Alienation under this Act... 187
Crown Lands not to be dealt with except under this Act ... ... 187
Section 16 of “ Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868” not to apply 188
Mode in which Land may be Alienated... ... ... ... ... 188
Conditions and Modifications affecting the Alienation of Lands ... 188
Sale by Auction —vide “ Sales.”
Disposal of Proceeds of Lands alienated ... ... ... ... 189
Auction —vide “Sales by Auction.”
Boundaries of Western Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... 189
Construction' of Railway from Dalby to Roma—
Governor in Council may cause Railway to be Constructed... ... 189
Account to be kept in Treasury entitled “The Western Hailway
Account” ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 189
Colonial Treasurer may advance Moneys 189


Subject. Page.
Disposal of Moneys received on alienation of Lands within Reserve... 189
Moneys to be expended in Construction of Western Railway ... 189
Countet Lands—
Upset Price of Lands offered at Auction ... ... ... ... 188
Limitation of Areas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 188
Reservation of Roads ... ... ... ... ... t .. ... 188
Ceown Lands—
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 186
Alienation of —vide “ Alienation.”
“ Ceown Lands Alienation Act op 1868” 9
Section 16 not applicable to lands within Western Railway Reserve 188
Reserve not deemed a Railway Reserve within the meaning of above
Act ... ... ~. ... ... ... ... ~. 189
. • >'/ .5: l;. '1 ’ : •(• H " - \
Effect of Resumption of Runs in the Reseeve 187
5- - ‘l. i ■ ■ • > ;r;1/ •; :, I
“ Cold Fields Act op 1874”
Land may be alienated under provisions of above Act, &c. ... ... 188
Homestead Selection-
Laws relating to Homestead Selection applicable to Western Railway
Reserve ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 188
Area within two miles of Railway Line set apart for Homesteads ... 188
Lands undee Pastobal Lease—
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Lease—
Interpretation—ride “Pastoral Leases” ... ... ... ... 186
Lessee—
Interpretation —vide “ Pastoral Leases” ... ... ... ... 186
License Fees on Runs—
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
“ Mineeal Lands Act of 1872”
Land in the Reserve may be alienated under provisions of above Act 188
Pastoral Leases—
Land resumed from Lease to be subject to Reservation, Selection, and
Alienation ... ... ... ~. ... ... ... ... 187
Rights of Lessee over Lands resumed ... ... ... ... ... 187
Payment of Rent ’ ... ... : ... 187
Reduction of Rent on account of Reservation, &c. ... ... ... 187
Pre-emptive Right under 54th Section of “Pastoral Leases Act
of 1869” .., ... ... . ... 187
Except as provided, operation of Pastoral Leases Act not interfered with 186
Increase of License Fees and Rent ... ... ... ... ... 188
Rent subject to appraisement under Section 20 of above Act ... 188


Subject. Page.
Limitation of available Area and Rent during second and third periods
of Lease ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 188
New Leases subject to Section sof this (Western Railway) Act ... 189
• ! :t
Pee-emption—
Vide “Pastoral Leases.”
Railway—
Lands within two miles of Railway Line set apart as a Homestead Area 188
Provisions for Construction of Railway from Dalby to Roma —vide
“ Construction of Railway.”
Rent —
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Reserves —
Vide “ Western Railway Reserve,” and “ Township Reserves.”
. i : ■ ■ .; ■ ;
Resumption of Runs—
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
v r , v 0 * y, ; ] , * * ; ; . ; f ,il , JJ( {
Roads —
To be reserved through country lots offered for sale ... ... ... 188
Secretary for Public Works may open roads ... ... ... ... 188
Run—
Interpretation ... 186
Resumption —vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
License Fees and Rent —vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Sale by Auction—
Laws relating to sale of land applicable to Western Railway Reserve 188
Upset price of country lands ... ... ... ... ... ... 188
Area of lots to be offered ... ... ... * ... * ... ... 188
Reservation of roads ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 188
Schedule—
Definition of Western Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... 189
Selection—
Land resumed from pastoral lease subject to selection under this Act
—vide “ Homestead Selection” ... ... ... ... ... 187
Township Reseeves—
Lands resumed from pastoral lease subject to reservation ... ... 187
Laws relating to alienation of land in reserves applicable to Western
Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 188
Upset Peice of Countey Lands offered at Auction 188
Western Railway Account—
Separate account to be kept in Treasury ... ... ... ... 189
Colonial Treasurer may advance £250,000 ... ... ... .... 189


Subject. j Page.
______ ' ;
Disposal of moneys on alienation of lands within Eescrre ... ... 189
Moneys to be expended in construction of Western Kailway ■ 189
Western Railway Reserve —
Establishment of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ! 187
“ Western Railway Act ” applicable to this Reserve only ... ... j 187
Effect of Resumption of Runs in the Reserve ... ... ... ... ; 187
Alienation of Land ... ... ... ... ... _ ... 187
Reserve not deemed a Railway Reserve under “ Croivn Lands Aliena-
tion Act of 1868” ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 189
Provisions for Construction of Railway from Dalby to Roma ... 189
Definition of Western Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... 189
“THE RAILWAY RESERVES ACT.”
Act—
Preamble ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 199
Short Title 190
Commencement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... I 190
Interpretation of Terms ... ... ... ... ... ... ... j 190
Application of Act ... ... ... ... ... ... ... i 191
Alienation of Land in the Reserves —
Lands Resumed from Pastoral Lease subject to Alienation ... ... 191,192
Mode in which Land may be Alienated... ... ... ... ... 192
Conditions and Modifications affecting Alienation ... ... ... j 192
Sale by Auction —vide “ Sales.”
Disposal of Proceeds of Lands Alienated 193
Alienation of Land, Western Railway Reserve —
Mode of Alienation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... | 194
Laws relating to Alienation by Conditional Selection, applicable ... 194
Provisions of this Act as to Pre-emption, extended to Western
Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 194
Auction —vide “ Sales by Auction.”
Boundaries —
Pre-emptive Selections —vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Railway Reserves ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 194
Central District Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... ... 195
'Consolidation of Pre-emptive Selections and of Runs —vide “Pastoral
Leases.”
Construction of Railways—
Governor may cause Railways to be made within Reserved Districts 193
Railway Accounts to be kept in Treasury ... ... ... ... 193
Colonial Treasurer may advance Moneys ... ... ... ... 193
Disposal of Proceeds of Lands alienated ... ... ... ... 193
Crown Lands—
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 190
Certain Lands set apart as Railway Reserves ... ... ... ... 191
Alienation and Lease 0f,.. ... ... ... ... ... ... 192


Subject. Page.
Effect of resumption of Runs in the Reserves ... ... ... ... 191
Forfeiture for non-payment by Lessee of half cost survey 192.
Homestead Aeeas—
Lands within two miles of Railway Lines—excepting special reserva-
tions—set apart for Homesteads ... ... ... ... ... 192’
Kennedy Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 195
Lands under Pastoral Lease —vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Lease—
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 190
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Lessee—
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 190
To be notified of division of Run ... ... ... ... ... 192;
To receive six months’ notice of intended further alienation ... ... 192.
Vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Notice —
To be given to Lessee re division of Runs ... ... ... ... 192
Six months’ notice of intended further alienation ... ... ... 192
Pasxoeal Leases —
Resumption of Runs in the Reserves ... ... ... ... ... 191
Land resumed—subject to Reservation, Selection, and Alienation ... 191
Rights of Lessees over Lands resumed ... ... ... ... ... 191
Determination of right of occupation ... ... ... ... ... 191
Reduction of Rent on account of Reservation, Selection, &c. ... 191
Pre-emptive right under 54th section of “ Pastoral Leases Act o/1869”| 191
Lessee of two or more adjoining Runs may consolidate his Pre-emptive I
Selections in one block ... ... ... ... ... ... i 191
Pre-emption In the case of Runs comprising a larger area than 25 !
square miles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 191
Consolidation of Pre-emptive Selections ... ... ... ... I 191
Boundaries of Pre-emptive Selections ... ... ... ... ... j 191
Except as provided, only one-half of Runs under 33 Yic., No. 10 to !
be taken ... „. ... ... ... ... ... ... 192
Runs may be Consolidated ... ... ... ... ... ... I 192
Notification of division of Runs by Secretary for Lands ... ... 192
Half Cost of Survey of Runs to bo paid by Lessee ... ... ... 192
Run liable to Forfeiture if half cost Survey not paid... ... ... 192
Further Alienation upon six months’ notice to Lessee ... ... | 192
Operation of “ Pastoral Leases Act of 1869 ” preserved in other
respects ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 192
New Leases subject to Reservation, Selection, and Alienation ... 193
Pre-emption —vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Proclamation of further Alienation from Runs ... ... ... ... 192
Railway—
Lands within two miles of Railway Lines, set apart as Homestead Areas 192
Provisions for the construction of Railways —vide “ Construction,
&c.”


Subject. Page.
Railway Account—
Separate Account to be kept by Treasury for each Reserve ... ... 193
Colonial Treasurer may advance moneys on Railway Account ... 193
Disposal of proceeds of Lands Alienated ... ... ... ... 193
Railway Reserves —Establishment 0f... ... ... ... ... ... 191
Reserves —vide “ Kailway Reserves ” and “ Township Reserves.”
Resumption of Runs —vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Roads—
To be reserved through Country Lots offered for Sale ... ... 193
Secretary for Public Works may open Roads ... ... ... ... 193
Run —
Interpretation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 190
Resumption of —vide “ Pastoral Leases,”
Consolidation of Runs —vide “ Pastoral Leases.”
Sales by Auction—
Areas of Country Lots to be offered ... ... ... ... ... 193
Reservation for Roads ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 193
Schedule—
Southern Extension Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... 194
Wide Bay and Burnett Districts Railway Reserve ... ... ... 194
Central District Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... 195
Kennedy Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... ... ... 195
Selection —
Lands resumed from Pastoral Lease, subject to Selection under
provisions of this Act ... ... ... ... ... ... 191
Southern Extension, Railway Reserve 194
Survey—
Half cost of Survey of Runs to be paid by Lessee ... ... ... 192
Penalty for non-payment of half cost ... ... ... ... ... 192
Township Reserves —
Lands Resumed from Pastoral Lease, subject to Reservation ... 191
Western Railway Reserve —vide “Alienation in, &c.”
Wide Bay and Burnett Districts Railway Reserve ... ... ... ... 194
By Authority; James C. Beal, Government Printer, William street,Brisbane,






