

Npf 631.450973 M154
I
NEW SOUTH WALES
I,
v SOIL CONSERVATION
I IN THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
.
?
?
REPORT BY
The Hon. W. J. McKell, K.C., M.L.A.,
Premier and Colonial Treasurer
of New South Wales
? 92297?0


.
? -
*
?
.
? .
?
?
'
.
< . ?
,
,
?
/ /


PARLIAMENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
SOIL CONSERVATION
IN THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Ordered to he printed, 14 November, 1945
REPORT BY
The Hon. W. J. McKell, K.C, M.L.A.,
Premier and Colonial Treasurer
of New South Wales
[1.9. 1 d.]
*92-97 1945?40


CONTENTS
Introduction 3
The Establishment of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States 3
The Nature of the Problem and its Causes .. , 4
The Objectives and Powers of the Soil Conservation Service .. .. 4
Demonstration and Education 5
Development of Means for the Widespread Extension of Soil Conservation 6
The Standard Soil Conservation Districts Law 6
The Work of Soil Conservation Districts 9
The Control of Land Use 9
Acquisition of Lands by the Federal Government 10
Research 10
Surveys 11
Economic Research 12
Information and Education 12
Technical 13
Assessment of Future Needs 13
Summary 14
Conclusions 14


rf Pj \
SOIL CONSERVATION IN THE UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA
? Introduction.
ONE of the major present day problems facing the Australian nation is that created by erosion of
the soil.
The nature of our climate, the topography of the country, the nature of the soils, and, above all,
the manner in which we use these lands, render this country particularly liable to erosion.
Serious damage has already occurred and can be seen on every side. The worst damage is occurring
on the western grazing and mixed farming country where land is bare fallowed to grow wheat. It is serious
also on the high country, on our overcleared and overgrazed hills and in our dry western grazing areas,
and even on the coast where river bank erosion is eating away our most fertile alluvial flats. The results
of cultivating steep slopes, of overclearing and overgrazing, the effects of sheep and rabbits and the destruction
of the protective cover of mallee and heath, and disastrous bush fires, are plain to see. Nature has clearly
shown that the balance she has established over many centuries can be disturbed only at great risk.
Exploitation of the land, its products and its workers has completely destroyed civilisations of the
past. If present day civilisation is to avoid its own destruction in the future, then society must change now
from an economy of exploitation to an economy of conservation.
I have always taken a deep personal interest in soil erosion and its control. As well as assisting the
New South Wales Soil Conservation Service in every way possible to take widespread and effective action
in this State, I have from time to time stressed the national importance of the problem. This has been
fully recognised in the United States of America and Congressional appropriations to the Soil Conservation
Service amount to well over $20,000,000 yearly.
? The Establishment of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States.
Soil Conservation became part of the national policy of the United States of America upon the
passage by Congress of the first Soil Conservation Act in 1935. In the preamble to that Act, Congress
declared that?
It is hereby recognised that the wastage of soil and moisture resources on farm, grazing,
and forest lands of the Nation, resulting from soil erosion, is a menace to the national welfare and
it is hereby declared to be the policy of Congress to provide permanently for the control and prevention
of soil erosion and thereby to preserve natural resources, control floods, prevent impairment of reservoirs,
and maintain the navigability of rivers and harbours, protect public health, public lands and relieve
unemployment . . .?
A commencement had, however, been made before that year. In 1929, the Department of
Agriculture established a number of Erosion Experiment Stations for the purpose of conducting research
into the causes of erosion and to develop and test corrective practices, and in 1933 a Soil Erosion Service
was established as an emergency agency in the Department of the Interior, To this Service the sum of
5 million dollars was allocated under the National Industrial Recovery Act to enable it to carry out
a programme of soil erosion control and at the same time to assist in relieving unemployment.
In March, 1935, the Soil Erosion Service was transferred from the Department of the Interior to the
Department of Agriculture and by direction of the Secretary of Agriculture all activities of the Department
of Agriculture relating to soil erosion were unified under that Service. After the enactment of the Soil
Conservation Act in 1935, the organisation was renamed the Soil Conservation Service.
The only other change of major importance affecting the field of responsibility for soil conservation
was the transfer in 1940 of the responsibility for soil conservation on Federal lands from the Soil Conservation
Service to the Department of the Interior. In soil conservation work on these lands the Branch of Soil
Conservation and Range Management of the Office of Land Utilisation in the Department of the Interior
largely follows the methods of the Soil Conservation Service. The latter Service is responsible for soil


conservation work on non-Federal lands and this is, of course, the major task, only a little over one-eighth
of the lands of the United States being under the control of the Department of the Interior. An Inter-
departmental Agreement provides for co-operation in the field between representatives of the Department of
the Interior and of the Soil Conservation Service.
? The Nature of the Problem and its Causes.
With the establishment of the Soil Erosion Service in 1933, it was decided that the best way to
commence the fight against erosion was through demonstrations in various representative parts of the
country where the problem was known to be serious. It was the belief of those in charge of the Organisation
that no progress would be made with the permanent control of erosion unless the different kinds of land
making up the farms and ranges of the country were treated in accordance with their individual needs and
capabilities. With this information available, the procedure adopted was to work out, in the field, the
detailed farm plans for the conservation of the soil ?thus developing a practical, co-ordinated plan
for applying the best known methods of water conservation and erosion control to the different kinds of land.
This approach made it necessary that a survey be made of every farm and range to be treated, of every
important, distinct body of soil on the area, as well as the degree of slope occupied by these different kinds
of soil, and the amount of soil that had been removed by cropping, overgrazing, or burning in the past.
In 1934, the Soil Erosion Service made a nation-wide survey to determine the approximate extent of
erosion by water and wind. The results of that survey showed that in a country the area of which was slightly
less than 2,000,000,000 acres, 14 per cent, of the land?about 280 million acres?had been ruined for any
further immediate cultivation. This area was once covered for the most part with a fairly deep layer of
fertile soil. Profitable use of these lands to-day is out of the question. They are gone, so far as
farming is concerned, for many generations. This survey revealed also that about 775 million acres
of land were seriously affected by erosion, some of it very badly, but not beyond redemption.
All told, therefore, over half the land of the United States had been affected by erosion in some
degree. An estimate made by the Soil Conservation Service in 1944, based on experimental evidence,
indicates that soil losses in the United States are occurring at the rate of 5,400,000 tons annually.
As to the causes of this situation I cannot do better than quote the words of Dr. H. H. Bennett,
Chief of the Soil Conservation Service?
? In the first place, probably no other people was ever confronted with such a seemingly limitless
supply of land as were the North American settlers. Before the gaze of the frontiersman good land
stretched to the far horizon. And on beyond the horizon he knew there was more virgin land lying rich
and available for cultivation. If the early American wore out a farm in the process of making a living,
it was comparatively easy to move on to fresher fields and greener pastures. Under such conditions
exploitation was part of the normal order of things, and conservation was almost an unknown concept.
? Another cause of the unparalleled soil waste in this country can be found in the conformations
of our land surface and the character of our climate. At least 75 per cent, of our cultivated area has
a sufficient degree of slope to be classified as definitely erodible. And over much of our crop-land area
the problem is further complicated by the fact that rains frequently come in sharp, dashing showers ?
the type of storms known in many sections as ? gully washers,? and cloudbursts. Furthermore,
in regions like the Great Plains, where the land is comparatively flat, droughts arc common,
and unprotected soil is subject to wind erosion.
? A third factor lying behind our many millions of eroding acres is the large amount of land we
have in cultivation to intertilled crops. Europe?outside of Russia?has almost exactly the same
total acreage in crops as the United States. But in the Old World countries, hay crops and pasture
grasses that guard and nourish the soil arc much more extensively grown. Altogether there are only
65 million acres in row crops in these countries, as compared with 155 million acres in the United
States. In other words, this country, with the same area of crop-land as Western Europe, exposes
two and a half times as many acres to the more serious forms of erosion.?
? The Objectives and Powers of the Soil Conservation Service.
The objectives of the Soil Conservation Service as outlined shortly after its establishment in 1935
were to propagate the use of soil conservation practices in agriculture through the medium of demonstration ;
to effect at the same time a maximum control of erosion on as large an area of agricultural land as possible ;
and to ascertain the fundamental scientific facts essential to the development and improvement of soil-
conservation methods and techniques.


Its activities were directed into three main fields?(i) The demonstration of practical and effective
measures of soil conservation by (2) actual work upon the land in co-operation with the landowners, and
(3) the consistent development and improvement of such measures through research and investigation.
The Soil Conservation Act of 1935 authorised the Secretary of Agriculture, in order to carry out the
policy laid down by Congress, from time to time ?
(1) to conduct surveys, investigations, and research relating to the character of soil erosion and the
preventive measures needed, to publish the results of any such surveys, investigations,
or research, to disseminate information concerning such methods, and to conduct
demonstrational projects in areas subject to erosion by wind and water;
(2) to carry out preventive measures, including, but not limited to engineering operations, methods
of cultivation, the growing of vegetation, and changes in use of land ;
(3) to co-operate or enter into agreements with, or to furnish financial or other aid to, any agency.
Governmental or otherwise, or any person, subject to such conditions as he may deem necessary,
for the purposes of the Act; and
(4) to acquire lands, or rights or interests therein, by condemnation, or otherwise, whenever
necessary for the purposes of the Act.
As a condition to the extension of any benefits under the Act to any lands not owned or controlled
by the United States or any of its agencies, the Secretary of Agriculture is authorised to require?
(1) the enactment and reasonable safeguards for the enforcement of State and local laws imposing
suitable permanent restrictions on the use of such lands and otherwise providing for the
prevention of soil erosion ;
(2) agreements or covenants as to the permanent use of such lands ; and
(3) contributions in money, services, materials, or otherwise, to any operations conferring such
benefits.
? Demonstration and Education.
From the time of its establishment, the Soil Conservation Service recognised that it would
be impracticable to attempt immediately to establish erosion-control measures and soil-conservation practices
on even a considerable proportion of the lands subject to erosion, and that the only sound practical course
which would give some assurance of the practice of soil conservation eventually on a nation-wide basis
was to seek the interest and active co-operation of farmers in the use of conservation practices.
With this in mind, the Service undertook a national plan of demonstration and education designed to
convince the farmers of the necessity for, and the practicability of, soil conservation. In this plan two
principles were fundamental?
(1) The full co-operation of the farmer should be sought.
(2) Co-ordination of method?by combined application of approved principles of correct land use,
the adoption of approved cultural practices, and the integrated employment of both engineering
and vegetative methods, according to the particular needs and adaptabilities of the land.
Two major considerations were taken into account in the selection of demonstration areas?the
problems in the area must be representative of those in the region generally and the farmers in the areas
must be willing to co-operate in the proposed work.
After the selection of an area, the next step was to carry out a survey of the existing land use practice,
the characteristics of the soil (particularly the physical characteristics), its slope, the degree of erosion and any
other factors which might need to be taken into consideration.
With the results of this survey, careful consideration was given to the preparation of a balanced
soil conservation plan for the area, in which all control measures?vegetative, mechanical and cultural?
were carefully integrated. The farmers were then invited to participate in the application of this plan upon
their lands.
A formal contract was made with the farmer under which he agreed to comply, for a period of five
years, with the plans prepared for his farm by the Soil Conservation Service. The contracts were based
entirely upon the co-operation of the farmers, laying down only the extent to which each of the parties
assumed responsibility for the work. Broadly, the contract gave expression to an arrangement under
which the farmer volunteered his land for the purposes of a Government demonstration and the Government,
in return, undertook to direct and, in part, to carry out the work necessary to control erosion on the land
involved.


In the early stages, mainly because only a minority of the farmers realised the seriousness of the
problem and the advantages of soil and water conservation, a large proportion of the costs of demonstration
projects had to be borne by the Soil Conservation Service. With the progress of the work, however,
farmers co-operated much more actively and at the end of 1937 the Chief of the Soil Conservation Service
was able to report that contributions by co-operating farmers?mainly in the form of supplies and materials
for the installation of the erosion-control programme on their farms?nearly balanced the total expenditures
by the Federal Government. Contributions by the Soil Conservation Service took the form, generally, of
technical service for planning, labour ( e.g ., by Civilian Conservation Corps workers) and the provision of
heavy equipment not available on the farms.
By the end of 1937, over 500 Soil Conservation Demonstration Areas had been established, spread
over forty-two of the States. In these areas about 81 million acres of private land had been made the subject
of over 50,000 co-operative agreements between the farmers and the Soil Conservation Service.
In accordance with the policy of pooling the resources of Federal and State agencies in giving effect
to the national policy of soil conservation, State Soil Conservation Advisory Committees ?comprising
usually the State Director of Extension Activities, the Director of the Agricultural Experiment Station,
and the State Co-ordinator of the Federal Soil Conservation Service?were established, by arrangement
with the various State Governments, and provided, with the State Extension Services, the channel for
the development of State Soil Conservation programmes. Soil Conservationists appointed to assist in the
extension phases of the work, together with county agents, actively stimulated local interest in
soil conservation. These officers also assisted the Soil Conservation Service in establishing, outside
demonstration projects, individual farm demonstrations designed to aid in spreading soil conservation
principles and practices.
? Development of Means for the Widespread Extension of Soil Conservation.
It was realised, however, that it was not sufficient to base the Governmental approach wholly upon the
principle of education by demonstration, and to limit the direct contact between the Government agencies
concerned with the conservation of the soil resources of the nation and the individual farmer to the areas
selected for the demonstration of erosion-control methods.
In order to provide the basis for co-operative action extending over the whole of the farm and grazing
lands of the nation, the Federal Government took steps early in 1936 to formulate a standard
form of legislation which might be enacted by the State Governments and provide an effective means for the
widespread extension of soil conservation principles and practices.
This is a particularly important development. It will be recalled that the Soil Conservation Act,
enacted by the United States Congress in 1935 (referred to previously in this report) provided that as a
condition to extending benefits under the Act to lands in any State the Secretary of Agriculture may require
the enactment of State laws providing suitably for the prevention of soil erosion. Following requests by a
number of States that the Department assist in preparing suitable legislation, and having regard to the need
for extending the basis for co-operative action in applying soil conservation methods, the Land Policy
Committee of the Department of Agriculture, working in co-operation with the Soil Conservation Service
and the Office of the Solicitor of the Department of Agriculture, prepared the Standard Soil Conservation
Districts law. This step was taken following a recommendation made by a Departmental Committee on
Soil Conservation (appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture shortly after the Soil Conservation Service
was transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Agriculture) that on and after
Ist July, 1937, and sooner wherever feasible, all erosion control work on private lands, including new
demonstration projects, be undertaken by the Soil Conservation Service only through legally constituted
Soil Conservation Associations or Governmental Agencies.
it The Standard Soil Conservation Districts Law.
The provisions of the Standard Act have been determined largely by three basic considerations ?
(1) Soil erosion is so intimately related to the farm management plan of a particular farm or to the
land-use practices on given lands that the mere adoption of such engineering devices as the
construction of terraces must fall far short of success in preventing and controlling erosion.
A genuine attack on the problem will in most instances require considerable modification of
land-use practices, including the utilisation of strip cropping, contour cultivating and contour
furrowing, the seeding of waste, sloping, abandoned, or eroded lands to water-conserving
and soil-holding grasses and legumes, modifications in cropping programmes and tillage
practices, and the retirement from cultivation of steep, highly erodible tracts of land.


(2) The failure of individual farmers to control erosion on their lands can cause a washing and
blowing of soil and water from such lands on to other lands, and thus make erosion control
on such lands difficult or impossible. It follows that the problem of erosion cannot be met by
the conduct of isolated demonstration projects by State and Federal Agencies. Virtually all
of the lands in particular watersheds must be brought under some form of erosion control
operations for the problem to be adequately dealt with.
(3) A programme for the modification of land-use practices in the interest of soil conservation
and the prevention of soil erosion can be made effective only if farmers can be induced to
co-operate in this work voluntarily. The legislation should, therefore, create machinery
which can be used by the farmers after they have been educated to the desirability of taking
action.
In essence, the Standard Act provides a procedure by which soil conservation districts may be
organised, such districts to be governmental subdivisions of the State and to exercise, in the main, two types
of powers : (1) the power to establish and administer erosion control demonstration projects and preventive
measures ; (2) the power to prescribe land-use regulations in the interests of the prevention and control of
erosion, such regulations to have the force of law within the district.
The Act establishes a State Soil Conservation Committee of from three to five members, the
membership to be selected from such officers as the Director of the State Extension Service, the Director of
the State Agricultural Experiment Station, the State Conservation Commissioner or Commissioner of
Agriculture, and a representative of the State Planning Board. The Committee is given authority to
invite the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States to appoint one person to serve on the Committee.
This Committee is to administer the procedures involved in establishing districts, assist the supervisors of the
various districts, encourage the organisation of districts where needed, facilitate an interchange of advice
and experience between districts, and co-ordinate the programmes of the several districts in the State
? so far as this may be done by advice and consultation.?
It is provided that any twenty-five land occupiers may file a petition with the State Committee
asking that a district be organised. The Committee is required to give public notice of a hearing to be
held upon the petition, to hold such hearing, at which all interested parties may be heard, and to define the
boundaries of the proposed district. Thereafter the Committee is required to conduct a referendum in
which all land occupiers within the proposed district may vote on the question whether a district should be
created. The result of the referendum is not made conclusive upon the Committee, except that the
Committee may not complete the organisation of a district unless at least a majority of the votes cast in the
referendum shall have been cast in favour of the organisation of the district. The governing body of each
district is to consist of five supervisors, three elected by the land occupiers of the district, two appointed
by the State Committee.
The first of the two types of powers mentioned above is provided in Section 8 of the Act.
This section empowers the districts, through their supervisors, to conduct necessary research (but seeks
to avoid duplication of research activities by requiring research projects to be initiated only in co-operation
with State or Federal Agencies), to conduct demonstration projects, to carry out preventive and
control measures, to acquire necessary properties and make necessary contracts, to make available to land
occupiers machinery and equipment needed for control operations, to develop land-use plans and bring
them to the attention of land occupiers, and to take over Federal and State erosion-control projects and
administer them.
The second major set of powers is provided in Sections 9to 12. The supervisors are authorised to
formulate land-use regulations in the interest of the prevention and control of erosion, and to conduct
hearings thereon. The regulations may not be enacted into law, however, until after they have been submitted
to a referendum of the land occupiers in the district. Again, the result of the referendum is not
made conclusive upon the supervisors, except that it is provided that the supervisors may not enact the
regulations into law unless they have been approved by at least a majority of the votes cast in the referendum.
It is provided that the regulations may include requirements for the carrying on of necessary
engineering operations including the construction of terraces, check dams and similar work, specifications
of cropping programmes, requirements with reference to methods of cultivation, provisions for retirement
from cultivation of highly erodible areas, and similar means and measures.
A violation of the regulations is declared to be a misdemeanour punishable in the local courts by fines,
and the supervisors are empowered to provide civil penalties as well. The supervisors are authorised to file
petitions in the local courts to require recalcitrant land occupiers to observe the provisions of the regulations.
The courts are empowered to compel compliance and to authorise the supervisors to go upon privately
owned lands and perform the necessary operations which the land occupier may fail to perform, the costs
of such performance to be recovered from the land occupier.


A Board of Adjustment is to be established in each district in which land-use regulations shall be in
force, the Board to consist of three members appointed by the State Committee, with the advice and approval
of the district supervisors. The Board of Adjustment is authorised, upon proper petition by a land occupier,
to authorise variations from the terms of the land-use regulations in cases where a literal application of the
land-use regulations to particular lands would result in great practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship.
Special provision is made for judicial review of decisions of the Board of Adjustment.
Provision is made for co-operation among districts and for co-operation of the districts with State and
Federal agencies. All agencies of the State are directed to observe upon publicly owned lands the provisions
of land-use regulations in force in any district within which such publicly owned lands may lie.
At any time after five years after the organisation of a district, its operations may be terminated and the
district discontinued by the State Committee upon appropriate petition of the land occupiers. The
Committee is not authorised, however, to discontinue any district until after it shall have held a referendum
upon the question of discontinuance and unless a majority of the votes cast in such referendum shall have
been cast in favour of such discontinuance. Referenda upon the discontinuance of districts may not be
held more often than once in five years.
The Statute contemplates that funds to finance the operations of the districts (which will, of course,
be supplemented by contributions from the land occupiers of funds, labour, materials, and equipment for
erosion-control operations carried out on their lands) will be secured in two ways : (i) by appropriations
made available to the districts out of funds in the State Treasury, these funds to be annually appropriated
by the State legislature and to be divided among the various districts ; (2) funds, properties and services
made available to the districts by the United States through the Soil Conservation Service of the Department
of Agriculture or through any other agencies.
Two other possible sources of funds were considered, but rejected, by the Land Policy Committee and
the Soil Conservation Service ?(a) a grant of power to the districts to levy property taxes upon property
within the district, or to make assessments against property in the district for benefits conferred ; ( h ) a grant
of power to the districts to borrow money by selling bonds.
In February, 1937, the President of the United States wrote to the Governor of each State in the
following terms :
?My Dear Governor : The dust storms and floods of the last few years have underscored
the importance of programmes to control soil erosion. I need not emphasise to you the seriousness
of the problem and the desirability of our taking effective action, as a Nation and in the several States,
to conserve the soil as our basic asset. The Nation that destroys its soil destroys itself.
? In the Act of Congress approved April 27, 1935 (Public No. 46 of the 74th Congress), the
Federal Government, through the Soil Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture, initiated
a broad programme for the control of soil erosion. Demonstration work has been undertaken but much
remains to be done. The conduct of isolated demonstration projects cannot control erosion adequately.
Such work can only point the way.
? The problem is further complicated by the fact that the failure to control erosion on some
lands, particularly if such eroding lands are situated strategically at the heads of valleys or watersheds,
can cause a washing and blowing of soil onto other lands and make the control of erosion anywhere
in the valley or watershed all the more difficult. We are confronted with the fact that for the problem
to be adequately dealt with, the erodible land in every watershed must be brought under some form
of control.
?To supplement the Federal programmes, and safeguard their results, State legislation is
needed. At the request of representatives from a number of States, and in co-operation with them,
the Department of Agriculture has prepared a standard form of suitable State legislation for this
purpose, generally referred to as the Standard State Soil Conservation Districts Law. The Act
provides for the organisation of ? Soil Conservation Districts ? as governmental subdivisions of the
State to carry on projects for erosion control, and to enact into law land-use regulations concerning
soil erosion after such regulations have been approved in a referendum. Such legislation is imperative
to enable farmers to take the necessary co-operative action.
? I am sending to you several copies of the Standard Soil Conservation Districts Law, with a
memorandum summarising its basic provisions. I hope you will see fit to make the adoption of
legislation along the lines of the standard Act part of the agricultural programme for your State.
� Very sincerely yours,
? Franklin D. Roosevelt.?


By the end of June, 1937, eighteen States had enacted Soil Conservation Districts Legislation.
Now, all but two States have enacted such legislation and over 1,250 soil conservation districts have been
formed.
? The Work of Soil Conservation Districts.
I have referred somewhat fully to the establishment of soil conservation districts because they now
form the most important means by which soil conservation practices and principles are applied to the
farming and grazing lands of the United States, Work which began on the demonstration projects,
mentioned earlier in this report, showed that the control of soil erosion was economically and physically
practicable on a large-scale basis, and the soil conservation district has become the main vehicle for spreading
the use of proved conservation farming practices.
Briefly, the procedure followed is that the soil conservation district, having been established under a
State Soil Conservation Districts Act, carries out a survey of the needs of its district and prepares a report
describing the area and its conservation problems and setting out the aims and objectives of its programme.
If this programme is considered by the Soil Conservation Service to provide a satisfactory basis for
co-operation, an agreement is entered into under which the Soil Conservation Service assigns technicians
to work with the district in carrying out the programme. For its own purposes, the Soil Conservation
Service groups several districts together and the technicians assigned to assist this group of districts are
placed under the supervision of a District Soil Conservationist. This latter officer works with the Boards of
Supervisors of the districts within his group and he is authorised to assign his men according to seasonal
requirements and the nature of the work being carried out.
Soil surveys are made by officers of the Soil Conservation Service and, upon the application of an
individual farmer or landowner, the Service carries out a conservation survey of his particular property and
proposes a plan of conservation operations to him. The Soil Conservationist, using the soil survey, assisted
by the Engineering Division of the Service and other facilities at his disposal, and working in consultation
with the landholder, prepares a specific programme.
With the signature of the landowner and the signature of the Soil Conservationist, this plan is then
presented to the Board of Supervisors of the District for their approval. The Board will either accept the
plan, or reject it, according as to whether it fits in with the over-all programme and plan of work adopted
for the district. If the Board approve of the plan, they will assign it a priority and the engineers and
conservationists of the Soil Conservation Service then work to that programme.
The landowner himself pays for the actual work done on his farm, other than the survey. The
Federal Government provides technical assistance. The district itself may own the machinery. In some
cases it does ?particularly heavy equipment ?and collects fees from the landowner for the use of the
machines. The district is responsible for the administrative supervision of the machinery, for the funds
involved, and for the eventual replacement of the equipment.
? The Control of Land Use.
In outlining the provisions of the standard State Soil Conservation Districts law I referred to the
power of the Board of Supervisors of a district to formulate land-use regulations, which may not, however,
be enacted into law unless they have been approved in a referendum.
Under this power, a district may, for instance, decide that certain classes of land may not be put
into cultivation without the consent of the Board of Supervisors. This Board, using the surveys made
by the conservation technicians as a basis for the authoritative classification of the land, may refuse a permit
and would have recourse to the Court in enforcing it.
I was particularly interested to know whether any action was taken to control over-stocking, one of
the main causes of erosion in this State. I was informed that this was done, where necessary, by regulations
made in accordance with the procedure I have just mentioned. Because of its special interest I secured
a copy of one such regulation, passed by the land occupiers of the Cedar Soil Conservation District in
North Dakota, and quote hereunder its essential features :
? All livestock owners and/or operators within the boundaries of the Cedar Soil Conservation
District must meet the grazing requirements as herein set forth . . .
? When the actual carrying capacity of each individual grazing unit shall have been determined
by the range examiner, this capacity shall thereafter apply . . . The range examiner shall make
periodic inspections of each unit and may raise the capacity if the unit is being under-utilised or lower
it if the unit is being over-utilised.
? If supplementary feed is used, the Supervisors may lower the number of acres required per
animal unit in proportion to the amount of feed used . . .


? The Supervisor shall have the power to authorise the range examiner to enter and survey any
and all land within the district.
? The Supervisors shall have the right to count or cause to be counted for the purpose of
determining compliance with this or other ordinances, the animal units grazing on any range unit.
? All livestock owners and/or operators bringing livestock into the district for grazing purposes
must comply with the following restrictions and regulations :
? An application for a permit to enter must be filed with the district Supervisors
The application must state the following :
Number and kind of livestock.
Length of grazing season.
Legal description of grazing units.
Proof of ownership or copy of lease or leases or other legal proof of right to use.
? If the application shows sufficient acreage of range land to meet the grazing capacity
requirements, and is approved by the supervisors, they shall issue a permit
? When livestock are being driven to or from the land . . . they must be moved not less than
five miles in the case of sheep, and ten miles in the case of cattle, each day (while in the district). In
cases of unnecessary delay or wilful trespass, the livestock shall be considered as being on the District
without a permit.
? If a herd of livestock is . . . without a permit . . . the owner shall be assessed a fine of
2$ cents per animal unit per day ... If more livestock is brought into the district than is provided
for in the permit, the owner shall be assessed a fine of 25 cents per day per animal in excess . . .
? If a fine is assessed against any owner of livestock, the Supervisors shall have the authority to
seize and hold the livestock herd or any part of it until settlement is made.?
? Acquisition of Lands by the Federal Government.
The Federal Soil Conservation Act authorises the acquisition of lands, whenever necessary for the
purposes of the Act. In extreme cases, an area which is deemed to be so badly out of control that the
local authorities cannot deal with the problem, may be purchased by the Soil Conservation Service with
Federal funds. This procedure is followed where the land is so badly damaged that reclamation would not
be a profitable operation for individual landowners. The Soil Conservation Service then restores the
vegetation and, when it is fit to be grazed, supervises grazing on the land. Federal lands are not taxable,
but the Soil Conservation Service enters into an agreement with the county to pay into the county Treasury
one-quarter of the fees received for grazing permits, in lieu of county taxation.
In one county, the Soil Conservation Service purchased 300,000 acres. In the first three or four
years of Federal ownership, the county did not receive anything. Of the fees now received for grazing
permits, one fourth is paid to the county and the balance is paid into the Federal Treasury. In due course
it may be possible for these lands to revert to private ownership and they will then be sold.
When a landowner has, by bad farming practice, reduced his land to worthlessness and the land is
purchased by the Federal Government, he is paid only the appraised present-day value.
? Research.
Although many of the conservation practices in use today are very old, research and experimentation
are an important phase of the work of the Soil Conservation Service.
From the start, the practical field work has been supplemented by a comprehensive programme of
soil and water conservation research ?through which both everyday and long-range problems are thoroughly
investigated and new and better methods of erosion control and land utilisation are developed.
The research work of the Soil Conservation Service includes investigation into the rates and processes
of erosion, the influence of land use and conservation practices on streamflow, the behaviour of rainstorms
and their relationship to erosion, the connection between farming practice and the silting of stream channels
or reservoirs, the control of moving sand dunes, the economics of conservation farming, the relationship
between mountain snow packs and irrigation water supplies in the West, the history of erosion in the United
States and foreign lands, and many other questions.
There is no need in this report to outline in detail the nature and extent of the research work carried
out. It is, however, of great importance and the information which I have obtained in regard
to the organisation of the Research Division of the Soil Conservation Service and of the results of such
research, will be made available to the Soil Conservation Service of this State for examination and
consideration as to its application to New South Wales conditions.


It is, however, important to say something about the policy of co-operation in research.
All of the work of the Research Division is correlated to that of the State Governments, in order to
avoid duplication and so that there may be built up a cross-braced structure of research, each phase of
which will support the other to the greatest practicable extent. The Federal Government subsidises research
work in each State by making grants to the State Agricultural College for the purpose. The
State Agricultural College is usually controlled by the State Government and is, in a practical sense, the
State Department of Agriculture. Although the Soil Conservation Service has several conservation
experiment stations, the Research Division works in close co-operation with the State Experiment
Stations, to which in some instances it assigns technicians. There is a research representative of the Soil
Conservation Service in each State who is located at the State Agricultural College and acts as a member
of the experimental staff of the College and works very closely with the Director of the State Experiment
Station.
The research work is also closely correlated with that of other Federal organisations. The Research
Division of the Soil Conservation Service does not engage in any work already being carried out by such
agencies as the Forest Service, the Bureau of Soils and the Bureau of Plant Industry. The Bureau of Plant
Industry, for example, is responsible for all genetic and breeding work on plants of all kinds. The Soil
Conservation Service is also interested in plant improvement from the standpoint of developing species
which will be effective for erosion control purposes and it has its own nursery for the propagation of erosion
control plants. Nevertheless, the Service would not carry out breeding work or plant improvement with
the object of making a plant better suited for conservation purposes but would ask the Bureau of Plant
Industry to handle the task.
? Surveys.
The United States Soil Conservation Service has always stressed the fact that no single erosion
control measure can, by itself, achieve effective soil conservation on agricultural land, but that all adaptable
measures must be utilised and co-ordinated to obtain the maximum advantages. Conservation plans include,
therefore, as the individual needs of the particular farm require, the co-ordinated use of a strip cropping,
terracing, drainage, crop rotation, contour cultivation, fertilisation, pasture improvement, controlled grazing,
woodland and wild-life plantings, and all other suitable vegetational and mechanical measures that will help
to prevent and control erosion. Actually over 200 different erosion control measures and practices have been
developed and such of these as are suitable are utilised on the principle that every acre of every field,
pasture and woodlot of every farm should be used according to its individual adaptabilities, and should
be treated according to its individual needs.
Economic factors have, however, been kept in mind, and in its final form, a farm conservation plan
aims to provide the maximum conservation of soil and water resources consistent with an adequate economic
return from the farm.
Surveys to determine the inherent capabilities of every acre are essential to the planning of
conservation programmes in accordance with these principles. The Soil Conservation Service places great
emphasis on such surveys and is carrying out a comprehensive programme designed to determine, record and
locate, the type of soil, the slope, the degree of erosion and the vegetative cover on the land. This
information is then used to group the land into classes which have similarity as to practices and measures
necessary to ensure safe and efficient use.
As the survey of each district is completed, copies of the field maps are made for the State Agricultural
Experiment Station, the county agent and other public officials who can pass the information on to the
farmers. The maps are usually accompanied by tables and charts that contain suggestions designed to
make the best use of each kind of land through proved conservation-farming methods. Information of
this kind has been compiled for over 200,000,000 acres of land.
It is pointed out by the Soil Conservation Service that land capability surveys are of value for several
purposes?
(1) They are an essential foundation for soil and water conservation work.
(2) They provide a sound basis for land use and many farming operations.
(3) They provide an excellent guide to farmers in periods when they wish to make adjustments
in their production to take advantage of a better market.
(4) They are equally valuable in connection with land settlement ?in determining whether a
particular farm is physically capable of producing sufficient to make it an economically sound
proposition, whether it can produce crops for which a market is economically available, and
whether it will produce those crops without endangering the land itself.


? Economic Research.
Economic studies have been a feature of the work of the Soil Conservation Service. Organised
shortly after the establishment of the Soil Conservation Service, in co-operation with the Bureau
of Agricultural Economics and the State Agricultural Experiment Stations, the programme of economic
research was developed along two main lines ?(i) from the private or individual farm-management point of
view?for the purpose of determining for individual farms and groups of farms the economic and social
effects of a soil-conserving system of farming as compared with a soil-depleting system, and (2) from the
standpoint of the general public?to determine the extent to which the public will be benefited by soil
conservation.
One fact of outstanding importance brought out as a result of these studies is that farming
in accordance with soil conservation methods has resulted, on the average, in a 20 per cent, increase in
production per acre.
Many investigations of a detailed nature have been made, firstly, to prove the short term as well
as the long term advantages of soil conservation, and, secondly, to provide the necessary information to
enable farm conservation plans to be reviewed in the light of their effect on the economic return from the
farm.
These studies have also shown?
(1) that the fear of some farmers that contour operations require more time, labour and power
than straight-row cultivation is generally unfounded;
(2) that total farm expenses per acre average no higher on soil conservation farms than on other
farms;
(3) that in some sections the products of the well-planned conservation programme?good quality
legume hays and legume and non-legume pastures ?could be utilised profitably through
a well-managed livestock enterprise;
(4) that by a careful selection and management of cows, milk could be produced successfully
and at low cost on a high roughage ration (this is important because soil conservation farming
frequently results in a reduction in the production of concentrates and an increase in the
production of roughage).
* Information and Education.
The Soil Conservation Service of the United States has, during the ten years of its existence, done
a wonderful job in organising the State Governments, the local districts and the individual farmers into
a body of people who are ? conservation conscious,? and in spreading the use of the most advanced methods
of preventing soil erosion.
But the Service seeks to do more than that, because the preservation of the soil is fundamental to the
future of the nation. For that reason stress is laid on the need for the essential facts to be made known to the
whole of the people?to the child attending the city school as well as to the students in the agricultural
colleges, to the city worker as well as to the farmer. All are concerned in such a national problem. The
task is so big that it is only by a concerted effort, backed by a full belief in the imperative need for action, that
any substantial impact can be made on the prevention of soil erosion.
Information and education activities have played a very important part in the work of the Soil
Conservation Service. It is pointed out that the knowledge accumulated and the results of research are of
little value until they are spread far and wide in a form in which they can be readily used.
It is the experience of the Service that the degree of success in the application of soil conservation
principles and practices is directly proportionate to the extent and efficiency of the educational work among
the farmers and citizens of the district concerned. The activities of the Service in this field have taken many
forms.
Relations are maintained with the press, with the broadcasting companies, and with leading
publishers of encyclopaediae and textbooks. Material of general interest is supplied to farm journals
and other magazines, and to the editors of farm radio programmes, to public speakers and to free-lance
writers.
Photographs, lantern slides, film strips and motion pictures are produced in large numbers.
A monthly magazine, containing articles of practical and scientific value on soil conservation, is
published. Bulletins, pamphlets and other publications ?ranging from the popular to the technical?have
been prepared in hundreds, The number of copies of these publications distributed annually is over
two millions.


In the field of education, the Service co-operates with, and assists in every way possible, all agencies
interested in soil conservation?with the church, with the schools, colleges and universities, with organisations
of business men and professional organisations, with scientific societies and other organisations, with
industry (especially manufacturers of agricultural machinery) and individuals.
I am convinced that the success of our efforts in New South Wales to check the menace of soil
erosion will depend largely on the extent to which we are able to build up an enlightened public opinion
on conservation and to spread amongst those primarily concerned?the land users?information as to
the basic facts of soil conservation and the most effective methods of preventing erosion.
Just before I left Australia I approved of the publication by the New South Wales Soil Conservation
Service of a Soil Conservation Journal and pamphlets covering various aspects of erosion prevention and
cure.
Whilst in the United States I secured several samples of the type of material produced for educational
purposes, including motion pictures, charts, bulletins, pamphlets and other publications. This material
will be of great value in guiding our informational and educational activities in this State.
? Technical.
Ido not intend in this report to deal with technical aspects of soil conservation. 1 hey did, however,
engage my attention during my inquiries in the United States and I was very interested in several
developments which might with advantage be applied in this State. The information of a technical nature
which I secured will, I am sure, be of great assistance to the New South Wales Soil Conservation Service.
I might mention that I also secured particulars of agricultural machinery and implements used
in carrying out various types of erosion control operations with the object of encouraging and, if necessary,
assisting farmers to obtain and use them where they may be suitable to our conditions and needs.
I have also made arrangements to be kept in touch with experiments being carried out in the United
States with a Chinese variety of the Kudzu vine, and also for experiments to be carried out with this variety
in New South Wales. The variety of Kudzu at present being used very successfully under certain conditions
for erosion control in the more humid parts of the United States is of Japanese origin, ihe Chinese
variety is thought to be much more suitable for the climatic conditions experienced in Australia than the
Japanese variety and may prove to be of great value in conservation work in this State.
? Assessment of Future Needs.
In 1944 the United States Soil Conservation Service completed a survey of the location and extent of
the areas which require conservation treatment.
This survey was designed to show, by basic land resource areas. States, and for the United States as
a whole ?
(1) Land use in terms of capabilities.
(2) Qualities, by appropriate units, of conservation practices needed for increased or sustained
production.
(3) Labour, equipment and material needed for applying and maintaining conservation practices
and measures.
(4) Technical assistance required.
(5) Estimated costs.
The purpose of the survey was (1) to provide a basis for developing departmental plans for carrying
out needed work in production and conservation, such as that essential in meeting agricultural production
goals and post-war problems ; (2) to provide a guide for the allocation of public assistance for conservation
work, as among regions. States and areas; (3) to provide a basis for developing plans for securing the
greatest possible participation of all Federal, State and local agencies in production-conservation work.
The work to be done, as shown by this analysis, covers two main divisions?
(1) that requiring heavy equipment and considerable labour for relatively large areas and providing
widespread benefits for one or more entire communities; and
(2) that which could be carried out by the owners and users of the land themselves, with technical
guidance, and with normal farm equipment, labour and other facilities.
Work in the first division includes the drainage of wet agricultural lands of good fertility and adaptable
to crops ; development of outlets for terraces and diversion ditches ; the planting ot eroded slopes, gullies,
and other exhausted lands to trees, vines and forage-crops ; water supply management and control projects ;


the control of sand dunes ; flood-control work on agricultural lands ; river bank erosion control; highway
erosion control; the construction of terraces and diversions ; and the reclamation of submarginal lands. It
is estimated that at least million acres of farm lands need drainage or drainage improvement, and 951
million acres need terracing, with diversions to carry off excess water.
Work in the second division includes such activities as contour cultivation ; cropping adjustments ;
trip cropping ; crop-rotation improvements ; surface mulching with vegetation ; liming and fertilising ;
he growing of cover and green-manure crops ; and others.
Largely as a means of providing employment and at the same time carrying out a task of great national
ocncfit, the Soil Conservation Service has suggested that the Federal Government might engage at least
100,000 men on this work, under the supervision of the Soil Conservation Service. It is stated that the
advantages of the programme would be ?
(1) approximately 200 million acres of farm lands in the United States would be safeguarded
against erosion and made more productive;
(2) drainage of 10 to 15 million acres of wet farm lands of good fertility would improve the country?s
total crop production capacity, take the pressure off land still under the plough, but unfit
for cultivation, and provide good opportunities for returning servicemen and farmer war workers
who wish to farm;
(3) virtual completion of upland flood control on thousands of small streams ;
(4) maximum protection would be provided against the effects of drought on millions of acres ;
(5) efficiency of farming operations on the treated land would be vastly increased, as a result of
reductions in one or more of the following items of farm-operation cost: seed, fertiliser,
labour, power machinery maintenance, and time.
? Summary.
The objective of soil conservation, as the United States Soil Conservation Service conceives it after
some ten years of experience, is the safeguarding of productive land, to the limits of economic practicability,
against impoverishment and depletion through : (1) excessive soil removal by wind or water; (2)
excessive leaching; (3) accumulation of toxic salts ; (4) burning; (5) waterlogging; (6) improper
cultivation?or any other cause in the nature of improper use or of failure to protect the land from loss
of its productiveness.
Soil Conservation, therefore, as sought to be achieved by the Soil Conservation Service, involves
erosion control and prevention, the conservation and utilisation of rainfall, the prevention of the accumulation
of toxic salts and waterlogging by drainage, the prevention of the burning up of organic matter, and the
prevention or reduction of leaching. These are achieved by means of improved tillage, mulching, and good
cropping practices; and by encouraging appropriate changes in land usage. Highly credible land is
changed from cultivation to grass, trees, or other protective cover ; the retirement of areas from cultivation
being compensated for by the substitution of land rendered suitable for cultivation by scientific drainage
and the more intensive culture of less-erodible lands.
Whilst the results achieved by the Service to date have been substantial, the fact is that less than
10 per cent, of the land has been adequately treated. Some 70,000,000 acres are now producing under
comprehensive soil conservation methods. In addition, over 7,000,000 acres have been improved by the
use of one or more individual conservation practices. It is stated, however, that over 850,000,000 acres
of various kinds of land?cropland, grazing land and woodland?still need soil and water conservation
treatment in some degree.
The Service considers, however, that soil conservation measures will be applied to the land at a
progressively faster rate in the future. During the ten years since the passage by Congress of the Soil
Conservation Act in 1935 it has been necessary to devote a considerable amount of time to research and the
development of techniques, but whilst research and experimental work must be continued it is felt that it will
be possible in the future for more time to be devoted to educational work and to the provision of technical
assistance in the application of conservation measures.
? Conclusions.
My inquiries and observations in the United States have convinced me more than ever of the need for
the Australian people to realise the necessity to devote increasing attention to the problem of soil erosion;
for Australian Governments to take the lead in a vigorous policy designed to conserve the basic resource of
our productive soil; and for the people generally, and the land-user in particular, to co-operate whole-
heartedly and do everything possible to assist in this task.


I am pleased that representatives of the Commonwealth and State Governments, at meetings of the
Australian Agricultural Council, have stressed the need for strong and well-staffed soil conservation bodies
in each State, as well as some measure of co-ordination as between States and some assistance from the
Commonwealth Government. As I mentioned in the Introduction to this Report, I have frequently urged
the national importance of the problem. I believe it is a field in which the Commonwealth Government
could render a real national service by assisting the States to carry out a vigorous programme.
lam satisfied that we are tackling the problem in New South Wales along the right lines. But
we have only just begun the fight against this enemy. During the war, it was not possible in Australia to
undertake a full scale programme of erosion control work, but now that the war has ended we must lose no
time.
I think there are many features of the work of the United States Soil Conservation Service which,
if they could be followed here, would assist the New South Wales Soil Conservation Service in developing
its techniques and applying its remedies to the eroding grazing and farming lands of the State.
As a first step towards extending and expediting soil conservation, as an urgent and important task
immediately ahead, I propose to arrange for the New South Wales Soil Conservation Service to supplement
and extend its plans to enable it to deal with all phases of the erosion situation throughout the State in the
light of American experience.
I might add that I was most impressed by the knowledge and enthusiasm of the officers of the United
States Soil Conservation Service whom I met and by the excellence of the work carried out in the various
parts of the United States which I was able to visit. The officers of the Service whom I contacted in the
course of my inquiries were most helpful and I cannot express too highly my appreciation of their willing
co-operation and the generosity with which they placed their time at my disposal and facilitated my inquiries
in every way possible.
Sydney: Thomas Henry Tennant, Government Printer?l9 i:>


I!!J
/
' ' /
I \
IL �J?I
St^yr^y/
?
\
-


,
?
/
-
?
s'
?
? , ??
? ?
?
