

?£fn-v pptvo
aa-is
SACRAMENT OF LIFE
jS E H M O N
DELIVERED IN THE UNITARIAN CHURCH, MELBOURNE, ON
3RD NOVEMBER, 1872, BY
MARTHA TURNER.
PUBLISHED BY BEQUEST.
JA I
GEORGE ROBERTSON, LITTLE COLLINS STREET W.
1 8 7 2.




THE SACRAMENT OF LIFE.
“ I will not let thee go except thou bless me.” —Genesis 32nd Chap., 2G th Verse.
Lord Bacon said of the heathen mythology that it invariably
expressed some deep want of our nature. In the same way many
of the stories of the Bible, which may appear puerile and childish
to the fastidious taste and critical spirit of the age in which we
live, contain a deep symbolical meaning. A kernel of true wis-
dom, a theory of life, showing a deep insight into some of its
mysteries, is concealed under their fanciful and even grotesque
shapes, if we will hut trouble ourselves to look for it. Some of
the deepest, widest, loftiest truths about human nature, and the
meaning of this complex life of ours, are presented to us clothed in
this form. Those people who have exalted the Bible almost into
an object of worship have greatly weakened its legitimate influ-
ence on the minds of their fellow-men by insisting on the literal
truth of every allegory, the logical exactness of every metaphor.
Much mischief has been done to Christianity by this worship of the
letter, which killeth. A remarkable instance of it is the dogma of the
Real Presence or Transubstantiation. This monstrous superstition,
which in past ages caused so much bickering and dissension, nay ?
so much strife and blood-shedding, in the Christian church, has
been aptly defined as the turning a flower of rhetoric into a logical
statement. It is this spirit of literalism that has arrayed ail scien-
tific truth against the Bible, placing innumerable weapons in the


hands of its enemies, and challenging 1 the philosophic thought of
the day and the facts of life to a combat as disastrous as it is
unequal. There is little need, perhaps, to oppose this literal theory
now; it is fast getting relegated into the limbo of exploded beliefs;
hut we are still concerned with its consequences, one of which has
been to practically close, to all who take the position of advanced
thinkers, a book that has much power to help us when perplexed
by the manifold problems of life; for is it not a record of the
experience of human beings who, under varying circumstances,
had to face precisely the same difficulties as ourselves ?
The story from which our text is taken—of the earnest, persistent
man, entreating through the watches of the night that the angel
will not go without blessing him—has it not a parallel in
the needs, the opportunities, the achievements of our daily life 1
Every event, every season of life, may be typified by the angel in
whose hands there is blessing*, if we, with diligent effort and stead-
fast will, set ourselves to extort it.
Life is a Sacrament; it comes to all of us with a deep, hidden
meaning under its outward seeming. Saint Augustine has
defined a Sacrament as the outward and visible sign of an inward
and spiritual grace—a definition as exhaustive as it is concise.
Each circumstance, each condition of life, is the outward and
visible means of conveying to us an inward and spiritual grace.
Reverently to seek that hidden meaning, to obtain that inward
grace, is our primary duty as Christians, It is to learn the will
of God concerning us. Every outward thing is symbolical, and
must be made to yield the whole of its inner significance, if we
are to have fulness of life, if we are to be redeemed; for it is this
sacramental theory of life alone that has power to redeem it from
triviality.
Every scientific discovery that has helped and blessed us has
been the result of patient wrestling with the facts of nature —how
long, wearying, and often nearly baffied, we who reap the benefits
may never know, yet we can partly divine by the toil and pain it
has cost us to gather together what little stock of real knowledge
we may possess. There is nothing we can be said to know in the


sense of possession, but has been the achievement of a personal com-
bat. Nothing- we g-ain that is worth g-aining-, but is the result of a
battle. Think of the intense mental labour, the patience, and the
self-repression needed to learn a language; but when once we have
made it our own, what power of blessing there is in the deep
insight into human thought, the strengthening of the bond of
universal brotherhood. “ I will not let thee go except thou bless
me,” must be the constant cry of the humble, patient soul who
seeks to learn the will of God in the only way in which He has
revealed it—the order of His universe, with which the laws that
round our little lives are in perfect harmony.
If there be any power in the Christian ethics—any truth in the
Christian religion—the building up of character is the great pur-
pose of life. Human nature, though we may see little to admire in
it in the aggregate, is the greatest thing with which we are
acquainted. It is the highest, grandest work of God, and for that
very reason it may, and often. does,*become the meanest and the
most contemptible. There is no pit of conceivable depravity into
which a human soul has not descended. There is no summit of
beatific purity to which some human soul has not attained.
Geologists tell us that for every Alpine height that rears its
crest above the clouds there is a corresponding depth ’mid the
unfathomed caves of ocean. In like manner every possibility
for g-ood that elevates our nature towards the Author of All Good,
has its corresponding declension or proclivity to evil. The perfect-
ing of this nature, the development of its highest capabilities,
individually and collectively, is the evident object of our life here.
In thoughtful moments the conviction is forced upon us that we
are working out a plan, the details of which are hidden from us.
Weavers of a fabric, the face of which we are not permitted to see,
we are in the position of the workers at the world-famed tapestries
of Gobelins, who never see the marvellous pictures they are pro-
ducing; each has simply the course of the colour he is putting in
mapped out to him. When, after years of toil, the completed
design is shown in all its beautiful finish, must not the faithful
worker rejoice to see the part he has been filling- in with patient


obedience harmonising- with and enhancing- the g-lorious whole ?
Will there be no joy for us when God shows us the completed
design, in which we have been fellow-labourers together with him,
and we see that the life of each one of us had its niche in His great
temple of humanity ?
The awful mystery of life—what it is, what it all means—cannot
be faced by a Christian on any other hypothesis than this —its
sacramental character. To some it may appear as if the circum-
stances and surroundings of their life were so small and common-
place they could have no sacramental meaning But in every
position of life the sordid, small, mean cares of it come first, lie
nearest to us. Our primary duty is always with lowly things;
with lofty things secondarily. It is the great misfortune of the
large majority of people that they cannot see the poetry of the
common-place, can see no beauty in that which is constantly before
their eyes —only in that which is rare, infrequent, or far-off.
The life of that carpenter’s son, in old Judea, could scarcely be
called rich in opportunities for the greatest spiritual work the
world has ever seen; yet he so used and glorified the common,
trivial incidents of it, that it has permeated and transcended the
lives of millions of his fellow-men. It has become a power in the
world, an incentive, a solace, an inspiration to a degree no other
life has ever achieved. Talk of the miracles of Christianity—is
there any miracle like this, that the life of one man should
become the motive power in tlie lives of millions ? Above all
the clamour and dissension, all the strife and animosity, that have
disgraced and divided Christendom, all the virus of the odium
theologicum ; all the caricatures of his gospel that have rendered
his religion repugnant to many a noble, gentle soul —towers the
simple, lofty life of the Founder of Christianity, energising many
a humble worker far removed from the arena of polemical warfare,
comforting many a patient sufferer unlearned in theological con-
troversy. Small wonder that in an age when hero-worship was
a reality amongst men, he should have been deified !
The narrowest life is full of opportunities of working out its own
redemption; opportunities which we neglect at the peril of our


infinite and irrecoverable loss, for if we miss the occasion of
acquiring- any virtue, the opposite defect in the character is
strengthened by that failure. For instance, an occasion may rise
that shall test your courag-e. You may prove equal to it, and
evince all the courag-e needful. In that case you win a victory
that leaves you more courag-eous to the end of your life than before
that trial. But you may flinch, you may run when you should
stand—and what follows ? You have missed a sacrament; you
remain for all time a greater coward than ever you were. Ag-ain,
you and I have known the rapid visitation of sudden shame when
we have done wrong. It is as if God’s angel passed by, and that
blush were the very shadow of his wing; but unless the angel be
held and entertained until the soul melt in penitence, we shall be
left with diminished power of feeling shame. There was an hour
when you sat silent and heard your friend maligned, disparaged,
ridiculed. It was your duty to speak, but you lost that sacramen-
tal opportunity, and your power of faithful friendship is weakened
henceforth. How often when we should make a bold stand for
what we know to be true and feel to be right, do we, through
indolence or moral cowardice, fall back upon the miserable con-
forming falsities current in society, till the greatest evil of all
happens to us, that our souls become dwarfed to fit the narrow
grooves of low motives and world-serving maxims. Let us cling
to every loftier impulse that woultfr save us from a fate like this,
and cry, with earnest, ardent purpose: “ I will not let thee go
except thou bless me.” If sorrow pass over us and do not quicken
and deepen our sympathies, do not widen our toleration, teach us
to bear more tenderly with the infirmities of our sorrowing fellow
mortals, then that sad angel has gone by without blessing us, and
we are left harder, more obdurate, more cynical than before. Or
if a joy, a brightness, come into our life, and we seek not to share
it, to gladden and refresh others with it, then the power of feeling
joy will wither in our hearts. Nothing is small, nothing is unim-
portant that contributes to the building up of character. The love
of humour may seem a trifling thing, yet it has its place in the
edifice; it can widen the sympathies, brace the whole tone of


the mind, and greatly clear the mental vision. We may not
lightly estimate the feeling of admiration that rises spontaneously
at the stirring of a great example ; the possibilities of kindred
achievements are in that feeling. Nay, we may not even dare to
scoff at the plaudits of the fickle multitude who shout Hosanna, and
run with a palm branch on Sunday, albeit they will Crucify him
on Friday. Better for themselves even this short-lived outburst of
loyalty to truth and reverence for goodness than never to have had
the power of recognising them at all. The doctrines distinctive of
Christianity have lost their meaning- by being emptied of their
sacramental character. If there be one thing more distinctly
taught than another by the Christian religion, it is that salvation
is a present thing-, a daily, hourly gain; that perdition, loss,
infinite loss, is here and now. In all that we do or say there are the
issues of life or death. According as we are true or false to the best
that is in us, we are working out our own redemption, or permit-
ting ourselves to be robbed of that which has power to redeem us.
The office of all true art, poetry, imagination is to show us the
sacramental side of life and of nature. To those who have learned
what nature has power to teach us, who have wrung the blessing
from her, what sacramental efficacy there is in her lessons ! But
those who approach her without the seeing eye, the open soul,
what do they find in nature ? —so much land—so much water—so
many cubic feet of piled-up rock. The mediaeval monks who
formed the moulds in which the doctrines of Christianity were
first cast in the selfish seclusion of the cloister and the cell, lost
the power of understanding the religion which they made the study
of their lives because the spirit of it is essentially social, and they
sought to segregate themselves. Christianity has to do with a
brotherhood, a state, a kingdom—and these men poured contempt
upon the family and social life. They blasphemed humanity, for
they proscribed the holiest relations, the truest instincts of our
nature. They reaped their reward—in that they shut themselves
out from the sweet humanities of life, therefore were they utterly
unable to comprehend the sacramental truth of Christianity.
They studied it from the outside as a science; they allowed them-


selves no scope for practising- it as an art. They saw around them
a state of society antagonistic to the religion they wished to pre-
serve to the world. Instead of remaining in it and doing what in
them lay to redeem it and witness for God to a purer and loftier
ideal, they deserted it as past all hope of amendment, and shut
themselves up, each intent on saving his own little soul; sitting
apart, in morbid self-contemplation, weaving metaphysical subtle-
ties. We can scarcely wonder at the dry, hard, lifeless character
of the doctrines with which they overlaid the simple religion of Jesus.
The threefold character of God, as the Creator, Redeemer, and
Comforter, was reduced by them to a dogma, that is simply an >
arithmetical puzzle.
The Atonement—that deep truth Christ taught—that the only
way in which a man can find the peace that makes him happy, the
faith that makes him strong, the hope that brightens and gives
purpose to his life, is in being at one with God, one with him in
aim; in sympathy with his work, became in this melancholy
mediaeval theology an elaborate system of barter. Imputations of
one man’s trangression to all his posterity —imputation of another
man’s righteousness to the few amongst them elected to be saved.
Can anything be more opposed than this fiction of merit by trans-
fer, to the religion which teaches that we shall all be judged by
the deeds done in the body.
Earnest, self-denying men, undoubtedly were these early fathers
of the Church ; many of them achieved the darning crown of mar-
tyrdom. They laboured hard to preserve and transmit to after
ages the religion they deemed too good for the world of their day.
Yet it is difficult to forgive them the wrong they did to Christian-
ity, by their stern repression of all human sympathies; difficult,
when we think of the tortured consciences of the sensitive and the
penitent, whose sighs and groans have been gauged and measured
under their terible system of casuistry. More difficult still, when
we think of the tears of the children who, as Jean Paul Richter
truly says, were not only the first martyrs to Christianity in the
da} r s of Herod, but are still the first martyrs to the method in
which it is taught.


The great injury these men did to Christianity lay in the fact
that they systematised it. Christianity is a life, a hope, an inspira-
tion, not a system. Its doctrines are the simplest interpretations
of the facts of life we have yet reached. But in this soulless sys-
tematising the facts of life have been misconstrued, in order to
interpret certain stereotyped doctrines. We owe it to this, that in
professing Christendom our religion remains a thing external to
our social and political life.
The truth of the Incarnation, is simply this, God has made the
natural, the channel of the spiritual; yet we shrink from the word
because of what it has been made to mean. This great living
truth, the very heart and vital essence of the Christian religion,
has been formulated in a dogma that kills all practical religion,
and reduces Christianity itself to a mournful reminiscence. It
teaches that 1800 years ago, in a remote nation, bearing but
unimportant relations to the world of that day, God dwelt in
human form, for three and thirty years, and then quitted the
world for ever.
Such a belief is founded on the idea of an absent and limited
God, not the God in whom we live and move and have our being.
The Incarnation is the humanity of Deity. The Incarnation of
God in the Prophet of Nazareth was but typical of his incarnation
in the universal Christ—humanity.
It is the missing of the sacramental side of Christianity that has
made it a system of external, priestly miracle-mongering, death-
bed repentances, and sudden conversions. So utterly is it a thing
of forms and ceremonies with large numbers of our fellow Chris-
tians that there are thousands of mothers who fear to let their
little child face death without a few drops of priestly sprinkling!
Yes, dare not suffer that stainless soul to return into the presence
of Him who gave it, without the interposition of an arbitrarily
appointed sign and symbol that the little one shall find mercy at
the hands of the great and dreadful God!
What an artificial unreality has prayer become, from not under-
standing its sacramental meaning, which is simply the opening of
the windows of the soul towards God. What is it in the majority


of instances in which prayer is used at all ? A feeble cry raised
between cause and consequence. God never separated cause and
consequence yet, and He never will. To the wise it is a blessed
assurance.
There is much in the signs of the times to indicate the dawning
of a brighter day, when we shall have less of theology and more
of religion. In the Church of England, and among the Congrega-
tionalists, both in England and America, much has been done to
introduce the humanising element into theology. Amongst Pro-
testant sects generally there is noticeable a tendency to soften the
harsher features of their accepted tenets, and to draw with less
exactness the lines of doctrinal definition that separate them from
the rest of Christendom. The fact that all liberal religious thought,
in the various churches, tends in the same direction—the recogni-
tion of the sacramental theory of life as the true one, and the right
of poor, down-trodden, much-abused Humanity, to be the high
priest and interpreter of his own religion, not the tool and subject
of any theologic system, points to the hope that the time may not
be very distant, when:—
“ Fusing all the skirts of self,
Eemerging in the general whole,”
our differing denominations shall form the one Church of the
future. In the meantime, let those who are doing what they can
to bring about the realisation of this grand ideal remember—
“ Ours must be a nobler story
Than was ever writ before;
After-comers ! dim our glory,
Be your hopes and winnings more !”
J. and A. M'Kinley, Printers, 57 Queen-street, Melbourne.


