

Hid
the 19th December, 1879, Mr. John Allen,
one of the oldest settlers in Glamorgan,
passed away at the age of 73. He was born in
county Somerset, England, on the 16th No-
vember, 1806, and left London for this colony
in the early part of 1826 in the ship Hugh
Crawford, commanded by the late Captain
Wm. Langdon, R.N. He arrived in Hobart
Town on the 26th October of the same year,
and on the recommendation of Governor Arthur
he resolved to go to Oyster Bay with the late
Mr. W. Lyne and family. They started in a
small vessel a few days before Christmas, and
spent Christmas Day in Stewart’s Harbour,
now called Port Arthur. Shortly after they
arrived in Oyster Bay, and landing at a place
called Moulting Bay, the first things they saw
were flocks of kangaroos, which were very
numerous then. Mr. Allen took up his first
grant of land at Milton, in Glamorgan, near
Swansea. In March, 1828, when he had
finished reaping and secured all his crops, and
when all hands were away except one boy, the
blacks came and burnt all the buildings, the
stacks of wheat, and nearly everything Mr.
Allen possessed ; the loss being about £3OO,
besides books, papers, etc., which could not be
replaced. Undaunted, however, by this dis-
aster, he set to work again, and so determined
was he to succeed that for nine months after
the fire he never took off his clothes except on
Sunday, and used to sleep on a sheet of bark,
with his musket beside him, and his ammu-
nition pouch strapped around him, until he
received another bed from England. On De-
cember 14, in the same year, he fought single-
handed a tribe of native blacks, numbering
from thirteen to eighteen, besides “gins” to
bring them spears, waddies, etc. For eight
hours on one of the hottest days recorded, Mr.
Allen kept the natives back with a musket and
pistol, neither of which, singular to say, he fired ;
the presentation of the firearms in the direction
of the blacks was sufficient to scare them. Nor
was he in any way hurt, though he had to
dodge the spears and waddies the whole time.
After this the Police Magistrate at Swansea
allowed two soldiers to be stationed on the farm
for protection, upon his taking the oath as a
special constable, and they remained there
about two years. Mr. Allen prospered, as he
well deserved to do. In May, 1832, he walked
to Hobart Town —he always did his business
on foot—and there found his sister, who had
just arrived from England with money for him
to return there, his relatives being anxious to
see him. Accordingly he sailed in the barque
Science, which was loaded with wool and specie.
For the first six weeks they had bad weather,
and then, on the 2ist June, the ship was caught
in a storm in lat. 56 S., and long. 125 W.
Getting among the icebergs she was struck and
capsized, but very soon righted. Mr. Allen,
who was the first on deck, found the mizenmast
broken short, the mainmast split up, the fore-
mast tottering, the rigging being across the
deck, and the bulwarks smashed ; besides
which nearly all the best hands were gone.
The captain gave up all hope of being saved ;
but Mr. Allen, determined to make an attempt
to save their lives, so he cut away with the
loose rigging, stopped up the holes in the deck
with wool, and with the aid of one or two others,
showed that the hull of the ship was still good.
Six days after they fell in with a South Sea
whaler, the barque Worrence, which took them
all on board to the number of fifteen. Mr.
Allen left in the last boat, after looking round
for any valuables ; but unfortunately he had
not been told about the specie, which was
therefore lost. It is related that one old man
would not leave the ship because he could not
find his treasury bills ; but when all his friends
had got aboard the Worrence, he was seen
beckoning to be taken off, so a boat was sent
for him. The hull was set fire to, and she was
seen to founder. The Worrence landed the
distressed people at Rio Janeiro, whence Mr.
Allen went to England in H.M.S. King William
IV., a sloop of war, in command of Lord Col-
chester. The first night he was in England he
caught a severe cold, and never had good health
while there. He accordingly soon returned
to Tasmania, in the barque Ann, and there
remained until his death. Mr. Allen was a man
of indomitable perseverance, and was an excel-
lent farmer, as many persons who have visited
Picnic Place, Bicheno, could testify. He was a
great walker. About fifteen months ago he
was at the Campbell Town Show, and through
some mistake horses were not sent to meet him ;
so he and his daughter walked home, a distance
of forty miles, and were not much fatigued
thereby. Mr. Allen passed away peacefully,
after only eleven days’ illness, and without
the slightest pain, on Friday, the 19th Decem-
ber, 1879. His remains were interred at Bicheno
on the 23rd, there being a very large and
respectable funeral, many friends coming long
distances to be present. The chief mourners
were six sons of the deceased, and the pall-
bearers were Messrs. Henry Lyne, Clarence
Lyne, Fred. Hume, and Alex. Robertson.
Davies Bugs., Printers.
