

NEW SOUTH WALES
RUGBY FOOTBALL LEAGUE
By-Laws
AND
Rules..
TOGETHER WITH
LAW OF THE GAME
BY AUTHORITY
Head Office, Market St., Sydney
J. J. GILTINAN.
HON. SEC.
Box 1149 G.P.O.
1908
F. CONNINGHAME & CO., PRINTERS. 146 PITT ST


AU y FOOT R A LIvER S
SHOUI.D SK)<;
J. PEARSON’S
STOCK OF
Knickers, Jerseys, Belts,
Stockings, Knee, Bar and
Shin Guards, etc.
And Everything
IN
Sporting Clothing
J. PEARSON
21 King Street Arcade
SYDNEY


NEW SOUTH VALES
RUGBY FOOTBALL LEAGUE
BY-LAWS and RULES
TOGETHER WITH
LAVS OP THE Gfl/TE
BY AUTHORITY
19 0 6
p, QU NN I NGH A iyj E i Co,, 14-6 PITT STREET SYDNEY-


Telephones...
n6O and 424
COFFILL&CO.
SYDNEY
&.L
CARRIAGE and
DRAG
PROPRIETORS
FUNERAL
CONDUCTORS
ECONOMY IN
CHARGES
Head Office :
472 to 484 Harris St.
Central Office :
735 GEORGE STREET


NEW SOUTH WALES
RUGBY FOOTBALL LEAGUE
BY-LAWS
1. The name of the League shall be Tiik New
South Wales Rugby Football League.
(a) Its objects are to foster and control Rugby
League Football throughout the State ; to
make all arrangements for Teams visiting
the State, and to take the entire manage-
ment of Rugby League Football in the
State of New South Wales.
(b) It consists of such Metropolitan District
Clubs and Rugby Branch Leagues formed
in the State, and any other Metropolitan
District Clubs or Branch Leagues which
may be admitted as hereinafter provided.
(c) Its jurisdiction extends to, and is acknow-
ledged by, all affiliated Branch Leagues
and Metropolitan District Clubs, and shall
be the Court of Appeal in the State in all
matters whether of dispute, misconduct,
or otherwise.
(d) The General Committee shall have sole
direction of the funds of the League.
The accounts shall be audited by two
Auditors appointed at the Annual General
Meeting. A printed copy of the draft
annual report and signed balance sheet
shall be sent to each Club and Branch
League, along with a notice calling the
Annual General Meeting.


(e) The funds of the League shall be banked
in the name of The New South Wales
Rugby Football League, and be operated
upon by the President, Honorary Secre-
tary, Honorary Treasurer, subject to con-
dition in by-law 1, sub-section “d.”
(f) The representative uniform of the State
shall be navy blue knickers, light blue
jersey and hose, with light blue top,
kangaroo with year in white on the left
breast, royal blue velvet cap, with silver
bullion tassel, kangaroo, year, and letters
“ N.S. W.R.F.L.”
(g) The head quarters of the League shall be
in Sydney, where the General Meetings
shall be held.
(h) The football year shall commence on the
Ist January in each year.
2. The Officials of the League shall consist of a
Patron, President, five Vice-Presidents, Captains
of First Grade District Clubs, a Committee elected
as hereinafter provided, the Honorary Treasurer of
the League, the Honorary Secretary, Assistant
Honorary Secretary, and duly appointed Repre-
sentative of the Nev South Wales Rugby League
Referees’ Association, and each shall hold office
until his successor is appointed.
(a) Each Executive Officer must be a member
of a Club affiliated to the League.
(b) 'lhe President, Vice-President, Honorary
Treasurer and Honorary Secretary shall
i be elected by a ballot of delegates and
\ officials of the League. No one shall be
\\ eligible for election to any of the above
offices unless he shall have been duly
nominated in writing by two bona tide,


members of the League. Such nomination
to be in the hands of the Honorary Secre-
tary of the League at least seven days
before the date of holding the Annual
Meeting. Any ballot paper which shall
contain more or less than the required
number of names shall be declared informal
by the scrutineers.
(c) The General Committee shall consist of one
member elected by each Club affiliated to
the League, playing in the metropolitan
district competition, and the Captain of
each first grade team playing in the metro-
politan district competitions, and one
member elected by each of the Branch
Leagues. All other Committees, with the
exception of Selection Committee, to be
selected from their number.
(d) The officials of the League shall have a seat
on and a vote in General Committee.
(e) The General Committee shall administer
the affairs of the League, in accordance
with the powers conferred by the by-laws,
and by the rules and resolutions passed at
a General Meeting.
(f) At any meeting of the General Committee,
ten (10) shall form a quorum.
(g) The Committee shall have power to make
rules for its procedure, which rules shall
be valid until revoked.
(h) The Committee shall have power to admit
strangers to, or exclude them from, its
meetings, but no stranger shall have the
right to vote.
(i) The General Committee may call upon any
member of any Club affiliated to the


League, the District Club, or a Branch
League, to attend any meeting, to reply
to any relevant questions as may be put,
and to produce any letters, papers, or
books; any failure to comply without
reasonable excuse, or to answer any rele-
vant questions put to them, and they make
misleading statements, they may be dealt
with at the discretion of the Committee.
(j) If the office o' President, Vice-President,
Don. Treasurer, Hon. Secietary becomes
vacant in the interval between Annual
General Meetings, the vacancy shall he
filled by an election at a Special General
Meeting. Until such meeting be held,
the Committee shall appoint some qualified
person to fill the vacancy.
(k) Xhe Buies for the control and management
of the Metropolitan District Competition
shall be framed by the General Committee
and submitted to a General Meeting for
consideration and adoption, or amendment
if necessary.
(l) Branch Leagues may be admitted to the
New South Wales Rugby Football League
to represent such districts defined by
boundaries to be set out, on a written
application to the Secretaiy, and on pay-
ment of entrance fee £1 Is., and may
become affiliated subject to the by-laws
of this League.
(m) The General Committee shall control the
management of all inter-League matches.
3. The entrance fee of each District Club and
Lranch League to affiliate with the New South
Wales Rugby Football League be one guinea (£1


Is.). Special arrangements to be made for the
admission of schools. The fee of affiliation to be
left to the discretion of the League.
(a) A delegate’s right to vote may be chal-
lenged, should their Club or Branch League
have failed to have paid its entrance fee,
and his power of voting shall be disallowed
by the Chairman. Any Club or Branch
League shall be considered in default if
thei-r entrance fee is not paid within one
month after same is due.
(b) The Hon. Secretary of each Club and
Branch League affiliated to the League,
shall notify the Hon. Secretary of the
N.S.W. R.F.L., in writing, the name of
the Delegates to represent them.
(c) Each Delegate shall, except as otherwise
provided, retain his powers from one
Annual General Meeting to the next, or
until the Secretary of the League shall be
notified by the Branch League or Metro-
politan District Club which the Delegate
represents, that another Delegate has been
appointed in his stead.
4. The meetings of the League shall be the
Annual General Meeting, and Special General
Meetings.
(a) The Annual General Meeting shall be held
not later than the first week in March, and
seven days’ notice of date and place of
holding shall be given by circular to the
Delegates and Hon. Secretary of each affili-
ated Branch League and Metropolitan
District Club.
(h) The ordinary business to be transacted at
an Annual General Meeting shall be the


consideration and adoption of the Annual
Report of the Committee (and the Hon.
Treasurer’s Balance Sheet, duly audited),
with amendment if sanctioned by the
meeting ; the election of officers for the
ensuing year, and such other business as
may be provided for by the By-laws.
(c) The Draft Annual Report and Balance
Sheet shall be forwarded with the notice,
vide subsection “ d,” By-law 1.
(d) The Chairman may, with the consent of
the meeting, alter the order in which the
business at such meeting shall be taken.
(e) A Special General Meeting shall bo con-
vened by the Executive, through the
Secretary, by a circular, giving at least
seven days’ notice to the Hon. Secre-
tary of each Metropolitan District Club
and Branch League, and to each Delegate
and official of the League, stating the
business proposed to be transacted, either
under the direction of the General Com-
mittee, or on receiving a requisition to
that effect signed by the Secretaries of not
less than four Metropolitan District Clubs
or three Branch Leagues.
(f) Notice of a resolution to be proposed at any
General Meeting, to add to, rescind, or
amend any By-law of the League, or of any
other business proposed to be transacted at
an Annual General Meeting, other than
the ordinary business, or at a Special
General Meeting, shall be given in writing,
together with the name of the proposer
and seconder, to the Secretary of the
League, in time to allow him to give four


teen (14) days’ notice to the Hon. -Secre-
taries of the Metropolitan District Clubs,
Branch Leagues, and each Delegate and
official of the League, and no such resolu-
tion shall be carried unless two-thirds of
those entitled to vote are in favour of it.
(g) At all General Meetings the President shall
take the Chair; in his absence, the Vice-
President in order of seniority ; in their
absence the meeting shall elect a Chair-
man.
(h) Any dissent from the Chairman’s ruling
shall be put without discussion.
(i) Delegates and officials of the League only
shall he allowed to speak and vote at any
General Meeting,
(j) The voting at all General Meetings in all
cases except in the ease of election of
officers, shall be by show of hands, which
shall be conclusive on the declaration of
the result by the Chairman, unless a vote
by ballot be immediately demanded.
(k) Any General Meeting maybe adjourned to
such time and place as a majority of the
voters present may decide. Visitors will
only be allowed to speak if the majority of
those in authority to vote request same.
(l) The Chairman of any meeting, whether of
the League or the Committee, shall have a
casting vote only.
5. Every Club and Branch League shall keep a
proper set of books, which shall be provided by the
New South Wales Rugby Football League, such
books shall remain the property of the League.


(a) Saoh books shall contain such information
regarding receipts and expenditure made
to, and by such Club and Branch League,
and be in such form as the Committee
shall direct.
(b) The General Committee shall have the
power to require the production of any
such books, and of any vouchers and
papers, or other documents.
(c) Any Club or Branch League failing to pro-
duce books, vouchers, or other documents
without reasonable excuse, shall be dealt
with as the Committee may direct.
(d) The General Committee shall deal with all
appeals from the decisions of District Clubs
and Branch Leagues, and uphold, reverse,
or amend such decisions as may seem to
them fit, and they shall deal with any
other matter submitted to them. All
such appeals shall be made in writing
through the District Club or Branch
League concerned, within seven days of
the date of the decision appealed against,
and the Secretary of the District Club or
Branch League shall be bound to forward
such appeal to the Secretary of the New
South Wal s Rugby Football League
within three days of the date of its receipt.
Every appeal shall be accompanied by a
deposit of 10s., which shall be forfeited if
the appeal be held frivolous or groundless.
(e) In all cases of misconduct by individual
players or officials, Clubs, Teams, the
Metropolitan District Club or Branch
League directly interested shall make
enquiries upon receipt of any charge


detrimental to tire interests or welfare of
the League, and such Metropolitan Dis-
trict Club or Branch League shall forward
its decision to the N.S W.E.F.L., which
decision shall be dealt with as the Com-
mittee directs.
(f) All other appeals against the decision of a
Metropolitan District Club or Branch
League must be made through the District
Club or Branch League affected (which
shall be bound to forward such appeal
within seven days of the appeal being
given), and shall be accompanied hy a
deposit of One Guinea (£1 Is.), which
shall be forfeited should the appeal be
held by the Committee of the New South
Wales Rugby Football League to be
frivolous or groundless.
I .rj Pending decisions of appeals, all decisions
B appealed against shall be operative.
(h) Each Branch League shall have power to
cite and cause to appear, any player or
officials deemed guilty of any infringement
of the By-laws and Competition Rules of
the New South Wales Rugby Football
League, and after proper enquiry shall
report all disqualifications and suspensions
imposed by them to the Committee of the
New South Wales Rugby Football League
within seven days of the decisions being
given. Every such disqualification and
suspension shall, from and after the date
on which it is imposed, operate throughout
the jurisdiction of the New South Wales
Rugby Football League, unless and until
an appeal therefrom shall have been finally
determined and allowed.


«.S
(a) They allow a member under suspension or
disqualification to take part in any match.
t;iV r any T ember or members, wilfully
tmon H^e“ fm,ge aDy CoS
(c) If they or any member or members, refuse
to produce its accounts or other books
any vouchers, papers or
called upon to do so by the Committee
‘ ’ with ° ne m ° nth in arrears
League “ y m ° ney due to the
(e) No Clubs affiliated to the New South
Wales Kubgy Football League will be
Meh^Vf 0 arian 8 e any matches in the
fh* K° ht % n “r a without the consent of
uIJL™ S ° Uth Wal6S Eu B by football
<f) A cond°ui! S “ emberS Sha ° be guilty of “i


fioation, shall be disqualified from holding any
position under the League.
9 No member of any Club, under disqualifica-
tion whether affiliated to the New South Wales
Rugby Football League or not, shall be permitted
to play with or against any of the Clubs affiliated
to the New South Wales Rugby Football League
without the consent of the Committee.
10. All Metropolitan District Clubs playing
Competition matches to receive, after paying
ground percentage and wages, thirty-three and a
third per cent, of the net proceeds, and the League
to receive thirty-three and a third per cent Xhe
League to pay all advertisements and Referees
fees This only applies to First Grade matches,
excepting the final match of the First Grade Com-
petition.
(a) The Final Match of the First Grade Com-
petition thirty-three and a third per cent,
of the net proceeds to be devoted to the
hospitals, and the balance to the Assur-
ance Fund.
(b) All Clubs affiliated to the New South
■ Wales Rugby Football League shall sub-
scribe sixpence (6d.) per head per week on
a minimum number of sixty (60) members.
This fee to be deposited to the Assurance
or Accident Fund.
(c) Any member hurt while playing football
under the direction of the New South
. Wales Rugby Football League, upon
receipt of a certificate from a medical
officer duly appointed by the League, that
such member is incapacitated and pie-
vented from following his usual occupation,
shall receive all medical aid, medicine,


and Two Pounds (£2) per week until such
player has been declared (by the appointed
medical officer) fit to follow his usual
occupation. The maximum time for
receiving benefit shall be sixteen weeks.
(d) Should any player be permanently injured
while playing football under the direction
of the New South Wales Rugby Football
League, the matter may be brought before
the Committee, and such steps may be
taken as the circumstances warrant.
(e) In the event of any member being hurt
while playing football in League matches,
it shall be compulsory for the injured
player to furnish the Hon. Secretary of
the New South Wales Rugby Football
League with a certificate from a medical
practitioner duly appointed by the League,
through the Secretary of his Club or other-
wise, within three days of the accident.
(f) Kach member receiving emolument from
the Assurance or Accident Fund to furnish
the Hon. Secretary of the New South
Wales Rugby Football League with a
receipt for such payment not less than
seven days after such payment.
(g) The funds of the District Clubs shall be
devoted to fostering the game of Rugby
football in such district. All amounts
expended, ss. and over, receipts of such
expenditure to he filed by the Hon.
Treasurer of each District Club.
(b) Membership subscription to each District
Club shall be Two Shillings and Sixpence
(2s. fid.) 1


(i) Each Club to furnish the New South Wales
Rugby Football League with its Report
and Balance Sheet, duly audited, on the
first Wednesday in March of each year.
(j) District Clubs shall supply playing members
with Uniform free of cost.
(k) The Secretary, or Assistant, of each District
Club to be in attendance every Saturday
at the ground where his Club is playing
for the purpose of checking turnstiles or
receipts.
(l) Each Secretary, or Assistant, to receive a
check card, and such card to be forwarded
to the Hon. Secretary of the New South
Wales Rugby Football League not later
than the following Monday, showing read-
ing of turnstiles.
(in) No member of any Club shall receive
benefits from the Accident or Assurance
Fund whose Club is unfinancial in such
Fund, as set forth in subsection “b,”
By«law 10.
11. The net proceeds of Interstate or Inter-
national matches, after deducting ground percen-
tages and expenses, to be placed to the credit of
the New South Wales Rugby Football League, as
provided in By-law 1, subsection “ e. ”
(a) Any player playing Interstate or Inter-
national matches in the Commonwealth
and the Dominion of New Zealand, under
the direction of the New South Wales
Rugby Football League, to be entitled to
receive the sum of seven shillings and
sixpence (7s. 6d.) per day for personal
expenses outside the State, and the sum
of five shillings (55.) per day within the


States and may receive the sum of ten
shillings (10s.) per day, Sundays not in-
cluded, for loss of time or salary.
Tf (b) All arrangements for international matches
I/; to be played beyond the Commonwealth
jl of Australia and the Dominion of New
Zealand shall be made by the New South
• Wales Rugby Football League.
(c) Players selected to play International
, matches to be played beyond the Com-
;monwealth of Australia and the Dominion
'( of New Zealand, and on the termination
j of the said tour, the surplus, if any, after
! defraying all expenses, such as steamer
fares, railway fares, hotel account (mean-
-1 j ing board and residence), football cus-
; tumes, the New South Wales Rugby
Football League to receive not less than
2| percent, of the net profits, then each
member of the combination, including the
(I 1 manager, to receive equal shares of the
1 balance.
(d) The Trustees of a Team on tour (the
manager being one of the said trustees)
to have power to deduct not less than
2J per cent, of the net profits on the
termination of a tour in the British Isles,
or elsewhere, and shall forward same by
draft to the Secretary of the New South
Wales Rugby Football League, which
shall be placed to the credit of the New
South Wales Rugby Football League, as
provided in By-law 1, sub-section “ o.”
12. Any playing member of any Club playing
Metropolitan District Football under the direction
of the New South Wales Rugby Football League


to be reimbursed for bis actual loss of time while
playing football only. Payment not to exceed ten
shillings (10s.) per day, and such payment to be
made by his Club.
13. Season tickets shall be issued by the New
South Wales Rugby Football League.
(a) Season tickets for gentlemen one guinea
(£1 Is.). Ladies’ season tickets half-a-
guinea (10s. 6d.). Such tickets shall
admit subscribers to all matches played
under the auspices of the New South
Wales Rugby Football League.
(b) Tickets are not transferable.
In these By-laws, unless context or subject
matter otherwise indicates or requires, “ Com-
mittee” means the General Committee of this
League. ‘'The League” and “This League’
means the New South Wales Rugby Football
League.
JAS. J. GILTINAN,
Hon. Sec.


COMMITTEE STANDING ORDERS.
1. The following (shall be the Standing Orders of
the Committee of the New South Wales Rugby
.Football League. 6 J
2. The Committee shall meet upon such days
place and tune as it may appoint, or as may be
fixed by the Secretary. At least 48 hours’ notice
shall be given of such meeting.
3 In the event of a quorum not being present
sbal] a ia'psT r after the time fiX6d ’ the meeti “8
4. It shall not be necessary for the Secretary to
notify the members of the Committee of the regular
meetings of the Committee. °
. s - Chair shall be taken by the President, or
in his absence by the senior Vice-President present-
u ?,° , V ‘ ce -P>;esident is present, the Committee
snail elect a Chairman
6. The order of business shall be :
(a) Reading and confirmation of minutes of
previous meeting,
(b) Business arising out of previous minutes.
NEW SOUTH WALES
RUGBY FOOTBALL LEAGUE.


(0) Correspondence and action thereon.
(d) Reports of sub-committees.
(e) Questions.
(f) Passing of accounts, and special votes.
(g) Appointment of Referees.
(h) Reception of notice of motion.
(1) Consideration of motions of which due
notice has been given.
(j) General business.
7. None but formal business shall be entered
into after 10 p.m. unless it is the wish of not less
than three-fourths of the members present.
8. No resolution of the Committee shall be
altered or rescinded unless seven days’ notice shall
have been given by the member proposing such
alteration or rescission. Such notice must be in
writing giving names of proposer and seconder.
9. All votes shall be taken by show of hands,
but any member may demand a ballot, which shall
be taken without further disou siou.
10. Members will be allowed to speak only once
to the question, but may speak to a “ point of
order,” or to correct a mis-statement, but no second
speech shall be allowed except when speaking to an
amendment. The proposer of a motion shall be
allowed fifteen (15) minutes in opening; all other
speakers ten (10) minutes.
11. Any decision or ruling of the Chairman may
be dissented from, and over-ruled by a majority
of the voters present, but a motion to dissent from
the Chairman’s ruling shall be put without debate.
12. No motion to amend, repeal, or add to a
standing order of the Committee shall be put to


the vote unless a week’s notice shall have been
given in writing giving name of mover and
seconder.
13. The Secretary may at any time call a special
meeting of the Committee by giving at least forty-
eight (48) hours’ notice.
14. Notice shall definitely state the business to
be considered, and no other business except that
for which the meeting is called shall be taken at
such special meeting.
15. The Hon. Treasurer shall make a financial
report at least once a month to the Committee, and
he shall produce his bank book at all meetings of
the Committee.
16. All books and papers in connection with the
League shall be kept as far as possible in the
recognised office of the League, and must be obtain-
able at all meetings of the Committee.
17. No member of the Committee shall leave the
room while evidence is being taken on protests,
appeals or charges, except with the Chairman’s
permission,
18. No application for the removal of a disquali-
fication or suspension or penalty, passed on a Club,
member of a Club, or official, shall be considered
unless seven days’ notice shall have first been given
to the Committee of such application, and no dis-
qualification, suspension, or penalty shall be re-
scinded unless with a three-fifths majority.
19. The Secretary shall be the Executive Officer
of the Committee to carry on the business of the
New South Wales Rugby Football League, and is
empowered to deal with all matters of urgency
without reference to the Committee. In such cases


the matters so dealt with shall be tabled at the
next meeting of the Committee.
20. No sum of money exceeding £5 shall be paid
unless same has been passed by the Committee.
21. All Sub-Committees shall present their
reports in writing to the General Committee for
adoption.
22. The proceedings of any Sub-Committee
appointed by the General Committee shall be
guided by these Standing Orders as far as they
are applicable.
JAS. J. GILTINAN,
Hon. Sec.


RULES
For Control and Management of
Metropolitan District Competition.
1. Matches shall be played in accordance with
the rules set out herewith.
2. There shall be Three Grades in each District,
viz., First, Second and Third, and there shall be a
Competition for each Grade.
3. The Sydney University may enter teams in
the First, Second and Third Grades, and the
Sydney Training College may enter teams in the
Second and Third Grades.
(a) Undergraduates proceeding to their
Degree, and Graduates of the University
of Sydney, shall be eligible to play with
the University Club in the First and
Second Grades of the Metropolitan Dis-
trict Competition, but only Graduates
proceeding to their Degree shall be eligible
to play with the Third Grade.
(b) Only Students at the Sydney Training
College shall be eligible to play with the
Sydney Training College in the Second
and Third Grade Competitions.
4. Entries for the different competitions shall
be made in writing to the Secretary of the League,
accompanied by the fee fixed by the Committee,


vide By-law 3. All entries shall close on the Ist
April, 1908.
(a) All matches shall be arranged by ballot for
dates fixed by the Committee.
5. The form and value of the trophies shall be
decided by the Committee.
6. Any person who shall been a bona fide resident
of a district for a period of six consecutive months
shall be eligible to play with the Club representing
such district, upon payment to such Club member-
ship subscription of 2s. 6d., vide By-law 10, sub-
section “ h.”
(a) No player shall in any one season represent
more than one Club in Competition
matches.
(b) A player shall not be qualified to play
with any Club if his membership subscrip-
tion be wholly or partly unpaid.
(c) Bona fide school boys and masters resident
at any school within the jurisdiction of
the New 18outh Wales Rugby Football
League may play with the Club represent-
ing the district in which such school is
situated.
7. If a player of any Club affiliated to any
Branch League takes up his residence within the
boundaries of the Metropolitan District, and shall
produce a letter from the Secretary of such
Branch League, stating that he is no longer a
playing member of such Club, such player may
play with the Club representing the district in
which he resides, providing that the New South
Wales Rugby Football League Committee are
satisfied that he has been for a period of six con-
secutive weeks, and intends to remain, a bona fide
2


resident of such district, and the application is
made in _ person, and receives the Committee’s
sanction in writing.
8. Players actually residing outside the boun-
daries of Metropolitan District Clubs, and not
within the area of any Branch League affiliated to
the New South Wales Rugby Football League,
who may desire to play in the competition arranged
for Metropolitan District Clubs, may, in the dis-
cretion of the Committee, be permitted to do so,
so long as they continue to reside outside the
above-mentioned boundaries, and shall be admitted
to such Clubs as the Committee may direct, upon
payment of membership subscription.
9. Any Club playing an unqualified player shall
lose the matches in which such player took part.
Protests under this rule may be made by any Club
in the competition or by an official of the League
and must be lodged with the Secretary of the
League. A copy of the protest shall in every case
be supplied to the Hon. Secretary of the Club com-
plained against.
10. No player, if he has taken part in three
matches of a higher grade, shall, without the sanc-
tum of the Committee, play in a lower grade, but
any player may play in a higher grade. Any
player who, after being called on to play in a
higher grade, shall fail to do so, unless the Com-
mittee be satisfied that he had good and sufficient
reasons for so acting, may be disqualified for the
remainder of the season. Permits shall not be
granted under this rule after second Saturday in
June. J
I'; Payers must appear in proper Football
Uniform, which shall consist of jerseys with sleeves
to _ elbows, and the Club’s registered colours,
knickers to knees, boots or shoes, and whole hose.


(a) The Referees shall report any infringement
of this rule to the Committee.
(b) Any Club failing to see that all its mem-
bers play and conform to terms of Rule 11
shall be fined a sum not exceeding 10s., to
be paid as directed by the Committee ;
failing payment within the time directed,
such Club may he disqualified or other-
wise dealt with.
12. A Referee shall be appointed for each match
by the Committee, or failing such appointment, by
the Secretary of the League. In the event of
the Referee so appointed not attending within 15
minutes after the time fixed to commence, then a
Referee may be appointed by the captains.
(a) The Committee shall have power to annul
a match, and order it to be re-played, on
the ground of incompetence or misconduct
of the Referee.
(b) The Referee of the League shall, without
any delay, report to the Secretary of the
League any instance of rough or foul play,
or any instance of misconduct occurring
during the progress of a match, whether
such misconduct shall have led to a player
being ordered off the field or not.
13. Any player who has been ordered off the
field shall be suspended from playing until his case
shall have been duly dealt with by the Committee.
The Committee shall, if possible, deal with the
case within seven days.
(a) Any Club playing any player while under
suspension or disqualification shall lose the
match or matches in which such suspended
or disqualified player took part. Protests
under this subsection may be made by any


Club in the competition, and shall be
lodged with the Secretary of the League.
Copy of the protest shall be supplied to
the Hon. Secretary of the Club complained
against.
14. Matches shall commence at such times and
be played upon such grounds as may be directed by
the Committee, and any Club not prepared to com-
mence a match within fifteen minutes of the time
directed, shall forfeit it, unless satisfactory reason
for the delay be given to the Committee.
(a) Each match shall be played in two divi-
sions of time, each division not less than
40 minutes (excepting Interstate and
International matches, which shall be 45
minutes each way), with an interval of not
more than 10 minutes, unless the Com-
mittee or the Referee on the field of play
shall otherwise direct. In the event of
any alteration in the playing time, the
Clubs must be informed prior to the start
of the match by the Referee, and the game
must be played in two equal divisions.
(b) Unless otherwise directed by the Com-
mittee, matches shall commence at 3.15
p.m.
(c) The fitness of the ground to be played
upon shall be decided by the captains, and
they failing to agree, it shall be decided
by the Referee.
(d) The Committee may disapprove of any
ground, and direct a match appointed to
be played on it to played elsewhere.
(e) In the event of any team playing with
more than 13 men it shall be the duty of
the opposing captain to draw the Referee’s


attention to the fact, and he shall dis-
allow all points scored by the opposing
side up to that time, and shall order the
removal of such extra player or players
from the field of play, and if such order
be not complied with within 5 minutes
the Referee shall award the match to the
opposing team.
(f) If a team begins a match with less than 13
men it may fill the vacant place or places
at any time during the game, but if it
shall begin a match with 13 men, and for
any reason except misconduct one or
more cease playing, his or their place or
places may be filled during the first half.
In the case of a player being ordered off
the field for misconduct, his place shall
not be filled, and if such order be not
complied with within 5 minutes of its
being given, the Referee shall award the
match to the opposing team.
15. The Committee shall investigate, decide, and
deal with all appeals, proceedings, protests, and
disputes in connection with the competitions.
(a) An appeal from a decision of a Referee on
a matter of law shall be dismissed if the
captain of the appellant Club shall have
failed to formally challenge such decision
on the field of play.
(b) In the case of an appeal from a decision of
a Referee, or in the case of a protest on
the ground of incompetence or misconduct
of the Referee, a written statement defi-
nitely submitting the points on which the
appeal or protest is founded, and the law
or law r s under which it is laid, must be in


the hands of the Secretary of the League
not later than 5 o’clock p.m. on the third
day following the match, and a copy of
such statement shall, within the same
time, be furnished by the Club appealing
or protesting to the Hon. Secretary of the
opposing Club, and to the Referee of the
match.
(c) All appeals and protests shall be in writing
and be accompanied by a deposit of 10s.,
which shall be forfeited should the Com-
mittee consider the appeal or protest
frivolous or groundless.
In these Competition Rules, unless context or
subject matter otherwise indicates or requires,
“ Committee ” means the General Committee of
this League. “ The League ” and “ This League ”
means the New South Wales Rugby Football
League.
JAS. J. GILTINAN,
Hon. Sec.


RULES
For Control of Country Branch League
Matches.
1. The Committee shall have power to direct any
Branch League to choose, and be registered under,
some other name than the one registered.
(a) Each Branch League shall register the
uniform to be worn by its respective teams
witli the Secretary of the New South
Wales Rugby Football League, and the
Committee may refuse to register any
proposed uniform if not sufficiently dis-
tinctive. Upon registration the uniform
shall become the exclusive property of the
Branch League first registering it, and
may not be worn by any other Branch
League.
(b) Each Branch League shall be furnished with
the By-laws of the New South Wales Rugby
Football League, and the Laws of the
Game.
2. Each Branch League shall forward to the
Secretary of the New South Wales Rugby Football
League a copy of its By-laws and Competition
Rules within one month of the Annual General
Meeting, for acceptance or modification by the
New South Wales Rugby Football League.
3. In case of a Branch League having no
Competition Rules, or in the event of a Branch
League’s Competition Rules being rejected, the
rules contained in Schedule herein shall be deemed
to be the Competition Rules of such Branch
League.


The Schedule of Competition Rules to
Govern Country Branch League Matches,
referred to in Rule 3.
1. Matches shall be played in accordance with
the rules of Rugby Football as set out herewith.
(a) All matches shall be arranged by ballot,
for dates fixed by the Committee.
(b) The team having the best record in all
Competition Matches played shall be the
Premier Club for the season.
(c) The best record shall be decided by Com-
petition Points. A win shall count as two
points, and a draw as one point. In the
event of a tie occurring for the Premiership
the Clubs concerned shall play off.
(d) If a Club forfeits to another the match
shall count as a match played, and be
declared in favour of the Club forfeited to.
(e) A bye shall count as a win.
2. Any person who is a bona fide resident within
the jurisdiction of the League shall be eligible to
play with any Club affiliated to the League, subject
to By-laws framed by the Branch Leagues.
3. No person shall play with more than one
Club in Competition Matches during any one
season.
(a) A player shall not be qualified to play
with any Club if his membership subscrip-
tion is in arrears.
(b) If, after the commencement of these Com-
petition Matches, a player of any Club


affiliated to this League shall remove from
the territory of one Branch League to
within the territory of another Branch
League, and shall produce a letter from
the Secretary of the former Branch League
stating that he is no longer a playing
member of such Club, such player may
play for any Club formed under the last-
mentioned Branch League upon satisfying
the Committee that he intends to remain
a bona fide resident of such district.
(c) Players residing within the State, who
may desire to take part in the Competition
Matches arranged by the Committee, may,
in the discretion of the Committee, be
permitted to do so, and shall play with
such Club as the Committee may direct.
4. Bona fide resident means a person w 7 ho
usually sleeps for at least five nights of the week
within the jurisdiction of the League.
5. Any Club playing an unqualified player shall
lose the match in which such player took part.
6. Players shall appear in proper football uni-
form, which shall consist of jerseys (with sleeves to
the elbows) with the Club’s registered colours
knickers to knees, boots or shoes, and whole hose.
7. A Referee shall be appointed for each match
by the Committee, or failing such appointment, by
the Secretary of the Branch League; and, in the
event of the Referee so appointed not attending
within 15 minutes after the time at which the
match is fixed to commence, then a Referee shall be
appointed by the captains of the opposing Clubs.
(a) The Committee shall have power to annul
a match and order it to be re-played on


the ground of incompetence or misconduct
of the Referee.
(b) The Referee shall, without delay, report to
the Secretary of the Branch League any
instance of rough or foul play, or other
instance of misconduct occurring during
the progress of a match, whether such
misconduct shall have led to a player
being ordered off the field or not.
(c) A player who is reported under the pre-
ceding section shall be disqualified from
playing until his case shall have been
dealt with by the Committee, and any
Clubplayingany such playerso disqualified
shall lose the match in which such dis-
qualified player took part.
8. Matches shall commence at such times and be
played upon such grounds as may be directed by
the Branch League Committee, or failing such
directions, by the Secretary of the League, and any
Club not prepared to commence a match within 15
minutes of the time directed, shall forfeit it, unless
a satisfactory reason for the delay be given to the
Committee.
(a) Each match shall be played in two divisions
of time, each division not less than 40
minutes, with interval of not more than
10 minutes, unless the Committee or
Referee on the field of play shall other-
wise direct. In the event of an alteration
in the playing time, the captains must be
informed prior to the start of the match
by the Referee, and the game must be
played in two equal divisions.
(b) The fitness of the ground to be played upon
shall be decided on the field by the cap


tains, failing to agree, the Referee to
decide.
(o) The Committee may disapprove of any
ground, and direct a match appointed to
be played upon it to be played elsewhere.
(d) In the event of any team playing with
more than 13 men, it shall be the duty
of the opposing captain to direct the
Referee’s attention to the fact, and he
shall disallow all points scored by the
offending side up to that time, and shall
order the removal of such extra player or
players from the field of play, and if such
order be not complied with within five
minutes, the Referee shall award the
match to the opposing team.
(e) If a team begin a match with less than
13 men it may fill the vacant place or
places at any time during the game ; but
if it shall begin a match with 13 men,
and for any reason except misconduct, one
or more cease playing, his or their places
may be filled with the consent of the
opposing captain. In the case of a player
being ordered off the field for misconduct
his place shall not be filled, and if such
order be not complied with within five
minutes, the Referee shall award the
match to the opposing team.
9. The Committee shall investigate, decide, and
deal with all appeals, proceedings, protests, and
disputes in connection with the Competitions.
(a) An appeal from a decision of a Referee on
a matter of law shall be dismissed if the
captain of the appellant Club shall have


failed to formally challenge such decision
on the field of play.
(b) In a case of an appeal from a decision of a
Referee, or in the case of a protest on the
ground of incompetence or misconduct of
the Referee, a written statement giving
the grounds on which the appeal or pro-
test is founded must be made.
(c) All appeals and protests must be in the
hands of the Secretary of the League not
later than the seventh day after the match,
and a copy of such statement shall, within
the same time, be furnished by the Club
appealing or protesting, to the Secretary
of the opposing Club, and to the Referee
of the match.
(d) All appeals and protests shall be in writing,
and be accompanied by a deposit of 10s.,
which shall be forfeited should the Com-
mittee consider the appeal or protest
frivolous or groundless.
10. In any case where matters are left by the
Committee to the discretion of the Secretary, there
shall be the right of appeal from the decision of
the Secretary.
11. Country Branch League Teams visiting
Sydney under the direction of the New South
Wales Rugby Football League to play Country
League Matches, the expenses of such teams, such
as board and lodgings, and fares, to be paid by the
New South Wales Rugby Football League, and in
addition, after defraying all expenses, 20 per cent,
of the net proceeds to be divided between the
visiting Branch League Teams.
12. Country week to be held May 30th, June Ist
and 3rd.


13. The winning team of Country League
Matches played in Sydney to play the winners of
the First Grade District Competition on grounds
chosen by the Committee of the New South Wales
Rugby Football League. The proceeds of such
matches, after defraying all expenses, to be placed
to the credit of the Assurance Fund.
14. The winners of the Inter-League Country
Matches, and the winners of the District Competi-
tion, to play on the following Saturday of the Dis-
trict Competition First Grade Final.
15. In all matches played in the country by
Metropolitan Teams, the whole of the net proceeds
to go to the Country Branch League or Club the
Metropolitan Teams are playing.
16. Each Metropolitan Team visiting the Country
Districts to defray its own expenses.
JAS. J. GILTINAN,
Hon. Sec.


THE LAWS
OF THE
GAME OF FOOTBALL.
AS PLAYED BY THE
New South Wales Rugby Football League.
1. Introduction.
1. The Rugby Game of Football should be
played by 13 players on each side. The field-of-
play shall not exceed 110 yards in length, nor 75
in breadth, and shall be as near these dimensions
as practicable. The lines defining the boundary
of the field-of-play shall be suitably marked, and
shall be called the goal-lines at the ends, and the
touch-lines at the sides. On each goal-line and
equi-distant from the touch-line shall be two
upright posts, called goal-posts, exceeding 11 feet
in height, and placed 18 feet 6 inches apart, and
joined by a cross-bar 10 feet from the ground ; and
the object of the game shall be to kick the ball
over this cross-bar and between the posts. The
game shall be played with an oval ball of as nearly
as possible the following size and weight, namely—
Length _ 11 to 11 Jin.
Length circumference ... ... 30 ~ 31 ~
W idth circumference 25J ~ 26 ~
Weight 13 „ UJoz.
Hand-sewn and not less than 8 stitches to the inch.


11. Glossary-Duties of Officials—Scoring.
2. The following terms occur in the laws, and
have the respective meanings attached to each :
Dead-Ball Line.—Not more than 23 yards behind
and equi-distant from each goal-line, and parallel
thereto, shall be lines, which shall be called the
Dead-Ball Lines; and if the ball, or player hold-
ing the ball, touch or cross these lines, the ball
shall be dead and out of play.
In-Goal.—Those portions of the ground imme-
diately at the ends of the field-of-play and
between the touch-lines, produced to the dead-
ball lines, are called In-Goal. The goal-lines are
in-goal.
Note.— A haU placed on the goal-line hy an
attacking player is a try, and hy a defending player
a touch-down.
I ouch. —Those portions of the ground immediately
at the sides of the field-of-play and between the
goal-lines, if produced, are called Touch. The
touch-lines are in-touch.
Note.— A player may he in touch and yet play
the hall with his foot if the ball he not in touch.
Todch-in-Goal.—Those portions of the ground
immediately at the four comers of the field-of-
play, and between the goal and touch-lines, if
respectively produced, are called Touoh-in-Goal.
Note.— lf the bailor a player holding it touch one
o f the corner posts or flags, the ball must he con-
sidered as in touch-in-goal. A player may himself
he in touch-in-goal and yet play the hall with his
foflt _ if the hall he not in touch-in-goal, or, under
similar case, he may touch it doion with his hands
and score a try.


A Drop-Kick is made by letting the ball fall from
the hands, and kicking it the very instant it
rises.
A Place-Kick is made by a player kicking the ball
after it has been placed on the ground.
A Punt is made by a player letting the ball fall
from his hands and kicking it with his foot before
it touches the ground.
A Tackle is when the holder of the ball is held by
one or more players of the opposite side.
Note.— Held is when the player carrying the ball
cannot pass it.
A Scrummage, which can only take place in the
field-of-play, is formed by one or more players
from each side closing round the ball when it is
on the ground, or by their closing up in readi-
ness to allow the ball to be put on the ground
between them.
Note.— When an attaching side in a scrummage
pushes the defending side over the in-goal line and
touches the hall down , a try should be allowed but
if the hall he touched down by the defending side , a
touch-down should be alloioed.
A Try is gained by the player who first puts his
hand on the ball on the ground in his opponents’
In-goal.
A Touch-down is when a player touches down as
above in his own In-goal.
A Goal is obtained by kicking the ball from the
field-of-play, except from a punt, from a kick-off,
or from a drop-out, over the opponents’ cross-
bar, whether it touch such cross-bar or the goal
posts or not.
Note. — A goal is scored if the ball has crossed the
bar , although it may be blown bach afterwards.


Knooking-on and Theowing-Foewaed are pro-
pelling the ball by the hand or arm in the
direction of the opponents’ In-goal.
Note.— A rebound is not a knock-on, and there-
fore no fair catch can be made therefrom, or a
penalty be given. If a ball is passed back, hut after
alighting on the ground is blown forward, the pass is
good, provided the ball did not alight in front of the
passer.
A Fair-Catch is a catch made direct, and at the
first attempt, from a kick, or knock-on, or throw
forward by one of the opposite side ; the catcher
must claim the same by immediately making a
mark with his heel at the spot where he made
the catch.
Kick-off is a place kick from the centre of the
field-of-play ; the opposite side may not stand
within ten yards of the ball, nor charge, other-
wise another kick-off shall be allowed. If the
ball pitch in touch it must be scrummaged at
centre.
Note. — A ball from a kick-off having reached ten
yards and then blown back, shall be considered as in
play, as also a ball having reached the 25 yards line
from a drop-out and blown back. If a player goes
beyond the 25 yards to drop out, or if he punts, the
referee must order a scrummage at the centre of the
25 yards line.
Dbop-out is a drop-kick from within the half-way
line after a try is scored, or from within 25 yards
of the kicker’s goal line after a minor point,
within which distance the opposite side may not
charge, otherwise another drop-out shall be
allowed. If the ball pitch in touch it must be
scrummaged at the centre of the half-way line
or 25 yards line as the case may be.


At kick-off the ball must reach the limit of ten
yards, and at drop-out must reach the half-way
line or 25 yards’ line, as the case may be ; if
otherwise, after a kick-off or drop-out after a
try, the ball shall be scrummaged at centre, and
after a minor point in the middle of the 25 yards’
line.
3. In all matches a Referee and two Touch-
Judges must be appointed. The Referee must
carry a whistle, which he must blow in the follow-
ing cases :
(a) When an infringement takes place, whereby
the side committing such, gain an advan-
tage
Note. —This is a most important rule, and at pre
sent is not so generally observed by referees as it
shoidd be. There is, unfortunately, a pronounced
tendency on their part to whistle immediately a law
has been infringed without waiting to see who gains
the advantage of the Infringement. The League
desire to urge referees to pay greater regard to this
rule in future.
(b) When a player makes and claims a fair catch.
(c) When he notices rough or foul play or miscon-
duct, he shall either caution the player or
order him off the ground ; in the latter case
he must not allow' him to take any further
part in the game, and report him to this
League.
(d) When he considers the continuation of play
to be dangerous.
'Nom. —lf a player be hurt, the referee should not
blow his whistle till the hall be dead, unless such
injured player is in a position that continuance of
play mould entail further danger. Having regard


to the numerous stoppages of play caused through
players having to replace hoot laces , &c., the League
desire that the game should not he stopped for trivial
causes.
(e) When he allows a decision given by a touch-
judge.
(/) When he wishes to stop the game for any
purpose.
ig) If the ball, or a player running with the ball,
touch him.
(A) At half-time and no-side, he being the sole
timekeeper, having sole power to allow
extra time for delays; but he shall not
whistle for half-time or no side until the
ball be held or out of play.
The referee shall be sole judge in all matters of
fact (except as to touch and touch-in-goal play as
hereinafter provided), but as to matters of law,
there shall be the right of appeal to the New South
Wales Rugby Football League.
A referee having given a decision after blowing
his whistle cannot under any circumstances alter
it.
The Touch-Judges shall carry flags, and shall
each take one side of the ground, outside the field
of play, and their duty shall be to hold up their
flag when and where the ball goes into touch, or
touch-in-goal.
The Referee shall accept all decisions of neutral
Touch Judges as to Touch and Touch in Goal play,
but in every other respect shall have sole control
of the game, and may blow his whistle without
Waiting any appeal. It shall be the duty of a
Judge to report to the Referee any rough,


or foul play, or obstruction which may have escaped
the notice of that official.
Note. When the ball or player carrying the hall
touch or cross the touch-line, the touch judge must
stand with flag uplifted at the point where the halt
or player entered touch until a scrummage has been
formed.
When the ball drops directly into touch from a kick,
and consequently has to be taken back to the place
from whence it was kicked, the touch judge must
wave his flag above his head until he is observed by
the referee.
When the ball or the player carrying it goes into
tonch-in-goal, the touch judge should immediately
run to the spot and wave his flag over his head.
When a touch judge has gone behind the goal-posts
to assist a referee in deciding whether or not a goal
has been scored, he should raise his flag above his
head if a goal has been scored; if otherwise, he shoidd
wave his Hag across his body, the flag pointing
downwards.
Touch judges should always hold themselves in
readiness to assist the referee in the detection of
rough or foul play or obstruction.
Examples :
(а) A player, running with the ball , kicks into the
field-of -play, away from touch, and follows up
to regain possession or to put his colleagues
“ on-side.”
(б) A player passes the hall to one of his own side,
and follows up for the re-pass.
In the above, or similar, cases, where it is plain
that the ball is not going towards touch, but clearly
into the field-of -play, touch judges must devote their
particular attention to the player who has kicked or


passed the hall, and , in the event of his being
obstructed or interfered vnth in following up, the
touch judge must immediately report to the referee
by advancing into the field of play with his flag
uplifted until he attracts the attention of the referee .
He should , meanwhile , be careful 7iot to lose sight of
the offending player.
4. The Captains of the respective sides shall
toss for the choice of In-goal or the kick-off. Each
side shall play an equal time from each In-goal,
and a match shall be won by a majority of points ;
if no point be scored, or the number be equal, the
match shall be drawn.
The following shall be the mode of scoring—
A Try ... ... equals three points.
A Goal ... ... ~ two points.
In case of a goal from a try, the try to count in
addition to goal.
5. At the time of the kick off all the kicker’s
side shall be behind the ball; if in front the
Referee shall order a scrummage where the kick-
off took place. The game shall be re-started by a
kick-off—
(a) After a goal by the side losing such goal and
(b) After half-time, ty the opposite side to that
which started the game.
111. Mode of Play—Definitions.
6. When once the game is started the ball may
be kicked or picked up and run with by any player
who is on-side, at any time; except that it may
not be picked up—
(a) In a scrummage.


(b) When it is on the ground after a player has
been tackled.
(c) When it has been put down after it has been
fairly held.
It may be passed or knocked from one player to
another provided it be not passed, knocked, or
thrown forward. If a player, while holding or
running with the ball, be tackled, and the ball
fairly held, he must at once put it down in front
of him between himself and his opponents’ goal
line.
Note.— The ball is deemed to be fairly held vnthin
the meaning of Rule G token the player's progress is
effectually stopped and he is unable to pass the hall,
or when a player is tackled and the hall comes into
contact with the ground.
Ij a player is tackled from behind, the ball is not
necessarily dead because the tackier succeeds
in getting his hands upon it unless the man in
possession is stopped also. On the other handy
if a player is tackled in front and held up so
that he cannot pass the ball, the tackier must
instantly release his opponent , and the man in
possession must at once drop the ball on to the
ground, when it may be played with the foot
by either side .
7. A player is placed off-side if the ball has
been kicked, touched, or is being run with by one
of his own side behind him. A player can be off-
side in his opponents’ In-goal, but not in his own,
except where one of his side takes a free kick
behind his goal line, in which case all of his side
must be behind the ball when kicked.
8. An off-side player is placed on side —
(a) When an opponent has run five yards with
the ball.


(i) When the ball has been kicked by, or has
touched an opponent, * nas
him
id) When one of his side has run in front of him
I having kicked the ball when behind h?m
'xzzzz r, J“»/
«. tea, „„ rh „
for the ball. On any /reach of thfs h.wV IDg
site side shall be awarded at their option—* ° PP °'
(6) lake^aith^ma^ 06 ° f SUCh breach bei "g
•Sr* =ttssauiftss
retiring beyond ti o z j> f* P^ oxi ' m ' l ty whd not
.^ZszLi'iis:


and it drops from his hands to the ground. An
opponent who is off-side and who is standing or has
approached within 5 yards of him, immediately
pounces upon him and prevents him recovering and
playing the hall. A free-hick should he awarded, as
it was the duty of the off-side player to have retired
beyond the 5 yards' limit. Referees too often give
offending players the benefit of unintentional of-side,
instead of inflicting the free-hick penalty. A player
when off-side can intercept a pass from an opposing
player , but he can only make a mark for a fair
catch if the pass intercepted is a forward one. A
player standing within the 5 yards' limit cannot
under any circumstances be placed on-side.
9. If a player makes a fair catch his side shall
be awarded a free kick. #
A player may make a mark and claim a fair
catch in his own In-goal, in which case the oppos-
ing side may line up to goal line, but not beyond..
An opponent is put on side when a player fails
to catch the ball at the first attempt.
10. All free kicks may be place kicks, drop
kicks, or punts, but must be in the direction of
the opponents’ goal line, and across the kicker s
goal line if kicked from behind the same. They
may be taken at any spot behind the mark in a
line parallel to the touch lines. In all cases the
kicker’s side must be behind the ball when it is
kicked, except the player who may be placing the
ball for a place-kick. In case of any infringement
of this law the referee shall order a scrummage at
the mark where the defending side are lined up.
The opposite side may come up to and stand
anywhere on or behind a line drawn through the
mark and parallel to the goal line, but must not
charge, or raise their hands higher than their
heads. Should the ball not reach the line of
mark the referee shall order a scrummage. |


IV. Penalties.
11. Free kicks by way of penalties shall be
award eil if any player—
(a) Intentionally either handles the ball, or falls
down in a scrummage, or picks the ball out
of a scrummage.
(b) Illegally tackles, charges, or obstructs, as in
law 8.
(c) Wilfully puts the ball unfairly into a scrum-
mage.
( d) Not himself running at the ball, charges or
obstructs an opponent not holding the ball.
(e) Not in a scrummage, gets in a line with any
of his forwards before the ball comes out of
such scrummage.
(/) V\ ith his hands pushes an opponent running
for or dribbling the ball.
Note. — A player running ai the hall may charge
an opponent also running at the hall, but such charge
may only be with the shoulder.
( g) Makes a deliberate knock-on or throw for-
ward.
(A) Detaches himself from a scrummage once
formed and re-enters at the side.
(i) Exercises unnecessary delay in putting ball
in a scrummage.
O') Being in a scrummage lifts a foot from the
ground before the ball has been put in. If
a player lifts his foot in a scrummage when
the ball is about to be put in a scrummage,
the referee may penalise such player, al-
though the ball has not been put in.
(k) Puts his foot across the opening in the
scrummage.
(l) Foul play of any kind.
(m) Having the ball does not immediately put it
down in front of him on being held.
3


{n) Being on the ground does not immediately
get up before putting the ball down.
Note. — The object of subsection (n) is chiefly to
prevent accident which otherwise might be caused by
players kicking at the ball before the man is properly
on his feet. When players have realised what they
are expected to do, there should he little difficulty in
seeing that the rule is properly carried out.
Examples :
When a player is tackled by an opponent and both
players go down to the ground , the tackier
must immediately get up. and must not use
the body of his opponent to assist himself in
doing so. He is then out of the game until the
ball is put down, and must in no way obstruct
until this has been done. The man tackled
must retain possession of the ball until he has
gained his feet (which he shoxdd do without
delay), when he must at once put the ball
down on the ground in front of him. The
ball is then in play , and may be played with
the foot by either side.
If a player, after being tackled and brought down
(the ball having come into contact xuith the
ground), wilfully throw the hall away from
him whilst still on the ground, he shoxdd be
penalised under Buie clause (n), or in extreme
cases under Rxde 13. On the other hand,
shoxdd the referee he satisfied that the hall has
escaped from the hold of a player or players
accidentally, he should then order an orthodox
packed scrummage.
A Properly Constituted Scrummage should
ALSO BE ORDERED :
(a) When a number of players go down to the
grouxid together, and the referee is of opinion
that contixiuaiion of play would he dangerous.


(h) In cases where a breach of rule is committed by
both sides,
(c) the referee is unable to definitely decide
which side is to blame for “ playing the hall, 01
Note. —ln order to prevent wrestling, dec., when
a player _ is tackled and the ball held, the referee
shall indicate to the players his decision that the ball
is “held” by giving verbal instructions to “play
the ball”
fo) Prevents an opponent getting up or putting
the ball down.
(p) any player or team wilfully and systemati-
cally endeavour to prevent the formation of
a fair and properly formed scrummage.
The places of infringement shall be taken as the
mark, except when a player is foully charged
or deliberately obstructed after he has got in
his kick, in which case the free kick shall be
taken where the ball drops or crosses the
touch-line, or at any spot behind where the
ball drops or crosses the touch-line or goal-line
in a line parallel to the touch-line, instead of
where the breach occurs.
The Referee may refrain from putting the provisions
of this law into effect in cases where he is
satisfied that by enforcing them he would be
giving an advantage to the opposing side.
Note, —Referees when penalising a player should
state to such player his reason for doing so.
Referees are justified in sending a player off the
field who persistently and wilfully breaks the rules of
the game (by systematically lying off-side, repeatedly
putting ball unfairly into a scrummage, he., dec.),
as such action is deemed misconduct. Before taking
this extreme course, however, a warning should be
given to the offending player .
In cases where circumstances in connection ivith
a match are likely to he made the subject of official


investigation , referees-are instructed to decline to he
interviewed , or to give information in any form
pending the Committee's inquiry .
V. General,
12. The ball is in touch when it or a player
carrying it touch or cross the touch line. When
the ball drops directly into touch, it shall (except
in the case of a penalty kick) be brought back and
scrummaged at the spot from whence it was kicked ;
in all other cases it shall be taken into play ten
yards from and at right angles to the touch line,
and there put down and scrummaged.
13. When a side has scored a try, the ball shall
be brought from the spot where the try was gained
into the field-of-play, in a line parallel to the
touch-lines, such distance as the placer thinks
proper, and there shall be placed for a kick at goal.
It is the duty of the defending side to see that the
ball is taken out straight.
The referee shall award a try if, in his opinion,
one would undoubtedly have been obtained but for
unfair play, interference of the defending side, or
encroachment of spectators over dead ball line.
Or, he shall disallow a try and adjudge a touch-
down if, in his opinion, a try would undoubtedly
not have been gained but for unfair play or inter-
ference of the attacking side. In case of a try so
allowed, the kick at goal shall be taken at any
point on a line parallel to the touch-lines, and
passing through the spot where the ball was when
such unfair play or interference took place. In
case a player, when running with the ball, crosses
his opponents’ goal line, and then touches the
referee or touch-judge, he shall be allowed a try
where such official was touched. Where a player,
running out of his own in-goal, touches the referee
or touch-judge, the ball is dead at the spot where


such official is touched, and a kick-out must he
taken, unless the player has run back behind his
own goal line, in which case the ball must be
scrummaged at the spot whence it was carried
back. A player may, for the purpose of getting a
try in a more favourable position, pick up a ball
lying motionless over his opponents’ goal line.
14. If the ball, when over the goal-line and in
possession of a player, be fairly held by an oppos-
ing player before it is grounded, it shall be
scrummaged five yards from the goal-line opposite
the spot where the ball was held.
15. After a touch-down, or if the ball after
crossing the goal-line go into touch-in-goal or
touch or cross the dead-ball line, it shall be brought
into play by means of a drop-out, when all the
kicker’s side must be behind the ball when kicked ;
in case any are in front the referee shall order a
scrummage on the 25 yards line, and equidistant
from the touch lines.
16. When a player knocks or throws the ball
forward, any player of the opposite side may play
the hall; hut should he or any player of his own
side play the hall it shall at once be brought back
to where such knock on, or throw forward took place,
and there put down and scrummaged. If the hall
or any player running with the hall touches the
Referee, it shall there he put down and scTUinntagtd.
A player who accidentally knocks the hall on shall
not he penalised if he obtains possession before it falls
to the ground ,
. Ia all ca ses where the ball is made dead
in m-goal by a defending player after having last
touched one of his own side in the field of play, or
if a player kick, pass, knock, or carry the ball
across his own the ball shall be brought
back and a scrummage formed in held of play at
the spot whence it was touched, kicked, passed,


knocked, or carried back. Under any other cir-
cumstances a player may touch down in his own
in-goal.
Note. —The words , “or if a player, hick, pass,
knock , or carry the hall across his own goal line,”
only applies in cases where the hall is made dead hy
the defending side.
Heeling hack over own goal line shall he con-
sidered as wilfully kicking hack. If when a hall is
passed hack, the would he receiver fumbles it so that,
it goes over his own goal line , the referee shall decide
whether such fumble were intentional or not, and
decide accordingly.
18. No tripping up shall be allowed under any
circumstances. No one wearing projecting nails,
or iron plates on any part of his boots or shoes
shall be allowed to play in a match.
19. It shall be imperative for the ball to be put
into a scrummage on the side upon which the
referee is standing, and the ball shall be placed in
the scrummage by one of the attacking team.
20. In case of any law being infringed in in-
goal by the attacking side, a touch-down shall be
awarded; but where such breach is committed
by the defending side a scrummage shall be
awarded 5 yards from the goal-line,.opposite to
the spot where the breach occurred.
But in the case of any law being broken, or any
irregularity of play occurring on the part of either
side not otherwise provided for, the ball shall be
taken back to the place where the breach of the
law or irregularity occurred, and a scrummage
formed there.
JAS. J. GILTINAN,
Hon. Sec.,
N.S.W.R. F.L.
F. Cunninghanie & Co., Printers, Sydney.


3 1508 01256298 4
RU
URIES&SKIN DISEASES
