

f//
PROSPECTUS
THE AUSTRALIAN COMPANY.
His Majesty’s Government has from time to time held out the most flattering en-
couragement to Settlers from the Mother Countryjn many of our most eligible Colo-
nies. We have, therefore, the highest authority for recommending the system of Co- j
lonization, which appears to us the simplest and most efficacious plan of relieving the
inconveniencies occasioned by a redundant Population, and has, at the same time, the
effect of creating employment for Labour and Capital, by opening new Channels for dis-
posing of Manufactures and engaging in Commerce.
Fhom authentic accounts and judicious observation, it appears that Australia,
comprehending New South Wales and Van Dieman's Land , is the most suitable of all
our Colonies for the reception of British Settlers. The fertility of the Soil, the salu-
brity of the Climate, the abundance of Coal, Lime, and Ironstone, Timber, &c., and
the advantages enjoyed by the Colony from the suitableness of its Rivers and Har-
bours for Commerce, must be so well known and appreciated by the intelligent part
of the Public, as to render any lengthened description here superfluous.
Governor Macquarie concludes his recent Report on the State of the Colony
with expressions of the great gratification he had experienced throughout every part
of his tour, arising from the happy situation of the people, the fertility of the soil,
and the beauty of the country at large, which, at no distant day, must, he thinks, be
raised to the proud distinction of being one of the most valuable Colonies belonging to
the British Crown ; —a period which, he farther observes, will be hastened by the re-
cent respectable Settlers with considerable property.
The temperature of Van Dieman’s Land is not sufficiently high for the cultiva-
tion of the Vine*T but, introduction of the Merino Sheep, the Wool has been al-
ready so much improved, as to leave no doubt it will soon become a valuable article of
export to the Mother Country. Mr. Wentworth, a recent and intelligent writer on
the state of the Colony, supposes that, twenty years hence, this single article will
raise the Colonies of New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land to as high a pitch of
happiness and prosperity as is enjoyed by any portion of his Majesty’s subjects in any
quarter of the Globe; and that they may be enabled to ship for Great Britain every
year to the value of a Million Sterling. The exports at present consist of Cattle, Sheep,
Wool, Flour, Corned Meats, Hams, Tongues, Hides, Dried Fish, Tallow, Barilla, Bark
for tanning Leather, Seal-skins, and Oil, Whale-oil, and Spars. The Markets hitherto
open to the Colonies are England, Cape of Good Hope, Mauritius, and the East In-
;V- /.
dies. They also enjoy a considerable home-trade.
The great impediment which has been found to exist against persons availing
themselves of the wise and benevolent resolutions of Government, in regard to Colo-
nization, seems to arise from the want of a regular Communication between the Fo-
reign Settlement and the Mother Country.
Impressed with the conviction of the great advantages which many of our Coun-
trymen would derive by becoming Settlers in Van Dieman’s Land and New South
Wales, and farther satisfied that the establishment of a Systematic Conveyance be-


tween this Country and the Colony is indispensably necessary, before the Public can (
be said to be put in possession of a fair opportunity of availing themselves of the en- /
couragements given by Government to Settlers, the Members of this Company have
associated themselves into a Society, for the purpose of facilitating the Conveyance of .
Goods and Passengers between Great Britain and New South Wales, Van Dieman s /
Land, and adjacent Territories.
Mitch was, no doubt, done to facilitate the intercourse between this Country and
New South Wales and adjacent Islands by the Act 53. Geo. 111, cap. 155, which en-
acted, “ that it shall be lawful for any Subject of his Majesty to proceed to and reside
JcKjLA :
« at any place situated more to the southward than 11° of south latitude, or more to the
“ westward than 64°; or more to the eastward than 150° of east longitude from Len-
ts for any lawful purposes, without any license whatever;” and by a subsequent
Act, Ivhich repealed the law restricting the navigation to Vessels of at least 650 tons
burden.
The Conveyance of Goods and Passengers to New South Wales and Van Dieman’s
XBlWUitjauvi.v.v.vvuu a V V if
Land, and the other neighbouring Settlements, is at present transacted through L.e
medium of vessels belonging to private individuals, and whose object is to make as
much gain as possible by the freight. While we are far from saying that any failure
has taken place, on the part of the Owners of these vessels, to fulfil their engagements
with the Public, we cannot forget the malpractices which have too satisfactorily and
repeatedly been proved to have been committed by the Masters of ships who contract-
ed to transport Emigrants to North America.. So glaring,, indeed, had the abuses
of private Transport Ships become, that the interference of the Legislature was found
necessary ; and, during Mr. Addington’s administration, an act was passed to enforce
a due care of the lives and health of the Passengers, and to prevent an undue profit
on the part of the Owners of the vessel, by crowding it too much.
An individual, though possessed of the utmost decision of character, and tho-
roughly convinced of the benefit and propriety of his becoming a Colonial Settler, may
well be excused for pausing to entrust himself,, in so long a voyage, on the responsi-
bility of private Ship-Owners, with whom he is imperfectly, or, perhaps, not at all
acquainted, and subject to the caprice and exposed to the unskilfulness of the Ship-
master selected by strangers.
Nothing has confessedly so much contributed to the accommodation of Passen-
gers between Leith and London, and given life to the intercourse between Scotland
and England, as the formation of the different public Shipping Companies; and it is
certainly incapable of dispute, that equal, if not greater facility of communication
is necessary between quarters of the Globe so much more remote. /, /
Ample employment for the Vessels of the Company would undoubtedly be found, / , t J
at the existing rate of Emigration, or even in prosecution of the trade of the present
Settlers; but the advantages held out by a regular and secure means of conveyance
to and from the Colony, while they insure a preference in favour of the Establishment
by which the facility is afforded, cannot fail incalculably to increase the extent of com-
munication. An idea may be formed of the length to which Emigration may be car-
ried, when we state, that during three years from 1771, of which there are accurate
accounts of the Emigration from Ireland to America, the average number of Emigrants
was 9,533 annually.. /
Our present limits do not permit us to enlarge on the numerous topics worthy of ( (( .
attention, as connected with the present scheme. We,, however, cannot conclude, with-
out remarking, that the great objection to most schemes of Joint Stock is, that the cf : (i - / ■ *
Partners risk not only the sum advanced or subscribed for by them, but also their
whole property, in consequence of the Company undertaking obligations to a greater , ' y V
extent than the Capital. It is, therefore, peculiarly worthy of notice, that as the Di- ./ /. j J. ,
rectors of the Australian Company cannot, in terms of the Contract, undertake ,fj
obligations beyond the actual Capital, no responsibility to a greater extent can possi- f
bly fall upon the Partners. Accidents may happen to the Vessels of the Company, (al-
nliji
',3? V &
though this may be pretty well guarded by Insurance), or the investments on which
the Funds of the Company are authorized to be employed may prove not so profit- // %
able as was expected ; but, still, more than the the Company can never be /jL-/
spentthe prosecution of the object and business of the Company making it, on the
other hand, become Creditor of the Public for Passage-Money and Freight. The pre- /
sent Establishment, while it combines security against responsibility, holds out the
most favourable prospect of proving lucrative to the Partners, and highly useful to the > '
Country in general.
The following are the leading Articles of the Contract of Copartnery—
Isf, That the firm of the Company shall be The Australian Company;
and the commencement of the Copartnership declared to have been upon the 31st
October 1822, from thenceforth to continue for the space of Forty-five Years, capa- A
1 . .. . C C Xli-tf -r- ,t> 1
ble of being dissolved or prorogated, under certain conditions.
2d, That the object and business of the Company shall be, the Conveying and ;/( C
Carrying of Goods and Passengers between Leith and the Ports in New South Wales / (r/ •/;/,.
and Van Dieman’s Land, and adjacent Territories, and in such description of Vessels
as it may be thought advisable to use or employ. A /LZ f iV
3d, That the Capital Stock of the Company shall be One Million Pounds Ster-
ling, divided into Shares of One Hundred Pounds each, payable, by certain instal- / / 7
ments, as may be required by the Committee of Management. The Shares of the
Company to be transferable by the Partners, under the usual restrictions stipulated
for in Joint Stock Companies.
4 thy That the Capital Stock of the Company shall be invested in the purchase j
of Vessels and their appurtenances. Wharfs, and other conveniences, necessary for / / V
carrying on the business of the Company; and in the purchase of such Goods and j;] /. ,// ,
Merchandize as the Directors may think necessary, for keeping the Vessels of the 'Tu/
Company employed, or beneficial to Import or Export to and from the Colonies. The V
unemployed Capital to be laid out on proper security.
6th, The affairs of the Company shall be under the direction of Fifteen Gentle- f-fe
men, as a Committee of Management. The persons appointed the Committee of
Management for the first year capable of being all re-elected next year; but the Three 1 luaiteeycm
Persons at the top of the List to retire every succeeding year, and Three other Mem- Clt I A C/ t :
bers of the Company chosen in their stead.
Qlh, A General Meeting of the Company to- be held on the 30th day of Novem-
ber annually, or on the first lawful day thereafter; when an Abstract of the Company’s // (, I tu. « a ' (
Affairs shall be exhibited to the Meeting, and the Election of Directors take place.
7th, That, after the first year, the clear Interest and Profits of the Company shall
be divided annually, under deduction of a per centage, to form a Sinking Fund for
/lAi
contingencies.
Until the Company’s Office is opened, (of which due intimation shall be given),
Persons desirous of becoming Partners are referred, for any further information they
may require, to Mr. William Alexander, Writer to the Signet, at whose Writing-
Chambers, No. 6, Elder Street, the Contract of Copartnery lies for Perusal and
Signature.
Edinburgh , 31st October 1822.


*
'‘; t ■
• I
* ! 'i ■i ■ !;• Or't . ’ .’;t 0 trl; rrdj- £f m J”:?. ; I x- ?*w*, »!</«
: i■’ ‘ • U • ■• r '-i •' / r ’•• * -.'.i V,, ; : ■ ■■■'♦- ; • • ./' f
• ' ' ' ... f I •:(' ■ ‘V. • f i 1 ' :■> r ?.* 9 ' n . .
.;r ' . - i:v » » •. f j ... ■ ■ j : ;
■
. . nr .0
• ' * 3 - - ■ 0 Sfl, >ol\uh , ' ?;!} o;« in. ; an I'
* ... ». ; ,&•■= .»pA- aii A >jj, X,
U V - ■* ■ • -•- * ‘-f
/•
4. - V '
K
• '■
C* *"d
CfJ- h-j
,•■■• ■ g o
*§ E ® 5
o H 3
O rH
■g
*"d
> /„
2J
IT
' • f
-*■ —V . v i— - •
.I* * • ■
/^/
‘
M. //|jf
, //c>
- •
I
I
■
■ .
.
i
