

Miff
*)
h
Gibus, Shallard, and Co., Printers, 108 Pitt Street, Sydney.




RATIONALISM
VERSUS
DOGMA: s
TWO LECTURES
DELIVERED AT THE THEATRE ROYAL, SYDNEY,
IN REVIEW OF
ARCHBISHOP VAUGHAN’S LENTEN DISCOURSES.
By CHARLES BRIGHT.
GEORGE ROBERTSON,
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE , ADELAIDE.
MDCCCLXXI X.




K fp T3
“We see the men of Theology coming out to parley with the men
of Science, —a white flag in their hands, and saying, ‘lf you will let ns
alone, we will do the same by you. Keep to your own province, do
not enter ours. The Reign of Law which you proclaim we admit—
outside these walls, but not within them ; —let there be peace between
us.’ But this will never do. There can be no such treaty dividing
the domain of Truth. Every one Truth is connected with every other
Truth in this great Universe of God.”
Duke oe Argyll.
“ Doubts, to the world's child-heart unknown,
Question us now from star and stone ;
Too little or too much we know,
And sight is swift and faith is slow :
The power is lost to self-deceive
With shallow forms of make-believe.”
Whittier.
~
Vr\ 1




RATIONALISM v. DOGMA.
I- s
In undertaking to criticise, review, and, so far as
in me lies, assail the position taken up by Archbishop
Vaughan in the Lenten lectures, which, in printed
form, have just been published, let no one suppose
for a moment that I underrate the magnitude of the
task; let no one imagine that I, who know myself
to be but one of the rank and tile of the Lreethought
army —a very humble soldier in the great conflict,
—plume myself in the belief that I can measure
swords on anything like equal terms with such an
accomplished and cultured veteran in the ranks
of theological controversy as the Most Reverend
gentleman who stands at the head of the Roman
Catholic organization of this colony. Trained in
all the varied learning of the schools, a master of
dialectics, a subtle logician, an eloquent lecturer,
Dr. Vaughan is distinguished even among the many
eminent men of his church at the present day; and
as a mental athlete I cheerfully accord him the
homage which is his due. Still, inasmuch as it
appears to me, after a careful perusal of the lectures
I hold in my hand, that they are sophistical rather
than philosophical in their main arguments, and
indubitably biassed in the conclusions at which they
arrive, I purpose attempting to traverse the argu-


ments and combat the conclusions, relying simply
on the potency of truth, which is, like beauty,
“when unadorned, adorned the most.” Dr. Vaughan
in his lectures purports to address all “ men of good
willand it is to such I also make appeal, for
with others the power of truth is not likely to be
effective.
The Lenten lectures of the Archbishop w r ere five
in introductory lecture, and discourses
on “Man,” “God,” “Unbelief,” and “Belief.”
The first lecture furnishes a sketch of the proposed
campaign: and here, at the outset, I would point
out that the nature of the conflict now waging in
Christendom is completely misstated. Hence, there
is much —very much —in these lectures with which
the majority of Freethinkers w r ould cordially agree.
The assertion of the dignity and superiority of man
as compared with the brutes, and the loveliness of
the belief in a divine government of the wmrld is
quite acceptable to Rationalism; but Dr. Vaughan
achieves a mighty leap in the conclusion he deduces
from these premises. Thus, on page 11 of this
pamphlet he says, —“ Once believe in God, in man’s
future destiny, in the sanction of Divine law, in the
immortality of the soul, and, if you are logical, you
must of necessity finally join the Catholic Church”
—meaning thereby the organization under the con-
trol of the Roman Catholic priesthood. Now", for
myself, I may say that, while I believe in these
preliminary propositions as firmly as in my exist-
ence, I would as soon think of bowing in worship
in a Roman Catholic temple wdiile a number of
priests were swinging dishes of burning incense


about before the figure of a crucified deity, as I
would of prostrating myself in another temple while
certain other priests were waving smoking joss-sticks
before the squat image of the great Chinese god, Do.
It seems to me that both these performances must
appear alike unworthy and degrading to all who
have learned to repose unwavering faith in the
natural laws of the infinite and inconj|)rehensible
God who rules the universe. It is of this God—the
true God —and His mode of operation in nature that
Science is gradually teaching us to know a little,
and showing us how, in certain directions, we may
emerge from the domain of ‘ c IJnbelief,” or ignorance,
and enter that of rational “ Belief.” So far as
Christianity may not contravene this domain of
“Belief” it is acceptable to nationalism.
But Dr. Vaughan, in arranging his pieces for his
mimic warfare, takes upon himself to play for both
sides of the board, and hence is prepared to score
an easy win. He describes Christianity as all that is
true, good, lovable, and virtuous; he paints what he
terms “Unbelief” —“Denial”—as evil, false, hate-
ful, and vicious ; and then he appeals to his hearers
for their votes as to which is most desirable, inform-
ing them at the same time that if they declare for
Christianity, they must, unless they would be
illogical, embrace Homan' Catholic Christianity, as
that is admitted even by its nationalistic opponents
to be the only logically authoritative system in
Christendom. This is a comparatively easy method
of arguing, but it possesses the disadvantage of
satisfying no one but those devout souls who care-
fully avoid hearing or reading the arguments of


their opponents. Eor these, a man of straw is just
as forcible a figure to overturn as a living man in
armour. Any figure labelled “ Infidelity ”is suffi-
cient for them ; and the easier it tumbles the more
completely convinced are they of its being the genu-
ine article. The Archbishop quotes a fable made
use of by Dr. John Henry Newman in his “ Lectures
on Catholicism in England,” which will serve to
illustrate MS' own position. A lion is conducted by
his human entertainers over a stately palace, and
shown the grand pictures and sculptures it contains.
Many of these represent contests between lions and
men, hut always to the brutes’ disadvantage. There
are Samson rending the lion, and David choking the
lion, and a gladiator dealing a fallen lion the coup
de grace. At last the quadruped exclaims—“ Lions
would have fared better had lions been the artists.”
So is it with Dr. Vaughan’s representations of the
opponents of dogmatic theology —they are made
likewise the opponents of all that is good and beau-
tiful. Of course his paintings were suited to his
audience, and hence their raison d'etre. Rogers,
the poet, used to tell a story of a duel between an
Englishman and a Erenchman, by the terms of
which the two, armed with pistols, were shut up
together in a dark room. After some time the
Englishman, declaring it was a barbarous way of
fighting, discharged his weapon up the chimney—
and brought down the Erenchman. The point of
the story, however, to which I wish to direct your
attention is this—that Rogers always said that when
he told it in Erance he made the Englishman steal up
the chimney. Now, Dr. Vaughan crams his opponents


rhetorically “up the chimney,” and of course they
look strange objects after that.
The “ Religion of Denial ” he sets up for the pur-
pose of overthrowing will he sought in vain in any
recognized school of Rationalistic thought. In
a desultory way I have read as widely of the
literature of Rationalism as most men. The greater
part of my life has been devoted to its study; but
I should he puzzled to discover the whereabouts of
the “hideous idol” which Dr. Vaughan proposes
to “ knock from its pedestal.” Where are these
people who are anxious to prove the non-existence
of God, and the identity of man with the brute P
Surely all this display of indignant rhetoric is but
so much wasted ammunition so far as Dr. Vaughan’s
real opponents are concerned; and if their attack is no
more damaging to him than his to them the warfare
resembles in its character that which was reported a
few days ago in the papers as now waging in one of
the Fijian Islands, where the natives blaze away at
each other from a safe distance, and shrewd Yankee
and German storekeepers stationed between the dire
combatants drive a thriving trade with both parties.
“ Where be these malefactors ” whom Dr. Vaughan
assails ? The Evolutionists seem to he as terrible to
him as the Copernicans were to his predecessors
some three centuries ago, and-tjieir teachings com-
prehend the greater part of his “ Religion of Denial.”
In his opinion, if man came from the “mud fish,”
there can he no religion. Unless he comes directly
from the mud, there is an end of God. But the
Evolutionists deny nothing. They simply put fact
and fact together from the great storehouse of


nature, as the Copernicans did before them, and
hence deduce a marvellous generalization. If their
generalization he placed under papal interdict, like
the Copernican was, so much the worse for the inter-
dict. They are merely anxious to discover God’s
mode of working in nature, and they marshal their
facts and “ bid them speak.” If Theology put itself
in the way-of the facts, as it has done in the past, it
will suffer. Religion will not suffer; for all that is
vital and not idolatrous in it necessarily conforms
itself to Science, which, as Herbert Spencer says,
is only “ opposed to superstitions which pass as
religions.” I take the following from Spencer’s
“ Essav on Education,” p. 51: —
“So far from Science being irreligious, as many
think, it is the neglect of Science that is irreligious
—it is the refusal to study the surrounding creation
that is irreligious. Take a humble simile. Suppose
a writer were daily saluted with praises couched in
superlative language. Suppose the wisdom, the
grandeur, the beauty of his works, were the con-
stant topics of the eulogies addressed to him. Sup-
pose those who unceasingly uttered these eulogies on
his works were content with looking at the outsides
of them; and had never opened them, much less
tried to understand them. What value should we
put upon their praises ? What should we think of
their sincerity ? Yet, comparing small things to
great, such is the conduct of mankind in general in
reference to the Universe and its Cause. Nay, it is
worse. Not only do they pass by without study these
things which they daily proclaim to he so wonderful;
but very frequently they condemn as mere triflers


those who give time to the observation of Nature
—they actually scorn those who show any active
interest in these marvels. We repeat, then, that
not Science, hut the neglect of Science, is irreligious.
Devotion to Science is a tacit worship—a tacit recog-
nition of wortli in the things studied; and, by
implication, in their Cause. It is not a mere lip-
homage, but a homage expressed in actions —not a
mere professed respect, but a respect proved by the
sacrifice of time, thought, and labour.
“ Nor is it thus only that true Science is essentially
religious. It is religious, too, inasmuch as it gene-
rates a profound respect for, and an implicit faith
in those uniformities of action which all things
disclose. By accumulated experiences the man of
science acquires a thorough belief in the unchanging
relations of phenomena—in the invariable con-
nection of cause and consequence—in the necessity
of good or evil results. Instead of the rewards and
punishments of traditional belief, which people
vaguely hope they may gain, or escape, spite of
their disobedience; he finds that there are rewards
and punishments in the ordained constitution of
things; and that the evil results of disobedience
are inevitable. He sees that the laws to which we
must submit are both inexorable and beneficent.
He sees that in conforming to them, the process of
things is ever towards a greater perfection and a
higher happiness. Hence, he is led constantly to
insist on them, and is indignant when they are
disregarded. And thus does he, by asserting the
eternal principles of things and the necessity of
obeying them, prove himself intrinsically religious.”


It is evident we must not turn to Spencer for our
“ Religion of Denial,” and yet Spencer is one of
the leading heresiarchs whom Archbishop Vaughan
affects to fight.
Tyndall is another. But will Tyndall more
appropriately than Spencer fill the vacant frame of
Denial ? This is what he says in an article entitled
Evolution” in The Ninteenth Cen-
tury.
“Reeling appeared in the world before knowledge;
and thoughts, conceptions, and creeds founded on
emotion had, before the dawn of Science, taken root
in man It is against this objective
rendering of the emotions, this thrusting into the
region of fact and positive knowledge, of concep-
tions essentially ideal and poetic, —that Science,
consciously or unconsciously, wages war. Religious
feeling is as much a verity as any other part of
human consciousness; and against it, on its sub-
jective side, the waves of Science beat in vain. But
when, manipulated by the constructive imagination,
mixed with imperfect or inaccurate historical data,
and moulded by misapplied logic, this feeling tra-
verses our knowledge of Nature, Science, as in
duty bound, stands as a hostile power in its path.
It is against the rnythologic scenery, if I may use
the term, rather than against the life and substance
of Religion, that Science enters her protest. Sooner
or later, among thinking people, that scenery will
be taken for what it is worth —as an effort on the
part of man to bring the mystery of life and Nature
within the range of his capacities; as a temporary
and essentially fluxional rendering in terms of


knowledge of that which transcends all knowledge,
and admits only of ideal approach.”
We must go, it seems, further afield for Dr.
Vaughan’s “Religion of Denial.” It is only the
“ mythologic scenery” of Religion that is in danger,
according to Tyndall; and thus there is a chance
for God to remain in His universe without the
patronage of the Papacy. Will Professor Huxley
oblige our Most Reverend friend hy occupying an
Atheistic position ? In a letter to the Spectator
of Pehruary 10th, 1866, Huxley thus answers a
charge of the kind, at that time brought against
him:—
“I do not know that I care very much about
popular odium, so that there is no great merit in
saying that if I really saw fit to deny the existence
of a God, I should certainly do so for the sake of
my own intellectual freedom, and be the honest
Atheist you are pleased to say I am. As it happens,
however, I cannot take this position with honesty,
inasmuch as it is, and always has been, a favourite
tenet of mine that Atheism is as absurd, logically
speaking, as Polytheism.”
Thus we see that Huxley is as little likely to set
up a No-God as he is to dogmatise about a Triple
God, conceiving both equally illogical.
If we turn to the Rationalists of a past century
shall we be more successful ? It is useless appeal-
ing to Hume, for he is subpoenaed by Dr. Vaughan
himself, on the side of Deity. Surely, Voltaire, if
any one, ought, according to orthodox testimony, to
be the very High Priest of Denial; but he, too, is a
witness for God and Preedom, both in his life and


writings. In his “ Philosophical Dictionary,” he
thus eloquently discourses on the “ Love of God”: —
“We have an infinity of steps to mount above
our grovelling human inclinations before we can
reach that sublime love. Since, however, we have
nothing to rest upon except the earth, let us draw
our comparisons from that. We view some master-
piece of %st in painting, sculpture, architecture,
poetry, or eloquence; we hear a piece of music that
absolutely enchants our ears and souls ; we admire
it, we love it, without any return of the slightest
advantage to ourselves from this attachment; it is
a pure and refined feeling; we proceed sometimes so
far as to entertain veneration or friendship for the
author, and were he present should cordially embrace
him. This is almost the only way in which we can
explain our profound admiration and the impulses
of our hearts towards the Eternal Architect of the
world. We survey the work with an astonishment
made up of respect and a sense of our own nothing-
ness, and our heart warms and rises as much as
possible towards the Divine Artificer.”
Let us catechise yet another priest of the “ Re-
ligion of Denial.” Let us appeal to one who said,
“ The world is my country, to do good my religion,”
and who acted up to his motto on behalf of three
nationalities. How will Thomas Paine look if sum-
moned into Court as a denier of God and a traducer
of Man ? :
“ The Creation is the Bible of a true believer in
God. Everything in this vast volume inspires him
with sublime ideas of the Creator. The little, and
paltry, and often obscene tales of the Bible sink


into wretchedness when put in comparison with
this mighty work. The Deist needs none of those
tricks and shows, called miracles, to confirm his
faith, for what can be a greater miracle than crea-
tion itself and his own existence ? ”
Again, then, I ask where are we to look for the
“ Religion of Denial,” which Archbishop Vaughan
makes such a parade of fighting ? Hum©} Voltaire,
and Paine despise it; Spencer, Tyndall, and Huxley
reject it. We shall ask for it in vain from the
Freethought philosophers—Carlyle, Greg, and F. W.
Newman; from the historians —Buckle, Draper,
and Lecky; from the Political Economists —Mill
and Harriet Martineau; from the revolutionary
statesmen —Mazzini and Garibaldi; from the trans-
cendental poets —Emerson and Victor Hugo. Nay,
even those who chivalrously take the name of
“Atheist,” because it is so abhorred of the Phari-
sees, and heroically resolve to lift it out of the
mire—even these will have none of this “ Religion
of Denial.” Charles Bradlaugh, while pleading for
what he terms Atheism, disowns it. Annie Besant,
in the volume entitled “ My Path to Atheism ”
one of the most religious books that ever issued
from the press —says :
“ Our faculties fail us when we try to estimate
the Deity, and we are betrayed into contradictions
and absurdities; but does it therefore follow that
He is not ? It seems to me that to deny His ex-
istence is to overstep the boundaries of our thought-
power almost as much as to try and define it. We
pretend to know the Unknown if we declare Him
to he the Unknowable. Unknowable to us at


present, yes ! Unknowable for ever, in other possi-
ble stages of existence ? We have reached a region
into which we cannot penetrate ; here, all human
faculties fail us ; we bow our heads on the threshold
of the Unknown.”
Thus she, too —the extreme of the Rationalistic
school—an Archbishop of Atheism, —merely en-
dorses therAruth of the irresistible axiom of Spinoza,
that “ to define God is to deny Him.”
I think, then, we are entitled to ask Hr. Vaughan
against whom or what is his formidable rhetorical
artillery levelled ? Where are we to discover this
“ Religion of Denial,” which he is never tired of
denouncing ? Where among representative Ration-
alists are those men and women to be found who
“ feel as little remorse in denying the existence of
God as they do in denying the existence of the man
in the moon”? Who are “the brazen, self-suffi-
cient votaries of a Negative religion ” ? Where are
we to discover the “ narrow brains ” and the “ pro-
fane hands and tongues ” ? What is it that this
Most Reverend critic stigmatises as “shallow philo-
sophy ” ? Who are they that “wish to destroy
the temple of Religion”? Surely not those who
seek their religion and their God in the marvellous
temple of Nature.
Shall we, then, fail altogether to discover a “ Re-
ligion of Denial ” ? Asssuredly we shall seek it
in vain among Rationalists, for Rationalism is a
Religion of Affirmation, not denial. It affirms the
sufficiency of Nature and the supremacy of Law,
and bids us seek the Infinite Soul of the Universe
there, where He is ever revealing Himself. “ Na-


ture,” says Carlyle, “is the Time-vesture of God,
that reveals him to the wise and hides him from the
foolish; ” and Nature includes human nature,
where, if anywhere, the Divine Mind will especially
he manifested. Rationalism is not a Religion of
Denial, excepting so far as the assertion of truth
leads inevitably to the denial of error. But there
is a Religion of Denial, albeit not one which Arch-
bishop Vaughan would be likely to call upon his
followers to criticise and condemn. The true
Religion of Denial is the religion which denies to man
the possession of a divine nature; denies that Nature
itself is divine ; denies the supremacy of divine law
in the Universe, and attempts to substitute the pitiful
potency of priestly magic; denies human brotherhood
in the interest of a sect, denies the Divine Fatherhood,
and bows down before a three-headed idol seated on
a throne, access to which is only to be secured by
paying court to an army of priestly servitors, who,
forsooth, keep possession of the “ keys” of the palace.
This is the “ Religion of Denial,” the religion of
exclusive salvation to he obtained at the cost of
cringing before your fellow-man, falling on your
knees, kissing the dust, and saying to some poor
puppet dressed in a little brief authority, “By your
leave, sir;” this is the Religion of Denial, which
denies to the natural, free, brave heart everything
excepting damnation. The only God denied by
Rationalism is the God of an eternal Hell —the Hell
which, according to the Augustinian and the
Calvinist, is “ paved with infants not a span long,”
and he is denied, because to accept him is to blas-
pheme against the God of Nature, who speaks in


the human reason and conscience. The God of
Hell must he denied so soon as the God of Law, and
that Law in itself the perfection of Love, comes to
be dimly discerned.
Let us then attempt to obtain a fair statement of
the nature of the conflict at present raging, and
likely for many years to come to continue, in
Christendony It is a conflict between nationalism
on the one hand, as represented by men of science
and philosophers, and Dogma on the other, as
represented by the various priesthoods and their
submissive, because ignorant, flocks. To he just,
we may probably give both sides the credit of
believing that they are contending on behalf of
truth —at any rate, the best men on both sides make
truth their central aim. But there is more faith in
the nationalist because he believes that the Divine
in Nature may he trusted to work itself out in
perfect freedom from, bondage, while the Dogmatist
dare not trust to God, but looks to some human
authority for the salvation of the world. Dogma-
tism declares that human nature is degraded, that
the God which created it is offended at it and
desirous of vengeance, and that the whole natural
world is a horror of desolation, the gateway to yet
greater horror in eternity, from which there is only
one specified loophole of escape. About this loop-
hole there is much difference of opinion among
Christians —the Calvinist pointing to one loophole,
the Arminian to another, and the Homan Catholic
to a third. Nay, each little sect has its own loop-
hole ; and, as a rule, the smaller the sect the more
persistently does it claim for its members that they


are the “ Lord’s people.” These multifarious sects
agree iu scarcely anything else save their denun-
ciations of the Papists, to whom, on account
of their recognition of the Virgin Mary as the
“ Mother of God,” they decline to accord even
the title of Christians; for the “ Lord’s people”
can have nothing in common with the “ Lady’s
people.” But, however they may differ about
the loophole of salvation, all the Dogmatists
agree that Nature is not to he trusted. They are
fearful souls who lack faith in the God of Nature,
and turn with anxious gaze to some human organiza-
tion, or some magical hit of printing for assistance.
This is the condition of the Dogmatist, and Dr.
Vaughan is justified in contending that a dogmatic
Christian must, if he would he logically safe, join
the Homan Catholic Church. That is the proper
receptacle for those who are afraid of freedom. In
the career of that distinguished theologian, John
Henry Newman, this phase of the conflict exhibits
its noblest living exemplar. Bred a churchman —
trained to shrink before the bracing air of freedom —
looking for human authority upon which to lean, hut
with a spirit too penetrating to be satisfied with a
phantasm of authority—he naturally drifted towards
the Papacy, and ended his career of unfettered
theological investigation by the condemnation of
free inquiry and the monkish counsel of submission.
His brother, Prancis William Newman, may be
selected as the representative of the nationalistic
side of the conflict. Of equal ability with the
Tractarian, but with a mind happily widened by
early travel, he learned when comparatively young


to place implicit reliance in the Infinite Father
working through natural laws, and so arrived at the
true Catholicity of regarding all humanity as the
children of God. The Hindoo, the Buddhist, and
the Mahometan were not shut out from the embrace
of his universal faith. He discerned with the poet
Lowell, that; —
“ God sends his teachers unto every age,
To every clime, and every race of men,
With revelations fitted to their growth
And shape of mind, nor gives the realm of Truth
Into the selfish rule of one sole race.”
Accordingly, he preached the gospel of national-
ism, the supremacy of Law, the impossibility of the
sequence of Cause and Effect being shattered by
lawless chance, or supernatural magic, and became
one of the Prophets of Ereethought. Prophet-like,
he has reaped no reward in this world, save that
benediction of conscience, that spirit-baptism, which
sanctifies all those who work simply and loyally
for Truth’s sake. His brother, who was lacking in
faith, and sought the prop of a human organization,
is now a Cardinal —a Prince of one of the mightiest
associations of this world. It has been the same
throughout the ages. Paul would probably have
been made a Bahhi at Jerusalem, had he stuck to
the ceremonial observances of the Pharisees, and
adhered to the cause of the Priests. He obeyed
the voice of his innermost spirit, “proved all things,”
and earned the title of heretic and atheist. In cer-
tain sectarian eyes Newman the Cardinal is secure
of salvation, while Newman the Freethinker is heir
to hell. But the God of nationalism is the Father


of both, and will turn each to further use in the
great hereafter.
In the lives of these two men —both now
approaching the probable end of their days —the
spirit of the age’s conflict is personified —the conflict
between Dogma and nationalism. The one declares
that doubt of the priestly “credos” is diabolical;
the other that it is God-sent, and opens the path
of progress. Dr. Vaughan quotes ofterTlrom Ten-
nyson, and calls him “our greatest living poet.”
He does not quote these lines :
“ You tell me, doubt is Devil-bom
I know not : one indeed I knew
In many a subtle question versed,
Who touch’d a jarring lyre at first,
But ever strove to make it true;
Perplext in faith, but pure in deeds,
At last he beat his music out.
There lives more faith in honest doubt,
Believe me, than in half the creeds.”
“More faith,” because “honest doubt” springs
out of an abhorrence of the God of the creeds and
leads to a dream of a God, infinite and incompre-
hensible indeed, but still infinite and incompre-
hensible in love, not hate, nationalism knows
nothing of God beyond what Science and Philosophy
teach; but that is enough to show that the sulphur-
scented God of the creeds cannot be He. But the
Dogmatists know all about him, can swear that he
is three and vet one, and that he has a wife and a
e/ y
son. They can teach the world how to win his
favour with incantation and ceremony, not by work-
ing for the benefit of humanity, as nationalists in-


cnlcate. These dogmas are born mainly of priestly
pride, and are upheld in the interest of theological
corporations. But the day of Dogma is passing.
Better men are developed outside than within its
folds. If it were true, as Dr. Vaughan affirms, that
godlessness is on the freer side, and godliness on the
side of the dogmatists, we should discern the fact in
the resultsrf hut these point quite in an opposite
direction. Take two fairly representative men of a
great nation —Victor Hugo, bred in the cloister, hut
impelled out of it by the spirit of Ereethought, ami
Mgr. Dupanloup, the late Bishop of Orleans, a res-
pected dignitary of the Church of Exclusive Salvation.
Last year, Victor Hugo delivered a glowing oration
in honour of the centenary of the death of Voltaire,
the champion who dealt a blow at priestcraft, from
the effects of which it has reeled ever since. Eor this
act Monseigneur Dupanloup denounced the poet-
orator, but Victor Hugo was equal to the occasion,
and in the letter he published in reply, we have the
career of the representatives of the two schools of
thought epitomised. He addressed the “ Bight
Beverend Bishop ” as plain “Monsieur,” and wrote
thus :
“ Monsieur, —You are guilty of an imprudence.
You remind those who might have forgotten it that
I was brought up by a Churchman, and that, if
my life began in prejudice and error, it was the
priest’s fault, not mine. That sort of education is
so fatal, that at nearly 10 years of age, as you point
out, I was still under its influence. All that has
been said before. I don’t dwell on it. I have a
certain contempt for mere futilities.


“ You insult Voltaire, and you do me the honour
to revile me. That is your affair.
“You and I are two men, better or worse : the
future will decide between us.
“ The moral sense is so imperfectly developed in
you that you reproach me with the very act which
does me. honour. You undertake to read me a
lesson. By what right ? Who are ydti ? Let us
come to the point. Let us see what sort of a thing
your conscience is, and what mine is. A single
comparison will suffice.
“France has lately passed through an ordeal.
France Avas free. One night a man treacherously
seized her, overthrew her, and gagged her. If a
nation could be murdered, that man would have
murdered France. He brought her near enough to
death to reign over her. He began his reign—since
reign it was —by perjury, ambush, and massacre.
He prolonged it by oppression, by tyranny, by des-
potism, by an indescribable parody on religion and
justice. He was at once a monster and a pigmy.
For him Avere sung the “TeDeum,” the “Mag-
nificat,” the “Salvumfac,” the “ Gloria tibi,” and
the rest. Who sang them ? Ask yourself. The
law abandoned the people to him, the Church sur-
rendered to him the Almighty. Justice, honour,
country, gave way before that man. He trampled
under foot his oath, equity, good faith, the glory of
the flag, the dignity of man, the liberty of the
citizen: that man’s prosperity perplexed the con-
science of mankind. This lasted 19 years. During
that time you were in a palace; I was in exile. Sir,
I pity you. — Victor Hugo.”


Orthodoxy is a worshipper of success and will
tolerate almost any atrocity, so that custom and the
conventional God he not outraged. But Bationalism
views every proceeding with a philosophical eye, and
tries all glittering pretensions with the test-stone of
natural, not priestly, morality, goodness, and virtue.
It turns with disgust from the fulsome formulas of
fashionable flattery —termed religious worship —to
the intrinsically noble and spiritual qualities de-
veloped in the souls of men whose lives are one long
sacrifice to their fellow-men —whose every breath is
an aspiration for human advancement. To the best
thoughts of the best minds it appeals for its ritual, —
to good deeds, not clamorous words, for its evidences
of conversion, —and, thus inspired, leaves with relief
inexpressible, the sickening courts of a servile and
sycophantic Church for the breezy bowers and sun-
illumined temple of the God of Nature.
My object in my last lecture was to endeavour to
show that nationalism, judging it from the ex-
positions of its* most distinguished advocates in
various domains of thought, is not interested in
defending the “ Beligion of Denial ” which Arch-
bishop Vaughan, following the example of nearly all
dogmatic theologians, makes it his principle busi-
ness to attack. So far as there is any “ Beligion of
Denial ” which authoritatively asserts itself, to the
extent that he can wound it, and prove its hollow-
ness and insufficiency, will he be doing the cause of


Rationalism and Rreethought a notable service.
Rationalism objects to dogma of tbe negative kind
just as strongly as to dogma of the
description, if it pass beyond the bounds where it is
prepared to stand or fall by philosophical investi-
gation and scientific proof. The test of truth is its
readiness to submit to the fullest and freest dis-
cussion, and Rationalism is antagonistic to prin-
ciples, whether negative or affirmative, which seek
to shirk this test, and dogmatise where they cannot
demonstrate. There is therefore no extensive con-
flict such as that which is forcibly delineated in
these Lenten lectures. As a work of imagination,
the picture presented by our Most Reverend friend,
—if, without sacrilege, we may term him “ our
friend—is deserving of the highest praise. It is
only when it comes to be inspected from the solid
ground of fact that it melts —
“ Into air, into thin air,
Like the baseless fabric of a vision.”
The conflict, as I have contended, is not one
between those who affirm that there is no God, and
those who uphold godliness; but between the up-
holders of dogma and human authority, and those
who insist on their right to follow Truth wherever
it may lead, and who maintain that Truth can only
be discerned where there is unfettered freedom of
research. The quarrel with the men of science,
now, as ever, arises because they will not submit
themselves to the priesthood. Dr. Vaughan says
“ Lid scientific men —men, that is, whose lives are
dedicated to the investigation of Nature —keep to
their science, and were they content with what can


be demonstrated and verified by it, then they
would be looked upon by the Church as amongst
the benefactors of mankind.” Here we have an
inkling of the true quarrel. Men of science will
not keep to their science, the bounds of science to
lie specified not by themselves but by the Church,
which is supremely ignorant of science. It is the
same quarrel as the Church picked with Copernicus,
Galileo, and Bruno; they would not keep to the
“ science ” prescribed for them by the Church. It
is not only men of science who are thus unaccommo-
dating, but poets and philosophers object, also, to
priestly dictation. The conflict is no new one. It has
been the conflict of the ages. In every epoch there
have been the same struggles between those who have
been swayed by the fresh inspiration of the time
direct from the Eount of Inspiration, and those
who have sought to manipulate the outflow on
behalf of some human organization; —a struggle
between heresy and orthodoxy, freethought and
fettered thought, —between those who worship the
living God in His temple of nature, and those who
have faith in outworn forms, dead ceremonies, and
defunct idols. In the times covered by biblewritings
we discern a similar contest. Ever we perceive
some vagrant and “ Bohemian” Elijah, Elisha, Jere-
miah, or John the Baptist, impelled by an irresistible
influence, forsaking the field or the workshop,
and seeking, in spite of priestly persecution, to
bring men back to Nature and Human Conscience,
the true expositors of God. Ever we see some
poor Jeremiah placed in the stocks, tumbled into
dungeons, tortured by the priests, or some John


the Baptist (invert into the desert, cast into
prison, and put to death by orthodox authority.
Those who betake themselves to Nature, at first
hand, for their God, are certain to become objects
of antipathy to the priesthood whose idle forms
and incantations they heartily, despise. Thus every
fundamental teacher of the race, —Buddha, Jesus,
Bruno, —each one who has listened tdHhe direct
inspiration of Nature rather than to the voice of
tradition and antiquity has had to fight the same
battle, and has earned the same martyr’s crown.
It is similar with the Prophets of Science and
Poetry in our own day, save that enlightment
is spreading, so that the persecuting power of
priestcraft is curtailed. All they are seeking to
inculcate is, that return to natural reason which has
formed the staple tuition of every genuine reformer.
The true conflict of this age, then, is between
Christian Dogma and nationalism, and in coming
to its consideration as Preethinkers, we must never
forget to draw a palpable line of demarcation
between Christian Dogma, and what the orthodox
are fond of terming “Christian Philosophy” and
“ Christian Morality.” Christian Philosophy and
Christian Morality are, so far as they may be really
philosophical and moral, a part of the Philosophy
and Morality of Humanity. Let them be found
where they will, and intermixed with as much
error and superstition as they may, they constitute
a part of the precious possessions of the race
which only folly would disregard. M r e must ever
bear in mind that nationalism includes all that is
not repellant to Beason and Conscience.


My object in the present lecture is to contrast in
a necessarily cursory and superficial manner the
teachings of the Dogmatic and Rationalistic
schools of thought. The radical difference between
them is, that the one is based on an appeal to
Authority, and the other, to individual Conscience;
the one reviles and distrusts human nature and
seeks to control it through fear, the other honours
and trusts it, and proposes to educate it to a know-
ledge of true goodness and consequent happiness.
In seeking to carry out the latter process,
nationalism does not despise Authority, provided
that it is at all times prepared to justify its fitness
and truth. Dr. Vaughan sophistically endeavours
to confound together two very different things, —
the Authority which naturally attaches to de-
monstration and ability, and the Authority which
is born of unchallenged assumption. Thus, on
page 138 of his published pamphlet, he quotes the
following words of a clear thinker, Sir George
Cornwall Lewis : “ Many are the tricks of
speech; and it has become almost a commonplace of
our time to set up in matters of opinion an oppo-
sition between Authority and Truth, and to treat
them as excluding one another. It would be
almost as reasonable to set up an opposition between
butcher’s meat and food.” You will observe that
Sir George Lewis is here very properly condemning
the position of those who assume that Authority
and Truth cannot be identical, but the use which
Archbishop Vaughan would make of the quotation
is to indilce his unthinking hearers to conceive that
Authority and Truth are rarely opposed to each


other. Because it would be absurd to set up a
necessary opposition between butcher’s meat and
food; therefore, all butcher’s meat must be whole-
some food —a proposition which, if half that has
been written lately in Sydney he true, is not likely
to find many ardent believers in this city. That
Authority and Truth may he coincident is a propo-
sition to which Rationalists would readily accede,
hut the very different deduction that Authority is
unlikely to he opposed to Truth is one which con-
tradicts all the facts of history. When Jesus
challenged the power of the orthodox priesthood of
his country and denounced their pretensions, were
Truth and Authority not in opposition ? When
Alexander Borgia was revelling in his papal palace,
and possessed sufficient authority to divide South
America between two of his satellite sovereigns,
was Truth with him, or with the poor miner’s son
begging from door to door for the means of ob-
taining education, with the spirit of the Protestant
Reformation fermenting in his soul? Authority
is doubtless a good thing so long as it is helpful to
the race, hut how is it when it is harmful ?
Dr. Vaughan dwells on the fact that the vast ma-
jority of the people have not time nor inclination to
investigate for themselves, and therefore must rely
on Authority. That contention may he granted,
hut it has no part in the conflict now agitating
Christendom, which turns upon quite other issues.
The question has reference not to those who have
not time nor inclination for personal investigation,
hut to those who have both, and are bent on dis-
seminating the knowledge they obtain; those who


are determined to enquire for themselves and to
teach others. Are they to be prevented by the
“iron hand” of authority? If there he people
who can be longer satisfied'to have their thinking
done for them by a priesthood, let them. It would
be no part of nationalism to bring any other power
to bear on them than that of argument. The
Homan Catholic hierarchy is, doubtless, a magni-
ficent organization from a worldly point of view,
and holds out promises and patents of salvation be-
yond any other confederacy. Its influence among
timid souls is doubtless mighty, and is likely,
for some years, rather to increase than diminish.
In the words of Mr. Gladstone
always been and there still are, no small proportion
of our race, and these by no means in all respects
the worst, who are sorely open to the temptation,
especially in times of religious disturbance, to dis-
charge their spiritual responsibilities by power of
attorney. As advertising houses find custom in
proportion, not so much to the solidity of their
resources as to the magniloquence of their promises
and assurances, so theological boldness in the ex-
tension of such claims is sure to pay, by widening
certain circles of devoted adherents, however it
may repel the mass of mankind.” The claims of a
priesthood which knows well how to advertise
itself are not likely to fail of effect. If all people
were in sound mental health it might advertise
for ever and not secure a single patient. Eut,
alas! people have been drugged into sickness.
They are trained from the cradle to distrust natural
law and the God of Nature; and hence, when a


priesthood points to its grand conclave of clerical
physicians, to its infallible head, to its well-attested
list of undoubted cures, —when it shouts to the
feeble and ailing, “Be in time ! Be in time ! or
the Devil will catch you ! ” —what wonder there
should be a rush on to the painted platform, and that
the medicated nostrums should be in great demand.
But all this is business, and nationalism leaves
it wisely alone. Its opposition to Dogma is based
on other grounds. Dogma is necessarily authori-
tative and persecuting. To the extent of its power
it is repressive to freedom of thought, and hence
Freethinkers are compelled to oppose its advance,
and unmask the true nature of its pretensions.
Every priesthood is of necessity an enemy to free-
dom ; the Roman Catholic priesthood especially so.
The latter body has never surrendered its claim to
persecute, and if its pretensions are admitted, it is
a logical claim. A Boman Catholic Bishop in the
United States openly declared a year or two ago
that the Church had ceased to persecute heretics
for lack of power, not because it deemed it wrong
to do so. To this day, the oath taken by the
bishops of this Church binds them to persecute to
the extent of their power. The words to which I
refer run thus : —“ The rights, honours, privileges,
and authority of the holy Boman Church of our
Lord the Pope, and his foresaid successors, I will
endeavour to preserve, defend, increase, and ad-
vance Heretics, schismatics, and
rebels to our said Lord, and his foresaid successors,
I will to my power persecute and oppose.”*
* Jura, honores, privilegia, et auctoritatem sanctse Romans
Ecclesiae Domini nostri Papse, et successorsm prsedictorum con-


It is because of this indestructible spirit of per-
secution attaching to theological Dogma that it
finds itself confronted by Science. Science does
not purpose to meddle with it in any way, but
unfortunately it is a part of its mission to be per-
petually sticking up feeble barriers across the road
where Science is advancing. In the past these
barriers were far from feeble, and then scientific
men and nationalists were troubled and harassed by
them. Now they are for the most part innoxious
excepting to those who confide in them. It is
amusing, however, to note that dogmatists affect to
consider themselves the injured personages. Thus
Dr. Vaughan says : “We should prefer by far to be
allowed to love and adore our Master in peace; but
the world will not let us ; there is a propaganda of
Denial around us, and we must therefore rouse
ourselves up.” I think I have read something very
like this in iEsop, who tells of a lamb whose propa-
gandist movements were complained of in similar
fashion. The Dogmatic Church has always been
persecuted by this propaganda of Denial. In the
past it took the shape of denying that the earth was
a flat plain, the centre of the universe. It denied
that the sun travelled round this globe; denied that
the world was made in six days, only some sixty
centuries ago. The propaganda in all these cases
really denied nothing, but it advanced its truths
in spite of opposition, and the errors gradually
denied themselves. It is a similar propaganda
which is now troubling Archbishop Vaughan. In
servare, defendere, augere, promovere curabo.
Hsereticos, scbismaticos, et I’ebelles eidem Domino nostro, vel
successoribns prsedictis, pro posse persequar et impugnabo.”


the domains of geology, palaeontology, biology,
embriology, and anatomy, scientific men are pre-
senting fact after fact which go to demonstrate
the process of growth in the earth and the earth’s
inhabitants, are proving by experiment that species
are not immutable but are capable of development
the one from the other, and are indicating the way
in which the apparently ruthless struggle, in Nature
ushers in new and advanced forms of being. Hence
the erroneous notions of a special magical creation
for each species are fading away, to the sore dismay
of the dogmatists, who affirm that they constitute
a portion of their God’s teachings. That these
scientific facts should form a part of the school
tuition is especially galling to the Homan Catholic
priesthood, who are not content with being tolerated
in such teaching as, to them, seems meet, but
want other people to teach according to their
direction. Rationalism is ready to tolerate sys-
tems of instruction of which it must disapprove,
but it cannot permit that its own money and
means shall be used in the propagation of what
it conceives to be “ damnable error.” It is a sad
thing to notice, but it is a fact, that the Roman
Catholic organization is intolerant alike where it is
in a majority and where it is in a minority. A
majority is tolerant, when it allows people who are
in a minority to prosecute their own methods of
teaching, in their own fashion, with their own
resources. At Rome, this toleration is obnoxious to
the Pope, and he is seeking to prohibit,
the establishment of Protestant schools, although
the money for the purpose comes exclusively from


Protestant coffers. A minority is tolerant, when it
is content that the revenue of a secular State shall
be employed for State purposes, and shall not be
diverted into sectarian channels. In Australia and
New Zealand, where the Roman Catholics are in a
minority, they are still intolerant, for they persis-
tently demand that a portion of the State funds
shall he handed over to them to be used for their
own exclusive purposes, nationalism is of neces-
sity opposed to a body thus inimical to public
liberty.
That dogmatic teaching leads logically to per-
secution is almost too apparent to need prolonged
discussion. If people conceive, or affect to con-
ceive, that the welfare of mankind rests upon the
maintenance of certain dogmatic assumptions, in-
capable of proof, they will, of course, resist, by all
means, contrary instruction. Dr. Vaughan says —
“ Grant that man sprang from the mud-fish, and
you have upset Christianity and left the world a
black ruin in a howling wilderness.” A gentleman
who thinks, or says he thinks, that the world is left
“ a black ruin in a howling wilderness,” if man
did not spring, at a bound, from the mud, is
impelled to persecute and, if he can, destroy all
those who attempt to show that man grew out of
the mud by natural gradations, until he reached the
statiou, prophetic of further elevation, where we
now find him. It would be useless, doubtless to
remind Dr. Vaughan of similar asseverations put
forth by his predecessors in bygone centuries.
“ Grant that the earth is not the centre of the uni-
verse, —allow that it is but one comparatively small


planet, among a number, and you upset Christian-
ity and leave the world a black ruin in a howling
wilderness;” such Avas the argument, or substitute
for argument addressed over and over again by the
theologians to Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo. If
such a concession were permitted, they contended
ad nauseam , the scheme of Christian salvation
Avould be shattered. God is not likely tAhave a son
bom and put to death as an atonement for sin on
every planet. Hence the earth must be the centre of
the solar system. It is curious to observe arguments
resembling these advanced here in Australia, at
the Antipodes, which the infallible Church declared
and reiterated had no existence. If the world had
listened to the dogmatic voice of the Pope, we
should not, at this moment, have been here. Our
very existence is an offence to the infallible Papacy,
and how it has condescended to establish a hierarchy
of its own in a place wdiich ought not to exist,
passes my comprehension to determine. Just, how
eA r er, as in the past, it affirmed that the earth could
not be permitted to travel round the sun, so now its
agents denounce the science, which asserts that
species have been, and continue to be, inter-devel-
oped, as “ miserable drivel.” And just as in
the past, it persecuted the enunciators of such
“ miserable drivel,” so would it persecute them now,
if the Spirit of the Age did not interpose its per-
emptory protest.
Let it not be assumed, that the position
occupied by Dr. Yaughan is one peculiar to him,
or the priests of his church. It is common to all
theological dogmatists. The clerical mind, more


especially, is trained to regard the universe from
the point of view of fable, rather than that of
science. Hence, it is that clergymen so rarely
figure in scientific ranks. In an admirable statis-
tical compilation entitled “ English Men of Science”
by Erancis Galton, E. 8.5., the well-known author
of “ Hereditary Genius,” the editor points out what
a small proportion of clergymen, and sons of clergy-
men, among University graduates, become known
in the walks of science, with the
members of other professions. He says —“ It is a
fact, that in proportion to the pains bestowed on
their education generally, the sons of clergymen
rarely take a lead in science. The pursuit of
science is uncongenial to the priestly character. It
has fallen to my lot to serve for many years, on the
councils of many scientific societies; and, excepting
a very few astronomers and mathematicians, about
whom I will speak directly, I can only recall
three colleagues, who were clergymen ; curiously
enough, two of these, the Hevs. Baden Powell and
Dunbar Heath, have been prosecuted for unortho-
doxy ; the third was Bishop Wilberforce, who can
hardly be f said to have loved science; he rarely
attended the meetings, but delighted in adminis-
tration, and sought openings for indirect influence.”
The average clerical mind is, in fact, incapable of
even comprehending the position, ivliich men of
science occupy. Minds of this stamp are so accus-
tomed to look for traces of God, only within their
own petty schemes of theology, that everything
outside seems to them to be godless. They tremble
with fear, and betake themselves to their knees or
36


to anathema, at every advance, which bolder men
make into the region of the unknown. In remote
antiquity, most men were thus timorous. Even of
Socrates, Spencer in his “ Study of Sociology ”
points out (quoting from Grote the historian): —
“ Physics and astronomy, in his opinion, belonged
to the divine class of phenomena, in which human
research was insane, fruitless, and impious.”
And regarding the attitude of the Greek mind
in general he quotes from the same historian :
“ In his (the early Greek’s) view, the description
of the sun, as given in a modern astronomical
treatise, would have appeared not merely absurd,
but repulsive and impious ; even in later times,
when the positive spirit of inquiry had made con-
siderable progress, Anaxagoras and other astro-
nomers incurred the charge of blasphemy for
dispersonifying Helios, and trying to assign invari-
able laws to the solar phenomena.” The application
which Spencer makes of these quotations is pre-
cisely adapted to the gentleman whose utterances
I am reviewing :
“ That a likeness exists between the feeling then
displayed respecting phenomena of inorganic nature,
and the feeling now displayed respecting pheno-
mena of Life and Society is manifest. The ascrip-
tion of social actions and political events entirely
to natural causes, thus leaving out Providence as a
factor, seems to the religious mind of our day, as
seemed to the mind of the pious Greek the dis-
personitication of Helios, and the explanation of
celestial motions otherwise than by immediate
divine agency.”
37


It was Atheism to the Greek dogmatist to
endeavour to prove that the glorious luminary of
the heavens moved by virtue of the mysterious
operation of universal law, and not because a
beneficent God directly conveyed him on his course.
It is Atheism to the Christian dogmatist to advance
evidence showing that man is the outcome of a
similarly mysterious universal law operating on all
preceding animal forms in Nature, and that he was
not moulded, in the male sex, from the mud, directly
by a God, and a subsequent female constructed, on
second thought, out of a superfluous rib.
Rationalism so far from being justly amenable
to the charge of Atheism is intensely^godly; hut its
God is the God of universal law. Its system of
creation —and therein lies its main offensiveness to
the clerical mind —knows of no capricious Potentate,
whom priests may he enabled to worry with their
prolix petitions, or coax with their obsequious
flattery. Its God is infinite and incomprehensible.
If the conflict were really, as the author of a
pamphlet published some time ago in this city,
well expresses it, “ between no God, and a God who
sympathised with the atrocities of the Church of
Rome in the slaughter of heretics ” —Rationalism
would speedily make its choice. Happily there is
no such dire necessity. We arc called upon to
choose between a God of Law, whose revelation is
made in the domain of Nature, which includes all
that the human mind has evolved, and a God of
Magic, whose sole revelation is to he found in a
certain portion of the legends, traditions, and
fancies of the past. Rationalists know that it is


idle to attempt to form a conception of God, but in
any speculations they may put forth they are at
least careful that no degrading, or immoral elements
shall be introduced. The author of these Lenten
lectures forcibly observes: —“I have a supreme
conviction that to lie, to kill, to blaspheme are in
themselves crimes, and never could be made virtues.”
Rationalists contend that this “ supreme conviction”
to which humanity has attained, is a part of the
Infinite God’s infallible teaching, and that we
degrade our ideal of God if we attribute to Him
the commission of “crimes which never could be
made virtues.” Hence they decline to believe that
God instigated a lying spirit to mislead the prophets
of King Ahab so that the monarch might be
deceived to his ruin (1 Kings c. xxii. 2 Chron.
c. xviii); they decline to believe that God com-
manded the Jews to kill their fellow-men and
women among the Amorites, and debauch those
who were virgins (Num. c. xxxi); they reject the
story of God’s giving success to Jephthah and so
entrapping him into the murder of his own
daughter; they will not accept the statement as
true that God killed 70,000 unoffending Jews
because their King, David, annoyed him by
instituting a census. To attribute such things as
these to the Infinite Lather of the universe is in
their opinion the rankest blasphemy, and what is
worse, is inconsistent with the teaching of truth.
At the same time, while rejecting these unwarran-
ted affirmations, Rationalism declines to dogmatise
about God. It has sufficient faith in His existence
to believe that it may be left to vindicate itself,


like that of the sun, without the help of an Act of
Parliament. There is no occasion, as Hobbes, I think
says “ for us to re-enact the laws of God.” God’s
existence, happily, does not depend on the efforts of
the Pope, or any less distinguished, self-appointed
“ fearless servant of God.”* This pitiful patronage
of the Infinite Soul of the universe seems grotesque
enough eyes of the Rationalist. It is
sufficient for him if he can be a fearless servant of
Humanity. It is to fit him for this office that the
teachings of rational philosophy and modern science
tend. The first and last word of the social science
of our day is “ Altruism.” Work for the benefit of
others; work with a single eye to the advancement
of the race. Ho not trouble about your own indi-
vidual salvation; leave that to take care of itself,
and strive for the good of humanity. Por as
Kingsley asks —
“ Is selfishness
For time a sin, stretched out into Eternity
Celestial prudence V’
The best part of the orthodox faiths is this indi-
vidual soul - saving. Its worst part is that it
creates sham vices and virtues, and tends to cause
indifference to the real ones. True religion has no
contest with Rationalism, which is offensive only to
the sectarian theologies. These latter confuse the
mind by elevating petty forms and ceremonies into
the sphere of virtues. Colonel Ingersoll in one of his
trenchant lectures narrates an anecdote regarding a
*lt may be well to inform distant readers that a certain
local “ Evangelist ” —whatever that may be—has latterly been
thus advertising himself in the public papers.


fellow in the States who had committed a murder.
There was no doubt of his guilt, and he attempted no
denial. He had stolen behind a poor working man
as he walked along the public road, and had killed
him with a blow from a bludgeon. He had then
robbed him of a small sum of money and some
sandwiches which he was carrying for his dinner.
The murderer was asked what he did with the poor
proceeds of his terrible crime. He answered
that he had spent the money in liquor, and that
he had eaten the bread, and thrown away
the meat —because it was Triday. In similar
fashion the brigands in Italy have been frequently
known ta fall on their knees by the roadside cross
and pray to their patron saint for success before
sallying forth to shoot and rob some hapless way-
farer. But this frame of mind is not peculiar to
one form of Christian faith. It belongs to all
dogmatic theologies. “ Pious people,” as Winwood
Beade says in that valuable book, “ The Martyrdom
of Man,” “ sin as men, and make restitution as
courtiers ” —they commit an offence against their
fellow-man, and they make atonement for it, as
they imagine, by falling on their knees and begging
pardon of some heavenly despot. The words popu-
larly ascribed to a cheating storekeeper will be
familiar to most persons : “ John have you sanded
the sugar ?” “ Yes, sir.” “ And mixed the chalk
and water with the milk?” “Yes, sir.” “Then
come upstairs, boy, to prayers.” Religion, on
account of the prevailing disbelief in its dogmas,
has become so much an affair of conventionality and
routine that it has lost the power it once possessed


for good. There is no heart in its hollow ceremonies.
I was told the other day of an incident which
occurred at a gentleman’s house in this city.
His servant, who was a Homan Catholic, was
in the habit of making no distinction in her
meals on Friday and the other days of the week.
Meat was quite acceptable ou all days alike.
Shortly afterwards he engaged an additional servant
who was of the same religion, and thereupon both
girls declined to take the priest-forbidden food on
Friday ! How completely, with Protestants, what
is called religion is a matter of habit, custom, and
conventional usage I need hardly impress on my
hearers. The following amusing incident will
illustrate my meaning. clipped it lately from a
newspaper where it was given as related by a
traveller in the Central States of America :
“When we made an excursion in Southern Utah
not long ago we were hospitably entertained by the
Mormon Bishop of Richfield He was a Scotch-
man, and had been brought up a rigid Presbyterian.
‘ Ah, well,’ said he, f they think ill of me at home
for changing my religion; but there was my poor
brother Alec who took it most to heart. He was
on his way last year to California, and turned off
the road a hit to see me and try to bring me hack
into the fold. When he got here he spent the
whole evening in lecturing me, and then went to
bed. In the morning I gave him the best breakfast
the country could afford —coffee and rolls, trout,
beef, and venison steak, and such like. Poor Alec,
he looked all over the table, and then turned upon
me his sorrowful face, blurting out: ‘Oh, Jamie,


mon ! Jamie, mon ! did I ever think it would come
to this ? I could hae forgi’en ye a’ yer poleegamy,
hut hae ye gi’en up yer parritch ?’ ”
How much of the popular religion of our day
is “ parritch,” at the best ? And it is well that
it should he so, for the dogmatic theology on which
it is based appeals to the lowest passion of our
nature, to fear, and, as it loses its hold, a nobler
philosophy, the philosophy of law, of the invariable
succession of cause and effect, of the certainty of
good results following rational effort, will take its
place. I have said that the dogmatists make their
appeal to the passion of fear. I like to judge a
theology not by its carefully-prepared public plati-
tudes, but by the teachings which it sets before its
young in the privacy of the family and the school.
I hold in my hand thirteen little penny productions,
termed “ Books for Children and Young Persons,”
written by Uev. J. Purniss, —a most appropriate
name. They are for the use of Homan Catholic
families, missions, and schools, and are published
i( permissu superiormn.” Here, then, we obtain a
glimpse of the nature of that “ Authority ” before
which Archbishop Vaughan would have the world,
in this nineteenth century, fall prostrate. The titles
of these precious compilations speak for themselves :
they are “ Almighty God,” “ The House of Heath,”
“ The Book of the Hying,” “Stumbling Blocks,”
“The Great Evil,” “The Terrible Judgment and
the Bad Child,” “ Schools in which Children Lose
their Holy Eaith,” “The Sight of Hell,” and the like.
By announcement on the cover of each, “ Parents
are recommended to read these Books to their


Children,” and they are commended to “ Schools,
Missions, and Retreats.” Of their contents, for
the sake of those who may not have glanced at
them, I may say that they largely consist of stories
so horrible, disgusting, and abominable, to any
healthy mind, that I would not condescend to read
them from this platform. Their production gives
us a fresh insight into the possible depths of cruelty
and baseness of which a diseased imagination is
capable. That such things should be conjured up
for the purpose of terrifying and dominating the
innocent and plastic mind of childhood constitutes
a depressing subject for reflection. This little pam-
phlet, entitled “The Sight of Hell!” is literally
crammed with the most nauseating and offensive
details. Regarded as a work of fiction it is clumsy
and brutal ; presented as a something which a
child is taught to believe actual in God’s universe
it almost passes the bounds of rational toleration.
There are one or two extracts calculated to amuse
rather than disgust, which I may venture to set
before you. This is how a child is to be impressed
with the idea of what is meant by the tortures of
Hell being Eternal. The heading of the “ lesson” is
—“Tears !—Sand ! !—Dots ! ! ! ”
“ Think that a man in Hell cries only one single
tear in ten hundred millions of years. Tell me,
how many millions of years must pass before he
fills a little basin with his tears ? how many millions
of years must pass before he cries as many tears as
there were drops of water at the deluge ? how
many years must pass before he has drowned the
heavens and earth with his tears ? Is this Eternity ?
Ho.


“ Turn all the earth into little grains of
sand, and fill all the skies and the heavens with
little grains of sand. After each hundred millions
of years, one grain of sand is taken away ; oh what
a long, long time it would be before the last grain
of sand was taken away. Is this Eternity ? No.
“ Cover all the earth and all the skies with little
dots like these .... Let every dot stand for a
hundred thousand millions of years. Is this eter-
nity ? No.
“ After such a long, long time will God still punish
sinners? Yes. Is. ix., After all this his anger is
not turned away, his hand is still stretched out.
How long, then, will the punishment of sinners go
on ? Eor ever, and ever, and ever ! ”
The next “lesson” headed “What are they
doing ? ” runs thus :
“ Perhaps at this moment, seven o’clock in the
evening, a child is just going into Hell. To-
morrow evening at seven o’clock, go and knock at
the gates of Hell, and ask what the child is doing.
The devils Avill go and look. Then they will come
back again and say, the child is burning I Go
in a week and ask what the child is doing; you will
get the same answer— it is burning ! Go in a year
and ask; the same answer comes — it is burning I
Go in a million of years and ask the same question;
the answer is just the same— it is burning ! So if
you go for ever and ever, you will always get the
same answer— it is burning in the fire I ”
Comment is unnecessary on teachings such as
these; and these, as I have said, are mild compared


with passages which I decline to read. Now, let
us turn from these wretched little hooks published
“ by Authority,” and reflect for whom this eternal
torment is said to be prepared by a beneficent God.
Not for those who inflict evil on their fellow-crea-
tures, not for those whose lives are made up of little
besides lust and cruelty. That would he had
enough, and would be altogether inconsistent with
any conception of a just and loving God. But Hell
is not for these. These may escape at the last mo-
ment, by some priestly “ hocus pocus,” or magical
conversion. Hell is for heretics, for those brave
souls who decline to fall down and kneel at the
command of their fellow-mortals. Thus, in these
lectures of Hr. Vaughans, the very men, the master
minds of the world, to whom he appeals for the
ideas which adorn his discourses—appeals some-
times approvingly, sometimes to condemn —these
very souls are, according to his worshipped
“ Authority,” the predestined heirs of Hell. Men
of science of the past, “ Kepler, Bacon, Newton; ”
men of science of the present, “ Harwin, Huxley,
Tyndall, Spencer, Mivart, Draper, Wallace, Haec-
kel, Moleschott, Von Hartmann, Virchow, Jevons;”
scholars, “ Sir W. Jones and Max Muller; ” poets,
<c Goethe, Tennyson, and Lowell; ” statesmen,
“ Gladstone and Lewis;” philosophers and reformers,
“Hume, Tillotson, Kant, Carlyle, Greg, Bradlaugh:”
All these, and others like them, furnish the raw
material for God’s eternal Hell, according to
“Authority,” which we are to regard as coincident
with “Truth.” These arc the souls which are to per-
petually roast and stew in the sulphur pit, where, in
the words of one of New Zealand’s poets, Domett —


“ Infinite love,
All human guess or gauge above,
Preserves in fiery suffocation
The myriads of his own creation.”
If Archbishop Vaughan declares that he does not
know that the master minds named by him are des-
tined for his God’s eternal Hell, then I ask him
what does he know, with all his than
other people ? If he admits a loophole of escape
outside of his infallible Church, I think all Ration-
alists —nay, all “men of good will”—would prefer
to cast in their lot with these prophetic souls rather
than shelter under “Authority” backed by all the
Leos and all the Gregories, all the Bonifaces and
all the Borgias.
At this stage of the world, then, men are called
upon to make their choice between Dogma, which
has scarcely sufficient faith left to be dogmatic, and
Rationalism which points to Nature as its teacher
and Science as its prophet, which banishes
“chance” and “magic” from the universe, and
discerns everywhere the reign of Law, the govern-
ment of Love. In this initiatory life it sees effect
following cause throughout the march of creation,
and where it is enabled to perceive glimpses of an
after-life it beholds still the same natural and
successive gradations. The after-life of Rationalism
is submitted, like every other domain of Nature, for
the investigation and verdict of Science. Those
who have made this phase of the question a study
know that upon it the verdict of Science is already
pronounced. Men of science, who have steadfastly
devoted their time to the collection of facts and the
investigation of phenomena, have in all countries


declared the same way. Mapes, Hare, Crowell, and
Buchanan in America; Kerner and Zollner in Ger-
many; Plammarion, Leon Pavre, and Eivail in
Prance; Crookes, Yarley, and Wallace in England;
all assert that when the needful impulse towards
investigation is felt, and the needful, patient industry
manifested, the life of human beings, after what is
termed death, lies open to profitable research the
same as the sometime proscribed domains of
astronomy and biology. But whether the Rationalist
incline to Spiritualism (which is hut a further de-
velopment out of the Materialism of this life), or
limit his outlook to earth, he is alike governed by
evidence and protests against speculations being
transformed into dogmas. He smiles at the poor
pretentions to infallible knowledge of an ill-informed
priesthood, and when anxious for rest, comfort, and
inspiration, betakes himself to the arms of the uni-
versal mother, Nature. To conclude in the joyous
words of one of the poets of the inper life —Lizzie
Hoten :
“ Grown weary and worn with the conflict of creeds,
I had sought a new faith for the soul with its needs,
When the love of the Beautiful guided my feet
Through a leafy arcade to a sylvan retreat,
Where the oriole sung in the branches above,
And the wild roses burned with their blushes of love,
And the purple-fringed aster, and bright golden rod,
Like jewels of beauty adorned the green sod.
O, how blessed to feel from the care-laden heart
All the sorrows and woes that oppressed it depart,
And to lay the tired head, with its achings, to rest
On the heart of all others that loves it the best !
O, thus is it ever when, wearied, we yearn
To the bosom of Nature and Truth to return !
And life blossoms forth into beauty anew,
As we learn to repose in the Simple and True.’'
48


. •
$
#
1
i
0.*
j
#
♦
i
■*
%
t
1
1
-
1
I
4


r P'
