





ye. th fwwA
7 nt




HAND-BOOK
THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH
Babep
HOBART TOWN.
“Let ah things be done Decently and in Order.”
— St. Paul to the Corinthians.
TASMANIA:
J, WALCH AND SONS, WELLINGTON BRIDGE, HOBART TOW.


HOBART TOWN :
PRATT AND SON, PRINTERS.


The following Hand-book has been drawn up at the request
of the Church. It furnishes information which, it is thought,
would be acceptable to the whole Congregation. We are
not accustomed to say much about our Church Government
and Constitution in the Pulpit, for that should be kept sacred
to the exposition of the common Faith. Nor do I attach
much value to a passing “ Lecture” on our distinctive prin-
ciples. On the whole, it seems preferable to state them in
this form, as simply as possible, and in language which,
while it may help to remove misconception, is free from any
reflection on our brethren who differ from us. No attempt
is here made to establish the position of Independents by
argument. My object is to declare what we hold, and not
to prove that it is right. The remaining contents explain
themselves, and the whole will, I trust, be found a useful
guide to all in the Congregation who feel an interest in our
common work.
GEORGE CLAEKE.
Patrick-street, Hobart Town,
2nd October, 1862.




THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH
MEETING IN
DAVEY STREET, HOBAET TOWN.
IKtmSter.
THE REV. GEOEGE CLARKE,
©caconsi.
MR. HENRY HOPKINS. MB. JOSEPH FACT,
MR. BASIL ROUT. MR. JAMES H. B. WALCH,
MR. JAMES E. SALIER.
Hinlncfjs.
Sunday Morning, at 11 o’clock.
Evening, at J-past G.
Wednesday , at J-after 7.
Communion Service.—On the first Sunday in the month,
Missionary Pbayek Meeting.—On the first Monday in
the month, at 7 P.M., held alternately in Brisbane and
Davey Street.
Sittings may be had on application to Mb, Eout or one
of the other DEACONS.




Ipmpfes 4 4aitfr.
The Independent or Congregational Denomi-
nation, are not, as a Body, distinguished from other
Evangelical Churches by any peculiarity in their
views of Christian Doctrine. The principles of
the Faith “ which are most surely believed among
us” are such as are common to nearly all Protes-
tants, and generally accepted as taught in Holy
Scripture. And although we question the pro-
priety of imposing subscription to any human
standard, as a test of orthodoxy or term of Com-
munion, it is open to us to declare the Principles
which are assumed by all our Churches as beyond
question or debate. We deem it better to indicate
in general terms the Doctrines which are thus held
among us to be “ without controversy,” than to
draw out our Confession into elaborate Articles
and scholastic Definitions. It is believed that no


Minister or Churcli among us would deny the sub-
stance of any of the following Principles of the
Faith :
1. The Divine Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures
and their authority and sufficiency as the
rule of Faith and Practice.
2. The Unity of God, with the proper Deity of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
3, The Universal Depravity of man in the sight
of God, and his exposure to eternal death as
the wages of sin.
4. The Incarnation and Mediation of the Son of
God, the reality and sufficiency of His Atone-
ment for sin, and free Justification by faith
alone in Him.
5. The necessity of the Holy Spirit’s grace and
power for man’s Regeneration and Sanctifica-
tion.
6. The perpetual and immutable authority of the
Moral Law.
7. The Predestination, according to God’s gra-
cious purpose, of a multitude whom no man
can number, unto eternal salvation.
8. The Immortality of the Soul,—the Resurrection
of the Body,—and the Last Judgment,—when
the Wicked “shallgo away into Everlasting
Punishment, but the “Righteous into Life
Eternal.”
Such, in substance, is the Confession of all the
Churches of our Order, whatever may be the dif-
ferent modes of verbal expression by which each
might prefer to set it forth.


It is ou the question of the right Constitution
and Government op a Christian Church, that
we differ from our Brethren in other Bodies, both
in theory and practice. And here it is important
to make a distinction between the Principles of
our Polity, and the Rules of applying them, which
may prevail in different Churches. The former ,
have we think the direct authority of the New
Testament, —for the latter we pretend to no such
sanction. A few Principles are laid down for us
in the Bible, and we do not hold ourselves at
liberty to depart from them—but Rules , which are
orderly methods of applying Principles, are left to
the wisdom of each Church, and may be made or
modified at discretion, according to the require-
ments of time, place, and circumstance, provided
only that they do not contravene the great ends of
Christian fellowship. Thus, for instance, —that


a credible profession of Faith in Christ, and of the
purpose to follow Him, is the proper condition of
Church Communion, we regard as a Principle that
may on no account be set aside ; but that this cre-
dibility should be ascertained by naming a Candi-
date to the Church a month before admission, and
by deputing certain persons to see him, and report
the result, —is only a Rule ;it may be a good Rule,
or it may, in given circumstances, be a bad one ;
we do not demand its uniform observance, nor deem
it a violation of our Polity to change it, if in the
judgment of any Church, the end can be better
secured by another course. And so with other
arrangements, such as the Order of Divine Service,
the use of a Liturgy, Chanting and Anthems, &o.;
all these are open questions, and should be kept
quite distinct from the Principles of the Body.
It argues great confusion of thought, and tends to
much mischief in feeling and practice, when the
mere Rules and Usages we may adopt are raised
to that position of sacred and immutable authority,
which at best we can only claim for the Principles
of our Polity. Not, indeed, but that in every
Church there must be Regulations, expressed or


understood, for the maintenance of order, —and
these, so long as they are recognized, ought to be
faithfully observed. While, however, Rules are
necessary , they are not like principles, unalterable.
Our first principle of Polity may be expressed
in the language of the XlXth Article of
the Church of England. “ The ” [or A*]
“ visible Church of Christ is A Congrega-
“ tion of Faithful men, in the which the
“pure Word of God is preached, and the
“ Sacraments be duly administered.” This
is precisely what we hold, and hence the
Churches of our Order are called “ Congre-
gational.”
Our second Principle cannot be better stated
than in the words of Archbishop Whately :
“ It appears plainly from the sacred narra-
“ tive that though the many Churches
“ which the Apostles founded were branches
“ of one Spiritual Brotherhood, of which
“the Lord Jesus Christ is the Heavenly
“ Head, —though there was one Lord, one
“ Faith, one Baptism, for all of them, yet
“ they were each a distinct, independent
“ Community on earth , united by the com-
“ mon principles on which they were founded,
* The original is “ Ecclesia Christi visibilis est, ” tyo.


“ and by their mutual agreement, affection,
“and respect; but not having any one
“ recognized Head on earth, or acknow-
“ ledging any sovereignty of one of these
“ Societies over others.” * And again,'—
“ The Apostles founded Christian Communi-
“ ties all based on the same principles, and
“having the same object in view, but quite
“ independent of each other, and having
“ no common Head on Earth.” f —So, we
believe they should continue to he, and it is
by our adherence to this principle that our
Churches are distinguished as “ Indepen-
dent.”
We recognize only two classes of Officers
over each Church as of Apostolic Author-
ity,—the Bishops or Elders (as they are
indiscriminately called in the New Testa-
ment,) and the Deacons, to whom is com-
mitted respectively the ministration of its
spiritual and secular concerns, —subject,
however, in the last appeal, to the approba-
tion of the Church.
4. The power and responsibly of appointment
to Office in the Church, of admitting and
* Whately on the Kingdom of Christ, p. 11l (Fifth Edition.)
t Dissertation Encycl, Britan. Vol 1. p. 487.


rejecting Members, of exercising Discipline,
and of sustaining Christian Ordinances,
belong, we believe, to the whole Church;
such power being exclusively spiritual, and
not therefore to be corrupted by admitting
the dictation, or employing the aid and
coercion, of the Civil Authority,
Note. —lt may be right to observe, that these principles
are held by the Baptists as well as by ourselves, there being
no question at issue between us except one of Ritual rather
than of Faith or Polity, —namely, the validity of Child bap-
tism. Our Baptist Brethren, however, are fully admitted
into our Church fellowship, on the tacit understanding, that
while they retain their views on this subject, and are at
liberty to urge them elsewhere, they do not introduce them
into the Meetings of the Chv/roh for Church discussion.
We act on the same principle in the case of any Brethren
who, while generally agreeing with us, cannot give their
consent to every position which, as a Body, we take up. In
such a case, we only require that they shall not controvert
it in the Church, and that they be willing to submit to the
practical Discipline set forth in our Kules of Order, With-
out this limitation, it is manifest that our Churches would
become constantly liable to agitation and confusion.


On the other hand, where there may be such a 'radical
difference of judgment on these Principles, as would prevent
any person from entering into the full and formal fellowship
of the Church professing them, we are content to waive the
whole question of Polity, and provided he bear a reputable
Christian character, and have been a recognized member
of any of the Evangelical Churches, we receive him cordially
and -without question to the Communion of the Lord’s
Supper, Only in such a case, it is expected that the intend-
ing Communicant shall give notice of his desire to the
Minister, or to one of the Officers of the Church.


Jlulcs of (Dnlini and Stadplinp
ADOPTED BT
THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, DAVEY STREET,
HOBART TOWN.
1. Constitution of the Church. —As a Christian
Church should consist exclusively of pious persons,
who profess their faith in the Lord Jesus Christ,
recognize their fellow-members as brethren, and
appeal to the Saered Scriptures as the sole author-
itative rule of faith and practice ; —it is expected
that those who are admitted into this Church shall
possess a knowledge of the essential principles of
the Gospel, give practical evidence of conversion,
depend upon the Saviour for acceptance and grace,
strive by the help of the Holy Spirit to “ maintain
good works,” train up their children “in the nur ■
ture and admonition of the Lord,” contribute ac-
cording to their ability to support, and diffuse the
Gospel: cherish and promote a spirit of brotherly
love, and conduct themselves in all things as Chris-
tians professing godliness.


2. Admission of Members. —Any person, not
having been a Member of any other Church, who
wishes to become a Member of this Society, shall
make known his desire to the Pastor, by whom it
will be laid before the Church. One or more of the
Members will then be appointed to see the Candi-
date, and their report be given in at the next
Church Meeting; if favourable, he will be proposed
for admission, and if elected by three-fourths of the
Members present, will be received into full Com-
munion. Should any Member know anything pre-
judicial to the moral character of a Candidate, it is
expected that he shall privately acquaint the Min-
ister and Deacons,
3. Conduct of Worship, &c.— lt is expected that
the Members of the Church shall contribute accord-
ing to their ability towards the decent conduct of
Public Worship, the due administration of Divine
Ordinances, and the support of the Minister,
4. Absence from Public Services. —lf a Member
be absent from our public services four successive
Sabbaths without a reasonable excuse, he shall be
visited by one of the Deacons :—lf the case require
expostulation, and he disregard it, it shall be laid
before the Church, and a deputation of two Deacons
or Members be appointed to obtain an interview;
—lf he reject their admonition, and continue to ab-
sent himself for one month more, he shall be


declared no longer a Member.—lt is also expected
that the Members of the Church will, as far as
circumstances permit, adopt the exemplary custom
of attending regularly the services of the week-day
as well as of the Sabbath.
5. Absence from the Lord’s Supper.— lf a Mem-
ber be absent from the Lord’s Supper three months
in succession without a satisfactory reason, he
shall be admonished for his neglect; if he persist
in his non attendance for two months longer, he
shall be excluded from the Church.
6. Private Offences. —lf a Member know any-
thing against the religious character and profession
of another, which does not amount to a public offence,
he shall expostulate with him privately in the spirit
of Christian love. If he reject the admonition and
persist in the offence, it shall be reported to the
Minister or Deacons ; If he disregard their expos •
tulation, it shall be laid before the Church, and
treated as a majority of the Members may decide.
7. Public Offences. —To preserve the purity of
the Church, public and scandalous offences commit-
ted by any Member shall be brought before the
Church (after due notice to the Pastor and Deacons)
without the intervention of private admonition.
8. Accusation, &c. in the Church.—To prevent
the interruption of harmony and peace, nothing
shall be brought before a Church Meeting by any


Member which is of an accusatory character, and
therefore likely to occasion a collision of feeling,
as well as of opinion, without its being previously
communicated to the Minister and Deacons, and
approved of and introduced by them:—and nothing
of this nature that transpires at a Church Meeting
shall be made known to any person who does not
belong to the Church.
9. Notice of business involving discussion.—
If any Member be desirous of personally introducing
business which, while not of an accusatory charac-
tei-, is yet likely to produce discussion and conflict
of opinion, it is expected that he will give a month’s
notice of his intention, and of the nature of such
business.
10. Restoration to Membership.— lf any Mem-
ber who has been excluded shall evince contrition, he
shall be received again into Church fellowship upon
his own application after sufficient time has elapsed
to test the genuineness of his repentance in the
opinion of any three Members who may have had
the best opportunities of observation, with the con-
sent of the Minister.
11. Consent of Candidates required. — A copy
of these Regulations,—which we deem agreeable to
the spirit of the New Testament, and as a legitimate
application of the principles of Christian discipline,
—shall be presented to each Candidate for approval


previous to admission, and shall be read at the first
Church Meeting every year.
Adopted by the Church,
GEORGE CLARKE.
*** The special function of the Deacons’ office is to ad-
minister the secular affairs of the Church. But it is found
convenient in practice to make them confidential advisers
with the Minister, —and in that position they are recognized
by all our Churches. As a rule all Church measures are
initiated by them, except such as come more directly within
the proper duty of the Pastor.
Note. —In matters of Conscience, properly so called, we
do not admit the right of a Majority in any Church to over-
rule the convictions of the Minority,—but in any measures
they may adopt that are opposed only to one’s private
judgment of expediency, the Minority is bound to submit
to the vote of their Brethren, This distinction, which is
obvious enough when stated, has been sometimes disregard-
ed, and Members of Independent Churches have brought
our Principles into disrepute by assuming a private liberty
to refuse compliance with a general decision, while still
maintaining their connexion with the Church. This is not
liberty, but such a licence as is subversive of all discipline
and order. It is a total misconception of our Polity to sup-
pose that it justifies a Member in setting at nought any
decision of the Church which merely raises the question of
administrative wisdom, and compliance with which involves
no commission of moral wrong,


The sum required by the Church in Davey-street
to meet its ordinary and current expenditure, is
at present, about £4OO a year. This does not
include special collections in aid of the various
Institutions, or for such extraordinary objects as
may from time to time be entertained by the
Church.
The following Resolutions were passed at a
Meeting of the Church, held on Wednesday,
February 26th, 1862:
1. That all monies for the ordinary purposes of the Con-
gregation be paid through the Boxes weekly, monthly,
or quarterly, as may be most convenient to the
offerer.
2. That the practice of putting loose money in the Boxes
be left entirely to those who are not seat-holders, nor
constant attendants at our services.
3. That the stated members of the Congregation always
enclose their offerings under cover before they place
them in the Boxes. For this purpose they can be
supplied once a quarter with envelopes having a dis-
tinguishing mark or cipher written inside. It will
be the duty of the Deacons to collect these after the
service and enter the ciphers, with their sums, in a
book kept for that object.
i. That at the end of the year (or oftener if necessary) a
list of these ciphers, with the sums annexed to them,
be printed, and circulated through the Congregation,
together with a statement of the Church’s financial
position at the time,


5. That as the names of Contributors will be known only
to the confidential officers of the Church, and nothing
but the ciphers appear before the Congregation, it is
believed that this plan will secure most of the
advantages with none of the disadvantages of a pub-
lication of names.
6. That the Treasurer report to the Members of the
Church every three months the amount received.
It is felt that, above all things, the Churches of
our Order want more light to be thrown upon the
details of their financial operations. The exact
state of our affairs will by these means be easily
understood, and it will be possible for every one
to satisfy himself as to his own fair share of the
general obligation. Working noiselessly, the ma-
chine will work more pleasantly and effectually,
and one great occasion of prejudice against our
Church System will be put out of the way. But
that this may be accomplished, it is earnestly de-
sired that every Contributor be regular and system-
atic In his payments.
Jklrkth Jkkol
The Sabbath School is conducted by a staff of
Teachers, and a Secretary, under the general direc-
tion of the Superintendent, who is appointed to
office by the Teachers, subject to the confirmation
of the Church. A Collection is made in the course
of the year to supply books for the School Library,
and to meet other incidental expenses connected
with its management.


Jfthihitpn) Jt&ty dpam
The Minister’s Class for the study of Holy Scrip-
ture meets in the Upper School Room every Fri-
day evening at half-past Seven. It is open to
Adults who do not belong to the Congregation, if
they wish to attend, and are introduced by some
one who is already a Member of the Class.
(EMlrtrein glHc Cliifi'i
A Bible Class of Children is instructed by the
Minister in the lower School Room, on every
Wednesday afternoon, at Three o’clock. This is
also an open Class.
J&nulag Sifcty <ste.
This is a Class of Youths under the care of Mr.
Stone. They meet in the larger Vestry, on
Sunday afternoon, at a quarter after Two.
J&njjing Cte.
A Class for the practice of Singing meets at the
close of the Service on Wednesday evening, under
the conduct of Mr. James E. Salier.
|kah.
The Time-book used in the Congregation is the


“ Weigh House Church Music,” which may he
procured in full score or in parts, with the Hymn
and Chant Books, at Messrs. J. Walch & Sons,
Elizabeth - street.
gumiml Called omj.
A yearly collection is made in the congregation on
behalf of the Colonial Missionary Society, an In-
stitution whose operations are confined to the Rural
districts of this Colony.
A similar collection is made on behalf of Foreign
Missions among the Heathen, and transmitted,
through the Treasurer, to the London Missionary
Society.
Collections for other objects can only be made
after obtaining the formal sanction of the Church.
(pm;dt f roprig.
The Property of the Church is vested in nine Trus-
tees, duly appointed at a Church Meeting called
for that purpose. The provisions of the Trust are
taken from the Model Deed of the “ London Con-
gregational Chapel-building Society,” and may be
found in the “ Year Book” for 1856, pp. 285-292.
The present Trustees are Messrs. Henry Hopkins,
William Woolley, James Harcourt, Basil Rout,
Joseph Facy, Sandford Scott, James H. B. Walch,
Charles S. Button, and Joseph G. Jennings.


United
On the first Sunday in January and July there is
a United Communion Service in the afternoon, held
alternately in Davey-street and Brisbane-street.
The Collections at these Services go to, what is
called “The Provident Fund,” —the object of
which is to aid Ministers of the Congregational
Body, who, through sickness or age, may be laid
aside from public labor. The sum now in hand for
this purpose is £450. There is, besides this, a
“ Widows’ Fund,” at present amounting to £250.
Sflty (|on(jv£pttoim! Union.
This Union consists of the Associated Pastors of
Congregational Churches in the Colony, of Dele-
gates deputed by these Churches, —and of approved
personal Members; and holds an Annual Meeting
at such place as may, from time to time, be ap-
pointed. The Union is merely a Deliberative
Assembly which can give advice, but cannot assume,
in any case, legislative authority over the Churches
or become a Court of Appeal. It is founded on a
full recognition of our distinctive Principle—rviz.,
the right of every separate Church to maintain
perfect independence in the administration of its
own particular affairs.
PRATT AND SON, PRINTERS, HOBART TOWN,




