

A N APP E A L
R-tTUGIOUS PAMf. j
TO THIS




AN APPEAL
TO THE
EIGHT EEVEREND
THE LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
METROPOLITAN
OF THE
DIOCESES OF AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA, &c.,
FROM
HENRY PIIIBBS FRY, D.D.,
MINISTER OF ST. GEORGE’S CHURCH, HOBART TOWN,
AGAINST
Ist. The condemnation pronounced by the Bishop of Tasmania upon
Dr. Fry and other Clergymen, and the penult es imposed upon
them for declaring that Holy Scripture is the Sole Rule of Faith •
that every Christian has a right to interpret the Word of God by
his own private judgment with the aid of the Holy Spirit, and that
no Church has the right so to overrule private judgment, that men
are bound to receive on its authority any doctrines which their own
judgment may convince them to be contrary to Holy Scripture.
2nd. Against the condemnation and exclusion from the Diocese of all
Ministers who do not profess to believe that all baptized infant*
are regenerated in their baptism.
3rd. Against the declaration of the Bishop of Tasmania that books
which contain much that is far more in accordance with the
principles of the Cliurdi of Rome than of the Church of England ”
are identified with the true teaching of the Chinch,
HOBART TOWN:
PRINTED BY BURNET, COLLINS STREET.
1 So 6.




TO THE
Higlit Hu. tjje tml st.alj(i]i of si\hm\,
METROPOLITAN OF THE DIOCESES OF AUSTRALIA
AND TASMANIA, &c., &c.
My Lord,
In presenting this appeal for your judgment as Metro-
politan of the Dioceses of Australia and Tasmania, I feel
much reluctance at occupying your time and attention ; but
after long consideration I am convinced, that as the duty
is laid upon me of appealing to your Lordship, if I would
avoid the sin and responsibility of not employing all the
means in my power to prevent the suppression of the most
important principles of Evangelical Ileligion in the Church
of England in this colony, so it is my duty not to withhold
from your Lordship the opportunity of exercising your
ministerial influence and the authority of your office, in
supporting and bearing testimony to the truth of the
Grospel, and in preserving from dangerous and destructive
errors the people over whom the Lord has appointed you.
I ground my appeal to your Lordship chiefly on the
great obligation laid upon all ministers “to contend
earnestly for the faith which was once delivered unto the
saints,” a Scriptural duty which the Church enforces by a
distinct engagement. In the Ordination Service, after
declaring that the Holy Scriptures contain sufficiently all doc-
trine required of necessity for salvation through faith in Jesus


Christ, and that nothing should be taught to the people as
required of necessity to salvation but what may be concluded
and proved by the same, the Church requires the Minister
or Bishop to—
“ Engage with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away
“all erroneous and strange doctrine, contrary to God’s word, and
“ to call upon and encourage others to do the same.”
I am farther warranted to appeal to your Lordship by a
direction from the Bishop of Tasmania. In the 7th and
3rd pages of “The Substance of a Reply to a Deputation,
&c.,” his Lordship says—■
“Still less—should any of the clergy conceive it needful to take
“exceptions to his decisions—can he countenance their illegal
“conduct in appealing to the people through the medium of
“newspapers and public meetings, when an appeal to the Metro-
politan is not only secured to them as their lawful right, but
“ pointed out as their only lawful course.”
“ From any sentence of the ordinary,whereby they (the clergy)
“ may feel themselves aggrieved, there is, very properly, an appeal
“to the Metropolitan secured to them by the Letters Patent
“constituting the Bishoprick.”*
• This statement of the Bishop of Tasmania was made to a deputation
appointed by a Public Meeting to wait upon the Bishop for the following
purpose :
1. Inasmuch as the Bishop of Tasmania rejected the certificate given
to a candidate for Holy Orders, by the llev. A. Stackhouse and the Rev.
G. Wilkinson, by the Rev. Dr. Browne and the Rev. A. C. Thompson, on
the ground that they are unsound in their religious opinions, and there-
fore incapable of testifying to the soundness of the opinions of another,
and that they had acted inconsistently with their allegiance to the
Church of England, because with eighteen other clergymen they had
signed a Declaration that—
“ The Holy Scripture is the sole rule of Faith, and that every indivi-
“ dual has the right to read and interpret the Word of God by his own
“ private judgment, with the aid of the Holy Spirit. Denying the
“ authority of Tradition, or the right of any Church or Minister to pre-
“ scribe to individuals on matters of religion, in opposition to their own
judgment.”
And inasmuch as this proceeding of the Bishop tends to compel
ministers to renounce one of the fundamental principles of the Protestant
Reformation, and to coerce them into an acknowledgment of an authority
in the Church to overrule private judgment, setting aside the Divine


The Bishop of Tasmania in these words declares that the
conduct of myself and other ministers in having appealed
to the people was “ illegal and that our only lawful
course was an appeal to the Metropolitan. As the subjects
concerning which, as he says, we should have appealed to the
Metropolitan are the same which I now submit to your
Lordship, I conclude that I am acting according to the
direction and with the consent of the Bishop of Tasmania,
in appealing to your Lordship, and earnestly soliciting the
expression of your judgment.
There are three distinct subjects upon which 1 pray your
Lordship’s decision.
Ist. The sentence of condemnation pronounced upon
myself and other clergymen, and the penalties imposed
upon us by the Bishop of Tasmania.
authority of Holy Scripture as the sole rule of Faith, and subverting
religious liberty, and inasmuch as it is calculated to drive out the
Evangelical Clergy from the Diocese, and to fill their places with
ministers of Romanizing sentiments, —•
Resolved. — l That a deputation wait upon the Bishop to request him, in
the name of the Meeting, to withdraw his condemnation of the Clergy.
11. Inasmuch as the Bishop of Tasmania has protested against the
decision given by the Privy Council in the case of Mr. Gorham, whose
opinions he terms a heresy, and refuses to admit to Holy Orders any
candidate who does not hold the doctrine that all baptized children were
regenerated in their baptism; and inasmuch as this resolution of the
Bishop is a denial of the law of the Church of England, tending to
separate the Church in this colony from the Mother Church in England,
and excludes, by his sole authority, from the Church of this colony
ministers holding Evangelical sentiments, &c., —
Resolved. That the Bishop be requested to retract his protest against
the decision of the Privy Council, and his resolution to exclude ministers
not holding the doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration.
111. Inasmuch as above twenty Clergymen have shown in the tract
called “ The Solemn Declaration,” that the books called “ Steps to the
Altar,” “ Spiritual Communion,” and “ Theophilus Anglicanus,” inculcate
some dangerous errors and corrupt practices of the Church of Rome ; and
inasmuch as the Bishop has expressed his judgment that the above named
books are identified with the true teaching of the Church of England ; and
that, under his direction, “ Theophilus Anglicanus ” has be in prescribed
to candidates for Holy Orders, and is taught to students in Divinity at
the College,—
Resolved. —That the deputation be instructed to request the Bishop, in
the name of the Meeting, to prohibit the use at the College of the book
called “ Theophilus Anglicanus.”


2nd. The declaration of the Bishop of Tasmania that the
doctrine of Baptism held by myself and other clergymen is
heretical, and that he will not ordain any candidate for
holy orders, or license any minister, who does not profess
to believe that all baptized infants are regenerated in their
baptism.
3rd. The declaration of the Bishop of Tasmania that
certain books are identified with the true teaching of the
Church ; which books, in the opinion of many clergymen,
and of the Archbishop of Canterbury, contain “ much that is
far more in accordance with the principles of the Church of
Rome than of the Church of England.”
The following is the Declaration of the sufficiency of
Holy Scripture, &c., which, together with the explanation
of it, was condemned by the Bishop of Tasmania. (Subst.
of Reply, &c., pp. 6. 10 )
DECLARATION OF THE SUFFICIENCY
OF HOLY SCRIPTURE AS THE RULE
OF FAITH, AND OF THE RIGHT
OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.
“ That the Holy Scripture is the
sole rule of faith, and that every
individual has the right to read
and interpret the Word of God
by his own private judgment,
with the aid of the Holy Spirit.
Denying the authority of Tra-
dition, or the right of any
Church or minister to prescribe
to individuals in matters of reli-
gion, in opposition to their own
judgment.”
EXPLANATION OF THE DECLARA-
TION OF THE SUFFICIENCY OF
HOLY SCRIPTURE, &C.
“ The Second Article of the
Declaration does not contradict
the right of the Church of Eng-
land to frame articles of religion,
and to decree rites and ceremo-
nies (the same not being contrary
to God’s Word), which its mem-
bers are bound to receive and
observe as long as they continue
members of the Church of Eng-
land.
The Article in the Declaration
only asserts that every Christian
may interpret the Word of God
by his own private judgment,
with the aid of the Holy Spirit,
and declares that no individual
is bound to receive, on the autho-
rity of any Church or Minister,
doctrines which the private
judgnient of such individual may
convince him to be contrary to
Holy Scripture.”


The Bishop of Tasmania also acknowledges that we
admit that—
“ The Church has authority to teach, guide, direct, and influence.”
—(Subst. of Reply, pp. 13. 50.)
The following are the reasons given by the Bishop of
Tasmania for condemning the preceding declarations :
“ By it every individual is at liberty to reject any doctrine of the
Church that does not agree with his own interpretation of Scripture.
—(lbid p. 11.)
“As individuals, they must be at perfect liberty to reject any
doctrine which their private judgment may convince them is
contrary to Scripture.”—(lbid, p. 12.)
“If this be truth—if they interpret the Word of God by their
private judgment, with the aid of the Holy Spirit, in a sensetotally
different from that in which the Catholic Church of Christ has
interpreted it, they are at perfect liberty to do so; the Church
d’sclaims all right to fetter their free opinion : she has only,
according to Dr. Fry’s view, ‘authority to teach, guide, direct, or
influence;’ but none to proscribe; none to speak with authority;
so as to overrule private judgment. No man is bound to receive
its teaching in opposition to his own judgment.”—(lbid, p. 13.)
“ Were each man to be his own interpreter, in matters where
the Church has recorded her judgment, and to be at liberty to set
up his individual opinion against that judgment,—either because
his own dwarfed intelligence could not, or his own rebellious spirit
would not, receive it,—it requires no great stretch of the imagina-
tion to forecast the consequence.”
“Such liberty, or rather such license, would speedily bring about
a state of things similar to that which St. Peter describes, when he
tells us that, in his days, ‘ the unlearned and unstable wrested St.
Paul’s epistles, as they did also the other Scriptures, unto their own
destruction,’ We cannot te so uncharitable as to suppose, that
they, who did thus much, abjured all prayer to the Holy Spirit, to
be guided aright in their search of Scripture. Wherefore, then,
did their study of God’s Holy Word lead to such an awful result?”
—(lbid p. 13.)
In a subsequent reply to an Address, the Bishop of
Tasmania, in explaining and answering the objections to the


doctrine inculcated in the preceding extracts, declares —-
“ The Church does not here declare that Scripture is so clear as
to need no interpreter, or that every individual of every grade, or
with any amount of information, is able to interpret for himself.
She does not leave her children so to be tossed about with every
wind of doctrine.”—(Reply to Address presented by R. Dry, Esq.)
The Bishop denies that—
“Each one has to judge for himself, whether the Church be
contradicting the express doctrines of Scripture.”
“If the faith of the Church was to be determined by the private
judgment of individuals, every man might set up as a religions
teacher. The Unitarian, the Quaker, the Roman Catholic, the
Dissenter from the Church of England of all kinds, might appeal to
Scripture in support of his particular view. The very differences of
interpretation would prove that the Scripture was not the clear
exposition of its own meaning ; and if this be so, to what witness
must we appeal ? To our own individual opinion ? Look to the
resnlts of such a doctrine amongst the countless sects of Protestants 1
Nay, surely, to the same witness which attests to us the very books
to which we make appeal, the Church herself.”
“The Church of England does not submit the doctrines of the
Church to the judgment of individual minds. She nowhere
allowed this latitude.”
Cardinal Wiseman says—“ Protestants have no fixed rule for
Teaching, and on this ground nothing should induce him (Bishop
Nixon) to admit the plenary right of piivate judgment.”
“ ‘ The Rule of Faith of the Church of England is Holy
Scripture.’—(Act. 6.) At first sight, our Nonconformist Brethren
appear to agree with her in this fundamental principle. Their
language is, * The Bible, and the Bible only, is the Religion
of Protestants;’ but on nearer inspection we find that some of
them differ widely from her in this matter. The Church of
England maintains that the Bible, and the Bible only, is the basis
of her Faith : but she maintains also that the true sense of the
Bible is that which alone ought to be called The Bible.”
“ This being the case, the question arises : —How is the true sense
of Scripture to be ascertained ?”
“ The Church of England affirms that whatever doctrine has been
received by the Church Universal in all ages as the sense op
Scripture, is the true sense of Holy Scripture.”


“Am I then to make myself the jiffige whether they (any
expounders of Scripture) are in error, and ‘ if not, to what test and
standard of doctrine am I to appeal V The answer is—We may
not .listen to our own independent private reason, but first, and
above all, Holy Scripture as received, guarded, and interpreted by
the Catholic Church from the beginning, ‘according to the proportion
of faith,’ is the rule and standard to which all teaching is referred.
—(lbid.)
It is evident from these extracts that there was no
misapprehension of our meaning. It was not an inacurate
expression or form of words which was condemned by the
Bishop, but, as he himself truly calls it, a fundamental
principle, clearly and fully expressed.
Wo declared our belief that every Christian may interpret
the Word of Clod by his own private judgement, with the
aid of the Holy Spirit, and that no individual is bound to
receive, on the authority of any Church doctrines, which
his own judgment convinces him are contrary to Holy
Scripture.
The Bishop declares that no Christian is to be his own
interpreter of Holy Scripture in matters where the Church
has recorded her judgment, or is at liberty to set up his
individual opinion against the teaching of the Church.
The Bishop affirms that a man is not at liberty to reject any
doctrine which his judgment may convince him is contrary
to Scripture, and that the Church lias authority to overrule
private judgment so that a man is bound to receive its
teaching in opposition to his own judgment, and is not to
judge for himself whether the Church contradict the express
doctrines of Scripture. The Church does not submit her
doctrines to the judgment of individual minds. She
nowhere allows this latitude.
We have expressed our conviction that the Holy Scriptures
are the sole rule of Faith for all Christians, which they have
a tight to search for themselves, and that the promised aid


of the Holy Spirit, sought for hy the prayer of Faith, will
enlighten their understandings, and guide them to the truth.
oo ' o
The Bishop of Tasmania declares that the Holy Scripture
is not a clear explainer of its own meaning. That the
Bible itself is not the rule of Faith and standard of
Teaching, but the sense put upon it by the Catholic Church
from the beginning. We are not to listen to our own
o o
judgments of the meaning of Holy Scripture and of the
truths which it teaches, but to the interpretations of the
Holy Scripture given by the Catholic Church from the
beginning.
We declared our conviction that the aid of the Holy
Spirit would enable Christians to interpret and understand
the Word of God for their spiritual instruction in the
saving truths of the Gospel.
The Bishop says, the persons spoken of by St. Peter
must be supposed to have sought for the Holy Spirit by
prayer, yet they nevertheless wrested the Word of God to
their own destruction.
1 would here solicit your Lordship’s attention to two
considerations ;
Ist. That the ground of my appeal and remonstrance is
not that the Bishop of Tasmania entertains or inculcates prin-
ciples opposed to those which we believe to be true and Scrip-
tural, but that he has, in the exercise of his office as Bishop of
this diocese, publicly condemned us as unsound in our
religious opinions, and imposed penalties upon us for holding
what we are assured is a great and important principle of
the Gospel.
2nd. That the Bishop in compelling us to retract our
declaration of the sufficiency of Holy Scripture and of the
right of private judgment, does in fact require us to receive
and acknowledge the opposite principles. For to retract
the statement that a man is not bound to receive,
on the authority of the Church, doctrines which lie


is convinced in Ids own judgment arc contrary to Holy
Scripture, is virtually to declare that lie is bound to receive
them. Since he either is or is not bound, and if we retract
the opinion that he is not bound, we virtually and of
necessity acknowledge and profess to believe that ho is
bound to receive the doctrines of the Church in opposition
to his judgment and convictions of Scriptural truth.
And now, my Lord, knowing fully the responsibility
which I undertake, I do declare that the principle which the
Bishop of Tasmania would thus enforce upon us is precisely
the Rule of Faith op the Church of Rome !
The Fourth Session of the Council of Trent thus decreed—
“ Prceterea, ad coercenda petulantia ingenia, decernit, ut
u nemo sure prudentim innixus, in rebus fidei, et morum,
“ad aedificationein doctrina? Christianoe pertinentium,
“ Sacram Scripturam ad suos sensus contorquens, contra
“ eum sensum, quern tenuit, et tenet sancta mater Ecclesia,
“ cujus est judicare de vero sensu, et interpretatione
“ Scripturarum Sanctarurn, aut etiam contra unanimem
“ consensum Patrum, ipsarn Scripturam Sacram interpretari
“ audeat,”
The Creed of Pius IY. requires that all priests of the
Church of Rome shall declare—
“ I also admit the Holy Scripture according to that sense
“ which our Holy Mother the Church has held, and does
“ hold, to which it belongs to judge of the true sense and
“ interpretation of the Scriptures.”
Bossuet accuses the Church of England of having
reformed their doctrine without taking for their rule what
the Church did always unanimously believe, contrary to
what he calls the fundamental principle which “prohibits
“ interpreting the Holy Scripture otherwise than the
“ Catholic Church interpreted it.”—(Bossuet Var, B.
vii. S. 69.)
“ Henry VIII,,” says Bossuet, “ allowed thereading of the


Scriptures in 1510, upon condition that liis subjects should
not presume to expound or take arguments from Scripture,
which was obliging them anew to refer themselves to the
o o
pastors of the Church for Scripture interpretations ; in
which case the reading of this Divine Book must undoubtedly
be very wholesome.”—(lbid, S. 64.)
“ What hastened and completed their (the English
Reformers) ruin, was the rashness inspired into them of
every man’s deciding for himself, which was the true sense
of Scripture—of every man making for himself his own
creed. Thus it was that ignorant and prejudiced people
found in Scripture the pretended Reformation.”—(lbid,
S. 65.)
It is thus proved that the Bishop of Tasmania compels us
to receive the Romish Rule of Faith, expressed in the same
words as the decree of the Council of Trent, and the
Catechism of Pope Pius IV.
The Bishop of Tasmania makes precisely the same
erroneous objection against the declaration of the sufficiency
of Holy Scripture and the right of private judgment set forth
by myself and other ministers, which Bossuet, and indeed as
every reader of Church history knows, which every other
Romish opposer of Protestantism alleges against the
Reformation in England and other countries.
I would now appeal to your Lordship whether the
declaration concerning the authority of the Church, on
account of which myself and others have been condemned
as unsound in faith, even as it is set forth by the Bishop of
Tasmania is not as full an acknowledgment of Church
authority as can be admitted without abandoning the
principles of Protestantism and adopting the Romish Rule
of Faith ?
We admit that the Church has power to frame articles of
religion, to decree rites and ceremonies, which all persons
are bound to observe as long as they continue members of


her communion. We admit that the Church has authority
to teach, to guide, to direct, and to influence, up to this
limit,* —“ that no Church has authority so to overrule the
private judgment of the people that they are bound to
receive her teaching in opposition to what they are convinced
by the Word of God is Divine Truth.”
I confidently appeal to your Lordship whether this
limitation bo not the very point which separates the religion
of the Gospel from the Romish system ? Whether it be
not the great question at issue between the maintainers of
true religion and the Romish Church, and whether we could
O J
recant our declaration without abandoning the great
Scriptural right of all Christian people, and avowing that
most fatal principle by which Romanism binds and enslaves
the minds of millions, withdrawing them from the lively
oracles of God as being so obscure that the people cannot
interpret them without danger, and under the pretext of
receiving the teaching and interpretations of the Church,
compelling them to give up their judgments to the decrees
of men, Avith no other security for Divine truth and the
salvation of their souls, than the word of a Priest or Bishop.
I might well submit to your Lordship’s judgment,
without adducing any evidence, that the important truth,
contained in the declaration for which we have been
condemned, was held and taught by the most eminent
Ministers of the Church of England ; but, as the general
object of this appeal, as a vindication of Protestant
• Bishop Mant, in his comment upon the xxth Article, assigns the
same limitation to the authority of the Church.
“ As the Church ought not to decree any thing against Holy Writ, so
besides the same ought it not to enforce anything to be believed for
necessity of salvation.” —Act xx,
“ In such rules of the Church,” says Bishop Mant, “we ought to
acquiesce. Nor can we assign any other bounds to our submission in this
case than those which the Gospel has limited. We must obey God rather than
man. So that if the Church or State have power to make rules and laws
in such matters, they must have this extent given to them : — That till
THEY BREAK IN UPON THE LAWS OF GOD AND THE GOSPEL, WE MUST
BE BOUND TO OBEY THEM.”


principles and an attempt to prevent their complete suppres-
sion in this diocese, may be promoted by such testimonies,
I have set down in an appendix conclusive passages from
the Homilies, the Confession and the Articles of the Church
of England and of the Church of Ireland ; the Reformers—
Tindal, Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Jewel, Hooper. Archb.
Usher, Rp. Reynolds, I3p. Sanderson, Archb. Wake, Ur.
Waterland, Dr. Leslie, Archb. Seeker, Up. Stillingflcet, Up.
Hibson, Up. Stanley, Up. Warburton, Dr. Fiddes, Mr.
Cardwell, Archb. Synge, Up. Burnet, Archb. Whately,
Metrop. Up. Wilson, Sir I. Newton, Up. Portens, Up.
Hall, &c.
And surely, my Lord, I may be pardoned if I here
express the astonishment no less than sorrow which I have
ever felt at being called upon to vindicate myself for pro-
fessing and refusing to recant what has ever been maintained
as the essential and distinguishing principle of the Refor-
mation. Personal considerations arc of little moment
compared with the deep injury to Evangelical truth by the
prohibition of this great principle, and I am persuaded that
1 do not exceed the limits of Christian feeling in calling for
the sympathy and prayers of all Evangelical believers to
turn to good so afflicting and so alarming an attempt to
substitute the Romish Rule of Faith for that of the Gospel.
That a Minister of the Church of England should publicly
sanction and inculcate such a grievous measure, so full of
discouragement to Evangelical Christians, and affording
such confirmation and trumph to Romanists, has seldom, I
believe, been known in the history of the Church ; but that
a Utshop should not only openly teach the Romish Rule of
Faith, but use every means in his power to compel the
Ministers of his diocese to receive it, will, I am assured, be
regarded by all who are interested in the cause of the
Redeemer as a strong obligation for an open testimony, and
for earnest supplication for the Divine aid and counsel.


If I may be permitted to speak for myself, I can truly
say, that, could I have done so with a safe conscience, I
should long since have retired from the colony and from a
painful controversy, carried on less with a hope of success
than from an obligation laid upon me to testify the truth
unto this people. But the Lord’s dealing has proved to me
that His witness is a privilege and blessing to those who
bear it, even in a season of darkness and depression. I
have to render thanks to God for the help and support of a
few whom the love of truth and religious principle have
raised above personal considerations and enabled to
encounter the disadvantages of opposing authority and
influence, and still more, for the Christian union of many
humble followers of the Lord in the bonds of the Gospel.
1 have learned, with deep thankfulness of heart, that the Lord
is a sufficient stay in the time of trouble, and that He will
give strength to the weakest and most unworthy, enabling
them to stand against the mighty in the cause of truth.
I am bound to declare to your Lordship that the evils
which myself and other Ministers have suffered for refusing
to retract our declaration have been very great. The
Bishop has declared publicly that he was compelled by a
conscientious regard to duty to refuse our testimonials, as our
religious principles were so unsound that we could not testify
to the soundness of another, and that, while we held such
opinions, he should subject us to Ecclesiastical disabilities,
especially stating that he would never license us to a new
charge, thereby declaring us unworthy of the Christian
Ministry. Thus the power and influence of the Bishop are
employed to destroy the confidence of our congregations,
who, by repeated declarations, are taught to regard us as
holding heretical opinions on Baptism,—as unsound in our
religious principles concerning the Rule of Faith and the
authority of the Church, —as being schismatics and rebels
against our Bishop, and as violators of our Ordination vows.


Although the obstructions to our ministry, and the
inconveniences and evils of our position are numerous and
distressing, I should never have appealed to your Lordship
for the redress of merely personal disadvantages ; and I
have now been induced to represent our condition, only, as
showing the measures which have been adopted to compel
us to recant, and so to silence the teachers of Protestant
principles, and in order, as I trust, thereby to prove to
your Lordship the absolute necessity for the interposition of
your authority as Metropolitan, as the only means of
preserving the cause of truth in this diocese.
Your Lordship will at once see how difficult, if not
impossible, it is for any minister to persevere in maintaining
a principle which singles him out from the other clergymen,
and exposes him denounced and condemned to be oppressed
by the whole weight of the Bishop’s power.
In this colony there is but onedßishop possessing, hitherto,
the appointment to all chaplaincies, and claiming the right
to revoke at his own pleasure the licenses of the Clergy,
without which they cannot hold any ministerial office.
The Ministers of the Church of England are therefore, in a
great measure, dependant upon the Bishop, who, in addition
to his Episcopal power, exercises in a small community a
great and extensive personal influence. It is not therefore
surprising that several Ministers should have recanted their
declaration of the Protestant Rule of Faith, and that of the
twenty clergymen by whom it was subscribed, but five or
six should now be found to maintain their principles. L*
contest so unequal, an opposing clergyman must sooner c
later be crushed. The last hope therefore of preserving
Protestant teaching in this colony lies in the interposition
of your Lordship ; such be the Divine will, I
believe that a plain declaration of the Evangelical principles
of our Reformed Church, and a solemn warning to the
people against Romanizing doctrines, following tb*' ''n


ami serious admonition which has been already given by
the Primate, would awaken very many to their danger and
to the necessity of adopting measures for preserving for
their children and for themselves faithful preachers of
Evangelical truth.
For myself, I can only meet the judgment of God, and
deliver ray own soul from participating in the sin of
suppressing Gospel truth, when I have done all in my
power to maintain it by ray public testimony and continued
protest, and by now appealing to your Lordship to declare
the whole counsel of God and feed the souls of the people
over whom, as I trust, the Holy Ghost has made you
overseer, with the truth which is now so needful for them,
keeping back nothing which may be profitable to build
them up in the holy faith, or to guard them against the
prevalent Romanizing spirit and teaching, so that you
“ may be pure from the blood of this people.”
I trust that your Lordship will not believe that any of
the clergymen, who signed the declaration of the sufficiency
of Holy Scripture interpreted by private judgment as the
Rule of Faith, would have refused to withdraw any expres-
sions to which the Bishop might have objected if it were
our words only which he required us to retract, and not the
principle which we designed to profess. As nothing can be
more certain than that the Bishop of Tasmania understood
our declaration correctly, and condemned it as expressing
the meaning and doctrine which we intended it should
convey, 1 confidently appeal to your Lordship, whether we
could have withdrawn our declaration without violating our
own consciences, —acting dishonestly towards the people,—
and betraying what we are assured is a great principle of
the Gospel ?
If our words were misunderstood, it would have been
clearly our duty to have explained, altered, or withdrawn
them. But with what honest purpose could we retract them


when they were rightly understood, and when the principle
which was condemned was that which we held and professed ?
If, while we still believed that principle to be a Gospel
truth, we had retracted the words in which we had publicly
declared it, no matter under what pretence, we should cer-
tainly have contradicted our own convictions, and laid a
heavy burthen upon our consciences.
What would have been the effect of such retractation
upon the minds of the people ? Undoubtedly it would
have been to mislead and deceive them ; they could never
have understood it in any other light than as an abandon-
ment by us of the Protestant principle to which we had
borne testimony. In the sight of God it would have been,
plainly, a betrayal of the cause of truth, —a withdrawal of
our testimony to a great Evangelical principle from the fear
of man, or other personal considerations.
Your Lordship will bear in mind that the declaration of
our principles was not a gratuitous act on our part, but one
to which we felt ourselves called, as Ministers of the
Gospel. The Senior Chaplain of the colony, the late
Dr. Bedford, having discovered that his curate the Rev.
W. Tancred, had disseminated without his knowledge and
given to the young persons then being prepared for con-
firmation, copies of a Romanizing Manual called “ Steps to
the Altar,” requested that his brethren in the ministry
should meet for consultation and advice. The result of our
deliberation was the publication of an address to the Bishop,
and of a tract called “ The Solemn Declaration,” in which
we set forth various passages from books disseminated in
the colony, or taught to the Divinity Students at the
College, and given to candidates for Holy Orders, with the
expression of our opinion that these books inculcated
Romanizing principles, and were calculated to undermine
the Evangelical truths of religion. One of the passages


thus set forth was the following, taken from “ Theophilus
Anglicanus,”—(p. 53, Ed. 1845.)
« q,—Am I then to make my own mind the judge whether they
“ (authorised expositors) are in error ; and if not, to what tests
“ of doctrine am I to appeal 1 ”
“ A, —lt is not our own private judgment, but, first, Holy
“ Scripture, as received, guarded, and interpreted by the Catholic
“Church from the beginning, ‘according to the proportion of
“ faith and next, the consent of the Church herself, speaking in
“ her public expositions, creeds, councils, liturgies, confessions, and
“ writings of her early Fathers, Bishops, and Doctors, is the Rule of
“ Faith to which the teaching of individuals is to be referred.”
In our judgments this was nothing less than establishing
the Romish Rule of Faith, thereby undermining Evangelical
religion, and chang-ino; the diocese into a semi-Romish
O 7 O O
Church. Nor was this the whole of the danger or evil: it
was but a part of what, as I believe, and as will be shewn
hereafter, was a systematic design to suppress Protestant
teaching, and Romanize the Church. A positive prohibi-
tion against Evangelical Ministers or preaching was enforced
by the Bishop, in condemning as heretics those who denied
his doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration, and in declaring
that he would never license or ordain any person not holding
that doctrine, while a number of clergymen teaching the
views set forth in “ The Steps to the Altar” and “ Theo-
philus Anglicanus” had been introduced into the colony,
and entrusted with the charge of the College and the most
important parishes as they became vacant. As an example
of the extent to which their opposition to Evangelical prin-
ciples was carried, I may mention that the tract on
Justification, written by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and published by the Ohristion Knowledge Society, was
rejected by a Clerical Sub-Committee at Hobart Town as
Lutheran and unsound ; while the works of Neale, Gresley,
Paget, Miss Sewell, &c., with the numerous tracts published


by Masters, and calculated to infuse Romanizing principles
into the minds even of children, were widely disseminated
among the people.
In such a condition of the Church myself and nearly the
whole of the old clergymen of the colony, (twenty in
number,) felt ourselves under a heavy responsibility, and,
saw no other way of freeing our consciences than by
delivering our open testimony to the people, warning them
of the danger and true nature of the books and principles
disseminated among them, and taught to their children as
the principles of the Church of England.
We felt that in endeavouring to counteract the false
teaching of these books, on “ Justification,” —“ The Sacra-
ments,” —“ Tiie Church of Christ,” — “ Absolution,”
“ Holy Scripture and the Rule of Faith,” we could not better
guard and instruct the people than by placing in opposition to
each Romanizing principle the true Scriptural doctrine.
Thus, we set forth our declaration of the sufficiency of Holy
Scripture interpreted by the private judgment of individuals
with the aid of the Holy Spirit as the true Rule of Faith,
in opposition to the positive denial of the right of private
judgment and of the sufficiency of Holy Scripture, so
plainly expressed in the foregoing passage from “ Theophilus
Anglicanus.” 1 trust, therefore, that your Lordship will
take into consideration the circumstances which led to the
publication of “ The Solemn Declaration and I feel a
brotherly confidence in the Christian sympathy with which
1 am persuaded every Evangelical Minister will regard the
condition of myself and brethren. My Lord, the only
request I have to prefer is, that you will deliver your
decision on the principle or merits of the question at issue.
It is not a question of words : there is no difference in the
manner in which the Bishop of Tasmania understands our
declaration, and that in which we ourselves understand it.
Let then, my Lord, I pray y the people of this colony


be instructed in the principle, to them all important, of the
Rule of Faith. Are they to believe that they can interpret
the Word of Glod by their own judgment with the aid of
the Holy Spirit, and that they are not bound to receive the
teaching of the Church if they are convinced that it is
contrary to Scripture ? Or are they to believe the reverse
of this, as declared by Theophilus Anglicanus and the
Bishop of Tasmania ?
1 have one positive proof to submit to your Lordship ;
that the Bishop of Tasmania condemned our Declaration of
private judgment for the principle it expressed, and in the
meaning which we designed it to convey. If your Lordship
will refer to page 9 of the Substance of the Reply by the
Bp. of Tasmania, you will find the following passage :
“ In proceeding to comment upon it” (our declaration on
“ private judgment) “ the fairer course would appear to be to
“ take the explanation, as recently drawn up by five clergy -
“ men at Campbell Town, and subsequently affirmed by
“ seven others ”
The explanation agrees completely with our Declaration,
but it is more full and, so, less liable to be misunderstood,
and in taking it as the subject of his comments, and
regarding the principle which we professed as it is fully set
forth in the explanation of our original statement, the
Bishop of Tasmania certainly did act fairly. He did not
discuss the question as a verbal one. He understood com-
pletely our meaning and the Rule of Faith which we
maintained. That Rule of Faith he considered unsound,
and he condemned us for holding it, and clearly set before
us the opposite Rule of Faith, as that which he requires us
to receive. What we now earnestly solicit from your
Lordship is, that you will not treat the subject as a question
of words, but that you will, as the Bishop of Tasmania has
done, “ take the explanation ” which we have given of
the principle set forth by us as the ground of your


“ comment ” and judgment. The following is a copy of our
explanation :
“ The Article in the Declaration only asserts that every
“ Christian may interpret the Word of God by his own
“ private judgment, with the aid of the Holy Spirit, and
“ declares that no individual is bound to receive, on the
“ authority of any Church or Minister, doctrines which
“ the private judgment of such individual may convince
“ him to be contrary to Holy Scripture.”
Reference to pages 7 and 8 of this appeal will show that
the Bishop of Tasmania condemns this Declaration, and
compels us by penalties to retract it as altogether unsound.
He requires us to receive the very opposite principles, and
“ Rule of Faith.” He affirms that “an individual has no
right to be his own interpreter in matters where the Church
has recorded her judgment.” He affirms that a man “is
hound to receive the teaching of the Church in opposition
to his own judgment'’ That he is not “at liberty to reject
any doctrine which his private judgment may convince him
is contrary to Scripture.”
It would be waste of time to show that these two
principles are the foundation of opposite religious systems,
and that, in their practical influence upon the minds of
men, they are perhaps the most important in determining
their faith, and so influencing their salvation.
For my own part, considering the principles held by the
Bishop of Tasmania, I can feel no surprise that he should
have condemned myself and brethren, as altogether unsound
in doctrine, and should use every means to induce us to
recant, or that he should allow no Minister to teach any
other Rule of Faith than that which he believes to be true.
If his Rule of Faith be required by the Church of
England, we have no more right to be clergymen of that
Church than we have to exercise our ministry in the
Church of Rome. But, as I believe, the Bishop of Tas-


mania requires us to recant the fundamental principle of all
Evangelical Churches, and to receive the Rule of Faith of
the Church of Rome, I feel justified in complaining of what,
in the judgment of those who regard it as I do, is a very-
grievous wrong to myself and brethren, and, what is infi-
nitely more lamentable, is a deep and fatal injury to true
religion.
Believe me, my Lord, this is the simple question on which
justice, and the religious interests of the people, call upon
you to pronounce your decision : and I cannot help express-
ing my hope and trust that the Grace of the Holy Spirit
may enable you to overcome the many considerations,
which, I know, must indispose you to a fearless uncompro-
mising and explicit declaration of Evangelical truth, and of
the all importance of the great Protestant principle now so
nearly suppressed in this colony. I trust that your name
will be recorded, not only in the grateful recollection ot the
Lord’s people, but in the Book of Life, as one whose sole
consideration was the Saviour’s Glory and the Saviour’s
Truth.
If I express myself too strongly, I pray your Lordship
to forgive me. After long contending and suffering for a
great Evangelical principle, I am naturally anxious that
the consideration of it should not turn into a verbal
discussion,* and that the people should receive from
your Lordship such instruction as may confirm in the
truth those whose minds have been unsettled, and stop the
progress of a fatal error. lam now an old minister, and,
* Some persons who agree with us in the principle set forth in the
Solemn Declaration, that if an individual in the exercise of his private
judgment conscientiously believes that a prescription of the Church is
contrary to God’s Word, it becomes a case of conscience with him what
way he shall signify his dissent or oppose an unrighteous decree, yet
think, that the concluding sentence in the Declaration of the right of
private judgment might be amended. In place of the words “Denying
the right of any Church to prescribe to individuals in matters of religion


in truth, experience lias in my mind stripped men—their
offices—their dignities of the importance and power in which
in opposition to their own judgment;” it is proposed that we should
withdraw the words “in opposition to their own judgment,’ 1 and substitute
the words, “in opposition to the Word of God.” In considering this sug-
gestion it must be borne in mind that our object in setting forth the
(Solemn Declaration was to testify to the people our conviction that they
bad a right to interpret Holy Scripture by their own private judgment,
and that no Church had a right to prescribe to them, in opposition to
their judgment what they were to believe. Now, if we were to withdraw
these words, and say that the Church had no right to prescribe to them
anything opposed to God’s Word, we should state a proposition which no
one controverts, — a proposition which those who hold the Romish
Rule of Faith, and which even Roman Catholics themselves would
agree with and subscribe to ; for, as they believe that the Church is infal-
lible, and that its teaching is the only true interpretation of Scripture,
they, of course, hold that the Church neither does nor can prescribe any
thing in opposition to God’s Word. Thus, we should retract our declara-
tion of the Protestant principle of private judgment, and substitute in its
place a statement which those who deny that principle, and which even
Roman Catholics would subscribe to; and we should set forth this state-
ment with the appearance, and under the pretence of testifying to the
people the Protestant Rule of Faith, as a necessary warning to them not
to be deceived by those writers, who, professing to teach the principles of
the Church of England, inculcate even the Rule of Faith of the Church
of Rome. Such a proceeding would certainly be very unworthy of those
who profess to teach the Word of God in sincerity. In my opinion, it
would be an evasion, adopted by us to escape the consequences of our
declaration of the right of private judgment. It is also plain that we
should betray and delude the people with a false pretence of delivering to
them a Protestant principle,—that we should trifle with and sacrifice the
truth, and forsake the cause of the Lord Jesus Christ, to escape persecu-
tion for a great principle of the Gospel.
But why should we withdraw our declaration ? Is it untrue ? .Are we
prepared to admit that the Church has a right to prescribe to us what we
are to believe, in opposition to our own judgments ? Certainly not !
How then can we withdraw our Declaration without relinquishing our
testimony and misleading the people ? If we recant a principle which we
believe to be true, in order to avoid the effects of the Bishop’s condemna-
tion, and be restored to peace and favour, we should betray the truth
from human policy.
But have our words been misunderstood that we should change them
for others more definite ? We have already done so. Our first Declaration
was simply a general denial of the assumption of the Church to prescribe
to individuals in opposition to their judgments. To guard against objec-
tions to a proposition thus generally expressed, we put forth an explana-
tion of our statement. We admit the right of the Church to frame Articles
of Religion, which its members are bound to receive so long as they
continue in her communion, and we explained our denial of the right of the
Church to prescribe to individuals, &c., as meaning “ that no individual is


they appear to those who have not so much observed the
course and influence of the Invisible Disposer of all things.
Your decision may do much for yourself, much for the
people, and for the future interests of religion in this
diocese : but I will not disguise from your Lordship that
your judgment will produce no change in my mind. If all
the Bishops in Christendom were to decree that the Word
of God is not a clear expositor of its own meaning, and
that Christians are not to interpret it for themselves, with
the light and gracious help of the Holy Spirit, my faith and
my conviction would remain precisely the same. Nor, in
such a cause as this, would I willingly mingle personal
relief or advantage. 1 know, yea, lam convinced by
reason, by Scripture, and by Spiritual experience, that it is
the cause of God. Oh, may all who are engaged in it be
enabled to keep it pure and free from personal considerations
and private feelings, so that at the last we may be found
bound to receive, on the authority of any Church, doctrines which the pri-
vate judgment of such individual may convince him to be contrary to Holy
Scripture.” This explanation was received by the Bishop as the expression
of our opinion, and was condemned by him as stating a principle which
lie considered unsound. To what purpose then should we withdraw our
Declaration, when the explanation which we gave of our principles was
condemned as equally unsound. In giving the explanation we virtually
withdrew the declaration, in so far as it might be supposed to convey any
other meaning or application than that expressed in our explanation.
The Bishop has, as he says, fairly judged us by the principles set forth in
the explanation, and it is on the condemnation passed upon us for those
principles as therein expressed, and understood by the Bishop, that I
present this appeal.
It may be remarked that the sentence suggested “ denying the right of
the Church to prescribe to individuals in opposition to God’s Word,” is
capable of two meanings. Ist. To prescribe to individuals what they
believe to be opposed to God’s Word : or 2nd, —to prescribe to individuals
what the Church believes to be opposed to God’s Word. The first sense
is, plainly, the same which we have set forth in our Declaration. The
second does not convey any very useful information, for it only declares
that “ the Church may not prescribe what the Church believes to be
opposed to God’s Worda statement not requiring to be made the
subject of a public declaration.


with a single eye, and full of light, to have spoken in
Godly sincerity the truth as it is in Jesus,
If the principles laid down by the Bishop of Tasmania
should, in your Lordship’s judgment, be in accordance with
God’s Word: if a Christian should not interpret Holy
Scripture where the Church has pronounced a decision : if
the Word of God does not clearly explain its own meaning, so
that those who endeavour with the aid of the Holy Spirit
to discover from it Divine truth, are in such danger of
deriving from it heretical opinions that they are prohibited from
interpreting it, and are bound to give up their own convic-
tions of Scripture truth to the authority and decision of the
Church, —then I beseech your Lordship to confirm the con-
demnation of the Bishop of Tasmania upon myself and
others as utterly unsound in faith ; for we do hold and teach
directly the opposite of this. We believe that he who seeks
Divine truth in God’s Word, in dependance upon
the teaching of the Holy Spirit, and with prayer
for its light and guidance, is in no danger of being led into
heresy, and we deny that the Church has any authority to
bind us to receive its decisions in opposition to our convic-
tions of the teaching of Holy Scripture. But if the
principles which the Bishop of Tasmania imposes upon the
clergymen and people of the colony be unscriptural, then I
solemnly entreat you by the sacred responsibility of testify-
ing to the truth, that you will deliver the souls of this
people from a principle, so absolutely opposed to Evangelical
Religion.
If but one immortal soul is misled, so as to doubt the
sufficiency of Scripture, or his being able to learn from it
Divine truth, on the false supposition of its being so
obscure that its meaning is only to be learned in the
decisions of the Church. If but a single individual is led to
give up his dependance upon the guidance of the Holy
Spirit, and to abandon Spiritual and Scriptural religion,


and so to make shipwreck of his faith, we may with reason
dread, lest the loss of that soul be laid to our charge should
we have refrained from warning him, with all earnestness,
against the delusive teaching which would lead him to
O O
depend upon the word of man and decisions of the Church,
rather than upon the Word of God, and guidance of the
Holy Spirit.
Surely the way of salvation is darkened, if not closed,
when men are told that they may not seek for Divine truth
in the Word of God. Believing as I do, with the strongest
conviction, that the means which our Lord has provided for
making known to us His saving truth are His Holy Word,
which He, by His Spirit, will prepare our hearts to receive,
and enlighten our minds to understand, I should feel
myself cut off from Christ, and under the condemnation of
death as an Apostate, if, from any consideration whatever,
I retracted my testimony to this great principle of Evan-
gelical Beligion, or ceased to teach it as the way by which
each man, by his own individual searching of God’s Word,
and approaching by faith to the throne of grace for the
guidance of the Holy Spirit, may be made wise unto
salvation.
Committing therefore the result to Him who disposeth all
things according to the counsels of infinite wisdom and
mercy, and who will make His truth to shine through and
dispel the darkness of every delusion, I submit to your
Lordship the following grounds of appeal:—■
Ist. I appeal to your Lordship, whether the principles
laid down by the Bishop of Tasmania do not directly
contradict the . positive declarations of Holy Scripture that
it is sufficient to make us wise unto salvation, and to teach
us all saving truth ?*
* Our Lord always refers individuals to Holy Scripture, that by their
own judgment, independently of the decisions of the Jewish Church, they
might discover its meaning. To the Lawyer who asked him what he


2nd. Whether it is not a most awful denial of the
enlightening influence of the Holy Ghost, and of the
should do to inherit eternal life, He replied, “ What is written in the
Law ? How readest thou ?”—(Luke x. 26.) In the parable, the same
direction is given as to the way to discover Divine truth, —“ They have
Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.”—(Luke xvi., 29.) So, our
Lord always appeals to Scripture to prove to the people the truth of His
doctrine, thereby calling upon them to use their own judgments in inter-
preting it. “ Search the Scriptures ; they are they which testify of me.”
• —(John v., 39) “Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures.”
—(Mat. xxii., 29.)
The Bereans are commended for ascertaining the meaning of Scripture
by their private judgment. “ They searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so.” —(Acts xvii., 11.)
The controversy of Paul with the Jews was always submitted to the
judgment of individuals, without reference to the authority of the Church.
The sufficiency and clearness of Scripture to explain its own meaning
are fully declared by Paul, (2 Tim. iii., 14 .,) “ All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correc-
tion, for instruction in righteousness that the name of God may be made
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.” If Paul believed
that the Church could alone interpret Scripture, he could not have thus
declared the sufficiency of the Word of God without any reference to
the Church.
To the same effect is the assurance whatsoever things were
written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience
and comfort of the Scripture, might have hope.”—(Rom. xv., 4.) The
Old Testament gives similar instruction, —“ These words which I command
thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shalt teach them diligently
unto thy children.” —(Deut. vi. 6.) “ This book of the Law shall not
depart out of thy mouth, but thou shalt meditate therein day and night.”
—(Josh, i. 8.) “ Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto
my path.” “ The entrance of thy words giveth light: it giveth under-
standing unto the simple.” “ The law of the Lord is perfect, converting
the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.”
Blessed, said our Lord, even above her who was blessed among women,
“ Are they who hear the Word of God, and do it.”—(Luke ii., 28.) The
Apostle says, “ Let the Word of Christ dwell in us richly in all wisdom.”
.—(Col. iii., 16.) “To receive with meekness the engrafted word which
is able to save our souls.” —(James i., 21.) St. Paul says, “ The word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith
which we preach.”—(Rom. x., 8.) Our Lord teaches us that “ man shall
live by every Word of God.”—(Luke iv. 4.) “ Faith comes by hearing
the Word of God.”—(Rom. x., 17.) “ These are written that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that, believing, ye
might have life through his name.”—(John xx., 31.) “It seemed good
to me also to write unto thee, that thou mightest know the certainty of
those things wherein thou hast been instructed.”- —(Luke i. 4.) “ I charge
you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read unto all the holy brethren.” —
(1 Thess. v., 27.) “ Blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy
of this book.” —(Revelation xxii., 7.)


promise of God to guide and direct His people by His
Spirit to all necessary truth ?*
But one design can be attributed to these declarations,—that Scripture
is given to make us wise unto salvation. The Gospels were written that
we might learn the truth, and know the certainty of what is preached.
A blessing is pronounced upon him who keeps the sayings of the most
obscure book of the Bible. The conclusion from this must be, that we are
to seek the knowledge of religion from Scripture, by examining its state-
ments and interpreting its meaning.
The whole system of the Gospel is founded upon individual judgment
and interpretation of Scripture. Christians are commanded to receive no
doctrine upon authority, without inquiring for themselves whether it be
in accordance with Scripture. Thus Paul commands “ Every man to
prove all things, and hold fast the truth.’’—(l Tliess. v., 21.) “To try
the Spirits, ’or teaching of the preachers.—(l John iv., 1.) “ lie that is
spiritual, judgeth all things.”—(l Cor. ii., 15.,) for his mind enlightened
and directed by the Holy Spirit, rejects error, and receives Gospel truths
“ which are spiritually discerned ; ’ “ while the natural man receiveth not
the things of the Spirit of God ; for they are foolishness unto him, neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.” The Apostle
confidently appeals to Christians to estimate and determine the truth of
teachers and doctrines, by using our own judgments in comparing them
with Holy Scripture. “If an angel from heaven preach any other Gospel
than that which you have received, let him be accursed.’—(Gal. i., 8.)
“ To the Law, and to the Testimony ; if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them.”—(lsaiah viii., 20.)
* I believe a more shocking passage cannot be found in any Christian
writer than that in which Bishop Nixon sets at naught, apparently, with
derision, the guiding influen -e of the Holy Spirit. If there be a doctrine
essential to the soul s comfort, it is the assurance that the Lord will guide
His people to the saving truths of His Gospel, and, by the grace of the
Holy Spirit, turn them away from error as from sin. Without this, there
were no assurance, no safety for the believer. Destroy the Christian s
confidence in the illumination and direction of the Holy Spirit, and he is
cast helpless and hopeless upon a sea of darkness and of error. Alas, that
the Christian’s hope should thus be undermined by his being told that
those who had lost their souls through perverting the Gospel had,
probably, sought the Spirit’s guidance, and had as much reason as the
true believer to confide in its direction ! This deplorable objection might
proceed from an unbeliever, attempting to overthrow the Gospel by
objecting that the guiding influence of the Holy Spirit is not to be
depended upon, because, in some cases, it is supposed to have proved
ineffectual. Popish advocates have frequently alleged it against Pro-
testants, but by the Divine goodness the promises and graces of God
are not thus to be made vain ; they are too plain, too substantial and
encouraging, to be set at naught by the mistrust or objections of man.
The following are some of the Scriptural promises of the Holy Spirit:—
“ I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts.
...They shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest.”—
(Jerm. xxxi., 33.)
“ I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.”—(Ezek. xl., 19,
and xxxvi., 27 ; also Joel ii., 28 ; Psal. lii., 10.)


3rd. Whether it does not directly lead the people to
undervalue and neglect Holy Scripture as not clearly
explaining its own meaning ?*
“ How much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask Him. ’ —(Luke xi., 13.)
“If any man thirst, let him come unto me aud drink. He that
believeth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water. But this spake He of the Spirit, which they that
believe on Him should receive.”—(John vii., 38.)
“ I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth,”—
(John xiv., 17.)
“ If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men
liberally and upraideth not, and it shall be given him.’’—(Jam. i., 5.)
“If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His.” “As
many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.”—
(Rom. viii., 9 14.)
“Ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit.’’
—(1 Pet. i., 22.)
“ If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit.”—(Gal. v., 25.)
“ Live according to God in the Spirit.”—(l Pet. iv., 6.) “In everything
ye are enriched by Him in all utterance and in all knowledge. ’ —•
(1 Cor. L, 5.)
“ Gbd hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit: for the Spirit
searcheth all things, yea the deep things of God.” “He that is spiritual
judgeth all things.”—(l Cor. ii., 10.)
“ That God may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in
the knowledge of Him ; the eyes of your understanding being enlightened
that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, &c. —(Eph. L, 18.)
“ The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man te profit withal.
For to one is given by tbe Spirit the word of wisdom : to another the
word of knowledge by the same Spirit.”—(l Cor. xii., 8.)
“Ye have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after
the image of Him that created him."—(Col. iii., 10.)
“ The Spirit also helpeth our infirmities, for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit maketh intercession for us.”—
(Rom. viii., 26.)
The root of Spiritual religion is dependance upon Divine Grace,
These passages of Scripture will, I trust, counteract the objection against
confiding upon the direction of the Holy Spirit. It is vain to look for
proofs of any other doctrine if these do not impress a positive conviction
that our Lord will assuredly enable us to understand His Word aright,
when we seek His Grace with the prayer of Faith.
* Bishop Nixon’s teaching, that Holy Scripture is an obscure book,
which does not clearly explain its own meaning,—a book from which the
deniers of our Lord, and every class of false teachers, have derived their
errors, and which we cannot with confidence hope to understand through
the aid of the Holy Spirit, would certainly lead us to regard it as
full of danger ; we could not read it without distrust and apprehension,
lest we receive from it some doctrine not in accordance with the Church.
If we are incapable of interpreting it, that is, of understanding it, and if
we are bound to receive the interpretations which the Church gives us,


4th. I would submit to your Lordship whether the
principle inculcated by the Bishop of Tasmania is not
calculated to destroy all faith in religion ?
We are required to believe that Holy Scripture not being
a clear explainer of its own meaning, is understood or
interpreted differently by those who study it, and that
many systems of religion and sects are thereby formed.
On this account, therefore, the people are not to interpret
Scripture by their own reason and judgment, lest they
should deduce from it some erroneous or heretical doctrines,
and are to give up their judgments to the Church, and
receive its teaching even in opposition to their own convic-
tions of Scripture truth.
This doctrine seems to me to overthrow not only all con-
fidence in Holy Scripture, but to impair its authority as
the inspired Word of God. To teach that it is so liable
to mislead those who read it, that to preserve them from
deriving from it dangerous errors, they are prohibited from
endeavouring to interpret it ; that is, to ascertain its
meaning or discover the truths which it teaches, is certainly
to induce doubts whether it can be the Word of God,
written by inspiration, to make us wise unto salvation.
Men will doubt whether that can be a Divine revelation,
which is so dangerous, so liable to be misunderstood, that it is
why should we needlessly endanger our salvation by reading what may
mislead us. when in the decisions of the Church we have the true teaching
of Scripture provided for us ?
If we are not to interpret, or put a sense or meaning on those passages
of Holy Scripture “ upon which the Church has recorded her judgment,”
as the Bishop teaches, our state of mind, in reading the Word of God,
would certainly be both perplexing and inconsistent. We must read with
the conviction that we cannot interpret or discern the meaning of what
we read, and we must have our understandings so chained and bound
that our reason and judgment must always see in the Word of God only
doctrines of the Church. This is the safeguard of Komanism to force the
enslaved minds of her members to make the Scriptures speak according to
her decrees. But the minds of Protestants, taught to search the Scriptures
that they may be made wise unto salvation, have not yet learned the art
of reading the Word of God without attempting to interpret it, that is, to
find out the Divine truth which it teaches.


necessary to prohibit them from trying to find out its
meaning. Many will consider it scarcely credible that the
inspired Scripture can be so difficult to understand, and
that its meaning is only to be discovered in the decisions
of the Church from the beginning to the present time. An
unintelligible word of God seems a contradiction. A word
of God which requires the comments or explanations of men to
render it safe, so that it may read without danger, appears
inconsistent with the Divine perfections. Nor will those
who regard Holy Scripture in this light entertain a
high conception of its value even should they not be led to
doubt its inspiration. It is indeed difficult to say whether
this doctrine be more derogatory to the Holy Scripture,
which it discredits as obscure, ambiguous, and dangerous ;
or to the reason of man, which it declares to be incapable
of understanding the Word of God.*
* Are we to suppose that man’s intelligence was given him to discover
the heights and depths of human inquiry, and yet be unable to understand
the truth revealed by God for his salvation ? Can we suppose him
capable of unravelling truth from the confusion of human prejudices and
indistinct conceptions, and yet unable to comprehend the inspired volume,
written for his instruction ? In admitting this doctrine, we dethrone
reason, condemn our understanding as a false guide, and unsettle every
principle of morals and religion. If incapable of comprehending the
precepts and reasoning of inspired Apostles, we must distrust our conclu-
sions on every moral subject, and abandon ourselves to universal doubt.
Persuade us that we cannot understand the Scripture by our own
private judgment,—deter us from its sacred page by holding before our
alarmed imaginations the example of those who have wrested it to their
destruction, —and we may indeed be terrified into implicit submission to
the Church or the Priest; but no bodily bondage can parallel the servitude
of the mind which gives up its convictions, which dreads to exercise its
judgments, and, violating its own nature, assents without inquiry, and
believes without evidence.
The very idea that God's Word, addressed to man, stands in need of
intermediate human explanation,—that it must be reconstructed and
systematized,—that the words of Christ and His Apostles must be changed
into other expressions,—put into another form, —have a sense and meaning
given to them by Assemblies of Priests or Bishops, in order to render
them safe and intelligible, is nothing less than impiety and presumption.
That can never be true which thus violates our moral sense ; that must be
false which asserts insufficiency or imperfection in any work or design of
God. It is therefore morally impossible that Gods Word can be so
obscure as not to be “a clear expositor of its own meaningso liable to


sth. I would submit to your Lordship that to teach the
people that the Church has by Divine appointment autho-
rity to bind us to receive her teaching and decisions
as the true sense of Scripture, even in opposition to our
own judgments and convictions, must have the effect of
enslaving the understandings of the people, and of binding
them to submit absolutely to the teaching of the priests, or
those who they suppose deliver to them the decisions of the
Church ; and that to oblige them to receive as religious
truth whatever the priesthood may teach, would open the
way to the grossest errors, superstitions, and corruptions.*
mislead, —so incapable of teaching Divine truth as to require human
interpretation to render it intelligible.
Holy Scripture is a great instrument of God’s spiritual Providence;
not a perishing human hair is unnumbered by infinite intelligence,—far
less is there one sentence or one word of that inspired volume, of which
one tittle shall not fail, that is not replete with Divine energy, under the
application of an all-directing Providence, to effect the will of God to
each human soul according to its capacity for instruction. Is man to
step in between the Word of the Almighty and the soul of His creature
and say, that his interpretation is necessary to give efficiency to the
Divine teaching by rendering it safer and more intelligible ?
* “ To teach that we must believe what the Church prescribes, even in
opposition to our own convictions, is to paralyze the mind and to remove
every bar to the progress of error and superstition, by inculcating the
sinfulness of doubting what the Priests deliver as the Church’s teaching.
A people indoctrinated with this notion will swallow every fable or
imposition put forth by a priesthood interested in implicit submission to
its authority. It would, in effect, enact over again the religious history
of the middle ages, and transform the Gospel into a human system of
spiritual bondage.”
“ The faith founded upon the authority of the Church is credulity : the
Bible faith is conviction. The one is accompanied with a sense of
dependance upon man, —upon those who tell us what the Church directs
us to believe, and is weak and humiliating; the other is firm, self-
dependent, and resting upon discernment of truth taught by the Word of
God. The Church Rule of Faith bids its disciples believe, because the
Priests believe, their fathers believe, all of their Church believe, and this
is found in practice sufficient to persuade the ignorant and unenlightened
to receive its teaching. The Bible rule bids us search the Scriptures to
become wise unto salvation, and try every word by the law and the
testimony. Where the Bible prevails there is progression of intellect,
development of the principles of truth, amelioration of laws and manners,
increased knowledge and observance of the rights and liberties of man,
and greater regard to the benevolent feelings and usages of humanity.
Where the Church rule prevails, as in Portugal, Spain, Ireland, and South
America, man in his moral and intellectual nature stagnates, depressed


6fch. I would submit to your Lordship that the Bishop of
Tasmania in condemning us for, as he says, denying the
authority of the Church, and assuming the right of rejecting
her teaching, when, in our judgments we believe it to be
opposed to Holy Scripture, should have told us what Church
psssesses this authority, and where we are to ascertain her
teaching,—by what marks we are to know them, and in
what books, and on what authority we are to rest our con-
viction of having found the true Church and the true
teaching of the Church.
The Bishop says “we are not to listen to our own inde-
“ pendent reason, but to the interpretation or sense put
“ upon Holy Scripture by the Catholic Church from the
“ beginning, and this is the rule and standard to which ail
“ teaching is referred.” It is certainly a hard thing to
require us to give up our own judgments to a Church, and
not tell us precisely what Church he means. We have
often begged him to tell us where we are to find out the
teaching of the Church which we are to receive even though
we should believe it to be opposed to Scripture, and who is
to deliver it to the people, and on what authority it is to be
set forth, so that we may be certain that we are not follow-
ing a false Church or receiving a false doctrine, —but all we
are told is, that it is the teaching of the Catholic Church
from the beginning to which we are to give up our judgments.
This direction leaves us in great doubt ; for the Church of
Rome, the Churches of England and of Greece, the Eastern
Churches and all Protestant Churches, affirm that they hold
the true teaching of the Catholic Church from the beginning.
We cannot suppose that the Bishop meant to describe the
Church of England to us as the “ Catholic Church from the
and degraded by the principle of servile submission in mind and conscience.
A slave in religion, he loses half his mental liberty in every thing else.
In his highest capacity, that of a religious being, he exhibits either super-
stition or infidelity as the general results of the principle of giving up
individual judgment and convictions to the authority of the Church.


beginning,” or that lie designed to teach us that we are to
receive any doctrine which she may prescribe, even though
we should he convinced that it is opposed to Scripture, for
if such were his meaning he would no doubt have expressed
it to us plainly.
The author of “ Theophilus Anglicanus, whose words the
Bishop of Tasmania copies, does indeed tell us that the
Catholic Church is composed of the Church of Home, the
Creek Church, and the Church of England ; but surely the
Bishop of Tasmania could not condemn us for not giving up
our judgments to the teaching of three Churches which
oppose and condemn each other.*
7th. If the Church of England claimed such an authority
to overrule private judgment as the Bishop of Tasmania
requires us to acknowledge, a principle of such importance
for the instruction of her members would certainly be set
forth in the Articles or Offices of the Church. If it were
* The rule of faith or “ standard of true teaching” in the decisions of the
Catholic Church from the beginning is a visionary system supposed to exist
in the countless volumes of the Fathers and Councils. Baronius or Dupin
might be dismayed at such an endless search for the faith ; but to ordinary
Christians the mere invitation to deduce their belief from a countless
catalogue seems so unreasonable, so like derision, that the proposal of it
is matter of astonishment. The learned, however, are not in a m uch better
condition than the ignorant in attempting to discover the true faith from
the teaching of the Catholic Churcn from the beginning ; the Romish, the
various Eastern Churches, the Greek Church, the Reformed Churches, and
every sect and heresy either derive their faith or confirm their doctrines,
with all confidence, from the Fathers and supposed teaching of the
Catholic Church, which are therefore shown by experience to be fully as
liable to be misunderstood as Hoi) Scripture. It is surprising that Bishop
JVixon, in affirming that the cause of sects and divisions was the right of
private judgment in interpreting Holy Scripture, and that the means of
preventing erroneous interpretation was to submit our judgments to the
Ca+holic Church, did not consider, that this was what the Church of Rome
taught and practised, and that the result of their doing so was their
receiving the Romish system as the faith of the Catholic Church. Will
the Bishop of Tasmania explain to us how, if submission to the teaching
of the Catholic Church be security against error and division, the Chuich
of Rome should have adopted a religious system so different from that
which the Bishop deduces from that same standard and rule of faith which
is to secure us against the evils resulting from the obscurity which he
attributes to Holy Scripture.


a principle of the Church of England that Christians were
not to interpret Scripture for themselves in matters where
the Catholic Church has declared her judgment, and were
bound to believe her teaching in opposition to their own
convictions of Scripture truth, it is not possible that the
Church would have failed to declare in the plainest manner
a doctrine so necessary to be known, —a principle which, if
true, would, as Bishop Nixon says, be the rule and standard
for the people of all religions teaching. The Church of
Rome, which holds this doctrine, sets it forth as a first
principle on which her authority is founded, and as instruct-
ing the people in their Rule of Faith and the authority on
which they are to rest for their religious principles, and no
more conclusive proof can be given that the Church of
England does not hold this doctrine or require her members
to acknowledge or submit to any such authority in the
Church than that she has nowhere set it forth in her
Articles, even when treating on Holy Scripture, and the
office and authority of the Church. I appeal to your
Lordship, therefore, whether the Bishop of Tasmania has
not altogether exceeded his Episcopal authority in condemn-
ing us for not receiving a doctrine which the Church of
England does not enjoin.*
* It has been said, “ what becomes of the authority of the Church, if it
has no right to prescribe to individuals in opposition to their judgments ? ’
The answer is, it has authority to frame its articles and laws and to
exclude from its communion those who contravene them. It has authority
to direct, guide, teach, and influence, and its members are bound to
receive its teaching and directions with respect and deference, and with
a disposition to obey them as far as they are in accordance with God’s
Word. The godly members of a Church will associate with her teaching
the sanction and influence of the eminent servants of God who have held
and observed the same faith and worship in preceding ages, and will feel
the evils and responsibility of separating from her communion as so great
that it can only be justified by the duty of obeying God rather than man, and
of receiving no other Gospel than that delivered by the Apostles in the
Word of God.
There are but two opinions regarding the authority of the Church.
It is either unlimited, which is the opinion of Romanists, consistent with
their belief in the infallibility of the Church : or it is limited by the con-


Bt»i. The Bishop of Tasmania has condemned us for
denying the following principles :
“ The Church does not submit her doctrines to the
“judgment of individual minds.”
“ Each one is not to judge for himself whether the Church
“ be contradicting the express doctrines of Scripture ; for, if
“so, each person would be judge over the decisions of the
“ Church.” —(Reply to Address.)
The Bishop denies—
“ That every person is at liberty to reject any doctrine of
“ the Church that does not agree with his own interpretation
“ of Scripture.”—(lbid.)
He condemns us for believing that if persons —
“ Interpret the Word of Hod by their own private judg-
viction in each man’s mind of what is taught in Holy Scripture; against
which conviction he may not receive the teaching or obey the prescriptions
of any Church. Such a limitation is not to be regarded as destroying the
authority of the Church, for the same limitation exists in regard to every
other power ordained of God. There is abundant evidence in Holy
Scripture that pious Israelites were on several occasions compelled to oppose
and separate from the Priests, the worship in the temple, and the religious
institutions or visible Church of the nation, in order to keep the command-
ments of God and avoid the sin of idolatry ; thus following their own con-
victions, and rejecting the authority of their Church where they judged
her prescriptions to be contrary to the Word of God. The authority of
the Government, of fathers, of husbands, although possessing the highest
Scriptural sanction, are all under the same limitation, —we are not to
disobey God in order to obey them. We are bound to oppose their
authority and commands, when, in our judgments, we are convinced they
are opposed to the Divine will, while within this limitation their authority
is sacred and to be obeyed as ordained of God. In all respects similar is
the authority of the Church and the limitation to which it is subject.
That the Church of England does not teach the principle of Church
authority required by Bishop Nixon is thus proved in the exposition of
the xixth Article, by Bishop Burnet, who refutes convincingly the objec-
tions which Dr. Nixon alleges against private judgment, proving most
distinctly, and almost in the words of the “ Solemn Declaration,” the
right of individuals to reject the Church’s teaching when convinced that
it is unscriptural. He says :
“ He who, being convinced of the errors and corruptions of a Church,
departs from them, and goes on in the purity of the Christian religion,
does pursue the true etfect both of his baptism and of his ordination vows.
“ They of the Church of Home allow private men to judge, and that in
so great a point as what Church and what communion ought to be chosen
or forsaken ; and it is certain that to judge of Churches and communions


“ ment, with the aid of the Holy Spirit, in a sense totally
“ different from that in which the Catholic Church of Christ
“ has interpreted it, they are at perfect liberty to do so.
He affirms that a man is not to be his own interpreter of
Scripture in matters where the Church has recorded her
judgment. —(Subst. of Reply, p. 13 )
1 would appeal to your Lordship whether this principle
does not condemn the Reformers as guilty of rebelling
against the Divinely constituted authority of the Church,
to whose teaching they were bound to submit their judgments,
whether it does not prove the Reformation to have been
unlawful, and that we, and all who adhere to it, are involved
in the sin of schism ? \ our Lordship will observe there is
is a thing of that intricacy, that if private judgment is allowed here, there
is no reason to deny its full scope as to all other matters.
“ God has given us rational faculties to guide and direct us ; and we
must make the most of these we can : we must judge with our own reason,
as well as see with our own eyes. Neither can we or ought we to resign
our understanding to any others, unless we are convinced that God has
imposed this upon us by mu king them mjallible, so that we are secured from
error if we follow them. , „
“ All this we must examine and he well assured of, otherwise it will be
a very rash, unmanly, and base thing in us to muffin vp our own under-
stuudnu,*. and to deliver our reason and faith over others b rndJoU.
Reason is God’s image in us ; and the use and application of our reason,
as well as of the freedom of our wills, are the highest excellencies of the
rational nature ; so they must always he claimed am oug i nevei o e
parted with by ushut upon clear and certain authorities, inthenaraeot God,
putting us implicitly under the dictates of others. ~
“ It seems clear that our understandings are left free to us, as well as
our wills ; and if wo observe the style and method of the Scriptures, wo
shall find in them, all over, a constant appeal to a man s reason, and to his
inteHectualnfacuUies.tes Church) or of infallible men had been the
resolution or foundation of faith, there had been no need of such a long
thread of reasoning and discourse, as both our Saviour use v> “ ’
and as the Apostles used in their writings. H e see the way of autho tty
not token, but explanations are offered, proofs and illustrations are rou|
to convince the mind, which shows that God, in the clearest mamfestation
of his will, would deal with us as with reasonable creatures who are.not to
believe but upon persuasion, and are to use our reason in NOT
ing that persuasion. And therefor up n toe who emo er ' TEACHES
TO BELIEVE DOCTRINES TO BE TRUE BECAUSE THE according
THEM ; BUT WE OUGHT TO SEARCH THE SCI RI PTIORES i and the , according
as we find the doctrine of any Church to be true in e ’ L, Art.)
ought to believe her to be a true Church. (Burne on


no limitation in the declaration of the Bishop of Tasmania.
He does not speak of any particular acts of opposition to
the authority of the Church, but in the most general expres-
sions denies the right of any individual, under any circum-
stances whatever, to reject any doctrine of the Church, or
to interpret Holy Scripture in any particular, so as to put
a sense upon it different from that in which the Catholic
Church has interpreted it. He has even gone so far as
expressly to say that no one is to be his own interpreter of
Holy Scripture in matters where the Church has recorded
her judgment. As far as my humble understanding can
judge, it is absolutely impossible to reconcile the Reformation
with this doctrine. If lam bound to receive the teaching,
say, of the Church of England or of any other Church, and
not to interpret Scripture for myself in matters where she
has pronounced her judgment, were not Luther and the other
Reformers bound in the same way to give up their judgments
to the Church of which they were members? Will it be said, —
“ They opposed the Church because they believed her teaching
to be unscriptural,”—True, but it was a sin in them to exercise
their private judgments where the Church had pronounced
her decision. They had no right, says Bishop Nixon, “to
“ reject any doctrine of the Church that did not agree with
“their own interpretation of Scripture.”*
* It certainly is most astonishing that any Protestant Minister should
profess an opinion which so directly condemns his own religion; for the
very Church to which he belongs is itself founded upon the Reformers
having denied and resisted such an authority in the Church as Bishop
Nixon insists upon. “ Submit to the Decision of the Church. Presume
not to set up your private judgment against the universal voice of
Christendom,” was the constant injunction of the Romish Bishops to the
persecuted Reformers. Their reply was:—“We are convinced, in our
judgment, that the Church’s teaching is unscriptural: we have searched
the Word of God, and are assured that it is opposed to your teaching :
we will rather die than receive it: we must obey God rather than men.”
According to Bishop Nixon’s teaching, these men acted unwarrantably,
were guilty of schism, and opposers of the Divine authority of the Church.
How unreasonable is the supposition that the Protestant Reformers
could demand for the Articles and Ritual which they drew up that autho-
rity to overrule private judgment, which authority themselves had repu-


My Lord, I feel that to engage your attention at such
length, with inferences in themselves so evident, must prove
no less wearisome than the subject itself is distressing. I
can only plead, as my excuse, the many uninformed and
well-disposed members of the Church who are exposed to
the danger of being misled by their unwillingness, even on
the plainest and fullest evidence, to believe that the teaching
of a Bishop can be erroneous. I trust, therefore, that your
Lordship will pardon me for setting forth, for their sakes,
as plainly as I can, the consequences of inducing the people
to believe in the decisions of the Church as the true sense
of Holy Scripture, which they must receive even in opposi-
tion to their own judgment.
9th. It is not only because we believe the Buie of Faith
required by the Bishop of Tasmania to be unscriptural that
we are unable to receive it, but because we are persuaded
that it is the principle which has induced so many ministers
of the Church of England to become Romanists, and that
those who adopt it abandon the solid foundatiou of Evange-
lical Religion—“ The Bible, the Sole Rule of Faith,” for a
principle which by logical inference leads those who embrace
it to abandon the religion of Protestants. How is it possi-
ble that a man who is persuaded that he is not to interpret
Scripture in order to find out what he is to believe, can con-
tinue in a Protestant Church founded on the principle and
through the exercise of the right of individual interpretation
of the Holy Scripture ? He who receives and acts upon the
principle laid down by the Bishop must, as his first considera-
tion, inquire what is the Church whose decisions he is bound
to receive as the true sense of Holy Scripture ? It will be vain
for him to persuade himself that the Church of England, or
diated in the Church of Rome. Their Reformed Church was framed
according to their private interpretation of Holy Scripture : and to deny
the full exercise of private judgment, and the right of every man “to
judge for himself whether the Church be contradicting the express
doctrines of Scripture,” would have been to condemn themselves.


any other Protestant Church has the authority which ho
seeks. They disclaim it : they refuse to exercise it: they
denounce it as Romish. Regardless of this denial of the
Church of England that she or any Church has such au-
thority, he imagines in opposition to all reason that the
Churches of England, Greece, and Rome, are all sister
branches of the one Catholic Church, whose decisions are
to be his Rule of Faith. But their doctrines and systems
are opposite and conflicting, and they condemn each other
as heretical. What is he to believe ? Which is he to
obey ? In this state of mind Romanism addresses him with
the whole weight of an influence and authority, which the
Rule of Faith that he has adopted compels him to submit
to. He believes and seeks for an authority in a Church to
overrule his own judgment, and he finds that authority
claimed by the Church of Rome, and by it alone. He sees
at once that if the decisions of the Church are to determine
the true sense of Scripture, and to deliver to the people
what they are to believe, the Church, whose teaching is
to be received as Divine truth, must be infallible, or its
decisions cannot be certainly true, and, as the Church of
Rome alone claims to be infallible, he is bound to submit to
her authority and embrace her communion. If he is with-
held by his conviction that many of her doctrines are
unscriptural, his objections are silenced and overcome by
the fatal principle,—that he has no right to set up his con-
victions in opposition to the teaching of the Church, —that
he is not to interpret Scripture in matters where the Church
has pronounced her decision, —and that the Church has a
right so to overrule his judgment, that he is bound to
receive her teaching in opposition to his own convictions of
the truths revealed in Scripture.
If there were a principle designed to deliver men up to
Romanism, —deprived of the use of their reason, —prohibited
to exercise their judgment,—and bound to admit her claims,


it is the llule of Faith or doctrine of Church authority
which the Bishop of Tasmania would compel us to receive.
Surely, my Lord, when we see the influence and tendency
of this principle thus evident from reason, and from its
actual effect on so many of those who have adopted it, all
who know the power of Evangelical Religion must feel it a
sacred duty to testify against this fatal doctrine, and assist
us in our efforts to prevent its being imposed upon the clergy
and people of this colony. Do we not live in a time when
Romanism, as it were with a revival of spirit and energy,
and with the accumulated cunning devices of past ages,
assails the Gospel ? The war, once waged with the weapons
of persecution against the saints and witnesses of our Lord,
is now carried on with the same enmity and determination
against their faith ;* and, certainly, every believer who knows
the mind of Christ in regard to the preservation of Divine
* Many persons disregard the danger, considering the Romish principle
of surrendering to the Church our reason and our right to interpret
Holy Scripture as so unscriptural and so unworthy of rational beings
that it can never prevail in an enlightened age. But such persons forget
that the Romish system is no less insidious and plausible than congenial
to the natural aversion of the unconverted heart to spiritual religion.
The worldly minded cannot tolerate the true Gospel, which teaches that
they must be convinced of sin, must repent, and be changed and renewed
in heart before they can enter the Lord’s Kingdom ; and that then, they
must under the influence of the Holy Spirit lead a life of faith, separate
from the world, devoted to the service of Christ, searching His Will in
the Gospel, and by prayer obtaining the grace of the Holy Spirit to
enlighten their understandings, to give them the will and the power to
walk in the light of Scripture, and to sanctify all their feelings and
desires so that they may live for Christ in righteousness and true holiness.
They shrink back from this religion because they are filled with the love
of earthly things so that they cannot give_up their hearts to the Lord ; hut
they are at the same time, very desirous to have a religion by which they
can quiet their consciences and enjoy the satisfaction of considering them-
selves members of Christ’s Church, and so in a state of salvation.
Romanism exactly meets their wishes, it relieves them from the labour
of seeking for Divine truth in the Word of God, it persuades them that
its Baptism, Masses, Absolutions, and Indulgences will obtain for them
pardon of sin and that interest in Christ which the Gospel promises to
those who are sanctified in heart and who live under the influences of
spiritual religion. In addition to this it employs and interests them in
religious forms of every description, and suited to every character of
mind and disposition. It can interest and employ the imagination and


truth must feel called upon to stand forth as a witness of
the faith and liberty of the Gospel.
1 Oth. The design of this appeal renders it necessary that I
should submit to your Lordship’s decision whether the
principle which the Bishop of Tasmania enjoins upon ns
and the power which he claims and exercises as Bishop, do
not in fact compel the clergy and people of this colony to
give up their judgments to his decisions, and receive his
opinions in opposition to their own convictions of the truths
revealed in God’s Word ; and whether they do not over-
throw all confidence as to what are the principles of the
Church of England, and destroy all union between the
various dioceses of which it is composed.
Your Lordship will perceive by reference to page 7 of the
Bishop of Tasmania’s “ Substance of Reply, &c.,” that he
declares in regard to the doctrines treated upon in the
feelings of all, whether they are inclined to literature, superstition,
mysticism, austerities, the solitary life, or to the work of instruction,
charity, and missions, rendering each attractive as the path to canoniza-
tion, obtaining honour in the Church, and merit in the sight of God.
.And more than this, while it gratifies the senses and overpowers the
imaginations with its music, incense, pictures, images, lofty temples,
georgeous processions and services impressive to the eye, it subdues weak
minds with the grandeur of its pretensions as the infallible Church out
of which there is no salvation, —the Church of Christ's Vicar with power
to bind and to loose, whose priests can change the bread and wine into
Christ’s body, soul, and Divinity, in order to offer them as sacrifice for
such persons as they please to deliver from sin or purgatory, —whose
sacraments and services bestow every grace, and whose absolution remits
every sin. In truth when one considers the deep policy of this perver-
sion of the Gospel, —this master-piece of Satan, truly described as the
great apostacy and delusion (2 Thess. ii. 3), the wonder is, not that it has
prevailed so long, but that it has not gained over the whole world, and
by its dominion in the sinful unbelieving hearts of men, and by its con-
stant and cruel persecutions and opposition to the truth, effected the
purpose, for which it was designed, of destroying the witnesses of Christ,
the followers of the true Gospel, and establishing its own idolatrous and
human system in the place of the spiritual religion revealed in Holy
Scripture.
If this system is attractive to the people it is far more seductive to the
ministers of the Church of England, and the progress of it in their minds
is wondrously insidious. They begin by a strong and too exclusive
attachment to their own Church ; they are assured that it is Scriptural
and Apostolic—that it possesses all the authority of the Church in the


“ Solemn Declaration/' and which form the subjects of this
appeal, that he has authority to determine what are the
principles or teaching of the Church of England.
“ The recorded principles of the Church of England, of
“ which, in my own diocese, I am the authorised exponent
“ should any doubt arise.”—(Subst. of Reply, p. 7.)
The Bishop requires us to believe and teach that we are
bound to receive the teaching of the Church in opposition to
our own judgments, and that he is authorised to declare to
us what the principles or teaching of the Church are. Thus
we are to receive his individual opinions, or what he supposes
to be the principles of the Church, even though they should
be opposed to what we are convinced is the teaching of
God’s Word, and are to regard his decisions as our Rule of
Faith. I confidently submit to your Lordship whether
this be not the direct effect of the principles enforced by the
days of the Apostles, and that therefore those who dissent from it must
be guilty of schism, and of the sin of rejecting an Apostolic Church.
This opinion leads them to believe that the teaching of the Church, which
it is sin and schism to dissent from, must have more authority than can
be derived from the individual opinions of the Reformers and compilers
of the liturgy. But what can this authority be, in whom is it vested,
and who is to exercise it by declaring to the people the decisions and
teaching which they are bound to receive ? These questions and con-
siderations naturally lead to the belief that the “ teaching of the Church
from the beginning must be the Rule of Faith.”
The same principle induces the denial of the right of private judgment
to search for Divine truth in Holy Scripture ; for if it be sin and schism
to dissent from the Church, the sin must consist not in the act of separa-
tion, but in adopting principles of religion opposed to her teaching—in
allowing the mind or judgment to believe what she condemns, or to dis-
believe what she declares to be true; and thus, as the mind can only be
allowed to believe what the Church believes, it must be prohibited from
exercising its own judgment in seeking for Divine truth in Holy Scrip-
ture in order to believe what it may be convinced is taught therein ;or
in order to ascertain whether the teaching of the Church is opposed to
the Word of God, that it may reject its doctrines if it should be convinced
that they are contrary to Scripture. Thus this erroneous opinion
regarding the Church leads necessarily to the denial of the Holy Scripture
as the rule of faith, and to the prohibition of the right of private
judgment.
The false principle, which thus generates exclusiveness and Romanism,
consists in an erroneous conception of the nature of the Christian Church,
when some one or more of the visible Churches .or associated bodies of


Bishop of Tasmania, and whether this be not the actual
condition to which we are reduced in this colony, Surelv
such a subjugation of judgment and conscience to the will
and opinion of an individual was never before attempted in
a Protestant Church !
Acting upon this supposed power, the Bishop condemned
our declaration of the right of private judgment and suffi-
ciency of Holy Scripture as unsound, and imposed penalties
upon us until we shall recant it and receive the Rule of
Faith, which he, as the exponent of the Church, declares to
be in accordance with what he supposes are her principles
and teaching.
The Bishop of Tasmania declares it to be in the highest
degree presumptuous to sit in judgment upon the decisions
of the Church , and that she no where submits her doctrines
to the judgment of individual minds, and that in differences
of teaching we are not to listen to our own reason ; while, as
professing Christians, whether connected with the State as national
Churches, or formed by voluntary agreement, are mistaken for the whole
Church of Christ, —that Catholic or universal Church or assembly, com-
posed of the faithful or believing people of the Lord out of every nation
and country and tribe, —all who hold the same precious faith, “ who are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, all that in every place call
upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours ” (1 Cor. i.
2.) Those who entertain the Scriptural view of the Church of Christ
are in no danger of being led away by Romanizing tendencies. They
know, well, that the teaching of Christ’s Church is infallible and authori-
tative, for it is the Word of God, not the miserable and presumptuous
decrees of a few priests or Bishops, in one country or another under-
taking to determine what is Divine truth and to condemn, in the name
of God, all who shall not confess their pretended infallible inspiration,
or doubt their decisions however opposed to Scripture or to reason. To
those who regard the Church as the general assembly of the faithful, so
that all believers are members of it, and no unconverted person has
entered into it, the idea of setting up the decisions of any number of
priests as the Rule of Faith is regarded with compassion as evidencing
total ignorance of the spiritual nature of the Christian covenant.
Romanism therefore falls powerless before that Evangelical religion
which regards Christ’s Kingdom or Church as consisting not of those
whose religion is founded in meat or drink—in human laws, Church policy,
or priestly institutions, —but composed of those only whose religion is
“ righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost” (Rom. xiv. 17.)


the exponent of the principles of the Church, he exercises his
own individual reason and private judgment to determine what
the principles of the Church are, and judging for all the clergy
and laity in the colony, lie compels them to receive the
opinions which he has formed by his single private judgment.
Thus, as will be shewn hereafter, he protests against the
judgment of the Privy Council, declares that the Archbishop
of Canterbury in instituting Mr. Gorham £ ‘ set aside the con-
scientious scruples of the Bishop of Exeter, and instituted
to a Using a clergyman whom that Bishop had proved to
entertain heretical notions on baptism and at the same
time he states his own resolution never to ordain or license
any person who does not hold his doctrine on .Baptismal
Regeneration.
Again, the Bishop of Tasmania declares of certain books
that they are identified with the true teaching of the Church
of England, while above twenty clergymen in this diocese,
and the Archbishop of Canterbury, expressed their convic-
tion that these books “ contain much that is far more in
accordance with the Church of Rome than with the Church
of England .” According to the doctrine laid down by the
Bishop of Tasmania, if the principles of these books are the
true teaching of the Church, we are bound to receive them,
even in opposition to our own convictions that they are
unscriptural and Romish, and, if he be the true and au-
thorised exponent of the principles of the Church in this
diocese, all the clergy and laity are bound to receive these
books as the Church’s teaching. Thus, my Lord, by the
plainest inferences the principles laid down by the Bishop
of Tasmania positively require us to receive his opinions as
our Rule of Faith, and to give up our judgments to his direc-
tion, He is to determine for us what we must believe, and
we are prohibited from exercising our judgments upon the
doctrines or principles which he as the Church’s exponent
declares to be her teaching.


It is evident that the faith of the diocese upon this prin-
ciple would change in accordance with the principles of each
succeeding Bishop, pr, indeed, with the different views or
opinions which even the same Bishop might adopt and
declare to be the Church’s teaching. Nay, in the case of a
translation or exchange of Bishops holding opposite views,
the religious principles of the members of the Church in the
two dioceses should also be exchanged, as the authorised
exponents of the Church’s principles delivered to them the
teaching which they were bound to receive, even in opposition
to their own convictions.
Such trifling with the religious belief of Christian people
is scarcely conceivable, and affords a striking example of
the effects of adopting a false principle, and attributing to
the Church, or to men as exponents of the Church, an au-
thority to prescribe to others the doctrines which they are
to receive even in preference to what they believe to be the
teaching of inspired Scripture.
I have now, my Lord, placed before you the first subject
of this appeal, as I trust fully and truly. I have also added
such notes as I hope may obviate any erroneous impressions
which the objections of the Bishop of Tasmania * against
*As far as I can judge, the onty reason which the Bishop of Tasmania
adduces for requiring us to retract our belief in the right of Christians
by their private judgment to interpret Holy Scripture with the aid of the
Holy Spirit, is his assertion, that from the exercise of private judgment
the various sects of Protestants and many heresies have arisen. Those
who desire to form a just judgment upon this objection should consider—
-Ist. That Holy Scripture is a Divine instructor, affording spiritual know-
ledge and wisdom not to all, whether profane, unbelieving, or impenitent, but
onlyto those who read itarightor with the disposition that God sees fit to bless
with the knowledge of Himself and of His salvation ; and that this ordinance
of God in regard to His Word is strictly in accordance with reason and
Divine analogy, since it is but just and reasonable that those only who
are willing to submit to and obey the Gospel should fully understand it;
and as no man can know the truth unless he be taught of God, it is not
to be supposed that the Lord will send His Holy Spirit to enlighten the
minds of those whose hearts are so filled with the love of sin that they
have no desire to seek the Lord that they may learn of him the way of
life. Hence the carnal-minded —the proud of heart, who have not the
love of the truth in them, who are unwilling to receive the true gospel


the sufficiency of Holy Scripture and the directing aid of
the Holy Spirit might create in the minds of some ; for,
with the prevalent disposition to adopt, as I believe, the
semi-Romish system inculcated in this diocese with such
high authority and influence, I felt it a duty not to set
forth the principles and measures opposed to Evangelical
truth without attaching to them such Scriptural statements
as would expose their fallacy and counteract their influence.
I am conscious how imperfectly I have vindicated the
great principles in defence of which I address you, and
how inadequate are my expressions and even convictions of
their sacred importance and of the solemn responsibility in
which they involve all upon whom the Lord lays the duty
and privilege of testifying in His name to their truth. My
trust is that as He has enabled the Venerable Primate to
deliver a solemn and general warning to the people against
being misled to adopt unwarily the false doctrines and
ordinances of the Romish Church inculcated among them
by the Bishop and Ministers as being the true teaching of
because they are conscious that it condemns them and requires that holi-
ness in the inward parts which they will not submit to, are through
their own sin blinded and hardened, so that they are given over to believe
a lie and wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction. It is thus that
the preaching of the gospel is the savour of life to those that believe, but
the savour of death to those who reject it. That such persons do not
understand the Holy Scriptures is no proof that those who study it with
a proper disposition,—seeking the light and guidance of the Holy
Spirit, shall not, according to God’s promise, be made wise unto salvation.
2nd. The case of those heretics spoken of by the Bishop, who denied
the Lord that bought them, and yet read and perverted Holy Scrip-
tures, is entirely beside the question, for they could not have studied the
Word of God aright, and sought the aid of the Holy Spirit, since they
did not even believe in the influence of the Holy Spirit. That thousands
of such persons should misunderstand Holy Scripture is no more proof
that it is not a sufficient guide and explainer of its own meaning than
are those, who mistake the laws of reason, the rules of virtue, or the
dictates of humanity, any evidence that reason, virtue and humanity
are so unintelligible that men cannot discover what they direct or what
they prohibit.
3rd. “ There must be heresies, that they which are approved may be
made manifest ” (1 Cor. xi. 19.) As the evil-disposed err from the
paths of virtue, so do men of corrupt minds depart from the ways of


the Church of England, so He will give your Lordship
spiritual strength to deliver the same instruction, not
less plainly and decisively, but more particularly and with
a full explanation of the truth on each of the subjects set
forth in the Solemn Declaration, upon which the Primate
speaks generally and which form the grounds of this appeal,
that those who hold the truth may rejoice and bless God, —
those who are unsettled may be confirmed, —those who sup-
press and oppose Evangelical principles may be ashamed, and
yourself have joy in that day when the Lord will take account
of those to whom He has committed the teaching of His word.
O
I know , my Lord , that some will counsel peace and
silence—to explain—to retract , so that there may be no
more division, no more opposition. That is, in effect, that
the truth should be completely suppressed, and the teachers
of it continue condemned, discouraged—be silenced and
driven away —that those who oppose and exclude Evangelical
Ministers, and condemn their principles as heresv,
should be enabled to enforce their measures without even a
truth and speak perverse things; both being set forth by the Divine
goodness as an example and warning that men take heed to seek and
follow truth and righteousness with a right mind and disposition.
4th. The errors and corruptions of the Jewish Church proceeded from
their not searching the Scriptures and attending to what Moses and the
Prophets did teach, preferring to follow the traditions of the Rabbis as
the authoritative teaching of the Church rather than read and ascertain
for themselves the truth revealed in God’s Word.
sth. When the Bishop of Tasmania speaks of the divisions of Protes-
tants as deterring him from receiving the Holy Scripture interpreted by
private judgment as the Rule of Faith, it is surprising that he did not
see the effects of adopting the decisions of the Church as the Rule of
Faith in the corruptions and apostacy of Romanism, all resulting from
that false and destructive principle. The Bishop repudiates private judg-
ment and the sufficiency of Scriptue on account of the divisions of Protes-
tants, and adopts and enforces the teaching of the Church as the Rule of
Faith without regarding the deplorable idolatry and perversion of
religion which it has produced in the Romish Church.
6th. In place of shewing the insufficiency of Holy Scripture as the
Rule of Faith, the Protestant Churches are a wondrous evidence of the
unity and plainness of the faith drawn from the Word of God by the pri-
vate judgment of all Christians who search for Divine truth with the
aid of the Holy Spirit. Is it not the happy confession of all Evangelical


single voice of remonstrance, and the people be given up to
Romanizing teaching inculcated without fear of opposition
after all who had dared to warn them of their danger and
testify to the truth had been reduced to silence or compelled
to retract their principles.
While I trust that your Lordship will be enabled to
overcome every suggestion or influence tending to repress
your full testimony to Evangelical principles, I am not
ignorant of the considerations which may render you reluc-
tant to express a judgment or sentiments adverse to the
Bishop of this diocese. I therefore pray your Lordship to
pardon my referring to the conduct of the Archbishop of Can-
terbury as a memorable fulfilment of the great duty of
instructing and warning the people against Romanizing
teaching, without regard to any personal considerations.
At a time when Evangelical Religion in this colony was
professed by the great body of the Clergy, and when it was
only threatened with those decisions and measures of the
Bishop by which it is now nearly suppressed , the Archbishop
felt it a duty to our Lord Jesus Christ to testify to the
truth for the preservation of a people over whom he had no
Churches that their differences are respecting unimportant matters, such
as forms of Church government or modes of worship, subjects which for
the most part are not precisely described in the New Testament,—the
principles only being declared and the mode or forms of carrying them
into effect, being left in many cases to the discretion of the several
churches. That this is the case is proved by the practice of the primitive
churches, in which the ministers and people adopted and changed their
forms of prayer and religious ordinances as they thought fit; complete
uniformity not being then desired much less required. At that period
as now, under various forms and observances there was one evangelical
Spirit, —one faith, —one way of salvation. Let the prayers and sermons
of all the Evangelical Churches be compared, and I am persuaded such
would be their unity of doctrine, —of devotion,—and even of language,
that the testimony of so many millions of independent—disconnected
witnesses to the same faith, which each derives for himself by his own
private judgment with the aid of the Holy Spirit from the Word of God,
would form the most glorious proof that the Holy Scripture delivers no
uncertain teaching, and that it sets forth one great way of salvation open
to all, and to be certainly found by all who humbly and truly seek it.


Episcopal jurisdiction, and I may not apprehend a different
proceeding from your Lordship possessing as Metropolitan
an immediate authority to declare to the members of the
Church in this colony the true principles of evangelical
religion, and to deliver those who are condemned for main-
O '
tabling them from some at least of the evils and penalties
which they have so long suffered.
I beg your Lordship’s permission to attach the decisive
testimony of Archbishop Whately and Bishop Daniel
Wilson. The former may well be taken as declaring the
principles of the Church of England according to the judg-
ment of a mind remarkable for accuracy and strength of
reasoning; the latter as the impressive judgment of a
venerable and evangelical father in our Church. Arch-
bishop Whately speaks thus—
“The Tractarians intended to devise a ‘middle way’ between
“ Romanism and Dissent; but they executed that intention by
“ taking the principles of Romanism. They agreed with the
“ Roman Catholics in holding that the Catholic Church (meaning
“ thereby one visible organised body of Christians, under one
“ government) ‘ was the authoritative expounder of the will of God,
“ and was consequently the authority to whose decision all men
“ WERE BOUND TO SUBMIT THEIR PRIVATE JUDGMENTS.’ ”
“ Those who became avowed Romanists are less to be feared
“ than those who still remain in our communion.” “ They come to
“ us in sheep’s clothing, professing to be loyal members of our
“Church; they are a recruiting depot for the Church of Rome,
“ kept up among ourselves, but loudly declaring that they ark
“ inculcating church princlples.” “ Their Church principles are
“ both repugnant to scripture- and to reason ; they are not the
“ principles of our Church, but, in many respects, quite opposed to
“ its decisions.” (Cautions for the Times, No. ix.)
The following is the teaching of Bishop Wilson :
“If Satan can once take men away from the inspired Scriptures
“ as the sole and adequate rule and standard ot our religious belief,
“ and let human tradition and the authority of the Church he in part
“ substituted, a way is opened for every other corruption of faith


“ and practice. Things are coming to such a pass that we are likely
“ to have tiie whole battle of the Reformation to fight over again.”
“ If the Holy Scriptures, therefore, were not designed to be com-
“ plete in themselves, would there not have been some intimation
“ that they were not intended as a full and final instruction for after
“ ages ; but that their omissions would be supplied by the authority
“ with which the Church would be invested? But not a word of
“ tradition being designed as the first teacher of the divine doctrine
“ of salvation, and the Scripture the second ; not a word of the rule
“ of faith being the Gospel as determined by the consent of all ages, as
“ men (Theophilus and Dr. Nixon) now speak”
Whatever assumes to itself to determine suo jure the sense of
“ Scripture, virtually corrupts the Scriptures themselves ; because
“ in each doubtful case it supersedes, by its own deteriorating
“ decision, the inspired word.”
“ The attempt to set up Catholic Tradition, and the teaching of
“ the Church as a joint rule of faith, direct'y tends to bring in, what
“ the Apostle terms another Gospel .”
“ It tends to sap the doctrine of St. Paul and of our Reformed
“ Church as to the vital and fundamental blessing of man’s justifi-
“ cation.’'
“ I believe our Church never was in the danger she now is,
“ except perhaps immediately before the great rebellion. Not the
“ high Church party of which Archbishop Laud was then the
“ head, nor the non-jurors who condemned the glorious Revolu-
“ of 1688, carried out so many of the main principles of the Church
“ of Rome, and professed them so formally, fully, and systemati-
cally within the Church of England as is now done.” (Sermon
on the Sufficiency of Scripture.)
If the condition of the Church in this colony were
reversed, and the Bishop were appealing to your Lordship
against some Ministers for inculcating and enforcing upon
their congregations the Rule of Faith and principles which
he now requires us to receive.—lf the Bishop were to solicit
your Lordship to deliver your testimony to the truth in
order to aid him in preserving the people from Romanizing
teaching, I suppose there could be no doubt but that you
would readily afford them the fullest and plainest instruc-
tion in the principles of evangelical religion. I submit to


your Lordship whether the only difference between this
supposed case and the present appeal be not, that in the
latter the necessity for such instruction from your Lord-
ship is far more urgent inasmuch as the danger of the
people being misled is inflnitively greater, since the truth
is condemned and suppressed, and Romanizing teaching
inculcated with the whole weight of the Episcopal power
and influence.
In the sight of Him whose mind we are to regard, whose
will we are to follow, it is not only the Romanizing princi-
ples which are inculcated in this colony that oppose the
work of salvation in the souls of the people, but the filling
of the pulpits with ministers who advocate such principles
and the exclusion of every preacher of the Gospel who may
have sufficient principle to raise his voice for the cause of
truth, thereby perpetuating the suppression of that preach-
ing which can alone convert souls and set forth the King-
dom of Christ, in its spiritual power, against the world and
against the false religions designed by Satan to keep men
from Christ and his Gospel.
I venture to declare, as the result of some experience,
that those who have adopted these Romanizing principles
are no less ignorant of spiritual religion than opposed to
evangelical truth. While one or two may be found who
adopt the Romish ascetic life of “ will worship/’—“ neglect-
ing the body,”—“ abstaining from meats,” —“ observing
days and times,” and undervaluing if not “forbidding
marriage,” the Romanizing party as a body are remarkable
for uniting worldly pleasures and dissipations witli high
religious pretension and formality. They deem it essential
to attend outward ordinances, to exhibit a reverential regard
for the sacraments, the priesthood and its ministrations,
and to revile and oppose evangelical religion, but it is by no
means requisite to be converted or renewed in heart, —to
live separate from the world and bring forth the fruits of


Divine grace in a spiritual and godly life. Thus those who
are induced to follow as “the true teaching of the Church”
such books as “The Steps to the Altar,”* while they
scrupulously observe the weekly fasts, attend the Lord’s
Supper, the daily service and absolution, at the same time
frequent public balls and other scenes of vanity wasteful-
ness and sin, in which the depraved and dissipated are
often admitted into private conversation with the young
and innocent, —where the dress, the manners, and the
amusements are such as should terrify those who seek to bo
holy and to walk with God, and from which the true dis-
ciples of Jesus shrink with disgust and alarm as designed
by the God of this world to cherish and strengthen the
carnal mind, and to weaken and destroy every serious feel-
ing—every religious impression.
My Lord, how should we feel for our children if they
were compelled to receive the religious instruction which is
inculcated in this colony as the true teaching of the Church ?
What sacrifice should we not undergo rather than allow
♦ “ The Steps to the Altar ” sets forth the highest form of sacramental
religion, it directs observance of the F asts —to receive the Sacrament
fasting—to confess to the priest before receiving the Lord’s Supper in an
humble posture ON the knees in order to obtain absolution “ from those
sins confessed to him ” (p. 120). The devout are to keep a written cata-
logue of their sins, and to open their hearts to their confessor, and trust
their souls to him as commissioned by God as His deputy to hear, judge,
and absolve them. Those who observe this form of godliness are supplied
with questions for self-examination that they may ascertain whether they
depart from the standard of perfection laid down for them. Among the
questions are the following,—
Do YOU PLAY AT CARDS OR OTHER SUCH GAMES FOR MORE THAN
AN OCCASIONAL RECREATION ? DO YOU PLAY FOR ANY STAKE? IF SO,
IS IT REALLY WHAT YOU CAN WELL AFFORD FOR SUCH A PURPOSE ?
IS IT NOTHING THAT HAD BETTER BE GIVEN TO THE POOR ? - ’ (p. 27).
Thus this book, which professes to teach the members of the Church
the highest standard of Christian devotion and penitential life, actually
allows and describes card-playing for money, and other such games, as
the occasional recreations of Christians, when the stakes are such as the
players can afford ! This is a remarkable example of the similarity be-
tween the devotion of Anglican semi-Romanism and the surprising union
of penitential observances and dissipated amusements sanctioned and
practised among the Romanists.


them to bo persuaded that the Bible does not explain its
own meaning, and that they are bound to give up their
judgments to the decisions of the Church ? If they were
given over to such religious teaching and to such a ministry
as shall in a few years be found throughout the colony
should the present measures and principles continue to be
enforced, I suppose our anxious warning and our earnest
exhortation to avoid a false gospel and to cleave to the
Bible as their sole rule of faith, would be proportioned to
our desire for their souls’ salvation. But they are no
dearer nor of more value in the sight of the Redeemer than
are those in whose behalf this Appeal is presented to your
Lordship.


Condemnation pronounced upon myself and other
Clergymen, and the Penalties imposed upon us by
the Bishop of Tasmania for Signing the Declaration
of the Sufficiency of Ploly Scripture and of the
Right of Private Judgment.
In the year 1852 the Bishop of Tasmania rejected the
Testimonials of the Rev. Alfred Stackhouse and the Rev.
George Wilkinson, on the ground that having signed the
declaration of the right of private judgment, they were—
“ Unsound in their religious opinions, and therefore
“ HE COULD NOT ACCEPT THEIR TESTIMONY AS SATISFAC-
“ TORILY VOUCHING FOR THE DOCTRINAL SOUNDNESS OF
“ ANOTHER.”
In a published and uncontradicted letter of the Rev. J.
G. Medland to the Bishop of Tasmania, dated July 14,
1853, Mr. Medland says that—
He informed the Bishop of Tasmania that the Rev.
Philip Palmer, incumbent of Trinity Parish, Plobart Town,
had offered to him the appointment of Curate in his parish,
and that the Bishop replied—
“ While Mr. Medland’s name remained attached to the
“ Solemn Declaration he would not to his dying day
“ consent to Mr. Medland’s appointment as Curate to


“ Mr. Palmer —that on a previous occasion, the Bishop
said to Mr. Medland, “ that in consequence of his
“ signing that declaration he would not renew his
“ license if removed from his present sphere of duty
“ (chaplaincy to the Penitentiary). 2nd. He would
“ not give him any employment in the colony. 3rd.
“ He would not receive his signature to testimonials.
“ 4th. He would not countersign his letters dirnissory.
“ sth. That he should report Mr. Medland to the
“ Society for Propagating the Gospel.”
In August, 1853, in a letter from some of the parishioners
of Trinity parish, Hobart Town, to the Duke of Newcastle,
it is stated, that above 600 of the parishioners had presented
a petition to the Governor praying that Mr. Medland
should be appointed their minister, and that his Excellency
Sir W. Denison replied, that—
“ He had many reasons to be satisfied with the mini-
“ sterial conduct of Mr, Medland, and would suggest
“ to the Bishop of Tasmania the advisability of grant-
“ ing to Mr. Medland the requisite license.
The Bishop of Tasmania refused to grant the license to
Mr. Medland, one of the reasons for his refusal being, as
stated in the petition of the parishioners to the Duke of
Newcastle, “that Mr. Medland had signed the Declara-
tion OP THE RIGHT OP PRIVATE JUDGMENT.”
In his reply to the Deputation, page 5, the Bishop of
Tasmania says that he refused to countersign the testimonial
from myself and two other clergymen to the letters dirnis-
sory of the Rev. Mr. Batchelor endorsing upon it three
reasons for his refusal, the third being—that I had signed
the article on private judgment.
A few months since, the Bishop informed the Rev. R.
Gurney, that he would not countersign his testimonials,
because they were signed by myself and unless he should
withdraw his name from the Solemn Declaration.


111 “the reply of the Bishop of Tasmania to the deputation/’
Plis Lordship declares that he considers it to be his duty to
revoke the licenses of any clergymen who should teach to
their congregations the principles set forth in the Solemn
Declaration.
I might mention other examples of clergymen who, on
preferring to the Bishop applications for advantages to which
they considered themselves entitled, were told by him that he
could not grant the application while their names remained
attached to the Solemn Declaration.
The preceding statements describe the condemnation and
penalties which myself and other ministers sutler for refus-
ing to recant our principles respecting the sufficiency of the
Holy Scripture and the right of private judgment. But few
have adhered to their Declaration ; those who have recanted
have been received into favor and are promoted and ad-
vanced, while a large number of those who signed the
Solemn Declaration have preferred to leave the colony
rather than abandon their principles or endure the penalties,
censures, and incessant annoyances which they should have
had to suffer if they remained in the diocese and refused to
recant their principles
Your Lordship will perceive that these censures and
penalties reach beyond us and affect the cause of truth and
the religious principles of the Church in this colony, since
the same measures adopted against us apply as a prohibi-
tion against all ministers holding our religious opinions ; so
that the question is not merely whether a few ministers
shall be condemned, persecuted, and driven away for hold-
ing Protestant and Evangelical principles, but whether
these principles shall be condemned and suppressed, and a
diocese of the Church of England shall adopt the Romish
Rule of Faith and exclude all Ministers who shall not
receive it has the true teaching of the Church.


Condemnation and Exclusion from the Diocese of all
Ministers who do not profess to believe that all
BAPTISED INFANTS WERE REGENERATED IN THEIR BAPTISM,
The following passages from the charges and published
statements of the Bishop of Tasmania exhibit the principles
laid down by him, and the measures adopted for excluding
all ministers who do not profess to believe that all baptized
infants are regenerated in their baptism :
In the charge delivered in 1851, the Bishop of Tasmania
said that he invariably put forth questions to candidates for
Holy Orders concerning the sacraments, and that he should
refuse a license to preach to any person who did not posi-
tively believe that all baptized infants were regenerated in
their baptism,—(Charge 1851, pp. 43—60.)
He protests against the decision of the Privy Council }
declares the opinion of Mr. Gorham to be heresy, and
censures the increased latitude of opinion conceded to the
clergy of the Church of England by the judgment of the
Privy Council.— (Charge p. 48.)
In his reply to an address requesting him to withdraw his
resolution to exclude ministers not holding the doctrine of
Baptismal Regeneration, the Bishop declared—
“ He would not suffer the judgment of the Privy Council
“ in the smallest degree to fetter or guide his discretion as
“to the admission of candidates for Holy Orders.” Their
“ decision was only an opinion of five lawyers.” “As God
“ gave him grace he should protest against it to his dying
“ day and in refusing to license any one who holds Mr.
“ Gorham’s opinion, he is not acting in defiance of the law
“ of either Church or State.”—(Substance of Reply p. 26.)
“ I must needs grieve when there is rejoicing that the
“ Primate (the Archbishop of Canterbury) lias thought
“ good or felt himself compelled so to set aside the consci-


“ eutious scruples of one of his suffragans, (the Bishop of
“ Exeter,) as to institute a clerk, whom that suffragan had
“ proved to entertain heretical notions on one of the two
“ sacraments of Christ ; if, indeed, in these days, learning,
“ argument, documents, and the testimony of centuries be
“ allowed to prove anything.”—(Subst. p. 28.)
To the various applications made to the Bishop of Tas-
mania, praying him to withdraw his resolution not to license
any minister who does not hold the doctrine of Baptismal
Regeneration, his Lordship has always replied, that he will
require all candidates for Holy Orders and Ministers
admitted to preach in this colony to profess their belief that
all baptized infants are regenerated in their baptism. At a
recent confirmation held in Hobart Town, the Bishop of
Tasmania declared in his sermon that it was a sin in the
children to have any doubt in their minds that they were
regenerated in their baptism, —that the Church declared they
were then made members of Christ and children of God,
and that any ministers who should induce them to have
any doubt about their being regenerated and made children
of God and members of Christ in their baptism were
recreants and traitors to the Church.
1 state this from having myself heard the Bishop, and
from the testimony of others who were present.
In appealing to your Lordship against these declarations
of the Bishop of Tasmania, I feel myself justified in soliciting
your intervention and the expression of your judgment to
relieve myself and other Ministers from the evils and disad-
vantages which they have occasioned to us, both in regard
to our personal influence and ministerial usefulness.
We are publicly condemned as holding an heretical
opinion on baptism, and the Bishop declares that he will
never admit into the diocese a minister who holds our prin-
ciples, or renew our license should we exchange our parishes,
thereby holding us up as persons whom he would reject, if


he had the opportunity of doing so, as unworthy of the
ministry. It is also out of our power to exchange our
present appointments, or to obtain from England assistant
ministers agreeing with us in our religious principles. We
have no other prospect than to continue suffering all the
disadvantages of the Bishop’s condemnation and censures, —
each year becoming fewer, more isolated and surrounded by
the increasing number of ministers concurring with the
Bishop in condemning us.*
* As an illustration of the effect of the proceedings of the Bishop of
Tasmania I may mention, that in a tract on Baptism by the liev. Edward
lloare the following principles are inculcated :
“ There is therefore throughout the Prayer Book a beautiful agreement
with the Bible. They both, in hortatory passages, assume regeneration
where faith lias been professed and baptism administered ; they both in
doctrinal statements, deny that regeneration is invariably con-
nected with Baptism. The Liturgy in language the most explicit
asserts that not every baptized person is regenerate by the Holy Ghost. The
language of the Prayer Book in regard to infants and adults is identical,
in both it is assumption not assertion,” (Pages 25, 26 ,}
Speaking of this doctrine the Bishop of Tasmania says—
“ When then a candidate for Holy Orders demands of me a commission
“to preacli the doctrines of the Church of England,— is he gravely to
“ tell me...that he cannot take upon himself to pronounce a baptized
“ child regenerate, though the Church declares it is so :—that he cannot
“ give God thanks that he has regenerated the child, —but that he only
“ hopes it may be so ?” He can scarcely find fault with the Bishop, if he
“ too exercises his right of private judgment and rejects him,” as “ He
“ must use the words of the Church in a non-natural sense.” “In such a
“ case it is not the Bishop, but the ‘ litera scripta ’ of the Church, which
“ pronounces a man unqualified to teach her doctrines.” (Charge, p. 61.)
Thus the Bishop of Tasmania would reject a candidate or minister
holding the view of Mr. lloare, that regeneration is not invariably connected
with boptizm.—that not every baptized pet son , whether adult or infant, is
regenerate. The Bishop of Tasmania would reject’ a minister holding
this opinion as unqualfied to teach the Church’s doctrine.
But the tract of Mr. Hoare is republished by the Bishop of Melbourne
as “ the most simple, clear, and satisfactory exposition” of the doctrine of
the Church of England concerning Baptism, with which he fully concurs.
The Bishop of Tasmania condemns therefore not only the evangelical
ministers of this colony but would reject, as unqualified to teach the
Church’s doctrines, the Bishop of Melbourne if he should desire his
license to preach in this diocese. The Bishop of Melbourne indeed dis-
tinctly says that while he puts forth what he believes to be the true doc-
trine of the Church, he willingly allows the liberty legally conceded by
the judgment of the Privy Council, and is far from desiring “ to impose
HIS OWN OPINIONS UPON ANY MEMBER OF THE CHURCH.” How de-
plorable is it that the Bishop of Tasmania should not only condemn the


Romanizing Books and Principles Inculcated in this
Colony as the True Teaching of the Church of
England.
Although many bonks not only teaching Romish opinions
but openly attacking the Reformation, and the principles ot
all Protestant Churches * have been introduced into this
Evangelical ministers of this colony and impose his own opinion upon all
the clergy admitted into the diocese, but should feel himself justified in
condemning all Bishops and Ministers who think differently from him,
even with the sanction of the Privy Council, and pronounce them
“ unqualified to teach" —“ holding the Church’s words in a non-natural
sense ” —“ entertaining heretical views on Baptism," &c. &c.
* As a specimen of such teaching the following passages are taken
from Neal’s History of England for Young Churchmen, one of many
similar books disseminated in this colony :
“ Saint Anslem, at day break departed to glory ; he is reckoned one
“ of the doctors of the English Church. ’— p. 48.
“ It is not often that God chooses for his saints those who like Thomas
“ a’Becket, are taking their fill of this world’s pleasure. Thus by a rough
“ but glorious Road St. Thomas of Canterbury went to his Crown.”—
p. <i4.
“ Innocent the Third, an able and courageous man, and though much
“ mistaken in some things, using his immense power, on the whole, well,
“ ail( j acting to the best of his judgment for the interests of the Church.
_p. 78.
«> The Church did not persecute more than the Lollards would have
“ done, had they possessed the power, nor than their descendants did ;
“ many false things have been said about these Lollards, and others, who
“ rebelled against the authority of the Church, by historians who were
“ enemies to the Church, if not downright infidels.”—p. 127.
Thus is persecution justified, and the Lollards, or first Reformers, con-
demned as rebels against the Church, that is, as protesting against the
corruptions and tyranny of Rome.
“ There was at this time one Martin Luther, an Augustinian monk.
“ He was enraged that the sale of indulgences was taken away from his
“ own order.” “ Some things he said were true ; but many more
“ that were false and unjustifiable.” “ He used most harsh and vile
“ language to his superiors. He had made a vow of never marrying, as
“ all monks had done : he wickedly broke this, and persuaded a nun to
“ break hers also and marry him. Germany was filled with confusion
“ They forsook their Bishops, and made Priests for themselves, mid
« thus instead of reforming they left the Church; for there can be no
“ Church where there is no Bishop.”—p. 150.
“ The name of Protestant came gradually to be applied to those who
“ believe that every man is bound to obey the Bible according to his own
“ interpretation of it. Churchmen believe that every man is bound to


colony and disseminated by ministers promoted to the
most important parishes in the colony, I propose to bring
before your Lordship passages from but two books, both of
which are referred to in “ the Solemn Declaration,” toge-
ther with the sanction and recommendation given by the
Bishop of Tasmania to these books, and the declarations
published by him respecting the principles which they
inculcate, in reply to the objections and protests addressed
to him against them.
The following statement is taken from the commence-
O
mcnt of the “ Solemn Declaration
“ Inasmuch as, by our office as Ministers of the Church
“of England, w T e have solemnly engaged, ‘ with all faith-
“ obey the Bible according to the Church's interpretation of it. Our Church
“ never was, nor is, Protestant in this sense.”—p. 153.
“ Cranraer was too much guided in his views by the foreign reformers :
“ and he endeavoured by yielding to the king in all things, to keep him-
“ self in favour. Indeed, no honest man could have retained the see of
“ Canterbury during the time he held it.”—p. 145.
“ John Calvin, op Geneva, a heretic of the 16th century.”
—p. 186.
“ All through the reign of James the Church became more Catholic ;
“ and, in consequence, old ceremonies were revived.”—p. 195.
“ At this time, A.D. 1633, the best of the Bishops began to think that
“ the only safety for our Church would be a re-union with Rome.”—
p. 199.
He thus speaks of the four great periods of English liberty,—Magna
Charta, the reign of Charles 1., the Revolution of 1688, and the Reform
Bill.
“ A great deal of nonsense has been written and said about Magna
“ Charta You will hear persons in these days, say that all real
“ authority comes from the people. It is not so ; all authority in civil
“ matters comes directly from the Queen, and through her from God. In
'• the case of which we are speaking, the Barons had not the power to
“ make Magna Charta ; King John only had authority to sign it.”—p. 80.
“ Finding the Commons did not do their duly in supplying his wants,
“ King Charles resolved, as many of his predecessors had done, to tax
“ the people by royal proclamation.” —p. 197.
“ King William 111., a son who had taken up arms against his father,
“ advanced prosperously Finally, the House of Lords declared him
“ king. This was a fatal blow to the English Constitution, and had
“ nearly been the ruin of our Church.”—p, 197.
“ The voice of the people, far from being as the provex'b says, the voice
“ of God, was too often the voice of the devil, and that measure (the
“ Reform Bill) was quite contrary to the Constitution—p. 28b.


“ ful diligence, to banish and drive away all erroneous and
“ strange doctrines, contrary to God’s word ; and inasmuch
“ as a book, called ‘ Steps to the Altar,’ has been given
“ by the Rev. S. B. Windsor, Warden of Christ’s College,
“ by the Rev. W. Tancred, and the Rev. F. H. Cox,
“ Ministers of the Church of England in this city, for the
“ purpose of religious instruction, and in several instances
“ as a preparation for Confirmation ; and as a book termed
“ ‘ Spiritual Communion ’ lias been disseminated by the
“ Venerable F. A. Marriott, Archdeacon of Hobart Town ;
“ and a book called c Theophilus Anglicanus ’* is taught
O
“ I am afraid King John was an infidel Next to Henry VIII. we
“ may call him our worst king, Henry was the scourge of God for the
“ sins of our country.”—p. 156.
“ King James lost his eldest son, Henry. This was a blessing to the
“ Church, for he was at heart a Puritan. —p. 191.
The Gunpowder Plot he thus palliates—“ The Roman Catholics had
“ borne patiently all the cruel sufferings heaped upon them, but now a
“ few of them were tempted to revenge themselves.—(p. 18s.) As the
“ Plot was revealed to Garnet in confession, he could not disclose it.”
The design of Romanizing the Church is carried out by writings cal-
culated to pervert all ages and classes of persons. In a little book for
young Churchmen called “ Samuel the Chorister,” the following instruc-
tion IS GIVEN TO CHILDREN :
“It would fill a larger book than this to tell you of all that was done
“ that night,—how before evening prayer all was finished, the Candles
lighted , the Altar spread for midnight Communion. .....
When this was done he opened the Bible, and took very carefully,
from between the leaves, a print of the ’Nativity which had been given him
by the Priest, and after looking very earnestly at this he again knelt, and
said the Collect for Christmas Day ; then he went down stairs.”
“ The low voices of the missionary Priests were hushed now: the fair
linen was spread over the golden paten, and jewelled chalice ; containing
the most Holy Body, and Bio id
“ And should I be so unhappy as to commit any grievous sin, and not
be able to quiet my own conscience, I will go to the Parish Priest and
open my grief, that I may receive the benefit of absolution, together with
ghostly Counsel and advice.”
“ And the Holy Scriptures come not unto me of themselves, but I
receive them from the Holy Catholic Church.”
“ Need there is, therefore, that I understand them as the Holy Church
understands them, and not by mine own interpretation.”
The reader will judge of the influence which such books and principles
must have on the young, and how far ministers of the Church of England
are justified in introducing and disseminating such works.
* The adoption of a book for catechetical instruction of students of
divinity in College, and for examination of candidates for Holy Orders,


“ to the students at Christ’s College in this colony, and has
“ been prescribed for the instruction and examination of
“ candidates for Holy Orders in this diocese.
“ We, being deeply convinced that each of these books
“ inculcates principles of a Romanizing tendency, feel called
“ upon to set forth passages which we consider as calculated
“ to undermine the evangelical truths of religion.”
O C)
The following Protest was also made to the Bishop of
Tasmania against these books :
July, 1851.
(( We, the undersigned Clergymen, solemnly protest to
“ the Lord Bishop of Tasmania against the pernicious ten-
“ dency of the doctrines inculcated in the following books,
“ which have been distributed by several Ministers of the
<( Church of England in this diocese, viz.—
“ Steps to the Altar,”
“ Spiritual Communion,”
“ Theophilus Anglicanus.”
In reply to this protest the Bishop of Tasmania returned
the following answer :
Bishopstowe, July 1 4<th, 1851.
“ My dear Dr. Bedford—
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of this
“ day’s date, accompanied by a protest, signed by yourself,
<f and twelve other clergymen of the diocese, against the
“ doctrines of the following books, viz.—
“ Steps to the Altar,”
“ Spiritual Communion,”
“ Theophilus Anglicanus.”
must be regarded an adoption of its views by authority, and as the most
practical recognition of its principles as a standard of correctness; as
well as the most efficient means of propagating and inculcating them, by
infusing them into the future teachers of the Church with all the autho-
rity of episcopal direction.
The editions of the books referred to in this Declaration are those of


“ The clergy will not, I trust, consider me as unmindful
f* of the respect with which I desire to regard the free ex-
“ pression of their opinions upon such subjects, if, in this
“ instance, I differ widely from their estimate of the £ perni-
“ cious tendency of the doctrinces inculcated in Steps to the
“ Altar and Theophilus Anglicanus.’
“ The former little work is used in my own family, and
“ I see no reason why it should be discarded.
<c ‘ Theophilus Anglicanus/ when carefully studied, and
“ rightly understood, appears to me to be one of the most
“ valuable of the many works published by ray esteemed
“ friend, Dr. Christopher Wordsworth, to whom the
“ Church of England is, perhaps, more indebted than to
“ any living writer, for a steadfast and uncompromising
“ advocacy of her real principles, in contradistinction to
“ the tenets and claims of the Church of Home.
“ With the work entitled £ Spiritual Communion/ I am
“ unacquainted. If, however, the objections raised against
“ it are of the same character as those which have been
“ advanced against ‘ Steps to the Altar,’ and which have
“ been so conclusively refuted by Mr. Tancred, I do not
“ suppose that I should discover anything seriously to ob-
“ ject to it on the score of doctrine.
“ There are, probably, few compositions to whose every
“ word any one of us would desire to give in an unqualified
“ adhesion, but I cannot join in your condemnation of
c< works, which if I mistake not would have been regarded
“ in the days of Hooker, Bull, Jeremy Taylor, and the like,
“ as identified with the true teaching of the Church.
“ I remain, my dear Dr. Bedford,
“ Faithfully yours,
“ F. R. Tasmania.”
the copies most in use in this colony ;—Steps to the Altar, fourth edition,
1849. Spiritual Communion, London, James Burns, 1844. Theophilus
Anglicanus, third edition, 1845,


In his reply to an address presented by Mr. Dry, the
Bishop of Tasmania said—
“ He had given a copy of Theophilus Anglicanus” to a
“ candidate for Holy Orders as likely to give him valuable
“ information. He had given to different friends perhaps a
“ dozen copies, and if he had a hundred he would give them
“to those who would make a right use of them.” “It was
“ QUITE CORRECT THAT IT HAD BEEN USED AS A TEXT BOOK AT
“ the college, but had been discontinued, for what reason
“ he ki\ew not, as he had no disposition to interfere with
“ the Warden.” It was recognized in England by at least
“ half her bishops as sound and valuable. It had gone
“ through six large editions.”
“ He reminded his hearers that the usefulness of 1 The
“ Steps to the Altar' had been proved in England by the
“ sale of six large editions : there, no popery had been dis-
“ covered in it.”
“ The charge against ‘ The Steps ’ is that it inculcates
“ auricular confession as practised by the Church of Borne”
—“ but in his mind it did nothing of the sort,”
“ It had been used by his wife as a manual of devotion
“ since 1848, and he saw no reason why it should be dis-
“ carded at the beck and bidding of those who deprecated it.”
The clergymen who signed “ The Solemn Declaration ”
objected to the principles inculcated in “ Theophilus Angli-
canus ” and “ The Steps to the Altar ” on the three follow-
ing subjects :
Eecognition of the Church of Rome,
The Lord’s Supper.
Confession and Absolution.
On the first of these subjects the following passages were
submitted to the Bishop :
“ The Church Catholic comprehends those of all nations
“ who are in the main points of religion one and the same.


“ In respect of faith and practice, as teaching all truth, as
“ requiring obedience alike from all, and as ministering by
“ God’s appointment all his means of spiritual grace.”—p. 5.
“ The members of the Church of Rome are Catholics as
the members of the Creek Church or of the English
(C Church are Catholics, and no more ; and not as opposed
“to either. The Church of Rome is a part of the Catholic
“ Church as the Church of Greece and the Church of
“ England is, but no particular Church is the Catholic or
“ Universal Church.”—p. 7.
“ The Church of England did not separate herself from
“ the Church of Rome.”—p. 1&8.
“ Salvation only in the Church.— lf we desire to be
“ saved it is necessary that we should be members of the
“ Church. He is not a Christian who is not in the
“ Church.”—p. 23.
“ Schism is a separation from the Church, in the nature
“of dissent from ecclesiastical governors, when a man
iC wholly or occasionally withdraws himself from com-
“ munion with his lawful bishop and pastor ” (p. 32.)
“ Schism is a carnal work, and excludes from heaven. We
“ may not say that schismatics are in the invisible Church.
“ They are subjects of Christ and rebellious ones. The
“ graces which they may have are in them, but not for
“ them, they are even against them, as long as they con-
“ tinue schismatics. Preaching in schism is sinful. Wilful
“ schism is mortal sin.”—p. 217, &c.
“ When God has appointed certain means for dispensing
u His grace, our salvation is tied to the use of them. He
“ remits the punishment of original sin by means of the
“ Sacrament of Baptism, and in the case of actual sin He
confers the grace of his own pardon by means of priestly
“ absolution” “ Though the Church may err, it does not
“ follow that she is not to be obeyed , for mater errans
“ mater est. In controverted points, we must stand by


u the determination of the Church ; for the preservation of
“ her Peace and Unity is of the very essence of Chris-
“ tianity.”—-p. 28.
Q. “Am I then to make my own mind the judge
<c whether they” (authorised expositors) “ are in error; and
“if not, to what tests of doctrine am I to appeal ?” A.
“ It is not our own private judgment, but, first, Holy
“ Scriptures, as received, guarded, and interpreted by the
“ Catholic Church from the beginning, £ according to the
“ proportion of faith and next, the consent of the Church
“ herself, speaking in her public expositions, creeds, councils,
“ liturgies, confessions, and writings of her early Fathers,
“ Bishops, and Doctors, is the Pule of Faith to which the'
“ teaching of individuals is to be referred.”—p. 53, ed. 1845.
Your Lordship will determine how far myself and the
the other old colonial Ministers were justified in regarding
this teaching as an admission of the Romish Church in the
highest degree dangerous to the younger members of the
Church of England, and calculated to pervert to Romanism
the minds of those who may yield to its influence.
The Catholic Church is set forth as composed of the
Church of Rome, the Greek Church, and the Church of
England, each of the three Churches being said to be a
part of the Catholic Church, the members of which are in
the main points of religion one and the same. Each of
the three Churches or parts of the Catholic Church are said
TO TEACH ALL TRUTH TO REQUIRE OBEDIENCE FROM ALL AS
MINISTERING BY GOd’s APPOINTMENT ALL HIS MEANS OP SPIRI-
TUAL GRACE.
The Church of England is declared not to have separated
herself from the Church of Rome, and salvation is said to
be only in the Church—none but the members of the
Church can be saved.
Those who separate from bishops wholly or occasionally


are in schism, which is a separation from the Church or
dissent from Ecclesiastical Governors. Schism is a carnal
work which excludes from heaven. The graces of schisma-
tics are against them, their preaching is sinful.
The rule of faith in the Catholic Church is the interpre-
tations put upon Holy Scripture by the Councils, early
Fathers, Doctors, &c., of the Church.
If a Romanist were to write a book for the purpose of
inducing the members of the Church of England to embrace
Romanism, I cannot conceive what principles he could
inculcate more directly calculated to effect his design than
those of “ Theophilus Anglicanus.” There is just sufficient
colouring to avoid an open avowal of Romanism which
might awaken distrust in the young and uninstructed, and
so counteract its influence, but its principles plainly tend
Ist to remove the objections of Protestants against the
Church of Rome, and 2nd to set forth her claims in the
strongest light.
The first effect is produced by teaching,—that the
Church of Rome is one of the three branches of the Catholic
Church which are in the main points of religion one and the
same, and that the Church of England never did separate
from her.
The second effect is produced by teaching,—that the
the Church of Rome as a branch ot the Catholic Church
teaches all truth, ministers by God’s appointment all His
means of grace atid requires obedience from all, and that
those who separate from the Catholic Church are excluded
from heaven and their preaching sinful.
And lest this should not be sufficient the young members
of the Church and Candidates for Holy Orders are instructed
to believe that their own minds are not to judge whether
Churches or teachers be in error, but are to receive the
decrees of Fathers, &c. as their rule of faith, and obey the
Church even though she should teach error.


Surely, my Lord, if Archbishop Whately truly describes
the Tractarian writers as a recruiting Depot for the Church
of Rome, this book must be regarded as one of their plainest
efforts to proselytize the members of our Church. Yet is
this book declared by the Bishop of this colony to be
valuable and to be identified with the true teaching of our
Church.
Romanizing Teaching respecting the Lord’s Supper.
The following are the passages from { * the Steps to the
Altar” which were set forth in the “ Solemn Declaration,”
and submitted to the Bishop of Tasmania with a protest
from several ministers. The Bishop in his reply stated
that “ the book was used in his own family and he saw no
reason why it should be discarded .” “ The objections to it
were conclusively refutedand it should be regarded “ as
identified with the true teaching of the Church .”
“ When the spiritual sacrifice, the service without blood
“ has been completed, upon that sacrifice of propitiation
“ we entreat God for the grace of all the Churches, and in
“ a word we all pray and offer up such sacrifice for all
11 WHO STAND IN NEED.” (Steps p. 69.)
“ And together with us, remember, 0 God, for good the
“ whole mystical Body of thy Son ; 'that such os are yet
“ alive may finish their course with joy, and that all such
“ as are dead in the Lord may rest in hope and rise in
“ glory ” —(Steps p. 64.)
“ Give unto us all, O God, a portion of the good prayers
“ in heaven and earth, the intercession of our Lord, and the
“ supplications of all thy servants.”—(Steps p. 69.)
“ I have humbly offered unto Thee, O Lord, the sacrifice’
of a troubled spirit, in union with the Sacrifice and*


“ Sacrament of tlie Body and Blood of Thy Son, my
“ Saviour.”—(Steps p. 83.)
“ The definition of a proper Sacrifice. —Sacrifice is,
“1. Some material thing, either animate or inanimate,
“ offered to God, 2. For the acknowledging the dominion
“ and other attributes of God, or for procuring Divine
“ blessings, especially remission of sin. 3. Upon a proper
“ altar (which yet is rather necessaxy for the external
“ decorum than the internal perfection of the sacrifice.)
“4. By a proper officei’, and with agi’eeable rites. 5. And
“ consumed, or otherwise disposed of, in such a manner as
“ the Author of the sacrifice has appointed.”—(Steps p. 107.)
“ At, and in the Eucharist, we offer up to God three
“ sacrifices. One by the Priest only ; that is the com-
memorative Sacrifice of Christ’s death represented in
“ bread broken, and wine poured out.”—(Steps p, 1 J O.)
“ The water in Baptism, with the blessing and grace of
“ God, has power in it to cleanse us fx*om our sins. And
“ the bread in the Lord’s Supper, being set apart and
“ blessed, becomes the Bread that noui’isheth to eternal
“ life.”—(Steps p. 114.)
“ When God has appointed certain means for dispensing
(i His grace, our salvation to the use op them,”
e< The primitive custom was to receive in the hollow palm
“ of the right hand, which was supported by the left crossed
<e under it.” —(Steps p, 66.)
“ It is an ancient and good custom for those who are
“ about to receive this Sacrament, not to take any food in
“ the morning before they communicate.” * —(Steps p. 88.)
“ Send Thy Holy Spirit upon this Sacrifice, that He may
make this bread and this wine the Body and Blood of
“ Thy Christ.”*f* —(Steps p. 62.)
* “ Have you presumed to receive the Blessed Sacrament, after having
broken your fast.” —Garden of the Soul, p. 209.
t Roman Missal, ordinary of the Mass,—“ Which oblatipu do Thou, 0


According to this teaching the members of the Church
believe that the Lord’s Supper is a proper sacrifice—
a sacrifice of Propitiation offered up upon a proper Altar,
for those who are alive to procure them remission of sins,
and for those who are dead in the Lord that they may rest
in hope. The Holy Spirit is supposed to descend upon the
sacrifice, that it may make the bread and wine the Body and
Blood of Christ, which are to be received fasting and with
crossed hands.
I believe there is not one word in this description which
Romanists would not assent to as agreeing with their doc-
trine of the Mass and Transubstantiation. Surely, my
Lord, if we hold the Article of the Church of England—
l< that Masses , in which the Priest is said to offer Christ
“ for the quick and the dead , to have remission of guilt ,
“ are blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits” —we are
bound to warn the people against teaching which, if it does
not actually inculcate the Romish doctrine of the yet
approaches so near to it, as to be exceedingly calculated to
mislead. How lamentable for the Church of England that
the Romanizing spirit should have prevailed to such an
extent that ministers describe even the sacraments in lan-
guage which Romanists can receive as in accordance with
their doctrines !
Although, indeed, it may be that your Lordship’s
opinion will not induce the Bishop of Tasmania to change
his measures and admit Evangelical ministers into the
colony, I yet trust that it will produce some bene-
ficial effect. I cannot but think that the Evangelical
ministers and people of this diocese who are condemned for
their opinions on baptism are entitled to the support and
ENCOURAGEMENT AS WELL AS RELIEF which the expression of
God, vouchsafe in all respects to bless, approve, ratify, and accept; that
it may be made for us the Body and Blood of Thy most beloved Son Jesus
Christ our Lord.”


your judgment would afford, if you deem them unjustly
censured. And should you, on the other hand, consider the
measures of the Bishop to be in accordance with the prin-
ciples of the Church of England, your judgment is not the
less necessary as well to confirm his proceedings and support
his authority as to teach us that our objections and remon-
strance are ungrounded. I therefore appeal to your Lordship
whether the declarations of the Bishop of Tasmania requir-
ing all Candidates for Holy Orders and Ministers applying
for his license, to profess a belief in the doctrine that all
baptized infants are regenerated in their baptism, and his
condemning those who deny this doctrine as unqualified to
teach the principles of the Church of England , and as
holding an heretical opinion on the sacrament of baptism,
be not, “ to exclude from the office of the ministry
“ MANY PERSONS WHOM THE PRIVY COUNCIL HAS AFFIRMED
“ TO HAVE ALWAYS BEEN ADMITTED, AND TO BE STILL
“ ADMISSABLE TO THE MINISTRY OF OUR CHURCH. 2nd.
“ Whether his practice be not avowedly opposed
“to the highest judicature in the land. 3rd.
“ Whether the Bishop of Tasmania does not so use
“ OUR FORMULARIES AS TO MAKE THEM AFFIRM A NEW
“ ARTICLE OF FAITH ; WHICH IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO PROVE
“ from Scripture, or, in the judgment of the Privy
“ Council, from the formularies themselves/'*
Romanizing Teaching respecting Confession and
Absolution.
The following directions are given in “ The Steps to the
Altar” and “ Theophilus Anglicanus—
CHOICE OF A CONFESSOR.
“ Having’made choice of such a Confessor, who is every way
“ qualified, that you may trust your soul with him, you are ad-
* This last paragraph is misplaced, and should have been printed
immediately after page 61.


“ vised plainly and sincerely to open your heart to him ; and that,
“ laying aside all consideration of any personal weakness in him,
“ you are to look upon him only as he is a trustee from God, and
“ commissioned by Him as His ministerial deputy, to hear, and
“ judge, and absolve you.”—(Steps, p. 120.)
“I suppose you are to choose only such a person as will faithfully
“ keep any secret you shall commit to him, and so it can be no
“ public shame you can fear.—(lbid, p. 118.)
MANNER OF CONFESSION.
“ You will also do well to write down on paper the sins, or, at
“ least, the chief sins of which you become conscious, that they
“ may not pass away from your memory.”
“That the manner of your confession be in a humble posture on
“ your knees, as being made to God rather than man. And for the
“ the matter of it, let it be severe and serious.”—(Steps, p. 15.)
“Everyone may keep the fast days profitably, and certainly
“ should make the attempt, by using plainer food, giving larger
“ alms and_using confession.” —(Steps, p. 22.)
“ Before you are to receive the Holy Sacrament, or when you
“ are visited by any dangerous sickness, if you find any one par-
“ ticular sin, or more, that lies heavy upon you, you are to dis-
“ burden yourself of it into the bosom of your Confessor, who not
“ only stands between God and you, to pray for you, but hath the
“ power of the keys committed to him, upon your true repentance,
“ to absolve you in Christ’s Name from those sins which you have
“ confessed to him.”—lbid, p. 120.
BENEFIT OF ABSOLUTION.
“ The benefit of Absolution. —lf we would choose to believe rather
“ than dispute, it would be a powerful cordial to every troubled
“ spirit, by a particular officer from the kingdom of heaven to be
“ thus saluted; and he that cannot value this absolution from the
“ Priest , can no other way receive satisfaction to his doubts and fears,
“ unless he expects to be assured of his remission by an immediate
“ revelation , or can be content to stay till the day of judgment for
“ the resolution of this great enquiry. Let it therefore cheer your
“ hearts, ye contrite ones, to hear this blessing from your spiritual
“ father ; for, behold, it contains all that you do need or can desire.
e ‘Are you miserable? Here is mercy. Are you sinful? Here is
“ pardon. Are you liable to punishment ? Here is deliverance. Are
“ you desirous , but unable to do good ? Here is strength and confir-
(i motion. Are you fearful of death and hell ? Here is heaven and


“everlasting life. And all this asked of God by one that Ho hath
“ commissioned to make this prayer ; so that your only care is, that
“ your repentance be such as your Minister believes it to be, and
“ then this absolution shall certainly he confirmed in the high court
“ of heaven , and not one word thereof shall fall to the ground.”—
(Steps p. 121.)
“ When God has appointed certain means for dispensing His
“ grace, our salvation is tied to the use of them. He remits the
“ punishment of original sin by means of the Sacrament of Baptism ;
“ and in the case of actual sin, He confers the grace of His own
“ pardon by means of priestly Absolution, ordinarily and where it
“ may be had, and whenever justly pronounced and duly received ;
•* and thus he makes repentance available to the true penitent,
“ through the declaration and pronunciation of pardon by the
“ Minister of Christ, acting by His authority, at His command, and
“by His power. Absolution does not give repentance, but makes it
“ effectual, as the loosing of Lazarus did not give him life, but the
“ full and free use of it.” —(Theop. Ang. p. 108.)
Occasional Auricular Confession Declared by the
Bishop of Tasmania to be Enjoined by the Church of
England.
The Bishop said—
“ The charge against ‘ The Steps’ was that it inculcated Auricular
“ Confession as practised by the Church of England.”—(Rcply to
Mr. Dry.)
“ But to come to the question of the doctrine of the Church of
“ England with regard to confession. Does she altogether ignore
“it ? Does she cast it out as a Popish abomination, forbidding
“ her children even under any circumstance to use or handle it ?
“ Not so: but she places most wise and careful restrictions both
“on her clergy and laity respecting its adoption. She looks upon
“ it as the exception, not the rule —a thing permitted, not en-
** forced. The great practical difference between the two Churches
“ of Rome and England on this head may perhaps be thus summed
“ up. The Church of Rome enjoins confession in all cases. The
“ Church of England permits and even recommends it in some.


“ The Church of Rome regards confession, so to speak, as the
“ natural food of the soul. The Church of England as its
“ MEDICINE.”
“ In the first Prayer-Book of King Edward VI. ‘ Auricular and
“ Secret Confession ’ to the priest was distinctly spoken of and
“ provision made for its right performance. In the second hook
“ these words were omitted : and why ? To establish the position
“ that private confession should not be the rule, but the exception
“ in the Reformed Church of England—that it should not be
“ regarded in the light of food for the children of the Church, but
“AS A MEDICINE FOR THE TROUBLED SICK, AND DISEASED SOUL.” “To
“show that confession under these limits and restrictions was
“ recognised by the Church of England, he directed them to the
“ 113th canon, which provided that if any man confess his secret
“ and hidden sins to the minister, he shall not reveal or make
“ known to any person any crime or offence so committed to his
“ trust, except they be such crimes as his own life may be called
“ in question for concealing.”
“ He wished them particularly to bear in mind that the penitent
“ was to resort to the minister not only for Ghostly counsel and
“ advice, but for absolution. Calvin, who was no Tractarian, did
“ not ignore absolution, and admitted that the absence of a form
“of absolution was a defect in his liturgy. The authority under
“ which a priest administers absolution is founded in the com-
“ mission given in the Ordination Service.— ‘ Whose sins thou
“ hast forgiven, they are forgiven, and whose sins thou dost retain
“ they are retained.” Thus Confession was not confined to any
“ public form of absolution, but extended clearly to the private übsolu-
“ tion referred to in the invitation to the Holy Communion and the
“ visitation of the sick,”
APPROVAL OF KNEELING BEFORE THE CONFESSOR.
“Respecting the direction given in ‘ The Steps ’ that the peni-
“ tent is to make his confession kneeling before the priest, the
“ bishop said, “ Exception had also been taken to the manner in
“ which the confession is recommended by these good old writers
“to be made, viz., in an humble posture on the knees. And are
“ we indeed so filled with pride and self-importance, asked the
“ Bishop—so lost to all sense of that godly penitence, &c.—that if
“ an overburthened sinner, all conscious of his guilt, all trembling
“ with remorse, should seek to unlock his grief and lay bare his


“ hidden sin before his valued friend and trusted Pastor, and seek
“ do it in the humblest attitude that can be selected —on the knees
“ —his humility is to be reproved and stigmatized as Popish. We
" are yet to learn that humility of attitude under such circum-
stances is to be confined to the Church of Rome.”—(Reply to
Mr. Dry.) ,
These instructions are systematic and complete. Each
member of the Church is to choose his confessor, (a title
not acknowledged in the Prayer Book.) The confessor is
to be regarded as God’s trustee, commissioned by Him as
His deputy to hear and judge and absolve.
The people are to trust their souls to him, and plainly
and sincerely to open their hearts to him, kneeling before
him, the matter of their confession being severe and serious,
committing to him their secrets, trusting to him not to
divulge what is confessed, that so they need not dread
public shame. They are to write down their sins that they
may not pass away from their memory, and are to disburthen
them into the bosom of their confessor.
They are to confess on Fast days—before receiving the
Lord’s Supper, or in dangerous sickness when their sins
lie heavy upon them.
Absolution from the Priest is declared to be the only way
by which a man can receive satisfaction to his doubts and
fears, God gives the grace of His own pardon by means of
priestly absolution, which conveys every blessing that any
one can need or desire, —pardon—strength—confirmation—
heaven and everlasting life. Their only care is, that their
repentance he such as the priest believes it to he, and then
his absolution shall certainly he confirmed in heaven, and
not one word of it shall fall to the ground.
In a published address of the Bishop of Tasmania vindi-
cating the preceding directions of “ The Steps to the Altar”
respecting Confession and Absolution, his Lordship declares—
1 'hat the Church of England does not ignore hut recoin-


mends secret or Auricular Confession to the priest as a
medicine for the troubled, sick, and diseased soul. He
affirms that the priest at his ordination obtains a commis-
sion—“ Whose sins thou hast forgiven, they are forgiven”
—to pronounce private absolution to those who confess
secret and hidden sins, and the priest is hound not to reveal
any crime or offence so confessed to him, unless his own
life be endangered by concealing it.
The Bishop says the great practical difference between
the two Churches of Rome and England respecting Confes-
sion and Absolution is—the Church of Rome enjoins
confession in all cases, regarding it as the natural food of
the soul—the Church of England recommends it in some
CASES AS THE MEDICINE OF THE SOUL.
It would thus appear that the principles and practice of
Confession and Absolution are said to be the same in the
Church of England as in the Church of Rome except in
regard to the frequency of its use. But even this poor dis-
tinction is unreal, for it is inconsistent with the directions in
“ The Steps to the Altar” and with the Bishop’s own
teaching. If Absolution be the great spiritual blessing,
pardon, comfort, &c., of the soul, and if penitents are
directed to receive it on Fast days and before the Lord’s
Supper, its use would be at least as frequent in the Church
of England as in that of Rome. If it be such a saving
medicine for the troubled soul, and if the Priest has a
special commission to forgive sins in private Absolution,
there can be no reason why its use should be limited, or why
it should not be administered as often as the people can be
induced to receive it. Thus the only distinction* pointed
♦ As an evidence of this, it may he worth mentioning that the Roman
Catholic Bishop of Hobart Town is reported, as I believe truly, to have
expressed, from the pulpit, his approbation of “ The Steps to the Altar,”
and after reading some passages from it to show its agreement with the
doctrines of the Church of Rome, to have declared his great satisfaction


out by tlie Bishop of Tasmania as existing between the
teaching of the Church of England and Romanism on the
o o
doctrine and practice of Confession and Absolution is shown
not to exist according to his own principles.
The doctrinal system of the Church of Rome is founded
upon her Rule of Faith, —the interpretation put upon
Scripture by the decrees of Councils, writings of Fathers,
&c. So her corrupt practice, her priestly tyranny, im-
morality, and superstition, are built upon the doctrine and
practice ,of Auricular Confession and Absolution. But
both these unscriptural principles are inculcated among the
members of the Church in this colony in addition to a com-
plete recognition of the authority of the Church of Rome,
and of the doctrine of sacramental propitiatory sacrifice.
If, my Lord, the principles which we are required to
receive as the true teaching of the Church were carried out
in practice, we should establish confessionals in our Churches
and exhort the people to come to confession and receive
private Absolution as the medicine of the troubled ani>
diseased soul. Surely there cannot be a greater incon-
sistency, violation of principle, and sacrifice of the spiritual
interest of the people than for their ministers to believe that
they were commissioned to confess and absolve them
with a pardon that will be confirmed in heaven, and
yet that they should neither preach its efficacy nor even
offer to administer it. They believe that pardon of sin is
tied to a priestly absolution, which can heal the troubled or
diseased soul, and yet they let their people die without
affording that spiritual remedy which they can so readily
dispense. It would seem that in honesty they are bound
either to carry out their principles by the practice of Con-
fession and Absolution or else to become members of the
that the Bishop and some of the clergy of the Church of England in this
colony were embracing the Catholic (Roman) doctrine respecting Confes-
sion and Absolution.


Romish Church, the doctrines of which they have adopted, and
which they could then practise without hindrance or objection.
The condition of the people who embrace these principles
is equally inconsistent. They are taught and they believe
that the absolution of the Priest conveys comfort, pardon,
peace, and eternal life. They see many troubled and diseased
souls perishing without peace and pardon, while the
ministers withhold that absolution which they were commis-
sioned to pronounce. It is plain that a conscientious man
holding these opinions must regard such ministers with
contempt as inconsistent with their own principles and
cruelly regardless of the salvation of the people. The love
of truth and religious conscientiousness must compel such
a man to embrace Romanism in order to obtain that
spiritual medicine which he is taught to believe will convey
pardon and peace to his soul. Thus the principles incul-
cated in this colony as the true teaching of the Church
must lead to Romanism in proportion as they are consci-
entiously believed.
I feel convinced, my Lord, that I need not solicit your
sympathy for a people given up to such religious teaching,
and I submit, to your own interest and concern for the sal-
vation of their souls , what measures you may deem it duo
to Our Lord to adopt, in order to prevent the suppression of
Evangelical truth, and to provide for the preaching of the
Gospel in this colony. It is comparatively an easy duty to
declare and preach Evangelical principles when the opposers
of those principles are distant, and to exhort and warn the
people against errors which involve us in no personal
opposition or difficulty. May the Lord enable all to w'hom
his Gospel is entrusted, to follow the example of him, who
to preserve the people from false teaching withstood his
brother Apostle to the face, regardless of the shame and
evil of disunion in the infant Church, or of the personal
consequences to himself.


Letter from the Arciirishop op Canterbury in reply to
an Address from the Hobart Town Christian
Knowledge Society.
“ Lambeth, Feb. 19, 1852.
“ Rev. Sir,
i have received through the hands of Dr. Armstrong, an
“ Address, bearing date September 10, signed by twenty-five
« members of the Committee of the Society for Promoting Christian
“ Knowledge in Hobart Town.
“ The subjects treated of in the Address are of a delicate nature :
“ and it will be enough for me to say that I sympathise with the
« difficulties of which the memorialists complain, and fully agree
“ with the opinion expressed in the * Declaration,’ that there is much
“ in the books to which it particularly refers which is far more in
“ accordance with the principles of the Church of Rome than of the
“ Church of England.
« if it shall happen, as is expected, that the Colonial Churches
“ should be brought at an early period under the consideration of
“ the Legislature, I will bear in mind the wishes and the rights of
« the memorialists, and endeavour to maintain them ; and cci tainly
w i will use whatever influence I may possess to secure the con-
«< nexion of the Colonial Churches with the Church of England.”
I remain, Reverend Sir,
Your faithful servant,
J. B. Cantuar.
Rev. Dr. Fry.
Letter of the Archbishop of Canterbury to the Bishop
of Tasmania.
“Addington, Dec. 23rd, 1853.
“My Lord,
“ I beg to acknowledge your Lordship’s letter of August 27th, »n
which you refer to a correspondence which has taken place res-
« pecting the appointment of Mr. Mcdland to a vacant chaplaincy
“ at Hobart Town.
“ The case appears to have been laid before the Duke of Ncw-
« castle, and as it contains nothing on which His Grace will bo
« at a loss to form his judgment, it is not probable that he will
“ think it necessary to ask for my opinion.


“Both in this and in a subsequent letter, bearing date Sept. 27,
“ your Lordship speaks of inconvenience which has arisen from
“ my answer to Dr. Fry, written in Feb., 1852, in reply to a statc-
“ ment which he and others had sent me, respecting grievances
“ which many of the clergy were said to be labouring under in the
“ diocese of Tasmania.
“I perceive from some sentences in the correspondence now
“ before me that use has been made of that letter which I should
“ have been far from desiring.*'
“ But I cannot alter ray opinion regarding the books to which
“it referred— ‘ The Tract on Communion ’ and ‘ Steps to the Altar.’
With regard to * Theophilus Anglicanus,’ I am aware that its
“ learned author is as far from favouring the Romish Church as
“ the Reformers themselves; though I confess that the impression
“ which it left upon my mind some years ago was to the effect that
“ the principles maintained in it were calculated to encourage
“ claims which the English Church does not uphold. But with
“ regard to the treatise especially present to my mind when I
“ wrote, ‘ Steps to the Altar,’ I need not go beyond the title. To
“ call the Holy Table an altar, is a step towards making the
u Lord’s Supper a sacrifice ; and so to pervert the purpose of the
“ Lord’s Supper is a step towards one of the most manifest corrup-
“ tions of the Church of Rome, and, so far from being in accor-
“ dance with our principles, is studiously avoided throughout our
“ formularies.
“It is with much regret, my Lord, that I acknowledge the
“ difference between our respective views. I can only plead in
“ justification that I differ from your Lordship, in company with
“ the highest judicature in the land, to which your practice is
“ avowedly opposed. The declaration which you require every
“ candidate for orders to sign would be to exclude from the office
“ of the ministry many persons whom the Privy Council has
“ affirmed to have always been admitted, and to be still admissi-
u ble, to the ministry of our Church. In my private opinion I
“ yield to no one in my sense of the importance of infant baptism.
“ Yet I cannot think it justifiable so to use our formularies, as virtually
* In a subsequent communication, the Archbishop of Canterbury
informed me that he had no intention of expressing disapprobation of
any use which I had made of his letter, and that he sympathized
with myself and the other ministers under the evils of which we com-
plained.


“ to make them affirm a new article of faith which it is impossible
“to prove from Scripture, or, in the judgment of the Privy
“ Council from the formularies themselves. And therefore I must
“ claim your excuse, if I have expressed more sympathy with
“ some of your clergy, than your Lordship is disposed to approve.”
I remain, my Lord,
Your faithful servant and brother,
(Signed) J. B. Cantuau.
The Lord Bishop of Tasmania.
In these letters the Archbishop of Canterbury declares—
Ist. That he fully agrees with the opinion expressed
in the “ Solemn Declaration” that there is much in the
ROOKS TO WHICH IT PARTICULARLY REFERS WHICH IS FAR MORE
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PRINCIPLES OF THE CHURCH OP ROME
THAN OF THE CIIURCH OF ENGLAND.
2nd. That the Bishop of Tasmania requires from
candidates for Orders a declaration on baptism which
EXCLUDES FROM THE MINISTRY MANY PERSONS LEGALLY ADMIS-
SIBLE THERETO, AND THAT HE MAKES SUCH A USE OF THE
FORMULARIES AS TO MAKE THEM AFFIRM A NEW ARTICLE OF
FAITH NOT TO BE PROVED BY HOLY SCRIPTURE NOR IN THE
JUDGMENT OF THE PRIVY COUNCIL FROM THE FORMULARIES
THEMSELVES.
The Archbishop “ could do no more ’ than thus express
his opinion and his sympathy. Both indeed were highly
valued by those to whom they were addressed, —they
THANKED God AND WERE ENCOURAGED, but the Opinion
of the Primate was ineffectual and disregarded. The Bishop
of Tasmania told Mr. Medland, who appealed to the Arch-
bishop’s judgment “THAT IT MIGHT GO FOR WHAT IT WAS
worth.” The Archbishop was declared to have been
“ weighed in the balance and found wanting,” and his letters
were censured as an attempt to obstruct the counsels of a
Bishop over whom he had no control or jurisdiction, and an


improper interference in the concerns of a diocese with which
he had no connection.
I appeal, therefore, to your Lordship, as Metropolitan,
for such redress and relief as your office and authority may
enable you to afford, and still more for a declaration of the
true principles of the Church, of which you are the chief
Minister in these colonies, to prevent the people from being
induced to receive as, identified with her teaching the
religious system set forth in such books as “ The Steps to
the Altar.”
If it, indeed, be true that principles in accordance with
Romanism are inculcated in this colony with the highest
influence and authority, and that the preachers of Evange-
lical religion are condemned and excluded,* there can be no
need of other inducement for your Lordship’s interposi-
tion than the interests of religion and the extreme danger
of the people, especially of the young, and of those now
* They are excluded by the condemnation and penalties imposed upon
ministers holding Protestant principles, and by the Bishop’s declaration
that he will not license any clergyman who refuses to subscribe to his
doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration. The usual reply made to complaints
against the latter measure is,—“ that the Bishop has licensed one or two
ministers without requiring from them an assent to this doctrine.”
Thus, some indiscriminating persons are led to suppose that the complaint
is groundless ; but the least consideration will show, that those who are
satisfied with such an answer yield to a delusion. For, Ist. Any unjust
or injurious measure might be maintained with impunity if it were a
sufficient justification to say, that there were some cases in which it was
not enforced. Every one who sought to establish such a measure would
only have to remit, or not to enforce it in one or two instances in order to
blind the eyes of the people by a particular case while the general measure
was being established. The actual injustice and wrong exist as long as it is
enforced or may be enforced in any case. 2nd. While the Bishop per-
severes in his general declaration, published in his charge and frequently
repeated, that he will never ordain any candidate or license any minister
who does not hold that all baptized infants are regenerate, and that those
who deny this doctrine are unqualified, &c., &c., he in effect condemns,
as unworthy of the ministry, all clergymen holding what are called
Evangelical opinions, and imposes against their admission into the diocese
a general prohibition. It cannot be supposed that they would come to a
colony where their principles are condemned, and themselves formally
excluded : nor while such a prohibition exists, could any colonial chaplain
or congregation invite an Evangelical minister to leave England in order
to seek a parochial charge or curacy in this diocese.


being educated in the college for the Ministry. If it be a
sacred obligation upon the preachers of God’s Word with
all earnestness to declare the truth and endeavour “to
banish and drive away false teaching, surely, the call of the
Lord conies upon us with all power when those for whose
souls we are to watch and give account are being deprived of
the gospel and given over to teaching which we are assured
will pervert their minds to Romanism. It may be true,
that for the most part, tiiey are secure and regardless,
sleeping while the tares are being sown, but the necessity
is only thereby the greater for an awakening voice to warn
them that they be not deceived, but that with their hearts
embracing the truth in sincerity and faith they may know
the power of the gospel and thus be enabled to detect and
withstand all false teaching.
With thankfulness to Him who has enabled me, even
thus imperfectly, to fulfil a duty painful and full of respon-
sibility, but as I believe, laid upon me by the Divine will, I
now commit the preservation of the truth—the interest of
the people’s souls, and the cause of Our Lord into your
hands, praying that in the spirit of wisdom and decision
He will enable you to make a good confession of Evange-
lical truth against those Romish principles which the
Enemy in all ages has used to corrupt and withstand the
Gospel; and that, without fear of what man can do or man
can say, you will be led to adopt measures for the preserva-
tion of a Gospel Ministry in this Island, and for saving the
people from the grievous calamity of being given over to
Romanism or semi-Romanism inculcated under the disguise
of being the true teaching of the Church of England.*
FINIS.
* In consequence of the length of this Appeal it has been deemed ad-
visable to omit the testimonies from the Reformers, &c., to the sufficiency of
Holy Scripture and to the right of private judgment, which were sub-
mitted to the Metropolitan.






REPLY
OF THE
BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
THE APPEAL.
Sydney, July 2nd, 1856.
llevd. Sir,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 28th
May, together with the pamphlet entitled “An Appeal to the
Lord Bishop of Sydney, Metropolitan, &c.”
You assign as one of your reasons for making this Appeal to me,
that the Bishop of Tasmania himself points out this as your only
lawful course, and has further stated, that “ from any Sentence of
the Ordinary, whereby the Clergy may feel themselves aggrieved,
there is very properly an Appeal secured to them by the letters
patent constituting the Bishoprick.”
The right which is thus secured to the Clergy of a Province is
one of a sacred character, and very highly to be prized.
I trust I shall not be suspected of discouraging the exercise of it
on your part, if I point out to you that I can only use the authority
committed to me in the manner prescribed by that power from
which the authority itself is derived.
The interests both of the appellant and of the judge would be
injured by any abuse of the right of making and adjudicating
upon an Appeal.
When therefore I receive from a Presbyter in the province of
which I am Metropolitan, that which purports to be an Appeal, I


am bound, no less in justice to him and to the whole Church than
to myself as judge, to ascertain whether hy virtue of the authority
with which I am entrusted, I have jurisdiction in the matters so
brought before mo.
the nature of my jurisdiction as Metropolitan, and the manner in
which it is to be exercised,are defined in Her Majesty’s Letters Patent
Constituting the See of Sydney the Metropolitan See of Australia
in the following terms :
“ If any person against whom a judgment or decree shall he pronounced
by the said Bishops or their successors or their commissary or commissaries,
shall conceive himself to be aggrieved by such sentence, it shall be lawful
for such person to appeal to the said Bishop of Sydney or his successors,
provided such appeal shall be entered within fifteen days after such sentence
shall have been pronounced,—And we do give and grant to the said Bishop
of Sydney and his successors full power and authority finally to decree
and determine the said Appeal.”
If then I regard your Appeal as one presented to me in my
capacity as Metropolitan, it is obvious I have nothing upon
which to adjudicate.
I have not received the required notice of appeal, nor does it
appear that any sentence has been pronounced.
But if I turn from this strictly legal view of the appeal, I am
led to suppose that you desire an expression of my opinion upon
the matters at issue between your Diocesan ami yourself, in order
that my influence as Metropolitan may be afforded to one party or
the other; that is to say, my official character is to give weight
to my private opinion.
There are many reasons why I should decline to adopt a course
so inconvenient and so unsatisfactory. But it may be sufficient
to assign one.
The matters in question may yet be brought before me in such
a legal form as to compel me to adjudicate upon them. A tribunal
where the judge had already expressed an opinion in favour of one
of the parties, could hardly be regarded as a satisfactory court
of appeal.
However much therefore 1 may desire to facilitate the exercise
of your right of appeal, I cannot adopt the course you wish
me to take.
Legally, I have no ground for interposition ; extrajudicially, I
decline to give an opinion.


1 have already replied to a private communication from one of
the Clergy of Tasmania on this subject, and trusted from the tenor
of his letter that my answer would have been satisfactory
to all parties.
This may indeed be too much to anticipate, but lam not without
hope that the blessing of peace may still be secured without any
sacrifice of consistency or of truth.
1 remain, Uov. Sir,
Your faithful Servant,
F. Sydney.
To the Rev. Dr. Fry.


LETTER
FROM
DR. FRY TO THE BISHOP OF SYDNEY.
Hobart Town, July 23rd , 1856.
My Loud,
In acknowledging the receipt of your reply to my Appeal, I beg
to express to your Lordship my full conviction that in declining to
pronounce any private or official judgment, you were influenced
only by a sense of duty, and I readily acquiesce in your determina-
tion, fully assured that it coincides with the Lord’s will, and that the
event will be for His glory.
There is one subject mentioned in your Lordship’s letter, which
I did not feel justified in referring to in my Appeal, and on which
I must beg permission to make some observations. Your Lordship
says that extrajudicially you decline to give an opinion, and that
you had already replied to Dr. Brown on the subject. As your
Lordship has thus referred me to this reply as expressing your
sentiments, with an intimation of your regret that it did not prove
satisfactory to all parties, it is necessary for me to submit to Your
Lordship the following explanation.
I beg therefore to state that while, for the reasons set forth in the
note to page 23 of my Appeal to which I solicit your consideration,
I cannot recant the statement of the right of private judgment
contained in the Solemn Declaration, in order to substitute in its
place the words suggested by your Lordship.


1 AM WILLING, AND EVEN DESIROUS, TO WITHDRAW IT OR ANY
OTHER AFFIRMATION OF THAT RIGHT WHICH I MAY HAVE MADE, IF I
MAY BE ALLOWED TO SUBSTITUTE FOB IT THE NO LESS CLEAR AND
POSITIVE DECLARATION GIVEN BY YOUR LoRDSHIP IN THE FOLLOWING
WORDS :
“ If the Church prescribes anything contrary to the Word of God, it is
“no man’s duty to yield obedience to such a decree. If an individual, in
“ the exercise of his private judgment, conscientiously and prayerfully
“ seeking the guidance of the Holy Spirit, believes that a prescription of
“ the Church in matters of religion is contrary to the Word of God, it
“ becomes a case of conscience in what way he shall signify his dissent, or
“ oppose what he believes to be an unrighteous decree.”—(Bishop of
Sydney’s letter to Dr. Brown.)
I submit to j r our Lordship’s judgment tlint if this statement of
the principle held by your Lordship be compared with the declara-
tions of the Bishop of Tasmania, it will be found to be the very
opinion which he has condemned
DECLARATION OF THE BISHOP OF
SYDNEY.
“ If the Church prescribes any-
thing contrary to the Word of God,
it is no man’s duty to yield obedience
to such a decree ; if an individual,
in the exercise of his private judg-
ment, conscientiously and prayer-
fully seeking the guidance of the
Holy Spirit, believes that a pre-
scription of the Church in matters
of religion is contrary to the Word
of God, it becomes a case of con-
science in what way he shall signify
his dissent, or oppose what he
believes to be an unrighteous
decree.” (Bishop of Sydney’s
Letter to Dr. Brown.)
STATEMENT OF THE MINISTERS IN
THE SOLEMN DECLARATION.
“ That the Holy Scripture is the
Sole Rule of Faith, and that every
individual has the right to read and
interpret the Word of God by his
private judgment, with the aid of
STATEMENTS OF THE BISHOP OF
TASMANIA.
“ A man is not to be his owu
interpreter of Scripture, in matters
where the Church has recorded her
judgment.”
“ A man is not to judge for him-
self whether the Church contradicts
Scripture.”
“ A man is not at liberty to
reject any doctrine of the Church
because it is contrary to his own
interpretation of Scripture,”
“ The Church has authority to
overrule private judgment.”
“ A man is bound to receive the
Church’s teaching, in opposition to
his own judgment.”
“ Holy Scripture is not a clear
expositor of its own meaning.”
“ The rule of faith to which all
teaching is to be referred, is the
decisions of the Church Catholic
from the beginning, the decrees of
Fathers, Councils, &c. We are not
to determine between different ex-


the Holy Spirit. Denying the positions or doctrines which is true
authority of Tradition, or *the right by our private judgment, but by the
of any Church or Minister to pre-
scribe to individuals in matters of
religion, in opposition to their own
judgment.”
“ This statement of the Solemn
Declaration does not contradict the
right of the Church of England to
frame articles of religion, and to
decree rites and ceremonies (the
same not being contrary to God’s
Word,) which its members are
bound to receive and observe as long
as they continue members of the
Church of England. The article in
the Declaration only asserts that
every Christian may interpret the
Word of God, by his own private
judgment, with the aid of the Holy
Spirit; and declares that no indivi-
dual is bound to receive, on the
authority of any Church or Minister,
Doctrines which the private judg-
ment of such individual may con-
vince him to be contrary to Holy
Scripture.”
interpretation put upon Scripture
in the Writings of the Fathers,
Decrees of Councils, &c.”
“If each man were to be at liberty
to set up his own individual opinion
against the Church, the consequences
would be a state of things similar to
that which St. Peter describes.”
The Church does not declare that
every individual is to interpret for
himself. “ The differences of inter-
pretation prove that Scripture is
not the clear expositor of its own
meaning. The Church of England
does not submit the doctrines of the
Church to the judgment of in-
dividual minds.” —(See pp. 7,8, 9,
of Appeal.)
I would humbly ask your Lordship, what can be more evident
than that the doctrine inculcated and enforced by the Bishop of
Tasmania on the fundamental subject of the rule of faith, is no less
clearly opposed to the declaration of your Lordship than to the
principle set forth in the Solemn Declaration. It is plain beyond
all question, that the rule of faith and right of private judgment, as
stated by your Lordship, exactly and completely coincides with the
Solemn Declaration, and that it is the precise principle which the
Bishop of Tasmania opposes, and for which he has condemned
myself and brethren.
The other principal subject upon which I have appealed to your
Lordship is the imminent danger to which the people of this colony
are exposed through the Romanizing books and principles which
they are instructed to regard and receive as the true teaching of the
Church. Oil this subject j our Lordship remarks in your letter to
Dr. Brown :
“ It is well known that I no think thebe was sufficient cause
for the Solemn Declaration.”


The Solemn Declaration was an earnest warning addressed by
twenty colonial Ministers to the people against Books circulated
among them by certain Clergymen, as calculated to “ undermine
the evangelical truths of religion,” and lead them to adopt the cor-
ruptions and errors of the Church of Rome. If there was sufficient
cause to justify us in publishing such an address impugning the
principles and teaching of Ministers of our own Church and
involving all the evils of division and controversy, that cause must
have been the extreme danger of the people, and the Romish
character of the teaching to which they were exposed.
It, my Lord, now, after full experience of all the disadvantages
and objections which have been attributed to our Declaration of
Protestant Truth in opposition to Romanism, you are of opinion
that it was not put forth without sufficient cause, is it too much to
say that had you been a Colonial Minister, your name would have
been in the list of signatures.
However necessary such a protest and warning were in 1851, they
are infinitely more called for now. Then, there were twenty
Ministers to raise their voices against the Romanizing teaching of
those who should have guarded the people against its influence
instead of insidiously inculcating it under pretence of being the
true teaching of the Church : now, they are reduced to three or
four, and the pulpits and people are given over to those very
Ministers by whom, in the words of the Primate, the members of
the Church are taught to receive and adopt religious 'principles
more in accordance with the Church of Rome than with the Church
of England.
My Lord, I am emboldened to use decided language, for experi-
ence has convinced me that expressions falling below reality weaken
the cause of truth the declaration of which should be as full and
earnest as the importance of the principle which it involves : I ask
then, can thera be any medium in such a work? If it was justified
and called for, was it not a great Christian duty ? If there
was sufficient cause for it, was it not a high act of religious
faithfulness for the preservation of the souls of the people and
the truth of the Gospel ?
It was not, surely, then, unreasonable in me to appeal to your
Lordship, far less in behalf of myself than of the people and of
that Evangelical religion, the preaching of which is so nearly sup-
pressed in this colony. It may have been that there wasnot sufficient
ground for the exercise of your Metropolitan authority, as the


Bishop of Tasmania had not condemned us by any legal form, or
imposed penalties upon us until we should retract our principles
by any sentence pronounced in Court, but that he has done so by
his Episcopal authority is evident from his own declarations. If an
actual judgment after legal proceedings be requisite, in order to
allow of the exercise of the right of Appeal, I fear it will be gene-
rally unavailing as a means of redress, since almost every evil short
of actual deprivation may be imposed upon colonial Ministers at
the sole will of the Bishop.
It may be true that the limitation of fifteen days excludes ray
Appeal from judicial consideration, but I wrote under the belief
that the Bishop of Tasmania would, according to his declaration,
concur in submitting the grievances against which we complained,
to be determined by the judgment of the Metropolitan.
It is evident from the Appeal, that my object was to obtain from
your Lordship such a declaration of the principles of the Church on
the subjects at issue, as would promote the cause of truth in the
minds of the people now delivered over to a system of religious
teaching if not openly Romanizing,* at least bitterly opposed to
Protestant and Evangelical principles. If I have done wrong in
so urgently intreating your Lordship to stop the progress of a false
Gospel, which not only misleads the minds of the people, but renders
them opposers of Spiritual religion so that their hearts are hardened
against the truth and set against that conversion by which alone
they can be saved, —I must solicit your Lordship’s indulgence, pray-
♦ In proof of this, it may be mentioned that Miss Sewel’s and Paget’s
and Gresley’s Tracts are disseminated and lent among the young, many
of whom use the Steps to the Altar as a manual of devotion, supposing
that they conform to the Bishop’s will, and imitate what he has declared
to be the practice of his family. On a recent occasion, the Christian
Remembrancer for January, 1848, belonging to the Bishop of Tasmania,
was circulated by persons connected with the Bishop among some young
females, to degrade the character of Luther and the Reformation.
This work states “ that Luther was literally and wholly without conscience
or fear,” —“ unscrupulously gross and foul-mouthed, with that extremity
of insolence noticed in the crowd at a hustings.” “ His marriage was
ignominious, and a deep blow to his self-respect.” “He broke from the
Church, —the schism was consummated, —he committed the act of
rebellion.” “ The Lutheran dogma of justification by faith is incon-
sistent with the first principles of common sense and natural religion.
The Church has always admitted good works into a regular place in man’s
justification. It was quite a new doctrine in the Christian world that
the goodness of the person had nothing to do with his being accounted
good by God, &c.”


ing you to consider the extreme importance of the principles
involved and the responsibility laid upon me.
I may say, my hope that your Lordship might be led to inter-
fere for the preservation of the people by a decided declaration of
Evangelical principles was strengthened by the example of the
venerable Primate, and the letter which he sent in reply to an
address very similar to my Appeal. I must also pray your Lordship
to forgive me for the opinion which I feel bound to express, that I
cannot see how the full expression of your conviction of what is
the true teaching of the Church of England would have interfered
with any future exercise of your judicial authority, more than the
brief statement of your principles in the letter to Dr. Brown.
It surely cannot be held that a Metropolitan Bishop is not to
instruct the people under his jurisdiction, or to warn them against
teaching which he may deem subversive of the truth in their minds
and from which they may be preserved by his counsel, because he
may be called upon afterwards to pronounce judgment in a case
connected with such teaching. "
On the contrary, it seems to me that there is therefore the greater
reason for his giving such general instruction and admonition as
may settle men’s minds, and probably remove differences and
prevent the measures which would render an exercise of his judicial
authority necessary. In thus expressing my own feeling, I presume
not to impugn your Lordship’s determination or to complain of
any personal grievance. My regret is for the people who might
have been preserved from the calamity of being given over to the
indefatigable dissemination of a nominal Gospel deadened and
shrouded in Romanism.
Your Lordship says that “ your opinion respecting the Solemn
Declaration was well known.” Thankful and glad lam that
such is the case with those among whom you deliver your testimony
to the pure and saving truths of the Gospel, and if I have any
consolation in present trouble and contention, it is in the belief
that our Declaration, and the .causes of it, have proved suggestive,
and, it may be, a warning to others. But, my Lord, I would
solemnly ask you, in the name of our Divine Master, —Where, in
order to preserve His truth and promote His cause, should your
opinion be best known and most fully declared? Where do the
souls of the Lord’s people most need it? Where would our Lord have
you make it known with the utmost power, and with such urgency
of admonition as would render it most effective ? Surely, my Lord,


here in this land, whore of those who signed that Solemn Declara-
tion some are now silent in death, while most of the remainder have
either recanted their principles or been driven to other countries.
It is true that the principle affirmed by your Lordship concerning
the right of Private Judgment, and your opinion respecting the
Solemn Declaration, are sufficient to satisfy myself and brethren
that your Lordship holds that fundamental principle of
Protestantism for which we are condemned ; but as exercising a
saving influence upon the people, as strengthening our hands, or as
discouraging the advocates of Romanizing principles and leading
them to serious consideration, the brief expression|of your sentiments
in Dr. Brown’s letter is entirely unavailing. To this end, nothing
else will be effectual but a direct testimony, a clear and full declara-
tion of Protestant principles, set against the Romanizing teaching
which we endeavoured to expose and counteract in the Solemn
Declaration.
But, my Lord, however much to be regretted, I am compelled to
say that your letter so far from contributing to these desired objects,
has only had the effect of inducing Dr. Brown to recant the assertion
of the right of private judgment in the Solemn Declaration, and to
substitute another statement which Romanists themselves would
concur in, and thereby to detach himself from us, and afford those
by whom" we are condemned, ground for declaring that he has
retracted his principles. It has thus contributed to confirm in error
the advocates of Romanizing teaching, and to enable them to
inculcate their principles, and carry out with greater success their
measures against Evangelical religion. We may well say, “ all
this is against us,” but while we lament it for the sake of others, wo
are not less confident of the result, which we shall patiently abide,
trusting that the Lord will still enable us to contend for the faith
earnestly and unto the end.
According to the testimony of the Primate, our voices were raised
in defence of Evangelical truth against the dissemination of Romish
principles in our Church; and in your Lordship’s opinion there
“ was sufficient cause for our warning and protest.” Is it not a
strange thing that for an act of ministerial faithfulness thus recog-
nised as necessary under such high sanction we should suffer for
so many years all the evils of being condemned by the Bishop of
Tasmania as unsound and schismatic, and be exposed to such
penalties and persecutions as should have compelled many to
recant and some to leave the colony ?


That so great an injury and injustice should be inflicted upon
myself and other ministers without hope of relief from the chief
authorities of the Church is sufficiently deplorable, but is as nothing
compared to the Divine judgment which must follow a continued
and permitted prohibition of Evangelical principles. The Lord
sees His Word dishonoured as incapable of explaining its own
meaning,—the preachers of His Gospel condemned, —the principles
of the Antichristian Apostasy inculcated in its place, and every
appeal for redress What will bo the end of these
things? The Lord’s people are abandoned, —a great opportunitj r is
lost. God grant that he may not set aside those who have neglected
it. It is true that your Lordship declares that our protestation and
warning against the insidious inculcation of Romanism, under the
pretext of teaching the true principles of the Church of England,
were called for by a sufficient cause, and such a declaration goestho
whole length of expressing your approbation and concurrence.
It is also true that you have declared in even stronger terms than
those which we have used, that you hold the principle of private
judgment, arid that you repudiate the claim ot any authority in the
Church to oblige us to receive its teaching in opposition to our own
convictions of Scriptural truth, and this is the precise principle for
which we have been condemned. But your Lordship’s complete
agreement with us only renders it more distressing that while you
hold with us the principles on which the preservation of Evan-
gelical religion in this colony depends, you yet feel unable to
declare them in such a manner as would preserve the people from
being misled, and would oppose the suppression of Gospel preaching.
In regard to my own condition, I am compelled to say that your
Lordship’s letter declining to pronounce an opinion concerning the
condemnation and penalties imposed upon myself and the other
ministers who signed the Solemn Declaration, has deprived me not
only of hope of redress but of continuance in my present position.
In 1851, the Senior Chaplain (Dr. Bedford,) the Rural Dean (Mr.
Palmer,) and the Rev. Mr. Medland, all stationed in Hobart Town,
united with me in the Solemn Declaration : the first two are dead,
and the third has been compelled to leave the colony through
unceasing persecution. I am now isolated in the midst of five
ministers concurring in the Bishop’s condemnation of my religious
principles, and uniting in the measures and penalties adopted to
coerce me to recant. It would be as wearisome as painful to detail
the harassing and distressing proceedings had recourse to, even so


fur as to induce persons to discontinue friendly or ministerial
intercourse with myself and family, and to injure my reputation
and weaken my influence. That I have been enabled so long to
continue in a position so full of difficulties and mortifications, and
with so many obstructions to my ministry, which in itself is
peculiarly arduous, I can only attribute to a surprising manifesta-
tion of Divine mercy and protection. But the consideration is now
forced upon me, that while 1 am worn out in body and in spirit,
the cause of Evangelical religion is the less weakened and
suppressed, and that a longer continuance in hopeless endurance
and resistance is little else than a useless sacrifice, while at the
same time' the evil has become so extreme, that it can only bo
repaired by a remedy no less extreme.*
I remain,
Your Lordship’s faithful Servant,
* No reply has hoen received to this letter.
BURNET, PRINTER.


*


