





THE
TORRES STRAITS
ROUTE.
FROM
QUEENSLAND TO ENGLAND,
BY THE
BRITISH-INDIA STRAM NAVIGATION COMPANY'S ROYAL
MAIL STEAMER
“CHYEBASSA.”
BY
E. J. BANFIELD
Travelling Correspondent of the “ Townsville Daily Bulletin."
REPRINTED BY SPECIAL PERMISSION.
Townsbille:
PRINTED BY T. WILLMETT, FLINDERS STREET.
1885.


BRITISH INDIA
stciiii| A\auiijitlim( (f om|iaau
(LIMITED).
INCORPORATED 1866.
Under Contract with Her Majesty's Government and the Governments
of India and Queensland for Mail Services to Ports in India ,
East Africa, Arabia, Persia, liurmah, and Queensland.
£m-ctarit.
P. MACNAUGHTAN, Esa., 13 AUSTIN FRIARS, LONDON, E.C.
AND 203, WEST GEORGE STREET, GLASGOW/
yriudjKil ,At|nrrir:i.
, MACKINNON. MACKENZIE & Co.,
Managing Agents in India.
BINNY & Co.
GRAY, DAWES & CO., 13, Austin Friars, E.C.
BRITISH INDIA AND QUEENSLAND
AGENCY CO., Ltd.,
;m& tbssagr iitolars,
GELLATLY, HANKEY, SEWELL A CO,,
100, Lcadenhall Street, E.C. 31, Fall Mall, London, B.W. Albert Square, Man-
chester. 1, Fenwick Buildings, Liverpool, and 101, St. Vinoent
Street, Glasgow.
CALCUTTA
BOMBAY
KURRACHEE ..
MADRAS
LONDON
BRISBANE ....


THE
TORRES STRAITS
ROUTE.
FROM
QUEENSLAND TO ENGLAND,
BY THE
BRITISH-INDIA STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY'S ROYAL
MAIL STEAMER
“ CHYEBASSA.”
BY
E. J. BANFIELD
Travelling Correspondent of the “ Townsville Daily Bulletin?
REPRINTED BY SPECIAL PERMISSION.
Sofonsbtllc:
PRINTED BY T. WILLMETT, FLINDERS STREET.
t 885.




INTRODUCTION.
X ow-a - ijAYH, the journey from almost any part of Australia to the old
country is an undertaking so simple and easy, it calls for so little preparation
on the part of the individual, and, perhaps what is more to the point, can bo
accomplished with such an insignificant strain upon the purse, that the average
colonist very readily convinces himself that an occasional trip home is one of
the duties that England expects every loyal subject to undertake. The
exiled BritOn must neods re-visit the scenes of his youth, if only to
astonish “ the old people ” with the narration of his life in the colonies, no
matter how commonplace and ordinary his lot has been. Many a tune and
oft his imagination—transcendent and strong of flight—has pictured the
home of his youthful days, and often has he longed—and longed with ever
increasing vigor—to traverse .the separating seas over which his imagina-
tion scarce stoops to soar, and to re-visit in the body those scenes which
absence has made so fond and old associations so sacred. The born
Australian again is filled -with unrest until he has familiarised himself with
the land where his fathers dwelt; until he has seen the magnificence and
wealth of which his country boasts; until he knows something by personal
observation of the places and buildings made famous by history or consecrated
by the deeds and works of the great men of by-gone days. Thus it is that colo-
nists of all sorts and conditions the more readily conceive that they are only
fulfilling a duty which they owe the mother-country when they pay her a visit
When first one happens to think of such an undertaking ho very naturally smiles
—perhaps grimly when ho recalls his financial state —and graciously puts
the question by. It soon recurs to him, and he begins to think rather
seriously of it. The next processes he finds pleasantly easy, for his
inquiries as to amount of passage-money, time occupied, &c., &c., cannot but
convince him that he has been neglecting a duty by not having before
availed himself of such advantages. Everything is arranged on the spot,
and in a few weeks aged parents at home have welcomed back their son, and
perhaps his wife and many smaller editions, or, it may be a genuine
Australian is a hero among the companions of his father’s youth. After
all, the trip to the old country has lost half of its romance, and, no doubt,
some considerable proportion of its charm, by being robbed of all the dreari-
ness and discomforts which at one time attended a voyage. The modem
traveller is totally deprived of the wholesome and inspiriting privilege of
grumbling at the means of conveyance which he finds at his service, and
of the incidents of shipboard life ; and, if he be a true Briton, will be
constrained to vent his discontent on such indifferent and wayward objects
' B 2


as the weather or the sportful ocean. He cannot even flatter himself that
there is in the least degree the element of adventure about the trip home.
The odds of being shipwrecked and tossed about for a week or two
upon a raft made of ancient hen-coops, and being cast upon a deserted
island, where highly-flavored birds’ eggs, seal’s blood, and sea weeds are
perennial luxuries, are so remote that they do not come within calculation.
No romance—although there may be an abundance of sentiment —attaches
to a voyage in an ocean-going steamer. In these latter days a sea trip
deserves to be regarded more in the light of a holiday excursion than a
voyage, especially when the traveller uses ordinary discrimination in the
choice of routes and boats. Given that he is unencumbered, and he need
not, like IMartha of old, trouble himself about many things. He will
generally find some humble and domesticated personage on board to under-
take all responsibility concerning “ the many things ” that one does require
on a voyage. He provides himself with a portmanteau, containing a
change or so of what Artemus "Ward would call boiled rags, &c., secures a
ticket, and steps on board. There he is sure to find some who will give a
friendly greeting, and peradvcnture some one from whom at the termina-
tion of the voyage he will part with feelings of genuine gratitude for
having provided that piquancy and crispness to his life, by having at the
outset taken pains to declare himself an enemy. Released from all
responsibility of providing for his everyday needs, and having banished
for the time being the petty duties as well as the great concerns of life, the
traveller during the voyage will live in luxurious ease, and at the termi-
nation discover that he has, like the eagle, renewed his yotith. He will
plunge into the business of the world again with refreshed energy, and be
compelled to own that the time spent on the sea has been in the highest
degree profitable and beneficial.


THE
BRITISH-INDIA STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY.
The purpose of this paper is to relate the experiences enjoyed in the
British-India Steam Navigation Company’s steamer Chyebassa, during a
voyage from Queensland to England via the Torres Straits route. There-
fore X must crave for a few remarks anent the Australian connection of
this favorite company. At the outset I would, with deference due and
without prejudice, ask my readers to compare the routes to Aden (whence
all roads lead direct to London) of the Peninsular and Oriental and Orient
Companies with that of the British-India Steam Navigation Company.
The former track, by Adelaide and Cape Leuwin, is so well known that to
say anything at all about it savor of reflection on the amount of
information possessed by the general reader. Yet, indeed, that track is so
dreary and monotonous, so entirely innocent of that element so much
desired and so keenly relished by your traveller —change, that the unvarnished
reproduction of that highly-sensational record known as the ‘ ‘ log ’ ’ would be
about the most startling narrative of a long voyage that could bo afforded.
Compare, then, that uninteresting route with that which I shall endeavour
to faithfully describe. The route of the steamers of the 8.1.5. N. Company
falls in lines pleasant enough to attract travellers from the South. AVho
would compare the monotony of the passage from Melbourne to Adelaide,
round Cape Leuwin to Aden and so on, to the series of excursion trips
which the traveller enjoys who journeys from Melbourne overland to
Sydney, thence to Brisbane, where he could arrange to stop long enough to
acquaint himself with the great natural beauties of the metropolis and its
surroundings; • thence in the steamer of his choice to Rockhampton, where
another respite from the sea would he afforded. Then comes Mackay,
where the traveller will find himself among sugar plantations and the like;
then he will he able to gorge himself with the delightful scenery of Whit-
sunday Passage, and so on along a picturesque coast to Bowen —pretty but
unfortunate Bowen ; thence Townsville—hot, arid, hut go-ahead and pro-
sperous Townsville, where another day ashore is allowed; thence among
lovely islands, and skirting along a wild and changeful coast to Cooktown,
and there another day ashore ; thence up to and through Albany Passage,
a place of even greater beauty than any we have yet passed, through
Torres Straits, on to Thursday Island, and another run ashore; thence
across the Gulf of Carpentaria, and Arafura Sea; westward along the North
of Australia, and past Timor, Sandalwood Island or Sumha, Sumhawa, the
giant peak of Lombok, past Banjoewangie, up through the narrow Straits of
Bali; along the changeful coast of Java to Batavia, and here another stay ;
then through the Straits of Sunda; within view of the remnants of Mount
Krackatoa which the memorable earthquake of August, 1883, rent in twain :


thence to Colombo, and so to Aden. The pleasing characteristic of this
route is that it carries one along within sight of land almost all the
way. Until Sumatra fades in the distance land is never from one’s sight
for more than a day at a stretch; indeed, for the most part, picturesque
coast scenery is always in view. Compare this with the monotony of the
passage from Adelaide to Aden.
Suppose we start then from the Australian headquarters of the P. &0.
and Orient Companies’ liners—Sydney, and voyage to Brisbane in one of
the superbly-fitted and fleet boats of the Queensland Steamship Company,
treating the trip throughout as a holiday tour. At Brisbane the traveller
will find oneof the 8.1.5. N Company’s mail boats, and will be able to secure a
cabin replete with comfort for the journey to Europe. Such substantial
and noteworthy service has the 8.1.5. N. Company done the State of
Queensland that it is entitled to large consideration. According to the
latest handbook, the company is “under contract with Her Majesty’s
Government, and the Governments of India and. Queensland, for mail
services to ports in India, East Africa, Arabia, Persia, Burmah, and
Queensland. ’ ’ It might also be said that the Company, by its relations with
the Netherlands-Indo Steam Navigation Company and other lines,
possesses the means of communication with all those vast, populous, and
interesting islands to the North of Australia, with the Malay Peninsula,
and with the principal ports of China. The advantage which must
eventually accrue to Australia by direct communication—which means
nothing less than the speedy and regular interchange of commodities and
ideas —with the “barbaric East,” are now so generally recognised, the
steps already taken to encourage and to foster a more intimate relationship,
' and to dissipate old-fashioned and unstable prejudices, have been followed
by such substantial promises of success, that it does not become me to
elaborate thereon. I propose simply to unroll a panorama of a voyage to
England, with, perhaps, some faint sketches of the East as a kind of side
show. The yearly subsidy paid by the Government of Queensland to the
8.1.5. N. Company for the conveyance of mails is by no means an
extravagant one. There be very few in Queensland who begrudge the
sura (£55,000), for, in addition to the regular monthly mail boat, provided
for by the terms of. contract, there are extra boats which give fortnightly
communication with Europe and the East. All the boats bring out,
immigrants and cargo at less charges for freight than those ruling between
Sydney and some of the ports of North Queensland. The Company’s
relationship with Queensland must prove in the highest respect beneficial
to England’s youngest and “ most vigorous colony ” —as Miss Braddon has
been pleased to designate the territory over which the Hon. Samuel and his
colleagues hold sway. Miss Braddon applied the term “ vigorous ” anterior
to the magnificent attempt at annexation by Sir Thomas MTlwraith. What
term will be strong enough when she next takes a character from “the
lonely sheep walks” of Queensland? But something more about the
company. The benefits conferred on North Queensland by the 8.1.5. N.
Company have been sufficiently conspicuous to excite the wholesale envy of
a very strong party in the metropolis of the colony. This party, doubtless,
had been endeavouring to govern the “most vigorous colony” on the
centralising principle which has made Melbourne and Sydney what they are
at the expense of less-favored towns in their respective colonies. Happily
for Townsville; and indeed, for all the ports in the North of Queensland,
the desire to choke off the Company never got beyond conception. What


may be expected from the Company in the future, when the colony shall
declare that the time has arrived for «a quicker mail route, is sufficiently
exemplified by the class of boats that will be engaged in the trade so soon
as extra speed is required. Then, with a service maintained by a fleet of
boats such as the Dacca, Manora (one of the finest boats afloat), and the
Quetta, the ports of North Queensland would be placed in a position that
would make the short-sighted merchants of Brisbane delirious with envy,
while the whole colony would share in the benefits. The mail subsidy at
present awarded the Company is quite insignificant when compared with
the solid prosperity that each successive steamer conveys to Northern ports,
and, therefore, a favorable answer to the question of continued support to
the Torres Straits mail route should be vigorously demanded of every
candidate seeking the suffrages of Northern electors.
The traveller will find the steamers of the Company comfortable and
roomy, fitted with punkahs and all other appliances and conveniences
necessary to temper the heat of the tropics to the constitution and feelings
of the denizens of Southern Australia. With regard to the not altogether
unimportant details of eating and drinking, the traveller will find himself
in clover. The saloon bills of fare are as liberal and as varied as those
issued in the very best hotels of Sydney, and the tables in the second-class
saloon arc set out with far better food, both with regard to quality and
cookery, than the average mistress, with the aid of a professional cook,
offers for the delectation of her lord and master ashore. It is from personal
experience of each class that I can vouch for the unusual excellence and
wholesomcness of the fare provided. I imagine that I have said enough to
convince that the traveller who patronises the Torres Straits route to Europe
will find that his lines have fallen in very pleasant places.
THE VOYAGE.
It was early in the evening of the 26th April, 1884, that, with a travelling
companion, I boarded the Q.R.M.S.' Chyebassa as she lay at anchor in
Cleveland Bay, off Bay Rock—some six miles from Townsville. Although
the Chyebassa is not one of the best boats on the line, she represents a good
and comfortable class of ocean-going steamers. It was not surprising,
then, that she was crowded with passengers, proving what, indeed, had
never been questioned, that the line is popular with Queenslanders. But,
besides those who might have been induced to patronise the line from
patriotic or interested motives, there were passengers from New Zealand,
and from New South Wales, and one, I believe, from Victoria.
The vessel was under the command of Captain A. Morris, who devoted
no small amount of attention to his passengers, while displaying all the
qualities essential in a careful and thoroughly competent navigator. He
was surrounded by hardworking officers, over whom Mr. Vine—the most
popular man in the ship—was in authority. I had been favored with an
introduction to Captain Morris by Captain Grainger, late of the 8.1.5. N.
Company’sManora, andnowheadof theshippingdepartmentof Messrs. Bums,
Philp, Sc Co.’s Townsville office. The magnitude of the shipping business
of a firm which can afford to retain the services of a gentleman of Captain
Grainger’s experience and ability can be well understood. It is not,


therefore, on the present occasion necessary to enlarge on the subject, nor
upon the general prosperity of Townsville, which has risen within a few
years from comparative insignificance to the position of second port in the
colony of Queensland. It may be said, however, that the go-ahead and
enterprising spirit displayed by Messrs. Bums, Philp, & Co. has assisted
greatly in the development of the resources not only of Townsville, but of
the whole of Northern Queensland.
"When we boarded the Chyebassa, the native crew were engaged receiving
from the lighters the last of the cargo from Townsville, so that “ the night
was at odds with morning, ” which was -which before the anchor was
lifted. Before daylight the following morning we had passed the string of
islets between Bay Rock and Cardwell, and were in view of the strangely
heaped-up and broken masses of the coast x*ange which forms the back-
ground of that port, and an almost insurmountable barrier against traffic
inland. This range we had in view, almost without interruption, until we
reached Cooktown, on the morning of Tuesday, the ‘29th April. Here
many of the passengers took the opportunity of stretching their legs
ashore ; others, whose spirits were indeed willing to follow suit, found
themselves so weak and nervous after the wrestling with the spirit Neptune
at the outset of the voyage that even the fair land about Cooktown had no
charms for them. Early on the second morning after leaving Cooktown
the Chyebassa steamed through Albany Passage, among a group of small
islands —islands round which the sea, which was “ darkly, deeply,
beautifully blue,” was slowly, scarcely perceptibly, heaving beneath the
level rays of the freshly risen sun. Above a quiet bay in which a couple of
, small vessels were lying peacefully at anchor, we saw the lonely residence
of Mr. Jardine, a wealthy squatter. There are strange stories current with
regard to the circumstances which induced Mr. Jardine to take up his
abode so far and so isolated, from the haunts of men. To the lover of all
that is grand yet reposeful in scenery, to one who desires to absolve himself
from the pleasures and conventionalities of city life, to the “world
forgetting, by the world forgot,” no finer place than Somerset - could be
found. Certainly a murmur and a greeting from the outside world comes
with the passing of each steamer, for the channel leads within a stone’s
throw of the points which partially enclose the tiny bay, and a flag is run
up to the mast-head. AVe could see the children skipping about on the
green in front of the house, and then tugging away to hoist the flag in
reply to our greeting. But the flag had scarcely fluttered out before a
point on the mainland shut out the view of the bay, and soon the lonely
homestead was forgotten in the interest evoked by the perusal of other
scenes. Towards the middle of the day anchor was dropped oft'
Thursday Island, the most important of a group off Cape York, among
which the days of the week have been distributed so far as the islands go.
Thursday Island is the centre of the pearl-shelling stations, which are
scattered among the islands and along the shores of Cape York, and is the
point whence most of the earlier expeditions to New Guinea started. It
was Mr. Chester, the Government representative here, who, under the
command of Sir Thomas MTlwraith, made that humble attempt at annexa-
tion, which, although it excited the scorn of Lord Derby, brought together
the heads of the Governments of the various colonies, who conspired in
secret—and that was all. It was evening before the Chyebassa had on
board all the pearl-shell that had accumulated since the passing of the last
boat, and with the closing of the night we lost the last view of Australia;


In the morning no land was in sight, and we set about toilfully and with
much deliberation to kill time in the easiest and most pleasant manner.
By this time we were quite accustomed to the eccentricities of the good
ship, and were thoroughly well satisfied with her steaming qualities and
her go-ahead business-like behaviour. Ample room was provided for
promenading beneath thick double awnings, and there were inviting lounges
and chairs when the required amount of exercise had been taken. A word
here with regard to the not altogether unimportant detail of fare may be
not out of place. It will be sufficient to reproduce an everyday bill of
fare —such a one as was current on the 9th of May;—The Saloon —Breakfast:
Porridge, Findon haddocks, rump steak and champignons, liver cutlets,
grilled bacon and potato chips, mince collops, poached eggs on toast,
devilled goose, curry and rice, preserves, tea, coffee, and cocoa. Tiffin
(1 p.m.): Jacket potatoes, cold ham, cold corned beef, salmon, cold lamb
and mint sauce, cold fowl and tongue, salad, fruit, biscuits, &c. Dinner
(7 p.m.): Mock turtle and gravy soups; entrees —chicken cutlets, ragout
oxtail; joints—roast sirloin of beef and Yorkshire pudding, boiled turkey
and oyster sauce, roast goose, roast mutton and rod currant jelly, curry,
brawn; sweets--blackcap pudding, tipsy cake, fruity jellies, Victoria
sandwiches, tartlets, ices ; dessert; coffee. Thus for the saloon, and now
for the second-class—Breakfast (8 a.m.) : Mutton chops, cutlets, Irish
stew, hashed duck, curry and rice, potatoes, toast, jams and marmalades,
tea and coffee. Dinner (1 p.m.): Oxtail soup, roast steak and kidney pie,
mutton and caper sauce, roast beef, baked and boiled potatoes, curry and
rice; sweets —sago pudding, fruit pie, jam tartlets ; dessert. Tea (5.30
p.m.): Fish, cold meats, preserves, biscuits. None but a fidgety old maid
or snarling selfish old bachelor could take exception to the accommodation
set apart for second-class passengers, taking the Chyebassa as an average
boat, and none but individuals whose digestive organs were at odds with
food of every kind would sneeze at the meals provided.
About this time I was favored with the attention of several of the officers,
who had been busily engaged while travelling along the Queensland coast
overlooking the disposition of cargo, and generally getting matters square
for the voyage, and acquired some information concerning the working of
the vessel, more particularly with regard to the colored crew, which it may
not be out of place to insert here. But, before touching the crew, it is but
meet to say something particular about the captain and officers —who are
not colored, but about tlic “whitest ” men I have ever met. Upon the ship
I need not waste any ink. She is too well known in Queensland to call for
description. Captain A. Morris enjoys the reputation of being a thorough
seaman, and were it necessary one could really vouch for the other qualities
possessed by him, which arc essential to the commander of a ship
which carries to and fro between distant ports crowds of passengers and
large cargoes. The captain of such a large vessel must be something of a
diplomat if he desires to see harmony among his passengers. Some one
who speaks with authority, not as a scribe, has said that the great devices
for killing time on board ship are quarrelling and flirting. For the latter
delight the siue qua non, alas, is not always available; but there be few
ships in which quarrelling cannot be indulged to one’s heart’s content.
But then,the captain, if he be politic, will so order the ship’s affairs that
unpleasantness, much more quarrelling, will be next to impossible.-* l l do
not imagine for an instant that Captain Morris had to exercise any discretion
for the prevention of unpleasantness among his passengers; but credit


must be given him for the qualities necessary to make society harmonious.
As for the officers, from Mr. Vino (the first) downwards, I can only say
that they were most attentive to their duties, and most obliging to the
passengers. If a demand on Mr. Vine’s attention were made, it was so
readily and pleasantly satisfied, that one felt almost grieved that he could
not always be demanding information. Under Messrs. Gillies (chief
steward) and Moore (second); with a numerous staff of Portuguese waiters,
the more animal pleasures of the passengers were efficiently attended to.
During the day one could afford a little time for the study of the habits
and character of the haughty Hindoo sailormen, by whom the ship was
manned. There was about them none of that joviality, open-heartedness,
and rollicking good humor which landsmen are proud to think attach to
the title of “ a British sailor.” They had no straw hats to stick at the
back of their heads without visible means of support; their trousers were
neither too long nor too loose, and did not require perpetually “hitching
up;” their cheeks were not forever “tumorous” with quids of .pigtail;
they were not always calling out, “Hi, hi, my hearty,” nor plunging
their knives into the planks to find a soft one to lie down on ; they didn’t
sing “Black-eyed Susan,” or “Kitty is my Darling,” or “Nancy Lee;” nor
did they spin yarns about what used to occur when they were “younkers.”
In fact, there was not about the manliest of them, in the smallest
degree, the semblance of an old salt of whom Dibdin sang. Their titles,
were also different from those enjoyed by British sailors. There was the
serang, who corresponded to the boatswain ; tindal, boats wain’s mate; second
tindal, second boatswain’s mate; cassab, lamp-trimmer; lascars, A.Bs. ;
topaz, sweeper; bhandarry, cook. Then there was the engine crow with
serangs, tindals, cassabs, donkeyman (for which title there does not appear
to be any synonym in Hiridostanee), tail wallahs (greasers), hog wallahs
(firemen), coal wallahs (trimmers), and bhandarry (cook). Each Sunday
morning before divine service ' all these men, dressed in their best,
mustered aft. The raiment of the serangs was perfectly gorgeous, and they
carried themselves with all the pomp which their high station in life and
gorgeous attire demanded. The men assume different costumes According to
their office. "When dressed out for Sunday morning’s inspection by the
Captain they look picturesque enough, but when one happened to know-
that in many cases the fine Indinn linen covered the dirty greasy garments
of everyday wear a vast deal of sentiment was lost. Orders were given
by the officers in Hindostanee, and instead of the homely, hearty cry—
“ Lower away the peak halyards I Hurry up there! Hurry up!” AVe
have something like this—“ Chordao peak hanger I Chillow ! Chillow ! ”
Then the tindal blows a plaintive but withal penetrative strain on his
whistle, and the men tail down to the proper place. The head man of the
mob—who is usually the biggest and the laziest —clutches hold of the rope,
and commences in very slow time a melancholy recitative. The others, in
unison, utter melancholy litantic responses. Presently the leader gives the
rope a gentle tug, and the others do ditto. Gradually the recitative
becomes a doleful chant, the vocalisation being emphasied by a proportionate
amount of work. By the time the music is being rendered in double quick
time some work is being done, and then the mob abandon the responses,
and give voice in strict time to deep-drawn methodic “ Gnahs,” while
above all floats the wild, shrill, but inspiring chant of the leader. And so,
after an intolerable deal of vocalisation, and what to Britishers would be a
most miserably small pennyworth of work, the halyards are lowered. In


comparison with the jovial cheery “ shanties ” of the British tar, the songs
of the Hindoo sailor are as dismal as the concerted bowlings of a pack of
half-starved hyaenas. When a company of them is piped up to perform
some duty, one would imagine that the men had assembled for the purpose
of intoning a dreary litany, and that work was far from their thoughts.
If the work really required the expenditure of muscles, the “Gnahs,” in
response to the leader’s chant, were expressed with desperate emphasis, and
in splendid time, but if the burden was light, the leader would break oft
and execute a solo with “ variegations,” while the men stood by, ready to
join in the chorus. The Hindoos, I was told, are good fair-weather sailors,
and from my own observation, I am fain to conclude that they are no-
where in a squall. They do not work in watches ; their regular hours are
from five a.m. to five p.m., and they are liable to be whistled up at any
hour of the night to perform extra work. They live on rice and curry (the
curry being made with the smallest possible modicum of meat), a little fish
now and again, and a good deal of rancid ghee. With the ghee that
happens to remain after a meal they anoint their heads, consequently the
presence of a Hindoo sailor is felt before he is seen in propria, persona.
Moreover, he is nothing if not religious, and his religion is so intimately
related to the petty duties of everyday life, that the utmost care has to be
taken, lest, inadvertently, his piety be shocked The food which he eats
and the water he drinks are consecrated to his use, and no deeper insult
can be given by a despised “ Euglisee ” man than to touch with his profane
hands that which has been set apart for the Hindoos’ consumption. If a
white man were unwittingly to take a dipper of water from one of their
barrels, there would be a great disturbance and probably a strike of all
hands, unless the offence were propitiated by the throwing away of the
remainder of the defiled water.
Soon after tearing Thursday Island, fields of pumice-stone were met with.
This had been evacuated from Krackatoa, the volcano of the Straits of Sunda,
which was in eruption in August, 1883. It was floating amidst light scum
of a dingy yellow color, which here and there was veined and streaked with
dark blue lines, where the restless swell had broken through and separated
the compact mass. We passengers with nets fished up lumps of the pumice,
to which fragile shell-fish had attached themselves. Some endeavoured to
rear the shell-fish—which the officers called sea-birds —but with indifferent
•success. They kept them in jars of salt water, which they were at pains to
change every few hours, and would whistle to them for hours together in
the belief that in time to come the sea-birds would learn to warble; but,
alas, in a few days those jars breathed and gave such odors that the
graceful occupants had to be returned to their natural element, their last
state being, so far as one’s nasal organs could perceive, considerably worse
than the first. It was several days after we had passed through the Straits
of Sunda, and by the volcano of Krackatoa, that the last streaks of pumice-
stone were met with, and this led us into the bewildering contemplation of
how vast an expanse of ocean is mottled and lined with the strange
substance which the volcano in its throes of August, 1883, sent forth.
Long before Timor—the land of ponies and cattle which never grow
bigger than calves—came in sight, we had accustomed ourselves to life on
shipboard, and were in the fullest enjoyment of those wild and stirring
delights to which all who brave the dangers of the deep must abandon them-
selves. Chief among these delights were eating and sleeping. On shore,
dinner at the best is but a prosaic and common-place entertainment, but on


p.hlpboard it becomes the acme of the day’s pleasures, the theme of hourly
thoughts, and, I am bound to say, the stimulant to ghastly and gruesome
nightmares. It is a lively comedy if the sea be calm, and the passengers
in genial spirits—a drama, oft evoking the most intense feeling if the sea
be rough and a plate of scalding soup be dashed down the back of one’s
neck by an all too eager “boy.” Then there were evenings to be passed
away. It was pleasant to diversify the prescribed amusements of
quarrelling, flirting, and eating by leaning over the bow's at eventide and
allowing the imagination to wander over and waste itself upon the dreary
stretch of water. A modern writer, whose speech betrayeth him, says—
“ Imagination’s the grandest o’ a’ our faculties—it loups ower obstacles.”
It was easy then, when long hours were devoted to lonely contemplation, to
invoke the spirits of the vasty deep until it and the night air were peopled
with wierd bodiless creations of fable and romance, until, obedient'to will—
“ Strange birds around the vessel shrieked and flew,
Strange shapes, like shadows, through the clear sky grew;
As our lone ship, wide-winged, came riding through;
Churning to foam the smooth and sleeping blue.”
Strange lights there* were in reality, to illumine the blackness of the sea—
lights that played and darted about the bows, and sparkled in the dead
white foam that hissed and curled away from our track. There were paths
of light leading across the wrinkled sea up to its uttermost verge towards
the more brilliant stars, and a w T ide track of moving tossing lights to mark
the course along which we had sped. But all our evenings were not spent
in the mystical regions of romance, or in the solemn contemplation of the
marvels of the deep. There was band music to be played, songs to be
sung, dances to be danced, and last there was sleep for those weighed down
■with heavy sea air and solid dinners.
After passing Timor, we sighted a few small islands, blue dots, which, in
the dazzling light of the early morning, appeared poised midway between
sky and water —half celestial, half terrestrial—but altogether .lovely.
Then we saw Sumba (or Sandalwood Island), then Sumbawa, then Lombok,
with the mighty mountain of that name asserting its greatness far above the
grey mists and the tumbled masses of fleecy clouds; then Bali with its
mountain scarcely inferior in height to Lombok. On the evening of the 7th
the great heart of the vessel ceased to beat. We were then in the Straits of
Bali, off Banjowangie, the Java station of the Eastern and Australian cable.
Blue lights were burned, rockets sent up into the clear sky, and cannons
fired before .the attention of those on shore was attracted. Then
telegraphic messages were interchanged by Captain Morris and the agents
of the Company at Batavia, and soon the Chyebassa was moving through the
narrow pass which divides Bali from Java. The next morning we rose to
find the ship skirting a low, level coast, with here and there groves of cocoa-
nut palms and scanty brown-roofed native villages. At every hand there
were small fishing boats, travelling with the speed of yachts under immense
leg-of-mutton sails. The boats were fitted with outriggers made of bamboo,
and seated upon the seemingly fragile conveniences could be seen lightly-
clad, copper-colored Javanese. All that day and until the evening of the
next (May 9th) this coast,was skirted. Then the Chyebassa dropped anchor
in Batavia Roads, in the midst of a considerable fleet of steamers and sailing
vessels, about two miles from shore. Scarcely had the anchor chains ceased
rattling before several of the light “prows,” which here fulfil the duties of
lighters, were alongside, pitching and tumbling on the uneasy swell as if


determined to rid themselves of their masts. Then commenced the clang and
the clamour consequent upon the receipt of cargo and coal, which lasted sans
intermission, save at meal times, to the moment of lifting the anchor on the
morning of the l‘2th. But few passengers hazarded the unfamiliar streets
of Batavia on the evening of our arrival, the majority preferring to live in
anticipation of the novel sights expected until the following morning.
OFF BATAVIA.
"We arose to find the vessel beset with a host of oddly-shaped “prows”
of all sizes. The Chyebassa looked like a motherly old duck surrounded by a
brood of uncouth but affectionate ducklings, the number of which was greatly
to her credit. Midships there swarmed Javanese, fancifully attired, in
twenties and fifties, all laboring under high pressure in a cloud of coal dust.
All the hard work was done by that species of the genus homo known to the
English as the “small boy.” In a prow of twenty-five tons burden there
would be from twenty to thirty men and half-a-dozen boys. The men fill
wicker baskets, which hold about half-a-hundredweight of coal, and the
boys pass the baskets from one to the other to a rough landing stage attached
to the steamer. Here other boys are stationed to receive the baskets and to
pass them on ; and so, after being handled by a couple of dozen individuals,
they are landed on the deck. Here are stationed two big boys, who lift
each basket on to the shoulders of a much younger companion, who staggers
away with it to the coal shoot, and tosses basket and all on the deck. There
are other big boys to send the coal down the shoot, and others again to throw
the empties into the prow to be re-filled. Thus a system of perpetual motion
is maintained until the prow bo emptied. The eldest of the deck boys who
did all the work on board the Chyebassa here, was not, I feel sure, more than
thirteen. Many of them looked young enough for seven or eight, yet they
toiled away with all the energy and purpose of grown men. No sooner had
one infant staggered away with his half-hundred of coal than there was
another youthful shoulder ready to receive the next basket. All the Java-
nese, young and old, wore turbans of divers colors. Indeed, if when in
working trim the turban were removed from a Javanee, one would on the
instant collide with the conclusion that it was quite time that he began to
dress himself. The turban with its ample folds has a remarkably dressy
effect, and as long as it adorns the head of the lithsome Javanee the
scantiness of his other garments passes without attracting special wonder.
At about eight o’clock there came an awful pause in and about the ship;
upon seeking the cause thereof we discovered that it was the breakfast hour of
the natives, and we took regard unto their manner of feeding. Each had a
large quantity of boiled rice on a piece of matting or bagging or anything
that would do duty for a plate. In the boiling of rice, it is the chief end
and aim of the Hindoo, as well as the Chinaman, to have each grain when
cooked separate and distinct from its fellows ; but the Javanee so boils his
rice that, although each grain preserves its shape, the mass is solid and
compact, yet withal dry. He utterly despises all such implements as the
European uses for the conveyance of food from the plate to the mouth.
With his fingers he detaches a lump from the concrete mass of rice, pokes it,
together with a pinch of pepper, into his mouth, and then calmly and with


“for-off eyes” surveys the beauties of Nature as he slowly munches.
When the hillock of rice has well nigh disappeared, from some "safe hiding
place is produced a tiny morsel of fish of the ‘ ‘ highest ’ ’ possible order.
He revels in the delicious odor for a moment or two, casts a longing lingering
look upon the fast decaying morceau, and with solemn deliberation and the
most evident satisfaction devours it, and then again attacks the rice with such
vigor that it fades away with terrible velocity. Then ho produces from a
supply in his turban two small pieces of cocoa-nut leaf and a-pinch of
tobacco, with which he makes a cigarette. Two of these he smokes, and he
is ready for work again. His dinner and tea are exactly the same. On
this faro he grows so fat and well-favored that the average Briton, with his
infinite variety of food, his elaborate cookery and his tricky digestive organs,
is stricken with envy, and begins to long for a stomach that is not superior to
solid rice and fish in the last stage of putrefaction. In the matter of wage,
too, the Javanee is less greedy than the Briton. He will toil all day with
all the energy he possesses for a guilder (Is. Bd.), and a boy will in the same
time do as much as his ‘‘old man” for half that sum. But then the Javanee
orders his affairs strictly in accordance with the text “ sufficient unto the day
is the evil thereof.” To see him in his idle hours is to he convinced that
work with him is an unmixed evil. Therefore he works to-day because it is
absolutely necessary, letting the morrow take care of things of itself. A few
cents in a land of plenty like Java will provide him with all the rice and fish
required for bodily sustenance for days, and what more does the soul of the
Javanee demand —save another cent or two for betel-nut. Be he ever so
improvident in other things, if he once becomes addicted to the habit of
chewing the betel-nut, he will find the wherewithal to purchase it, although
its effects upon him are disastrous enough in all conscience. Here is one
whose passion for the potent drug evidently rules his life. He has toiled
wearily up the gangway from one of the prows. His body inclines forward,
his eyes are fixed and very prominent, as though a hangman’s rope was
round his neck ; his lower lip is swollen and obtrusive, and from the corners of
his mouth blood red spittle exudes ; between the blackened stumps of his teeth
there is a small “quid” of a dark-red substance, which he slowly chews
with the passiveness that a cow does her cud; he sets ahout’his work in a
nervous, mechanical manner, and talks in dry, husky, throaty tones.
Probably he will earn his guilder, and that means with him long days of
listless idleness, devoted wholly and solely to his favorite vice. The habit of
chewing the betel-nut —like most other unwholesome habits—is not a natural
one, yet lam told the natives are at groat pains to acquire it. When once
the palate has become educated, however, its charms are irresistible. To the
traveller who is given to indulge in idle fancies, and who would, for the sake
of experience, take a chow, I would say most feelingly, “Don’t.” The
experience is bitter and biting, be it bought with ever so small a chew.
Ashore we found hundreds of natives—men, women, and youths alike —
whose teeth were worn down to the stumps b} r incessant chewing, and whoso
whole physique declared them to be irreclaimable victims of the noxious
habit.
Most of 'the vessels which lay around us were, of course, Dutch. There
were several splendid steamers and a large number of barques and brigs. It
was said that the shipping trade was dull, although the vessels lying in port
represented something like 30,000 tons. The anchorage is not considered
very safe, there being little protection from high winds on the land and
none on the sea side. The Dutch Government has, however, advanced two


million guilders for the construction of a new harbor at Tanjor Priok, about
four miles to the south-east of the present anchorage. Capacious docks have
been built, and at present wharves are being run out, but the work is
progressing but slowly, in consequence of the hesitancy of the Government
to make further advances. The position of the new haihor is not regarded
with favor by sea captains, as the country around is swampy, and therefore
a very hot-bed of fever. There is also a naval station to the north of the
anchorage, where are fine docks and all other conveniences, which, however,
was my lot to view only from a distance.
DOING BATAVIA.
Shortly after nine o’clock a number of the passengers, with Captain Morris
to the fore, took their seats in the powerful steam launch which is at the
service of the Company’s steamers throughout their stay in port, and soon
the launch was an insignificant atom in the procession of small craft which
was making its way to the wharves. Before entering the canal, which runs
through the heart of the city of Batavia, and thence for miles inland, boats
have to navigate the smooth water which lies between a jetty and a break-
water. Both these structures are of brick, and the breakwater, which is just
awash at high tide, is flimsy and unstable looking. Upon the jetty is a
towing path, along which staunch Chinamen, harnessed to unwieldy prows
and barges, were stepping sturdily along. The breakwater near its base and
the opposite bank of the canal suffered some damage by the tidal wave which
followed hard upon the last eruption of Kraekatoa, a considerable breach
being yet apparent in the brickwork. Before reaching this point, however,
we passed an outpost of the Customs House, which was situated at the base
of ihe jetty. This gave the first flavor of the Hutch element, of which we
had plenty later on. The most prominent feature of the building was a low
round tower, sparklingly white, surmounted with an extinguisher-shaped
roof of rust-colored tiles. The offices around were alike white as to walls and
rusly as to roofs, and decidedly foreign looking. One could not but admire
the remarkable cleanliness and order that, as it were, sweetened the pre-
mises. The native servants about and the boatmen were attired in fancy
cotton stuffs. With regard to quantity of clothing not one of them could
boast, but there was not a soil or a stain to mar the wholesomeness and
picturesque appearance of their attire. Although, like a wise man, the
Javance does not encumber himself with much clothing, he invariably looks
well dressed, for all that ho wears is scrupulously clean. It would be well
for the inhabitants of tropical Australia if some hold reformer were to intro-
duce among the laboring classes some such light, comfortable, consistent, and
cheap costume as is fashionable with the natives of Batavia. In years to
come lie would be regarded as a public benefactor, and, perhaps, when the
glory of his good work had broadened down from generation to generation,
would be heaped upon him, after the fashion of men, all sorts of magnificent
honors. All this time we have been steaming swiftly up the broad canal.
Upon the right, bank is a dense grove of cocoa-nut palms in lull fruitage, the
dark green loaves of which shine in the morning sun, and between the clean
straight trunks is the gleam of still water. Away to the left little save the
plumed hcads of palms are visible above the compact growth of vegetation,
which clothes as with a garment the low-lying coast lands. Captain Morris


pointed out a goodly piece of land abutting on the left bank, which the
8.1.5. N. Company has purchased for a coal depot (the present depot being
too far up the canal), also a fort a little further along. This latter place
wears a drowsy peaceful aspect, but it deserves some sort of reverence, if only
on account of its antiquity, for somewhere on its walls, I am told, are
characters which convey the information that it was built in 1600 odd.
Among the strange vessels we have passed are veritable Chinese junks—
cumbersome looking craft, yet it would seem easily managed and seaworthy.
Now we have reached the termination of our steam-launch journey and
land beneath a cool stone-built structure, and pass on through lofty iron
gates to a covered way or court, where wait conveyances to carry us to town.
Now surely we are in a land of dwarfs and pigmies, so far as horses and
vehicles are concerned. The horses all are of the Timor breed— diminutive
creatures not much bigger than large Newfoundland dogs.—and the vehicles
are of corresponding size. There are Albert cars, cabs,’waggonettes, broug-
hams, &c., all true to their kind as regards shape and style, but so small that
they look like playthings. Veritable Tom Thumb carriages they are, and it
is by the force of example only that the large ideas of a Briton are brought
down to their insignificant level, and he trusts himself in one of them. A
small detachment of we strangers, however, soon ceased to wonder, and then
we monopolised a stylish brougham, and ordered the heathen Chinee who
acted as coachman to drive to the Hotel de L’Europe. I would advise other
strangers from Australia, who would go to a cool, comfortable, stylish, yet
quiet hotel, where he will have first-class food and first-class drink, and
where his English tongue will not be a burden, to whisper to his coachman,
“ Europe.” We went rattling over the paved way, and out into a shady
road as level (to use a hackneyed phrase) as a billiard table. There was not
a speck of dust floating about, although the thoroughfare was alive with
traffic, for the road had been made as roads should be made. There was no
shoddy, suspicious contract work about it. The metal was flat clear shingle,
which had thoroughly consolidated with a blinding of black clay, so that a
perfectly smooth surface was presented to traffic. Our coachman was char-
mingly ignorant of the rules of the road. His ambition to land us at the
‘ ‘Europe’ ’ at the shortest time on record was his ruling passion, which rendered
him stolidly oblivious to everything else. Under the powerful stimulus of his
voice and whip our ponies stretched themselves out to their work, scamper-
ing away as if they were conveying a select company of Queen’s messengers
on an urgent mission. Thus till we came to a massive arch, under which we
passed at a dignified walk. This structure was, of course, dazzlingly white,
but in niches on the inner side were two figures, black of color, heroic
of size and horrific of aspect. The why and wherefore of these figures we
could not comprehend. If they were intended for ornament, or were repre-
sentative works of art, I can only say that they do not satisfy the taste of a
Briton. Perhaps they had been set up in order to instil a proper respect in
the minds of the natives for the road, for notwithstanding that there was
plenty of room on either side of the archway for the passage of vehicles
drivers always adhered to the narrow road guarded by the gruesome images.
We took the advice tendered to us in “Pinafore,” and did not mind the why
and wherefore of the arch, &c., but immediately through resumed
the race to the centre of the city, which as yet lay two miles ahead. Soon
after leaving the landing place we had crossed the canal, which was there
spanned by a.massive drawbridge ; but here, we met it and ran along
the right bank even unto our journey’s end. What was still a greatei


surprise a double tram line was crossed, and presently, with jingling- of bells
and the whistling of conductors, a long train of steam cars came charging
down at us. The land around was marvellously beautiful. Gigantic trees,
rich in foliage and festooned with parasitical growths, crowded round the
habitations which lined the way, and everywhere the grass was of living
green, long and rank. It would appear that the Batavians have to maintain
a perpetual warfare with vegetation, which encroaches even to the doors of
the houses. It is said that the soil of some parts of America needs only to
be tickled with the hoe and it smiles with plenty. Around Batavia the soil
indulges with outrageous and boisterous mirth of this sort, without any kind
of provocation from man, and the shovel and the hoe have ever to be kept
going to restrain its excessive fun. We found the weather to be agreeable.
Speaking nautically we had experienced nothing but cloudy weather with
light airs and calms from the landing place to the “Europe,” but for all
that there was an unfamiliar hot-house flavor in the air which we did not
quite appreciate, but which none Of our party seriously objected to. By this
time we had entered a street and were traversing a narrow road between
houses and shops and tram lines on the right, and the canal on the left hand.
On the other side of the canal was another narrow roadway, and then other
houses and shops. Those on our side were, however, more pretentious, and
the variety of trades represented was perplexing to one who endeavored to
keep tally. All the smaller shops were kept by Chinamen, generally of very
aristocratic appearance. The officials on the train, too, even to the engineers
and conductors, and the great majority of the passengers also belonged to
the “yellow agony ”, species, and very smart and important the conductors
looked, and shrilly—all too shrilly—did they blow their whistles. The
narrow footpaths swarmed with passengers, and upon the steps which led
down to the sluggish, dingy waters of the canal, were groups of women
washing either clothes or babies. Hero the canal is too shallow for
navigation, but it appears to be the common bath and washhouse for thou-
sands and thousands of natives. It is about forty feet wide, and is crossed
at frequent intervals by light wooden bridges. There were always hundreds
of natives sporting about in the water, and hundreds more industriously
scrubbing clothes on the worn brick steps. No wonder, then, that they are
a cleanly people, both as regards person and clothing. Our jaunt along the
crowded thoroughfare was not to pass without some excitement, for which
we were indebted to our Jehu. The one rule of the road which earns for
itself casual respect, is that which ordains that vehicles in crowded parts
shall stand by, my lord, and let the tramears pass. In obedience to this our
driver drew up as the bells announced a tram, but in restraining the fiery
impatience of his steeds he pulled them across the rails. The driver of the
tram saw the predicament with perspicuity that was remarkable for a
Chinaman. He brought his brakes -to bear, so that instead of all too
suddenly making very mixed mincemeat of the horses, driver, brougham,
and the innocent strangers, the locomotive merely bowled over one of the
ponies, and gave the carriage such a twist that those of us who had not
discreetly parted company with it on the approach of danger, did so then
with alacrity. IVe lifted the trembling but plucky little steed on to its feet,
addressed a few strong words of remonstrance, advice, and caution to the
driver —to which by the way ho was stolidly indifferent, for he did not
understand a word of English—and away we went again. The incident was
only a ripple on the smooth surface of street traffic, and the next moment the
current swept on as if nothing had happened.
0


There was still another little ripple on the smooth surface of our pleasure.
It appeared that our ponies—like sensible creatures —had their favorite
hotel, for suddenly we found ourselves dashing across the tram-line with
terrible impetuosity. We were carried through wide open hospitable gates
to a place that we desired not, and this in the presence of a crowd of broad
Dutchmen, who grinned, as broadly as Dutchmen can grin, at the futile
attempts of our driver to turn the ponies from the error of their ways. The
driver appealed in forcible terms to their feelings, but they took up a posi-
tion in front of the hotel, and refused to budge. Then we all turned out,
and proceeded to carry brougham, ponies, and all into the street, but this
seemed to be insipid fun after we had borne the burden about ten yards, so
one of our party, who hailed from the bush, and who knew a thing or two
about horses, usurped the box, and the next moment the ponies, panic-
stricken, were scampering up the street, and the would-be passengers
excitedly tailing after in order as to their fleetness of foot. It was thus we
got to “ L’Europe,” to find ourselves beset by a host of Chinese pedlers, of
whom more anon. True to instinct, a newspaper was first demanded, for we
learned that the Dutch papers—of which there are three, viz., Java Bode y
Bataviaajch Handehblas, and Baghlad von Xed-Inde —repeated all telegrams in
English. It seemed an age since we had heard a whisper from the outside
world, and therefore the most promising of the three journals, the Javaßodt y
was seized upon with fierce and greedy impatience. We quivered with ner-
vous expectation as the short arid columns of the tiny paper were eagerly
scanned, yet, not a word of familiar English greeted our eyes. Another
minute examination, and, stowed away in a comer, the following lines of
awful interest were discovered:—‘‘Washington, Mei 8 (1). The House of
Representatives has rejected the bill for the reduction of the tariff.’ ’ With
one more glance which gave the knowledge that the feature of the paper was
the continuation of a story by Rhoda Broughton, the journal was dashed
madly down, and we betook ourselves with reckless enthusiasm to the delights
and dissipations of tropical Rotterdam. We found it to be a city set in a vastf
shady garden—a garden in which tall pines and feathery palms, and plumed
cocoa-nut trees and umbrageous figs—
“ Not that kind for fruit renowned,
But such as this day, to Indians known,
In Malabar or Deccan spreads her arms,
Branching so broad and long that in the ground
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow
About the mother tree a pillar’d shade,
High over-arched, and echoing walks between”—
and shady cedars, and trembling bamboos, and waving plantains, grew in
wild luxuriance, and between them were flaming hibiscus, and painted
crotons, and clinging to them grotesque orchids. The city is remarkable as
it is beautiful, but its beauty is of the siren order —it allures but to destroy.
Along the banks of the canal, in front and around hotels'and shops and
private houses, crowding down in the narrow footpaths—wherever, indeed,
there is a yard or so of vacant ground—there are groves of trees —not puny,
sickly specimens, but vigorous and strong-growing giants, which would be
more at home in a forest than in the heart of a city. As our time was
limited, we sternly resolved to see as much of the remarkable place, and to
glean as much information as possible concerning the customs and
peculiarities of its people as might be. We therefore chartered an Albert
car and driver of course, at the rate of three-quarters of a guilder (16d.) an
hour, and started out on a voyage of discovery. Following the course of


the canal we came to the Netherlands Hotel. Embowered in trees, it
looked so cool, so inviting', and hospitable that we could not resist the
temptation to explore its interior, especially as it was about the hour of
“ tiffin.’ ’ Fighting our way up marble steps, through a battalion of
Chinese pedlers, we discovered a vast hall of marble, where, having first
tinkled a silver bell, we poured out chilly libations in homage to the genius
of the place. Passing through other marble halls, our footsteps clattering
on the polished floor, a dining room —or rather an open portico supported by
numerous pillars, between which there hung mats of delicate cocoa-nut
fibre—was discovered. Alabama! and we did so. There was the refreshing
sound of falling water in our ears, and cool draughts fanned our cheeks;
the din of the Chinese pedlers was mellowed into a soothing murmur as
we fell to. Tiffin was quite indescribable. Waiters (Javanese), of which
there appeared to be three or four for each guest, heaped upon one’s plate a
sample of goodly proportion from each dish on the bill of fare, and we saw
by looking at our Dutch friends and others who had been to the manner
bom, that we were expected to mix up the ingredients, as Little Buttercup
did those babies, and devour the mess. Some of us did so, and enjoyed the
“feed.” Others contented themselves with plain curry and rice, without
which no Batavian meal would be perfect. Dessert was delicious. There
were pine apples and pomeloes—which, according to the faith of the natives,
is—
“ The fruit of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
Brought death into this world, and all our woe ; M
—the rambotan, the durian (that most deliciously flavoured but most
foul-smelling of all fruits), the leechee which Macauley says is the only
fruit of the tropics which “ deserves to be regretted even amidst the plenty
of Covent Garden”); the mangosteen, fresh dates, bananas, oranges,
melons, &c., See. Pomona has been lavish and profuse to the inhabitants of
Java, and were it not that livers are prone to enlarge themselves to
unnatural and most uncomfortable proportions, one could scarcely desire
a better fate than to be exiled to Batavia, if only to enjoy a life-long
acquaintance with the indigenous fruits of the island. But that dessert
came to an end at last, and we wandered forth to our charioteer, and went
wherever he listed. Away to King’s Square—a noble park surrounded by
magnificent trees, where is the “zoo” of the city; to the museum, which
contains a complete collection of the arms and implements of the natives
of the whole of the Malay archipelago, &c., &c., and a throne of gold
whereon in times past one of the native princes used to sit in state ; through
the Chinese quarter, where, among houses of the meanest order, we
discovered spendidly fitted and furnished shops; past a ladies’ school, whence
we saw troops of happy school-girls wending their way home. And here
give me pause, while I endeavour, without shocking your modesty, to
describe in simple, homely terms the simple homely out-door costume of a
Dutch school-girl at Batavia—costume in which we saw girls of all ages,
up to eighteen and nineteen, by the score. Her chemise is loose and
elongated; her drawers tight and abbreviated; stockings are high; her
shoes low; her hair is worn a la “Lucia,” in the mad scene, or done up in
a fat pigtail. Nothing more is worn, and all is white—snowy white—save
the shoes. All the graceful contour of the body is displayed to the fullest
perfection, and yet a Batavian girl appears to be every whit as modest as
are her sisters elsewhere. The costume, or rather lack of it, is appropriate
to the climate, and though a Batavian girl is a startling object at first
C 2


sight, she soon ceases to excite extraordinary wonder. Dress seems to be
going out of fashion in this city, and I expect that should it ever be my
fortune to visit that lovely place again I shall find the fair creatures of the
opposite sex clad in the simple style of our first parents before the fall.
But this must be hurried over. It is altogether too appalling to think upon.
Hats are discarded by all sorts and conditions of women, parasols being
substituted; so that when a lady has stepped out of her carriage and
entered a shop, she seems to a stranger to belong to the place, and he is apt
to make a mistake by devoting to her attentions which belong to the shop
girls. , Among the vehicles dashing about were splendidly equipped
carriages, all, of course, on the diminutive pattern previously described.
For style, appearance, and pace, better animals could not be imagined ;
but it seemed almost cruel to tax the strength of a pair with the weight
of a couple or three bulky Dutch gentlemen, and as a rule Dutch gentlemen
are bulky—very bulky. For the matter of that so are the Dutch girls,
for one can form a fair estimation of the weight of a Dutch girl when so
much of her form is exposed to public view. But all things come to their
ends, and so, alas, did our drive round Batavia, not, however, until we had
been shown swiftly round another large square (where is the town residence
of the Governor-General), and had inspected public buildings, and the
outsides of the houses of the great. The canal of which I have spoken is
simply the course of a small river, the natural curves and wanderings
corrected to straight lines, and the banks and beds walled perpendicularly,
and paved with splendid brickwork throughout. While yet the Javanese
were slaves to the Dutch, this great work was executed. The conclusion
that it would never have been done by a free people who could demand
wages appears to be obvious.
Then we got back to “ L’Europe,” where we indulged in the fun of bar-
gaining for curios with the Chinese pedlers who flocked round us. This is
how the business was conducted:—
Chinaman —“Good morning, Mister. You buy nicecard case.”
Traveller—“ How much ? ”
Chinaman—“ Eight guilder.”
Traveller—“ Too much.”
Chinaman—“ Well, how much you give 1”
Traveller—“ One guilder.”
Chinaman—“ Too little; you give two guilder r ”
Traveller—“ No. I give half-guilder.”
Chinaman— ‘ ‘ Too little. All right; I give you very good card case half-
guilder.”
Traveller—“ No. I give quarter-guilder.”
Chinaman —“Fitch! You say half-guilder ; you give me half-guilder.
All right. I give fine card case quarter-guilder.”
Traveller—“ All right; ” and he secures a nicely-carved sandalwood card
case for the matter of fivepence.
This is the principle of small trade throughout the city. The seller asks
twenty or thirty times the value of the article which he wishes to dispose of,
and the buyer must “ beat down ” to the uttermost cent.
After we had paid our devotions to the hidden genius who presides with
such perfect skill over the liquid department at “L’Europe,” we took
another walk abroad, and saw more strange sights. We saw that the
Javanese —at least those who reside in Batavia —are pedlers from their youth
up. There were small boys with a small supply of fruit and sweetmeats,


selling small parcels to other small boys ; and there -were bigger boys -with
bigger supplies, selling to other bigger boys, and so on throughout the
remaining ages of man. We saw hundreds of women still washing their
hundreds of babies and their hundreds of dozens of dirty clothes in the
muddy water of the canal. We saw hundreds of men, women, and children
bathing with the strictest regard for decency and decorum. We
saw troops of street coolers, each of whom had a pair of wooden buckets
with watering-can spouts, slung across his shoulders; each would
fill his buckets with canal water, and then toil up the steep steps,
and sprinkle about twelve or fourteen yards of roadway, and then
return again for more water. We saw gangs of prisoners, harnessed
with a thin cord round the waist to huge logs, with which they
marched away, in the highest of spirits, some of them smoking, some'
fanning themselves, all grinning with happiness and content, notwith-
standing the presence of a harmless-looking guard with a drawn sword.
We saw the “ Holfsmedery ” of Van der Yossen, where dozens of little
ponies, from the carriage to the cart-horse stamp, were being shod; and
shops in which they sold hundreds of Java sparrows and other little birds
at one penny a-piece. Wo saw Chinese houses of the true willow-plate
style of architecture, and a Chinese theatre, which was patronised by
hundreds of that rageful heathen. And we saw lots of other strange sights
that it would not do to mention here. Then we returned to the hotel, and
eventually took our seats in the “ Nederlandsch-Indische Tramway
Maatochoppy, I. Klasse,” and dashed down to the wharves (about three
miles) for the sum of twopence farthing a-piece, and reached the Chyebassa
just as the sun disappeared.
During the excursion through Batavia I managed to glean a quantity of
useful information, which it is unnecessary to repeat here. The possessions
of the Dutch in the Malay Archipelago are so wonderfully rich, they form
such a good milch cow for the Fatherland, that it might not be altogether
uninteresting to a section of the colonists from Britain to be reminded, by
comparison, of the peculiar privileges which they enjoy under the liberal
protection of a Home Government, which looks for nothing more than
loyalty and respect for the occupant of the throne.
The ambition of the native population is kept in check by a system of
petty chiefs, so that when a native is thought to be guilty of treason, or is
suspected of murder, the number of trials and examinations he has to
undergo before final sentence is passed by the Chief Judges is apt to pall
upon his appetite. Naughty natives are tried by juries, naughty Europeans
by a Court of Justice, from which there is appeal to the High Court of
Justice. For capital crimes natives are sentenced to from fifteen to twenty
years’ hard labor on the roads, and have the distinction of wearing an iron
collar round their necks ; thieves and other vagabonds serve their country
for lesser periods, and are not honored by the collar. No wonder that there
are roads —perfect roads—throughout the length and breadth of the island of
Java, which, by-the-way, is by far the richest in the Archipelago.
Prisoners are also hired out to private persons, who pay to Government
something like a guilder a day for their labor. To princes and regents who
are docile and obedient the Government is very liberal, especially on the
occasion of the celebration of matrimonial alliances between neighboring
princes and princesses. Then the Government steps forward in a fatherly
manner, says, “Bless you my children; be happy,” &c., &c., and “lends”
the bridegroom .£3OOO or £4OOO. The Government always calls this dot a


loan, but the happy man knows very well that he will never be called upon
to repay it. A railway is now being constructed which will traverse the
whole island from Batavia at the extreme east, to Samarang in the centre to
the north, and to Sourabaya, another port on the west coast. It is now
finished to Bandong (some three hours out from Batavia), where is the
private seat of the Governor-General. There is also telegraphic communi-
cation throughout Java and Sumatra, and other lines are in contemplation.
It has not been possible to form an estimation of the native population of
Java. For hundreds of years the Dutch soldiers have been fighting and
still do fight with the savage tribes which inhabit the mountainous interior,
and, therefore, the work of civilisation progresses but slowly. As for the
European population it is always fluctuating the climate demanding
continual relays of staunch Dutchman, whose livers want enlarging. The
population of Batavia was set down by our Dutch pilot at “What was
more better than one meelyon of beoplesout of this, I am told,
there are not more than 2500 whites. Another report said that
there were 30,000 Europeans in Batavia; but this surely must mean
people of European descent. Batavia possesses two English banks—
the Chartered Mercantile Bank, and the Bank of India, London,
and China, and if report be correct good business is done by each.
A kind paternal Government relieves the natives of all trouble attendant
upon the cultivation of coffee, the most important product of the island.
That is, Government reserves to itself the monopoly of its production, so that
it would be high treason for a native to raise a single bean for his own
profit. Monopolies extend in other directions. For example, the Neder-
land’s Inde Steam Navigation Company enjoy the monopoly of the carnage
to and from the old country of all Government cargo and people in the
employ of the Government. As Government is the biggest trader of them
all, the monopoly of the carriage of its goods means something great, and as
a very large proportion of the European population is in the employ of the
Government, and as frequent changes to the old country are absolutely
necessary for health’s sake, the profits from passengers’ fares must be some-
thing substantial. Europeans find living in Batavia very expensive. They
have to pay from £2OO to £3OO per year for the rent of their houses, and they
have to keep an immense retinue of servants, for manual labor of the mildest
kind is quite out of question to dwellers in this hot and extremely unhealthy
clime. All the year round the thermometer ranges between 92 and 96 deg.
Not very warm, but the heat is peculiar. It induces profuse perspiration, so
that it is not uncommon for a gentleman whose duties lead liim into the
open air to be compelled to change his linen four times a day. All the
houses (which are built of stone) even those of the highest in the land, are
of one storey, for even the labor of climbing up a flight of stairs would be
too exhaustive for persons with livers bulky enough for bullocks. Carpets
are unknown ; marble in the houses of the very rich, and polished bluestone
in those belonging to persons less favored of fortune, forming cool and com-
fortable substitutes. Visitors are received in a spacious chamber like an
immense hall, round which are small tables of marble or mahogany, according
to the wealth of the host, whereon are perpetually kept supplies of cool drinks
and fruits. It must, of course, be understood that all the white people are
wealthy, and remembered that there are degrees of wealth. He is com-
paratively poor who cannot afford to keep twenty or thirty servants, whom
he pays at the rate of £1 per month and rations; but then the rations consist
only of two or three cupfulls of rice per day, with a scrap of “ high ” fish


or a few chips of dried meat, and a pinch of pungent pepper. At the Nether-
lands Hotel the charge for board and lodging (exclusive of wines) is 10s. per
day. All the Europeans, who are not Government officials, are merchants,
but the shopkeeping is done entirely by Chinamen, who are not allowed to
set up in business beyond the limits of prescribed quarters. The majority of
the merchants live in magnificent mansions round King’s Square. They
drive to their business houses at eight o’clock in the morning, and return
home at four or five o’clock in the afternoon. Lunch is brought from their
homes by their “boys; ” but lunch, I am told, is of the lightest description,
consisting almost universally of boiled rice and a very little fruit. Chinese
here diversify the monotony of shopkeeping by practising the arts of the
usurer. At the time of festivals, the joyful but improvident Javanee raises,
on spare clothes or what little his household possesses in the way of furniture,
the few guilders necessary to give him and his family a terrible orgie. The
money is borrowed for three months, and at the end of that time the wily
Chinaman sells the goods, for the Javanee never by any mistake redeems his
pledges. Therefore Chinamen wax fat and prosper, and entwine with their
back hair ribbon of white, and red, and blue, and travel like lords in the
tram-cars, the while that the careless Javanee strolls peacefuly along the
shady thoroughfares, and thinks of vice and betel-nut. The natives of the
city of Batavia are comely of feature and graceful, surpassingly graceful in
all their movements ; but they lack the jewel honesty. The Chinese have
robbed them of their primitive sinlessness by inculcating a passion for opium,
which with some of them is even a more engrossing vice than betel-nut.
Some of the natives, too, give way inordinately to gin. This is scarcely to
be wondered at, for gin is so common and cheap that in most of the hotels a
white man gets his nip for the asking, and in any of the shops the Javanee
can buy a “ square shaft ” of about four times the dimensions of those which
obtain in Australia for a guilder and a quarter—2s. Id. The natives of the
country are industrious and sober, faithful and true to those placed in
authority over them. They live in ‘ ‘ compagones, ’ ’ or villages, and their
houses are built of bamboo and roofed with the thick leaves of the tree called
atop. The land they cultivate is so fertile that it bears two crops during the
year of the products already named, with the exception of coffee; but succes-
sion of crops is understood and insisted upon by the Hutch masters. Land
that in the first of the season has been under rice, in the latter part is made
to grow potatoes or something else. Large numbers of small cattle are raised
by the natives. One of these pretty animals was brought on board alive, and
after a few days of life on board ship, to which he took most kindly, he fell
a victim at the hands of a heartless butcher. It made passable beef. These
cattle are all of a color—a soft fawn—and have large black eyes and black
muzzles, and altogether are very handsome animals, and are as docile as pet
lambs. One more interesting fact about the natives and I have done with them.
They can live on so little —twopence or threepence a day—that marriage is not
considered an expensive luxury, and therefore the working people are allowed
by law and religion (they are Mahomcdans), three wives and as many concu-
bines as they can afford to feed and clothe. Princes and nobles are allowed
as many wives as their hearts desire. No marvel then the Dutch found the
men, when they began to know them well, docile and amenable to rule. At
the present time the Dutchmen are extending their civilising influences to
their possessions in Borneo, where live that strange fierce people the Dyaks.
One of their peculiar customs deserves to be mentioned. Their men and
women who are too old for work are sacrificed and eaten. At a certain time


of the year a great festival is held in each village, when all the old people are
mustered. Each is set before a young banana tree, and if he or she has
not strength enough to pull it out by the roots sentence of death is sum-
marily passed. The victim is tied up with the limbs extended, and warriors
of the tribe prick him to death with long knives. Then the body is cooked
with great care, and eaten with great pomp and ceremony. The Dutch are
doing their utmost to stamp out this horrid custom; but even partially
civilised tribes repair to the mountains at the time of the festival, and in
unapproachable fastnesses perferm their bloody rites.
A word or two with regard to commerce. I was told that sugar, of
which immense quantities are produced, is sent to the old country to be
refined, and when it is brought back again in a fit state for consumption,
an import duty of six per cent, is levied upon it. Queer kind of encourage-
ment that; but then we must remember that the Government has large
dealings on its own account. Then, with regard to meat, the Eastern
and Australian Fresh Meat Company went to great expense •in the
establishment of a dejpot at Batavia; they took three cargoes of frozen
meat, and lost such an intolerable deal on each that no more experiments
will, for the time being, be made to educate the palate of the tropical
Dutchman up to Australian beef. Dutchmen devour nothing but lean,
which they cut off the carcases of their beeves in strips, in utter disregard
of joints, for such a thing as a joint is unknown on their tables. As for
mutton, they eat it not at all. When we left Batavia there were 800 frozen
sheep reposing in the factory, and they will probably rest there to the end
of time for all that the Dutchmen care. Notwithstanding this, I communed
with several merchants, who expressed their earnest anxiety to establish
business connections with Australia. They want wool, hides, and leather,
and will send in return fine linen stuffs, rice, coffee, and spices.
FROM BATAVIA TO ADEN.
"While the last bundle of rattans was swinging in the air midway between
a prow and the Chycbassa, the bell had tinkled to the engineers full speed
ahead. This was at eight o’clock on the morning of Sunday (11th May),
and soon the ships lying at anchor at Batavia had sunk below the horizon,
and we wore working our way among unseen sand banks through a channel
marked here and there with nothing but long bamboos stuck in the sand.
Thence unto the Straits of Sunda, close along a coast of wizard beauty.
Even to the edge of the sand upon the beach were groves of cocoa-nut trees,
and beyond a narrow strip of flat land there rose in confused masses
conical-shaped hills flecked, wherever the scrub was not, with emerald
green. From out the sombre foliage which draped hills and valleys, rose
faint blue wreaths of smoke, denoting the humble abodes of the natives,
and with glasses one could see them toiling in their rich but tiny
plantations. As we neared the pilot station at Point Anjer, the islet
which the wave from Krackatoa swept entirely over was pointed out. It
stands seventy or eighty feet above sea level, and perhaps it is here
to say that every one who happened to be on the islet at the time perished
with the thousands who cultivated the low lying lands at the back. At
Anjer we parted company with the Dutch pilot, and not without regret.
Krackatoa hove in sight early in the afternoon, and we were abreast of it
just as the sun went down. Previous to its last and most disastrous attack
of internal disorder, the 8.1.5. N. Company’s steamers used to pass to the


north, hut the eruption so disorganised that channel that another between
the mountain and the mainland had to be availed of. We did not, therefore,
see the injured part of the mountain—the remains of the peak that was
blown away being to the north; but we saw a peak rising abruptly out of
the sea, and tapering regularly from the base to the pinnacle, round which
floated tiny clouds of thin vapor, which were for ever waxing and waning ;
we saw that the peak was wild and horridly desolate, for in place of the
dense vegetation which clothed from base to summit neighboring island
peaks, there was nothing but dull gray lava, seamed and scored by
thousands of conflicting wrinkles. The mountain was dead. We saw but
the dry and withered exterior of what had once been an emblem of
luxurious life, and we could not but be affected with its stem, gloomy, and
forbidding aspect. It was soon lost in the brief twilight; but some of the
passengers, after its form had been swallowed in the gloom of night,
thought that they could perceive a faint pink—the sign of flickering life—
where we had lost its summit. After that we saw not land until the 19th,
when the island of Adoo Atoll was sighted, a faint blue speck away to the
north. It was not our lot to see Colombo, an unusual amount of cargo
having been picked up at Batavia. The line was crossed, without doing
any damage to the ship, on the 20th, in long. 69 deg. 43 min. E., and on
the morning of the 26th we sighted the coast of Africa, a little to the south
of Cape Guardafui; then the brown'rugged promontory of Has Uloolah,
and on the following afternoon anchored within a quarter of a mile of sun-
burnt Aden.
Of the diversions of the passage from Batavia to Aden it is scarcely
necessary to speak. We ate, drank, and were merry; we read, slept, and
played divers games: we took regular turns in lecturing the one flirtable
girl; we went to church on Sundays, and endeavored to look solemn all
the day, and, altogether, succeeded in putting time to death in the most
pleasant manner. We studied the dress and habits of the Dutch passengers
who had come aboard at Batavia, and our ladies grew to be exceedingly
shocked in that the Dutch ladies chose to promenade the deck all the morning,
and in the gloaming as well, in very scanty clothing. They wore a
capacious fan; a loose white blouse open at the neck called the “ kabiah
and a short colored gown, the “ sarong,” which allowed the display of
robust calves, emphatic feet, and toes forced into tiny slippers, the high
heels of which supported the middle of the foot, leaving something less
than a yard of heel sticking out into space in unrelieved loveliness. The
girls affected the, lovely costume which is fashionable among the Batavian
school-girls, and both young and old allowed the wayward wind to revel in
the loose abundance of their hair. On the Queen’s Birthday we drank
champagne to her health and to our own discomfort; we sang the “National
Anthem,” and all the patriotic songs which the united and co-operated
energy of all on board could call to remembrance ; we played on fifes and
drums, until our repertoire had been exhausted twenty times over ; and then
we sang until our voices grew cracked and hoarse —and that was how we
honored Her Majesty. .
ADEN.
When the native of a temperate climate visits such a place as Aden, he
learns to appreciate with the vigor and keenness of physical concern the inten-
sity of the longing of the dweller of these parts for the “ shadow of a great


rock.” Over the head of the pilgrim by land there is the clear, cruel sky,
the fierce sun striking down direct rays ; beneath his feet burning stones and
hot loose sand. It is indeed “a dry and thirsty land; ” and even from afar
off the rugged outlines of a great rock must be a refreshingly grateful sight.
How much more so when the pilgrim knows that the great rock is set in a
deep blue sea and is fanned by frequent breezes. To the pilgrim by sea the
first view of the great rock of Aden is by no means a refreshing sight.
Distance lends it no enchantment; the pearly haze of the sea does not soften
its barren, uncompromisingly harsh features. Its peaks and pinnacles, out*
lined against the far-off sky, are not limned in the tender ethereal blue, but
in dingy purple, that changes to dusky-brown long before the forbidding
ruggedness of its form can be traced. On a nearer approach it seems a
fragment of a half-formed world, void of order and form; a mountain of
brown slag and clinkers, which the violence of sudden cooling has rent and
shattered into inconceivable shapes. At the bases of its precipices, and upon
the shaggy sides of its ravines, there are hills of loose dust and stones; and
its sharply cut cliffs throb and quiver in the intense light. Round its foun-
dations the ocean swirls, tossing light clouds of spray against the hot brown
rocks. The vast mass is furrowed with chasms, and in places honeycombed
with shallow caves. Myriads of crude architectural designs are to be traced
among the ridges and precipices. Here and there are graceful slender spires
shooting out from rough-hewn domes; the long irregular rows of half-
formed pillars supporting vast arches against the rugged walls ; then huge
buttresses staying the headlong fall of mountains of crumbling ruins. Nor
is the roughness and desolatencss of the whole ameliorated or refreshed by
the presence of vegetation. There is not a single shrub or tree of the meanest
order upon the ridges or upon the sides of the sunburnt rock; but at the
bottom of some of the deeper gullies there are a few and far-between patches
of dull, gray-green, denoting the presence of primitive vegetable life. The
prospect of the whole is intolerably dreary, and provocative of thirst. Perched
on some of the dizziest heights, on crags seemingly unscalable, are small
cairns, testifying to the hardihood and strong-headedness of the adventurous
spirits who first conquered the roughness of the way. On some of the sea-
ward ridges, close to the margin of the rocks, yet hundreds of feet above-
sea-level, there are forts and walls, seemingly incorporate with and part and
parcel of the mountain. A fortified lighthouse occupies a commanding
position not far distant from a lofty signal-staff, from the top of which a
flag fluttered out a welcome to us toilers on the sea. It was on the
afternoon of the 27th May that the Chycbassa swept round the rock of
Aden, so close that the passengers, after gazing upwards and earnestly to
the uttermost heights, found themselves, to their discomfort, entitled to rank
with the stiff-necked generation ere Steamer Point was reached. Presently
the white flat-roofed houses and the steamers at anchor came into view, and
the Chyebassa swept past the Duke of "Westminster (outward bound), the
passengers on board which steamer cheering in response to “Auld Lang
Syne ” from our band. In the hands of a Turkish pilot, the Chyebassa
steamed past a couple of pugnacious little gunboats, and anchored within a
quarter of a mile from the wharves. Numbers of young Arabians came
alongside in “dug outs,” and. to their profit and the entertainment of the
passengers, performed wonderful diving feats for small coins. Hordes of
Arabian Jews —each with a long thin curl dangling in front of each ear—
swarmed up the gangway with bags of ostrich feathers, shells, coral, baskets,
silver jewellery, fans, &c., &c., for sale. Towards evening, and when prices.


had teen lowered ninety per cent., business began to be done, and some of
the passengers secured fine feathers and excellent jewellery at very cheap
rates. As soon as possible a small party of us went ashore, and were at
once set upon by a horde of rapacious natives. A dozen carriages swept
down upon us, every driver extolling in shrill shrieks the speed of his steeds
and the comfort of his vehicle ; dozens of hotel touts yelled in our ears, each
proclaiming that his hotel was the only English hotel in the place ; dozens
of money-changers offered handfuls of rupees in exchange for English gold ;
there were those that held out bundles of cigars; those that created whirl-
winds about us with huge fans; those that waved snowy white ostrich
feathers; those that begged, and those that shouted seemingly for shouting’s
sake. Then the drivers began to chide each other; and to vent their rage on
each other’s horses ; and the hotel touts fell out, swore at each other for our
benefit in choice English, tore to fragments each other’s cards, and slapped
each other’s cheeks. Eor the novelty of it we enjoyed this riot for a while,
and then, selecting a substantial-looking carriage drawn by a pair of small
but willing horses, we crowded in with instructions to drive to the tanks—
the only lion which Aden possesses. We passed up a dusty street,
across a barren esplanade, where fronting the sea there are several hotels,
round a comer where the narrow road had been cut out of the
foot of a rocky ridge, and along close to the sea yet skirting the
heights. At one point we were shut out from the view of the sea by vast
heaps of coal; and thence the road led across a barren waste and up a hill so
steep that at last we were compelled to get out and walk. We had met
buffaloes with humps upon their shoulders harnessed in pairs to carts, mobs
of asses driven by dirty Arabs, and strings of camels bearing immense loads
of dried fish, and bags of other merchandise; men and women whose coun-
tenances were of ebony blackness had stared at us ; Arabs mounted on small
donkeys had raced us; and Arab women and girls had hid their faces from
the gaze of the stranger. There was a lonely graveyard among the tumbled
"rocks and loose stones; a red flag instead of mound of fresh earth showing
‘ the resting place of him that died o’ yesterday. Close beside the road there
were long low buildings with flat roofs, and furnished with many arched
doorways, uniform as to height and style, in which naked children and goats
and women (dressed for the most part in dingy red) seemed to live on equal
terms. Now and again a sleepy ass would bray at us from an open doorway,
and then naked children would swarm out between its legs, and a hideous hag
would peer out between its long ears. Hundreds of feet above us there were
set great guns, and above them again fringing the ridges were low walls
with here and there ominous black dots telling of the position of other guns.
The road led zig-zag fashion up the hill, and into a cutting just wide enough
for two small vehicles to pass each other. This cutting is called the “ Great
Pass,” and is on the road from Steamer Point to Aden proper. At its
greatest depth—considerably over a hundred feet, I should think—it is
spanned by a massive bridge, beneath which is a guardhouse and a ponderous
gate. Passing the gate we found ourselves in a small yard, round which
were set immense cannons. These command the harbor, or rather form an
insignificant portion of the protection which the harbor enjoys. To
the right and to the left from the bridge low walls, which appear
in the distance like seams on the face of the rock, ascend to heights
which made one dizzy to contemplate. There were dark-skinned soldiers
in dozens here, enjoying life in perpetual shade, and the place
echoed and rang again with the endless procession of carriages, foot


passengers, and the shouts of the drivers of camels and asses. The
breeze swept through the narrow pass in refreshing gusts, and our
carriage dashed down the shady incline between perpendicular walls.
Presently the rocks receded, and beyond us lay the ocean, and below,
compressed in a hollow, the jumbled-up, orderless town of Aden. In a few
minutes we were driving at full speed through the narrow streets of the
native portion.' Dozens of naked youths raced alongside demanding
charity ; old men rose up from their doorways, stretched out their skinny
arms, and shrieked after us ; women forgot the stranger in their eagerness
to beg; the deformed exhibited their repulsive features and misshapen
limbs ; shopkeepers plunged down upon us with handfuls of dirty dates and
shrunken oranges. Everywhere there was a great din ; everywhere a great
stink, and we were relieved when the carriage stopped beside a small bridge,
among some parched-up shrubs planted in tubs. Here was the first tank.
We accepted the guidance of an aged Arab, and began to look round. We
found ourselves at the mouth of a great gorge. Immediately below lay the
town of Aden; above, the perpendicular heights of the main mountain
peak. In the receding distance were low white walls, encompassing the
furthest tanks, which are built on terraces, right to the head of the gorge.
Under the conduct of our guide we mounted from terrace to terrace to the
uppermost tank, which is wedged in and blocked by stupendous material, and
turned to look down again upon the white houscsof the town; the busy square,
where, among the swarms of dusky figures, herds of camels enjoying their
evening feed could be seen ; the brown square church, built upon a brown
rock, round which the path to its door winds spirally up ; the low dome of
the mosque ; the craggy outlines of the coast, and the blue sea beyond,
flecked here and there with the white sails of feluccas. The tanks—in all to
the number of twelve—were dry, with the exception of three, and water
was being drawn from the most capacious of the three, w-hich occupies a
central position. They are nothing more than great natural hollows in the
rocky bed of the gorge, which the English have improved by excavation
and masonry. In olden days the Arabs used to store water in the hollows—
a very necessary economy on the part of those who desired to live in the
country, for on an average the rock of Aden is cooled by rain only once in
four years. In times of drought water was brought long distances in
goat-skins on the backs of asses and camels, and now the English eke out
the natural supply by condensing. Some thirty years ago the English so
improved the hollows that their capacity was increased a hundredfold, and
now Aden is actually a watering-place for steamers. The tanks are
irregular in position and shape, and the modem improvers have been at
pains to increase the depth of the hollow's by building up solid masonry,
rather than excavation. From the central point in the series of tanks there
is a rope walk, which leads up the side of the gorge to the top of the
mountain, where there is a tank which holds, according to our guide, some-
thing like twelve million gallons. This we had not time to inspect; besides
the slender rope attached to thin rods of iron let into the rock did not
inspire one with any degree of confidence that he would ever reach there,
though days of time were at his disposal. Of the twelve tanks in the gorge
above the town the most capacious holds 4,645,273 gallons, and the smallest
128,765 gallons. The air was deliciously cool, and we pilgrims from afar
were glad to rest awhile, and to drink of the clear, cool water tendered by
Arab boys, and watch the wheeling flight of blue rock pigeons about the
crevices in which they had built their nests. We lingered until the sun no


longer shone on the white-walled houses below, and slowly descended from
terrace to terrace to our carriage. Troops of Arabs were carrying away each
his goat-skin of water, and the scene was rendered still more Oriental and
picturesque by the presence of graceful young ladies of the “ Itebeeca-at-
the-Well ” class bearing upon their heads pitchers of the essential fluid.
Europeans and natives alike are charged so much per gallon for the water,
and the revenue derived is devoted towards the repayment of the outlay on
the improvements, and towards the expense of maintaining the tanks. Our
way now led to the European quarter of the town past the square, where
hundreds of Arabs were preparing themselves and their camels for the
night’s rest. The crouching camels were being hand fed with long strips of
green fodder, and it was seen that the majority of them were condemned to
pass the night with their burdens still upon their backs. Eor themselves the
men had provided bedsteads of a nondescript stretcher pattern, which they
had set down each man beside his beast. These were not the only occupants
of the square. There were idlers and gossipers, mobs of asses, and flocks of
goats and animals that seemed to be an equal mixture of goat and sheep..
Outside the houses there sat swarthy Arabs enjoying sedate gossip
and the cumbersome hookah. After visiting the shops of a very aristo-
cratic Turkish merchant, we drove through the Arab quarter again
to find the dirty streets surging with brown and black denizens.
There was scarcely carriage way through the dense crowds. Again
were we set upon by hordes of shopkeepers, w r ho held out handfuls
of ware they wished to dispose of. At last the more desperate of
them clung to the wheels of the carriage, while others stood before the
horses and flourished leopard skins, and baskets of oranges, and parti-
colored mats. Never before had we seen such pushing and energetic
business. They certainly deserved some recognition from us, and
undoubtedly they would have received it, but for the advent of a Hindoo
policeman in a uniform of yellowish-brown. He stormed at the merchants,
flourished a substantial staff, and eventually, after repeated sallies into the
crowd, cleared a passage for the carriage, and away we went. By this time it
was getting dusk, and our steeds were urged up the hill to the Great Bass.
Troups of beggar boys raced alongside, encouraged by the distribution of a
few small coins at the foot of the hill. But, alas, we led them into an
ambush. Crouched behind a low wall there was a grim policeman armed
with his staff and a heap of road metal. The carriage whirled past, and
out ho sprang, putting the army of beggar boys to rout with a shower of
stones. The last we saw of the conflict as wo entered the pass was the
policeman charging down the steep roadway, and the naked boys scattering
in as many directions as the physical features of the country would permit.
It was dark before wo reached the esplanade at Steamer Point, and our
driver had to pick his way cautiously among the forms of sleeping Arabs,
who had stretched themselves out on the stony ground, each, doubtless, with
the intention of being the early bird to catch the all-too-confiding stranger.
After inspecting some of the larger shops, and purchasing some of the
curios displayed, a boat was obtained, and we were soon pacing the
familiar deck of the Chyebassa, and crowing about our exploits, for we
found that ours was the only party that had visited the tanks. At night-
time the rock of Aden is, perhaps, more dreary-looking, as it is certainly
more gloomy, than in the day. Every peak was cut out with intense
blackness against the starlit sky. At various heights, and on remote ridges,
tiny stars twinkled ; but no sound came across the narrow strip of water


that separated us from the shore. The scene was cheerless and melancholy,
yet grand and solemn.
THE SUEZ CANAL.
In the morning, at getting-up time, we were far away from Aden,
steaming np the Straits of Babelmandeb. By noon, the island of Berim, at
the entrance to the Red Sea, with its lighthouse hove in sight, and on its
shores, within a very short distance of each other, were seen the wrecks of
two steamers. It was here that during the seventeenth century, a set of bold
pirates, afterwards joined by the famous, or rather infamous, Captain Kid, set
up a stronghold. They dug in vain for water, and at length were compelled
to abandon a position which gave them command of the Red Sea. They
betook themselves to Madagascar, where Captain Kid, who had been sent
by the English Government in command of the Adventurer of thirty guns
and 200 men, to disperse them, resolved himself into head buccaneer. In the
twilight of the same evening the island of Jebel Zukar, on which are two or
three more wrecks, was passed. This portion of the Red Sea is a veritable
resting place for wayward and wilful boats, the relics of which stand out as
warnings to other strongheaded vessels. In the Red Sea the weather was
much cooler than the passengers had anticipated. Indeed, throughout the
voyage, so far, the weather had been most agreeable, having been pleasantly
cool even during the seventeen days we passed within a degree or so of the
equator. Some had expected to be frizzled in the Red Sea, and when the
thermometer down below touched only 93 deg. at its very highest, they were
agreeably disappointed. On deck, beneath the ample awnings, it was always
cool, and none but those who had been used to much more temperate climates
than that of Northern Queensland made the least objection. Early on the
afternoon of the 29th May, when most of the passengers were enjoying their
post tiffin doze, the cry of “fire! ” ran through the ship. In a moment
there was a rushing to and fro. Ladies turned pale, and their champions
assumed tragic do-or-die attitudes. The native firemen rushed down the
decks with coils of hose, and the voice of the chief was heard above the din
giving his orders. Clouds of smoke issued from the windows and doors of the
chief engineer’s cabin, which is on deck ; brave young men rushed in and
tore down blazing curtains and poured toilet-bottles of water on burning
paper; and before many of the passengers had time to realise that the ship
was actually on fire the flames were extinguished, and the excitement and
scorched boards gradually cooled down. It appeared that to a carelessly-
disposed-of match, used for pipe-lighting, the passengers were indebted for
the thrilling, but happily momentary experience of being on board a
burning ship. There was a look of anxiety about several faces for the rest
of that afternoon. Next day, shortly before noon, the stirring cry of “ man
overboard ” woke the slumbering excitement of the day previous, and away
astern the black head of one of the cre-w, who had been cleaning the side of
the vessel, was seen. One of the passengers sent after him a life-buoy;
bells rang and the steamer stopped, and two boats were lowered on the
instant. But by this time the man was a quarter of a mile away. The
water was wonderfully calm, and impelled by eager arms the boats shot
away in his direction. Ho had managed to reach the buoy, and was
floating about at his ease in the ruffled wake of the vessel. In five minutes
from the first alarm the man was rescued, and in a quarter of an hour the


Chyebassa was steaming full speed ahead again as if nothing had
happened. The man staggered a little when he was lifted on his feet on
deck, but in an hour or so he appeared to be none the worse for his
adventure. These mishaps were the fruitful scources of numberless
“yams,” and for several evenings after the more travelled of the passengers
and officers entertained the others with such highly sensational stories that
some of us began to feel a shade of disappointment in that we had not been
favored with similarly exciting adventures. Every day of our passage up
the Red Sea large steamers were met. Occasionally there were two in sight
at the same time, and some passed so close that -without glasses the names
upon the bows could be easily made out.
The evening of Sunday (Ist June) brought with it,aview of the inhospitable
bulk of Mount Sinai—rising out of a wilderness of brown sand. To many
of the passengers its cliffs and precipices, the startling clearness of the
heavens above, and the vague purple distances of its more remote ridges,
preached eloquent and inspiriting sermons. Among those dreary ravines
had not Moses communed with the God of Israel for forty days and forty
nights ? There, had not the leaders of the people beheld the glory of the
Lord when ‘ ‘ there were under his feet as it were a paved work of a
sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness? ” From
those very rocks had not been hewn the “ two tables of testimony, tables of
stone, written with the finger of God ? ” It was meet, therefore, to linger
in placid contemplation on that glorious Sunday evening, while the twilight
deepened around the grand old mountain, and to give pause while the mind
flew back to those dim, hazy ages, and followed the wanderings of the
“peculiar people ”on the desert sands. No sermon preached on board that
day had half the influence for good that the view of Mount Sinai had.
Teachings of younger days, and reasonings of latter days, here received
confirmation and support; and even those on board who had marked
themselves for noisy indifference to the observances of the Sabbath within
view of the mount, grew calm and subdued. The same evening the last
view of the Southern Cross, which had been a nightly remembrancer of
Australia, was vouchsafed, and henceforth our ambition was directed solely
in the direction of the Pole Star.
On the morning of the 2nd, the shipping at anchor, the low-lying land
ahead through which no passage was to be discerned, and afar-off the
brown square houses and slender minarets of Suez, told us that we were
about to enter the Canal. Several of the vessels about us were flying the yellow
flag, but there was a brisk fresh breeze blowing, and the most apprehensive
of the passengers looked upon the unwholesome signal without flinching.
We drew up close beside the Orient liner, the Cuzco, and the Austrian boat,
the Vorwaerts, and, after an hour’s delay for a pilot, the former marshalled
us the way she was going, and disappeared among the sandridges. Among
the passengers the rumor went abroad that our pilot -was a man that did not
give barnacles the opportunity of cultivating close acquaintanceship
with his ships during the passage of the Canal, and thereat we were
in high glee. The idea of spending four or five days in a narrow
ditch, between banks of loose hot sand, was not at all relished, and
consequently when it was bruited about that our pilot was going to put
us through in twenty-four hours, spirits rose to a lofty altitude. At
nine o’clock the Chyebassa entered the Canal, the Vorwaerts keeping a
respectful distance behind, and then a small cloud of dull brown smoke
ahead was the only sign over sand of the whereabouts of the Cuzco. To the


left was the town of Suez (whence the railway to Cairo could be seen
stretching away) and the outposts of a chain of barren precipitous hills; to-
the right a dreary desert. Of the Canal, itself it is sufficient to say—what,
perhaps, is already known to the majority of my readers —that it is a ditch
extending from Suez to Port Said, a distance of eighty-seven miles ; that its
average depth is 2G feet; that its breadth at the surface varies, for where
the hanks are high it is 190 feet, and where they are low it expands to
330 feet; that the breadth of the central or navigable part is 72 feet;
that the banks vary in height from a foot or so to 100 feet; that in some
low-lying tracts the banks have been built up ; that the walls here and
there are roughly paved with “spalls;” that at every five or six miles there
are short widenings, known locally as “ gares,” which give room for vessels
to haul into the bend to allow the passage of other vessels, and near which
are the houses of officials; that two vessels can pass each other at any part
by one of them stopping and using the warps; that in Lake Timsah (the
half-way house of the Canal) there is a “gare” sufficiently large for any
ship to turn in; that vessels are not permitted to travel at night, and that
their speed must not exceed five miles an hour. The Chyebassa steamed
slowly through the narrow channel, and having suffered the indignity of
being twice tied up to permit of the passing of other boats outward bound,
entered the Great Bitter Lake shortly after three in the afternoon. Then the
Vorwaerts raced after us at full speed, evidently with the intention of
reaching the other side and entering the Canal again before us; but the
wishes of the Austrians were doomed to disappointment. The sun was
lengthening out the shadows of the masts on the banks of the Canal whenwc
entered Lake Timsah, and by the time Ismalia (in the distance) and the Swiss
cottage of the Khedive (on the left bank) were passed it was hanging—no
brighter than a full moon—above a horizon, blurred, brown, and indistinct
with shifting sand. The pleasant sound of labor attracted attention a little
further on, and herds of Arabs were seen digging out the left bank, and
presently three or four electric lamps flashed out a welcome to ns, and told
us that the Arabs were doomed to night work. A mile or so further on and
the vessel was tied up for the night. Some few took the opportunity of
indulging in a trudge through the sand, but they got nothing for their pains
save swollen ankles. At four o’clock the following morning (3rd) another
start was made, and most of the morning was occupied in tying up to the
bank and off again. It appears that the rule of the Canal is that the first
vessel telegraphed from the preceding “gare,” or stopping place, shall have
the precedence in passing. The Chyebassa happened to strike a vein of ill-
luck, and was compelled to hangup at nearly every “ gare.” She had to wait
until the Austrian had come up and fastened herself to the bank, and then
the more lucky outward bound vessels would steam slowly past. In this
way we had to make room for processions of vessels of all nations except
Japanese. Fortunately, on one occasion, we were signalled by the “ gare ”
ahead just in time to remove from us this slight, and a splendid vessel
flying the flag of the “Jap.” had to hang-up for us. Some of the “gares”
were veritable oases, being surrounded by gardens in which trees and
shrubs flourished to a degree quite out of proportion with the apparent
barrenness of the soil. We passed numbers of boats, the exact counterpart
of the Noah’s arks of our young days, in which reside amphibiously Canal
officials and their families, and dogs and goats, &c., &c. At about twenty-
four miles from Port Said is the stopping place 'of Kantara, where the
telegraph line to Syria is crossed, and where there were a few fugitive pilgrims


and merchants, with their camels and asses, waiting to be taken across in a
commodious punt. Further along one of the wonders of the desert was
displayed Away back from the right bank there appeared a wide-
spreading silvery lake dotted with innumerable islets. Wavelets could bo
seen lapping the margin of brown hot sand. Pillars of brown smoke
floated over moving masses that appeared to bo grotesquely shaped steamers.
There were the shadows of the islets reflected in the white glistening
water, and beyond could Ix 3 outlined the further shore. Glasses served
only to clarify the view; but, presently, while yet wo were earnestly
gazing at the captivating scene, it dissolved, and, like the “insubstantial
pageant ” that it was, faded, leaving “not a rack behind.” It was the
mirage that has mocked many a fainting traveller, and the smoky columns
were nothing more than whirlwinds of sand stalking across the thirsty
plain. On the opposite side was another lake, fringed here and there with
tall reeds and patched with white. The delusive mirage had made us so
incredulous that until the waters came down even to the bank of the Canal, and
the patches of white were seen to be made up of flocks of tall flamingoes,
we inclined to express a Betsy-Prigish disbelief in the existence of any lake
whatever in those parts. Approaching Port Said, the last twenty-five
miles of the Canal is in as straight a line as the skill of man can devise, and
the passage along it was uninterrupted. Several dredges-- one of gigantic
proportions—were passed, and it was noticed that considerably more pains
had been devoted to the preservation of the banks by encouraging the
growth of reeds, paving, &c. Even when going at the measured pace of
live miles au hour, the wasli of such a steamer as the Chycbassa in such a
confined place as the Canal is considerable, and the banks are being
continually fretted and washed away.
POET SAID.
Pout Said was readied at three o’clock in the afternoon. From a distance
the chief objects to attract attention are* tall lighthouse, and the targe
building—palace it was intended to be by its founder—recently purchased
by the English and transformed into a hospital. The principal part of the
town, directly off which anchor was cast, lay on the port side. Opposite
was the coaling station, were there were dozens of large vessels discharging
into huge lighters. The country for miles out was dingy with coal dust,
and there was deafening clatter all round. As soon as the vessel anchored,
lighters with Arabs and coal were alongside, and by seven o’clock in the
evening 500 tons had been stowed away in our bunkers. The Arabs who
did this work were tall, well-made fellows, who did not appear to know
what fatigue was. They ran up narrow planks, each with a huge basket of
coal, with the lightness of a dancing muster, and sang “ responsive to each
other’s voice” like a party of choristers from the nether regions. During
the whole time that the ship was in port a cloud of coal dust enveloped her,
so that the visages of officers and passengers alike were greatly changed,
and the demand for water for washing purposes kept the “ boys ” continually
on the trot long after the lights of Port Said had sunk beneath the horizon.
Here, again, the ship was besieged by an army of pedlers, who had everything
from dried flowers from Jerusalem to ” Bnunaguni ” ware, to dispose of.
. I)


Ashore wo had,to resist a charge from the horde of “merchants ” who live
on the stranger, but our hearts had been hardened against all of that ilk,
and we charged through the crowd and swept up the main street. Here we
fared hut little better. In avoiding Charybdis in the person of a shopkeeper
and his assistants, who had stationed himself in the middle of the narrow
street to intercept the way, one stood the risk of striking Scylla, represented
by a group of Frenchmen playing dominoes without a cafe, or the table of a
money changer set out in the street. The way was set with ditHculties, and
now and again, as we were pioneers of the Chyehnssa people, wc had
literally to tight our way through an excited crowd. When we would not
buy of their wares they would offer to us, toss so much or nothing for tlie
article displayed. When one was lucky and carried off a bundle of coral th.it
the vendor had valued at £1 fornought, we began to realise forcibly that old
Butler was not far wrong when he wrote —
*• Doubtless the pleasure is as great
Of being cheated, as to cheat.”
We strolled through the town to the Arab quarter, the scene of the late fire,
to find the sand covered with thousands of military tents, in winch the
houseless poor dwelt for the time being. Very few of the wooden houses of
the natives had escaped the fire, hut among the few was a rude mosque, from
the wooden minaret of which was a loud-voiced piiost who called the faithful
to prayer. Veiled women and weak-eyed children fought round the pumps
for water, and idlers of each sex played “jack-stones’* on the sandy foot-
ways. At Aden we had more than enough of noise and had smells. Here
we had just as much too much of those elements, with the addition of a
disgustingly had one in the shape of clouds of flies— one of those plagues
from which Moses of old but very imperfectly relieved the land of the
Bharoahs. In shape the fly of Egypt is similar to the common house-fly;
but in the dogged persistence with which he attacks the corners of the eyes
lie will give the house-fly “ pints innumerable.” lie knows that there are
so many of him to maintain the war against all that is flesh that he sacrifices
himself without endeavoring to escape. Smash him, and Ids comrades
crowd over his carcase to avenge his death. If a fly gets into the corner of
your eye it is well to let him feast, for if you kill Idm there are hundreds of
thousands buzzing ready for his vacant place. The fly knows that Ids life
is nothing worth, and is so patriotic that after a good till he submits to he
smashed with the calmness cf pure heroism. He knows that by his decease
one at least of his ravenous companions will have Ids fill too. AVhat with
noise, unpleasant odors, and flies, our exploration into the -Arab quarter was
not altogether lovely, and wc hurried hack to the European streets. One
idea that visit to the crowded tents of the Arabs impressed upon us, and it
was not a too comfortable one. Despite the dirt and dust and heat, A:c., and
frailness of the women and children, the unusual stature and hulk of the
majority of the men could not hut excite attention and the remark that if
“the tribes of the desert” arc comprised of men of like build who have
spirits in proportion to their size, the difficulty of checking a widespread
rebellion, even with English troops, is by no means to he lightly esteemed.
Taking the working Arabs of Port Said as a sample, one could not hut think
that the barren sandy country, where water and vegetation arc so scarce, has
produced a race of which the most fruitful and temperate clime in the world
might well he proud. In passing through the Canal we had man}- opportu-
nities Of becoming familiar with the hardihood and strength of the Arabs.


For mile after mile they would trudge on the hunks of the Canal, keeping
pace with the steamer with apparent ease, and it must he remembered that
the weather was by no means cool, that the way led over hot loose sand, and
the steamer travelled the full five miles an hour. In Port Said we noticed
that there were very few vehicles; indeed, during oijr peregrinations only
two—a hearse and an open carriage—were noticed. The popular mode of
transit is the donkey, and there was plenty of that sedate animal about.
Some splendid horses, evidently belonging to the land, were being ridden by
the military ; but all the civilians seemed to affect the donkey. French
residents appear to spend the greater part of their lives in the streets. When
not strolling dreamily along beneath capacious umbrellas, they were seated
round small tables outside the cafes, enjoying dominoes and cigars, or
chocolate and cards. In some places the tables of these light-hearted gentry
wore scattered well nigh across the road, and their excited chatter and much
protest maintained a perpetual babble. We were on board again in time to
witness the gallant chief officer jmt to flight a whole army of pedlers which
had held possession of the ship since the moment that anchor had been cast.
The army fled in disorder and confusion down the gangway, and fell higglcy-
dy-pigglcdy into boats below; but to the last moment its component parts
made bargains at alarming reductions on rales ruling early in the afternoon,
with those of the passengers who had bided their time. Soon after the
anchor was lifted, and in an hour or so, the lights of Port Said had dis-
appeared behind us. In the morning the ship was scudding through the
smooth waters of the Mediterranean, and most of the pasj-engers were over-
hauling their boxes for warm clothing, for the air was felt to be much too
keen to bo resisted by such attire as that usually worn in Northern Queens-
land. At Port Said some Arabian sheep had been shipped, and as the breed
has at least one extraordinary feature a word or two on the subject may bo
road. The sheep arc large framed, and have pied faces, long cars and coarse
hair—it can hardly be called wool; but the remarkable and distinguishing
feature of the breed is that humble and nnvomantic one which Australian
woolgrowers, with ruthless hand, deprive their increase of ere yet the poor
innocents have lived long enough to mourn their loss—the tail. Instead of'
being somewhat round, frisky, sportful, and nervous—as a tail usually is—
that appendage in an Arabian sheep is a broad, thick, flat, inert mass, which
which forms quite a shield over that portion of the body which in ordinary
animals is ornamented by the tails. If an Arabian sheep was divided into
five “ quarters ” the tail would be the bulkiest; so that if Little 80-Peep’s
sheep had been of that breed she would have no occasion to be light-hearted
or indifferent when they came home imperfect in that respect. She would
have had solid and weighty and practical reasons for praying that in that
quarter at least each of the herd should come home safe and sound. In many
points the breed bears a family likeness to that patient and responsible animal
the Scape Goat, which used to carry out into the wilderness the sins of the
children of Israel.
THROUGH THE MEDITERRANEAN AND HOME.
On the afternoon of the 7th a small white cloud scarcely bigger than a
man’s hand appeared on the horizon to the north. It was stationary, and
did not change in shape or size as clouds usually do, and when it was
1)2


explained that the speck which was set like a pearl on the blue rim of the
ocean, was vapour hovering* about the summit of Mount Etna, we were
scarcely surprised. The mountain was a hundred miles away. Before
sundown we were abreast of Valetta (the capital of Malta), and close enough
in to distinguish the multitudes which thronged the narrow streets; to
appreciate the form and shape of tire cathedral ; and to watch the
motion of the windmills upon the more exposed parts of the tiny island.
Until the morning of the 11th the varied coast of Northern Africa was
scarcely ever out of sight. Then the first view of the Continent of Europe
was obtained, and a noble and refreshing spectacle it was. Away to the
starboard was the lofty unbroken harrier of the Sierra Ncvadas, and, true
to name, the heights were covered with snow. "When the sun rose and
penetrated the mantle of mist in which the mountains were draped, the
snow assumed a delicate pink hue, which harmonised to perfection with the
rich blue of the mountain. Gradually the light increased, the mist vanished ;
the snow changed from pink to the purest of white; the blue of the moun-
tains to purple ; in the intense clearness scattered white patches, which
rivalled the snow in purity, showed the elevated situations of towns mid
villages; and oif the land there came, making fairy footprints ou the
smooth ocean, a gentle breeze, so delicately warm, so generous, and so
thrilling, that it seemed to whisper a greeting from “the vine-clad hills of
Spain.” The same evening we passed under the shadow of the grim old
rock of Gibraltar, and ere the sun went down the Chyebassa was plunging
in the confused waters where the Atlantic and the Mediterranean meet.
Solemn, gloomy, pall-like clouds overhung Trafalgar’s Bay, and a danger
light cast a blood-red gleam through the misty air from a point which
overlooks the scene of Nelson’s glorious victory. At midday on the 12th
the Chyebassa passed within gunshot of the weather-beaten points which
form the outposts of Cape St. Vincent. At the water’s edge the flagstaff
point is here and there undermined by caves, in the darkness of which flocks
of white sea-birds are continually wheeling. On the next point a low
staunch lighthouse stands among the ruins of a stone-built convent, the
walls of which actually creep down the face of the cliff. Some forty or fifty
steamers, together with a greater number of sailing craft, were sighted
during the day, and to the credit of the Chyebassa be it said, that she passed
with case every steamer hound in the same direction. Across the Bay of
Biscay the we ather was unusually fine, and the sea so smooth that table
“racks” were,not required, notwithstanding bushels of prophecies to the
contrary. These articles of furniture were never once called into requisition
throughout the long voyage, which is sufficient to say that old Boreas,
whoso most notorious attribute is that of being rude, to us was excessively
polite. Early on the morning of the IGth of June, Eddystonc lighthouse,
with the ruins of its most recently-departed predecessor beside it, hove in
sight, and on port side was the misty outline of the shores of Old England.
Soon the Chyebassa passed into the smoother water inside of the Plymouth
breakwater, and the passengers had leisure to admire the greenness of the
irregular fields and the freshness of the woods, and to inspire deep draughts
of the soft air that came off the land. Those to whom the sight of the green
fields of England re-kindled the tires of a smouldering memory, grew
subdued or merry as their recollections were sad or pleasant, while those to
whom the sight was novel, who had never touched a “ dust of England’s
ground” felt their patriotism rise to an enthusiastic degree, and gave way
to inordinate cheers or poured hursts of soul down responsive fifes, without


the slightest regard for the feelings of others. Here a good proportion of
the passengers— those who were desperately impatient to reach London —
left us, and the friendships which had been formed during the passage were
broken with hearty handshakings, and mutually expressed hopes of meeting
again in the “sweet by-and-bye.” At 9 a.m. the Chycbassa was on her way
up the Channel. The green holds of merry England were grateful sights to
those long accustomed to the sombre, monotonous brownness of the
Australian bush, and seemed to beam a kindly welcome on us as with long
and greedy glances we drank in the quiet beauty of the south coast scenery.
That morning the coast was scarcely out of sight. It was now rocky,
barren, and dreary ; now checkered with woods, green fields, and quiet cosy
villages; now faint and unreal in the gray haze; but it was there, and that
was enough. To us, “wearied of the wandering wastes of barren foam,” it
would have been too much of joy to have had those pleasant fields and
comfortable woods always with us, and we were quite content with and very
thankful for an occasional view. Morning brought the white cliffs of Dover,
which glistened in the fitful sunshine, and a far-off view of the coast of
Trance, and afternoon —the mighty city of London.
Before concluding this account of the voyage, it behoves me to say that
the passage from Queensland to London was accomplished in two days under
contract time, and that before reaching Plymouth Captain Morris was
presented with an address expressive of the sentiments which all right-
minded passengers should entertain towards a genial and attentive
commander —one who, while taking a lively interest in their concerns,
showed that the uttermost parts of the vessel and all the details thereof were
under his personal supervision. To this address the signatures of every
passenger on board was attached, and its presentation was honored with
champagne, and evoked all sorts of pretty speeches.
CONCLUSION.
From what has been said, it will be allowed that the voyage to England
from Queensland, via the Torres Straits route, is in the nature of an extended
pleasure trip. Throughout, the mind is invigorated and refreshed by a rich
variety of rare experiences. Pictures of now countries and strange peoples
arc presented at agreeable intervals; while there is ample time for indulgence
in that complete, undisturbable rest, to experience which alone many are
induced to travel. In such vessels as the British India Steam Navigation
employ, nothing is left to be desired, cither with regard to convenience or
comfort. It is not therefore necessary to recapitulate or to elaborate upon
the superiorities of the route; but, in conclusion, I may be permitted to
acknowledge the kindness and consideration shown while on board the
Chycbassa, and to express on behalf of several passengers regret that the
voyage did not last a little longer, glad as all were to see old England’s
shores again.


Namk.
Gross
. Tonnage.
Nominal
II. r.
Commanders.
ABYSSINIA
1129 ..
.... 135
A. Ltddi.uid.
AFRICA
2032 ..
.. .. 250
AY. H. S. Loutitt.
AGRA
.... 1907 ..
...-. ISO
M. AIaCEARLANE.
*ALMORA
2G13 ..
,... 300
ARABIA
.... 1080 ...
.. .. 110
W. H. RoimVELL.
ARGOT
.... 1782 ..
200
ASIA
... 1700 ..
... 200
.... S. Davison.
ASSYRIA
.... 1195 ...
... 200
.... A. Penfounh.
AVAGYEE
... -127 ...
... 76
.... A. C. Davies.
BAGHDAD
.... 1271 .. .
... 180
BANCOORA
... 2880 ...
... 300
BHUNDARA
... 2899 ...
... 300
.... W. Britten.
BOOLDANA
. .. 2823 ...
... 300
*BULIMBA
... 2503 ...
... 300
BURMAII
... 1081 ...
... 142
BUSHEER
... 792 .. .
... 120
BYCULLA
. .. 11G1 .. .
... 130
.. .. S. AYarinoton.
CALCUTTA
... 803 ...
... 120
CANARA-
... 1903 ...
,,. 200
.... J. B. Pearson.
CHANDA
... 2022 ...
... 220
CIIILKA
... 1911 ...
... 200
CHINDWAERA.. .
... 1983 ...
... 200
CHUTRA
... 1911 ...
... 180
*CHYEBASSA
. .. 2011 ...
... 318
COCONADA
... SG2 ...
... 120
.... H. G. Greet.
COLABA
... 1100 ...
... 130
COAIMILLIA
... 872 ...
... 110
.... J. B. Maceadyen.
CULNA
... 1981 ...
... 200
*DACCA
... 3909 ...
... 500
*DORUNDA
... 2977 ...
... 100
*ELDORADO
... 3332 ...
. .. 150
.. .. H. B. Smith.
ELLORA
... 1970 ...
... 200
.. .. J. H. AYarjian.
ETHIOPIA
... 2032 ...
... 25G
H. J. Guy.
EUPHRATES
... 803 ...
... 120
GOA
... 1900 ...
... 206
GOALPAEA
... 2111 ...
... 2->0
.... J. A. Maoenis.
GOORKHA
. .. 1101 ...
... 500
.... J. C. Sharp.
HENZADA
. .. 2078 ...
... 200
.,.. J. Afern,
BRITISH INDIA STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY, LIMITED.
FLEET OF STEAMERS.
* Steamers of the British India Association, running on the Trunk* Lines from
London to India and Queensland.


Names.
Gross
Tonnage.
Nominal
ii. r.
CuMMASDERS. ,
TTTiU ATiAVA
1427 ...
.... W. W, Allen.
HUZAEA
.. 2078 ...
,.. 200
INDIA
.. 4065 ...
... 500
.... C. M. II. Day.
JAVA
.. 1165 ...
... ISO
KANDRA
.. 1952 ...
... 200
KERBELA
.. 1937 •■..
... 200
KTT A N'T) \TT,A
•>040
2 >1
KTT/VVA
... 200
.... M. England.
LOODIANA
.. 3000 ...
.. .. G. N. Blown.
MADURA
.. 1942 ...
... 300
.. .. E. A. Wilson. ‘
MAIIRATTA
.. 742 ...
... R>0
.... R. II. Coorr,.
MALDA
.. 1945 ...
... 300
.... G. Brown.
MANOEA
.. 4707 ...
... 050
MECCA
.. 1150 ..,
... 180
. . .. A. May.
AIEDTN A
.. 811 ...
... 112
*MERKARA
.. 2971 ...
... 400
♦NAVARINO
.. 3400 ...
.. . 310
.... L. T. Bergejian.
NERBUDDA
.. °977 ...
... 324
.... AV. SlAIillATT.
NOWSHERA
.. 2962 ...
... 324
.... A. Sanders.
NEVASA
.. 2970 ...
... 321
.... T. R. Nailer.
NUDDEA
.. 2964 ...
... 324
A. B. Cave.
ORTENTAE
_ 1496 ...
. . . 165
PAOTTTTMRA
_ 867 ...
. .. 140
RATNA
.. 1780 ...
... 200
REMBA
., 1536 .. .
... 280
RURULIA
,.. 1552 ...
... 200
*QTT1',TTA
3302
RAJROOTANA
... 2030 ...
,... 221
RANGOON (Ruddle) .
... 547 ..,
,... 400
O. Kruse.
REWA
... 4017 ...
... 500
J. Templeton.
*ROATA
... 2727 ...
II. M. Ingram.
SATARA
... 1301 ..
.... 200
SCINDIA
.. 2601 ...
... 270
SECUNDRA
.. 2000 ...
... 300
K. Macaulay.
SIMLA
. .. 1015 .. .
. .. ISO
SIRDIIANA
, .. 2001 ...
. .. 270
J. AV. Livingstone
SIRSA
,.. 2000 ...
... 300
*WAROONGA
.. 2500 ...
... 300
NEW STEAMER ...,
,.. 3000 .. .
... —
NEW STEAMER ...
... 3000 ...
,. .. —
* Steamers of the British India Association, running on the Trunk Linos from
London to India and Queensland.
STEAMEES— continued.




AGENTS IN THE QUEENSLAND LINE.
Brisbane . . . . . . British-India & Queensland
Agency Co., Ltd.
Rockhampton . . . . Walter Reid A Co.
Mackay . . . . . . George Smith.
Bowen J. Stevens.
Townsville . . . . Burns, Philp, & Co., Ltd.
Cooktown . . . . Power, Thomas, & Madden.
Thursday Island .. Captain Haughton.
Normanton .. .. Burns, Philp, & Co., Ltd.
Batavia . . .. . . Maclaine, Watson, & Co.
„ , , \ Alstons, Scott, & Co., and
Colombo .. .. .. Darley> Butler> & Co .
. , j Cowsajee, Duishaw &
AQen { Brothers.
Suez . . . . G. Beyts & Co.
Port Said S Worms, Jose, & Co., Wills,
Port Said Manche, & Co.
Malta .. .. .. Smith & Co.
London . . . . . . Gray, Dawes, & Co.








