

(kj




UNITED, WE STAND ; DIVIDED, WE^FALL.
BALLARAT BRANCH, No. 5,
OF THE
||tintrs’ Association
AND
IL onsolitiatrti Actittcnt Jfimi).
t((is is 10 4«li
dad dem d-nic/Zec/ a -sdemdei o/ rfde a dove 'J^ddccoa/am.
tdfyedic/en/.
Sdcie/aJj/..
ddda/ZaJa/j
dddduet/ dy
d/dwat(/ d'oy/y'tsft/y'




BYE-LAWS
OP THE
BALLARAT BRANCH, No. 5,
OF THE
j|n|alijamatd Miners’
OF AUSTRALASIA.
ADOPTED MAY 1, 1880; REVISED APRIL 14.1888.
Ballarat:
F. W. Niven and Co., General Printers, 40 Sturt Street.
mdccclxxxviii.




UNITED, WE STAND ; DIVIDED, WE FALL.
LABOR AND CAPITAL UNITED.
PREFACE.
No Society can expect permanency without rules and
regulations. They are, however, of no use if not read and
observed, but remain only a form without force. On the
contrary, when due attention and obedience is paid to their
wholesome and salutary orders, peace and concord arise,
which animate the members to union and friendship. Let,
then, each of you read and fully digest the following Rules,
and it will be discovered that, by strictly adhering to the
same, the evils attendant upon our respective occupations,
the advancement of rights and privileges of labor, the
cultivation of brotherly affections, and mutual regard
for each other’s welfare, cannot fail to be the result;
and every good member of society will admire and respect
the noble triumph you will have obtained by your united
exertions and perseverance.


OFFICE HOURS s
Tuesdays and Thursdays, from 7 till 9 p.m.
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, from 10 to 1, and
from 3 till 5 o’clock.


BYE-LAWS
OF THE
Ballarat Branch, If® 5,
1. This Society shall be called the “Ballarat Branch, No.
5, of the Amalgamated Miners’ Association and Con-
solidated Accident Fund,” which shall consist of as many
miners and others as shall from time to time conform to
the following rules.
OBJECTS.
2. To maintain the privileges and customs at present
appertaining to mining in this district ; to mutually assist
our brethren in carrying out the objects defined and speci-
fied in the General Rules of the A.M.A.; in rendering
pecuniary and other assistance in repelling any infringement
that may be attempted against rights and privileges, and
also to provide pecuniary assistance to its members in case
of accident incurred during the pursuit of their occupations ;
also for providing pecuniary assistance to their widows and
children in case of death to a member, arising from accident
while pursuing his occupation.
MEANS.
3. For the purpose of carrying out the above objects,
every person in the employ of the mining companies in the
mining district of Ballarat shall contribute the sum of
sixpence per week. Means shall also be raised by the pay-
ment of entrance fees (subject to annexed rules), tines, levies,
donations, and interest upon capital.


GOVERNMENT.
4. This Branch shall he governed by a President, Vice-
President, Secretary, Treasurer, and a Committee —to con-
sist of twelve members—and one additional representative
from every mine employing not less than 40 members ; said
representatives to be elected half-yearly by members in their
own mines ; seven to form a quorum.
DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
5. The President shall be the recognised head of this
Branch. He shall preside at all meetings in connection
with the business of this Branch and Committee, &c., and
see that the business is conducted in a proper manner. He
Shall sign all cheques passed for payment, and other docu-
ments requiring his signature as head of this Branch. He
shall be empowered to call Committee Meetings in all cases
of emergency, and generally to ensure the well-being and
objects of the Association ; and in case the votes at any
time be equal, the President shall have a casting-vote.
6. The duty of the Vice-President shall be to assist the
President at all meetings of the Association ; and, in the
absence of the President, occupy the chair and conduct the
business. He shall perform all functions indicated for the
President to the best of his ability and judgment, pro tem.,
if the President through sickness or absence is unable to do
7. The duty of the Secretary shall be to keep a correct
account of all moneys received and expended ; attend all
meetings, and take minutes of the same. He shall zeal-
ously attend to all correspondence, and answer such
questions as may be asked in accordance with the Rules
and Resolutions of the Branch. He shall write returns
according to instructions from the Committee, and forward
where required. He shall keep a memorandum book, and
insert the date of postage of all correspondence and letters
received, and keep copies of the same. He shall sit with
the Auditors when auditing the accounts of the Branch, and
shall insert his name and address in all letters and returns;
enter in his account-book a detailed account of all moneys
received from all branches, or from any other source, with
date of receipt ; also a detailed account of all expenditure ;


write any correspondence the Committee may instruct him,
and do all other things for the advancement of the Branch
that the President may direct. He shall regularly pay over
to the Treasurer all moneys received weekly, and shall in
no case hold in his possession a larger sum than ten pounds
sterling for a longer period than forty-eight hours after the
date of making such weekly payments to the Treasurer.
He shall hold office for twelve months, but the Committee
shall have power to depose him for neglect of duty or for
the misappropriation of money or goods belonging to the
Branch ; and he shall in all meetings be allowed the right
to speak and vote. He shall also find security for the sum of
£IOO.
8. The Treasurer shall receive and pay all moneys
belonging to the Branch into the Commercial (or other ap-
pointed) Bank in the names of three Trustees, and shall
under no circumstances pay, lend, or otherwise appropriate
any of the funds belonging to the Branch to any member,
cause, or purpose whatever, except in accordance with the
Rules, Resolutions, and Minutes of Committee or General
Meeting. He shall sign all cheques, and duly take receipts
for all payments made by him, and shall not retain in his
possession any sum of money exceeding five pounds sterling
for a longer period than forty-eight hours. He shall at all
reasonable times produce the Bank Pass-book, for inspection
by the President or Trustees, whenever demanded. He
shall also find security for the sum of £lOO, and shall hold
office for twelve months.
TRUSTEES.
9. This Branch shall elect three Trustees, in whom the
whole of the funds and property of the Branch shall be
vested, and shall not be under the control of the A.M.A.
Such Trustees shall have power to invest or otherwise use
and dispose of said funds or property in such manner as the
Branch may direct, subject to its Bye-laws and the pro-
visions of the “Trades’ Union Act.”
auditors’ duties.
10. The Auditors, when instructed, shall take the Trea-
surer’s and Secretary’s books and balance-sheets, with all
receipts, compare them, and draw up a correct report of
same. They shall attach to each audit report an inventory


of goods. Auditors finding any deficiency in money or
goods, to state the particulars in their report, and lay the
same before the following meeting.
MEETINGS.
11. This Branch shall meet half-yearly as a General
Meeting of Members, such meetings to be held on the third
Saturday in each of the months of January and July, at
such place as the President and Committee may determine.
12. If any of the Officers or Committee of this Branch
do anything contrary to the laws of this Association,
the Committee shall have power to suspend them until
the same has been laid before a General Meeting of the
members, for their approval or otherwise.
13. Any officer or member of Committee not taking his
seat when a meeting has been duly opened, will be con-
sidered to have committed a neglect of duty, except a
satisfactory apology be sent to the President; and no officer
shall leave his seat while the meeting is on without the
consent of the Chairman.
ORDER OF BUSINESS.
14. After the opening of the meeting, for the purpose of
facilitating business, the following order shall be strictly
adhered to :
(1) Confirmation of Minutes.
(2) Beading Correspondence.
(3) Reports.
(4) Finance.
(5) Calling Roll.
(6) General Business.
(7) Discussion of Motions on Notice.
(8) Orders of the Day.
(9) Receive Notices of Motion.
STANDING RULES AND ORDERS.
15. Every member on giving notice of motion shall read
it aloud, and give to the Secretary a copy of such notice,
together with his name and the day proposed for bringing
on such motion.
16. No motion entered on notice-papers"shall be proceeded
with unless the member who has given such notice, or some
one authorised by him, be present when the business is


called in order. Notices not so proceeded with shall be
struck out.
17. Any motion not seconded shall not he further de-
bated, but shall lapse.
18. As soon as a debate upon a question shall be con-
cluded, the President shall put the question to the meeting
in a distinct and audible manner.
19. The question being put, shall be resolved in the
affirmative or negative by a show of hands, but any two
members may demand a division.
AMENDMENTS.
20. A question having been proposed, may be amended
by leaving out, substituting, or adding words ; and such
amendments shall be resolved by a majority of votes.
21. An amendment proposed and not seconded will not
be entertained or entered on the minutes.
22. Amendments may be proposed to any amendment, as
if such amendments were an original question.
23. When amendments have been lost, the original
question shall be put.
ORDER OF DEBATE.
24. Any member desiring to propose a motion or amend-
ment, or of discussing any matter under consideration, must
rise and address the President; and no member when speak-
ing shall be interrupted unless called to order, when he shall
sit down, and the member so calling to order shall be heard
in preference to any other speaker, and the President shall
then decide without discussion on the point of order before
the subject is resumed, or any other subject entered upon.
25. No member may speak to any motion after the same
has been put by the President, and the voting has been
given either in the affirmative or negative.
26. When two or more members rise to speak, the
President shall call upon the member who, in his opinion,
rose first in his place.
27. A member may speak once to any motion before the
meeting, and to any amendment proposed thereto, and upon
a motion or amendment proposed by himself.


28. Any member proposing or seconding a resolution
shall be held to have spoken, and the mover only shall have
the right to reply; but any member may, with the consent
of the President, speak again in explanation.
29. Whenever the President rises during a debate, any
member then speaking or offering to speak shall sit down,
so that the President may be heard without interruption.
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS.
30, It shall be competent by a vote of two-thirds of the
members present for the meeting to suspend any standing
order herein contained, provided the object of such suspen-
sion shall not be the rescinding of any resolution previously
adopted by the Branch.
SPECIAL.
31. If any member attend a meeting intoxicated, or
interrupt the business, he shall be requested to withdraw
forthwith ; failing which he shall be fined a sum of not less
than one shilling, and not exceeding ten shillings, for each
offence.
32. Any officer or member of Committee absenting him-
self from three consecutive meetings of Committee, and
failing to furnish a satisfactory explanation, shall be struck
off the list of Committee, and another member shall be
elected in his stead at the first ordinary Committee Meeting
afterwards. No member shall leave the meeting without
the consent of the President.
33. The whole of these Rules shall, as far as practicable,
regulate the proceedings of all meetings in connection
with this Branch.
HALF-YEARLY MEETINGS.
34. The General Half-yearly Meetings of this Branch
shall be held on the third Saturday nights in January and
July, for the purpose of receiving Auditors’ Reports and
Balance Sheets, election of Committee, and such other
business as may be brought forward.
35. The financial half-year shall terminate on the last
day in June and December, in order to prepare the
Accounts and Auditors’-Report for submission to the Half-
yearly Meeting,


NOMINATION OP OFFICERS AND COMMITTEE.
36, Names of members who are willing to stand for
election to the office of President, Vice-President, Treasurer,
Auditors, Secretary, Trustees, or Committee, respectively,
with the names of the proposer and seconder attached, must
be sent in to the Secretary fourteen clear days before each
Annual Meeting. The names of members so nominated
shall then be duly advertised. All financial members shall
be eligible for election as officers of the Branch.
37. Any member nominated for office, having reasons to
assign why he should not be elected, and stating the same
to the Branch immediately upon nomination, may withdraw.
ELECTION OP OFFICERS.
38. This Branch at the Annual Meeting shall elect a
President, Vice-President, Secretary, Treasurer, and three
Trustees, who shall remain in office twelve months; such
election to be conducted by ballot during the week termi-
nated by the Annual Meeting.
39. Two Auditors shall also be appointed half-yearly by
ballot, who shall hold office for six months, and shall be
eligible for re-election.
ELECTION OP COMMITTEE.
40. One-half of the twelve members of Committee
shall retire half-yearly, but shall be eligible for re-election;
and the required number of members shall be duly elected
at the Half-yearly Meeting, to act with those remaining in
office. Such election shall be conducted by ballot during
the week terminated by the Half-yearly Meeting.
CONDUCT OF BALLOT.
41. The ballot (see bye-laws 38, 39, and 40) shall be con-
ducted as follows ;—Where twelve or more members are
employed, a ballot-box shall be sent to the mine ; where less
than twelve members are employed, the required number of
ballot papers shall be sent in a sealed envelope. The
Stewards in each case to conduct the ballot at the mine.
Miscellaneous and Honorary Members shall vote at the
office. The Returning Officer, who shall be appointed by
the Committee, shall hold the keys of the boxes until after
the election.


STEWARDS.
42. One or more Stewards may be appointed for each
mine by the Committee, who shall explain the objects and
benefits of the Association, and endeavour to induce non-
members to join ; shall collect all moneys fortnightly
from the members, and pay over same to the
Secretary within not less than seven days after each
pay day; they shall attend to and report upon all
cases of accident in the mine which they represent, and
shall report to the Secretary fortnightly. Stewards leaving
any mine shall give notice to the Secretary, when a suc-
cessor shall be appointed at the next Committee Meeting.
Such Stewards may be nominated by members working at
the mine.
delegates’ duties.
43. Delegates who may be elected by the Branch to
transact Branch business shall use all possible despatch in
fulfilling their missions, and in all cases make a report of
their proceedings and lay it before the following Branch
meeting. Delegates neglecting to comply with these in-
structions to forfeit all claim for time lost and expenses
incurred.
44. Members of deputations on business of the Association
shall receive the sum of ten shillings per day and
expenses.
ENTRANCE FEES AND CONTRIBUTIONS.
45, The Entrance Fee to this Branch shall be one
shilling. Members on paying first fortnight’s contribution
shall receive a copy of these Bye-Laws, with Certificate of
Membership attached. The fortnightly contribution of one
shilling must be paid to the Stewards on or within three
days after each pay-day. Any member neglecting to pay
his contributions or levy (if any) within the time specified
will be considered as in arrears, and not entitled to benefit
in case of accident. Members out of employment will not
be required to pay contributions or levies until recommencing
work, but will receive no benefits until payment is made.
Boys receiving 255, per week, or under, shall only contribute
sixpence per fortnight. • -


46. Tributors and members of co-operative parties may
cease paying contributions when not in receipt of dividends ;
but the Branch shall not be liable in case of accident that
may occur during the period of non-payments.
47. Members working any portion of a fortnight shall
contribute the fortnight’s contribution of one shilling.
HONORARY MEMBERS.
48. Any person may be admitted an Honorary Member
of the Association by the payment of two shillings and
sixpence entrance fee, and a contribution of five shillings
per annum. They may hold office, and shall be allowed to
vote on all matters, except Finance, in connection with the
Association, but shall not be entitled to any benefits from
the funds of the Association.
RESTRICTIONS.
49. No member of this Branch shall be allowed to tender
for any work for which day wages is being paid, unless
tenders have been called for by the Company; or to accept
any daily or weekly wages below the current rate ruling for
such work in this district. Nor shall any member be
allowed to work with non-members.
50. Should any infringements on the rights and privi-
leges of the members of this Branch be attempted by the
employers in any mine, the members employed therein shall
lay the complaint before the Committee, in writing, who
shall deal with the same, and give due notice to the A.M.A.,
and, if necessary, appoint a deputation to wait upon the
employer and endeavour to adjust the dispute. Failing in
this, the matter to be referred to a General Meeting con-
vened for the purpose, which may, if deemed advisable,
submit the whole matter to arbitration. Providing no
settlement can be arrived at, the members so aggrieved
as above shall, with the consent of the A.M. A., cease work,
and be entitled to strike pay as per Rule 53.
BRANCH,
51. No member or members of this Branch shall strike
for an advance of wages, or any other cause, without the
sanction of the Branch. The Branch before adopting a
resolution for an advance of wages, or any infringement
upon rights, must take into consideration the demand for,


and supply of, labor in the Ballarat district, as well as in
the immediate district, so that its demands may be reason-
able, and the result in all likelihood certain.
52. If any members receive from an employer notice of
a reduction of wages, or increased hours of labor, they shall
at once give notice thereof to the Secretary, who shall call a
Special Meeting of Committee to consider the same and
act thereon.
53. When a strike takes place, all members on strike
sanctioned by the Branch shall receive the sum of £1 per
week strike pay, provided they meet at the Association’s
Branch committee-rooms or office, or other place appointed
by the strike committee, each day at ten o’clock, and
enrol their names on the strike-list. Persons on strike
neglecting to enrol their names to forfeit that day’s strike
pay. No apology for absence to be received. Members
not claiming strike pay within one fortnight to forfeit the
same. Members on strike to receive their pay on the
first Branch night, and weekly while the strike continues.
STRIKE COMMITTEE’S DUTIES.
54. When any strike takes place, turn-outs shall imme-
diately elect a strike committee of five (where practicable),
who shall elect a chairman and secretary, and sit at the
place appointed, from 10 to 2 o’clock each day, to transact
the strike business, and receive any offer of settlement that
may be made by the employer or employers, but shall in no
case resume work through any such offer without a vote of
the Branch. If the employers give way, the chairman of
the committee shall request the President to call a Special
Meeting to decide whether the objects of the strike are
attained.
55. The strike secretary shall take the names of all
present at 10 o’clock each day, and insert no name afterwards
(pickets excepted).
56. The strike secretary shall also prepare a list of
names of all members on strike, and the first two men on
such list shall picket the mine the first half-day, the next
two the remainder, and so on in rotation. Members of
strike committee shall be exempt from serving as pickets.


pickets’ duties.
57. They shall remain in the vicinity of the mine on
strike until relieved; watch all the avenues, and inform
any miner who may be seeking employment that the mine
is on strike, and the nature of infringement or demand that
caused such strike ; and shall in no case whatever attempt
by any threatening, coercive, or illegal means to prevent
any one from obtaining employment or working on the said
mine. In case any one has commenced work in ignorance
or otherwise, they shall state matters to them as instructed
above, but shall in no case speak to or interfere with them
on the mine.
benefits.
58. The funds of the Association shall only be available
to members for relief in case of accident received when on
duty—that is, when at work for the company by whom they
are employed.
59. No member shall be entitled to receive any relief
from the funds of the Association whilst able to perform
any kind of work ; and any member meeting with an ac-
cident whilst in a state of intoxication, shall be excluded
from the benefits of the Association.
60. Any member receiving benefit from the Association
shall not remain out of doors after sundown, without the
consent of the Committee.
61. Any member meeting with an accident on a Sunday,
while performing unnecessary work, shall not be entitled to
receive any benefits from the funds of this Association.
Definition.- —By unnecessary work is meant that no member
of this Association shall be allowed to work on the Sunday,
only in accordance with the provisions of this rule Ist.
He shall be allowed to work in cases of an influx of water
that would be detrimental to the progress of the mine.
2nd. He shall be allowed to secure any ground that would in
any way be dangerous to human life. 3rd. He shall be allowed
to work in order to effect any repairs to machinery on the
surface or below, the neglect of which would cause operations
to cease on the recognised working days. But in no case shall
he be allowed to work in a drive, shaft, winze, rise, or stopes,
unless it is within the provisions of this rule. Penalty. —


Any member failing to comply with the above rule shall
be expelled for the period of one month, during which time
he shall have no claim upon the benefits of this Association,
and shall only be reinstated by paying an entrance fee of
one shilling, in addition to his fortnightly contributions. In
case of an accident to any member whilst working on the
Sunday, if at the time of the accident he is not complying
with the above rule, he shall forfeit all claims on the funds
of this Association. But in case of a dispute relative to
his claim upon the funds of the Association, there shall be
appointed by the Committee two men, to act with the
Steward of the said mine in making an enquiry, and submit
a report of the same for the next meeting’s consideration.
Duty of Steward.-— lt shall be the duty of the Steward
to report to the Committee all known cases of the violation
of this rule.
62. Any member receiving benefit from the Association,
and retarding his recovery by the use of intoxicating liquors,
or by immoral conduct of any kind, shall forfeit all claim to
any relief from the Association in respect of such illness.
63. Any full contributing member meeting with an
accident shall receive the sum of one pound (£1) per week
for a period of twelve months ; if at the end of that period
he still continue unable to work, the payment shall be
reduced to ten shillings per week until he is able to resume
work, or while the Association is in existence. Boys paying
sixpence per fortnight, as per rule 45, shall receive half
benefits, and all members receiving accident allowance shall
pay the usual contributions, but shall be exempt from levies.
64. In the event of a member of the Branch meeting
with a fatal accident while following his occupation,
providing such member is good on the books, the
sum of fifty pounds (£5O) shall be paid to the
nearest relative of the deceased. In cases of half contri-
buting members, death allowance to be pro rata. In the
event of the relatives not claiming said accident allowance
within a period of twelve months, the amount, less funeral
expenses when necessary, shall revert to the A.M.A. funds.
65. Members who are on the accident fund for more
than two weeks, and are able to call at the office, shall


report themselves to the Secretary at least once during the
interval of Committee meetings.
66. In the event of an accident taking place at any of
the mines, notice thereof shall be given to one of the
Stewards by the injured party or his mates (if any) imme-
diately after the same has taken place, and should he (the
injured party) be confined to his bed, his mates or friends
shall report his condition to the Steward at least once each
week, who shall report same to the Secretary. If the
member injured is able to walk so far, he shall be compelled
to see his Steward once every week so long as he is disabled
from work, under a penalty of no relief from the Asso-
ciation.
67. Any member meeting with an accident shall produce
a doctor’s certificate if requested to do so by the Committee.
68. Should a member in receipt of relief from the funds
declare off, and resume work before he is thoroughly cured,
in the event of his declaring on the funds again within a
period of six months from the same accident, it shall be
considered a relapse, and the number of weeks for which he
has previously received pay shall be considered a portion of
the twelve months in which he receives full pay. Should a
recipient recovering from an accident be desirous of resuming
work, he may, on application to the Committee, be allowed
a trial for a week or two, when (if compelled through a
relapse of his previous injury to leave off work) he shall
again be entitled to the scale of benefits he was receiving
at the date of application.
69. Any member suffering from an accident of long
standing, and desirous to dispose of his accident allowance
to the Association, in consideration of a sum of money,
shall give notice in writing to the Secretary (naming the
sum) fourteen clear days before the Half-yearly Meeting of
Members, held in the months of January and July in each
year, to be placed on the business sheet.
70. Any member absent from the district for a period of
six months, or not contributing to the funds of the Associa-
tion for a period of three months, shall cease to be a
member, and shall not be entitled to any benefits until he
has paid an entry fee of one shilling.


BANKING.
71. All funds of this Branch shall be placed in the
Commercial Bank, or such other bank as the Branch may
at any future time determine • and three members shall be
elected by the Branch as Trustees for the same, who shall
insert their names in the bank books. No funds shall be
withdrawn from the bank except by cheque, to be signed by
the Treasurer, one Trustee, and President, and countersigned
by the Secretary ; and no Trustee shall attach his signature
to any cheque without a written authority signed by the
Secretary, and also by the President or V ice-President.
INCIDENTAL FUND.
72. For the purpose of maintaining an Incidental Fund,
which shall be vested in the Committee, to be used in cases
of distress only, each member shall (except as provided by
Buie 45), contribute a special quarterly levy of threepence,
such levy to be made when the Committee shall direct.
LEVIES AND MONEY VOTES.
73. If at any time the funds of the Association shall be
reduced to the sum of five hundred pounds (£500), such
sura shall not be available for any purpose other than relief
in cases of accidents to members ; and for the purpose of
keeping the funds of the Association above such sum of five
hundred pounds (£500), or in cases of protracted strikes,
or to meet the quarterly and funeral levies made by the
A.M.A., the Committee shall be empowered to make a levy
upon all members sufficient to meet the current requirements
and payment of salaries. And it shall be competent for any
General or Special Meeting to vote any sum of money for
other than the purpose specified above—provided that due
notice of such meeting, and the intention to vote a sum of
money thereat, together with the purpose for which it is
proposed to be voted, shall have been given to all the
members ; and, further, that such vote shall only be declared
carried by the vote of three-fourths of the members present
at such meeting.
MISCELLANEOUS.
74. Should any member of the Association be dismissed
from his employment for taking a leading part in any matter
connected with the Association, the members are pledged
to stand by him, and see that he is reinstated ; and the


Committee shall have power to vote him strike pay till he
obtains employment; provided that the Association approve
of the action which he had taken.
75. The Committee shall have power to expel any member
wilfully and persistently acting in direct contravention of
any of the Bye-laws of the Association.
76. The Committee may at any time pass resolutions for
their own guidance, provided same are in accord with the
foregoing laws.
77. Members shall be allowed to inspect the books of the
Branch, including the Members’ Register, at all reasonable
times.
78. No vote of any number of members shall be
taken for the purpose of winding up the affairs of this
Branch so long as there shall be twenty financial members
in favor of carrying on the Branch and opposed to the
winding up of the same.
79. We, the members of the Ballarat Branch of the
A.M. A. of Australasia, in consideration of the benefits the
Association will confer upon us, determine to hold one day
in every year as a general holiday, as the anniversary of its
introduction; also, Christmas Day, Boxing Day, New
Year's Day, Eight Hours’ Day, and Easter Monday.
80. Members leaving their employment as miners,
and following any other employment, may continue their
contributions, and receive the benefits of the Association as
piovided by the laws ; but tradesmen not engaged in
mining shall not be admitted as benefit members.
81. Members leaving the district, or going to any of
the Australian Colonies, may continue their membership,
and shall be entitled to the benefits of the Association ;
provided that in all cases of accident the injured member
shall obtain a doctor’s certificate, or a certificate signed by
a clergyman, a justice of the peace, or by the manager of
the mine where the accident occurred ; but no person shall
be admitted as a member out of the district or colony.
82. A book shall be kept on the table of the office,
in which the names and addresses of non-members shall be


recorded, and the Secretary shall report the same at
the next Committee meeting following the insertion of same.
83. A book shall be kept on the table of the office,
in which shall be recorded any complaints relating to mem-
bers or companies ; the nature of said complaints to be
specially notified, and reported by the Secretary at the first
Committee meeting following the insertion of same; all
such complaints shall be strictly confidential.
84. We, the members of the Ballarat Branch of the
Amalgamated Miners’ Association, pledge ourselves not to
accept or tender for any contract for any underground work,
other than shaft-sinking and the working of main drives,
winzes, rises, and crosscuts. Any member tendering for
and accepting a contract and not carrying it to completion
shall be liable to be blackballed for a period of three
months ; and, further, that we will not work with any
miners who violate the foregoing pledge.
85. No new rule shall be made, nor any of the rules
herein contained, or hereafter to be made, shall be amended,
altered, or rescinded, unless with the consent of a majority
of the members present at a meeting of the Branch specially
called for that purpose, due notice of the proposed alteration
having been given at the previous meeting of the Branch.
R. SMITH, President.
JAS. SAMPSON, Vice-President.
A. PEARCE, Treasurer.
T. H. LA WIST, Secretary.


SCALE OF WAGES
Shall not be less than
For Men working in Wet Shafts, Bs. id. per Shift of 6 hours.
» » Dry „ Bs, 4d. „ 8 „
For Facemen, Wet Drives, ... Bs. Od. „ „ „
» Dry „ ... 7s. 6d. „ „ „
Windlass Men ... ... ... 7s. Od.
Bracemen ... ... ... 6s. 6d.
Platmen 6s. 6d.
F. W. Niven & Co., Printers, Lithographers, &c., 40 Sturt Street, Ballarat.
23


