

ft#"
DRfIM/l CDITION
4 TRAGEDY
IN THREE 4CTS


T
*■
i
V


(ALL RIGHTS RESERVED)
A TRAGEDY
IN 3 ACTS
* •
By JAS. A. ROSS
t »
SYDNEY:
William Brooks & Co. Ltd., 17 Castlereagh Street
I 19,5
"THE AWAKENING"


THE AWAKENING
A Tragedy in Three Acts.
CHARACTERS REPRESENTED:
ALBERT, King of Belgium.
THE KAISER, Emperor of Germany
TRUTH (a Spirit).
THE PRINCE (of Darkness) THE DEVIL.
BOBS, an English Field-Marshal in retirement.
LOVE (a Spirit).
OLIVIA, a Lady.
MARIE, her Niece.
GUARDIAN (a Spirit).
DEATH.
General; Officer; Subaltern; Professors; Peasant First,
Second, Third; Peasants; Beelzebubs; Bavarians.
ACT ONE.
SCENE 1. — Berlin; a room at Potsdam Palace.
Enter General.
THE KAISER: On, my brave General, to Paris. Belgium
is open to you. Pass that way. I follow quickly.
On to Paris, for God and the Fatherland!
[Exit General.


Enter the Prince.
THE PRINCE : I am the Prince of Heaven, and will preside
at all onr feasts of blood, and be your guide,
philosopher and friend.
THE KAISER: Great God be praised, and you will be my
friend?
THE PRINCE:
The world is ours, and you and I shall dwell
As gods on earth, in heaven, and —oh!
We play with words when it is time for deeds;
Our car is here, and yonder waits our steeds,
So quickly to our purpose let us bend.
They both descend and enter the car
Death acts as chauffeur.
{Exeunt.
SCENE 2.— Belgium; the frontier.
TRUTH (an ancient sage, white robed, sandalled feet, eyes
of fire, long white beard, in his hand the shepherd's
crook, a small bunch of keys hanging from his
girdle) stands erect before a closed gate, looking in
the direction of the approaching army.
This Prussian god, with sword, and gilt, and glitter,
Comes quickly on with all his well-grown litter;
Proud Imperial Mars could wish no army fitter
But for the shadow of a sitter and a sitter.
The German troops halt before the gate
Enter General.
GENERAL: In the name of the Kaiser
TRUTH : Withdraw!
GENERAL: In the name of our Emperor we pass this
way.
TRUTH: In the name of Heaven, withdraw!


Enter the Kaiser.
THE KAISER : Who dares say withdraw to me ? Who speaks
in the name of Heaven? Blasphemer! Aside!
Take the name of this insolent Ancient, who dares
insult my Majesty and God.
TRUTH : I say again, withdraw!
GENERAL: Your name?
TRUTH : I am Truth!
THE KAISER : I know you not, and never shall I know
or wish to know you. Myself and God, that is
enough! Aside! (He makes an effort to push
Truth aside and stum~bles against the gate.)
Though hell itself should bar the way, I pass.
TRUTH: And you will pass—to hell.
[Exit Truth.
(They t)reak the gate and the army passes into Belgium.)
SCENE 3. — Belgium; an open field.
Enter King Albert with his staff.
ALBERT: Can it be true? This man of war, till now
an Emperor, so lightly treats the sacred word
of kings, and breaks, with all his horde, into our
erstwhile peaceful, neutral land, regardless of the
holy rights of God and man. Bar every passage,
seal every door, and backward press this vile in-
vading tide. To arms! To arms! Force back
this human flood. It will not pass this way
except through Belgian blood.
[Exeunt.
Enter Love (singing).
LOVE: Fear not the tyrant at your gate,
Nor all the cruel hordes of hell;
We are the guardians of your fate —
With you, beloved, all is well.


»
Enter Truth.
TRUTH: O, all ye mighty powers of earth and heaven
Arise, and by the holy birth of Christ, the Lord,
Swear hot and speedy vengeance on this man;
No sacred bond with heaven or earth has he,
h*o place on earth, in planet, snn, or stars;
In deep black hell he has his ancient lair,
And back to hell drive this invading liar.
The Peasants assemble, coming from different quarters
of the field.
FIRST PEASANT: It must be war.
SECOND PEASANT : The King' is waiting there on yonder
rise.
THIRD PEASANT: They come again this way.
FIRST PEASANT: They come, they come with speed.
THE LOT : It must be war; it mnst be war; it mnst be war.
Enter King Albert at the head of his army; they cross
the stage.
THE PEASANTS: Vive le Roi! Vive le Roi! Vive le Roi!
The King salutes them.
THE PEASANTS ( singing) :
They pass! they pass! onr lives and homes to save!
Go forth! go forth! the bravest of the brave!
SCENE 4. — England; Bobs's home; a room.
Enter Bobs.
BOBS: Oh that I could one moment here converse
With some great Spirit of the Universe,
Or read our nation's fate in yonder sky.
(He looks out through an open window.)
These clouds of war oppress my inmost soul;
To-night, the dome of Heaven, black as coal,
Is pregnant with the dangers drawing nigh.


Oft have I sought in my declining days
To bend my rod to God's divining ways,
And tap this slumbering ocean, but in vain.
The voice of Truth my waking soul inspires
With thoughts that burn like white ethereal fires,
And knowing all I know —they give me pain.
England, awake! Awake! I say again!
Enter Truth.
TRUTH: Faithful and True
I am the answer to your fervent prayer;
With speed exceeding light, the news I bear
Fresh from the borders of distorted night
Will stir your pure, devoted, loyal soul
Ere we convey it to our home of light.
With all its vile contending elements
The storm has burst and sacred Belgium bleeds.
I come with greater forces at command
Than all the angry powers of cunning hell;
And now upon this freedom-loving land
Of Justice, Truth, and Love I cast my spell.
Soon from the Empire's distant ports will flow
Contingent on contingent; leading them
Your own true men from India's sunny shore,
And you will greet your own in arms once more.
To Russia, France, Japan, I pass ere you
Shall have this news confirmed officially;
So for a little while, my own, adieu.
[Exit Truth.
BOBS: I know his voice, and what he says is true —
Brave Belgium bleeds! And Belgium is in need!
Then we shall send her aid with lightning speed.
[Exit Bohs.
SCENE 5. — Belgium; the Cross-roads; the Tree of Evil — -a
large tree in the foreground. Finger-posts, "To
Louvain," "To Berlin/' "Brussels." Motor
pass, marked "Express 8.D." (Berlin, Deutsch-
land).
A secret door on the trunk of the tree, which is hollow }
opens, and the Prince steps out.


THE PRINCE (He looks at the cars) : B.D. —my brand.
We have a friend in every hole and tree.
(He strikes the tree with his sword.)
Out! Out! My Beelzebubs.
Beelze~bubs, with helmets lettered 8.8., come out from
a hole in the making hideous noises.
You know your mission: burn, loot, ravage, kill —
innocents.
This is your way, without delay—Louvain.
(Army Officer passes with Bavarian soldiers.)
Pardon, Mein Herr! What brand is that you bear?
OFFICER: B.D. (Bavaria, Deutschland).
THE PRINCE: Ah! Ah! Ah! I've an army here already
made, a veritable army. My work upon the field
is done, and we can say The Day's as good as
won. B.D. Ah! Ah! Ah!
OFBUCER: Why laugh you so, 8.D.?
THE PRINCE : Ah! Ah! Ah! B.D. is my brand, too.
OFFICER: Then we are all Bavarians.
THE PRINCE : And still they come, the more they come the
more. 8.D.!
OFFICER (angry) : And why you say 8.D.?
Are you Bavarian?
THE PRINCE: B.D. Beelzebub, Bavarian, Beast.
Deutschland, Death, Devil.
I am the first and the last;
You are all of them in one.
OFFICER: Your card.
THE PRINCE: We will meet in Brussels
[Exeunt Bavarians.


Enter Death on a horse.
THE PRINCE ( mounting the horse behind Death) :
To Brussels! We ride together, nothing could be fitter
Than on this horse should sit a sitter and a sitter.
[Exeunt,
Enter motor-waggon, returning to Berlin, two Professors
in charge.
(The car stops; they examine a book.)
FIRST PROFESSOR: English! W T e must not take it to the
Fatherland.
SECOND PROFESSOR: It is Shakespeare, your Excellency;
and Shakespeare was a German, which I will now
prove. Here I read:
"Those lips that love's own hand did make
Breathed forth the sound that said T hale!'"
FIRST PROFESSOR: It is good German.
SECOND PROFESSOR: It is good high German.
FIRST PROFESSOR: It is good Prussian.
Enter Subaltern.
SUBALTERN: On! What have we here? A dirty English
book! (He seizes the book.) I spit upon it as I
would spit on them and all their dirty works.
(He throws the book away, and the car moves on.)
Enter Truth.
TRUTH: They passed this way. It is the book we seek.
(He picks up the book.) I will take it to my own
abode, and later we'll restore it to Louvain.
[Exit Truth with the Book,


Enter Olivia (dressed as a Nurse).
OLIVIA : Oh! I could weep an ocean full of tears;
Such deeds no words of mine will here describe —
No artist act, no stage could represent —
As I have witnessed in this tortured land.
If crucifixion be the price of peace,
Then what a price has Belgium paid in blood.
The infant soul, and the maiden in her teens,
The sacred mother with her child unborn,
The aged, the infirm, all victims of
These cruel, callous, calculating curs.
Enter Truth.
So long as time endures they will be known
As Belgium's curse, the world's arch murderers.
O, Land of Schiller do you hear these words?
Or understand what they must mean to you?
Far better deaf and dumb and blind you be,
If there remains a woman's heart in thee.
TRUTH : 'Tis true, my child, the threads of self-control
Are severed quite, and that fine silvery web
That did suspend within its central disc
The body of this nation high in space,
Is now consumed by ambition's hell;
And thus it was the Prince of Darkness fell.
The powers of hate now fasten on their souls,
And each, a crawling victim of the earth,
Sinks lower as he meditates on death.
Already they have met the blasts of fate,
And now begin to realise our power—
The subtle force I exercise in men,
The virtue of your heart in womankind —
And we will conquer, as they soon shall find.
ACT TWO.
SCENE I.— Brussels. the Palace of Justice, the Prince of
Darkness as a Prussian Prince, presiding.


Enter the Kaiser and his staff.
THE PRINCE : Hail, mighty liege! My Most Imperious
Will! How fares it with our armies in the field?
THE KAISER: I have this mighty city taken, and Liege
and Louvain.
THE PRINCE: Ah! you play the game so well. Did you
say Louvain?
THE KAISER: Yes, we have burnt Louvain.
THE PRINCE: Ah, ah, we have burnt Louvain': Down
with the sacred edifice! Line up the dark-robed
priestly saints, Hie aged men, the women, young
and old, shoot, ravage, murder, mutilate the
young.
THE KAISER: I have already'much of this accomplished;
the others flee in terror from the land.
THE PRINCE: My own great brother in this quest for
blood! You are indeed my Will, my very Will,
and these great deeds of blood I shall record. This
is, indeed, for me a glorious day. Lead on, your
Majesty, lead thou the way.
THE KAISER : I thank the good God for this great and
mighty victory. On! my brave generals, on to
Paris! ;
THE PRINCE: Kot so fast, William, not so fast. You
mistake me. Kheims, Malines, Antwerp, more
churches, more innocent blood! More innocent
blood! I want more innocent blood!
Enter General, who hands a despatch to the Kaiser.
THE KAISER: God be praised! My invincible army walks
over the contemptible little Englishers. Already
they are shattered and in retreat. On, my brave
brothers of the Fatherland! On to Paris!
[Exeunt.
Enter Bavarian Officer
OFFICER : Your Majesty!


THE PRINCE: Your card!
OFFICER ( surprised ) : The Prince! Your Majesty, my
pardon. \
THE PRINCE: I decorate you with the iron cross.
OFFICER : I am unworthy of so great an honor, my Prince!
Your Majesty, my pardon!
THE PRINCE : Despatches tell me of your noble deeds, and
I am proud of all my Beelzebubs.
OFFICER: Your Majesty, we are a Prussian Guard.
THE PRINCE: Then guard this cross. You'll gain a Prus-
sian crown.
(The Officer bows low and retires with the cross.)
THE PRINCE: Kill! Kill! Kill!
More innocent blood!
More innocent blood!
Drink! drink! drink!
I thirst, I thirst for blood.
SCENE 2.— France; a Chateau; a drawing-room, the walls
hung with tapestries, cabinets of art treasures,
miniatures, old masters, a painting of a Madonna
on an easel. Olivia and Marie seated near the
fire, knitting. The Kaiser sitting a little way off.
OLIVIA: If you possessed a woman's heart of love, this
bloody war of hate could never be.
THE KAISER : This bloody war of hate! I like the phrase.
This war, dear madam, is for God, not me, and
when I'm seated on my larger throne, the glory will
be his, and his alone. I praise him now for all
that he has done.
OLIVIA: The powers of Heaven, sire, are Truth and Love,
and this I know, not of my own free will.
THE KAISER: There is one ruler in high Heaven, and
there must be one ruler here on earth. (Rising.)
I must away to Paris. Madam, we will meet again.
[Exit Kaiser.


•V
1
I
I
1
MARIE: HOW brave of you, dear madam!
OLIVIA : I know the Kaiser and his family well, and so
our name lias so far saved our home.
MARIE: But is it not, dear madam, some greater power
that saves us from these fearful-looking men? I
shudder at the very thought of them. And are
you truly, madam, not afraid.
OLIVIA: My dear, I fear no man upon the earth. My
heart is full of love for all the world. I pity
these misguided, wicked men, and, pitying, forget
and pardon them.
MARIE : How good of you, dear madam, to speak so.
OLIVIA : If I could not forgive, I could not be so brave.
MARIE: Then I will pray that you be known as Love.
OLIVIA: Love is the child of Truth, my dear, and Truth
is God's own messenger from Heaven, and Love
comes with Him when He comes to earth.
MARIE : How well you speak, dear madam; and now I feel
that I am not afraid. And is He truly our great
Father here on earth?
OLIVIA: He is, and the great Spirit of the Universe.
MARIE: And Love, dear madam, does she really live, and
is she old, or is she young like you?
OLIVIA: Now r , dear, it's time you went to bed, for w r e
have hardly closed our eyes for one whole week.
And you will sleep in my own private room, close
here to me, and I will also rest, for I am tired.
MARIE [rises, then kneels before the Madonna and prays) :
Holy Mother of the gentle Christ, send us Love to
guard us here to-night. Good-night, dear madam,
and may Truth and Love bless you forever.
OLIVIA ( kisses Marie) : Good-night, my dear, sweet child!
(Kisses her again.) Good-night!


{Marie retires; Olivia lowers the light, and sinks into an
easy chair.) Oh, if T conid inspire ten million
women with this girl's desire!
{She falls asleep.)
Enter Marie, who places a screen in front of the chair,
and silently retires.
Enter Love.
LOVE : O, eyes of Love, look down on your own star
Reflected here in great Olivia's heart
Deep centred in the sacred well of Truth,
Placid as the calm ethereal blue
-that nangs eternal 'neath the dome of Heaven
Through all the ages that are known to man,
Back to the dawn of first-beginning Time,
On earth, in Heaven, we have walked together,
And here we come, and go, and come again.
How brave is woman with the heart of Love!
How great is Love within this woman's heart!
MARIE {coming from the room, walking in her sleep) :
Madam, did you call?
LOVE: Ho! Marie dear, all is well. I did not call you.
I have disturbed your rest {Love moving towards
her) Dear Child! for one sweet moment rest upon
my breast. {Love kisses her.) How you will
sleep, by Love and by Olivia caressed.
[Exit Marie.
I must remain, for Truth has said to-day the tide
will turn. The dawn is breaking for a brighter
day, but ere the day is born he will be here. So
I shall stay and be Olivia's heart, and when he
comes we two will play a gentlewoman's part.
{Love passes behind the screen.)
SCENE 3. — A Chateau near Paris.
The Kaiser and his staff seated at lunch
THE KAISER: My invincible army moves onward like a
mighty sea. To you all, my brave generals, I drink
—The Day.


Enter General.
GENERAL (breathless) : The car, the car, withdraw, your
Majesty! They come! They kill! They are upon
us!
THE KAISER: Withdraw! Mein Gott, I heard that word
before. We will on. We will not withdraw. My
field glass! Mein Gott, we run, we run, 'tis true.
GENERAL: Quick, your Majesty, or they will have us too.
THE KAISER: To Belgium! To Brussels! To Berlin!
Back!
TRUTH (a voice) : "Back to Hell!" [ Exeunt.
(Noises are heard from the vanguard of the retreating
German army.)
SCENE 4.— Same as Scene 2.
OLIVIA (awakes) :It is the bugle call of a retreat. ( She
goes to the window.) Yes, they are in retreat.
I see them pushing back on every side. A motor-
car is coming now this way.
Enter General.
GENERAL: His Majesty the Kaiser sends his compliments
to the Lady Olivia; he will call upon her.
OLIVIA : Lady Olivia sends her compliments to His
Majesty the Kaiser; she will receive him.
[Exit General.
(Olivia goes to Marie's room.)
Awake, dear, the Kaiser will be here in a few
minutes.
MARIE : O, madam, are you not afraid ?
OLIVIA : I shall be glad to meet him, dear
MARIE : Then let me do your hair quickly. I dreamt Love
was here with us. I am no longer afraid of these
men.
OLIVIA: My dear, Love was with us this morning. She
is here now. She is always with us.


.
I
It
I
MARIE: I heard a voice just like yours. I thought it
was the voice of Love. But it was you.
OLIVIA: The Kaiser conies.
Enter the Kaiser.
Sire, you are welcome
THE KAISER ( looking pale) : I thank you, madam. You
are very kind.
OLIVIA: And you are very tired, sire. ( Indicating a
chair.) Your Majesty!
(The Kaiser sits in an easy chair near the fire.)
(Olivia places a small table near him, and Marie brings
in a tray with coffee and refreshments. Olivia sits
opposite the Kaiser, also taking coffee.)
THE KAISER: HOW kind! Now I feel much better! Let
me hear a little more of Love! How beauti-
ful, madam! ( looking at her face). Pardon me this
personal remark; but I have never seen such beauty
in my life.
OLIVIA: Then you are looking on the face of Love.
THE KAISER :If that be so, then Love is beautiful. I have
never seen her face before. Oh, that I could but
wear the face of Love! And you are not afraid to
be alone?
OLIVIA: I am afraid of nothing, sire, on earth.
THE KAISER: If I only had this woman's heart!
I'd sacrifice my claim to all on earth.
OLIVIA: But you do sacrifice the innocent.
THE KAISER (angry) : Madam, do not let me think of
that. I am afraid to look in my own glass.
OLIVIA: Then you must go and win the heart of Love.
If you did love then you would cease to fear. And
that is what the scripture teacheth us.
THE KAISER: But I do love my dear Fatherland.
16


OLIVIA: And are you sure that God still leads you on?
THE KAISER: My time is up; you lift a load of sorrow;
Now I must go! I'll answer you to-morrow!
[Exeunt.
SCENE s.— Brussel the Palace of Justice.
The Prince presiding.
TRUTH ( a voice): Back to Hell!
THE PRINCE: What! Did I hear a voice?
Enter Kaiser (alone).
Ah! Back already, sire? Yon frightened me!
I thought I heard
THE KAISER: Hate! I hate
THE PRINCE: Ah, my own, my only saving word! My
life on earth! Repeat that word, your Majesty, it
gives me life. It gives me all yon have. It gives
me you for ever. Repeat that word!
THE KAISER : I hate the English! I hate them all
(The Prince descends, and they embrace.)
SCENE 6.— A wood on the battlefield. King Albert camped
in the open. Time, grey dawn. The King sleeps.
Music low and sweet in the wood close by.
LOVE (bending over the King) :
Though your sorrows heavy be,
And your cup be full of" woe,
Fear you not this raging sea,
Now repelled—'twill backward flow.
All the hosts of Heaven are thine;
All the holy powers of right
Mingle with the powers divine
To uphold you in your fight.
All my heart to thee I give,
All thy sorrows now are mine;
Albert, King of Belgium, live;
By your side is Truth Divine.


This my secret key I leave
At your feet, here by your side;
With your people, too, I grieve;
I am Love, with Truth, your Guide.
ALBERT (in his sleep) :
Holy Spirit from above
Be my guide to Truth and Love.
TRUTH (standing close to the head of the King and look-
ing down upon him) : My son, my own beloved in
the ages past, fear not this surging torrent of hot
hell. Long have we watched and waited for this
day, this hour of Death, now here, but soon to pass,
and pass it will, with Death and Hell both pros-
trate at your feet. Immortal glory waits upon
you here, for we will grant a lasting peace to earth.
Your noble deeds of love ascend to Heaven, and
mighty powers attend you, here below. This
bloody work of Hate will run its course, as these
dread forces now beyond control must work their
own destruction, ere we can a higher and a nobler
state create. We hold the keys of the eternal
gate. We hold the keys of Heaven, too, on earth.
I give you mine (placing a small gold key at the
King's feet), as Love hath given you hers, with
all my heart, and on thy stainless crown we'll
write our names, that all who look thereon may be
your own. We pass, but we are here to comfort
and to cheer.
[Exeunt.
ALBERT (awake) : Now sweet, refreshing sleep restores
me to myself once more, and oh, what life
and hope and love expands my soul. Was it a
dream, or was it very Truth. I saw the spirit of
the holy man of God, and with him came a lovely
child of Heaven. (He picks up the golden keys
and reads the names of "Truth" and ''Love.")
Her name! Yes, she said her name was Love,
and he, the holy man of God, was Truth. What
words of comfort, also, did I hear. No! Not
alone! forgotten by my God. He lives! He leads
me on! I hear his voice again.


Lead on, bright Spirit, to the light of day,
My night of sorrow passed, I go thy way.
[Exit Albert.
SCENE 7. — Brussels—Palace of Justice. The Prince
presiding.
Enter the Kaiser, alone.
THE PRINCE: What news, my own Imperial Will?
THE KAISER: A great and mighty victory is ours. We
have driven the invader from Antwerp. Ghent is
ours, Ostend is ours, Calais
Enter General.
GENERAL : Your Majesty, we are in retreat from Calais.
THE KAISER : Gott im Himmel, we must have Calais! Back
to Calais! Calais at all costs!
TRUTH (a voice) : Back, vile curs, to Hell!
THE PRINCE ( covering his eyes): What! Did I hear a
voice?
THE KAISER: Hate! I hate them all, these cruel, greedy
English.
THE PRINCE: Ah! My word, my only word, my life!
THE KAISER :My horse! My horse! Bring me my own
white horse! I will lead my invincible army
myself to victory.
[Exeunt.
SCENE B.—REVIEW OF INDIAN TROOPS BY BOBS IN FRANCE.
ACT THREE.
SCENE I.— Berlin, Potsdam Palace; a bedroom; the lights
turned low.
THE KAISER (on a couch, in uniform) : Oh, if I could only
get one hour of sleep!


THE PRINCE {in a black cloak, sitting at the foot of the
conch) : What, my own, back in Berlin? I thought
you were at Calais.
THE KAISER [frightened, sitting up) : Who are you?
THE PRINCE: Don't you know me, William? I am your-
self and me!
THE KAISER ( reaches for his sword and strikes, but the
Prince shifts to the other side of the couch. : Oh,
that I could sleep for one little hour!
THE PRINCE: Sleep! I have not heard that word for a
thousand years.
THE KXIISER: Oh, that I could forget
THE PRINCE: Forget! We never forget! We never
sleep!
THE KAISER: What mocking trickster speaks thus unto
me? Am I not greater than the great God of
Battles?
TRUTH {a voice at the door) : Greater than the great
God of Hell!
THE PRINCE ( shrieks, covers his head with his cloak, and
falls prostrate on the floor) : O, William, speak my
word, and give me life. I perish! I perish! I
perish!
THE KAISER ( jumps up, strikes a light, and uncovers head
of the prostrate form on the floor, and draws back-
ward) : Mein Gott, der Teufel!
TRUTH {appearing inside the room) : It is your own soul!
THE KAISER: Black Hell!
(The Devil groans and wriggles on the floor.)
Can it be true?
Am I myself and God,
And the devil, too?
{Looking at the Devil on the floor)
O, hate! 0, hate!


(At the sound of "Hate" the Devil is restored, and rises
quickly to his feet.)
THE DEVIL: It is our fate;
I am myself
And you! [ The Devil vanishes.
THE KAISER:
The Day is lost, and now it is to-morrow!
I'll face it!—though it be with sorrow.
Truth approaches.
THE KAISER: And who are you?
TRUTH : I could a tale unfold of what is past and what is
yet to be, that would in one short moment strip
your bones as bare and white as grinning, silent
Death.
THE KAISER: Withhold! I know you now; but now it is
too late. [ Exit the Kaiser, sword in hand.
[Exit Truth.
Re-enter the Devil.
THE DEVIL: Phwee —u!
He gives me life; as yet he holds my heart;
He holds me not, he has my worser part;
I have no heart! And yet his heart is mine;
And all I have, my liege, will soon be thine.
To be with me, to be my honored guest,
The heir of all I have, and all the rest.
Ah! Happy thought! Now I will inspire
What yet remains with my one desire —
My word! My only word! O, Fate,
Give me new legions of the Sons of Hate;
They are his own, and they must follow him;
Ere we depart, I'll leave with them my hymn.
[Exit the Devil.
SCENE 2— Same as Act 1, Scene 5. A storm. The
tree, struck ~by lightning, has just fallen, revealing
a deep dark pit, and killing the gunners close hy.
The Devil, hiding in the trunk, falls too, and is
rising, sword in hand, in hlack uniform.


Enter the Kaiser, sword in hand.
THE KAISER: At last! Your ancient lair! Hateful, cun-
ning, vile, deceiving liar, I'll slay you here!
(He thrusts.)
THE DEVIL: Ah! Ah! Right on the brink of Hell?
(The Devil springs across the pit.)
Hullo!
(Death comes up out of the pit, and quickly disappears
again.)
(Smoke rises from the pit.)
THE KAISER: YOU! Prince of Heaven, philosopher and
friend.!
(He thrusts again.)
THE DEVIL : Don't come too close, or you will hurt your-
self!
THE KAISER: Back! Back! Ah!
(The Devil knocks the sword out of the Kaiser's hand,
and closes upon him. They struggle for a moment
on the t)rink of the pit.)
TRUTH (a voice) : Back! to black Hell!
THE DEVIL * (tightening his grip on the Kaiser, and slowly
descending) : With you! Ambition! Down!
THE KAISER (disappearing into Hell) : Love! Save the
Fatherland!
Enter Truth.
TRUTH : Close not this pit till all the sons of hate
Are gathered here to meet a Kaiser's fate.
Enter Love.
LOVE (to Truth):
There sleeps close by, and dreams, the noble King,
And I have your commands delivered him.
TRUTH : We pass, but we return to earth again,
And with us Peace to all the sons of men;
LOVE: And there will be a great awakening.


SCENE 3.— King Albert's Dream; The Hague; a Forest.
Enter Albert.
ALBERT (walking in his sleep, passes along a narrow path
to two golden gates) : When peace is signed we
come to live on earth, and near to Peace; and peace
was signed to-day. Yes! this is the way, and this,
I know, the gate. It is pure gold. It is the golden
gate. I have my key, and lam clothed in white.
GUARDIAN: Stay! Do not pass this way. The gate is
barred, and this is sacred ground.
ALBERT: IS not this the home of Truth and Love?
GUARDIAN: But here no mortal man may pass, no human
soul may come, without a key.
ALBERT: But I have the keys of both Truth and Love.
GUARDIAN: This cannot be. As yet no mortal man has
so been blessed.
(Albert hands the guardian the keys.)
GUARDIAN : Yes! It is so! You are the favored guest.
(He opens the gate to the abode of Truth.)
(At a golden table Bobs and Truth are sitting, and as
Albert enters Truth rises to receive him.)
(The Book of Shakespeare open on the table.)
TRUTH: Welcome, Good and True.
(Truth's abode is the source of all the great thoughts that
have come to man. These thoughts are again
recorded by Truth, who, in his abode, anticipated
them. The scene is illumined by a light not yet
known on earth, but as soon as the time arrives
Truth will reveal it, as it is from here that know-
ledge is gradually unfolded to us, while Love in-
spires art, music and song.)
ALBERT (slowly surveying the place) : And this is Truth's
abode! And you, my noble Lord! (Saluting.)
BOBS (dressed in white, saluting) : And Albert, too!


ALBERT (to Truth) : I thank you for this honor.
TRUTH: Thou art worthy! (Unlocking the other gate.)
See! And here is Love!
(Love is surrounded by beautiful women, all young, or
apparently so; they are her great Olivias of the
earth. The women are all dressed in white loose
robes, relieved slightly with gold. The color
scheme is white and gold. The new light gives
them any color or combination of colors they
desire, and these are all in subdued tones. The
scene is all light, life, music and art. Love comes
forward to greet the King. Albert, bowing, kisses
the hand of Love.)
LOVE: Welcome, beloved, welcome to our home.
ALBERT: YOU do me honor to invite me here.
LOVE : Now let us have some music and good cheer.
(Albert passes in, and delicious refreshment is served as
the music and singing proceeds. Truth's guests
mingle with the company.)
CURTAIN.
Sydney, March 10, 1915.




• • v t . I .
L . ' ' ' . j
|
' ' ' i
! is
