





LITHGOW, 1942
A SURVEY OF THE LIFE OF THE TOWN
For Private Circulation
Hazel Dotson
and
H. E. Howes
Department of Labour and National Service
(Industrial Welfare Division)
Australia, 1943.




CONTENTS
Page
I. HOUSING
A. HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF 1
B. A GLIMPSE OF THE BASIC PROBLEMS 2
1. Rapid Increase of Population
2. The Lag in Housing
3. Bitterness
C. EXPERIENCE OF THE PAST 2
D. ITS SIGNIFICANCE TO-DAY 3
E. THE FIGHT BEGINS AGAIN 3
F. WHAT HAS BEEN DONE 3
1. Men’s Hostel
2. Munition Workers’ Cottages
3. Duration Houses
4. Allocation
5. Accommodation for Women War Workers
6. Private Enterprise
7. Building Restrictions
G. RESULTS OF HOUSING LAG 6
1. Sub-standard Houses
2. Overcrowding and High Rents
3. Houses Sub-let as ’’Flats”
4. Furnished Rooms
5. Board and Lodging
6. Converted Buildings
7. Caravans
8. The Camping Areas
9. Supervision
10. Boarders
H. DURATION HOUSES VERSUS CAMPS 11


Page
I, HOW IT SEEMS TO NEWCOMERS 13
J, LIFE IN THE CAMPING AREAS 13
K, EVICTIONS 13
L, NATIONAL SECURITY REGULATIONS 15
1. Preference to Munition Workers
£. The Gentlemen’s Agreement
5. How the Regulations ’Worked
M, T. VERSUS S. - A PROTRACTED CASE 16
11. HOW THE PEOPLE EARN THEIR LIVING
A, MINING 20
B- RAILWAY ’WORKERS 24
C. SMALL ARMS FACTORY 24
111. LEISURE TIME
A. THE LOCAL PRESS AND ITS EFFECT ON PEOPLE 26
B. WIRELESS 29
C. DANCING 29
D. CINIMA 30
E. DRINKING % 3£
F’. GAMBLING 34
0. THE CHURCHES 36
H. CLUBS AND SOCIETIES 37
I. LIBRARIES 39
J. WORKERS’ EDUCATIONAL ASSOCIATION 40


Page
K. GENERAL LACK OF INTEREST 42
L. ACTIVITIES CONNECTED WITH THE WAR 43
IV, TRADE UNIONS IN LITHGOW
A. THREE MIN GROUPS 46
B. THE INDUSTRIAL STRUGGLE 47
1. Small Arms Factory
2. Miners
C, RANK and FILE AND EXECUTIVES 49
D, CLASH BETY/EEN THE UNIONS 50
E, WHAT THE UNIONS HAVE DONE 52
F. TRADE UNIONS AND POLITICAL THEORY 53
G, TRADE UNIONS AND THE WAR EFFORT 55
H. WOMEN IN THE TRADE UNIONS 57
V. THE WOMEN OF LITHGOW 59
VI, THE YOUTH OF LITHGOW 67
VII. THE REASONS BEHIND LITHGOW»S APATHY
A, THE OLD AND THE NEW 70
B. CIVIC PRIDE 70
C, VANDALISM 73
D. LITHGOW AND THE WAR EFFORT 74
E, ABSENTEEISM 75
F. THE AFTERMATH OF THE DEPRESSION 77




PREFACE
Lithgow is a town behind the Blue Mountains in New South 7»ales.
Because government munitions production was responsible for the over-
crowding of the town, Mr. Howes and Miss Dobson spent the greater part
of 1942 there as community welfare officers of the Department of Labour
and National Service. At the end of their stay, they wrote the following
survey.
The object of circulating the report now is not to convey information
about Lithgow, but to give a typical picture of what happens to workers
when war production has drawn into any area a number of people far in
excess of those for whom living facilities can be provided; and as an
example of a useful type of study of how people feel about the organisation
of their community.
While living conditions in Lithgow now are still below the standard
of localities not having to accommodate so large an increase of wartime
population, they do not remain as described in the survey. Many men then
employed at the government factory have been transferred to feeder factories
elsewhere, or have entered the armed Forces. Total employment in the
factory has been maintained by the increased employment of women, some of
whom were already living in the town.
Also, since the date of the survey, more accommodation has been
provided by the Commonwealth War Workers Housing Trust. The total amount
erected by the Trust now stands at 240 permanent houses, 300 wartime
cottages (built and building), a hotel for 700 men, and a hotel for 300
women, (building). A local accommodation committee has been set up to
secure the maximum use of existing accommodation, and new accommodation
becoming available. Further action has also been taken under the National
Security (Housing of War Workers) Regulations to make more accommodation
in neighbouring mountain towns available to munition workers. The people
in the camping areas detailed on pages 8 to 9 have now been housed.
All these measures, while not affording a complete solution to the
many problems indicated in the survey, have done something to ameliorate
the stress of social life in the town.
Melbourne, 1943*




I. HOUSING
A. HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF
"Lithgow is one of Australia's most important war towns. Workers em-
ployed in war industries are doing their best towards a 100 per cent*
war effort. But they are not getting a fair go from the Government
Which is failing in its responsibility to see that these men live under
decent conditions.
"That is the general opinion of the workers in the town (and of many
delegates of representative organisations) who have almost reached
breaking point in their demand for more and better houses."
Extract from "Lithgow Clarion", September Ist, 1942,
In another local paper, the "Lithgow Mercury", an article on tho same
topic of housing the workers, reads as follows:
"One of the greatest local social problems Lithgow has to face is the
housing of its workers* During the past few years house building has
not kept pace with the increase of population. Houses are not to be
had, and rents for some time past have increased to a fictitious value,
with the result that local landlords are reaping a golden harvest....,
it behoves the Federal Government to take steps to house its workors."
But the actual date of this article, which might have been written to-
day was not September 1942, but April 1911. Apparently more than 50 years
ago, Lithgow, "inland industrial centre of Australia" had the identical
housing problem it has to-day.
In 1911 Lithgow*s population was not quite 9,000, and the newly-
eonstructed Small Arms Factory was just about to open. The article con-
tinues:
"Let our local Federal and State representatives take heed. They know
that workers will be coming here to work at the Small Arms Factory.
They know that these people will want dwellings. They know that none
are to be obtained in Lithgow, and builders are not keeping pace with
the needs of the town..... Then what on earth are they doing to cope
with the pressing problem? Let them get at work on the housing
question, and they will merit the thanks of the whole community,"


B. A GLIMPSE OP TEE BASIC PROBLEMS
1. Rapid increase of population: To-day, in September 1942, Lithgow’s
population exceeds 25,000 in the municipality alone, and there are
approximately 6,000 men and women working at the Small Arms Factory. The
factory itself has rapidly grown since the outbreak of war in September
1939, when it employed only 500 workers, and large and substantial build-
ings have been, and are still being, added to accommodate machines and
men.
2. The lag in housing: But only 351 cottages, of which 111 were built by
private enterprise, have been erected since the outbreak of war, to house
the total influx of well over 10,000 people.
3* Bitterness: The following comment made to us, is typical of the
bitterness expressed by many of the workers;
"They take damn fine care to house the machines, but what about us and
our wives and families? We can camp on the town’s old ash-dumpl
C. THE EXPERIENCE OF THE PAST
But there was a time in her history when Lithgow had many mere houses
than sufficed the needs of her people. In the "depression" many homes
were abandoned - among them many of the 100 cottages m Littleton Tzuilt
during the Great War after prolonged agitation for the Governmen o o
its factory workers. Poors hung loose on their hinges, skirting-boards
were torn up, and homes fell into ruin and desolation.
Lithgow had always been a mining town, and it had "cradled the iron
and steel industry in Australia We are the strong right hand of the
people, reaching westward into the bowels of the earth for ores, dragging
out of the surrounding hills the coal, and ouilding great tires ° „
rate the dross and conserve the metals". - "Mercury", February 18th, 1927.
The need of a nation threatened by war had been responsible for the
building up of a new industry, the making of arm 5...... But f™ 1 ® • ,
after the end of the war, most of the munition workers who had flowed in
the town found themselves without work, for, despite protests, the factor}
closed down, and there was no attempt to convert to peace-time industries.
Then in 1926 Hoskins Steelworks which had employed about two thousand
men in Lithgow were transferred to Port Eembla The "depression hit
Lithgow badly; it lasted for many years. 2,000 men were unemploye .
population fell from nearly 21,000 to about 13,000. Homes tfere
deserted.


T. ITS SIGNIFICANCE TO-DAY
To-day, in September 1942, thousands of men work again at the Small Arms
Factory. They work long hours and receive big wages, and for many it is the
first regular job they have had in years. ’’But it won’t last. As soon as
the war’s finished, we’re finished. They’ll shut the factory down like they
did last time and where will our jobs be then?”
The same attitude was seen in the early days of the w’ar in their firm
refusal to build their own homes, though there were two co-operative Build-
ing Societies operating in Lithgow. ’’Why should we sink our money in a place
like Lithgow? As soon as the war’s over, there’ll be nothing for us here*”
In any case many of them could not have found the deposits of 1 0% and
20/o respectively, required by the Societies. Some could not even pay the
2/6d# ground rent in the Municipal Camping area, until they had received
their first week’s w r ages at the factory,
E. THE FIGHT BEGINS AGAIN
Once again began the public agitation for the Government to house its
workers; and the struggle for houses, prolonged over a period of many months
and finally years, is as violent to-day as it has been at any time in the
history of the town.
F. WHAT HAS BEEN DONE
1* Men’s Hostel: Through the instrumentality of the Commonwealth War
Workers’ Housing Trust, a hostel to house 568 single men has been built -
the long pine-wood huts being grouped in a half crescent around an adminis-
trative and recreational block. Full board is provided for 32/6d, weekly,
and the hostel is conveniently placed within a few minutes’ walk of the
factory.
Workers’ Cottages at Littleton: The supply of cottages
built by the Trust h*s always lagged far behind the demand. A total cf 240
had been reached, when, the critical turn of events caused by Japan’s en-
trance into the war was responsible for the decision to abandon further
plans for the building of full-size permanent cottages. The final batch of
20 are just being The cottages are of several different designs,
t Written in September, 1942.


and usually contain a lounge, kitchenette, breakfast room, bathroom and
two and sometimes three bedrooms. Linen press and cupboards are also
provided and gas stove, electric light and, sewerage are installed. Most
of the gardens are neatly kept and a good area of ground surrounds each
cottage. Rents range from £1 to 32/6d., 80$ of them being let at 27/6d.»
The majority of the 240 new cottages are grouped around the original
100 cottages built during the Great V/ar. Known as New and Old Littleton
respectively, they tend to form a village settlement in the western end of
the town near the factory, and somewhat separated from the main township.
A bus service runs from the village to the railway station and Main Street,
the shopping centre, a.distance of to .2 miles.
In Littleton itself, there are one or two small shops dotted about;
no church halls, and no social amenities or recreational facilities. The
nearest school, Ccoerwull Public, is a considerable distance from most of
the homes, if“ th© needs of very young children are to. be remembered. *
Ground has been set aside by the Tepartment of the Interior, so that
Littleton may be provided with a Children 1 s Playground eventually. Some
of the roads have been improved recently and a street tree-planting scheme
has come up for consideration by Council.
In this connection it is interesting to read an article in the
’’Mercury" of April 14th 1911, to which reference has already been made.
Under the heading, "A Model Village at the Small Arms Factory", the
writer appealed to the Government to erect cottages for the factory
workers, and, (31 years ago) outlined a plan which, in many respects,
brings to mind forcibly the modern conception of a Community Centre:
" The houses would probably be arranged in the form of a square,
and in the centre would be a public garden, laid out with flower beds,
trees and shrubs similar to Wynyard Square, Sydney...... The Govern-
ment would study the comfort of its employees far more than the
private employer does. It would erect a cheerful public reading room,
with a supply of newspapers, periodicals, and a library for its
-employees...... Adjacent to the reading room v/ould be one or two
smaller rooms for the holding of workmen’s Committee meetings, debates,
games and billiards, whilst the reading room could be utilised for
occasional lectures, concerts etc. The young children would net be
forgotten. For there would be a public nursery or playrooms, supplied
with a liberal assortment of kindergarten toys, in charge of a res-
ponsible senior woman."
For Littleton - and for Lithgow itself with its population of 25,000
** GVe n this 30-year-old plan is still a Utopian dream. It has never emerged
from the torn and dusty files of an old newspaper.


3. ”Duration” Houses: With the -cessation of cottage-building due to the
shortage of man-power and materials, the Commonwealth War Workers’ Housing
Trust planned to build ’’duration” houses for munition workers. Of 30 re-
presentative people whose reactions to the proposal were sought at this time,
only 4 were opposed to the plan - all 4 being executive members of Unions,
who feared that it would result in a general lowering of working-class
standards. Three other persons were not personally interested, although they
were living under extremely had conditions, 2 in camps and 1 in a condemned
house.
There was, however, a determination in all quarters that under no cir-
cumstances whatsoever, would the ’’duration” houses be permitted to remain
after the war. A number of unionists argued strongly that a ’’covenant”
should be signed by the Government to the effect that the places would be
pulled down at the end of the war. Previous experience had shown only too
clearly that ’’the thing that was allowed as a temporary measure, always
tended tc become permanent”.
At the time of writing, the building of at least 200 ’’duration” houses
in Lithgow is contemplated by the Trust, and the first batch, near the
Littleton permanent cottages, is well under way* They are built of fibro,
and contain two bedrooms, a combined dining and living room and kitchenette.
There is a fuel stove; electric light is provided, but they are not sewered,
They are built in groups of four, with a communal laundry containing 2 sets
of coppers and tubs* Some opposition has been voiced against the plan of
the communal laundry which includes under the same roof four lavatories, two
at either end. Apart from this fact and a certain amount of concern that
the proximity of the houses to one another allows for little privacy, the
general feeling is one of relief that many munition workers now living in
-amps will soon be housed in decent, though small places. The agitation at
present is not against ’’duration” houses, but for v. further 2GO or 300 to be
constructed. The total cost of each ’’duration” house is expected to bo about
£350, and the rentals are to be 12/6d. and 14/- ex-lusive of sanitary and
garbage fees.
Alio cation: Allocation of Trust cottages has been made by means of s
ballot, though a certain number were always set aside for ’’key” factory
workers whose services management wished to be sure of retaining. The
living conditions of hundreds of families in Lithgow are pitiful, and sugges-
tions are frequently raised that in the case of the ’’duration” houses,
allocation should be made according to need.
for iComen War Workers: The introduction of women into the
factory during the past few months has added yet another problem in accommo-
dation in a town where the housing position was already desperate. The supply
of local women being soon exhausted, board has had tc be found for the
hundreds of women who have been, and are still being drawn from other centres,
To this end the Ministry of Munitions, on the advice of the Welfare Officer
at the Small Aims Factory, took over the large Guest House, ’’California” at
Katoomba. There 200 girls receive full board for 32/6d. and travel to work


by subsidised bus for only 5/6d. weekly* The ’’Sans Souci", also at
Katoomba, has since been taken over to cope with the increasing numbers of
women employees* Nevertheless, although satisfactory in many respects the
plan involves approximately 2 hours and 40 minutes travelling time each day*
It is understood that the Commonwealth War Workers 1 Housing Trust
proposes to erect a hostel in Lithgow to house 300 women, a plan which
should ease the position further.
6. Private Enterprise: As mentioned previously, only 111 houses (and 1
block of 6 flats) have been built by private enterprise in the past 3 years
since the outbreak of war. As far as can be ascertained, the great
majority of them were built for letting purposes.
The actual figures are given belaw:
Sept. 1939 - Sept. 1940 ... S 3 houses.
* 1940 - " .1941 ... ... m« ... 71 houses plus 1
block of 6 flats.
M 1941 - June 1942 * 17 houses.
These figures are not large over a period of 3 years, but in a com-
munity where the most wretched dwelling is fought for, these new houses
have represented relief from an intolerable situation for at least 117
families.
Building Restrictions: The building regulations, introduced in June
1942, which restricted building without permits to a maximum of £25, met
with a storm of protest from the local Council, and other bodies interested
in Lithgow*s housing problem. The "Mercury" reports the Mayor as follows:
"I suggest that a very vigorous protest should be entered against
this latest proclamation. I think it is absurd and scandalous in a
town like Lithgow where housing is such an urgent question, that we
find Government regulations which say private individuals cannot
build without permission...... The protest motion was carried unani-
mously (by Council)".
G. RESULTS OF HOUSING LAG
As yet, however, neither the Trust nor private enterprise has been
able to do more than touch the fringe of the problem, as the population
figures rise by thousands with each successive year of the war. High rents,
over-crowding, poor living conditions in Lithgow itself have been the result.
Put other problems arise from the fact that many married men cannot find a
house at all in the town, and are obliged to keep a home for their families


in Sydnoy, pay board for themselves in Lithgow, and fares to visit their wives
and children at week-ends. Furthermore, hundreds of munition workers are
forced to travel daily from the mountain towns, thereby adding from 2-3 hours
travelling time on to each 12-hour working day.
The Trade Unions, who have consistently fought for better housing in
Lithgow, maintain that absenteeism, with consequent loss of production, is
largely the result of the present living conditions. The secretary of one
of the Factory unions told a housing conference that 400 men had left the
Factory recently because of the housing conditions. The local press, in
reviewing Lithgow*s housing problem, summed up the position in the following
terms: **Australia is losing many hours of production a week because her
workers are not properly catered for in their homes.** Clarion, August 11th,
1942.
Sub-standard Houses: Houses which have been condemned years ago, are still
being occupied. There are 238 houses at present on which closing orders could
be issued. About lUt to 20$ of these might possibly be brought up to require-
ments, but the remainder would certainly have to be demolished. Of these 238
houses, 147 are in subdivided areas, but 91 are on unsubdivided land, and there-
fore have no gas, water or light, though in some cases lines have been extended.
Owners of houses on unsubdivided land have no title and cannot sell.
It should be pointed out that although a house may fall very far below
present-day standards, it cannot be condemned unless it fails to conform with
the requirements of the Public Health Act of 1902. It may be condemned because
of dampness, rooms less than 9 feet in height, or floor joists less than 12”
from the ground. It must be ?J unfit or unsafe for human habitation or occu-
pation or has become ruinous and dangerous (that is to say ruinous to such an
extent that tne continuance of such house or building is dangerous to the
public or to the inhabitants of the neighbouring dwelling houses)”.
It is impossible at the present time even to-enforce the meagre require-
ments of the Public Health Act in Lithgow. A condemned house is counted
better than none at all.
2. ■ vercrowding end High Rents: The examples given below show that over-
crowding and high rents are frequently twin evils. Some of the most glaring
examples exist where -
(a) Houses are sub-let as "flats”:
(b) Furnished rooms are occupied by families.
Houses sub-let as "flats”: In Lithgow itself, the acute shortage of
houses has resulted in 2 or even 3 families sharing a small cottage for which
they frequently pay an exorbitant rent. Instances are numerous of a house
being rented for a moderate sum, and then sub-let in flats at very high
rentals.


The following examples are typical of the kind of rents "racket”
which has developed:
A man rented a house for 15/6d. He then sub-let it as 2 flats, for
each of which he recoived £l. For the use of the backyard and cement
tubs, he obtained another 7/6d. The garage he let for 5/-, making a
total of £2/12/6d.
One cottage containing only 3 rooms and kitchen was divided into 3
"flats", bringing in a total of £3 weekly from the 3 families occupy-
ing them. The total number of people living in this small place is
12-6 adults and 6 children. 3of the adults are munition workers. .
"On the night shift you can’t get your sleep."
In another case (at Katoomba) a man divided his house into 3 flats,
which he sub-let to 3 families of munition workers, who were unable
to get a place of any kind in Lithgow. 'He charged them 32/6d., 30/-
and 37/6d. respectively. This total weekly rental of £3 was being
obtained from a cottage whose valuation was only £325. The rents
were later reduced to 12/6d. for each flat when the matter was finally
taken before the Fair Rents Oourt,
A substantial number of cases have been brought before the Fair Rents
Court, and reductions in rent have been made; but not infrequently, tenants
agree to pay a high rent as a means of securing some kind of a roof over
their heads.
4. Furnished Rooms: Cases where a whole family have been obliged to live
in one room, with use of a kitchen, are quite common in Lithgow, and any-
thing from 25/- to 35/- may be charged.' One of the families now living in
a shack on the Municipal Camping Area came there because they were "tired
of paying 35/- for just one room, and eating outside in a wash-house along-
side of the fowl-yard".
It is impossible to measure the amount of over-crowding which is the
result of this situation. According to the Local Government Act of 1919,
a Council may "control and regulate the use and occupation of buildings and
rooms so os to prevent over-crowding", whilst the Public Health (Amendment)
Act, 1921, specifically states that "no room in any house or building shall
be used for sleeping purposes unless an unencumbered air-space of not less
than 500 cubic feet is available for each occupant".-
In actual practice, however, the Health Inspectors in Lithgow have
little means of controlling over-crowding - partly because the Act itself
is extremely cumbersome to administer and difficult to enforce - partly
because the local housing position makes it impracticable to insist that
any shelter is inadequate, when no other can be provided.


5. Board and Lodging: Decent board at a reasonable price is practically
unprocurable in Lithgow. In one boarding house, 4 men sleep in one room.
Off that room there is a verandah on which a sleep-out has been made, and
there 2 men sleep. These men use the room, where the other 4 sleep, as a
dressing room. That means there are 6 men using that room. But there are
6 other men who work on the opposite shift, and use the same beds - one lot
out and the other lot in. They pay 30/- per week for this accommodation.
6. Tf Converted" Buildings: Recently Council proceeded against a man for
having unclean premises, and making wrongful use of a building in Main
Street. There were about 20 beds in 2 separate rooms in premises previously
used as an electric laundry. The bed-linen was filthy and fruit skins were
lying on the floor. All the tenants were munition workers. Meal’s were ob-
tained at a cafe 100 yards down the street which was under the same owner-
ship. In another part of the town an old hall, iron and unlined, was roughly
partitioned off, and let for £3/10/-. The Fair Rents Board later reduced
this rent to 14/9.
7. Caravans: On 2or 3 sme.ll pieces of land in the district, caravans are
parked. The ground belongs to private individuals, and the owners provide
water and sanitation, and charge each family ground rent. From 8 to 10
caravans are sometimes parked in one block of land. In one instance as much
as 10/- per '.veek was charged each family merely for the privilege of parking
a caravan.
8* The Camping Areas: Two years ago, scores of families were living in tents
under the most primitive conditions in the Pine Forest near Littleton. They
had neither water nor sanitary conveniences. In an effort to alleviate the
position the local Council later set up the Municipal Camping area in the
outer Recreation Reserve. Some community wash-houses, galvanised iron bath-
rooms and sanitary conveniences were provided, and a ground rent of 2/6d.
weekly was charged. This area wa-s originally intended to provide some 28
camping sites for tents, but in a very short time over 100 humpies of bag,
iron, timber and kerosene tins had come into existence.
One of the present investigators paid a visit to Lithgow at the time when
the transfer, of campers from the Pine Forest to the Municipal Area was proceed-
ing. It was a cold windy morning. ‘The wind had blown fiercely all night,
many of the tents had collapsed, end most of the campers had spent a sleepless
night hammering in tent pegs. The women were trying to prenare a meal in
front of their tents over open fires while the wind blew the flames in all
directions.
Council had ruled that only tents should be erected, but after their ex-
perience of the previous night, many of the men were already obtaining odd
ends of iron, timber of all lengths, and bags and placing rough structures
round their tents to keep out the cold wind,.
Intended as an emergency measure only, the Municipal Camp has still
nearly 100 camps, and now to quote one of the aldermen "the old garbage dump


and the sawmill dump have been built on*'. In this camp alone there ore
between 450 and 500 people living under the most depressing conditions.
Some of the better shacks are built of rough timber or galvanised iron,
but the majority are crude, unsightly collections of old bags, iron, wood
and kerosene tins. Heaps of junk, old broken cars, rubbish of all descrip-
tions are piled beside many of them. Recently complaints were made that six
families were keeping greyhounds in the tiny yards against their shacks,
many kept dogs of other breeds, and seven families kept fowls.
In the summer there is nov/here for the children to play except in the
thick dust around the shacks; there are no trees and no grass. In the
winter they play in the cold puddles of muddy water - toddlers of two and
three years of age, wading knee-deep in it. On several occasions the
camps on the lower ground have been completely flooded out, the water
lying a foot deep in their bedrooms. For days after a storm the ground
is cold and sodden and the women stand in front of their shacks washing
thair clothes with the mud oozing up 1 over their shoes.
Yet, despite these appalling conditions, camps on the Municipal area,
locally kno7/n as Lithgow’s "Happy Valley" were frequently sold at prices
ranging from £2O to £6O. Men working at the factory who were moved on to
Orange or Bathurst contended that they had a right to sell their own
property, and thus the shacks were being perpetuated. Newcomers were ob-
liged to pay high prices for mere"humpies", because they could find no
other accommodation in the town. On the other hand, several authentic
cases were quoted to us where families who owned their own homes in the
district had let them at a high rental, and gone to live on the Municipal
Area.
On June Ist of this year, the following Council regulation came into
operation:
"No further camps are to be permitted to be erected on the outer
Recreation Reserve, and as one camp at present is vacated, the
structure must be demolished ana removed from the site, and under no:
circumstances will Council allow the structure to be sold or
transferred from one person to another".
Since the passing of this regulation, the number of camps in the
Municipal Area has been reduced from 102 to 95. In addition, there are
approximately another 100 camps in Lithgow. The largest group is at
South Littleton and the Rifle Range, where there are about 35 camps, to
which must be added a further 17 camps belonging to the families of men
working for the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission and from 30
to 40 tents belonging to the single men. <
The Pine Forest Camp - the unauthorised camping area which came into
being with the first influx of 7/orkers to the factory has always contained,
until recent weeks, some 30 or more camps. Finally, after more than 18
months, the continuous efforts to clear this area seem to be meeting with
success.


Brown*a Camp is an area about 50 yards from the Sewerage Treatment works,
and here 8 families put up shacks of the poorest type.
9. Supervision; Supervision of the camps is a difficult and constant job.
The Health Inspectors are continuously at work in an effort to keep down camps
which spring up overnight, without permission, outside the regular camping
areas. On one of the lovliest spots in Lithgow, 2 men, said to be half-castes,
recently put up their camps without permission. With them were two young
women, aged about 21 and 26 respectively. About 16 months ago, the same men
with two other women were living in a camp in the district - one of them with
3 children. The effect of this roving insecure life and environment upon
young children needs no emphasis.
"Boarders”: It is not uncommon to find that a camping family has taken
a. ’’Boarder”. In one of the small old bag humpies in Brown’s Camp, there
lives a munition worker, his wife, a boy aged 2 years and a ’’young lady
boarder”. They are perhaps a hundred yards or so from where the night soil
is dumped. It was to this area that a certain woman brought a three-weeks
old baby, whom she had taken at birth - with no legal formalities - from a
young girl in another country town. It was the young mother’s third child.
K. DURATION HOUSES VERSUS CAMPS
There are a small number of shacks on the Municipal Camping Area which
are neat, fairly well-built structures, costing their owners between £6O and
£7O. Some of these men contend that some compensation should be paid them if
th° Council forces them to leave when the duration houses are ready for
occupation.
The following extracts, taken from 2 campers’ letters to ’’The Lithgow
Clarion” give some indication of the different attitudes adopted;
’’When securing a site from Council, we asked if there was any possibility
of having, to move at a later date. 77e were told verbally that there was
no risk of this at least for the duration.
Many of us have put up places that will stand any weather, three or four
rooms of iron or fibro, floored with tongues and grooved flooring, ceiled
. lined, and well ventilated, with new stoves and an open fire, and al-
together as convenient as possible.
’’The cost of these places is around £7O, and the material was purchased
on small weekly payments which means that they are not completely paid
off yet. y
*’l say that any of these places are on a par with these ’’duration houses”}
in fact, they are better. They can offer an open fire.
”How can you keep kiddies warm in weather the like of Lithgow, around a
tin pot heater?


"Also our kiddies are safely fenced in their own yard here. You could
not turn your head up there, before they would be gone.
"Another point, everyone here has left a home in some other town,
probably soiling their furniture, or at least not bringing it here.
"Now after 12 months paying off their place, they are faced with
another 12 months burden of finding furniture for a four roomed house.
"Shopping is convenient here. You can get small store within a few
hundred yards in any direction. A woman who has two or three small
kiddies who r.eed a pram - how will she fare when she has to walk a
couple of miles each time she has need of anything from the town."
"Clarion" 5. 9.1942.
"Mr. Jordan stated that he and "many others" had built houses of
three or four rooms, perfectly floored, well ventilated, and altogether
superior to the duration houses now in process of completion.
■'l have yet to see such a place here;
"I have visited the duration homes, and I found that they* were fitted
with water, bathroom, electricity, to mention only some of the con-
veniences we do not have in the recreation reserve......
* Anyone with only an elementary knowledge of the danger accru-
ing from general insanitary conditions, will agree that this encamp-
ment is a danger to the whole of the Lithgow valley.
"With regard iq the money spent on building here, I agree that some
measure of compensation should be afforded by the Government, but
until Lr» Jordan and others attempt to do something for themselvos
in this matter, 1 do not hold much hope,
"So far, it has been left almost entirely to the efforts of the Trade
Union leaders, and. the officers of the Trades and Labor Council, some
of whom are themselves workers, to obtain better living conditions for
us, ar.i I believe that in the matter concerning compensation, a little
effort is required irom those affected most by the change for the
better, lor bhe majority of the people existing here.
"As a Trade Unionist, Mr, Jordan, I stand by the interests of the
majority,"
"Clarion" 12. 7.1942.


I. HOW IT SEmS TO NEWCOMERS
Many people who came to work at the factory had no conception of the
real position until they actually arrived in the town. In Littleton Camp
Mrs. B.- said,
”My husband got work at the factory. Nobody asked him any questions
about his family, so of course he brought me and the children up here
with him*', (six of them, the youngest a baby in arms.) "We knew it
would mean camping a night or so, but wo thought we’d be able to find
a house once we were here on the spot. Anyway, we’re leaving here -
I’m not stopping in this kind of a place."
Another woman, Mrs. S.-, who had finally come to live in a shock on the
Municipal Camp said,
"You haven’t any idea of 7/hat this town is like till you get here. We •
arrived here with 2 children, and at midnight we were still walking the
streets with nowhere to go. We had to live in a cement basement all
the first winter till we bought this camp. It was cold, but we were
glad to get it then. I've lived in a camp at Glen Davis too. It was
bad, but better than here, because there were trees."
J* LIFE IN TEE CAMPING AREAS
In a bag humpy with 2 rooms, lives Mrs. J.-. She has had 12 children;
5 of her ooys are fighting, but 2 of them have oeen missing for some time.
Her husband came to Lithgow on construction work. Mrs. J.- found it was
very lonely up north, with her husband working at Lithgow, and her boys
sway. So she came here at last to join him. They arranged to buy a little
place, and paid £l2 on it, only to find when they arrived there that it. had
been sold again to someone else, and the man had disappeared with their £l2.
They tried to get a place, but were finally obliged to buy the bag humoy on
the Municipal Area in which they are now living.
Mr. and Mrs. J.- and the six younger children sleep in one room, sharing
3 double beds between them. In the other room they live and eat. She has
nowhere to put her things. There is an open hearth, and the "furniture" con-
sists of a rough, home-made dresser, a table, and a few chairs.
One of Mrs. J.-’s children - a girl of 10 - is seriously ill in hospital
with kidney trouble". She i 3 worried because the doctor says she must move
into a dry house before the child comes home. Mr. J.- is working on construc-
tion work outside the factoiy, and is afraid he will not be counted as a
munition worker and consequently will be unable to obtain a Duration Cottage.
When we visited them, the mud was thick around the shack - there was not a
patch of ground which was not sodden.


Around this and the other camps, children, some of them under 2 years
old, were playing in the mud and slush. Wot and indescribably dirty, they
wandered in and out among the huts. Inside, many of them had fathers who
were now trying to snatch some much-needed sleep before going to work their
12-hour shift that night at the factory.. Puddles of cold muddy water were
everywhere. In one of them, several children, aged about four years, were
wading up to their knees. Another child about the same age stood on the
edge, looking at his bandaged foot from which the blood still oozed freely.
"What did you do to your foot?" "I tut it in there," he said, pointing to
the water-hole where the others still played.
Everywhere cold wet slush and depressing heaps of rubbish; everywhere
children - little toddlers.
Prom another low-roofed shack came the sound of quarrelling - a man
and a woman. The place was dark, and on the damp earthen floor a tiny
child, 12 months old, crawled around, its hands and face and bare feet
covered with dirt.
Mrs. 0.- is young, but she has neither the energy nor the knowledge tn
care for her child. She has "kidney trouble", and in two months’ time
another baby is coming. The child developing within her is already throw-
ing a double burden on the diseased kidneys, and the cold damp atmosphere
and wet ground do not help her trouble. She has lost her voice from an
attack of laryngitis. Her young husband is angry and bewildered - tired of
the dirt and of the hopelessness of it all. Ke works a 12-hour shift at the
factory. To-day he has stayed home because she is ill, but she has insisted
on standing over an iron tub, washing, because she has to go into hospital
in two days’ time. "My God, I hate this - I’d like to clear out". They
paid £3O for this dark shack with its two cramped rooms.
Not infrequently there are quarrels between neighbours, on this area,
too, for they are crowded together, and there is no privacy. The shouts
of the children playing in the tiny yards and on the "streets" ore some-
times the cause of trouble. "Those children next door are just uncontrol-
lable...... There are 12 of them in that little place" (a shack cf* about 2
or 3 small rooms). "There’s 6 grown-ups and 6 children. God only knows
where they all go to at nights."
But the children play on. Nearby, an old shack had been pulled down -
only the rough floor remained. Three very small children showed us how you
made a "stage", by decorating the old board floor with some bright green
grass they had found. "I’m an aerobatter, and she’s a step-dancer, and
that one’s a yoddler". They are ingenious, these children. They deserve a
real playground.
Further on, there is a neat galvanised iron shack fenced with narrow
wooden pickets, the little earth paths swept clean. The floor is of wood,
and the walls are lined with gay periodicals. She is carefully dressed,
the lady of this little camp home; but she, too, is worried. "My daughter
is only 16. I shouldn’t have let her join me here - she won’t he happy


while she f s only got this to look out on”, and she pointed to the dreary
collection of humpies, with their heaps of junk, their tethered dogs and
fowls, and the uncared-for children. ”1 shouldn’t have let her come, hut I
don’t know what to do now. There’s plenty of money coming in, but you can’t
get a house anywhere in Lithgov.”
Another woman, with a tidy wooden shack, had been trying for months to
geo a house without any success. She said, ”1 would like to get a Duration
House, as I can’t get the house at Wallerawang we wanted. But, you know,
I’ie got £lo coming in every week, between my husband and the boy, and I
reckon I could afford to pay £3 a week for rent, if I could only find a nice
home”.
K. EVICTIONS
The inevitable result of the acute housing shortage was to create an
intense form of competition between individual and individual to secure some
kind of dwelling. Inevitably, too, as the competition grew keener, there
were those who felt free to take .advantage of the situation to ’’work a point
here and there”. Scruples were put aside; it became a case of every man for
himself.
On tne one hand there was a decided tendency for the selling price of a
house to rise well above its real value, and for rents to be increased out of
all proportion. On the other hand, a man who needed a house agreed readily
enough m many cases to ’’pay £5 on the key”, providing that he were given
preference over another prospective tenant.
Men rho oWned bouses in Livhgow but who had lived for years away from
the town, frequently ceAo back to work in the factory, and naturally tried to
get possession of their own homes again. In many coses, however, it
appened that the tenant was also in essential work, and was quite unable to
find another house in the district.
Men coming to work in the factory sometimes wanted to buy a house, and
once again the tenant was unable to find other accommodation. Some landlords
tried „o evict a tenant in order to allow another man possession because he
nad agreed to pay a higher rent.
This unfortunate position arose in many munition towns; it was intensi-
ned m because the housing shortage was more than usually severe.
L. NATIONAL SECURITY REGULATIONS
In oraer to c °P e -ith and stabilise the position in certain prescribed
Ro ?’ wo sets Regulations, the National Security (Landlord and Tenant)
a^ Q , the National Security (Housing of War Workers) Regulations
were introduced during 1941 and 1942.


The effect of these series of Regulations was to fix the rent of a
house at that paid on August 31st 1939; and to limit very considerably the
right of the landlord to evict any tenant, but especially a munition worker
and certain of his dependents or a member of the Armed Forces and certain
of his dependents. The Department of Labour and National Service prepared
a simple summary of the important sections of these regulations which was
published in the "Lithgow Mercury” and broadcast from the local broad-
casting station.
1, Preference to Munition Workers: Since the hardship clause applied in
the cose of all tenants, the advantage that a munition worker enjoyed over
any other person in this respect was relatively small, in actual practice.
One of the most protracted cases, where a tenancy cose was adjourned by
the Court again and again, was that of ”T. versus S.”, in which a munition
worker was unable to obtain possession of the house he had bought, because
the fact that no ’’suitable accommodation” could be found for the tenant,
a railway worker, constituted ’’hardship”.
But the munition worker still hod a very great advantage over the
other worker in one respect - he could obtain a certificate from the
Factory Welfare Officer and compel the owner of a vacant house to let it
to him in preference to any other applicant. Intense feeling was gene-
rated both between individuals, and Unions because of this ’’preference
to munition workers”.
2, ’’The Gentlemen’s Agreement”: It became necessary, finally, to work
out a ’’Gentlemen’s Agreement”, as it came to be called, by which it was
understood that the munition workers’ priority would not be enforced where
a railwayman or a miner was vacating and another railwayman or miner
wished to occupy his house. This Agreement resulted in a better under-
standing between the three different Unions involved.
3, How the Regulations worked: 77hile certain anomalies were apparent,
then, the Regulations had succeeded in stabilising the position. As the
local Clerk of Petty Sessions said, ’’There were loads of tenancy cases
last year before the Regulations but the Magistrate hardly ever makes an
order now**", The number of cases coming before the Court was reduced to
about half a dozen, and these were again end again adjourned, as nc
* suitable '‘accommodation” could be found for the tenant.
A good deal of hostility between the opposing parties became apparent
in several of these cases. A thorough examination of both sides of the
question was made in 6 eviction cases by one of the present investigators.
In the case of ”T. versus S.” mentioned above, the fact emerges that the
Regulations were successful in preventing cases coming before the Court
except where both parties were convinced of the justice of their own cause.
M. T. VERSUS S. - A PROTRACTED CASE
T« (in Court): ’’The wife, myself and three children are living in a wash-
house. We have to eat and sleep and cook in this room. I suggest both
families live temporarily together”.


(Case adjourned till April 14th. Third time adjourned.)
T. INTERVISI7BD: When interviewed on April 13th, Mr. T. said that he was a
tradesman, a first-class metal-polisher, working at the Small Arms Factory.
As he was a returned soldier, whose health has been affected by gas, he
decided to purchase a small place in lithgow, as he could not stand the long-
distance travelling.
On October 9th, 1941, he paid a preliminary deposit on the weatherboard
house, 22 Bridge Street, occupied by S.. It was a cash deal, and all the
money was transferred by about November 6th, and deeds on November 27th.
"I’d never have bought, if I’d known the Regulations were coming out
Official notice to quit was given S. on December 23rd, but withheld as no-
body knew what the new Regulations were, not even the agent", said Mr. T..
Taken to Court three weeks ago, and "S. was given 3 weeks to get out."
Mr. T. said he had offered to share the place temporarily with S. and
that the Magistrate had said nothing could be fairer. He himself had been
living all this time (with his wife and a boy and girl aged 10 and 12 years)
in one rocm 16’ x 16’, which had been built as a wash-house, "All I ask is
justice for my wife and children", said Mr. T.. "Our furniture is stored
and the rats are in it." S. had 5 rooms and kitchen, and a large shed, he
said.
» INT-MHVIil> l 5l): Mr. S., when interviewed said he was an examiner on the
Railway, and got acout £o/b/- per week. He had a wife and 3 children -
the eldest a boy nearly 14, twins 10 (boys), a boy 9, and a girl 4. He was
Ikying 10/- rent, and had been in the place 5 years. The rooms of the house
were avail, two were only 7’ x B’, and he refused to share with T. because
it was j.ar too small for the two families; weatherboard and very dark inside.
Th_e House in the Dispute: The investigator saw the house, which was clean,
but \ ery dilapidated, with a narrow low hall, leaning crazily to one side.
S. says the Health Inspector says the place could be condemned on the hall
alone,. All four bedrooms are very small, but two of them are exceptionally
sc. Mrs. S. says the furniture has to be shifted round when it rains, as
the rcof leaks in several places. The "shed" which Mr. T. offered to repair
if S. would share the house with him, is an utter ruin.
The Secretary, A.R.U*, told me there "would probably be a strike if S.
were evicted.
April 14th: 77hen the case came before the magistrate again on
April 14th, it was adjourned for a month.
~ T -- : ' Eeard to say as he left the Court) "There’s no justice left in
this world".
—■ "* A3AEN INTHRVIEV.ED: After the case, T. made an offer to 3.. A certain
wea xorcoard house was falling vacant, as the people were going to Orange.


The rent was excessive, 30/- but T. offered to pay half the rent if S. would
move in, until the matter of the high rental could be brought before the
Fair Rents Board. He had had advice concerning the assessed annual value,
and had been told that a substantial reduction could be expected on the
present rent.
S. was prepared to accept T’s. offer. Later, however, he discovered
that there was a certain Mrs. 0. already in occupation. It was then proposed
that the C T s, ana the S’s. should share the place. Mr* S. refused to con-
sider the proposal. Mrs. C. has a husband and V children, and the S’s. have
5 children. S. was resentful and worried; Mrs. S. soys she has been unsett-
led for weeks nov» T , in the fear that they will be put out and have uO go into
a tent with the children - "and winter coming on". She is now sleeping badly.
S. had seen the 7/elfare Officer cf the S.A.F. some time ago, and he premised
to try all the agents for him. But some munition workers who had just come
to the district had got a place in 2 weeks, S. stated.
Mr. S. is still without a house. However, the Secretary, A.S.E., saw
him yesterday on behalf of Mir. T.. They say they expect to be able to pro-
cure a house for him very soon now, as numbers of the munition workers are
going to Orange. Mr. S. thinks that "seeing is believing." "Anyhow, I
won’t budge now till they da find me a place, so that’s all about it."
T. said bitterly, "S. isn’t trying. As far as he and the Secretary of
the A.R.U. are concerned, we will still be living in a wash-house a year
from now! Preference for munition workers! I’d like to know where it
comes in!"
S., on the other hand, maintained that his work was as essential as
that of any munition worker.
lt was seme months after the v/riting-up of the above case be-
fore an executive of the A.R.U. was successful in obtaining a cottage for
S. This cottage was finally obtained as a result of the fullest co-
operation between the Factory Welfare Officer, the Miners’ Federation and
the A.R.U. A house was being vacated by a miner, and as no other miner
wanted it, the Federation Secretary agreed that S., the railwayman, should
have it. The Factory Welfare Officer then willingly agreed to issue a
certificate for the place for S..
This case illustrates the better spirit which has gradually developed
between the unions in regard to the working out of tno Gentlemen s Agree-
ment. The inter-union friction concerning housing which had at one stage
threatened to develop, had been probably the most disquieting feature of
the whole situation.
Mere than ono executive of the Factory unions has said in recent weeks
that he does not wish to see the munition workers obtaining houses at the
expense cf other workers. "Miners and railwaymen and all the other workers
in the valley need houses just as much os we do, and have as much right to
them."


Nevertheless, there are still difficulties to he overcome because
legally there is nothing to prevent a munition warier from requiring the
owner of a house, vacated by a railwayman or miner to let it to him, irre-
spective of the existence of the ’Gentlemen’s Agreement,”
A suggestion has been put forward by a miner’s executive and also by an
A.R.U. executive end approved by the Ilacquarie Assembly, that a Vfelfare
Officer should be appointed to contro] housing in the immediate district,
and that all prospective tenants should be compelled to rent their houses
through him.


II. HOW TEE PEOPLE EARN THEIR LIVING
A. MINING
Lithgow has for many years been an important centre for ooal; it was the
finding of coal which first caused the town’s growth. The first mine
established which produced coal for export was Bowonfels Mine in 1848.
This was followed by Eskbank Mine in 1858; the site of this mine, which is
no longer working, is at the end of Main Street and the workings stretch
under most of the town. Hermitage, 1869, Cooerwull Colliery 1870, Lithgow
Valley 1874, Vale of Clywdd 1874, Iron works 1881, Zig-Zag 1881, Gakey
Park 1888, Vale of Clywdd Colliery 1888, Cullen Bullen 1888, Cobar Colliery
1899, Methven Colliery 1904, Invincible Colliery 1905, Statemine 1920 and
Steelworks Colliery 1926 are the dates on which the other mines were opened.
The following are the only ones in Lithgow working at present:-
Statemine Total employees 400 - production 150C-16Q0 tons per day
Steelworks " * ” 220 - ” 1000 ” ” "
Lithgow Coll. " ” 150 - ” 600 ” ” "
Vale of Clywdd " ” 100 - ” 500 ” ” ”
Hermitage v " 150 - ” 500 ” ” ”
The presence of over 1000 miners in a town is bound to have an effect
on the place for it is a generally accepted fact that the winning of coal
from the earth produces a type which is different to any other group of
people. To quote an authority, Dr. Bullman in ”Coal Mining and the Coal
Miner” - pp. 1 and 2:
”It is impossible to appreciate the ccal miner properly until one has
seen him frequently at his work in its most arduous aspects. Darkness
and dirt, poisonous and inflammeble gasses, falling stone, volumes of
rushing water, a murky and dusty atmosphere, and in the deeper mines
exhausting heat - these are the natural surroundings amid which coal
has to be wen from the crust of the earth All the natural con-
ditions are harsh and repellant, and nature has no consideration for
ignorance or weakness or mistakes...... His daily worj£ necessarily
sets its mark on a man and helps to mould his character and to colour
his general outlook on life He is real and genuine in his feel-
ings and conduct, and has a robust individuality of his own. Self-
reliant and independent he is nc respecter of persons, but his respect
once gained is sincere and lasting. Of all classes of labour, he is
the most grasping and the most combative, the sturdiest fighter in
the industrial field, always asking for more.”


A report made following a visit tj one of the mines which is the wettest
in the district, gives an idea of the conditions under which some men work:'
"There was, I thought, a touch of humour about the clothes worn by the
party which was making the inspection of a mine where water money was in
dispute. The Chairman of the Local Coal Deference Board, had brought
with him old clothes into which he changed in the mine office; he was
loaned a pair of rubber ’'rots by the mine manager. The President cf
tho Western District Miners Pederation, was in his pit clothes, and
the district Secretary also had on pit clothes and boots. I, fore-
warned, had on a large waterproof ccat and stout shoes. The other two
members of the party - the owner and the manager - were wearing rubber
which reached to their knees. Thus arrayed, we entered the mine.
"Into the mouth of the mine and down the tunnel. The roof for the first
three-quarters of a mile was good and high - none had difficulty in
walking upright. But from there to the coal face the roof ".vas low and
we could make our way along the read only by bending low, a position
which I found most tiring. Long ' oforo we had reached the lower roof
we wore walking in thick mud. The further 7/e proceeded the v/etter it
became. Where we could, we walked on the wheelers 1 road but even there
we slithered and squelched through puddles cf water. Between the rails
the mud was deep. With luck it was possible to step on the wooden
sleepers under the rails, but that was not always possible for often
they were hidden under the mud. I often found myself floundering; black
sticky mud sucked at my shoes and I thought that at any moment I would
leave one behind.
"on and on we went until I heard a voice sheut, "Get up you bastard".
It v/as a 7/heeler moving some skips. In the dim light made by our carbide
lamps I could see a couple of ponies, with steam rising from them, pulling
some skips along the rails. The wheeler was alongside. It was impossible
to get any idea of his age for he was covered in v/ot slime from head to
foot. The skips trundled away into the darkness.
"On again until a voice said "Good-day"; we v/ere at the first Beard to
be visited. Two men v/ere there at the ccal face. Mr. K. went about his
inspection asking questions of the men. Water v/as running down the face
of the coal and it was lying on the floor to a depth of about 4 inches,
* and it was in that water that those men had to stand all day to cut coal.
It v/as, I thought, distressing that men should have to work under those
conditions. Mining, under the ’ est of conditions is the most arduous
work. One has only for a short time to watch men working at the coal
face tc realise that it is work which calls for much exertion - during
Oil their working hours they are in a lather of perspiration. That
suroly is test enough of a man’s endurance v ut under the conditions which
I saw at the first Board.which we visited I thought, this surely is
inhuman. But there was worse to follow. At the second Board, the water
was dripping from the roof in many places; at one place, where a hole
had been bored in the roof, the water was gushing out. There was b
inches of water on the floor in which the men had to stand when working.


One of the two men working that Board had a sack a'.out his shoulders,
as protection against the water dripping from the roof. Ee had
changed it once since starting in the morning, and later, as we were
making our way out of the mine„ he was changing the sack once again.
We visited four other 3oards and it was the same thing at each -
water on the floor in which the men had to stand (at one Board it was
12 inches deep); water dripping off the- roof on to their sweating
bodies; *r water running down the walls. There was water lying in
pools in the wheelers roads; mud everywhere - we were never cut of it
- in most places ankle deep. No dust certainly, but black mud under
foot and covering the men from head to foot.
"To me, a layman, the conditions under which those men have to work
are diabolical. As I ploughed on through the mud, no longer trying
to keep to the dry places for that I found to be a foolish thing to
try to do and quite impossible, I thought, this is evil. And yet,
the Lodge Secretary, who had joined us, said, with quite a relish,
when at one of the Boards, "That’s beautiful coal". One would have
thought, from the way in which he said it, that it was his coal; he
said it in much the same way as a collector would gloat over some
newly acquired treasure.
"At each of the Beards the owner said to Mr. R., "I claim that this
is a normal wet Board." The water was dripping on my coat; the
clothes of the men who were working there './ere wet from the drippers;
I was standing in water two and three inches deep. "I claim this to
be a normal wet Board." Mr. R. replied ”l have made a note of that."
There was nothing else that really could have been said then.
"<Ve came across a boy with a bailer. He was wearing a pair of bath-
ing trunks and a pair of boots. He answered a cheery "I’ll say" when
asked if he was kept busy.
"I retain an impression of sweating men in clothes wet from v/ater
dripping from the roof; men, standing in pools of water, smeared with
black slime; thick ''lack mud churned up by the feet of steaming ponies
(what a life for even those animals); water running by the sides of the
roads and pools of water into which it was impossible not to tread.
"Just after we had left the last Board, the Lodge Secretary stopped me
and said, "My mate and I were in a fall just here. I was bloody lucky
and wasn’t buried, but he was, poor bugger. Ee escaped injury. I
think that the timber falling over him must have saved him. He died a
year and a half later. He came back to work but he was never the same
after. It must ’e a big nervous shock, being buried like that."
"The manager talked incessantly of the good conditions of the mine.
I thought that he must have beer, joking but he was net. "The .air is
good and there is no dust!!"


"I learned from the Lodge Secretary that before the claim for extra
water was made nothing was done to improve the conditions, .ut since
the Board's award the management had been working night and day to get
the water down. A special effort had, apparently, been made last night,
in preparation for to-day's visit. But no doubt, to the practised eye,
this was apparent.
n We made our way back to the mouth of the mine. My feet were cpld - I
had more than once stepped into pools of water which oame well over my
ankles - and I was sweating from walking in the humid atmosphere in an
awkward position. From time to time I heard a dull "voomp" - the firing
of a shot; at*ene point I heard a voice cheerily singing, "The White
Cliffs of Dover" -an incongruous note. These things were part of the
general picture.
"Why do men work in such a mine at all? Why do they continue to do so?
Once they have started work there, they are almost forced to continue.
To transfer to another would mean that their seniority would be lost;
it would mean starting off again from a position that they had filled,
perhaps, years before. Leaving the mine because it has bad conditions
is net raised. What is sought is seme recompense for the misery of
working under specially trying conditions. Surely not an unreasona le
request.
"I thought, as we v/ero on our way back to Lithgow in the car, of the
work which is being done to improve the working conditions of men in
factories; of the thought and work to give good ventilation, lighting
and heating, and hot meals from attractive canteens. Necessary, no one
would deny, but to compare factory conditions with the conditions under
which the men at the Mine have to work is impossible. There is
nothing in common. One might as well try tc compare the Queen Mary with
a field cf clover. I am not competent to judge ’whether the conditions
that I saw in the mine could Le improved very much, but could not special
clothing be provided by the management? There can be no canteens for
hot meals. The men, at crib time, must continue to eat their sandwiches
from tin cans with hands coiled with black slime."
On an average, the miner (the man who works at the face, cutting coal)
earns £B/10/- per week. Wheelers working on contract earn an average of
35/- per day - wage employees have an average of 26/- per day. The average
wage of men working on the surface is £l/-/- per day (5 day week). A tact
of which the members of the Executive of the Western District Miner’s
Federation are proud is that the Western District (the centre of which is
Lithgow) has the highest production per man per shift in the world. No
suggestion is made that the men of the district are super-men; they will
jocularly say when questioned about this that it's because "our executive
drive us to it" but the real reason seems to be that the district is fortu-
nate in having high seams and possibly the strata is more easily maintained
than in other places.
Coal mining here, as elsewhere, is a family trade, son following father
into the pit, but parents do not send the mere delicate ones, for they know


that only the strong will survive in the pits. It is a common thing to
hear" has been ordered cut of the pit”, which means that the work is
too heavy for that man or loy. One sees, occasionally in the street, men
cycling from the pit with the grime still cr them (they are mostly old men
who refuse to use the lathing facilities provided at the pit - when they
started in the mine there were no pit-top laths, and they have never acquired
the habit of a hath there before returning home) hut the majority of the men
one sees in the streets wearing helmets and with crib tins slung across their
shoulders give no other sign that they have just come from the pit - the
grime and pit clothes have been removed before the homeward journey has been
started. ”0n a fine Saturday morning they’re like a lot cf school kids”,
said the Chairman of the local Coal Reference Board. ’’Gardening in their
backyards is their favourite hobby.”
B. RAILWAY WORKERS
One hears little of the railway workers in Litngcw; they are somewhat
overshadowed by the large number cf people employed at the Small Arms
Factory and the more colourful miners. Their work is of the greatest im-
portance to the town; that work goes on without tumult; they are, m most
cases working many hours of overtime and so must be feeling the strain no
less tvan others; they have as great a struggle to get houses as the miners;
sc little does one hear of them that they might almost be called ’’the
silent service”. There are approximately DfO railway employees in Lithgow,
which number includes all classes. Excluding salaried staff the average
wage is £B/-/- per week with overtime. These are the approximate fiaires:-
Drivers and firemen ... £9 per week (working 120-130
hours a fortnight).
Signalmen ... ... ... ... ... per week (working 96 hours
a fortnight).
Guards ... & per week (working 108-112
hours a fortnight).
Fettlers ... ... ... ... Te r week -no overtime.
A plan had been formulated to electrify the line from Sydney to Lith-
gow and but for the war it would have been put into effect. If this scheme
is carried out after the war, Lithgow is likely to become an even more
important railway centre.
C„ SMALL ARMS FACTORY
The most important enterprise in Lithgow is the Commonwealth’s Small
Arms Factory employing approximately 6, COG people. The factory was first
established in 1911 and was expanded during the 1914-1918 war, but it
suffered an eclipse when peace came again, and during the depression years
there was but a handful of men employed in it. With the war clouds once


more looming the Commonwealth Government set about enlarging the buildings
and plant and so rapidly has it grown that it is now one of the largest small
arms factories in the Empire. The rapid growth of the factory has aotracted
thousands of new-comers to the town; they have come from the neighbouring
towns, from Sydney and from more distant towns in the State and even from
other States; shop assistants, small shop owners, unemployed men of all
classes and some professional men have obtained employment there, the majority
of whom had had no previous experience of factory life or work with machines.
The Government's policy of transferring every man who can be spared from
industry to the armed forces has resulted in a change at the factory, for
whereas six months ago there were no women operatives there are now 1200
women (approximately) so employed at the present time and there is a con-
tinuous effort to obtain more female laocur as the need for more men in the
forces is greater. At the present time the men are working I^>—hour shifts,
the day shift works from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. and the night shift follows it with
another 12-hours of work. The women work 8-hour shifts and there is con-
tinuous work with three shifts.
The majority of the men are prepared to admit that a 12-hcur shift is
to* long but it is attractive to them because of the weekly wage which it
produces and this high wage is for them a matter oi the greatest importance.
But there has been a gradual shortening of hours. Three months ago the
Saturday afternoon shift was discontinued - the men xnocking-off at mid-day
instead of 5 p.m., and at the present time the trade union leaders ere dis-
cussing with the management the latest decision of cutting out the Sunday
night shift (this was done because of the difficulties oi running the shift
when there was tf.o much absenteeism) . It appears likely that the men may
eventually be placed on three 8-hour shifts; the management w T ould prefer it
and the trade union leaders favour it but whether it will be acceptable to
the rank-ond-file, who will find their wages reduced from an average of £9
per week for day shift and £lO per week for night shift to £7/15/- for the
8-hour shift is a matter which yet is still in doubt; the struggle within
the union is likely tr be interesting. A great deal is heard in the town
about the way in which the men earn their wages in the factory; these are
comments which are common - "There are some who work well, out the majority
just fill-in time": "The whole thing is a racket": "Just between ourselves,
there’s not a tap of work done in the last hour": "There are boys working
alongside me who put through as many components in a day as I do- and I draw
three times the wages": "I don’t think that I'll go to work tnis afternoon.
Oh, I may as well; I mught just as well sleep there as here".
There is little else other than the three industries already mentioned,
but a word might be said of the Tweed Kills if for nc other reason than the
fact they are in one of the near-beauty spots. Two things a new-comer is
usually asked "Have you seen the camp on the recreation reserve?", and "Have
you seen the Tweed Mills?" and this is not done deliberately to make a con-
trast between the foulest and the fairest, but undoubtedly "The. Tweed Mills ,
because of their setting have become in the minds of the older inhabitants,
something of which they are proud. They were set up in 1858 and at the
present time employ 6 women (average wage £4/b/- per ./eek of So hour.,),
girls (average wage £l/5/- per week), 15 men (wage £7 for 53 hour week) and
2Q junior boys whose wages are £2/10/-.


III. LEISURE TIME
Most of Lithgow’s leisure-time activities aro but a reflection of glories
which are past. Ministers of Churches, Secretaries and Presidents of
organisations talk of former happier days when members were more enthu-
siastic and when attendances were larger. Apart from dancing, the cinema,
gambling and drinking in hotel bars, the people of Lithgow seem to have
little idea of enjoying what leisure time they have; for the majority there
is little planning of out-of-work time. War-time activities are taking up
a great deal of the spare time of many who were formerly engaged in organi-
sations of a cultural and social nature. This has resulted in giving the
impression "that there is nothing to do in Lithgow".
A. THE LOCAL PRESS AND ITS EEFSCT ON PEOPLE
In the 1890’s the "Lithgow Mercury" quietly commenced its life, and
since then it has been published on four evenings in each week. Lntil
1930 it was the only local paper, but in that year the Lithgow unemployed
organisation, feeling the need of publicity which they were unable to get
through the "Mercury", issued its own paper, "The Beacon". "The Beacon"
was successful for some months, but after an'existence of just over a year
it was discontinued. It was then, 1932, that "The Lithgow clarion
menced, for it was felt that there was a place for a local paper which was
less conservative in its attitude than the "Lithgow Mercury". "The Clarion
has been issued on two evenings each week (the two evenings when the
"Mercury" does not appear) so giving the people of the town a local evening
paper every day of the week except Sunday.
The following is a rough analysis of the contents of the two papers.-
"THE LITHGOW MERCURY" :
-J- of paper - local advertisements,
i*' « - general advertisements,
w « - news - International - 1/8
- Local - 3/8
Local News Per Month
Hospital ••• columns
Women in Industry... ... 1
. 4rb »t
Council ... *
_ 4. ICHr «
Sport... ... •••


Local News (Cont’d) Per Month
Vandalism . ... ... ... •* • ... Is' columns
Dances ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1^
Rationing ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• •• • ••• g
Hartley Assembly 2
Housing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... B^-
N.E.S. ••• ... ... ... ... • • • •»• 3
... tl
Miners ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
t n
Ambulance .•. ... •*. ... ... ... ... 3g
Red Cross ... ... ... ... ... ... ... lgr
Editorials:
3£- columns - Australian-wide interests.
"THE LITHCQY/ CLARION”:
2/6 local advertisements.
1/6 international news*
2/6 local news.
1/6 general - serial - gardening notes etc.
Local News. Per Month
Sport ... ... ... ... ... ... ...18 columns
Concerts ... ... ... ... ... ... ...1
Miners ... ... ... ... ... ... ...1
H. 2.3. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... B*^
Housing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... * 6g
Product ion ... ... ... ... ... ... ... g
Hospital ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Rationing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... g
Ambulance ... ... ... ... ... ... ... I<^.
Red Cross ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1;j
Editorials:
Australian 3 columns N.E.S. h column
Housing " Health g "
Sport #• " Ambulance x "
Production g- " Hater Scheme -g "
Hospital It "
The "Lithgow Mercury" has a good following* Mr. A. one of the two
newsagents, sells as many "Mercury’s" as Sydney evening papers and the other,
Mr. B.,sells "infinitely more". Quite a number of people buy both a Sydney
evening paper and a local paper. Questioned, Mr, A. said,


"It is hard to say whether the "Mercury” influences local opinion#
It doesn’t take a strong line with matters of local importance, but
it has fallen out with the Trade Union people. The A.E.U. have
declared it "bla'tk". After that was dene, fellows came in and said,
’Cancel my "Mercury"’ and then after a time they’d come in and say,
’Start my paper again. I shouldn’t be doing this, but I may as well
have it again’. A comment which I often hear is, ’I don’t know why
I take this paper, there’s nothing in it’."
Mr, B’s. comments were of a similar nature:
"The Mercury doesn’t greatly influence local opinion - I’d say,
hardly at all. It doesn’t attempt to. It wouldn’t pay it to. As
soon as it sticks out its head it gets it socked. All it does is to
report current local events. The general attitude of the paper is,
’He'd better take it, otherwise we might miss something which we'd
like to see’.”
A business man in the town, who buys much advertising space in both
papers and who is very closely in touch with working class people said:
"The influence of the local press on public opinion in Lithgow is
practically nil. A lot of people take the papers, the men look at
the sport, the women read the serial and thats about all. From the
number of people who ring up and ask for information which we have
given in our advertisements, we often wonder whether it's worth
while bothering with it."
"The Mercury" is conservative and cautious. Occasionally it leaves
its usual role of reporting local events and ventures a comment 6 During
a strike oy members of the A.E.U., by its comments and insinuations about
the rightness of strikes in war time it incurred the wrath of that union
and so was declared "black", the members of that union being forbidden to
buy it. But the paper took a different attitude during the Clerks’ strike
almost going as far as to say it was justified, .bn editorial on 27th August
had in it:
"ihe Lithgow Trades and Labour Council holds strong views on the
subject (^ithgov;’s Housing Neods) and its executive members are to be
congratulated on their pugnacity and deteimination to force into being,
if at all possible, a better state of affairs in Lithgow. He cannot
3ee how a one-day strike will help, but we feel that their continuous
agitation, backed up by all responsible bodies in the town and district
will bring its reward."
A few weeks before this article appeared the editor of the "Mercury"
found himself locked in the rooms of one of the Unions, there to receive a
lecture on distorting and withholding trade union news. As the newsagent
said, "As soon as it sticks out its head it gets it socked", and it is
withdrawn.


The general opinion among the working class men is that the "Clarion”
is "not too lad. Young -- is doing quite a good job with it", which means
that it takes the Labour line. On 15th August there was an editorial in
the "Clarion" under the title "Bouquet for Y/ard" in which it referred to
"popular industrialist Minister Eddie Y/ard" and said, "The Clarion has
many times praised Y/ard for his smart decisions, and for the ready ear he
always has for workers' troubles". Such an article would never appear in
the "Mercury". Another editorial in August, ’Curtin has the people’s con-
fidence’ , expressed the opinion:
"In Lithgow, if called upon to-day, every organisation and association
would back Curtin’s Government against any previous Government as far
as conduct of the war is concerned If the Government of the
country were in the hands of the people of Lithgow to-morrow, there is
no doubt what the result would be. It would be more than overwhelming
victory for Labour and for Curtin."
3. WIRELESS
Lithgow is unfortunate in the broadcasting service available. At
most times there is little pleasure in listening-in to the Sydney stations
because of interference. The A.B.C* engineers knew of this and have said
that the static which interferes with reception is possibly caused by the
hills. With that restriction there remains the local station, 2LT, which
is a ’local’ station and makes no pretence at being anything else.
The management, knowing its public, presents programmes which people
can listen to easily. Having to satisfy local advertisers that a wide circle
of listeners are provided for, no attem.pt is made to broadcast any othei
than light entertainment. Serials, which are generally popular, are broad-
cast for two hours most evenings and little time is given to music other
than dance or "light" music; even in a "classical" session the items ore
wellkncwn classics - in the station’s record library there is not one com-
plete symphony or concerto. Few talks are given from the studio because,
as the manager said, "there are so few local people capable of putting over
anything interesting."
C. DANCING
For many years, dancing has been popular in Lithgow 7 and it still is*
Two clubs, The Scots Social Club and the Scottish Re—union Club, nm dan ,es
every Saturday night. The Scots Social Club is the older oi these and it
has a membership of 400. The attendance at their w'eekly dance held in i>ho
Town Hall has fallen off since the war started owing to "men going away,
fatigue following the long hours of work during the week and the formation
of the Scottish Ee-union Club", which attracts the younger people. The
Scottish Re-union Club holds a weekly dance in a hall on the Show Ground
and every week 700 to 800 people (mostly under 30 years of age) take part.


The dances are well conducted and the dancing is taken quite serious-
ly as the greater part of the evening is devoted to old fashioned dances
which are n«t easily learned. The remark is often heard "we never have
any trouble". These two dances and others which are held regularly during
the week in other halls play an important part in the social life of
Lithgow.
D. CINEMA
"People come to the pictures for relaxation" was the comment of both
cinema managers in lithgow and it sums up people’s attitude to the cinema
and it explains why this form of entertainment is more popular than any
other. The Trade Unions run two of the cinemas (Trades Hall Theatre and
Union Theatre); all the capital was supplied by them and a dividend of 4$
is paid each year. The other, The Theatre Royal is under private owner-
ship and is the most attractive of the three.
On Saturday nights all three cinemas are always full, no matter what
films are shown and no matter what the weather.
The effects of long hours of working are shown in the attendances on
the other nights of the week. Except for Saturday, more people attend the
cinemas on Wednesday than any other night. The managers say the reasons
for this is that Wednesday is pay day at the Snail Arms Factory, and that
after the week-end most people are net inclined to turn out on Monday or
Tuesday but are prepared to have one late night in the week and that one
is Wednesday. Monday night’s attendances are the next largest - possibly
with son© .there is an extension of the week-end feeling. The Manager of
the Trade Unions Theatres, in commenting en the attendances at his two
cinemas said, "The evening performances during the week are made up mainly
of women. But about 9 p.m. an average of 40-50 young fellows seek admission.
Before the war, when shorter hours were worked, week night audiences were
mixed. It is a very rare thing to see elderly men present at week-day
performances. Films which appeal to men rather than women are shown in the
three days which include Saturday. The Saturday night audience is a mixed
audience". The manager of the Theatre Royal shows his best films on
Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday otherwise, as he said, "the house would not
be worth two bob". The proportion of males to females on week nights
depends on the film being shown. For a film like "Jesse James" men will
attend and there is a 50-50 attendance, but for a film like "Rebecca" there
will be mostly women. More than 1,000 children attend Saturday afternoon
matinees but there were very few at the evening performances.
What the bookseller said of the people of the town ("They are low-
brow") was confirmed, less crudely, by the two cinema managers. Both of
them see more in the film than a means of making money: they have tried
over a period to present films which are something more than two hours
escape from reality, but as well as having a desire to show the highest
forms of cinema art, they are not in a position to forget that they are


managing businesses which have to pay dividends. This is what one of them
said:
"It's hopeless trying to give them decent films. I did better out of
"Eiders of the Purple Sage" than "Remember the Pay", although "Remember
the Pay" was a better film and cost me more. It’s no good giving them
anything decent - westerns, mystery, musicals and comedies are all they
want. I’m showing a drama at the end of the week. They’ll ask me what
the hell I’ve put it on for. They don’t want to think. I have, waiting
to show, "The Moonlight Sonata" with Padevewski in it,"Pon Quixote" and
"Fantasia", but I’m afraid to put them on. They won’t come to see them."
Continuing, and dealing with other types of films he said,
"Now take "The March of Time, which is one of the finest things which
has ever been done. When it comes on a great number of men walk out to
have a smoke. They’re net interested even in that. It makes me mad.
The people in Lithgow have no interest in the war. They’ll come to see
war films, but only because there is action in them, in the same way as
there is action in westerns. They will look at the Department of
Information films but I’m sure they don’t think of tham in terns of
their own lives. The reason fer the lax w T ar effort and general slack-
ness is because they’ve got too much money; they’re too independent.
We get young fellows coming to the booking office and if the circle
should be full they’ll go away as they refuse to sit in the stalls.
They must have the best. When I was their age I’d have been only too
pleased to see the films, no matter whut the seat."
The other manager gave some comments on films which have beep, popular,
"Russia Aflame":
This was shown for a v/hole week, the only film which that manager had
shown for a week. The response was excellent. The reason given - because
the people of Lithgow are interested in Russia.
"I’ve never seen a film which got so much applause, and from audiences
* which included all classes."
"Kokoda Front" - (a short}:
"Excellent houses; many came just to see that film."
"Advance Australia Fair":
"People re-act every night to this. There’s clapping and some
cheering when it shows the men marching."


"Eagle Squadron”:
”I ,m after I don't care what I pay for it. I’ll pack the house
every night."
"Ships With Wings":
"'.7e had excellent houses for this film. People want war films which
are not crude. They won’t have them if there are dead bodies in them.
As one woman said to me, ’I don’t want to see that sort of thing (men*
being killed). I’ve got two boys overseas in the army’."
which, in another way is what the other manager said:
The glamour of war still attracts people. Westerns, musicals and
comedies always go well", he continued, "but they don’t want anything
that makes them think. It’s a form of relaxation and they do not want
heavy dramas or ’love-sick’ films. ’Woman of the Year’, with Spencer
Tracy, the highest paid star in Hollywood and Katherine Hepburn,
another fine actress, which was considered a first-rate film was a
complete flop."
Prom observations made during visits to the cinemas there is no reason
to doubt the truth of the abovementioned statements. The following is an
additional list of typical films shown:
"The Oklohama Kid";
"The Roaring Twenties";
"Navy Blues";
"Nine Lives are not Enough";
"How Green was my Valley";
"Tanks a Million";
"All American Co-ed";
"The Falcon takes over";
"The Three little Foxes";
"Riding the Wind";
"Dumbo"•
E. DRINKING
So much time is spent in the bars of the eleven hotels in Lithgow
that consideration must be given to drinking as a leisure-time activity.
More money is being paid in wages in Lithgow than ever before in its
history and a great deal of it is spent in the hotels. Commenting on this,
a Manager of one of the Banks said, "The increase in the takings of the
hotels in Lithgow is enoimous". And another said, "I have been staggered
by the amount of money which is being spent in hotels and at the Workmen’s
Clu. on drink. It is a tragedy." When the investigator remarked that he
had seen £175 paid in on a Monday morning by one of the hotel managers


(which sum it was assumed was the week-end takings), the same manager said,
"That is nothing. You will get some idea of the amount of money which they
are making when you know that the new owners of one of the hotels recently
paid £6,000 for the house."
Lithgow has always "been known as a heavy-drinking town. The presence
of miners in the place gives colour to this for there is the accepted idea
that when a miner leaves the pit he makes straight for the "pub" and "washes
the dust away with the first pint and then has a drink". Miners here, as
elsewhere, are solid drinkers and on Saturday are a part of the crowds which •
fill the bars but they do not account solely for the great increase in the
takings of the hotels. The Police are greatly concerned with the increase in
drinking. The local inspector considers that the cases of drunkenness which-,
come before them have increased, this year, by over last year. Drunken-
ness has increased rapidly in Lithgow, according to the Clerk of Petty Sessions.
There have often been as many as from 10 to 14 cases before the court in a
single day. "Approximately 90/ of them are employees of the Commonwealth
Government - mostly factory hands - some of them putting in machinery, draw-
ing big money, sometimes up to £l6, but they We got no decent homes to spend
it in." One of the local ministers has complained about tho parties of men
who congregate behind his church and drink there on Saturday nights until the
small hours, "finishing up by smashing the bottles against the wall". "I
dare not go down to tell them to move off", he said, "for I know that I should
very quickly get a bottle over my head."
On Saturday afternoons all the bars in the hotels are crowded, in many
of them the men stand four and five deep. Some stay there for the whole after-
noon, drinking, smoking and talking. Every one talks loudly to make themselves
heard; the atmosphere is foul and there is nothing to do but to talk and drink,
for no effort is made to make the bars attractive; there is no alternative to
standing, being jostled by the crowd. It gives men an oasy opportunity of
meeting their fellow men in a superficial way and it can be nothing but super-
ficial as the crush is so thick that any private talk is impossible and one is
never clear of a drunk who wanders into the group to break up any conversation.
It is not on Saturday afternoons alor.e that the hotels are full. Every
evening of the week there are a great number of men drinking at the bars and
for some time there has been an understanding that the bare will re-open for
the sale of liquor from 7 to 8 p.m., to give those men who work at the
factory an opportunity to get a drink after they have finished work at 7 p.m.
No proof that those seeking drinks do work at the factory is sought and that
hour, which is out of official hours, is an "open go". The recent increase
of prices, which is part of the Prime Minister’s austerity campaign is not
likely to reduce the consumption of liquor. The "Lithgow Mercury", in an
article on this on 9/9/1942 said:
"Lithgow hotels are now charging the new prices ruling since the intro-
duction of the austerity campaign. They began on Monday instead of
Saturday when city hotels charged the new ruling prices. Generally, the
opinion of local hotelkeepers is that the increase will not affect


drinking hore. It is believed that there is plenty of money in
Lithgow and the extra penny on a glass of beer will not stop the
average worker having his drink. Dealers in wines anticipate an
increase in their trade folio I ,ving the introdu tion of the new prices.”
The bar trade is the main consideration of the hotels in Lithgow,
little consideration being given to hotel guests and everything is done to
force them to use the bar. Rooms have to be booked in the bar - this
applies to women as well as men, keys are kept there and so are letters and
all enquiries hove to be made over the bar counter.
There is a growing concern in Lithgow about the tendency for women to
drink. One Factory Trade Union leader mentioned recently that there had
beon cases of girls turning up to the factory drunk and on 18th August •
”The Lithgow Clarion” reported, ”Two women, six men on drunk list* Among
eight persons who failed to appear at Lithgow court yesterday cn drunken-
ness charges, each of whom forfeited their recognisances of 10/-, wore two
women factory workers.” And a recent development for Lithgow, which is
becoming increasingly noticeable is men buying in the hotels, ”a couple of
bottles of beer and bottle of gin for the old lady”.
The relationship between beer drinking and the attitude to other means
of spending leisure-time is well illustrated by the Workmen’s Club. This
cluo has been running for a number of years and has quite large premises.
There is a reading room where there are a few magazines, the daily papers
and a library of 4,000 books - most of the books are fiction of a very poor
type* J-here are two milliard tables, a card room and a concert room* The
jilliafd tables and card room are very little used except on Saturday nights.
Concerts ore held every two months and dances every two months also. All of
those tilings are one side of the club’s life, the other side is much more
important - the bar. The bar at the Workmen’s Club is the finest in Lithgow;
it has 90 feet of counter and as the secretary said, ”we are still owing
£3,000 for it”. It is a most magnificent bar and in the evenings between
five and six o’clock men stand four and five deep around the whole counter.
To quote an authority whose identity cannot here be mentioned, ”The
takings are enormous”.
F. GAMBLING
Until two years ago there were five recognised gambling dens in Lithgow
of which most people knew. But the closing of them by the police not
stopped gambling, it has merely forced it underground. There is now talk
of ”Tha.Jews” who run the gambling. The title must not be taken as an
indication of their nationality but it is a term by which those who run
gameling dens are known. The closing of the old dens has not only driven
gambling underground, it has brought a change in the spirit of it. A man
who has lived in the town for many years referred to this change; he said,
”Uhen the recognised gambling dens were in operation, it was a friendly
affair* Groups of men would arrange to meet at a certain den and would


rflake up a school between themselves, paying something to the man running the
cluo for the facilities given. But now, there was a bunch of men - a rotten
type - who ran various games of chance which are all crook. It’s an absolute
racket. The odds are all against the backer every time.” On 15th July the
"Lithgow Mercury” reported:
"Following two raids on local promises by Sydney police recently, 43
charges of being found without lawful excuse in a gaming house wore
preferred at the Lithgow police court yesterday. Seventeen were
charged with being found in a gaming house, known as McSorley*s hair-
dressing saloon, and were fined £2 or four days. Sgt. L. J. Purdon,
for the police, stated that on Sunday night the defendants were found
in the saloon when the police raided the premises. They were playing
hazards The remaining 26 were charged that on June 27 they wore
found without lav/ful excuse in a house situated on New Road, used by
Henry William Trye as a common gaming house Several of the
defendants were unfortunate in that they were involved in both affairs. 7 ’
There is mention in the town of "Two-up" schools which are held in the
frills nearby on Sunday afternoons and in this connection it is not an unusual
sight to see four or five cars leave the town, closely following each other,
packed with men.
The greyhound racing track provides further facilities for gambling.
There has been a greyhound racing track in Lithgow for some years and in IS3B
the local hospital authorities took control of the club and it is now known
as Lithgow Hospital Greyhound Racing Club. Racing has been taking place on
40 Saturday afternoons in each year and the average attendance is between 700
and 800 and at times amounts to 1,000, the proportion of men. to women being
sto 1. There are two rings of bookies, one ring betting on the dog races and
another ring betting on the Melbourne and Sydney races; their business is
quite separate. Quite half of the people who pay for admission spend the
whole afternoon engaged in betting on the Sydney and Melbourne races, not
taking any interest in the dogs. Near the bookies betting on horse racing
there is a permanent structure from which running commentaries are broadcast
and where lists of jockeys and horses ore chalked up. There, three or four
hundred people spend their Saturday afternoon standing in a tightly-packed
group, listening intently to the commentaries coming from the amplifier. The
silence which prevails while the race is on is broken when it is over b3 r a
babble of talk and those who have backed a winner move off to collect their
winnings. The remainder stand where they are to give consideration to the
runners in the next race, then off to the betting ring to place a bet; that
done the crowd reassembles in readiness for the cornmencorient of the next race.
There is every evidence that a great deal of money changes hands during the
afternoon, with bets cn the horse races and the dogs. There is more action
amongst these who watch and bet on the dogs, but there is very little excite-
ment. There will be an isolated cheer as a winner nears the post but the
majority take the whole affair stolidly, remarking, "That’s all right, I’ve
won a fiver on that. What does that make me now?" "He never got a fair go
right from the start."


Lithgow hospital looks upon the greyhound 'racing club as a good source
of income. The secretary of the hospital who is also secretary of the
racing club when talking of the proposed cut in racing said:
"If the dog races were taken away from us the hospital would be
affected to the extent of nearly £4,000 this year. These proceeds
are most valuable, and I don’t know of anything else we could do to
try and raise a similar amount if we are cut out of it. Any steps
taken to step the races would be an added blow to the hospital now
in view of the recent purchase of the coursing ground."
There has been a move recently by the Lithgow Show Society to estab-
lish a horse racing track on the Show ground in Lithgow. The proposal
was submitted to the Council and although it was rejected there is an
agitation for them to reconsider their decision. In submitting the scheme
to the Council a member of the deputation from the Show Society said, "We
realise that the present time is most opportune to start along these lines.
Restrictions on racing are practically nothing as far as country racing is
concerned." Another member of the deputation said, "I believe that racing
would boom in Lithgow."
Gambling is an important feature of life in Lithgow. "The people of
Lithgow have too much mmey"; "Many of those now drawing big wages have
never had as much money before and they don’t know what to do with it";
Gambling is rife in Lithgow"; are among the comments of responsible
citizens.
G. THE CHURCHES
The Baptist,.Roman.Catholic, Church of England, Methodist, Presbyterian
Churches and the Salvation Army are established in Lithgow. They are not
playing an important part in the life of the community. The usual Sunday
services are run but there is little activity apart from that. Ministers
of all the churches say that the clubs and social gatherings which they were
running before the war have ceased to exist and they account for this break-
down's being due to the long hours which all the people in Lithgow are
working. One Church has a men’s league which was started in 1916 and they
proudly claim that it has met every week since then. Before the war the
attendances ranged from 30 to 60 but now it is with the greatest difficulty
that it continues; there are never more than 8 present. The league was
quite well known miles beyond this town. Y*ith this almost complete break-
down in general life, the Churches have become organisations conducting
services on Sunday. One church alone seems to be active on week days but
the number of people that it touches is very small in comparison with the
total population*
Most of the churches run some kind of women’s group - these being
mainly of a devotional character. The function of certain others is mainly
to raise money for Church funds, and these run a monthly musicals or
*


social or an annual garden fete, With the exception of one or two, the mem-
bership is small.
Without any reservations one is told by all the church ministers that
they have failed completely to make any impact on the new comers to the town.
"I have been in Lithgow for 7 months”, said the minister of one of the churches,
and added, "seven months too long". Comments from the others have been,
."There is a poor type of Christian in Lithgow." "There is a feeling of
inferiority about the people of Lithgow. They feel that it is a poor sort of
town to live in. I have had no response from the newcomers." "There has been
a falling off in my congregations and I have failed to capture any of
Lithgow’s new jopulation. There has been such a falling off in the congrega-
tions at the evening services that I am thinking of holding an afternoon
service instead." "I have made no impact on the new comers but there is a
tendency for some of the old members to return." The congregations at the
morning and evening services are quite small. No exact figures of attendances
have been obtained but from observation at occasional visits at the various
churches, the congregations would roughly number 50-70 in the mornings and
60-100 in the evenings. The underlying reason fur this apathy towards the
church is a general feeling of disillusionment among the masses; everything,
including God, is highly suspect; most of the younger people have grown up
to maturity without a hobby and without a faith, and the churches are not
giving what the people are seeking.
No careful examination has been made of the sermons which have
delivered in the churches but the following titles give an indication of the
subjects treated - "A Study in Parasites"; "The Secret of Self Reliance";
"What Extra do Ye?"; "The Most Uncomfortable Bod-place - If I make My Bed in
Hell"; "The Great Thirst"; "The Over Confident Eriand"; "The Known and the
Unknown"; "Mind Your own Business"; "Hot.' to make the Church more effective";
"Goodbye to God". In the addresses that have been heard there appears to
have ‘keen no attempt on the part of the preacher to relate the remarks to the
every-day problems of the people and their concern about, the class war, which
is a matter of importance to many in Lithgow.
H. CLUBS AND SOCIETIES
There are a number of organisations in Lithgow which provide facilities
•for leisure-time activities. The most notable of these is TEE HOSKINS
INSTITUTE which was a gift of the Hoskins family to the town. The building
is valued at £13,500, the land at £1,200, Billiard tables, furniture fittings
etc. at £l,lOO and books in the library at £4OO. There is a pleasant reading
room which is for the use of subscribers to the library. (The library is
dealt with below.) There is a fair selection of magazines, but the room does
not appear to l*e used very much. Until the war started there were 6 table
tennis teams, 6 billiard teams and 6 snooker teams which used the facilities
provided. None of these now exist. Before the war the bookings for the
seven billiard tables were always heavy, at any time during the evening there
would be bookings ahead of 5 or 6 players. Now it is always possible to get


a table at any time of the day or evening. There are no bookings for
table tennis. The attendant said, ’'The men are too tired to turn out in
the evenings and it is no uncommon sight to see fellows turn up to play
billiards and then go to sleep beside the fire while waiting for an
opponent to turn up.”
The secretary of the RAILWAY INSTITUTE also spoke of the almost com-
plete cessation of their activities since the war started. The institute
has a small library and runs loco safe working and shorthand and type-
writing classes for their employees, but the social activities have
ceased.
THE WORKMEN 1 S CLUB gives the impression of being a Bar and some
rooms. Occasional concerts are successfully run there and there is some
card playing and billiards but the bar overshadows all else.
Every week the ROTARY CLUB members have dinner together and listen
to a speaker. The number attending the weekly gatherings has diminished
since the war and the reason given for their doing nothing in the way of
service in the community as a group is because of the fact that most of
the members are busy with their own businesses or engaged on some activity
in which they are personally interested.
( •
The ladies of the EASTERN STAR are an active group conducting dances
and card parties, which ore always popular in Lithgow. Like the Cheerio
Club, its purpose is mainly social.
The RETURNED SOLDIERS AND SAILORS LEAGUE meets every Sunday afternoon
and the attendance, as the secretary said, ''depends on what football match
there is on”. The organisations mentioned are the principal ones. There
are a few other small social clubs but there is, in all of them, a marked
falling off in attendance and enthusiasm since the v/ar started, mainly
because the long hours of v/ork and the sudden influx c£' people without any
sense of community. Some organisations which were firmly established have
gone out of existence, the most striking of these is the BURNS CLUB. 3efore
the war started the club met once a month and is described as "the finest
thing in Lithgow when it was running.” The attendance wa3 between 50 and
60 each meeting.
During the depression, when Hoskins steel works closed, the local
operatic society, the philharmonic society and a male voice choir collapsed.
A man who took a leading part in these societies said, ”1 have discussed
the possibility of restarting the orchestra and choir, but, after much
thought have reached the conclusion that it is hopeless. The new-comers
to the town are, on the whole, a poor type - the wandering type who have
known much unemployment. They have no interest in anything except making
money. The only thing that they will attend is the pictures* Apaa*t from
a night at the pictures, they sleep. They may listen to the wireless, but
it is unintelligent listening”. There are still three bands, the Lithgow
Industrial Band which gives public performances, the Church of England


Brass Band., a new venture with 21 members which has made good progress in
its year of enthusiastic life, and the Lithgow Burns Club Pipe Band which
is experiencing difficulties, as the band leader said, "It is very difficult
to keep the band going as shift work interferes with the turn-up,"
The "A" Grade rugby football matches, played on the Show Ground attract
between 1000 and 3000 spectators. These matches are not very frequent as
there ere only 2 local first grade teams (there were 4 last year) but
occasional matches with teams from nearby towns are played* The number of
players shows an increase over last year but this is accounted for by the
formation of 4 teams for boys under 21 years of age. There has been a big
decline in the number of teams playing Association football; in 1940 there
were 17 teams and this year (1942) there are only 7.
The LITHGOW ROE FISHERS SOCIETY has maintained its membership (the
present membership is 64) and there is enthusiasm fer the sport. As many as
100 fishermen leave Lithgow at the end of each week during the season to
fish for the whole week-end*
Four hockey clubs and two athletic clubs which functioned before the
war are no longer in existence, but a women’s hockey club plays regularly.
There is a Small Arms Factory swimming club to which any person in
Lithgow’ may belong, but there is not a great deal of enthusiasm for the
pool, which is situated behind the factory* Twelve years ago the possibili-
ties of making a first-class pool was discussed but nothing has been done
and the matter is raised from time to time.
X. LIBRARIES
The largest library in Lithgow is at the Hoskins Institute in which
there are about 0,000 volumes. The Lithgow Council makes a grant to the
Library of £2O a year. There are 637 subscribers. A rough analysis was
taken of the books* These are the details:
Analysis of Books:
* Novels;
Detective and Mystery - 1400 volumes.
Western - 280 "
Adventure - 560 "
School - 280 "
Romance - 2240 "
Historical Romance - 560 "
5320 volumes.
Biography - 60 volumes.


v/or id -Affairs - 100 volumes.
(only 50 of these up-to-date)
Travel - Pqq v
Economics (Elementary) - 20 »
Poetry - Drama - 40 »»
(Nothing recent)
Australian - 140 w
460 volumes.
Children’s Encyclopedia (behind glass counter) and
Encyclopedia Britannica - 9th edition.
The analysis shows a preponderance of novels and in this connection
the librarian, who is old and appears to do little to help the subscribers
in the choice of their books, said, "The people don’t seem to like
biographers and heavy books. They seem to want something light.”
Apart from an occasional announcement in the local press giving a
list oi books added to the library, and slide advertisements at the local
cinemas inviting people to join the library where there are 6,000 volumes,
nothing is cone to make the people of Lithgow book-minded, or to improve
the standard oi reading. It seems to be accepted that those who do read
’’want something light” and this fact has been confirmed by observing,
oyer a period of some months, the books which have been taken from the
library. The major portion of the books returned (w’hich are left on a
counter) are the ’’lightest” of the novels in the library, and often there
haa been none other than light fiction.
The Workmen ’s Club Library and the Lailway Institute both ha7e lib-
raries in which novels predominate. There are also small libraries in
shops, but these make no attempt to provide books other than cheap novels.
Bocks are sold by the two newsagents. One of them said that 9cs of the
books he sold were wild west, mystery and romance. The people of Lithgow
are’low-brow” was his comment. The other bookseller sells a great number
of wild v/ests, mysteries and romances but recently has been introducing
modern books of a higher standard and the response which he has had en-
courages him to continue stocking them. ”1 now have a few people who come
in and spend a pound or two on these better bocks, and they’re working
men too. It’s not the professional class that buy them”, he said.
J > WORKERS’ EDUCATIONAL ASSOCIATION
What has been said of the press and cinema, wireless and libraries,
shows the attitude of the town’s people to any activities of a cultural


nature. The fact that the musical socieites have gone out of existence is
further evidence of this lack of enthusiasm. In the field there remains
little further to report except the experience of the Workers’ Educational
Association and this is important as a guide.
Workers 1 Educational Association classes have been held intermittently
for many years in Lithgow. From 1930 to 1933 the Principal of the Lithgow
High School ran classes in literature and International Affairs. Before that
there had been tutorial classes in Economics and History. Attendances
varied from time to time but 24 was roughly the average. In 1940 and 1941
a "Literature” discussion group, led by a school teacher, was run. They
were not a success; not more than 12 people attended and towards the end of
each year the group had dwindled to 5 people. It is apparent, that, in
past years, the members of the various trade unions in Lithgow have not
supported the W*2,A# classes. From conversations with a limited number of
union members it has been gathered that they consider the background of the
organisation "too bourgeois", and that the classes were lacking in decision
for they feel that talk without action is of little avail; the result of
the classes should have been an entry of the participants in the political
fight. Other people in the town have said that they have noticed a
tendency for communists to use the time devoted to discussion as an oppor-
tunity for putting over communist propaganda.
In June of this year a T/eek-end school, which had been well advertised,
was held. A strong team of speakers cume from Sydney and the attendances
for the three lectures were, 30,41 and 20; at the first two there were 5 who
were under 30 years of age and at the third there was one under thirty*
Following this week-end school, a discussion group was started and at the
first meeting there were 15 present, 10 men and 5 women, (one under 30 years
of age). A fortnight later the group met and there were 10 present, /ifter
another month had gone by the group had dwindled to five and when the course
finished that was the attendance.’ However, another subject having been
chosen, the group re-started and on the first evening there were 9 present.
The outcome of the evening was reported in the "Lithgow Mercury" on 2/10/42,
"Lithgow Study Group Declares Certain Courses ’Black’":
"At Thursday night’s meeting of the study group of the Workers’
Educational Association, indignation and dissatisfaction with certain
types of courses being provided were voiced. It was claimed that
courses on modern political systems was biassed in their unwarranted
condemnation of Russia and her governmental system.
"Members of the group have declared certain courses ’black’ until such
time as they are revised. ’We do not want any country condemned unless
the instruction papers contain facts to bear out the assertions', said
Mr. J. B. Ireland, Principal of the High School to-day.
"’On the other hand, we don’t want to have any particular governmental
system praised unless the facts to substantiate them are there. But
there is a definitely biassed interpretation of the facts against Russia


in these works, and the people don’t like it*’
’’The association is being communicated with in connection with the
matter and it is hoped that there will be an immediate revision of
the courses concerned.”
This may attract a few new members for, as an elderly man who once
was a regular attendant some time ago, said, ’’The only way you can get a
crowd to anything is to stage a row - then they’ll turn up and cut each
other’s throats.” And in connection with the response to W.E.A. in
Lithgow the same man said:
”1 used to go to the Y/.E.A. up here; for two years I hardly missed.
We used to discuss fairly well. In the early days we only had 8 or
10 coming - then we had about 40 members later on. , There’s a great
deal of apathy new. It’s easier to go to tie pictures after you’ve
teen working all day - if you bother to get dressed to go out a.t all.
You can’t get them to it. If they’re getting their money and can
see one week ahead, that’s ell they care.”
K. GENERAL LACK OF INTEREST
This is an indication of the response on the part of the people of
Lithgow to cultural pursuits; except for a handful, there is no interest.
The commonly accepted reason for tMs lack of interest is the long Lours
of work. A local trade union secretary, when asked about this, said:
’’The men are ’.vorking toe hard to take any interest in cultural
pursuits. They won’t even interest themselves in their own union
affairs. Long hours and big money are responsible for the lack of
interest. They just can’t be bothered.”
On the otter hand a school teacher said, that she thought that it was a
question of leadership:
’’There are but few leaders in Lithgow, but those few are too busy
with their callings to encourage any cultural pursuits. The only
people interested in education in Lithgow are the communists. The
collapse of all the societies in Lithgow i 3 not due to long hours,
I only wish it were.”
’ f 4* . ' . • v 'l; - ', ;
TWc more trade union secretaries both suggest long hours as the cause
of the lack of enthusiasm for cultural activities. Another man who has
lived in Lithgow most of his life, and has been, in the past, a trade union
leader, said:
’’There is little possibility of interesting the men in education.
They have no time to give to it - they’re too tired.”


There seems to be little doubt that the long working hours is one of
the reasons for the apathy which is evident, but it does not wholly account
for it. In the case of the younger people they are not interested and even
if shorter hours were worked there would be no great response. A man closely
in touch with the working class youth of the town said:
’’The young men are not interested in ’’’isms” and ’’’ologies”. At
election times I have noticed that they don’t even know who the people
are whose names appear on the voting paper. They’ll ask, ’Who’s the
Labour man?’ They know that they are against the capitalist but they
don’t know why.”
And this attitude of indifference to ideas and ideals is confirmed by all
the trade union officials in the town. The Minister of a local church in
the course of a long conversation with one of the investigators about the
apathy amongst the young people to anything of a cultural nature said:
’’The parents do nothing to encourage children to do anything other
than earn money. There are no young people interested in anything
cultural.”
Long working hours, high wages (following the depression) N.E*S. work
and lack of leadership no doubt play their part in Lithgow’s attitude to
culture but fundamentally it is a question of appreciation of real values;
there appears to be a certain cheapness about the attitude towards life of
many in the town and it is shown in beer, dogs, V,E*A* and pictures.
L. ACTIVITIES CONNECTED WITH THE WAR
In recent weeks there appears to have been considerable improvement in
the organisation of the National Emergency Services in Lithgcw. Throughout
the past six months there have been varying reports about the extent to
which Lithgow was prepared should an air raid occur, but this is probably
due to the fact that all the divisions vary in their preparedness. The
officials in charge of the services appear to be pleased with v/hat they
have accomplished.
The Lithgov/ Mercury reported on 28/9/42:
”A total personnel of over 400 was engaged when Lithgow’s N*E*S*
organisation swung into action on the sounding of the alert yesterday
afternoon at 2.30. Asked what were the chief faults revealed by the
tost, the liaison officer said it was the inability of wardens to
interpret the kind of squads required to carry out the repair v/ork.
Generally the v/ork done was most creditable.”
The same officer also reported that:


"It ias regrettable that in the Yale of Clwydd and Corneytown there
were insufficient people interested in the work to enable them to
participate in the test.”
The divisional Warden in another Division also reported that there were
many absentees in his area. After a previous test the Lithgow Clarion
said, ’’Lithgow can stand on its own feet in an air raid”, but on
26th August the deputy-divisional warden of the division which includes
Main Street said, regarding the division exercise:
”It demonstrates there is no reason to be sanguine about N.E*S* here
except it be used in the vernacular. It was not a trial, but a "try”
by the majority of the enrolled wardens to enjoy tho day elsewhere.
They succeeded. There were too few wardens who responded to the
call. However, practically all who did not attend could not have
been much more than a nuisance. They were the men who, for the most
part never attend meetings and do not know their job.”
Until recently little had been done about Civilian Aid Services but
this has been taken in hand and on 29th August a reporter of the Clarion
reported:
’’This week I paid a visit to a number of places in the town where
growing stocks of all sorts of clothing are being stacked away daily
* Busy fingers of hundreds of women work ceaselessly in rooms
of old, out-of-the-way buildings, adding to the supplies. It was an
.eye-opener of how Lithgow women are working miracles as they prepare
against the disasters which might strike if Lithgow is ever blitzed
with enemy action.”
The day previously the Lithgow Mercury reported:
”The Cld Academy is a C.A.S. rest centre capable of holding approxi-
mately 2,C00 homeless persons should the occasion arise as a result
of enemy action.”
The membership of the Lithgow Red Cross branch is 456 which is con-
siderably less than the total last year when there were 630 members, but
in spite of that it is a lively unit and is doing much good work. Money
has been raised by means of a Popular Girl competition, police ball, race
meetings, beach girl competition, band concerts, concert, picture benefit,
weekly bridge and whist, street stalls, donations and waste japor
(the latter has now been discontinued). The wodc of the branch has teen
extended during the past few months and supplies of food and clothing have
been collected in preparation for any emergency which might arise. A Red
Cross Company was formed and 22 Red Cross Aids Gre being trained. In the
months of August-September, ever £3OO was collected for prisoners of war
by means of the street-adoption scheme.


More than 40 V,A*D’s. are assisting in the military ward of the local
hospital.
The Country Women’s Association in Lithgow is now devoting much of its
energy to the running of a Club for members cf the Services, where tea,
sandwiches and light refreshments are dispensed from 10 a.m. till midnight.
Billiards, cards, quoits, chequers etc. are played, and the Workmen 1 s Club
has provided books for a library for the men. The service is much appreciated
and well patronised by the men. The membership of the C.W.A. has risen from
30 to 70 in the past few months, and they are an extremely keen group.
Several of the groups contribute in one way or another to the raising of
funds for the provision of comforts for the services, notably the women's
auxiliary of the Lord Mayor’s Patriotic and War Fund. About 40 women meet
once a month to pack parcels for local toys overseas, the money being mainly
raised by street collections.


IV. TRADE UNIONS IN LITHGOW
A. THREE MAIN GROUPS
There are few men living and working in Lithgow who are not members of a
union. The three main groups of unions in Lithgow cover the Small Arms
Factory employees, the miners and the railway workers. The S.A.F. unions
have by far the greatest number of members, the miners are more close-knit
and more union-conscious, and the railway workers are the quietest, but
not necessarily less effective.
The employees at the Small Arms Factory are divided between three
unions, the Arms, Explosives and Munition Workers' Federation (hereafter
referred to as the Arms and Explosives Union), the Australasian Society
of Engineers, and the Amalgamated Engineers Union. The Arms and Explo-
sives Union is by far the largest; it has in its ranks a number of men
(and women) who are new to trade unionism, but there is no evidence that
this is causing any weakness or embarrassment to the leaders, for they are
never hesitant in any moves which they make - they move with the assurance
that the ncmbers are with them. The A«S«E», a union with a smaller mem-
bership, in most matters supports the moves made by the Arms and Explosives
Union. The A.E.U» - the union of skilled engineers appears to dwell apart
somewhat, but in spite of their small numbers there is no doubt that there
is a unity within their ranks which gives them power out of proportion to
their numbers; they also gain strength from the fact that all their members
are unionists of same years’ standing and there is no dilution of men new
to unionism.
The Miners’ Federation is the most militant of the unions in Lithgow.
There are no more sturdy fighters in the industrial field than the miners
and past struggles have resulted in their being welded into a body ready,
at any time, to do battle for their rights. Their attitude to "scabs” -
once a scab always a scab - is typical of their resoluteness in maintain-
ing the strength in their ranks.
Little or nothing is heard of the A»R»U« in Lithgow. Their executive
officers are active in local affairs but the members, as a group, have
avoided any action which was apparent to the public, but this suggests
that the central leadership is such that action locally is not necessary.


B. THE INDUSTRIAL STRUGGLE
SF-all Arms Factory: There has been one complete stoppage of work
(lasting for 10 days) at the 3.A.F. during the six months covered by this
report and that was brought about by the "clerks’ strike". The clerks are
a sub-branch of the Arms and Explosives Union, the operative members of which
haa granted a. war loading by order of the Court. From this the clerks
were excluded and in spite of representations over a long period failed to
get that position altered by an order in Court. Frustrated in their efforts,
the clerks went on strike; the management thereupon closed the factory. 'The
union leaders took steps to negotiate with the Minister of Munitions and in
a puolic statement the Secretary of the union said:
"It is. natural for the clerks, who are members of the Arms and
Explosives and Munition 'workers’ Federation to expect to get the war
loading. The clerical staff at the factory are. most patriotic people.
We do not want strikes just now, but when those people in authority
ignore you and treat you with contempt, what else-is there to do?"
Whilst the factory was still idle a mass demonstration was held when
3,C00 employees who assembled at the factory entrance demanded that the
gates be opened and w r ork to commence. The management refused the request,
f the demonstration s. member of the union executive said:
"The demonstration was an indication of support for the statements
made by the.Prime.Minister, Mr. Curtin, over the air last night asking
for an all-in national effort by Australian workers."
There. have been small sectional strikes; the A.E.U. strike in April
over dilution: a two day strike in the forge shop over promotion - an
important principle, which is often a "bone of contention"; and slight
stoppages brought about by friction between men and foremen - these°cases
have. been quickly and finnly dealt with by the union officials who have
hurried the men back to work.
Other aspects of the work which the unions aro doing is referred to
below but mention should be made here of their present efforts to institute
three 8-hour shifts in place of the two 12-hour shifts, the union leaders
stressing the point that the reduction in working hours will bring an
increase of production.
2 * Miners: In July the following decision, endorsing the Peace Code, was
reached by the Miners Conference:
"That we, mer&bers of the board of management of the Western District,
endorse in its entirety, the agreement as arrived at between the central
and district executives end the Prime Minister at Sydney on July £lst."
(For particulars of'agreement ■■and rcgulatase." ace -'appendix.*)


Before this regulation came into force there had been a tendency for
some of the miners’ lodges to take matters into their own hands when
trouble arose and to cease work without reference to the district executive
Of this tendency the comment of a man who has been closely in touch with
mining in this district for many years is of interest:
’ f lt is a pity that there is so little discipline amongst the men.
It seems almost as though their leaders no longer have control over
them. They have told the men that they have not got to strike but
to continue at work and that they must leave the settlement of dis-
putes to their leaders. But what do we see? The men are out on
strike at the least bit of trouble. They are only weakening their
own position.”
Since the regulation came into force there has been almost a cessation
of stoppages which have not had the executives sanction. Qf this important
agreement the Secretary of the Western District Federation said:
"The agreement whioh we reached is in accord with our own district
rules; they specifically state that all disputes shall be referred
to the executive before any action is taken. If an executive cannot
control its men, then they should go to the coal face and cut coal.”
The men appear to have accepted the terms of the agreement, not be-
cause they are impressed by Government regulations - for it seems to be an
aooepted thing that ”you Will never get coal by regulation” - but because
it is just and not £imed solely at tha workers. At one of the mines there
has been a strike sanctioned by the executive of the federation (in this
owner refused to carry out the order of the local Coal Reference
Boara, but following an unsuccessful appeal to the Minister concerned he
found that he could not avoid it) and a case of the district executive
themselves imposing fines on members of a lodge for causing a strike
without referring the matter to them. The leadership in the district seems
to be strong which is appreciated.by the men for they are never in doubt
about their position,
The local Coal Reference Board appears to be a great help to the
industry in the district. The men appreciate the promptness with which
.eir claims are dealt and what to them is more important, the decisions
are given by a man. who not only knowj the industry intimately but has a
thorough knowledge of local conditions, and for those same reasons they
View the central Reference Board with suspicion. All parties have
generally accepted the findings of the Board without protest and there
seems to be little doubt that it has helped considerably in maintaining
peace in the industry in this district*


C, HANK AND NILE AND EXECUTIVES
A matter which concerns all the union leaders in Lithgow is the lack of
interest in trade union affairs on the part of the majority of the members,
especially the younger ones. A railway union executive commenting on this
said:
tr Ue have got one or two young fellows coming along who are doing quite
good work but the majority take no interest; they just can’t be
■bothered.”
An executive officer of a munitions employees union said:
”Our meetings which take place on Sunday mornings ore very badly attended
The men are earning good money and at the present time they have little
interest in trade union affairs. It f s the same few men who turn up
every time.”
A miners’ leader:
"There is little conception of what a trade union really is. We have
got a long way to go before men think in terms of a working class
movement. A trade union for many exists solely for the benefit of the
individual; there is little appreciation of the obligations which it
brings.”
In spite of this lack of interest on the part of the ordinary members it
would appear that the leaders are able to judge the attitude of the men for
there appears to have been no open breach between the rank-and-file and the
executives, but this may again be accounted for by the fact that the men are
indifferent and cannot be bothered*' But the leaders must of necessity take
matters to a large extent into their own hands and make decisions for the
membership if there is an almost complete absence of rank-and-file at regular
union meetings* The unions cannot be as democratic as they are often con-
sidered for unless the worker is taking an interest and making his voice
heard at meetings then those who lead must themselves decide what shall be
done when decisions are to be made.
At the present time the factory union leaders are negotiating with the
management at out the setting up of three eight-hour shifts to take the place
of the two 12-hour shifts. Questioned on whether the men were in favour of
the idea, one union leader said, "They will have to be”. There seems to be
a feeling amongst the men (a sufficient number has not been questioned to
indicate how general this is) that they would regret the reduction in wages
which would result from a shortening of the shifts.


D. CLASH BETWEEN THE UNIONS
Incidents occur occasionally which indicate that there is not complete
harmony between the various unions on all matters. The most significant
of those was the clash between the ’’skilled" union and the "unskilled"
unions at the S.A.F. which resulted in a strike by members of the A.E.U.
(the "skilled" union). The struggle about dilution had beon going on for
many months. The A.E.U. demanded that section hands should all be skilled
men (although the job had been done in some cases for 28 years by unskilled
men who were members of the Arms and Explosives Union) and those section
hands who were unskilled should sign an agreement that they would stand
down in the event of a skilled man (A.E.U.) becoming available for the
position. The terms under which the A.E.U. men returned to work were
received "under protest" and the friction between the "skilled" and the
"unskilled" has not been removed. The following statement gives an indica-
tion of the feeling which prevails; an A.E.U. member, "The foremen in the
factory - when they are unskilled - sometimes cause trouble because they
haven’t the breeding of the skilled men"; and an official of the Arms and
Explosives Union, expressing himself with some bitterness said that in his
opinion the day of the craft union’s usefulness was over and that workers
should realise that their strength lay not in craft but industrial unionism.
If his feelings on the matter are an indication of those held by others
of his union then the question of "skilled" and "unskilled" is one which
is of vital importance and one which will continue to cause conflict between
the two groups. Further support to the breach has been given in the dis-
cussions which have taken place about housing in Lithgow. Whilst generally
there has been an acceptance by members of the "unskilled" unions of the
temporary house scheme which the War Workers’ Housing Trust has suggested
and is now carrying through in the town, the attitude of the members of
the "skilled" union has been one of superiority to that- type of accommoda-
tion; and there is that same air of superiority towards those living in
the camps for on one occassion the secretary of the A.E.U. said:
"No member of my union would live on the camping area, and anyone of
us would prefer to leave his wife and children in Sydney rather than
bring them to live under such conditions."
There has been evidence of some bitterness between munition workers
and workers in other industries in the town which has been voiced by the
union leaders. On April 27th the following article appeared in "The
Lithgow Mercury":
"MINERS DEPLORE RAILWAYS ’ONE- SI JED' FAKE POLICY
"A complaint concerning railway fares has been received at the
Western Minors’ Office. The system adopted in regard tc privileges
to men employed in essential industries, it is pointed out, is most
one-sided.


"For instance, mineworkers who have been unable to secure homes in
Lithgow and are compelled to have their families residing in other
centres, mainly the metropolitan area, have to pay the ordinary return
fare from Lithgow to their homes at the week-end. On the other hand,'
men engaged in munition work, similarly situated, travel for single
return fare.
"Such distinction, it is contended, does not tend to create the happy
relationship necessary for the maximum output which the workers are
called upon to make in the war effort,
"The Western Federation is referring the question to the Federal
Gov eminent, with a request that action be taken to allow the same
privileges for mineworkers as munition workers."
Following the representations made by the I,liners’ Federation the concessions
were withdrawn from munition workers and this brought forth a protest from
the secretary of one of the Factory unions but the concessions hove not
been restored.
There is still talk amongst the miners and railway workers of the pre-
ference which was given to munition workers over blankets a year ago; the
fact that during the v/inter of a year ago munition workers were given pre-
ference in the shops at a time when there was a great shortage of blankets
still rankles in their minds.
Another cause of bitterness at the present time is the cartage of coal.
There is great difficulty in getting coal carted from the pits to the homes
of the people in the town. The railway men complain bitterly that they have
as great need of coal as munition workers and miners who are given preference
in getting their household coal carted.
The secretary of the Miners ’ Federation says that there is unrest
throughout the western district over the distribution of tobacco. In May
the men at four mines in the district were on strike as a protest against
the tobacco distribution. He was reported in the "Lithgow Clarion" as
having said that the "strike had occurred because of the preferential treat-
ment given to munition workers in many instances". He considers the matter
so serious that he made the following statement to the press on September
22nd:
"Unless there is a more equitable distribution of tobacco to miners,
fifteen of the collieries on the V/estern coalfields will be called out
on a protest strike by the local Federation."
He went on to say, and here again there is an indication of the feeling
that all workers are not treated alike:
"The average miner on the western field to-day was getting about four
ounces for five weeks. This was not enough. Other workers in the town


are getting tobacco while the miners are not. At the factory they're
* *. getting a guarantee of li ounces a week."
Although there is still the feeling amongst the miners and the rail-
way workers that the munition workers have a decided advantage in obtain-
ing houses in Lithgow, there are signs that a more friendly understanding
has grown up amongst the various union leaders on the whole housing
question.
E. WHAT THE UNIONS HAVE DCNE
"A trade union, as we understand the t«rm, is a continuous association
of wage earners for the purpose of maintaining or improving the conditions
of their working lives.” £ How far are the unions in Lithgow fulfilling
the purpose given in this definition by the Webbs?
In addition to dealing with such questions os dilution, promotion,
friction between foremen and men, wage increases (to which reference has
been made) the factory union leaders have interested themselves in a num-
ber of other matters which concern the working conditions of the men. On
the question of ventilation in the factory the secretary of the Anns and
Explosives Union said:
"This is a matter that the unions have repeatedly requested the
department to treat as a serious matter and they sent along a
committee to investigate, but the results have been negligible and
the ventilation is still far from good in some sections of the
factory. Only the other week the matter was further discussed
with the works manager."
Heating and lighting have also been the subjects of agitation by the
unicn leaders. Ever vigilant on the workers' behalf, the combined unions
opposed a proposal to alter cafeteria arrangements when in the scheme for
establishing a canteen it was suggested that the food should be cooked
outside and reheated in the canteen, for they contended that that was not
the best service which could be given. By their representations they ob-
tained the service which they considered best.
Rationing has been a matter to which the Miners' Federation officials
have given much time on the men’s behalf, and although, after much nego-
tiation, satisfaction was obtained, one of the officials following a
visit to the officials of the Rationing Commission, made this statement
to one of the local papers:
A. "The History of Trade Unionism", Revised Edition 1920 by
Sidney and Beatrice Webb.


’’The Rationing Commission is pretty safe from invasion - they are so
surrounded by red tape in procedure that the enemy would find it a
harder job to break through than thoir recent effort in the Milne Bay
jungle."
All df these things fall within the definition which has been given, but the
trade unions in Lithgow have gone beyond it, notably in two instances, (a)
they have taken an active and important part in the struggle for houses, and
(b) they have been instrumental in having Production Committees set up in
the factory.
(a) In their efforts to obtain more houses they have called public
meetings, sent deputations to the local council and to ministers
of the Cabinet, threatened to stop production, used every weapon
that they have to obtain better housing conditions for the
workers, and in this agitation all the unions, A.R.U,, Miners’
Federation, A.S.E., A.E, & M.W.F, and A.E.U. have all worked
together. In this clamour for better housing conditions the
unions are united and their efforts have played an important
part in obtaining what improvements there have been.
(b) Early in the year the unions demanded that Efficiency Committees
should be set up to aid production and as a result of that
agitation one such a committee was formed in the Bren Gun
section. This proved so successful, (an official of the manage-
ment stating that there had been an increase in production in
that section of 30$ for which the efforts of the committee was,
he said, partly responsible) that it v/as thought that they would
be set up throughout the factory. However only one other has
been set up and there seems to be the opinion amongst some of
the union leaders that those committees have not functioned as
they should, owing fact that the matters dealt with at
the meetings have not been of vital importance, and insufficient
publicity has been given to them.
F, TRADE UNIONS AND POLITICAL THEORY
Such slogans as, "We must smash fascism within and fascism without”;
”our friends m the Soviet Union”; "The class war”; "Open a second front
m support of our gallant allies" and "Britain is pursuing an anti-
revolutionary role" are frequently heard from some of the trade union leaders
in Lithgow at meetings and rallies and in conversation leaving no doubt in
the minds of the listeners of where their sympathies lie. The extent to
which most of the trade union leaders emphasise the part of the Soviet Union
is at present playing in the war and the good features cf the system under
which that country is run, is most striking. (There has been no evidence
that A.E.l T . leaders are in this group. They do not appear at political
rallies and. no public statements of a political nature have been made by
them.) It is difficult to decide how great an effect all of this has on the


minds of the members of the various unions, but there is a strong bias
that way amongst the men themselves, with the leaders there is an accep-
tance of the Marxian theory and a desire to see those ideas put into
practice in this country. With the men, there is less understanding of
theory but in. spite of that there is a strong urge to see a change in the
system of control in this country and a desire for the adoption here of
present-day Russian political practice. One hears a great deal of talk
about Russia and its system of Government but the talk does not give the
impression that the question has been studied very closely but rather that
the knowledge is superficial and accepted because there has been a loss of
faith in democracy, for many, at the present time, relate democracy and
capitalism with the depression years and all its suffering. This lack of
faith makes them ready to accept what is written in the press and what is
said by their union leaders. One hears talk of "The Old School Tie" and
of "Colonel Blimp" but it is very doubtful whether very many of the men in
Lithgow have ever been personally affected by what is implied in those
two terms.
An officer of the Miners’ Federation, when he was askod if miners had
much interest in the war, replied: "The miner is more interested in the
class war than the war which is going on outside," and this class struggle
is linked up (vaguely in some cases) with Marxian theory.
There have been "communist" meetings in the Miners’ rooms and the man
who was responsible for opening a bookshop where "communist" literature is
sold, is a trade union leader, but apart from these two things the trade
unions have no regular educational policy within their movements.
A number of the trade union leaders play an important port in Hartley
A.L.P. Assembly and the Macquarie Assembly of the A.L.P., and many things
with which the unions are concerned in industry are there discussed. An
instance of this, and there are others, was the discussion which took
place both in the Hartley and the Macquarie assemblies about the difficul-
ties that certain unjoins had when trying to arrive at a settlement of a
strike at the factory. As a result of the discussion, a motion censuring
the Minister concerned was carried. Again, when submitting a resolution
demanding the removal of Fascist and New Guard elements from administration
of the Public Service and the armed forces, a trade union secretary said
at a Macquarie Assembly, "that there was a Fascist element within the
military service." Another officer at another meeting dealing with a
resolution as to whether the Labour party should press on towards its ob-
jective of socialism or whether it should shelve its aims for the time
being, said:
"Socialism is a basic platform of the party. Capitalism knew that
the writing was on the wall, and Labour principles should not be
poked in a pigeon-hole."
At a Six-hour Day committee meeting a president of a union said:


"The Prime Minister is going through one of the most difficult times
of his career, and I think we should write and offer him the full
support of this committee. Mr. Curtin has been attacked vigorously
by the Hughes, Fadden, Menzies element and the capitalised Press, and
if through their efforts he is put out of office, the worker will be
in a sorry plight."
In both of these ways the trade union leaders are protagonists in the
political field: on the one hand by expressing their own political
philosophy to the members at meetings and rallies, and on the other, by
playing a part in the Labour party machine.
By sending telegrams, writing letters and by interviews local trade
union officials at times attempt (on occasions successfully) to influence
the actions of Ministers of the Government. The remark is not infrequently
heard in a trade union office, "I am sending a wire to " (naming a
Minister) or "I gave something to think about when I told him in
Sydney that ......".
G. TRADE UNIONS AND THE WAR EFFORT
The following article appeared on 15th July 1942 in the "Lithgow
Mercury" praising the railwayman’s war effort:
"RAIIWAYMEN AND THE WAR EFFORT
"Stop work meetings - strikes - production loss.'
These are the headlines that greet the public day in and day out,
bringing different occupations and industries into the limelight and,
incidentally, putting others into a dark background.
"When the public thinks of essential industries, coal mines, munition
factories and the like immediately spring tn the mind. However, there
are others just as important, smooth-working organisations which but
seldom excite any attention.
"For instance, all the coal and munitions in the world would be of
little use if there were no available means of transporting them to
where they were most needed. This thought seldom comes into the
public mind, but it is very evident to the employees of the Railway
Department. Work in peace time with normal traffic and an adequate
staff was comparatively pleasant, but to-day with staffs depleted
owing to man-power regulations,' and the swollen war-time traffic, things
are difficult from the railwayman’s point of view.
"An article appeared in a western paper recently claiming that their
railway staffs were working double time. Anyone imagining that this
was an isolated case would be laboring under a misapprehension. When
interviewed, a local railway executive paid tribute to the never-


failing service being given by the Lithgow staff which, though over-
burdened with duties, continued to see that precious train-leads of
vital war materials, food and the like, reach their various destina-
tions.-
,f ’Munition workers may work their 12 hours per day’, he said, ’but
our men may be called upon to book in trains and execute numerous
other duties irrespective of the time or weather’.
’’Everybody knows that trains come and go, that consignments of goods
are continually arriving at their destinations, but it is seldom
given much thought, since it is seldom in the people’s eye. It is
only when thought is given to these items that we realise that more
than one or two sections of the community are assisting the war
effort, and it is indeed a truism to say that the one that receives
the greatest publicity is not necessarily the most generous con-
tributor.”
From time to time statements are made by trade union leaders pledging
on behalf of the men, full support to the war effort. Thus, in on article
7fritten oy the secretary of the A.E. & M,W,F, which appeared in the
’’Lithgow Mercury” on 30th September:
”1 have to say that this union, or any other union in the S.A.E. has
no desire to encourage anyone to shirk or be a slacker on the job.
On the contrary we support a policy of ’Win the war on the production
front and in the field’.”
Again the some official in an article which appeared in the ’’Munition
Worker” wrote:
’’All politics to-day, all trade union activity, must be directed
towards defeating world fascism ...... To do this we must keep our
factories open We must discipline ourselves as trade unionists
who know the stakes of the struggle I re-affirm the pledge
made at the meeting of Federal Council in March last, to give our
unstinted support to the Government in the prosecuting of the war
until final victory is won.”
There is no doubt that the union leaders are sincere in their pledges
in support of the war effort for they realise that a maximum effort on
the part of everyone is necessary if victory is tri be won. For those
promises to be fulfilled it is necessary for the Trade Unions to co-
operate closely with managers and owners which in many cases is often
such a change of direction that it is difficult to carry out. Instead of
a continual fight with managers and owners Over working conditions * it
means working with them in an effort 'to increase production. Thus we have
the secretary of the Miners’ Federation saying, at a meeting at which a
minister of the Commonwealth Government had referred to his efforts to
maintain peace in the coal field:


"If you use intimidatory tactics you won’t get coal. You won f t get
coal by regulation, but with co-operation and understanding you will.
Whilst I have advocated strikes in the past, and circumstances in the
future may compel us to take exactly the same stand the way the Federa-
tion approaches the question at the present time is that we do every-
thing in our power to avert an impending dispute."
Again the old struggle (the class war, the fight for conditions what-
ever it may be called) raised its head j>. an article by the same official
which appeared in "Common Cause" on 27th June (the article dealt with wage
cuts in the western district following an award):
"The award shows G lack of understanding of the Western District Miners’
conditions and classifications, and may well precipitate a crisis in the
coal mining industry If the position we are in compels the rank
and file to move as a last resort to strike action, then it is not they
who are guilty, it is those who laid down conditions by which the rank
and file may be left with no other course."
But since the Peace Code came into operation (and the two quotations given
above referred the disputes before that code came into force) there has been
every effort made (not without success) by the miners’ executives to ensure
a continuity of production.
The Clerks’ strike, mentioned above, and ether small sectional stoppages
which have occurred show that the unions functioning in the factory have not
been able to forget entirely their struggle with the management over matters
which affect the working conditions of the men. The change is not easily
made, but if the Production Committee which the factory unions insisted upon
are a disinterested effort to help war production, then it may be taken as
a sign that some progress has been made towards that end,
H. 7/OMEN IN THE TRADE UNIONS
At the time of writing, there are about 1,200 women employed at the
Snail Arms Factory, The A.S.E. have about 300 women members, most of the
others belonging to the Arms and Explosives Union. The Secretary of the
A.S.E. says that no women have so far attended meetings of the Union. Some
time ago he explained his Union’s quandary with regard to accepting the
industrial levy from women in addition to ordinary union dues; and the
difficulty of getting women who had not been in industry before to under-
stand Trade Union principles:
"Y/e’ve had some v/omen going into factories, and thinking they were
helping by offering to do the Clerk’s work when the clerks were on
strike. In fact most of the girls are like that, at first, and of
course, what would happen would be management would say, ’O.K. you go
right ahead -wo don’t need the clerks now’. There’s always that
danger, of course, women not understanding and undermining what has


taken us so long to build up. The Unions are afraid of being flooded
out with women. Of course, you know we have the 60-40 basis - not
more than 40 women allowed in a factory to every 60 men. That T s why.
And it T s the same thing in the Union itself. We could be outvoted
by the women who wouldn’t know what they were voting about
Then again, there’s the question of the industrial levy. If we let
the women pay it in addition to the ordinary union dues of 7/6d. a
quarter, then we’d have tc pay them strike pay. In a way, that’s
only fair if they’re out on strike, but if we do that, a big strike,
even lasting a week, would cost more than they’d be paying in for
the whole of the duration, probably. Of course, they just rush you
with the whole lot including the levy, but we feel we can’t take it.
After all, they’re only in for the war, so we’re trying to get a
cheaper rate for them...... Besides, if v/e give them full Trade Union
rights, what’s going to happen after the war? When the question
arises as to who’s going to be put off first, the women would say,
’Why should it be us? We pay in as much as you do. We’ve as much
right to this job as ycu have.’...... It’s the same about equal pay.
If a manager can get women cheaper than men, he’s going to keep
them on, and let the men go. Because, to tell you the truth, the
women are just as good as the men on most of tlrese factory jobs
(the lighter ones), in fact lots of them are better at some things.”
This union has since compromised, and has decided to accept only 6/6d.
per quarter from the women instead of the 7/6d. which the men pay; but,
like the men, they pay an additional 1/- per quarter into the Industrial
Fund, and'in the event of a strike, will receive strike pay. As their
ordinary union dues are slightly less, however, and they are not paying
into the funeral fund, they have not been given full Trade Union rights,
and will be expected tc stand down in favour of the men, if there should
not be sufficient work to go round at the end of the war.


V. THE WOMEN OF LITHGOW
7ftiat does life in a war town like Lith.gov/ mean to the women folk? The older
residents and the newcomers - how do they adjust tr. the changes brought about
by the war? The young girl, and the older women - what is their viewpoint?
Are values altering? Despite individual differences - and they are many -
there have always been certain things important in the life of the average
woman. How far does the quickening pace of war - and in particular, the
difficulties and anomalies of a war town - affect the attitude of women?
What are they doing, and what do they feel matters most to them now?
The following extracts are revealing:
"I am one of the happiest and luckiest women in Lithgow. I am most
certainly content, with my husband a munition worker, and being the
proud mother of three darling children. I could not help but feel
content.
"I spend my time mostly doing the housework in our home, which I am
thankful to add, is our own, and also looking after my two younger
children. My other girl is much older and is a great help to me in
the house. I am not worried about the children as they are all very
healthy.
w Still, I have lived in Lithgow about 6 or 7 years, and I am getting
tired of looking at the same old ragged mountains, tired of complaining
about the same old smoky atmosphere, find tired of the so quickly-
changeable weather. However, we're settled here, and we are all pre-
pared to make the best of it until after the v/ar, but I would then, if
things weren't too bad, like to go for a quiet holiday somewhere.
'’The war has made a great difference in my life, things don't seom to be
anything like the same; I don't know if it's the boarded-up shop windows,
the increased prices of things, the shortage of necessary things, or my
dearly beloved brother fighting in this war that's made such a difference
to me, but somehow I feel different, but I try to forget these things
and think how lucky I really am, compared to some poor unfortunate women.”
A woman of 65, who has lived for 25 years in Lithgow, says;
"I am a widow; my husband passed away 2 years ago. He was a war veteran
...... I have seen my ups and downs* My children seem to be my one
thought; also the soldiers who are so bravely fighting for us all. I


have a few relatives in this war; one has not long returned but is in
hospital in Western Australia at present At the moment nothing
would give me greater happiness than to see my daughter well again
My time is well taken up doing housework, patching, darning^
going messages. I don’t mind shopping, dc you? Sometimes I
look round the house and think, to m3*self, ’We must get a new fence
at the side, it’s fairly shaky, and there’s a couple of odd jobs to
do. But things will just have to wait, as my son is tired when he
comes home after 12 hours solid toil If I could go and see all
the places of my girlhood days and see the old home once again, I’d
feel kind of glad, but to come back after saying farewell, would make
me perhaps unsettled. You see, I have lived hero 25 years.”
Another elderly woman says:
’’Fancy anyone feeling settled these timesl Could you imagine any
mother not worrying about her children; whether they are in the army,
navy, factory or pit work, she worries if there’s no letter from
them It’s 24 years since we first came to Lithgow; it’s a good
town and fine folks in it Busy hands, such, as knitting socks
for the soldiers, looking after the family on different shifts, buying
tickets for a good- cause that is how my time goes.”
A woman of 40, married, with one child, says:
”We are all safe and well, but life does not go on as before, because
I’m now making guns-; it’s helping me to keep my courage I’m so
busy I’ve no time to sit and cry at the wireless like I did. I was
lotting it get me down As you know, I’m no good at collecting
or asking people to buy things. Anyhow, here I am, at a machine,
making a small gadget, which I am assured three times a day or night
at least, is very important. I resolve every piece is perfect. I
get tired on the night shift; at forty you can’t dc what you did at
twenty. Jut women are needed so badly. The ones with little chil-
dren are tied Bobby grows so big for his age, and is doing well
at his music; he seems gifted that way.”
A newcomer:
”I’ve been out house hunting till I’m weary and cold. Houses are
rarer than potatoes...... I’ll have no regrets at leaving Lithgow.”
A young girl:
’'Such a lot of cur girlfriends are doing men’s work in the factories,
shops, and we oven have a pretty little girl to deliver our papers
My little flower bed is just showing signs of life, a few anemones,
ranunculus, delphiniums, with a border of shamrock - when they are
all in flower it should look all fight, don’t you think? One
brother has just been home on six days’ leave; he left this aftornocn


to return to camp* We all miss his company terribly and the house seems
very quiet and lonely without him.’'
A woman with nine children said:
f, one of my sons are among the missing in Malaya; we last heard from him
when Malaya was first invaded, he was quite cheerful then and said they
had good officers I also have another son in the R O A«A,F., the
rest of the boys and one daughter are employed at the Small Arms Factory
here I feel sure that should Australia be invaded we will all put
up a brave showing and will all keep our heads and carry on How
are you using your coupons? I still have a number on hand. The potato
shortage took some getting used to; I do not trouble to inquire for any
now; in fact, X consider we will all benefit by the rationing, don T t
you? It will make better citizens of us by the time peace comes.”
A young woman, about 3C years of age, now housekeeping for a doctor,
said:
,f My greatest trouble is in varying the menu from day to day, because
with my limited experience of cocking, I can concoct only certain
dishes...... My specialty pudding is a rice custard, but with rice
unprocurable, I am unable to put that on the menu I wish some
good fairy would bring along a simple menu, varied a little to cover
2 weeks 1 meals I have travelled here and there during my teaching
days. I have lived in various homes I have had attendances ranging
from 6 to 20 pupils. I have joined in their games, kept in touch with
many »f them after they left school, and succeeded in gaining their
respect but put all that in a nutshell - it does not compensate
a woman for a home and children of her own. That is rhat I want rut ef
life, although I have left it rather late. t;
A woman going to Sydney for the 'week-end said:
M I T m glad to get away - I T m sick of work - it’s the cooking, especially
in summer. I don’t mind the house work so much. The last week-end I
had was in June (4 months ago). It just sets me up - a week-end - it’s
a break. I’ve got 2 sisters in town - it’s good to get with your rwn
ueople for a while - does me the world of good, just to get away. I
don’t care whether it rains or not - so long os I can have a good talk.
I used to get away every now and then for a ’week-end, but, I don’t know,
I can’t manage it now very often. I’ve got a daughter in the factory.”
Women have had to adjust, then, in a score of ways - the older woman
often works all day to provide a comfortable home and hot meals for sons and
daughters working on different shifts in the factory. The younger woman maj/
herself be working,, although she had given up her job when she married several
years ago. Many women - whether old or young - are anxious about seme relative
in the fighting forces. All have had to adjust to war-time restrictions to
rationing, to higher prices, But basically, women have changed very little -


the family, and the thousand and one details involved in the running of a
home are still the important factors in the lives of very many women.
This fact has been at the root of many married women deciding against
going into the factory, although they wished to do so.
w lf I could get someone to look after Brian, I’d either go into the
factory or else into Bracoy’s store.”
”I’ve got 3 children, a boy 10, a girl 9, and a girl 6. I’d like to
go to the factory, but you can’t with children when they’re that
young unless you’ve got someone to take care of them for you.”
”My wife would go to the factory if she could get one of her sisters
to look after the two children. We’ve got a girl 10 and a boy 12 and
you can’t leave them to come home of an afternoon and find nobody
there.”
Nevertheless, there are some women who, attracted by the high wages,
have shelved their family responsibilities, and entered the factory al-
though they were unable to make satisfactory arrangements for their
children to be cored for.
’’There are a lot of women that I know of with young families going
in to the factory and just leaving the kids to the mercy of neigh-
bours. Some of them say it’s to help the war effort, but as I said
to B.- ’7/ell, if it’s to help the war effort, what about giving half
of your wages to the war?’ But she just said, ’Not on your life.
I’m doing what everybody else is doing - filling my pockets a bit
first.’ Now she’s got her husband and 2 sons working in the factory
as well - that’s four of them earning good money, and she’s got 2
boarders as well and she gets home and cooks tea for them all, but
what happens the 3 little kids all day, I don’t know „”
To the extent that this neglect of home and children has occurred,
a serious problem is likely to develop, particularly in view of the fact
that Lithgow is almost entirely without facilities to provide for the care
of the pro-school child, and for the older child after school hours.
The Lithgow public school has a kindergarten attached catering for
81 children whose ages range from 4-g to C years, while the kindergarten
at Cooerwull caters for 46. A further 17 children below 6 years of age are
allowed to sit in the Infants’ class at ZignZag public school and 31 at
St. Patrick’s, but in neither case has a trained kindergarten teacher
been provided, and no work is done with the child, until it is able to •
join in with tne older children.
There are no Children’s Playgrounds and no Children’s Library in
Lithgow, where the older child could go after school until his mother
could return from the factory.


The Headmaster of the High School said that some boys are causing trouble,
probably because of their fathers being away and in some cases the mothers
being at the factory. He also instanced cases of girls of 12 and 13 being
without supervision and associating with soldiers in the park after school.
A high percentage of women, however, refuse to enter the factory because
of their children, and many women feel that the family is still their first
and highest responsibility. On March 23rd of this year, the first woman
operator commenced work at the factory. Over 1100 women are now employed
as operators, but the number of local women amongst them is not great.
The present investigators were able to obtain, in casual conversation,
the opinions of over 90 people about the reasons behind the reluctance of
many women to enter the factory:
T, I wouldn’t go out there to work - I don’t like factory work. I once
worked in a factory, but I didn’t like the machines. I like cafe work,
it’s interesting meeting all the different people. Some are a bit
cranky, but you get to know some of them real well. My cousin works
out at the factory - she likes it - she doesn’t mind the shift work,
the only one she doesn’t like is the 4-12 shift because she can’t go
out anywhere.
’’The wages are good out there, but I’m better off than my cousin, after
she has paid her board.”
Another woman in the factory:
”1 got fed up with nothing to do, there are seven other girls in the
room with me., they’re all very nice. The roughies are all down-stairs.”
28 - 33 years:
”It’s good money - I think the girls like it all right - my word we’re
getting some toughies now - Gee They’re rough. One of them’s so bad
that even the men say they don’t like going near her - the things she
says. And some of them don’t seem to wash properly. Of course the
shift work is hard sometimes - getting home - at midnight on the 4-12
shift.”
Or a single girl summarises the attitude of indifference and lack of
appreciation of the problems:
”I’m just on my way down to Sydney - it’s good to get away from the
factory for a while - I should be back on Sunday night but I’m going
to stay down till Wednesday. What’s the good of making money and not
having time to spend it. Then the hours are pretty awful - you know
going at midnight this weather.”


Rumours - them more rumours. A woman 43 -48 -Small General Store
Lithgow:
«I have tried for a long time to get a girl to help me here - it’s
been very difficult, but I’ve got one now; she f s just on 18 years.
She said she doesn T t want to go into the factory because of the
shift work. Some people say that if women go into the factory it
will mean that the men are put into the Army. It doesn’t stop them
going though# It’s the money that gets them in.
The men come down with a heavy hand - the poor male tries hard to
keep his male superiority. As a member of the Munition Union
executive said:
”1 definitely think that some of the men in the factory won’t let
their wives and daughters go in because come of the women there are
pretty tough.
”I’ve heard some of the men say they wouldn’t have their wives ant
daughters there, on any account.’'
Some of them say they have told them - T, lf you go into the factory, I
stay home and wash the dishes.”
Another woman:
*»No, I can find too much to do at home, my husband said to me,
’Well, if you go out there I’ll stop home’. I saw j-.il the other
night when she landed back after midnight she was that tired -
working those hours is no good to me - I wouldn’t work there for
anything.”
These conversations at least give the cross feeling of opinions,
outside of the main reasons the struggle between the dislike of shift
work against the good money made in the factory. It should be easy by
decent truthful information and publicity to eradicate a number of mis-
conceptions, especially in relation to the roughies, toughs and bad types
of girls. Also a simple explanation of the work and its relation to the
bigger job on hand is needed. One of the biggest problems is the male
attitude. We must remember that after the last war the women in
Australia did not have the feeling for emancipation and rights which the
European women tend towards.
Some women feel that ’’money isn’t everything”. As one young girl
in a tea-shop said:
’’The main thing is whether you like your work. If you like a job,
and people are good to you, that’s what counts - not the money so
much. Everybody is so nice-to you here, and the work is easy.....*
The people that come in are so interesting I love talking to


people. The other girls here feel like I do about it. There are 4 of
them. Geet they’re lovely girls.”
A girl about 24 years of age, working in a library, said:
♦tj love my job here. ••• •. I like it because of the books and all the
people coming in ”
A shop assistant (in the age group 18-23 years) said:
”1 wouldn’t like factory work. It’s different here - I know all the
girls - we’re just a group on our 0wn...... If you work in a factory,
there’d be so many girls - you wouldn’t know them in the same way.
It’s so friendly here, all knowing each other.”
Older women who have been residents of Lithgow for a good number of years
notice a big difference in the social life of the town:
’’People don’t entertain in their own homes now, or very little. '.Then I
was a girl, it was nothing for us to have a score of young people round
the piano at home in the evenings. We used to sing, and just have a
good time. We used to make all our own fun. Now, everything is
different. I did have a couple of parties for my eldest daughter. We
asked a lot of young folk for her, but she wasn’t invited to any of their
homes in return, although she is a popular girl. Mostly they all seem
to go to dances, these days.”
An elderly woman said:
”Wo used to have luncheon parties years ago, at one another’s places,
tut all that’s gone now - people are too busy.”
Those women who are not working themselves find their. time fairly well
occupied in cooking meals for the rest of the family, and in keeping ome
together. Shopping takes a woman much longer now, owing to the fact that
there is no delivery for man} commodities. The Manager of SLT says that in
advertising one must concentrate on the women. "Women are the buyers. Also
they drag the men to dances, etc.”.
Shopping holds the same attraction for the Lithgow women as for the
women in the city, and the introduction of rationing was preceded here, as
elsewhere, by a rush for goods irhich forced many of the shops to close thei-
doors.
’’Lithgow’s wives and mothers have continued their wild scramble
dresses and all articles of wearing apparel at the various stores this
week So far as Lithgow is concerned it is the greatest exhibition
of panic buying ever known.”
- ’’Mercury”, 13/5/42.


On the other hand, women in Lithgow have shown little interest in
actual prices, and although unfavourable comparisons are often drawn
between those in Lithgow and those in other places, nevertheless, there
has been no concerted effort on their part to inquire into local prices
and no women’s organisation exists for this purpose.
The only organisation to take a practical interest in the matter has
been the Hartley Trades and Labour Council, which completed a list of
prices ruling in Lithgow and sent it to the Prices Commissioner,
Professor Copland, for his consideration. ”No satisfaction was received,
so it is now proposed that the Council take the matter into its own hands. 11
The Trades and Labour Council intends to call the retailors of the town
together and establish the principle that a list of all prices must be
exhibited in every shop window.
The prices of the Lithgow Co-operative Society are competitive; their
policy is not to undercut other firms, but to return profits to their own
shareholders in the form of dividends. The Co-operative Society has just
concluded another good half-year, with a net profit of £16,724 compared
with £79 in 1933. The bonus to be paid is 2/- in the pound. When the half-
yearly bonus is paid, the Lithgow Council puts on an extra clerk to cope
with the rush of women who go straight over with their bonuses to pay
their rates. Also some of them buy clothing and boots for their children
and fit them out, instead of using their husband’s wages.
There are very few outstanding women leaders in the town, but certain
associations include some energetic workers amongst their members. Most
associations are devoting a good deal of their time and funds to activities
connected with the war effort. Patriotic work, a certain amount of Church
work, some bridge cr whist, a dance, or the picture show (’’Just for some-
where to go’.’), usually fill in the limited spare time of the women of
Lithgow.


VI. THE YOUTH OF LITHGOW
Referring to the school buildings in Mort Street, Lithgow, a well-known citi-
zen said, "They aro a disgrace to a town of this sort." The school buildings
of which ho was speaking were, the High School, the boys’ primary, the girls’
primary and the infants’ schools, all of which are huddled together on a
corner site opposite the drab Town Hall and a row of houses which once were
condemned but have been renovated, and overlooking two rows of houses which
are a slum. The High School building, grey and drab, has a flight of steps
from the pavement to the main entrance - it gives the impression of having
been pushed up to the pavement level to make room for the buildings behind.
Alongside the High School is the girls’ primary school, a gaunt, uninviting
building which has a narrow strip of rough gravel between it and the pavement
just large enough for a small class of girls to dance - which can be seen
sometimes on sunny mornings from the street. Behind these two buildings in
close proximity is a barn-like two-storied brick building - the boys’
primary school and further back still is the infants’ school. So close to-
gether have the buildings been erected that there is no space for free play;
the playgrounds are uneven, part gravel (scarred with water channels) and
part tarred. This is the main centre of the schools in Lithgow. In xnose
uninviting surroundings the children receive their schooling.
When questioned about the behaviour and responsiveness of the children,
a young school master, who has taken a leading part in the agitation for
better housing conditions in the town, said:
"Recently, we’ve been having a much more difficult time with the children.
There is so much more crime and drunkenness in Lithgow - the children
see it themselves - that there is a tendency for them to copy the attitude of
lawlessness. The question of corporal punishment should be looked into:
we should be able to punish, as we are having to do what the parents
themselves should be doing, and are not doing, as woll as our own work.
There is a deterioration in the children living in the camps; it s
bound to happen. The bad housing conditions are shown in the children.
The chilaron of railway employees are interesting. Some of the brightest
children are railway employees’ children - the brightest boy I have in
my class is the son of a railway employee - but many of them are back-
ward because of their parents having to move from place to place; their
work is often interrupted by the father having to take his holidays
during term time - they sometimes lose 3 or 4 weeks because of this."
The Principal of the High School, a man greatly respected in the town, is
deeply concerned about the attitude of many parents towards their children’s
education:


"There are far too many parents 7/ho take their children away from
school before a sufficiently high standard has been reached. Educa-
tion must be treated more seriously by the community in general."
The Principal of the Technical College also had something to say about the
attitude of parents:
"The majority of the parents* thinking is coloured by the last de-
pression. They remember that there was just no money to be earned in
Lithgow then. Now that there are opportunities for earning money the
boys are encouraged to earn as much as possible ’while the going is
good’• It is a concentration on the present at the expense of the
future. There is little or no encouragement given to the boys to
train themselves for the future, for that is a very uncertain thing."
There aro few recreational facilities for the under-twenties after
they have left school. At the end of last year the local police called a
public meeting to discuss the possibility of starting a boys’ club in the
town, The attendance fit that meeting was described as "fairly good". The
local Notary Club had, some time previously, evidenced some interest in
the proposal. So few people attended the second meeting called to discuss
the plans in detail that no further move was made. Noth the police and the
Rotary Club have firmly decided that they will do nothing about starting a
club while the war lasts.
The Church cf England holds a weekly gymnasium class (at which there is
an average attendance of 30) in the parish hall for boys over 14 of
age. "The boys stay in until they are about 21", said the leader, "and
then it seems that the strain of work begins to tell and they are too tired
to come along after a big day’s work."
The Scout leader is anxious to extend scouting in Lithgow for he feels
that there should be more than 28 scouts in a place of this size (that is
the number in the only local troup) but he has found it impossiole to find
new Scouters. Thirty five boys between the ages of 11 and 18 years attend
a weekly ambulance class; a pack of 12 cubs have met each week for a year
and the captain of a Boys’ Brigade when asked about his show said, "I am
not bothering much about them now". The Rugby Football Association during
the past season has made an effort to encourage the under-twenties to play
the game and they have been ploased at being able to raise 7 teams. ihe
number of under-twenties playing soccer has shown a falling-off; there ore
9 less teams than two years ago.
Most of the boys after they have left school have little leisure time
as they are, in the majority of cases, working overtime every night of the
week. What spare time they have has to be spent as best they can for there
are few in the town who have the time or inclination tc do much to help them,
and until shorter working hours are v/orked there seems to be little possibility
of any change coming in this respect* Many of the younger children appear
wide-awake and sophisticated, possibly because they are living in over-


crowded iioic.es* The following will illustrate the point this was overliedrd
at a band practice! The bandmaster was telling the boys about a '\isit to
Sydney. A email boy aged 11 years, who plays a cornet in the band asked:
"Will there be any girls for us?"
"What do you want girls for?"
"Oh well, it’s nice to have a sheila to walk around with."
There is only 1 company of Guides in Lithgow, The Captain says there
should be at least 3 companies in a town of this size* She says, however,
that her Company is fairly keen. There are 25 on the roll, and the average
attendance every Friday night is about 18 or 20. The ages range from 11 to
16 years ordinarily, but as there are no Rangers in Lithgow, 4 of the girls
have remained in the Company although they are over 16.
Besides routine work, the girls have been bringing along clothes for
English children (bomb victims) and the cider ones have offered their
services as "roof spotters". The Guides are one of the few groups for young
people which have not had their numbers seriously reduced owing to the brown-
out. It is hoped that a Brownie pack will begin here soon. Some are already
training as leaders.
Most of the churches used to run girls’ clubs, but several of them,
including the Methodist Girls’ Comradeship, lapsed temporarily owing to
"brown-out" conditions. However, the Church of England still has xrom 12-15
girls attending the weekly meetings of the Girls’ Friendly Society, the pro-
gramme including impromptu speeches, debates, camouflage netting and knitting
for the Red Cross and Comforts Fund, Both boys and girls frequently go round
to the Rectory on a Sunday night after Church for music and singing round the
piano. It is difficult to get sport going.
"They’re a lazy crowd in that way, although scavenger hunts go well.
They’re not very interested in tennis, and badminton died out this
winter."
The Presbyterian Fellowship Association (boys and girls fr?m 16-25)
meet weekly, and although numbers are falling off, there are still from
30-35 in the Senior, and about 12 in the Junior Fellowship, The meeting is
usually devotional in character and is then followed by a social. "Tho
same crowd go to dances."
The Country Women’s Association has recently banded together a group
of about 20 older girls (non-members) to assist them entertain service men
at their regular dances, and this "invitation" system seems to be working
out very well.


VII. THE REASONS BEHIND LITHGOW’S APATHY
A, THE OLD AND THE NEW
There seems to be a general tendency amongst the older inhabitants of the
town to say that the newcomers are of a poor type; the remark is usually
qualified by,. "Mind you, there are some very nice people amongst them,
but.,,,,.". The Ministers of the churches seem to look upon them as a hard
core of people with whom they can do nothing, "Been unemployed most of
their lives"; "Don’t want houses; have never been used to them"; "They’re
only here because of the money"; "Soon as the war is over they’ll be gone"
are the sort of generalisations which responsible citizens make. One of
Lithgow’s leading business men expressed himself thus, "Lithgow was, until
the influx of people, a very respectable place". The police also give the
impression that they think that the newcomers have not added much to the
tone of the place; when commenting on the increase in the number of cases
which come into the courts, a highly placed police officer said, "It wasn’t
like this before we had all these people here," But in spite of this
feeling there appears to be little hostility. The older inhabitants accept
the thing philosophically, a few saying that they look forward to the end
of the war when they can start doing something for and in the place when
many of the war time workers will have gone# A business man, who is also
a Rotarian, had something to say on this:
"There is no open split between the new and the old. Practically all
the newcomers haven’t a good word to say for Lithgow. I’ve made a
point of asking them, for business reasons, and they all say that as
soon as the war is over, they’ll clear out again, They’re only here
for the duration. The old inhabitants put up with it and don’t
complain,"
B, CIVIC PRIDE
There is one phrase which has persistently come up in the course of
our conversation with old and new residents alike: "Of course, there is no
civic pride!" In almost every case this has been uttered as a simple state-
ment of fact. It is an extremely rare thing to detect any suggestion in
tho speaker’s attitude that something could or must be done to stimulate
Lithgow’s "civic pride". Little thought seems to be devoted to the reasons
which might account for this lack. A few of the oldor residents volunteered
that "Lithgow ha 3 always been like that". Others said, "It’s a place 'where
things start off all right and then just fizzle out."


Some, on the other hand, 7/ere inclined to blame the nev/comers to the
town. In one sense, a good deal might bo said on this score, because few of
the factory v/orkers intend to stay when the v/ar is over; in fact most of them
expect to lose their jobs* It is undeniable that on the whole we tend to
take less care of that which is not our own, whether it be a house or a town.
Mrs. C. said:
"Before we lost our home, we had our place lovely. My husband used to
spend all his time in the house and garden. We had all our own vege-
tables and lovely fO7/1 s - Rhode Island Reds - and our own cow. be
never bought an onion and there were potatoes and heaps of pumpkins 9 I
eould do with them now. But we’re not even going to put a nail in this.
You don’t feel like doing much to a place that’s not your ov/n, do you?
Other people get the benefit."
Mrs. C’s. attitude is common, and it is not difficult to understand,
"Other people get the benefit." But a man who does not think it worth while
even to "put a nail" in the house he is living in, is hardly likely to think
it worth v/hile to plant a tree in the streets of the town. On the other hand,
it would seem that the mere fact of better surroundings tends to give tenants
a pride in their homes, even though they are not permanent. The Commonwealth
Property Supervisor reports that generally speaking, the tenants of the new
Littleton cottages are keeping their homes in very good condition. There are
very few who have not made some attempt at a garden and in some cases a great
deal of work has been put into then.
In the camping areas, however, and in other parts of the town, there are
some 7; hose living standards have been reduced more or less permanently after
years of unemployment and existence upon the "dole". Some of them need to be
helped to build up their standards of home life, and their personal and civic
pride.
Good money has been made in the town during the 3 years since the war
began, and Lithgor/’s weekly wages bill is roughly £60,000. But very little
has been done in that period to improve the social amenities of the town or
to beautify it. Or.e exception has been the raising of £1,500 for a Maternity
YYard of the Lithgow Hospital, but even here the burden of the organising
work has fallen upon 2 or 3 people.
Although set amongst beautiful hills, Lithgow itself has become, on the
whole, a drab town. Yet, to quote a visiting expert’s opinion, "Lithgow
would seem to be fortunate in having on hand most things necessary for the
foundation of an ideal city."
Dog-racing in Lithgow is bringing in about £4,000 annually for the
Lithgow Hospital, The general opinion of organisers of appeals for charities
here seems to be that "You’ve got to give them a chance to win something
before you can get anything out of them - they like a raffle or a gamble of
some kind." As another expressed it, "They’re poor givers, but we find
chocolate-wheels are good."


One exception was a statement by the wife of a certain parson who
said, "It is not our experience that the people here won’t give. We have
noticed that voluntary giving has increased by £2OO a year in the offertory
alone since we came.”
The Secretary of the local War Loan Committee, one of the most
energetic leaders in the district, said, "It is a very difficult community
to arouse.” He had wanted to make an appeal for support for the Loan
during the interval at the, local picture shows, but even his own Committee
had said, "They don’t come to the pictures to listen to that.”
With an objective of £65,000, Lithgow contributed only £24,680 to the
Second Liberty Loan. To quote a local paper:
”.,....approximately only 1 person in every 55 responded to the appeal,
and the local committee regards it as on appallingly bad response
remembering that- it is for our own preservation.”
But the takings of the local hotels are increasing enormously, and
the manager of one bank said:
”1 know from the accounts of the business people in Lithgow that the
wage earners are spending their moneyj the increase in business
accounts is great; the money is spent mostly on beer and gambling,
clothes and food. We have had practically no new accounts - our
accounts are almost entirely accounts of business people.”
The manager of another bank said that people were not banking their
money. ”What we have now in savings account deposits would in normal
times be quite good, but when you consider what is being paid in wages in
Lithgow it is very poor.” He thought that some people were hoarding money
at home, but nevertheless, "there’s a lot of foolish spending.”
'With regard to attendance at public meetings and participation in
public affairs, some of the following extracts taken from local papers
recently, are significant:
"The local secretary of the War Loan Committee deplored the
fact that although he circularised about 80 business people and
organisations in the town, only 8 representatives attended the
meeting. Few apologies were received.”
"Six local boys who have recently returned from the Middle East were
given a welcome home last night in the Town Hall by the residents of
Lithgow the attendance was very disappointing......”
"The postponed annual meeting of the Hoskins Institute which was to
have been held at the Institute last night once again lapsed for
want of a quorum. Only 9 members attended.”


"There was a very disappointing attendance at the fifth amateur stage
parade conducted in the Convent School hall last night."
The Chairman of the local Coal Reference Board told us:
"It is extraordinary the lack of understanding on the part of many of
the younger miners of the machinery which has keen set up for their
own protection. I’ve had scores of fellows ask me, ’Where are you
working?’ ’l’m the chairman of the Reference Board.’ ’What’s that?’
they ask.
C. VANDALISM
At a Council meeting in September the electrical engineer stated that
over £l,OOO 7/orth of damage was caused by vandalism each year to Council’s
lines and lights. But a week later, the "Mercury" reported on other
destructive acts, which make the cost of total damages sustained far higher:
‘ T ' ' ‘ • < . : * • *
"MALIGNANT MINDS CAUSE WORRY AND INCONVENIENCE IN UTHGOW
"Statements by the Council electrical engineer, Mr. R* Houston, recently,
that vandalism to Council’s lines and lights cost £l,OOO or mere yearly
to repair, were only half the story of the permanent vandalism which
occurs in the municipality.
"Subsequent reports show that this type of offence is rampant as far os
public telephones are concerned.
"Some of the deeds of twisted minds brought to notice are: Mouthpiece
unscrewed and stolen; other smashed; receivers and cords pulled out,
removed or damaged; slots stuffed with matches and cardboard and walls
disfigured with undesirable drawings, etc..
"The stamp machines at the post office have also been the centre of
this malignant activity, flattened bottle tops having often been found
inserted in the slots. Hardly a day gees by that the repair staff is
not called out to make these amenities suitable for use again. Apart
from the worthless nature of the acts - nobody can possibly profit -
other members of the public are very often inconvenienced*
"Attention has also been drawn to the fact that weighing machines also
very often are put out of action, a miscellany of items, including the
actual weight cards, having beon shoved down the slots.
"The unfortunate aspect of it all is that it is very difficult to catch
the offenders In the act."
- "Mercury" 10. 9.1942.


D, LITHGOW AND THE WAR EFFORT
With regard to work and the war effort, it is generally accepted
that there is not a great deal of interest:
"They’re not interested orelittle bit in the war* If they were they’d
work harder."
"The people of Lithgow are less interested in the war than any people
that I’ve met. I speak to a lot of people who come into this shop;
quite often there are SO to 25 people waiting and by talking to Ihem,
I’ve learnt that they are not interested in the war. They're far more
interested in the change that is coming after the war."
Although there are many who wish to do everything in their power to
increase the production of arms and materials essential for the prosecution
of the war, there is comparatively little appreciation of the seriousness
of the situation. It seems as though the every-day oommcn-place incidents
in the lives of the people tend to crowd out the lull realisation of dangers
that lie ahead, just beyond the reach of their imagination. Only a major
disaster occurring in their midst would seem capaele of stirring them out
of this lethargy.
There are some men, comparatively few, who have always fought to
maintain working-class standards. Those are watching still, determined
that hard-won privileges shall be given up only where the exigencies of war
absolutely demand it.
It has been this small group, too, who have fought for more houses for
the people, and better living conditions. Very few of the people who
actually need the homes will come to the conferences on Housing, which have
been called from time to time. They will talk over their. grievances among
themselves, but when it comes to direct action, the work is left to the
Trade Union leaders.
There is a general tendency to leave things tc "the Government" and
community spirit i s not strong. It is difficult to assess, however, just
how far this apathy is a general thing, end how far it may be accounted
for by the resentment that has arisen because workers Drought here to a
Government factory have not been decently housed.
On the whole, it can be 3aia that the changes, added responsibilities,
higher prices and'less freedom, brought about by war have been accepted by
the mass of the people with nothing more than a little grumbling, much of
it good-natured.
But this acceptance has been more often a passive thing than a positive
striving to help in the struggle. Patriotism, the passionate surrender of
rights, privileges, possessions, for the sake of their country, is seldom


found to antar into the question.' It would be incorrect to say that patriot-
ism is not the r i driving force - rather there is no driving force. While
the people are noc "stirred by the spirit of sacrifice, neither are they filled
with the zest of living, ncr the active desire for pleasure. Rather they play
as they work - without undue effort or enthusiasm.. Pleasure is not curtailed,
hut neither is it a vigorous filling of their ii\es with the things that they
desire - it is pleasure the easy way. The kind of sport or recreation most
generally engaged in, is that which demands the least effort. Spectator-
sport is the most popular - comparatively few actively participate*
Much that has been written of Lithgow is probably true of other
Australian war towns with a similar history. Some of it is true of the
Australian people as a whole. It is an indictment of our educational system
that we have taught our people the three E f s. yet have not taught them how
to live. Most of them can read and write and make simple mathematical cal-
culations; but how many know hew to think for themselves? As there is a
singular lack of inspiration in our educational system, so is there a lack
of inspiring leadership in the adult community.
2. AB3ENTS3ICM
Recently it was decided to cut off the Sunday night shift at the factory
because of the rate of absenteeism which had risen as high as. S 3 % on that
night. As has been mentioned in a previous section, some of the Trade Union
leaders have been concerned about loss of pin duct ion because of absenteeism.
Amongst the men themselves, comments are frequently a.out ”slackers on
the job” amongst a certain section*
”In the shop in which I work there are very few men who are really doing
a good honest day's work - they stand around and loaf about and tho
foreman can do nothing about it, “The greatest shame of the whole thing,
though, is the period after the tea break at 5 p.m.. We return at 5.1 C
p.m. and from then until 7 p.m. practically no work is done at all. It
is the biggest racket that I have ever seen. It is so bad that I nave
handed in my resignation and this has been accepted, and I go to idle
man-power people in Sydney in a week’s time.”
The following letter published in the "Lithgow Mercury” is cf interest
because it indicates the attitude of some of the Lithgow men in the fight-
ing services towards absenteeism at home:
”Sir, I am a Lithgow native who is fortunate enough to be a member of
the A.1.P.. Recently, during my ramblinga from one street of Sydney
to another before catching my train to another State, I was surprised
to meet quite a number of Lithgowites and, with the exception of one,
all were S.A.F. employees.
"On holidays?” I enquired. ”oh, no.!” was the reply, "Just having an
unofficial day off.” Having read at various times wh ?e the


Honorable Hamilton Knight described the same men as "front line
fighters", doing as good a job as the men facing Australia’s enemies,
I thought the men in the firing line must have been given a day off
from their posts for a picnic that Monday also, that is if they were
to be compared with these S.A.E. workers. I am afraid these men are
letting Mr. Knight down, not to mention Australia and our comrades
overseas.
"I look at it this way. These alleged workers would lose only a day’s
or several days’ pay depending on the length of their absence, of
course, but what do the members of the fighting forces get for taking
a day off unofficially?
"Men who have served in Syria, Libya, Crete, Greece and Tobruk for
two years and have returned to Australia, but have been absent with-
out lease passes were and still are receiving sentences in punishment
camps of 14 to 90 days, on top of fines and forfeitures.
"Believe me, I am not stressing this too much, Mr. Editor, and might
I suggest that this be the subject of a leading article. These men
are not playing the game, and if they let their country down, and
they are, then how can we poor chaps in the firing line hope to save
it?" - Yours etc., "JUST A SOLDIER".
That there is apathy towards the war effort amongst some of the workers
is indisputable. In fact it is the common talk of the town. But many of
these men have been working twelve-hour shifts for over 2 years, and about
900 of them have to travel 2 to 3 hours each day, making altogether a
fourteen or fifteen-hour day.
"I don’t think that I shall go back this afternoon. It is too wet and
lam too tired." Then, when his wife tried to argue with him, "Look
here, I am the one that goes to work, not you. I/hen you have done 12
hours a day for 2 years, you will know what it means."
"Just at the end of a fortnight’s night shift, it does not take much
to irritate men. I did not like his attitude and I crossed him to
the jaw and I am not a bit sorry I did it."
The acute housing shortage and the conditions under which so many of
the workers are obliged to live, is another very important factor contri-
buting to absenteeism and to inefficiency and "slackness" on the job. As
has been pointed out, ?/hole families are living in over-crowded "flats"
and in "rooms".
In addition, there are those workers who are living in the camping
areas. About 85$ of the camps in Lithgow are the "homes" of munition,
workers, and many of them have been ©nduring those discomforts for about
18 months. They are resentful. More than one.man has remarked to us,
"What have we_ got to fight for, anyway? It couldn’t be worse if the
Japs did come here."


These intolerable conditions of life in many of the camps gradually
undermine the well-being and morale of the workers. Probably the most trying
feature of all is the utter impossibility of securing adequate sleep for the
worker who is on night’shift. But in this respect many hundreds of men who
are living in lodgings, or with their families are living in "rooms” or flats,
are very little better off. There is a complete lack of privacy; it is
impossible to keep the children quiet in the confined space; and other mem-
bers of the household have frequently to go into the room whore the man is
trying to sleep. Their efficiency is being daily impaired.
Many a dispute over a minor matter at work has probably arisen through
lack of sleep and irritability due to home conditions. As the Secretary of
one of the Unions said to us recently, "That kind of life makes a man ’naggy’."
No man, whatever his attitude to the war, could hope to attain full
industrial efficiency under these conditions. No man can give a fair cay s
work unless he has first had a proper rest, good food, well-prepared, and
some degree of comfort and contentment in his home.
F, THE AFTERMATH OF THE DEPRESSION
In order to understand fully the situation in Lithgow to-day, one other
factor must be taken into consideration, the significance of which is seldom
realised - the aftermath of the "depression". As one man put it, "The
depression left a fear in the minds of many people in Lithgow. Some cf them
were unemployed for many years."
There were 2,000 men unemployed during 1934, 1935 and 1936. When it is
remembered that many of them had dependents, some idea con be obtained of the
large proportion affected in a population reduced to little more than 13,000.
From the State mine alone 500 men had been put off in 1952.
A nurse who lived and worked amongst the people here during the depression
years said that she went into many homos which were practically without a
stick of furniture. The files of the local newspapers of the time contain
articles pleading the cause of women who had to leave the hospital after
child-birth to return to homes where there was insufficient to eat.
A who had been unemployed for many years, and who had had no regular
work until the war broke out, said recently that he wanted to see the \I. E.A.
discussion groups on Post-War Reconstruction started because he hoped that
such groups would help to establish a post-war v/orld in which there would be
no chance of his child and other children going through the hell which had
been his. Trying to explain what those years of insecurity had meant t*
him and to others like him, he said:
"Trust is the main thing. If we could give one another trust. The
trouble is a chap is on the dole, then he has a couple of years’ work,
then a couple of years’ dole. Then when you’re in work again, you


say, ’Blow the other fellow’. A fellov; gets that -jay, so that if
f\ they said to him, ’Here y’are, mate - here’s security’, he just
wouldn’t believe it,”
rjG J
But in addition to the numbers of people who remember the depression
years in Lithgow, many of the new comers have brought with them their own
memories of unemployment and insecurity. On many Australian men and women,
now middle-aged, and on their children - that now generation of workers on
whom we now call for ’’greater production” - the depression years have left
their mark.
Large numbers are affected either directly or indirectly. In the
middle of 1932, it is calculated that one third of the workers of New South
Wales were unemployed, In August 1933, according to the Government Statis-
tician, there were 106,811 registered unemployed in that State alone.
The full extent to which our people were affected can only be dimly
realised, for these figures include only registered unemployed. And behind
these men are the many thousands of dependents who suffered with them. .Boys
grew up in these homes without knowing what it was to see their father in
regular work. They were not exactly hundry - they were simply never
properly fed. While bread and tea and jam was the diet with <?hich thoy
were most familiar, they got meat and vegetables, chiefly potatoes, when
they could. There was no provision for green vegetables or fruit; in the
ordinary dole ration - even if the meagre sum provided could have purchased
them.
Throughout the depression years, mothers brought children into the
world who were to grow up in mean, cramped rooms and damp basements
frequently neglected because the mothers’ own energy was sapped by too
many pregnancies and the little nourishing food. In many cases, ignorance
of food values, of the most elementary care of children and of the nome
added to the almost insuperable difficulties of providing for a family
out of the dole ration.
Such has been the social and economic background of many of our
Australian people on whom we are now dependent lor our supreme war effort.
Such has been their physical and spiritual inheritance.
For some of them the-war has provided, in Lithgow and. in other war
towns, their first constant job in years. It is not surprising that many
of them think of the end of the war with mixed feelings. They nay ae si re
victory and peace sincerely enough, but after all, why think beyond ..ie
present, for war at least means employment and money to. handle. Timo .
enough to think of peace when it comes, because at the back of their mm s,
most of them feel that peace means trouble again. .... .no work no
money the old insecurity. Of course, we will win some day
meantime, well, one just goes on.
THE END
(5.1608)


DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND NATIONAL SERVICE
ADDRESS ALL COMMUNICATIONS TO
THE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR
AND NATIONAL SERVICE,
P O BOX 281 7aa
ADDRESS TELEGRAMS
COLABOUR. MELBOURNE.
TELEPHONE MF 0341
In reply quote
CENTURY BUILDING.
129 SWANSTON STREET,
MELBOURNE. C.l
30th November , 1955
MEMORANDUM for :
Librarian,
Commonwealth National Library,
CANBERRA. A.C.T.,
During 1942, two Community Welfare Officers of this
Department ?/ere stationed at Lithgow, N.S.W. At the end of
their stay, they wrote a survey on the life of that town which
Vvas later produced in booklet form. It covered many aspects
including Housing, Leisure Time, Trades Unions in Lithgow and
How the People earn their Living".
_ Distribution of this booklet in 1943 was restricted
to private circulation and as far as can be ascertained, no
copies were forwarded to you at that time. A few copies are
still held by this Department and as the information in the
booklet has an historical interest, I am forwarding you two
copies for your retention.
BLjfllD)
S e c r e <*ja r y






