

PUDDICQMBE i
< <
( VERSUS
\ ROSSI AISTD OTHERS \
VERBATIM REPORT <
< <
) (
) OF THE
< Judgment ojf tlmr |)ononi j
< \
l THE JUDGES,
HI
<
< f/h Supplied by tJje ’Official Sf}ortfjand Writer <
$ <
of tf)e Supreme "Court,
GOTTIABUIRISr : (
Printed and Published by the southern Argus Newspaper Co., Limited. £




PUDDICOMBE
■VEEBXJS
ROSSI AND OTHERS.
Before their Honors Mr.
Justice Faucett, Sir George Innes,
r. Justice Deffell.
and Mr.
In this case, which was an Equity ap-
peal to the Full Court, the Rev. A.T. Puddi-
combe was the plaintiff, and F. Rossi,
Hon. James Chisholm, A. F. Gibson, and
A. M. Betts were the defendants. The de-
fendant Rossi severed his defence from the
other defendants. .
The following is the full report of the
judgments of their Honors the Judges, as
supplied by the official shorthand reporter
of the Supreme Court.
Mr. Justice Faucett, delivering judg-
ment, said This case comes before the
court in this way : The statement of claim
was filed by Archdeacon Puddicombe
against the defendants, who are trustees of
the land occupied with St. Saviour’s parish,
Goulburn, and for reasons which are known
to most of us his Honor the primary judge
did not think he ought to hear it. It ap-
pears that he had been mixed up in the
case on a former occasion before he took
his seat on the bench, and under these cir-
cumstances, with the consent of all parties,
it was arranged that the case should come
before the Full Court as if on appeal. This is,
therefore, treated as if it were the first
hearing, and we have to determine the
case both de novo and also as if it came be-
fore us on appeal. I have listened very
attentively to the arguments on both sides,
and I have read the documents very care-
fully, in fact I have read the principal
documents paragraph by paragraph several
times. The claim is filed for the purpose
of getting a declaration from the court,
first as to the meaning of the agreement
which is set out in the claim, and if the
agreement be not such as the plaintiff con-
tends for, it is asked that then, upon the
evidence before the court, it should be set
aside altogether, or at all events, be so
amended as to bring it within the meaning
of certain documents which are in evidence.
Under these circumstances there are three
questions to be considered : first, what is
the meaning of the agreement; secondly,
it is contended that the agreement means
this : that the giving by the Archdeacon
of leave to the trustees to lease the Glebe
lands, should be dependent upon other con-
ditions of the agreement; in other words,
that the other conditions are conditions
precedent to the giving of the leases. If
we are to hold that that contention is not
according to the terms of the agreement,
then we are asked to look at the letters,
and to say that these letters show what
the real meaning of the deed was intended
to be, and then we are called upon to sub-
stitute the meaning contained in the let-
ters for the terms of the deed. Well that
last course requires very strong evidence
to bear it out. Then there is the third
ground which we have to consider. It is
said that suppose we are to hold that the
deed is valid and must be carried out
or ought to be carried out in
these terms, then it is said still further
that the defendants have not performed
their part of the contract, and consequent-
ly Mr. Puddicome is entitled to rescind the
agreement altogether and it ought to be
set aside. Taking the first question
whether the terms of this agreement show
that the conditions should be performed
before the granting of permission by the
Archdeacon, I take the terms of the deed


as set out, and this strikes one as being such as obtaining the act of Parliament*
very remarkable, for, in the very com-
mencement of the deed, all the covenants
and terms of the contract are in the pre-
sent tense. They are all declared
to be done at the same time, at
the date of the deed. Archdeacon Puddi-
combe gives his consent to the trustees to
enter upon the Glebe land at once. The
deed says “ Archdeacon Puddicombe hereby
consents to the trustees entering upon the
lands.” We are called upon, however, to
say that it does not mean that, but some-
thing else, that he shall not give his leave
at once, but that something else has to be
performed before it is given. Let us
remember one plain rule in the construc-
tion of documents of every kind, which is,
that you give to ordinary words their
ordinary meaning, and you construe them
in the ordinary sense, unless it is shown
that in some trade, profession, or calling
they have some particular meaning.
Nothing of that kind is contended for here,
but the terms are plain, clear and distinct
in themselves. We are called upon to say
that they are not plain, not distinct, and
that they mean something different to
what they say. I take the most remarkable
part of the deed: Archdeacon Puddicombe
says he “ hereby releases all claim to the
accumulated funds by the collection of in-
terest from resumption money paid by the
Government,” and he does so not only for
himself, but for his successors, and the deed
very proyerly says “ so far as he can legally
do,” so that if he had not legal power to
bind his successors he does not do so; but
so far as he himself is concerned he is sui
juris, and so there is nothing to prevent
him doing that. All the terms of the deed
are in the same way. Take another part
of the deed which is very important, and
upon which plaintiff’s counsel have relied
to strengthen their case, namely, the pro-
vision that “ the trustees shall obtain an
act of Parliament.” But they do not say
that they agree to obtain such act, but that
all parties agree by the very last clause of
the deed, that they shall do their best to
obtain an act of Parliament, or, to use the
-expression in the deed, “ to legalise by act
of Parliament the terms of the deed.” The
first thing that strikes one on reading this
deed is the plain meaning, that the things
are done at the very time that the deed is
executed, and they are not to be done in
the future. Some things are to be done,
because that cannot be done at a moment,
and it cannot be co-temporaneous with the
deed. There is one rule laid down for the
construction of documents and contracts,
and it is very commonly applied. One of
these rules referred to was applied in the
case of Spoon v. Eyre, and it is to consider
whether different things are to be done at
the same time. If you find one thing has
to be done to-day, and another the next
day, and another a month after, and another
six months afterwards, then these acts can-
not be co-temporaneous, but they amount
to what are called concurrent conditions.
You must see whether one thing depends
on the other, or whether certain things
must be done before other things can be
done. It seems tolerably clear that some
of these things are stated to be done. The
giving of the leave is said to be done.
The releasing of the rights of Mr. Puddi-
combe to the interests of the money is
stated to be done at the execution of the
deed. The deed says he “releases from
this date,” which is the date of the execu-
tion of the deed, and those are very strong
words. Are we to say that he releases
from that uncertain date of obtaining the
act of Parliament ? It is impossible to con-
strue these things in the way contended
for.
Mr. Manning : It says “ up to this date.”
Mr. Justice Faucett: It is the same thing,
Mr. Manning. These are the words I am read-
ing, “he releases up to this date” his interest
in that property. It shows at all events that
what was in the minds of the contracting
parties was, that they intended to do these
very things at the time of the execution of
the deed. These expressions show strongly
how the court ought to construe a deed of
this kind. The obtaining an act of Parlia-
ment is an event which cannot be calcu-
lated upon with anything like certainty,
though it is strongly probable that an act
of Parliament will be obtained in a case of
this kind, applied for in a proper way. This
contract must be read altogether. While
Mr. Puddicombe is content to do certain
acts at the very time of the execution of
the deed, they are not dependent on other
circumstances, or other covenants contained
in the deed. He gives permission to the
trustees to enter, and he releases his rights
to the accumulated funds. He agrees to
take JBISO a-year on getting a bond secured,
and he agrees further to take JB3OO if they


get an act of Parliament. They all seem
to have been under the impression that
they could not give .£3OO a year. I dare
say that they were right that they could
not do so without the authority of Parlia-
ment, but in my opinion there is no ground
for holding that these were conditions pre-
cedent to his giving permission to lease. I
say on the contrary, that he has given
permission to lease, and that it was in no
way dependent on their obtaining an act
of Parliament, because they all did their
best to obtain legislative sanction. I do
not think it necessary to dwell further on
the deed. I think we must construe this
deed without any reference to the letters.
We are told that we ought to construe it by
surrounding circumstances. We all know
that that principle is applied wherever
there is anything requiring explanation, as
in cases where a person agrees to sell by
the dozen in a particular trade or business,
or according to the usage of which a dozen
may be twelve or fourteen or more or less.
In such a case as that you may get evi-
dence dehors the deed to construe it and to
fix the parcels; but for the construction of
a deed like this, where we find the mean-
ing of these words is clear, it is utterly
unallowable to refer to documents of any
kind which do not form part of the deed.
If such a thing were permitted, what would
be the result ? Supposing persons, as they
often do, after negotiating lor a long time
about a certain transaction, and indulging
in a large amount of correspondence,
eventually come to distinct and clear terms
in writing, is it to be contended that we
are to be called upon to look to the anterior
correspondence for the purpose of explain-
ing the deed ? If it is, I must say that it
appears to me to be a most extravagant
proposition to put forward after all the
authorities we have had over and over
again on this point. We have had the
authority of the Privy Council and the
House of Lords, and I do not suppose there
is any higher authority to be found, and
they say that that shall not be done. We
were asked yesterday or the day before, to
look to the correspondence for the purpose
of construing the deed.
Mr. Manning : We did not contend that.
Mr. Justice Faucett: I beg your pardon;
Mr. Knox argued it at large.
Mr. Knox: I did not, your Honor. I
would not contend a thing which would be
a gross absurdity.
Mr. Justice Faucett: You certainly did
so argue, Mr. Knox, and the learned
counsel for the defendants took it upon
themselves to answer it. If you did not
intend it, that is another thing.
Mr. Salomons : It was contended in that
very case in the House of Lords.
Mr. Justice Faucett: Of course I take
Mr. Knox’s word for it ; at all events, I say
we cannot do it; but we can do it, as the
learned counsel for the plaintiff says, for
another purpose, as showing what was in-
tended by the parties when the deed was
executed. If we were justified in using the
anterior correspondence for that purpose,
the probability is that, in any case where
there has been correspondence and the
parties have been negotiating with one
another, one party would claim different
rights, or perhaps would be desirous of ex-
tending their rights to certain points, and
the other might be desirous of extending
their rights to certain points, but probably,
at last, they would come to an agreement
on a certain state of things, which would
represent concessions on both sides. How
are we to say that such a deed,as would re-
present that agreement, ought to be set
aside or remodelled according to the provi-
sions of the correspondence. It appears to
me that the correspondence can only be
looked to where there has been a clearly-
proved mistake, or some fraud, which I do
not think is charged here, or some negli-
gence, which would almost approach to
fraud, but not fraud in the ordinary sense.
Ido not see anything of the kind here. If
there were any difference between the
parties themselves, as to their being misled,
I confess that, notwithstanding the corres-
pondence put in, and Mr. Puddicombe's
evidence (and I do not wish for one moment
to say that he does not believe every word
he has uttered), I do not see one point
which would lead me to believe that the
correspondence does not bear put the agree-
ment. But there is one document which
satisfies me that we cannot actTtm this
suggestion, and that is this draft deed,
which I think was for some Weeks in pos-
session of Mr. Puddicombe, for the purpose
of construing the terms. In that document
there is writing in red ink in his own hand,
showing with what care and deliberation
he considered the terms of that deed.
There are numerous interlineations and
marginal notes, so that we cannot but come
to the conclusion that he took very great


care and deliberation, in considering the what the state of things was at the time
purport of the document; and how we can the deed was executed. The 20th sec-
*.-i-t•n i j 1 j J ~ 4-T-» a A /-»+• nn ttci i-Vi o - o A noli rl Cta OATI
come to the conclusion after that, that Mr.
Puddicombe did not know what he was
doing, but was misled or deceived, is a
thing I cannot understand. I cannot help
coming to the former conclusion, whatever
respect I may have for Mr. Puddicombe,
and as I undoubtedly am most willing to
believe every word he utters in respect to
the document, after carefully examining
the document and the letters which
preceded it, I cannot help coming
to the conclusion that there is no
ground for disturbing the deed. Further,
we have the proceedings in the meeting
when that remarkable resolution was
passed, although he says he was not pre-
sent, yet we have other resolutions which
show that the matters were considered by
him, and that they were present to his mind
at one period or another when this agree-
ment was executed. Surely in the face of
all these facts we cannot but be constrained
to come to the conclusion that he knew
what he was about. It is said that he had
not independent legal advice. Though I
do not pay any attention to what was
thrown out about his having been in a
solicitor’s office for some time, we find him
a remarkably intelligent gentleman, as we
might expect; we find him considering
these things, and we find him conversant
with the opinions of such learned counsel
as Mr. Alexander Gordon, Q.C., the late
Mr. Davies, and Mr. Charles Campbell,
and that he had that conversation
with Mr. Betts; all of which things go
to show that he was conversant with the
state of things. If any difficulty arose as
to a mere matter of form, and the plaintiff
complained of his not having counsel for
that, I would take that fact into consider-
ation, but it is not a matter of form here.
It appears to me that the very substance
of the deed is complained of, but I cannot
help coming to the conclusion that the deed
was brought about after much consideration
and with a knowledge of all the transac-
tions —I will not say with a knowledge of
his rights, because few men in his position
would have full knowledge of their rights.
However, after a careful examination of
the deed and of what the plaintiff had be-
fore him, I cannot see that we ought to
disturb the deed on that account. U nder
all the circumstances I do not see that I
am justified in referring to the act of Par-
liament, excepting with a view of showing
tion of the Act says that the Archdeacon,
who is incumbent, shall have free right to
enter the dwelling house, if there is one,
and the adjoining glebe and every part of
it, so long as he is incumbent, but he has
no property in the house or in the glebe,
and when he ceases to be incumbent, he
loses all right of property and all right of
entering, and he could not plead the right
of property if the trustees brought an ac-
tion of ejectment. I think it would be giv-
ing a very wide meaning to the terms of
the 21st section to say that they could have
given leases without the plaintiff’s leave.
Then the act gives the trustees power and
control over the surplus, beyond the .£l5O
for purposes connected witli the church ;
indeed, they have a very large power over the
surplus, so that whenever it is found by
the trustees, that the property may be in-
creased by building beyond the value of
<£lso a year, then they will give him £l5O
and no more, because it is provided that
the surplus beyond that, shall be entirely
under the control of the trustees for other
purposes. By this deed he gets exactly
what he would have got under that act. He
gets £l5O a year only, and then if the pro-
perty can be increased by building with his
consent to £5OOO a year, all that be is to get-
is £l5O, and the surplus is to go to the trus-
tees for other purposes ; that is the meaning
of thaf section as it strikes me. There may
however, be a very fair question as to the V
interest which accrued for the compensation
for the resumption of land. Some of the
lawyers who gave opinions, considered that
the incumbent was entitled to that interest,
at the same time the Railway Act provided
that whatever it was, it was placed under
the original trust as if it had never been
converted, and of course it would then be ,
subject to the clauses. Of course under
those circumstances, the consent of the in-
cumbent would have been useless because a
vis major catne in and took the land away,
so it strikes me that, as far as the compensa-
tion money was concerned, with the excep-
tion of £l5O a year, that no consent would
have been necessary, as it was taken out of
the hands of Mr. Puddicombe. If the whole
of the land had been taken, probably the
trustees would have been able to have given
Mr. Puddicombe £l5O a year; still they
would have been entitled to have applied 1
any surplus as they thought proper. How-
ever, it is not necessary to decide that; all
that is necessary to say is, that Mr. Puddi-


combe had some doubt whether Mr. Gordon chair. lam not going to say that he had no
was rieht. Mr. Betts said that Mr. Gordon right to do so, because it does appear that the
was wrong, though Mr. Betts may have had
a better opinion than Mr. Gordon. I have
no doubt that Mr. Puddicombe gave it up in
the expectation of getting that act of Parlia-
ment, and if he had contracted to have the
Act of Parliament before he gave anything
up, he would have been all right; but
unfortunately the terms of the agreement
leave him in the position in which he is. He
has depended on the intention of the trus-
tees to obtain the act of Parliament, and I
have no doubt that it is their intention to
get one. The agreement gives him what
he would have got in any case. He has
got all that there would have been if the
land had not been resumed, and he has got
all that he would be entitled to from the
interest of the resumption money, whether
he consented or not. The next point is
whether there have been any laches, delays,
or neglect on the part of the trustees to
deprive Mr. Puddicombe of any right. It
is said that their conduct has been suffi-
cient to show' that they had given up any
intention of applying for an act of T arlia-
ment. If I thought this was the case it is
quite possible I should take a different
view of this matter, and I doubt very much
whether I would not come to the conclu-
sion that the court would have the right
to stay the hand of these trustees, and pre-
vent them from carrying on this agreement
any further until they complied with the
last condition ; but, inasmuch as they used
every reasonable endeavour, and did all
they could to get an act of Parliament, it
seems to me that the circumstances are not
of that kind. Notice of intention to apply
for an act of Parliament was given almost
immediately, I think before the deed was
signed, but we are told that in consequence
of the particular business that was before
the Parliament, that there was no chance of
getting a private bill of whatever character
whatever through that session, and in proof of
that we have evidence of the period that Parlia
ment sat. I think the result of the evidence is
that there is no reason to attribute gross
negligence or laches to the defendants on this
account, and it appears to me that there is
nothing to justify the court in coming to the
conclusion that the trustees have neglected
their duty in that respect. In considering
this part of the case we must also look at
the action of Mr, Puddicombe and those
associated with him. It is said that there
was a meeting to oppose the act of Parlia-
ment and that Mr, Puddicombe took the i
bill, as originally drawn, provided for two
things, one of which was connected with the
regulations of St. Saviour’s church, and
cathedral, which would perhaps have caused
a discussion and would have led to the entire
bill being thrown out. I think that, if Mr.
Puddicombe had proposed a meeting to
oppose that bill, it would have been
different, but I do not see anything wrong in
his doing what he did. Moreover we find that
the effect of this movement was that the
trustees adopted a different form of bill. 1
do not see that there is anything to induce
me to come to the conclusion that that was
done intentionally, or in such a manner as to
warrant the assertion that they were guilty
of wrong or of laches , to justify me in saying
that they acted in such a way, as to warrant
the court restraining them from going on with
the other part of the transaction. On the
contrary, it seems to me that they are trying
to carry out the bill, and I hope that they
will do so. It is said that there was some
wire-pulling behind the scenes; I have
nothing to say with regard to that. Under
all the circumstances I am of opinion that
this appeal must be dismissed.
Mr. Justice Innes said : I concur with his
Honor in saying that this appeal should be
dismissed. I should have been glad perhaps
if we had had an opportunity of putting our
judgment into more symmetrical shape, but
as there is no probability of our having
leisure to prepare a considered judgment,
and we are unanimous, it is better that we
should give our decision at once. It seems
to me that the whole case is too clear to
admit of serious doubt. I must confess that
I fail to Bee the reason for bringing this suit.
I asked, during the argument, what was the
raison d'etre for bringing it, and could get
no answer. It seems to be admitted by the
plaintiff’s counsel that if the act of Parlia-
ment had been asked for, he would have
obtained that he has stipulated
for. There is no suggestion that anything
has been introduced into this contract which
is contrary to the matters for which he
stipulated. If he had allowed the matter
to go on, the bill would have been presented
to Parliament and disposed of one way or the
other, probably it would have passed into
law, but he has put a stop to the proceedings
for obtaining parliamentary sanction to this
very deed. There are three matters to be
considered here, the first of which is—has the
plaintiff been misled into the execution of
the deed of the sth December, 1883 ? Part of


the argument was that he has been, and the necessity for the trustees receiving
therefore the deed should not stand. With legal sanction, which may mean the opinion
regard to this branch of the case we have
a perfect right to look at all the antecedent
circumstances, not only the correspondence,
but the proceedings of the meetings also.
This is not a case in which the court has to
construe an agreement which the plaintiff
says he has been misled into signing. He
does not say that he did not understand it or
that he was led into it by misrepresentation.
There is no suggestion of mistake that I can
see. It is conceded by the plaintiff’s counsel
that the construction they put upon the deed
carries into effect what was intended. There
was no undue haste in carrying out this
agreement because we know that for two or
three years before its execution the matter
had been exercising the anxious thought of
the Archdeacon on one side and the trustees
on the other. There is no necessity to go
through this correspondence, extending as
it does over such a lengthened period. I
concur with his Honor in what he says
about the plaintiff having no independent
legal advice. It is not to be contended
that because a party has no lawyer that he
is to be released from the effect of his deed
especially when that party, like the plain-
tiff in this case, is of a high degree of in-
telligence, clear-headed, possessed of full
ability to look after his own interests in
the ordinary affairs of life, and is really
conversant with all the legal bearings of
the case. There was therefore every oppor-
tunity for the plaintiff to obtain legal as-
sistance if he chose. I suppose he had per-
fect confidence in the solicitors for the
other side as they had no private interest
to subserve. So far as the opinion of Mr.
Campbell, the chancellor, is concerned, he
is a gentleman of great acquaintance with
ecclesiastical matters, and Mr. Gordon was
the chancellor of the Metropolitan Diocese.
Then Mr. Davis was a gentleman of emin-
ence in his profession. The plaintiff had
well-founded confidence in these gentle-
men, both as regards their integrity and
learning, especially as they were associated
with him in carrying out a high trust of
considerable importance, and in one sense
a public concern. The negotiations were
conducted by the plaintiff, there was no
want of disclosure, and the whole matter
was considered with him in the fullest
possible manner. The letter of March
12th, 1885, shows that he had a week to
think over the proposal, and that he had
well appreciated and fully comprehended
of the court, or what is afterwards in the
agreement aptly called legislative sanction,
by extending their powers. It seems to me
that where opinions of a different charac-
ter have been obtained with regard to the
interest derivable from the compensation
money, some doubt must have been sug-
gested to the plaintiff's mind as to whether
the incumbent of St. Saviour’s would be
entitled to any surplus receipts from that
sum, whatever it might amount to, over
and above the <£lso per annum. If these
opinions did mean that he was entitled
to the whole sum, whatever it might be, I
feel bound to say that I do not agree with
them, but rather with the doubt expressed
in the plaintiff’s letter. We do not know
whether the approval of the Bishop was
obtained to that proposed arrangement or
not. That arrangement was not carried
out, but it is clear for reasons given by his
Honor, in which I entirely concur, that the
abandonment of that second stipulation, if
it was abandoned, was with the perfect
assent and full knowledge of the plaintiff.
I doubt very much if his rights are affected
by it. If it refers to the surplus over
and above the <£lso, of course that has
not been insisted upon, because the
agreement which was the result of
that gets rid of it. I have only dwelt on
the letter of March 12th, but the whole
correspondence shows that the plaintiff was
perfectly well able to take care of himself,
and that his interests would not have been
one whit better conserved if he had the
whole bar of Sydney at his elbow. I do not
know how long the plaintiff had the draft
agreement in his possession, but it was
ample and abundant to enable him to
study and understand the whole of its pur-
port ; in fact, the draft itself bears intrin-
sic evidence that such was the case. It
seems to me to be an experiment on the
credulity of the Court to say that the
Archdeacon was ignorant of his rights, or
that he was prejudiced by not having in-
dependent legal advice, or that he was
misled or overreached. The ,£lOO he had
given to an assistant clergyman—-the Rev,
Canon Soares—was a thing which seemed
to have influenced his mind, and no doubt
it was a right and proper thing that he
should have been reimbursed that money,
but the trustees had not the power, ac a
cording to the view that I take, to pay it
to him out of the funds over which they


had disposal, though they could have done could the incumbent have claimed the whole
so out of their private purses, or the synod
or some other body might have reimbursed
him, seeing that the expenditure was one
which had been incurred in the best in-
terests of the parish. That was one of the
alterations made in the course of the
negotiations, for the plaintiff very properly
saw the justice of excluding that from the
terms. I am of opinion that there are no
circumstances antecedent to the execution
of this deed to justify the court in setting
the document aside. We do not want the
high authority of the House of Lords, and
the very clear exposition of the law given
by Lord Justice Blackburn, to show that
in the construction of a document of this
sort we must not look at the antecedent
conditions or the doubts that the parties had
before they came to an agreement. I should
have thought that that was mere elemen-
tary reading. You may look at preceding
correspondence to ascertain the meaning of
a particular word, but there is no difficulty
in the construction of this document. It
seems to me that if any document was easy
to understand it is this one. In heading
after heading, and paragraph after para-
graph, apt terms are used, the present tense
is adopted where things are to be taken as
done, and the future where anything has
to be done, so that I cannot understand
anyone, much less a person of the Arch-
deacon’s high intelligence, making any
mistake as to the meaning of the whole
deed. The other consideration is, whether
there is evidence to satisfy the court that
the defendants have so far broken their
contract as to justify its rescission. I
do not see any such evidence. The
defendants have explained the delay and
how the matter is still going on. It is
necessary to examine very closely the bear-
ing of the Bth William IY No. 5 secs. 20 and
21, and I must say that the result of my
examination of that Act is, that there can be
no ground for saying that the incumbent for
the time being, would be entitled to more
than £l5O per annum. As I suggested the
other day, if the income had been £2500
of it ? Perhaps the attention of Mr Campbell
and Mr Gordon was not directed to this view
of this case. Looking at these two s°ctions
together, I am of opinion that the position of
the money paid by way of compensation is
just the same as if the property had remained
in land. Ido not think that the Archdeacon
has parted with any of his rights in any way,
nor do I think that there was any effort to
make him do so. He would get an addition,
al and substantial advantage by having the
arrangement carried out, because he would
thereby have a secure tenure worth £3OO
instead of £l5O, though of course his stipend
might be reduced from other sources to some
extent. I must express my regret that the
suit had been brought at all. It may be that
there are some matters behind with which we
have nothing to do ; perhaps the striking out
of the ordinance which was said to conserve
the incumbent’s interests, by the synod, may
have had something to do with it. I quite
agree with his Honor in saying that no blame
can be attached to the plaintiff for having
opposed a bill which contained an obnoxious
provision, but I cannot understand why that
opposition was continued after the objection-
able matter was withdrawn. I also concur
with his Honor that this appeal should be
dismissed.
Mr. Justice Deffell said : I concur in the
opinions of my brother judges. I merely
wish to make the observation that if the
plaintiff had sent in a petition to Parliament
after the 28th August, 1884, so that the bill
might have been dealt with at its next meet-
ing, everything might have been settled
months and months ago.
Mr. Justice Faucett: The appeal is dis-
missed with costs. We took it formerly as
an appeal, but it really is only a hearing.
Mr. Manning : There should be no costs
below, as we had tq go there to get here.
Mr. Justice Faucett : It does not alter the
expense. We must not give any costs to
defendant Eossi, but if he had happened to
be sole trustee he would have found himself
to be in a very awkward position. The costs
of the defendants, other than the defendant
Eossi, must be paid by the plaintiff.






•‘-1*
