

The Accession
Oath,
OR.....
Protestant
Declaration.
BY
REV. DIGBY M. BERRY, M.A.
PRICE THREEPENCE,


The Accession
Oath,
OR.....
Protestant
Declaration.
BY
REV. DIGBY M. BERRY, M.A.
PRICE THREEPENCE.


THE
Coronation Oath and Protestant
Declaration.
[Revised by the Author.]
Let me begin by setting before you two scenes from English
history, separated from one another by an interval of exactly 500
years. Just 500 years ago, on the 24th of February, 140 L a
memorable scene occurred in old St. Paul’s Cathedral, London.
It was the first year of the reign of Henry IV., and he had
signalised it by sanctioning the Act “ De Heretico Comburendo
(“on the duty of burning a heretic”). A few days after the
passing of the Act a heretic was arrested, one William Sautre,
priest of the parish of St. Osyth, London, and the 24th of
February was the last day of his trial. On the Episcopal throne
in the Cathedral sat Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, and on
his right and left sat the Bishops of London, Lincoln, Hereford,
Exeter, St. David’s, and Rochester. The prisoner was charged
with being an obstinate heretic as to the doctrine of transubstan-
tiation and the sacrifice of the Mass. He was required by the
Archbishop to express his assent to the following statement:
“ That, after consecration, the substance of the bread and
wine no longer remained, but was converted into the substance
of the body and blood of Christ, which were as really and truly in
their oroper substance and nature in the Sacrament as they were
in the" womb of the Virgin Mary, as they hung upon the cross, as
they lay in the grave, and as they ascended into heaven.”
After a three hours’ examination on the subject of sacramental
bread, which Sautre declared to be “ after consecration the same
bread as before,” he was condemned, and then, under the Act
“ De Heretico Comburendo,” he was sentenced to be burned alive
“to the great horror of his offence, and the manifest example of
other Christians.”
This is the first example in English history of a man being
burnt at the stake for his religion. This horrible law was the
cause of many other similar burnings during the ensuing century
and a half.
And in the burning of Lollards in the fifteenth century and
of Protestants in the sixteenth the doctrine of the Mass was


always the principal, or at least a principal, cause of condemnation.
In the parish of Clerkenwell, London, there is a church called the
Martyrs’ Memorial Church, containing the monuments of sixty-six
persons who were burned at Smithfield. In each case the charge
on which the martyr was condemned is stated, and I doubt if there
is one in which the denial of Transubstantiation is not prominent.
We are requested to refrain from calling the Mass “superstitious
and idolatrous.” Suppose we preferred to call it “ sanguinary ”
instead; there would be ample evidence from English history to
support this epithet.
THE SECOND SCENE
is in marked contrast with the above. It took place scarcely more
than three months ago, on the 14th of February, 1901, the first
year of King Edward VIE, and at the opening of his first
Parliament. It is in the gilded chamber of the House of Lords,
where the peers of the realm are assembled in their robes of state.
The King and Queen enter hand-in-hand, bowing right and left to
the peers, who bow much lower to their Majesties. The King and
Queen, having sat down on their thrones, the Lord Chancellor
approaches, kneels to the King, hands him a copy of the New
Testament, and then proceeds to read a formula which the King
repeats after him. It is as follows :
“ I, Edward, do solemnly and sincerely, in the presence of
God, profess, testify, and declare that I do believe that in the
Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper there is not any Transubstantia-
tion of the Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood
of Christ, at or after the consecration thereof by any person what-
soever ; and that the Invocation of the Virgin Mary or any other
Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass as they are now used in the
Church of Rome, are superstitious and idolatrous. And I do
solemnly, in the presence of God, confess, testily and declare, that
I do make this declaration and every part thereof in the plain and
ordinary sense of the words read unto me, as they are commonly
understood by English Protestants, without any evasion, equivocation,
or mental reservation whatsoever, and without any dispensation
already granted me for this purpose by the Pope, or any other
authority or person whatsoever, or without any hope of any such
dispensation from any person or authority whatsoever, or without
thinking that I am or can be acquitted before God or man, or ab-
solved of this declaration or any part thereof, although the Pope or
any other person or persons or power whatsoever should dispense
with or annul the same or declare that it was null and void from
the beginning.”
While observing the contrast between this scene and the
former, we remark also that there is something in common between
them. In both the doctrine of the Sacrament has a conspicuous
place, and seems to have a mysterious importance in connection
with the Throne of England. What that importance and that
connection is, we shall see more clearly as we go on. I shall
reserve till the concluding portion of this lecture, any notice of the
objections that have been made against this Declaration of King


Edward VIL, and will proceed now to explain what were its
ORIGIN AND INTENTION.
It was drawn up about 230 years ago, namely, in the thirteenth
year of Charles 11., and was not originally intended to be used by
the King. It was to be used by members of Parliament and
officers of the Government. The Parliament of Charles 11. had its
own reasons, as we shall see later on, for wishing to exclude
Romanists from among the advisers of the King. They
therefore, in 1673, passed the Test Act, which required all holders
of office under Government to make this Declaration. It was
carefully drawn up with one single object in view, namely, so to
word it, that it should be impossible for any Romanist to
assent to it. This was by no means an easy thing to secure,
because by this time the Jesuits had been at work about a hundred
years in England, and had effectually taught the arts of “Evasion,
Equivocation, and Mental Reservation.” Hence the allusion to
these things in the formulary.
The Parliament of 1673 considered that the best way to make
sure that a particular official was not a Romanist would be
to make him protest against one or two leading features of
Romanism.
You will see then that the purpose of this Declaration was
purely political. It was not intended as an insult to anyone’s
religion, but merely to ascertain that the individual officer was not
himself of a particular religion, namely, the Romanist. And
one of the first effects of this Declaration was to reveal to the
English people that James, Duke of York (afterwards James II.),
had joined the Church of Rome. Being at the time Lord High
Admiral of the Fleet, and refusing this test, he had to resign his
office.
About fifteen years later, the English people had arrived at
the solemn determination never again to have a Romanist King
or Queen. And as the best method of securing this end, this
Declaration was adopted and prescribed to be made by the
Sovereign either at his coronation or at his first Parliament,
whichever came first. The Act which ordered this, called the Bill
of Rights, was passed in 1688, the first year of William and Mary,
and its provisions were embodied in the Act of Settlement twelve
years afterwards.
And why then were the English people, in 1688, so firmly
resolved that a Romanist should never again sit on the throne
of Great Britain ?
The answer will be found in the Ninth Clause of the Bill of
Rights:—
“Whereas it hath been found by experience that it is
inconsistent with the safety and welfare of this Protestant kingdom
to be governed by a Papist Prince, or by any King or Queen
marrying a Papist, etc., etc.”
“ IT HATH BEEN FOUND BY EXPERIENCE.”
These words are the text of my discourse this evening. I must
occupy most of our time by endeavouring to show you what that
“ experience ” was. It was an experience of a hundred and fifty


years, covering the latter half of the sixteenth century and almost
the whole of the seventeenth. It covers six reigns—namely, those
of Mary, Elizabeth, James 1., Charles L, Charles 11. and James 11.
It will be necessary for us briefly to review this “experience.”
THE PROTESTANT REFORMATION,
which began in the reign of Edward VI., was abruptly stopped by
the accession of Mary. The Reformation was a great movement,
but sometimes great movements are made by means of an ap-
parently small instrument.
When the pointsman on the railway wants to move a train on
to another line of rails, he pulls an iron lever, and the thing is done.
Now the lever which made the mighty movement of the English
Reformation was the Doctrine of the Sacrament of Holy Com-
munion.
When Cranmer abolished the Mass, and restored the simple
Scriptural doctrine and ritual of the Lord’s Supper, he pulled a
lever which moved England on to a different line of rails. Other
countries, such as Spain, continued to run on the Roman line until
they came to where Spain is at present, very decidedly on the
down grade. England went forward on the Protestant line and
came to where the British Empire is now.
And why should a true or false view of the Sacrament be so
powerful a lever to turn a nation right or wrong ?
Let me endeavour in a few words to indicate to you the
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FAITH AND SUPERSTITION
in the matter of the Sacrament. An illustration may help us.
We all know what it means when a young girl wears an engage-
ment ring. That ring is an outward and visible sign of something
that is not visible. It is a witness to her that someone loves her;
that she belongs to him and he belongs to her. It is the promise
of a closer union in the future. It tells her that he is coming to
claim her, and take her to himself. A wonderful thing it is that a
ring should be all that, and tell all that. And yet there is nothing
wonderful in the ring itself. Not what the ring is, but what it
signifies, what it pledges, what it conveys, is the important matter.
Now what the engagement ring is to the betrothed maiden,
that the Sacrament is to the Christian. For the Christian life is a
betrothal of the Christian to Christ, and the Sacrament is an out-
ward and visible sign of that betrothal. It is a pledge to us from
Him who loved us and gave Himself for us. It witnesses to us
that we are His and He is ours. It is the promise of an everlasting
marriage union with Him. And yet the Sacrament itself is the
simplest thing possible—a mere “breaking of bread,” as it is
generally called in the New Testament, Not what the Sacrament
is, but what it signifies, and pledges, and conveys, is the secret of
its value.
Now can you imagine a young girl being so foolish and so
faithless as to become more devoted to her ring than to him who
gave it to her? She does not write to him ; she does not read his
letters to her, but she tries to make up fcr this neglect by exag-
gerated devotion to the ring. She studs it with so many imitation


jewels that it is no longer recognisable as the ring he gave. She
even fancies that there is a mysterious presence in the ring, and
that its gold is no longer gold but transubstantiated—but we
cannot continue the illustration; it is impossible to imagine such
folly and faithlessness. It is only in matters of religion that
men are guilty of such monstrous absurdities.
And this was the kind of error concerning the Sacrament that
the Reformation purged away. It taught men no longer to fix
their attention upon a priest working a mysterious miracle upon a
supposed altar, but to fix their attention on Christ accomplishing
the work of our Redemption on Calvary, and giving us a simple
and transparent token and pledge of this inestimable benefit.
But by the
ACCESSION OF MARY
the Reformation was arrested and forced back during the
five years of her reign, And those of her subjects who refused
to accept the superstitious perversion of the Sacrament were liable
to death by burning under the Act, “ De Heretico Comburendo,”
and 288 of them (according to the estimate of Strype’s Annals)
suffered that death. They were not accused of treason or any
other crime (except in the case of Cranmer and possibly one or two
others); they were burnt as heretics, because they would not
accept the noctrines connected with the Mass. They would not
accept these doctrines because they considered them “superstitious
and idolatrous.” For the past two hundred years our kings have
expressly upheld the opinion of our Reformation martyrs. But
now we are asked to discontinue the practice. Let us not give
our answer without due consideration.
Who was mainly responsible for the burning of the Protes-
tants ? Was it Mary herself, who was what her religion made
her? Was it her cousin, Cardinal Pole, who came over as the
Pope’s representative to receive the submission of the English
people ? Or was it her husband, Philip 11., of Spain, who was
head of the Catholic League, the object of which was to recover
dor the Popes the authority that they had lost by the Reforma-
tion ?
It matters little to us which of the three was most responsible.
The short reign of Mary was red with the blood of her subjects,
and for no crime of theirs but their religion. And bad as was the
state of England in Mary’s reign, the state of the Continent
generally during great part of the sixteenth century was far worse.
In France there were more Protestant martyrs than in England.
In Spain the decrees of the Council of Trent were enforced by the
Inquisition with such rigour that the beginnings of a Reformation
were quenched in blood. The same thing took place in Italy. In
the Netherlands, Alva, the Spanish Viceroy, with his Council of
Blood, sentenced to death 18,000 persons, before the Dutch rose in
revolt and won their independence. Alva’s administration, by the
way, was highly commended by the Pope. And there were in addi-
tion civil wars from the same cause. I may mention, in passing, the
case of John Frederick, Elector of Saxony, who, when made
prisoner by the Emperor Charles V., was offered the choice of


giving up the Protestant faith or giving up his kingdom, and lie
nobly chose to keep the faith and give up the kingdom. In
consequence, he returned to his private estate of Coburg, and 300-
years afterwards one of his descendants, Albert of Saxe-Coburg,
became the husband of Queen Victoria, and father of our present
King.
It should never be forgotten that England, all through the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, was only on the edge of the
European storm. English Protestants all through this period not
only experienced troubles and dangers in their own country, but
were continually threatened with far worse calamities, which were
devastating the Continent. If their fear and hatred of Romanism
seems to us at all exaggerated, we must remember that they were
witnesses of what Romanism was doing in France, in the Nether-
lands, in Germany, in Italy, in Spain, and that they had good
reason to dread like things for themselves. And in order to under-
stand the history either of England or of the Continent, we must
know something of the history of the Jesuit Order.
When a business is in danger of failing, it may sometimes be
revived by admitting a new partner with new capital and new
methods of enterprise. In the year 1540 the Papal business, which
had suffered heavy losses through the Reformation, took into
partnership the newly-founded Order of the Jesuits, and almost
ever since that order has been the mainstay of the Papacy. It is
so, more than ever, at the present moment. Founded for the
express purpose of making the Papal system supreme throughout
the world, the Jesuits have pursued that object with heroic devotion
and courage, but with a moral unscrupulousness which has made their
name a by-word to all time. None have more severely condemned
their ways than Romanists themselves. I doubt if there is a
Roman Catholic State in Europe from which they have not been
expelled. In 1773 P°P e Clement XIV., yielding to the protests of
the Governments of France, Spain, Portugal, Naples and Parma,
abolished the Order ; but in 1814, in the reaction after the French
Revolution, it was restored by Pius VII.; and now it has so
impressed its character upon the whole Romanist system that the
two are practically but one.
In the first delivery of this lecture I read, on the authority of
the London Standard , a form of oath said to be administered to
Jesuits. Two days later a letter was published in the Argus and
Age, from the pen of an English Jesuit, stating that the alleged oath
was a clumsy forgery, and that it first appeared in Germany in 1891.
This latter statement is certainly a mistake, because this very form
of oath was published nearly forty years earlier than 1891 —namely*,
in 1853 —in a magazine called The Protestant , which claims to have
copied it from a collection of papers by Archbishop Ussher, who, as
you know, was contemporary with Charles I. In Ussher’s collection
it is headed “ The Oath of Secrecy devised the Roman Catholic
Clergy, as it remaineth on record at Paris, among the Society of
Jesus.” Usher was an eminent scholar and controversialist, and is
not likely to have been imposed on by a forgery. There is con-
siderable presumption therefore that this formulary is genuine, and
as it agrees most accurately with the part that the Jesuits have


always taken in European history, I give it again for what it is
worth:—-
“I, A. 8., now in the presence of Almighty God, the blessed
Virgin Mary, the blessed Michael the Archangel, the blessed St.
John Baptist, the Holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, and the
Saints and Sacred Host of Heaven, and to you my ghostly father, do
declare from my heart, without mental reservation, that his holiness
Pope Urban is Christ’s vicar-general, and is the true and only head
of the Catholic or Universal Church throughout the earth, and
that by virtue of the keys of binding and loosing given to his holiness
by my Saviour Jesus Christ, he hath power to depose heretical kings,
princes, states, commonwealths and governments, all being illegal
without his sacred confirmation, and that they may safely be
destroyed ; therefore to the utmost of my power I shall and will
defend this doctrine, and his holiness’ rights and customs against all
usurpers of the heretical (or Protestant) authority whatsoever,
especially against the now pretended authority and Church of
England, and all adherents, in regard that they and she be usurpal
and heretical, opposing the sacred mother Church of Rome. I do
renounce and disown any allegiance as due to any heretical king,
prince or state, named Protestants, or obedience to any of their
inferior magistrates or officers. I do further declare that the doctrine
of the Church of England, of the Calvinists, Huguenots, and of other
of the name of Protestants, to be damnable, and they themselves are
damned and to be damned, that will not forsake the same. Ido
further declare that I will help, assist and advise all or any of his
holiness’ agents in any place, wherever I shall be in England, Scot-
land, and Ireland, or in any other territory or kingdom I shall come
to, and do my utmost to extirpate the heretical Protestants’ doctrine,
and to destroy all their pretended powers, regal or otherwise. Ido
further promise and declare, that notwithstanding I am dispensed
with to assume any religion heretical for the propagating of the
mother Church’s interest, to keep secret and private all her agents’
counsels from time to time as they intrust me, and not to divulge
directly or indirectly, by word, writing or circumstance, whatsoever;
but to execute all what shall be proposed, given in charge, or dis-
covered unto me by you, my ghostly father, or by any of this sacred
convent. All which I, A. 8., do swear by the blessed Trinity, and
blessed Sacrament, which I now am to receive, to perform, and
on my part to keep inviolably : and do call all the heavenly and
glorious host of heaven to witness these my real intentions to keep
this my oath. In testimony hereof, I take this most holy and blessed
sacrament of the Eucharist ; and witness the same further with my
hand and seal in the face of this holy convent this day of
An. Dom. etc.”
For a very similar Oath, with details of names, place, and date,
printed by order of the House of Commons 1580, see Harleian
Miscellany, vol. 7, p. 285.
But to return to our historical sketch. The five years of Mary
were succeeded by the forty-five years of
Elizabeth’s reign.
At her accession Elizabeth earnestly desired to conciliate her
Roman Catholic subjects, and to avoid a rupture with the Roman


Catholic powers of Europe, and accordingly by her ambassador at
Rome she respectfully notified the Pope, Paul IV,, of her accession.
In reply, he told her that England was a fief of the Holy See
(in plain English, that England belonged to Rome); that she could
not succeed to the throne, having been declared illegitimate by his
predecessors ; and he therefore required her to abdicate and submit
to hig decision.
Are we surprised that Paul IV, should adopt this tone towards
the Queen of England ? But the statements of a Bull published
by the same Pope in the same year are still more startling, and are
thus summarised by a German historian :
“i. The Pope, who, as Pontifex Maximus, is the repre-
sentative of God on earth, has, in the plenitude of his power, entire
dominion over peoples and kingdoms; he directs all, but cannot
himself be directed by anyone in this world.
“2. All princes and monarchy as well as all bishops, as soon
as they have degenerated into heresy or schism from the Church are
irrevocably deposed, deprived of all sovereign rights for ever, and
have incurred the penalty of death without any judicial formality
being required. In case of penitential conversion they shall be
immured in a cloister in order that they may make atonement for
life on bread and water.”
This Bull, entitled “ Cum ex Apostolatus Officio," was drawn up
by Laynez, General of the Jesuit Order, and will be found in the
Bullarium Romanum , year 1558. The above summary is from
Griesinger’s History of the Jesuits , p. 749.
Can we wonder if, in Elizabeth’s reign, it was made treason
to publish any of the Pope’s “ Bulls” (i.e. Bills) in England ?
But there was no very serious trouble for the first ten years.
Then in 1569 a formidable rebellion broke out in the North of
England, the object of which was to compel Elizabeth to alter her
Protestant policy, and to nominate Mary Queen of Scots as her
successor, Mary being the agent of the Catholic league in England.
In 1570 Pope Pius V. solemnly cursed Elizabeth, and absolved
her subjects from their allegiance. Here are some of the words of
that notable utterance :
THE POPE’S CURSE.
“ We do, out of the fulness of our apostolic power, declare
the said Elizabeth, being heretic, to have incurred the sentence of
anathema, and be cut off from the unity of the Body of Christ,
“And moreover we do declare her to be deprived of her
pretended title to the kingdom aforesaid (of England), and of all
dominion, dignity, and privilege whatsoever.
“And also the nobility, subjects, and people of the said
kingdom, and all others who have in any manner sworn to her,
to be for ever absolved from any such oath, and all kind of duty,
fidelity, and obedience, as we do deprive the same Elizabeth of
her pretended title to the kingdom. And we do command and
interdict all and every the nobility, subjects, and people, and
others aforesaid, that they presume not to obey her, or her
monitions, mandates, and laws ; and those who do the contrary we


do involve in the same sentence of anathema.” (See Bullarium
Romanum , 1570.)
In the next year occurred the Ridolphi plot, according to
which the Duke of Norfolk was to marry Mary Queen of Scots
and raise the standard of rebellion. At the same time Ridolphi,
an Italian, was to seize Elizabeth and her Council at one of her
country palaces, and simultaneously a Spanish army was to land
in England, and Mary was to be placed on the throne. To this
plot the Pope gave his approval when Ridolphi was sent to him as
the messenger of Mary and of the Duke of Norfolk.
And about the same time Seminary Priests began to pour
into England to the number of about three hundred for the
purpose of converting the country to Romanism. The Pope himself
had founded a Seminary at Rome and put it under the charge of
Jesuits, and from this college came Parsons and Campion and
other Jesuit missionaries into England.
And in consequence of the Pope’s curse, and in consequence
of the preaching of Seminary Priests and Jesuits, so numerous did
the plots against the life of the Queen become, that an association
of English gentlemen was formed to protect her from assassination
or to avenge her if assassinated ; and this association was
formally recognised by Parliament.
Under these circumstances can we wonder that the indignation
of the country was aroused ? Can we wonder that the severest
penal laws were made against the Jesuit missionaries and their
converts? The Parliament of 1581 made it treason to attempt
the conversion of an English subjedl to Romanism. The executions
were numerous and barbarous. We must not palliate or defend
the atrocious cruelty of some of them. Parry and Babington, and
Savage and Ballard, convicted of plotting to assassinate the Queen,
were disembowelled while alive. According to a Roman Catholic
estimate two hundred and sixty persons were put to death
under these laws. It is deplorable, but can we, in fairness,
call it religious persecution ? Can we class these deaths with the
two hundred and eighty-eight burnings in Mary’s reign ? Under
Mary, two hundred and eighty-eight persons were burned for no
crime but heresy. Under Elizabeth, two hundred and sixty per-
sons were put to death not for heresy but for treason, for being
implicated in plots of assassination and of foreign conquest. The
Roman Catholics of England complained to the Pope that the
Jesuits were the cause of their sufferings, the ceaseless plots of the
Jesuits being the cause of the penal laws passed against them.
The writer of English history in the Encyclopedia Britannica says,
“ Many Catholics were put to death, but any one of them might
have saved his life by explicitly denying the Pope’s right to depose
the Queen.”
Let me not be misunderstood. lam not denying that Protes-
tants have persecuted. The great principle of liberty of conscience
was not clear to their minds until somewhat later than the sixteenth
century. It was an effect of Reformation principles, but not an
immediate effect.
The fadt is, through most of this reign England was fight in
for its Protestantism and for its national existence at the same time.


The question was, who was to rule in England, the Queen or the
Pope ? The party in France which tried to raise Mary Queen of
Scots to the throne of England was also the party which per-
petrated the massacre of St. Bartholomew in 1572, and in England
the St. Bartholomew massacre was generally regarded as part of a
plot for extirpating Protestantism everywhere.
THE SPANISH ARMADA.
Then there was the looming danger'of an invasion from Spain.
At last it came —the Invincible Armada—in 1588. And then the
God who rules the winds and waves protected us from the greatest
national danger that our country has ever passed through.
Elizabeth was the first Protestant sovereign of our country,
and during the forty-five years of her reign England rose from
being a comparatively feeble state to be one of the great powers of
the world. The first beginnings of our Colonial Empire were seen
in this reign, the East India Company in one continent, and the
colony of Virginia in another, being among the earliest growths.
F rom the time of the defeat of the Armada, England began to take
the place of Spain as the great maritime power of the world.
Better still, the intellectual life of the nation began to flourish::
Shakespeare wrote his unrivalled works ; Bacon laid the foundation
of modern science ; and, best of all, national worship of God in the
native tongue was established, and the English Bible freely
circulated.
Well might Englishmen begin to think that it was better for
the safety and welfare of the kingdom to have a Protestant
sovereign.
THE STUART DYNASTY.
We pass on now to the seventeenth century. The united
reigns of James I. and Charles I. covered about the same length of
time as that of Elizabeth, namely, nearly half a century, and during
the greater part of that half-century Germany was devastated by
the Thirty Years’ War. This dreadful civil war was caused by
the efforts of the Emperor Ferdinand 11., a pupil of the
Jesuits, to force the reformed states of Germany back into
Romanism. It took Germany nearly two centuries to recover from
the effects of this war. These things must be remembered when
we consider the attitude of Englishmen at this time towards their
kings, especially towards Charles I. It was only natural that
Englishmen should be suspicious of those who seemed to sympa-
thise with the Romanists on the Continent, and they had at least
some reason for being suspicious of their King, and of his minister,
Strafford, and of his primate, Laud. .
Consider for a moment the experience of an Englishman in
the position of Oliver Cromwell. When Oliver Cromwell was a
little boy all England was horrified by the Gunpowder Plot, that
diabolical attempt to annihilate the king and the legislature of the
country at one blow. As he grew up he would hear of the horrors
of the Thirty Years’ War, and the danger of similar horrors in his
own country. At one time of his life he purposed, it is said, to
leave his country and take service under the Protestant leader.


Gustavus Adolphus. At another time he thought of going, with
so many of his countrymen, to America, for “ freedom to worship
God.”
Then in 1641 occurred the horror of the Irish massacre. The
Irish Romanists rose in rebellion to help King Charles, so
they said, who was just beginning the war with his Parliament,
They called themselves “ The United Catholics,” and declared
their intention of restoring “the Catholic Roman Religion.” And
how did these Irish Romanists help the King ? By
massacring 30,000 of their Protestant neighbours. They boasted
of having killed 100,000 of them, but Mr. J. A. Froude, who care-
fully examined the records of the event preserved in Dublin, gives
30,000 as the most likely figure.
Think of this, you who denounce Cromwell for his cruelties in
Ireland. Have you reflected on the dangerous character of the
people he had to control? Have you reflected on the terrible
dangers which he saw menacing England through Ireland ? At
any rate, to call it religious persecution is an abuse of language.
If Cromwell’s suppression of the Irish rebellion was religious
persecution, then the suppression of the Indian Mutiny, the
suppression of the Paris Commune, and the punishment of Boer
outrages in Soutli Africa, must be classed as religious persecution.
THE RESTORATION,
Well, the administration of Cromwell was followed by a re-
action of loyalty to the throne. And the Puritans joined in the
invitation to Charles 11. to return and reign in England, fondly
hoping that he would be faithful to his solemn promise to make
concessions which might keep the Puritans within the fold of the
national Church of England. But they were bitterly disappointed.
He had not been back two years when he sanctioned the Act of Uni-
formity, which successfully accomplished what it was intended to
accomplish, the expulsion of two thousand of the English clergy,
some of then, like Richard Baxter, among the best and holiest men
in England.
Charles H.’s reign of twenty-five years was inglorious
and disastrous. During part of his reign he was in the pay of the
French king, Louis XIV., who was now the leader of the
Homanist party in Europe. Here, again, we can only understand
English history by remembering that England was on the edge of
a European storm.
Louis XIV. was the great French monarch who tried to con-
vert the Protestants in his kingdom by turning loose regiments of
dragoons among them with licence to do anything short of killing
them. By thus making war on the most industrious and pro-
gressive of his own subjects, Louis ruined the prosperity of his
country, and prepared the way for the French Revolution.
From this monarch the king of England accepted a pension of
a year to enable him to rule without a Parliament. All
through his reign Charles was suspected of having secretly become
a Romanist, and on his death-bed in 1685 the fact of his
having done so was no longer possible to conceal.


JAMES 11.
Charles 11. was succeeded by his brother James 11., who was
already known to have become a Romanist. His conversion
to the Church of Rome was found out in 1673 by his refusing to
make that Protestant Declaration which is the subject of our
lecture this evening ; nevertheless he solemnly promised to main-
tain the Constitution in Church and State as established by law;
and the people trusted him. “We have the word of a king,”
they said, “ who has never been known to break his word.”
But they were bitterly disappointed. James was a tool of the
Jesuits and a vassal of the King of France. In a reign of only
four years he contrived to commit a larger number of cruel, dis-
graceful, and stupid acts of tyranny than perhaps any English king
has been guilty of.
To save time I will follow Bishop Ryle (“ Fadts and Men ”)
by selecting six of these actions for comment.
(l) NONCONFORMISTS.
His infamous persecution of Nonconformists in England and
Scotland : The mock trial of the saintly Richard Baxter by the
infamous Judge Jeffreys ; and the drowning of Margaret
Maclachlan and Margaret Wilson in the Solway Frith, are
notorious examples of this practice.
(2) monmouth’s rebellion.
The detestable cruelty with which he punished those English
counties which had taken any part in Monmouth’s rebellion. At
Taunton alone, a small town in Somersetshire, Colonel Kirke is
said to have hanged at least a hundred so-called rebels within a
week of the battle of Sedgmoor.
But the cruelties of Kirke were far surpassed by the diabolical
sentences of Jeffreys, in what was called the Bloody Assize, in
Hampshire, Dorset, and Somerset.
“ In Somersetshire,” says Macaulay, “on the green of every
large village which had furnished Monmouth with soldiers, ironed
corpses clattering in the wind or human heads and quarters stuck on
poles poisoned the air, and made the traveller sick with horror. In
many parishes the peasantry could not even assemble in God’s
house without seeing the ghastly face of some neighbour’s skull
grinning at them on the porch.”
In Hampshire, the Lady Lisle, aged seventy, was sentenced
to be burnt alive for the crime of having sheltered an insurgent,
but through the intercession of influential people her sentence was
commuted, and she was beheaded in Winchester market-place.
A woman named Gaunt actually was burnt alive in London for a
similar offence.
Hallam says (iii. 93) that the King was the author of all this
bloodshed, and that Jeffreys afterwards declared “ he had not been
bloody enough for his employer.”
Certain it is that Jeffreys was immediately raised to the
Peerage and made Lord Chancellor of England.
THE CLERGY.
His attempt to gag the pulpit, and stop the mouths of all who
preached against Popery,


Macaulay says (ii. gi): “He took on himself to charge the
clergy of the Established Church to abstain from touching on
controverted points of doctrine in their discourses. Thus, while
sermons in defence of the Roman Catholic religion were preached
every Sunday and holiday in the Royal Chapel, the Church of the
State, the Church of the great majority of the nation, was forbidden
to explain and vindicate her own principles.”
William Sherlock, Master of the Temple, John Sharpe, Dean
of Norwich, and Compton, Bishop of London, were suspended for
disobedience to this decree.
But the spirit of the clergy was roused, and the pulpits of
England from the Isle of Wight to Berwick-upon-Tweed rang with
sermons against Popery, and so many pamphlets were issued on
the same subject that 20,000 pages of them, according to Macaulay,
are still preserved in the British Museum.
THE UNIVERSITIES.
The King saw that he must convert the universities before he
could convert the clergy, so he took his next step of stupid tyranny
by invading the rights of the universities.
In Cambridge he summoned the Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Pechell
before his New Court of High Commission, presided over by Lord
Chancellor Jeffreys, for refusing to confer the degree of Master of
Arts on a Benedictine monk, contrary to the statutes of the
University.
In Oxford he appointed a Romanist Dean of Christchurch
and gave Magdalen College a president who was not only
a Roman Catholic, but a drunkard and a man of infamous moral
chjwacter. The Fellows of the College refused to acknowledge the
King’s nominee, and elected their own president, as it was their
right and their duty to do. Thereupon the King declared all their
fellowships vacant.
This was the college which had melted down all its plate to
supply money to Charles I. in his conflict with the Parliament and
had cut down all the trees in its beautiful little park to make
barricades for the defence of the city. This was how Tames II
rewarded the most devotedly loyal of his subjects.
THE ELECTIONS.
James’ next inglorious act was an attempt to pack Parliament
with supporters of his policy by interfering with the freedom of the
elections. He relied on the lord lieutenants of the counties to do
this for him. But half of them flatly refused to do the king’s
bidding, and were immediately turned out of office. Fourteen of
these were noblemen of high rank. The Earl of Oxford, when
required to explain his refusal, nobly answered, “ Sir I will stand
by your Majesty against all enemies to the last drop of blood • but
this is a matter of conscience, and I cannot comply.”
And this answer really voiced the feeling of all. These were
the men whose fathers and grandfathers had fought for Kinv
Charles at Edge Hill and Marston Moor and Naseby, and not a
few of them had ruined their fortunes in supporting the throne In
fact, the ingratitude of the king was only equalled by his folly.


The gentry of the English counties followed the example of
the nobility. They told the king’s officers that they would sacrifice
life and property for the Crown, but that the Protestant religion
was dearer to them than either.
THE SEVEN BISHOPS.
The last exploit of King James was the imprisonment and trial
of the seven bishops.
In 1687 he issued a Declaration of Indulgence, suspending all
the penal laws against Nonconformists, whether Protestant Dis-
senters or Romanists, and giving them full liberty to perform
their worship publicly. .
To us in the twentieth century nothing could seem more inno-
cent and commendable than this Declaration. But in the seven-
teenth century, and under the rule of James 11., men knew what it
meant, and when an order came to all the Bishops to have this
Declaration read in all the churches under their authority, the
Protestant Dissenters were every bit as anxious as the Church
people that it should not be read.
There was no time to lose. Only on the I* nday before the
Sunday when the Declaration was to be read, Sancroft, Archbishop
of Canterbury, and six Bishops with him, waited on the king at
St. James’s Palace with a respectfully-worded refusal.
A few days later they were summoned before the Council at
Whitehall, and committed to the Tower on a charge of “false and
seditious libel.” .
It is impossible to describe the excitement of Eondon over
this event. The passage of the Bishops to the Tower was like a
triumphal progress. When the governor of the Tower wanted to
keep back the crowds his officers told him it was no use, for all their
men were drinking the health of the Bishops.
Among the crowds of sympathising visitors, who came every
day to see the distinguished prisoners, was a deputation of ten
leading Nonconformist ministers, and when the King sent for some
of them and reprimanded them, they boldy replied that they
“thought it a solemn duty to forget and stand by the
men who stood by the Protestant cause.”
Even from the Presbyterians of Scotland came messages of
sympathy and encouragement. And as for the men of Cornwall,
they were so stirred up on behalf of Bishop Trelawney, a
Cornishman, one of the prisoners, that a ballad was composed and
sung all over the country, with the refrain: —
And have they fixed the where and when,
And shall Trelawney die ?
Then twenty thousand Cornishmen
Shall know the reason why.
At last, on the 29th of June, 1687, came the trial at
Westminster Hall, and the next morning, at ten o’clock, the jury
came into court with a verdict of “Not guilty,’ and all London
went mad with rejoicing. u ,
The King had a camp of 13,000 soldiers at Hounslow Heath,
intended to keep London quiet and submissive, and he had the
mortification of hearing these soldiers rending the air with cheers
for the acquittal of the Bishops.


THE REVOLUTION.
The same day a letter left England signed by some of the
principal men in the country, and addressed to William, Prince of
Orange, inviting him to come oyer and put an end to the Stuart
dynasty. For many days a violent westerly gale prevented his
sailing, and Dr. Burnet, who, like most of his followers, was very
despondent, said to the Prince that he feared he was not
predestinated to land on the English shores. However “a
Protestant wind” came and wafted his fleet down the Channel, and
at the same time prevented King James’s fleet from leaving the
lhames. But the fleet was blown too far to the westward, and it
was feared that it would have to put in at Plymouth, where Lord
Bath, in command of the garrison, was believed to be hostile
Then it was rumoured that the fleet of James had got round the
North Foreland, and was coming to the attack. Admiral Russell
said to Dr. Burnet, “You may go to your prayers, doctor, for it is
all over! ” No doubt the doctor did betake himself to prayer. At
any rate the wind changed, and a gentle southerly breeze bore the
fleet into Torbay. When Dr. Burnet landed he immediately made
his way to the Prince, who took him by the hand, and said “Weil
Doctor, what do you think of predestination now ? ”
A few days later William marched into Exeter, and the motto
on his banner was;—
“THE PROTESTANT RELIGION AND THE LIBERTIES OF ENGLAND.”
The experience of 150 years had convinced the English people
that “the liberties of England” were inseparably bound up with the
Protestant Religion.
Therefore it was that when William and Mary were crowned
together, it was ordered in the Bill of Rights that the following
oath should be administered to them:—
. Archbishop or Bishop —“ Will you to the utmost of your power
maintain the laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel and
the Protestant Reformed Religion established by law ? And will
you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of this Realm, and
to the Churches committed to their charge, all such rights and
privileges as by law do or shall appertain unto them or any of
them ? 1
King and Queen— All this I promise to do.”
, Ct Settlement, twelve years later, it was
ordered that the same form of oath should be administered to all
their successors. This is the Coronation Oath. But the Protestant
Declaration against the Mass is a further safeguard.
HOUSE OF HANOVER.
It is also specially interesting to us to remember that the present
Royal Faimly the House of Hanover, never would have come to
the Throne of England but for this determination of the English
people to exclude a Roman Catholic from the succession
When Queen Anne died there were several families more
nearly related to her than the family of Hanover, but they were all
Roman Catholic, and therefore, could not come to the English Throne
But for this resolve of the English people England would
never have had its Queen Victoria; Edward VII. would not


be on the throne; and the Australian Commonwealth would not
have made the acquaintance of the same Royal Duke and Duchess,
whose coming among us last week will long be remembered with
pleasure by us all.
PROTEST OF THE PEERS.
But granting that the King must never be a Roman Catholic,
could not the Protestant Succession be kept secure without the
Protestant Declaration which gives so much offence ?
On the day when our King made the Declaration, thirty
Roman Catholic Peers presented to the Lord Chancellor a protest,
expressed in temperate and dignified language, regretting that the
sovereign should be required by law “ to brand with contumelious
epithets the religious tenets of any of his subjects.”
We should wish to give this protest a full and fair con-
sideration.
Of course there are certain facts which make it questionable
whether these peers have any moral right to make such a protest.
For example, we can scarcely forget that their leader, the
Duke of Norfolk, had but recently returned from a visit to Rome,
in which he publicly expressed, on behalf of the Roman Catholics
of England, a pious wish for the restoration of the temporal power
of the Pope.
But he must know perfectly well that the restoration of the
Pope’s temporal power would mean the instant expulsion of the
King of Italy from his own capital, and the destruction of that
Italian unity which was won after so heroic a struggle,
A peer whose religion teaches him to insult a king and a nation
in their own capital ought not to be too thin-skinned about “ con-
tumelious epithets ” against that religion.
Again, every one of these peers is bound, as a good Roman
Catholic, by the Tridentine Creed, including the Canons of the
Council of Trent. And these Canons brand every Protestant not
with “contumelious epithets ” merely, but with an anathema.
Surely it would not be unreasonable to say to these peers,
When you, my lords, have secured the removal of these anathemas
from the creed which you are bound to profess, it will be time
to talk to us about “ contumelious epithets ” against your religion.
But, putting aside these considerations, let us ask the thirty
peers if they could assure us that the Roman Catholic Church
would be in the least degree satisfied or conciliated by the removal
of the “ contumelious epithets ” contained in this Declaration.
They certainly could not, because their own Archbishop,
Cardinal Vaughan, has protested not merely against certain
expressions in the Declaration, but against the Declaration itself,
calling it a “ blasphemous formulary,” and “an act of national
apostacy.”
Here is an extract from his Pastoral Letter on the subject; —
PROTEST OF THE CARDINAL.
“ I had myself, some three years ago, brought the question of
the repeal of this blasphemous formulary before a leading member
of the Cabinet, but I was assured by him and by others that the
Government of the day would certainly not then take up the matter.


or in any way seek to obtain its repeal. And quite recently, on
learning that the Declaration and Oath were to be tendered to
the King upon the meeting of Parliament, I ventured at once, in
discharge of a sense of religious duty, to address to his Majesty a
letter, couched in terms of fidelity, and dictated alike by conscience
and loyalty. I could do no more.”
Here we have the head of a religious denomination confessing
to having written letters to a Cabinet Minister and to the King
himself about a matter affecting the Protestant Constitution of
Great Britain.
Might we not remind Cardinal Vaughan that it is only through
the good-natured tolerance of the people of Great Britain that he is
allowed to style himself “ Archbishop of Westminster?”
When the Pope, some fifty years ago, presumed to parcel out
England into dioceses and to appoint Bishops over them, the easy-
going English people only smiled and said, “It pleases him and
it doesn’t hurt us.”
But has not this liberalism gone far enough ? Is it not time
to tell the head of the Roman Catholic denomination in England
to mind his own business ? Has not Cardinal Vaughan, like all
other Roman Catholic Bishops, taken an oath in which these words
occur:—
“ Heretics, schismatics and rebels against my lord \i.e., the
Pope] and his successors, I will to the utmost of my power
persecute and combat ?”
And a Bishop who has taken this oath appeals to a heretic
King to amend two statutes of his realm, in order to avoid insulting
the Pope’s religion !
CARDINAL MANNING.
Those who think that the feelings of Roman Catholics would
be conciliated by repealing or altering this Declaration can have
very little idea of what Rome really is.
Hear the evidence of Cardinal Manning, predecessor of
Cardinal Vaughan as Archbishop of Westminster, as reported in
the Tablet of gth October, 1864. Cardinal Manning, speaking in
the name of the Pope, says:—
“ I acknowledge no civil power. I am the subject of no prince.
And I claim more than this : I claim to be the supreme judge and
director of the consciences of men—of the peasants that till the
field and of the prince that sits upon the throne, of the household
that lives in the shade of privacy and the legislator that makes laws
for kingdoms. lam sole, last, supreme judge of what is right and
wrong. Moreover, we declare, affirm, define and pronounce it to
be necessary to salvation to every human creature to be subject to
the Roman Pontiff.”
Again, in a sermon preached before Cardinal Wiseman,
Manning says:—
“ England is the head of Protestantism, the centre of its move-
ments, and the stronghold of its power; conquered in England, it is
conquered throughout the world; once overthrown here, all is but
a war of detail. All the roads of the world meet in one point, and
this point reached, the whole world opens to the Church’s will.”


Englishmen seem hopelessly blind to the fact that the power
which has its seat at Rome is something more than a religious
organisation, a form of Christianity, a method of worshipping God
rather more showy and less rational than other methods.
WHAT IS ROMANISM ?
They ignore the fact that Rome is the seat of a vast political
organisation aiming at universal empire, and as such, that it is
really the most formidable rival and enemy that the British Empire
has to reckon with.
Adam Smith was not a Protestant controversialist, but in his
“ Wealth of Nations ” he has told us: —
“ The Constitution of the Church of Rome is the most formid-
able combination that ever existed against the authority and secur-
ity of civil government, as well as against the liberty, reason, and
happiness of mankind.”
Ladies and gentlemen, in the strong things which I have felt
obliged to say in this lecture I trust it will be remembered that I am
denouncing not people but principles. My feeling towards Romanism
is one thing; my feeling towards Roman Catholics is quite another
thing. Some of them have been my personal friends. Some of
them I have known by personal acquaintance to be genuine and
earnest Christians, notwithstanding the objectionable spiritual food
on which they were brought up. Some people seem to be blest
with such good spiritual constitutions that they can thrive even upon
bad spiritual food. But I hope I may point out to my fellow Chris-
tians the adulteration of their spiritual food without being supposed
to be their personal enemy.
CONCLUSION.
After all, the main question as to any Declaration is the ques-
tion, Is it true ? And this Declaration can be proved by most certain
warrant of Holy Scripture. It is a temperate contradiction of one
of the most colossal falsifications of Christ’s Gospel. Therefore, in
the Name of the Lord, let the King of England stand by it. Let
not one word of it be altered, and let our prayer be, “ Give the king
thy judgments, O Lord, and thy righteousness unto the king’s son.”
In conclusion, therefore, I beg to move the following
RESOLUTION.
“ That, with every feeling of Christian good will towards our
Roman Catholic fellow subjects, this meeting is convinced that the
King’s Protestant Declaration, which has been in use for two
hundred years, could not be repealed or altered without endangering
the Protestant succession to the Throne.”
Green & Fargher, Printers, 14 M'Killop St., Melbourne


Evangelical Church Association,
OFFICES: Y.W.C.A. HALL,
SPRING ST., MELBOURNE.
©bjects:
GT” HE objects of tt\e Association are—
l. Ti\e union of Members for tl\e purposes
of prayer, iqUtUal sympathy ar\d
instruction, ar\d such other con\bir\ed
action as n\ay be iq accordance
■With tl\e Constitution.
2. The spread of tlqe Gospel of the Grace
of God, at l\ort\e aqd abroad,
3. The promotion of union grqong all
Evangelical Christians.
&orms of Application for 77/embership
can be obtained from
