

THE RECENT OUTRAGE AT THE
SCOTS CHURCH.
Early during the present year (1877), the Rev. Dr. Gilchrist,
for upwards of three years previous Junior Pastor of the Scots
Church, was invited to preach and lecture for two Sabbaths at
Hotham, an important vacancy in North Melbourne, Victoria;
and having accepted the invitation, he was unanimously and
strongly invited to become the Pastor of that important charge,
of which the emoluments were considerably superior to those he
had had in Sydney. At the meeting of the members and adherents
of the Scots Church, which was held on the occasion, to ascertain
the mind of the congregation on the snbject, and to appoint com-
missioners to report the result to the Presbytery, I presided, as a
matter of course, as the Senior Pastor. But Dr. Gilchrist having
made up his mind to accept the call, he was translated forthwith.
As soon, therefore, as Dr. Gilchrist had accepted the call to
Melbourne, and vacated his office as Junior Pastor of the Scots
Church, a congregational meeting, of which the nature and object
are stated in the following letter, addressed to myself, was held
in the church :
Sydney, 25th May, 1877.
Rev. Sib,
At a meeting of members and adherents of the congregation of
the Scots Church, held on Tuesday, the 22nd instant, the following
resolution was adopted, and ordered to be sent to you, viz. ;
That the Rev. Dr. Lang some time ago, on the completion of the
fiftieth year of his ministry, signified his wish and determination to
retire from the pastorate of the Scots Church.
That prior to the induction of the Rev. Dr. Gilchrist he did
actually retire on certain conditions in favour of the incoming
Minister.
And that it cannot be expected that he should now undertake to
discharge the duties of the pastorate. That this congregation, there-
fore, while they express that respect for the Rev. Dr. Lang and that
appreciation of his past ministerial labours to which he is justly
entitled, think that he should not return to the pulpit of the Scots
Church except occasionally, and that application should be made to
the Presbytery for such supplies as may be acceptable to the congre-
gation until a suitable Minister can be found to whom a call may be
given.
I am, Rev. Sir, yours truly,
Alex. Halkett, Joint Hon. Sec.
To this letter I merely replied that I would submit it to the
Presbytery, to meet thereafter on the sth June. I did so accord-
ingly j but as the congregational meeting had neither been called
nor presided over by the minister of the church, as is the law in the
Presbyterian Church, the Presbytery refused to receive it. In
short, the proceeding was simply an attempt to set aside the
constitution of the church, as a Presbyterian, and to transform
it into an Independent church. Besides, I was still the Senior
Pastor of the church, and had acted in that capacity in presiding
over the Congregational meeting regularly held only a few days be-
fore, to elect commissioners to inform the Presbytery of the opinion
and desire of the congregation on the subject of the fresh call to Dr.
Gilchrist, Nay, although I had signified my desire and intention
to retire completely from the management of the church on the
appointment of a colleague and successor, 1 had never surren-
dered the appointment of such colleague and successor into the
hands of the persons who are now endeavouring to exclude me
from the church altogether. It was I, and I only, who, in my
capacity of Senior Pastor, had nominated Dr. Gilchrist to that
office, my nomination being cordially accepted by the office-bearers
generally j and when Dr. Gilchrist thought proper to vacate his
Sydney p 7th 1877
f/tflf i
office of Junior Pastor by accepting the call to Hotham or North
Melbourne, the agreement with him and the congregation neces-
sarily terminated, and the power of nominating another colleague
and successor returned into my hands. , )
In the evening of Friday, the Ist of June, there was a
public tea-meeting held in the church, to take leave of Dr. Gil-
christ ; but it was evidently not more for the glorification of Dr.
Gilchrist than for offering a whole series of studied insults to
myself, merely because I had refused to surrender my rights and
status as the Senior Pastor of the church at the bidding of men
who had certainly no right to demand anything of the kind at
my hands. I therefore inserted an advertisement in the Herald
on Saturday, the 2d of June, announcing that as the Rev. Dr.
Gilchrist, the Junior Pastor, had accepted a call to Hotham or
North Melbourne, and had thereby vacated the office he had pre-
viously held as Junior Pastor of the Scots Church, I should, as
Senior Pastor (D.V.) resume the sole pastorate of the church on
the following Sabbath.
In the afternoon of that day, (Saturday, the 2d of June,) Mr.
Robert Horniman and Mr. Robert Watson, two of the elders of
the church, called upon me to inform me that they had ascer-
tained that Mr, McDonnell, the treasurer, and Mr. Halkett, one
of the secretaries of the church, had seized the keys from the
doorkeeper, and had not only locked the front door, but nailed
up the door of the vestry from behind, so as to prevent any
entrance into the church, either for myself as the pastor or for/
the congregation. The two elders expressed themselves very
much concerned at the astounding occurrence ; but .s they
recommended no particular course of action, I merely told them
that I should not allow myself to be excluded from the church,
and I accordingly went to Mr. Fosbery, the Inspector-General’s
office, to request him, or his next in office, to station two or three
constables about the doors of the Scots Church at the hour of
morning service on Sabbath to prevent any disturbance. I also
requested Mr. Dyer, the builder, of Jamison-street, to force an
entrance into the church, which he did by getting one of his men
to enter the vestry by one of the windows, and wrenching the
lock off the door. Divine Service then proceeded without any
further annoyance, although the 1 debris of the tea-meeting sRN
remained in the church, from the doorkeeper having been lor]fed
out on Saturday.
The outrage that had thus been perpetrated by Messrs.
McDonnell and Halkett naturally produced a profound sensation
among the Presbyterians of the colony. Nobody of course could
suppose that persons who could be guilty of such enormous pro-
cedure could have any title to the name of Christians; and I
was strongly urged in various influential quarters to make a
formal complaint on the subject to the authorities. But the only
consideration that restrained me from doing so was the fear that if
they had been formally complained against they would both have
been dismissed from their offices-—as I conceived they richly
deserved to be—the one as master of the Government dredge,
and the other as Town Hall constable. But I chose rather to
allow the outrage to remain unpunished than to be the instrument
of their merited punishment.
Now, all I ask in the case is that the two offenders, Messrs.
George McDonnell and Alexander Halkett, cease to hold any
office in the Scots Church from henceforth; and lam confident
that neither any Christian community in the colony, nor the
public generally, can suppose that 1 could ask anything less. To
suppose that any Christian church can tolerate in its communion
men who act like burglars and housebreakers is out of the
question,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D,.
