

INTENDED ADDRESSES |
OF THE
VICTOKIAN CANDIDATES
TO THEIE CONSTITUEjS’CIES,
AT THE
m APPROACHING ELECTIONS.
Collected at enormous Expense, and the betrayal of Private
Confidence.
By BELPHBGOR,
He Static ioitm.
SECOND EDITION.
MELBOUENE:
H. O. EVANS, 94 BOURKE STREET EAST; CV
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS IN TOWN & COUNTRY'.
1859.




INTEODUCTIOK
In laying before the Public the stolen goods that follow, we must
claim the privilege of explaining away the impeachment of being re-
ceivers, and —of selling too. We are going to lay it all upon the —Devil!
Don’t start, gentle reader; you possibly imagine that a gentleman of
that name could not have found his way into so virtuous a community,
as these Austral lands possess. We can unhappily vouch for the
fact of his existence, for his thieving and mischievous propensi-
ties, for his übiquity and love of sooty chimneys, whence he makes
his entries and his exits; he walks upon Wo sticks, and is
called Belphegor! All our readers will remember well Le Sage’s
witty Asmodean gentleman, on similar support, of sitnilar habits, but
whose mischief had a widely different characteristic. It is not to be
supposed that we should introduce into modest Melbourne, or into
the virgin soil of Victoria, so unchaste an imp as Asmodeus. Is it
to be conceived, that we should have uncorked, or broken the phial he
was confined in ? Be assured we should have fastened him tighter
in, and added a glass stopper, well capsuled over. The amorous
naughty wretch, the very worst of Juan’s —his mischief—but we will
not go into the streets of Madrid, or even look down one single chim-
ney. Our Boiteux Diable is a political rogue ; he cares not for widow,
maid, or wife ; for rake, or loving youth ; he dives into the hearts and
minds of plodding men, watches them writing, steals their papers and
their thoughts. Our Devil rides upon ambition’s bgck^Amp-fashion,
whispers in the ear, flatters their vanity, brings out their inmost
hopes and feelings, moulds them into shape, and we—give them
to the public. Belphegor does not confine himself to dry political
matter ; he is a literary imp of great age, knows full well, ancient,
mediaeval and modern history, but he shines the most in his private
history of mankind—he can tell everybody, and everything about them.
Being of a literary turn, he has hitherto found no occupation here,
but having discovered that we have got a University, and ascertained
the nature of gasses, the villain broke the bottle that contained him,
and was found perched at the end of the Public Library, on the shelf
and next, to Gril Bias. How we have entrapped him into our service
and upon what terms, we shall not tell; suffice that he was inquiring
after our printer’s gentleman of the same name. It is very strange
that you cannot find a Devil but he is mixed up with the women :
We should have discarded our villain, but having had his twelve
months’ marriage, and spent his wedding portion, he took to virtuous,
though somewhat devilish habits. We introduce him, therefore, as
Belphegor, the reformed and constitutional D . You have all
read of course, the “ Eejected Addresses ” of the Brothers Smith.
Pray now read the Intended Addresses we have collated for you.


Cfte SntmDeli
How addresses came into the possession of the publisher it
is not for him to say. Neither will they he altogether acknowledged
by the honorable candidates who had carefully prepared them.
Doubtless, now that they have been pre-puhlished, many changes
and alterations will be made in their language and style. Still he
that is, the publisher—will have done good service to both electors
and candidates. He trusts to receive their warm acknowledgments
and thanks.
TO THE ELECTOES OF THE EASTEEN DIVISION OF
THE “CITY.”
G-etttlemeiv, — Having represented united Melbourne, by your kind
suffrage, in the just expired Parliament, I can feel myself but half a
man, now that I am to select which slice of the unevenly divided
city I am to find my friends in. A man who has had the proud satis-
faction of being the chosen member of the first constituency in the
country he belongs to, cannot rise to the same ambitious proportions
when two-thirds of that constituency are taken from him. I said
that I could be but half a man under these new circumstances ; 1
find that lam but one-third. Being a lawyer, you would naturally
imagine that I should select Chancery-lane, the Attorneys, and my
friends in the western portion. Not only, however, is a man no
prophet in his own country, but I have felt, that where the City
holds its councils, where the Mayor presides, where the Fire-bell is
rung —that there is the post of honor and of danger. Ido not mean
to offend one side of Elizabeth-street, by flattery to the other. Ido
not mean to pit St. Francis against St. James. I desire most
earnestly to put aside all sectarian views and feelings. What matters
it to me, in what particular manner the Christian prays to the
Christian Grodhead. What need I care in what particular part of
the British Empire a man is born. Am I not to take every man as
honest, conscientious, and patriotic. lam not to suppose that Grould
or Geoghegan care whether O’Shanassy or I represent their district,
for our country, or our faith. An honest, intelligent, faithful member
is the all that you, and they, and I require. It is upon that platform,
I take my stand on this. Gentlemen, let us take our breath, and
consider. The New Constitution Act has as yet, sown but very
meagre seed—it has produced but very sour, unripe fruit—it has
made parties without principles, opposition without reason—it has
made no men—it has shown many to be very shallow—it has brought
out many talkers, and no efficient actors—it has reduced the respon-
sibility of the Governor into—-nothing! Gentlemen, am I, on that
account opposed to constitutional government ? believe me, from my
heart, lam not. It is not because we have not all that we desire ;
that what we have planned does not possess the fair proportions we
had imagined that it would; that what we have planted—because the
gardeners, to whom we have entrusted its nurture and its growth,
have been ignorant, inefficient and presumptuous—has no beauty in


it, no usefulness; believe me, no. The tree of liberty must be trained
and pruned, and led into its proper shapes, like unto any other tree.
It begins a shrub, and rises gracefully into the proper proportions, as
nature disposed, by the assisting hand of intelligent man. Here, in
this southernmost soil, Hreat Britain designs to try the effect of
perfect liberty, a liberty which does not mean individual license, a
liberty which knows no class, a liberty which restrains alone, for the
general good; a liberty which makes man a man indeed —a good
father, a good son, a good husband, a good citizen ; a liberty which
binds mankind by good thoughts and by better deeds; a liberty
which makes society benevolent, generous and good; a liberty
from being universal, takes man from his selfish and narrow aims,
makes him religious, and lifts him up to Heaven. This is that perfect
liberty taught to us in the Hospel; this is that liberty we should
try for in this new world. Gentlemen, is that our object
and our aim ? Ho you propose to select your representative
Member to the Assembly with these views, on these grounds ?
Have you the welfare of the Colony at heart ? Can you
shake off your own prejudices and opinions, and believe that the
same objects, interests, and ends may be obtained in any other way,
than in the particular path that you yourselves have laid out ? Can
you trust others to think, to leel, to understand differently from
yourselves, and yet be right ? Have you any faith in education, ex-
perience, knowledge of the world ? Do you allow yourselves to
fancy for a moment that those who for years of life have lived in the
world, of the world—taken some part in its progress, literary, scientific,
or political—who have seen society grow, watched the alteration in its
phases, as regards all classes, grown through the course of reading
the last forty years have cast before the astonished public; brought
steam into a plaything; dashed an illuminating gas for miles and miles
throughout population; sent man’s thoughts, as it were by lightning,
from end to end of the habitable globe—do you believe /that he, who
knew the world before, has seen its rise and progress, watched its
uses and its benefits, can still know nothing; and that you know
everything ? Do you altogether ignore such experience, which
mellows into wisdom ? You will not say so; you will not acknow-
ledge it; practically, however, you put it on one side; you do
not elect your members from such qualification. If you select a
schoolmaster, on what pretension do you pick him out ? Ought it not
to be on his superiority in all mental attainments over every other ?
You do not appoint him because that he is a good fellow, an old
chum (who is very often indeed an old fool), a rich man, or for any
such qualification whatsoever ? You select him because he has read
—been educated—can impart his information —can appreciate and
understand, and make others do so, what is useful for mankind to
know. It matters not, my friends, whether the taught be of older
or of younger growth, the parallel equally exists; your member
should possess, as largely as you can get him, these attributes. Gen-
tlemen, though you are to be a city divided against itself —a city
having two interests—whose very drainage may become the soimce
of rivalry and dissension —still to you will the country look lor an


example in the coming strife of election. It will be as you say, as
you act, that other less important constituencies will follow. If you
cast away nationalities and sectarianism, and become one great Aus-
tralian brotherhood, so will others be compelled by high and good
example to do the same; the worst Scotchman never was better than
the best Englishman ; and the Scotchman who gave utterance to the
words was no good Christian. Grentlemen, for the sake of our com-
mon country—-for the sake of our general interests—for the love of
(xod and ot his creatures, let us drop these opposing interests, and
choose your member, taking into your view, and into your considera-
tion, every man of mark throughout the inhabitants. You have the
fullest power, of the largest selection ; there is no qualification in
property; let your qualification be superiority—learning alone will
not do it; the best-read Girecian, the highest classic, is neither the
best Legislator, or any necessarily Executive administrator ; indeed,
we have here found exactly the reverse. The full knowledge of the
oldest of the Gireek writers, of the best of the Eoman, has shown
the weakest capacity in dealing with his fellow-men. The man who
could boast of his intimacy with Thucydides, Demosthenes, Themis-
tocles, Alcibiades, and every other hero of Girecian history—a very
Aristides in his self-elected justness, who could tell you in the full,
the laws of Draco and Lycurgus, who fancies that he has the daunt-
less spirit of the Spartan, with the eloquence and wisdom of the
Athenian, succumbs in fact to a working mason of the “ Convention.”
Gentlemen, such learning is useful only upon paper; a man to be
beneficial to his fellow-man must not only have read the history of
the past, sacred and profane, the daily history of the present, but he
must have mixed in the very interior of society, seen its peculiarities,
its errors and its prejudices ; realized the positive, most absolute truth,
that a “a little learning is a dangerous thingreflected upon the fact,
the cause and the effect, before he can look into andpredicatethefuture.
Gentlemen, I am taking a high standard for your member ; I am en-
riching him with perfections he will never possess ; I am taking from
him all selfishness; lam enabling him to use his soid with that wis-
dom which is given to man only when he does his duty to his God,
by loving his neighbour as himself; I am endowing him with the
power of abnegation of self; lam sketching a patriot and a real
Cliristian. Where is such a man ? In what position of life shall we
seek him ? Has he seen sorrow and been acquainted with grief ?
If so, he may be somewhere. Providence has put it into the power
of all, so to feel, so to act, if society will permit it. I have tried, in
putting my humble self before you, to show you what I wish I was,
to ask you so to select my colleague. Then, gentlemen, you may
trust the Land question, with that of Education, and all other
matters for the public weal, unhesitatingly in his hands. A man who
so possesses his soul can express his high intentions with his tongue ;
the fervour and glowing eloquence of his speech will illuminate the
minds of all around, soften the asperities and rough expression of the
ill-bred and half-educated ; give life, soul and vigour to the debates
in the House, eliminate a knowledge and understanding of the
subject to be discussed, creditable to our legislators, and most bene-


ficial in the results. Gentlemen, would I were such a man; go
w ith me, how'ever, in the feeling that the model is just and correct in
all its proportions, and if w'e cannot fulfil all its beauties and its
let us come as near to it as we can. Here, in this country of
labour, mental and physical; here, where have all come to better
our estates, the singleness of purpose and devotion of our owm time,
to do our duty by the public, is a very difficult task. A man to be
independent in all the relations of life must be possessed of an ade-
quate income to his wants, must have no family and friends to pro-
vide for out of the public purse ; herein, and in a new formed society,
lays much of the difficulty in your selection. Still allow me to make
the offer of myself again; and that although I cannot equal what I
would be, lam not altogether without some merit in your eyes; if a
man sets a high standard for himself, he disgraces that self, if he does
not make every effort to perfect his own model; to teach without
practice is sheer hypocrisy. I have endeavoured to serve you during
the past Parliament: I have been in office, I have ascertained the
weakness of a Government; I have seen the presumptuous folly of
men placed out of their position and their pow'er; I have witnessed
the good effect of gentlemanly bearing; I have felt the difficulty of
combined action with men who have not undergone the discipline of
education and society ; I have ascertained that however much the
natural and proper ambition of a man to serve his country, and have
his name written in her annals, may tempt him into place, it is all at
present here, but vanity and vexation of spirit; it has been but the
action of a parish-vestry in Marylebone or St. Pancras. We are,
however, passing out of this normal state ; men are fast finding their
proper level—the chaff and the wheat are being separated, the pure
metal dissevered from the alloy; legislation must now have a character,
be conducted wdth intelligence; the incidents must be considered
as the principle. What is good for man in one part of the wprld, is
equally good for him in another. The speciality of this the
mythology of the squatter and the long resident, must bq replaced by
the Christian code of universal good, not only for the present but the
futiue.
Here the Honourable Candidate fell into serious thought, and our
Hiable Boiteux rushed up the chimney with all his lucubrations.


The following prepared address is strictly private, as it was intended
to astonish the natives, by extensive revelations on English manners
and customs. That our diable should have secured the prize, and
placed us exclusively in possession of its contents, is a feat worthy of
his powers and übiquity.
TO THE ELECTOES OF EAST MELBOUENE.
G-entlemen and Publicans, Feiends and Fellow Citizens, —
Although I am living on the other side of the way, it is not my
intention to patronise my neighbours. As Melbourne’s Mayor
proper, it is but right and very fitting that I should represent the
Mansion House, wherein lies my glory; and the Police Court, wherein
lies my usefulness. Gentlemen, so entirely do I feel myself your
Mayor, that, whether dreaming or awake, I am ever in fancy at my
post. I have risen, gentlemen, like my house, so as to look down
upon the world. Have I not been your chosen Mayor four several
times ? Was not I chosen before all men to represent this Colony
of Victoria, as a sole deputation to our Queen ? If I were not the
first and best of men the Colony could produce, why was I so
selected ? Why did the Bishop of Melbourne, the Chief Justice, and
others of high note, sign the address I delivered, with their desire, at
Windsor Castle? Gentlemen, this was an honor given to my deserts
—I feel it, I know it, and no man shall take it from me. Did not
Sturt, a gentleman by family as well as local position, go to visit the
country of his forefathers, some of the first gentry in the land. He
could not presume to take the place that 1 did —who would have
thought of trusting Sturt with such a dignified mission ? Ho, he paid
the just tribute to my superiority, and signed it also. Again, my
friends, did not William Hicholson go home ? Was he not feasted,
and made a fuss with —in true Ballot fashion—by those who would
not write their names upon their paper. Ho, gentlemen ;to me and
to me alone could be entrusted the full and just representation of this
Colony. Johnny Fawkner may be as jealous as he pleases ; nobody
ever thought of sending him. Ho, on me be alone the honor, and to
you the credit of the act. Ho great ever yet lived that had not
his detractors. I do not pretend to ppzzle my brain, or take up your
time, by ransacking history for thefr names in proof; it is suificient
for me and for you, that there are men wicked enough to say that
my antecedents are not quite so moral as I profess. They talk of the
Adelphi public-house—they say that scenes were enacted therein that
you and I should blush at. People say that all my money has been
derived from grog-shops, and theatres. Gentlemen, who knows
what was done in those days ? did anybody know better ?
were we not all alike ? It is all very fine for these numerous new-
chum fellows to pick holes and find fault with the successful of other
days, because they cannot themselves make money. They are all
very pure and very good, when temptation is out of their way —wEo
coifid be good, when all alike were bad. Did I not improve with the
times ? Did I not give a fancy dress-ball in the theatre to purify it ?
Did I not ask everybody who could help me into the Mayoralty, and


did not those I did not ask, ask me to allow them to come ? Do I
not know that the women are the best judges of the moralitv’of men?
and was it not that ball that gave me my success ? Again gentlemen
if they talk to me of nude women at the Adelphi, hafe I’not insisted
upon draping the figure of the Greek Slave ? Gentlemen, havTl not
written sermons, such as Perks himself might copy and be iealousof-
and id I not print and leave them all behfnd mefwhe?y„nt™t me
to patronize the Queen. Has not the institution to which I dedi-
cated the money, my and religious feelings wrought in its behalf
flounshed ever since ? Gentlemen, is not this a niost ungenerous
I have done for you, my public friends, and
for this ungrateful city, have they not robbed me of my dearH and
glory, the accolade of knighthood. Is it that such
men as Wilson and Mackinnon should be allowed to go to England
to destroy the hopes and injure the character of your own Mayor ?
i know that it is envy and sheer malice—that feUow Wilson wiU do
fish and birds ; and I have been told,
Mackinnon volunteered to throw aside his paper, and become our
Governor. It is very true I did not understand England and English
and habits; who could, after being all his life in these blSsed
Colonies and mmy positiontoo ? Who would have supposed, that while
all the Mayors, Lords and others, were paying me their court, and wor-
shipiing my very shadow, as if I had been the moving golden
of ]\ (you see that I have always my Bible at com-
mand), that so smaU a slip as trpng to kiss a silly girl, and having
Court, could have let me comelway, plain mI
? What IS the use of telling you what a great man I was in
button-making Birmingham ; in the sooty town of Manchester, with
its palaces of labour; or m Leeds ; or in that self-edified 4itv the
natives call m their presumption. Modem Athens ? Wh4t matters
aU my glory civic or masonic, without my knighthood? Gentlemen
my heart, like Henry Miller’s, is too fuU to give expression to
my leelmgs. But, gentlemen, I have seen the Queen and^His Eoyal
ighness too ; I fear that I saw the Lords in Waiting laughing but
they are simply ignorant fools, and as for that Sir Edward Gust’who
does the work of introducing, with all his elegance of manner I only
wish I had him in the Police Court here—that’s aU. What matters
how 1 looked m the eyes of jealous men ? you, who have seen me for
so many years in light-brown great coat, shirt frill erect, brown hat
and black band, sat jauntily aside, cigar in comer of my mouth- you
my friends, can teU how pleased the Queen must be with my Austra-
lian what the French call tout ensemble. Hear my heart, as this
subject-matter is, it is really not quite pleasant; the very thought
makes me sick and thirsty—let us drink—but, oh ! again, I recollect
i must be upon my P’s and Q’s. Harry Jenkins will do the needful
Corporation. Gentlemen, I have not told you aU
the little stories I could tell, all the little scenes I have enacted •
you, i am sure, feel a pride in your perpetual Mayor, for I am not
Master Walsh to have it any longer. He flatters him-
selt that he keeps the time of the city, because he tells us so in Col-
lins street; but I teU him that “time was made for slaves,” and that


my time is not over yet, for you will elect me as just the model
man, the gent who spoke before me talked so much about. Gentle-
men, I cannot tell you of the disappointment her ladyship felt in
Queen Street. I have forbidden that insulting song of Moore’s, “ I’d
mourn the hopes that leave me,” take my toddy, and smoke the same
as ever. The donkey I brought with me carries the young Smiths
the children of an untitled father. Gentlemen, this is so unpleasant
a subject, that I trust you will allow this speech to answer for both
the election and the mayoralty.
Again Le Boiteux vanished with the words.
TO THE IEISH ELECTOES OE SOUTH BOUEKE.
Mt Dear Feieivds akd CoirisrTßTMEN,—-As I cannot imagine any
man giving me his vote, except from sectarian and national motives,
I leave out altogether those Saxon wretches, who do not consider
my sintiments worth hearing ; I do not give them to the House as
often as I used, because you know we have got the great man of our
country and our hopes, in the right place. Sure does he not look
the finest of men, in that same place; would not the great St. Patrick
himself be proud of him, as well as little Geogahan ? Ah ! that is a
real priest; them Protestant Saxon can’t understand him.
Does he not talk of liberty and equality as big as any of them ; and
does not he laugh in his sleeve, when he finds they believe him ? Oh,
leave me alone, niver mind what they thinks of me in the House; 1
knows a thing or two—and don’t you know I am just the sort'of
mimber the great man likes to have to support him ; isn’t there
Phelan and I that’ll stick to him always ; won’t we vote as he likes •
don’t we understand his wink ; sure and then he could not get on
without us. What is the use of all them spalpeens, who vote iust
as they please ? It is just such broths of boys as Phelan and me
whom you should elect. Is not this Colony meant for us ? Haven’t
they always sent to Ireland, sure, for the w”omen, because we should
have this one place for the Irish ? Oh! blood an ’ounds, if that
gold had not been found, and brought so many other people among
we should have had it all our own way, as our countrymen are
trying in them United States, where there will be a pretty bobbery
some of these days soon. But I must not teU you all I know, for
fear them other chaps should know our plans ; so you must returij,
me, to help the Minister, or they will be turning him out, they be so
jealous of him.
Our Diable Boiteux, though a sensible, educated, gentlemanly
devil in his way, brought the above, merely to tell us he has his eye
down every body’s chimney.


Le Diable entered our sanctum in a terrible frigbt; be had tumbled
over that awful piece of furniture, “ The Mace,” wrapt in green baize,
close to the chimney, to keep the tinsel from tarnishing, this strange
damp w'eather. He had not seen the dreaded emblem of the Com-
mons’ power; he had, however, taken advantage of its living repre-
sentative, who, in rushing to its protection, lost his “ Speech.’
TO THE ELECTOES OE THE COUNTY OE DALHOHSIE.
GrEifTLEMEir, —The Speaker—oh! I had forgotten that his Excel-
lency has sent us all about our business, sent us back to our consti-
tuencies, and taken from me fifteen hundred pounds a-year, I had
fancied, wEen I came among you, that Palmer was in full state before
me; and, not hearing his well-known voice, I had uttered in my
thoughts his awful announcement, when I am about to preside over
my fellow-men. To you, gentlemen, I owe the proud position I have
held since last we met. Eor Mr. Speaker cannot talk to his consti-
tuents like other common men. His is a thorough Irishism; he is a
speaker that never speaks, and that is one of the reasons that they
put me there. They all knew that I was the best speaker in the olden
house. Sir James need not push forward his dumpling of a body ;it
is very true, and, although Grriffith was a thorough educated gentle-
man, he could not speak, and I became the foremost man among the
people’s representatives. And now, my electors, as I propose to be
again the same elevated person in the new Parliament, as no man in
the Colony could be got up better to the eye; as I have a large stock
of gloves still on hand, and having taken great pains to be a thorough
speaker, it will be a cruel shame indeed, if Erancis Murphy is not
again elected. Gentlemen, I nobody in Ireland, and we were all
nobodies before we came here. We did flatter ourselves that we
were to form, not only a new w'orld in these southern lands, but to
be independent of England and her old musty customs —indeed, we
some of us thought, that we w ere to teach old England how to behave
herself. No sooner, however, had we got that New Constitution,
which we have been tinkering at ever since, than w'e have done every
single thing we could to imitate her very follies. Strange it that
we, whose very earth is based with gold, sprinkled throughout with
the best of the most precious metals, should care for the tinsel, frip-
pery and trumpery of life. Oh! I could quote to you from Shake-
speare, till I awoke the very dust of Kemble; from any and every
play, that most wonderful anticipator of all the thoughts and acts of
man, on what is sterling, what is superficial and no good. Yet lam
wrong, very, very wrong, the superficial is all in all to most men.
What should we be without the robes of olfice and of state ? what the
peer, the prince, the very king upon his throne ? Did not Buona-
parte study his dress, his ermined purple, and his manner too, with
Talma ? I have sometimes thought of sending for Brooke, but he is
after all a mere clumsy lout —no graceful actor. I have thought of
Eichard Younge, but he is too short, too stiff; he wants the flexibi-
lity and ease which the most majestic bearing is but an automaton
without. No, gentlemen, I can manage for myself; am I


not an Irisliman, and is not every mother’s son of us very mo-
dest ? Grentlemen, lam not allowed to be a party politician, I hold
the even scales of justice between them in my hands —I do not mean
the Chief Justice, though he too is an Irishman; all the men of mark
among us come from that dear “Isle of the Oceanand while I think
of it, gentlemen, why did not the Irish, who have it all their own way
here, have a feast to Tom Moore ? the Scotch made row enough about
that extraordinary moral fish, Bobbie Burns ; did not Macadam talk
till his hair curled, to prove that all the Scotch were Admirable
Crichton’s, Chevalier Bayard’s. I certainly would not trust the
analysis of his countrymen to him, for he w'ould declare them all an-
gels ; nobody of course, doubts their perfect morality. But, about
our poet: will not his soft mellifluous strains, his most elegant well
turned numbers, his-heart stirring poetry, live for ever? Is not Lalla
ilookh the most perfect poem of its kind ever written ? the prose is, to
use an Irish truism, as poetical as the rhythm. Is not the whole gor-
geous picture taken from the very life, and the best collated history of
the people ? Why then my countrymen, do you not rouse your souls
in honour of your Anacreontic bard ? Is it because we are divided
against ourselves ? Is it because the Homan Catholic party here will
not allow “the feast of reason and the flow of soul” to have free scope
among us? If Tom Moore had been a bigot (if he had, he never could
have written), and a Homan, he would have been canonized. Gentle-
men, I think that I have thrown out a new idea, and I will leave it among
you. I have already said that politics and the Speaker’s chair ought
not to co-exist —that is, if the united voice of the Assembly is to put
me there again. I will not then tell of my speeches and my votes
for past time; I will not tell you how I sometimes laughed, was
sometimes deeply grieved, over the error and follies of legislation.
But as I am a long way oft' from Melbourne, and there is no local
paper, I may say something of the strange animals in the
human menagerie, where I have so ably presided. The world,
in its erroneous feelings, may imagine that the speaker’s place
is a sinecure—that Mr. Speaker is nobody. Listen and learn —you
might vainly and deep in error if you did suppose, that in a new country
such as this we dwell in, no man could have a difference of opinion as to
its welfare and its progress, founded on the laws, the manners and
the customs of the freest country in the world, not excepting even
the United American States ; with no class-interests ; —that party
would have no power of existence—no difference to nourish it—no
selfish objects to give rancorous life to it, that it could not be ! We
have no disputed succession to keep up our animosities; no Montagues,
no Capulets, to form two rival houses ; no visible motive for any op-
position. Would you not suppose that the whole Assembly would
be neutral; that the Governor, as in duty bound, woMd select his
ministers, to perform the necessary ofiices of Government, from the
most capable of the people’s representatives ? that every measure
would stand upon its own merit; that men according to their read-
ing, their experience and their conscience would speak and vote; that
the Governor, from his position, his knowledge of the world, his
place in society, his reading and his sense, would govern the Colony


through his ministers. What has ever existed here, to make two
parties —to divide men, who can have no two distinct public objects,
and have scarce two ideas ? JSTo two men, or sets of men in either
House, would write the preamble of any bill in different language ;
I am in earnest now, and will say nothing of those who put them-
selves forward as legislators, and could not write one at all. I ask,
in sober seriousness, where is the difference of principle in any mem-
ber of the House ? I ask also, where is the similarity of detail in
carrying any measure between gentlemen on one side of me or the
other ? The whole is a farcical imitation of the very thing that is
wearing out in St. Stephen’s, and makes the special difhculty to the
formation of any stable government in England. Glentlemen, lam
running my speech into the length beyond which I fall fast asleep
in my Chair; and as I know that the exposition of general truths
forms the most unwelcome of public addresses, I will give you a
few of my private observations and sketches in the House. Irish-
men, countrymen, and lovers! it were impossible to catch the eye, or
delineate the form of any member, until I had got out of my view
the nineteen-stone screen from the Isle of Isles. I have often re-
flected, while on my seat of state —by the way, Knight is not good at
chairs, and knows nothing of a dais or a screen; but let that pass, it
makes no ditterence in the pay. I have felt, that on one side was the
thesis, on the other the exact antithesis of life ; in subject, and is not
man a subject ? in position, in proposition ! It will not do my friends,
to give out all my feelings, all my thoughts. Haines is away, and
will not be of the new House. I will leave my thesis out; it is very
dangerous to come across a man who gives his small opponent warn-
ing, that his bulky form weighs nineteen stone; I fancied little
Wood’s squeak would be something like that of the Princes in the
Tower, under the ponderous body of his opponent. I will say no-
thing more of the giant than to remind him that it is most unparlia-
mentary to interrupt any speaker, as he so constantly terhum
sap; as he is a classical scholar, he will take my hint, and/^save me
much trouble in the new Assembly. I would remind bin/ also that
Haines’s popularity and power arose from his honest-hearted and
perfectly gentlemanly bearing. Shall I give you some of my notes,
special and particular, to the right, to the left, before me —shall I ?
Or will not each of these gentlemen place themselves before their re-
spective constituencies ? Those who have the good sense to retire,
and leave room for better men, shall have no epitaph from me; I
should like to give, however, a hint to Barker, about his reading
but I feel—
Here had the honorable gentleman got, when he was disturbed, as
we have stated; and our active friend on his two sticks, has saved
the learned clerk from the detractive observation of his late master.


TO THE ELECTOES OE SOUTH GEANT.
OENTLEMEif, —I liave becoine so used to being your member, that
I cannot fancy your being so ungrateful as to turn me out. Have I
not turned out better than you expected ? You did not fancy, when
I made that terrible mistake about inhabiting the Council Club, that
I should ever have made so good a legislator as I have. Is it not
very saucy of that conceited fellow Brooke—who made his money
by attending upon us members, that short old time ago, and selling
to us bad wines and weak grog —to stick himself up as he does ? He
sent for by the Governor —was ever such presumption ? lam the
proper man; did I not go in to oppose Haines, to show you what a
vulgar noodle he was ? and have I not taken every opportunity of
doing so ? ought I not then to have taken his place ? Perhaps, if I
were only on the other side, as there is nobody there now, His
Excellency would send for me at once, for I have heard people say,
that it is time he made a change, and that he would do so, if he knew
who to send for. Why he has not thought of me, I cannot tell, and
I think you ought to express yourselves very strongly about it. I
was pitchforked into the old Council, perhaps ; but that’s nothing.
You have done yourselves and me the honor to return me since ; you
have shown a proper appreciation of my merits and your own under-
standings, by selecting me as your chosen and continued represent-
ative. lam your member —why then do you not insist upon my
reward for the services I have performed ? Here are new govern-
ments after new governments, and they never send for me. O’Shanassy
has been twice in, and each time with new members, and yet, though
I am ready, willing and able, he does not ask me to give my valuable
talents and my highly-read educational powers to the formation of a
strong ministry. Do you suppose he would have become so unpo-
pular as he has, had he had my assistance. As the acknowledged
first and best member of the House, I need say no more ; for your
honor and credit, send me back again.
Here this perfect Victorian representative began to whimper, and
cover his face with an old red handkerchief, and the mischievous devil
deprived him of his thoughts,


TO THE ELECTORS OF R J).
Gentlemen, —It is with sentiments of the most profound respect
for the people, that I appear here to-day before you, to render my
account of the income I have received, since you did me the honor
to secure to me the office of Land and Survey. I have recovered the
profound calm my soul requires, after the infamous treatment I re-
ceived at the hands of the press, at the last election—that press Iso
dearly loved, which I have venerated from that youth which has be-
come so familiar to the people here—a press that I may be said to be
the very father of, both from my age and style of writing. Ido not
consider John Pascoe Fawkner as any body—l mean the ingraft from
the parent stem of European civilization ; every flippant boy in these
days fancies he can write —but scribbling and writing are two very
different things ; what I mean are Leaders, such as the mighty Times
pours forth. Gentlemen, when these young men can feel for age and
knowledge acquired in the schools, dipped up from the fountain head,
drank from the pure stream of classic lore, then may they know how
to write, to think, to teach. Respect for persons is not the virtue of
our modern days ; and I have been the subject of your Punch, and
the insulted of the various papers for years since past. Still all has
been decency and in order, until the last election. Because I said I
had been baptized into politics by my revered parents in the House
of Commons, startling Mr. Speaker Abbott from his proprieties in
wonder at my huge infantile form suspended o’er the gallery’s front,
clearing the House in anger and astonishment, from the unwonted
spectacle of such a “ stranger in the House,” the papers turn it into
ridicule. Because I receive two of my warm admirers and friends, who
by some great mistake abuse me on the hustings, in the veriest
Billingsgate they could use, and chum most kindly with them in my
house on a Sunday afternoon, do I deserve such names and insult
as I received ? Have I not been known among you, for a most
extensive hospitality ? Have not my doors been open to alike
of Richmond’s various voters ? Have I not spent all the income,
the public gives, so pleasant and so punctually, in bringing
society together and in making it ? Gentlemen, it is the duty
of the old to have the young among them —shew them, by the
superiority of their manners, w'hat is taste and style. It is
always most agreeable to the elder members of society to see the
young enjoy their youth in innocence and happiness. Have I not
startled all Richmond with these necessary and becoming duties ?
Not after the manner of the Croesus, or the Elwes of our set; I pre-
fer the ancient, though certainly he is no true son of Crassus ; his
parties are for show, and for match-making ; he dances, gold spectacle
on nose, as if all charity lay in a polka, and all modesty too, and
there were no such Parable as “ Dives.” Our fMes are more re-
fined and classic in their nature—sometimes we have our younger
friends to music, and for a discussion of the lighter sciences—some-
times our more humble friends, if a democrat may so express himself,
and pour forth the wonderful learning I possess, in true Platonic
form. The ancients you know were wont so to instruct their
13


fellow-men. True to their example, have I not delighted our
suburban town by lectures and by orations that Cicero himself could
scarce have equalled ? Gentlemen, after all I have done no more
than M my duty, in return for the largest salary, I ever have received;
and I merely name it because my enemies say I should have
answered B and C- on the hustings, where they so much mis-
understood me; and not in my front parlour, particularly they add upon
a Sunday. These saintly fellows say that criminations and recrimina-
tions, the strife of party and the feud of politics, should cease on that
one day. Have I not shown to you that they took advantage of my
constant open door, and the cheerful glass that always circulates
among my constituents, when no election is taking place. Gentle-
men, I have condescended to forget my Greek and Latin and speak
to you m the vulgar tongue. But, oh ! gentlemen, is it not hard that
he scholar who has passed his life with Homer, traced every line of
that great Trojan war, felt himself every hero in the song, from Aga-
down to Troilus ; at one time Paris, then I was very young,
and thought each beauty was a Helen; then I became Hector; then
great Achilles ; I sometimes thought more humbly, and was Diomed •
not old enough for Priam; having no sympathy with Menelaus, I
settled into the mse Ulysses ; then I passed into the more certain
era ot that mystic nation. have I not roused my soul
into the full feeling of ? Have I not been Athenian in quick and
subtle intellect, each and every man in turn—Plato, Demosthenes,
Pericles ; and, when they ostracised Aristides, did not my young heart
burst. Then again those high Spartan virtues, less polished, but
more weighty. Who would not be Boeotian ? to be led by Epami-
nondas. Oh ! gentlemen, that I, so true a Roman, a Cato and a
Cicero in one ; that have got their very Lares and Penates in my
house, and who am as ready to die for his country as was Brutus’
sell; that I, who only loved Rome so much, that I might love Greece
the more—your own Euripides. That I should be called “ a disrepu- .
able old man ”by a boy: why, it is as if Coriolanus were himself
again, that I, who could flutter the whole Press together, alone ; I’d
do it, boy. Gentlemen, I want you to re-elect me, without talking
ot the past. History is very well, when it does not come too close,
l have been studying the Agrarian law as the last of pleasant remi-
I gave up the ancients and Diogenes, when the sallow,
Dr. of our village dragged me out of my tub in Bourke-street.
Ixentlemen, you have heard of the seven wise men of Greece: Such
are our seven ministers ; I leave them each to their own similarities,
but lam the My son of the number. Gentlemen, among the vicious
statements of the Press, it has been told to you that I am a New
-Zealand chief, and that I have been tattooed. Gentlemen, in my
smooth visage you will see the lies they tell you. I may have some
chisel-marks of Cutters on my front, that no Batten will hide ; but I
am Anglo-Saxon, I do assure you, and came from Bristol, of a some-
what tamed and ancient sober family—let that pass. I certainly had
e Imnour of establishing the now-flourishing province of Wellington •
and I have been thinking of the doctrine of afiinities. The largest
bodies are the most attractive; witness my great chief and I—the


tauglit and self-taught, nature and art, the rough and the
polish, the classic- and the colonial. Again, look at the cohesion
of the same particles from New Zealand, in old C and me ; and
in mine office, scarce divided, is another of the Maori tribe ; who, will
not believe, in the atomic system, when such large bodies come
together, and that the biggest granite mountain was not formed from
separate grains of sand ? G-entlemen, you know that our oath of office
makes it utterly impossible to reveal our secret thoughts. And as
some among us forgot exactly how far we should go, they tell me 1
spoke most strangely (it must have been under excitement) about
“ fraud ” or something worse in carrying out the Electoral Correction
Bill, or some such foolish stuff. 1 had forgot that a Ministry is
answerable to the country for the acts that pass the House, and that
it is their duty to see them such as can be justly carried out in law,
or lose their places. I laid it all to Adamson. I should have put it
on the shoulders of old Nestor C ,my long and dearly beloved
friend, and a very cunning old cove, who will always swim where
others drown, j. O desired that neither I or I should
talk politics, and M is never to dine out again: he must keep l^i^"
self either at one end, or the other of Collins-street, or give his
flashy parties ; fancy his talking of being overworked—who ever
sees him at the western end ? Gentlemen, I promise you 111 do
everything I can. My atomic friend, and deputy New Zealand
chief, shall have orders to cut up the land in any fashion that you
like. He does not like giving it away ; because, he says, the plan
has been tried and not succeeded in New Zealand. So we
where he knows nothing about it. Canada, there are lots of hard-
headed blue noses and yellow skins here; or America, there are sober
Yankees, who will tell you all about it. The law is what we want,
and not the breach which Wilson Gray would cram down all our
throats. But you must be the judges until you put me in, and then
you know I must do as lam told. They say that we shall turned
out. I can tell them we shall bid very high indeed, as high Mount
Parnassus ; and as that’s the Tlltima Thule of my ideas, wi no
weary the kind lieturning Officer, but leave myself to you and the
Convention.
This well-prepared address was just brought to a close, when
Belphegor, our demon messenger rushed oft’ with it for fear m error,
it should light a pipe.


Le Diable lias been flitting about with his double sticks, looking
down chimneys, watching the incomers and outgoers of houses, pick-
ing up scattered notes, and pieces of torn paper, some with the
words “ Land Bill,” some “ Education,” “ Denominational,” others
with mystic characters—one d that Ireland, le diable was nearly
flying off to that distant Isle, when he saw “ Mining Leases,” and
finding himself still at home, he looked still further—“ Marker,” “ I
wish we could do without that slim Cassius-looking chap;” “Honest,”
psha! “ Miller,” “ stupid ass, why does he talk at dinners; has he
never indulged in a glass of wine, except when he can get it for no-
thing ?” “He will ruin us, who ought to be the most cunning; ”
“ Chapman,” “Oh ! that is a cunning cove;” “ Evans,” “ what a great
mistake that man is,” “ pit myself, teaching, against his Thucydides
and Co., and see the result;” “ I hope he won’t make a fool of him-
self again at Richmond.” Happily after such and such-like thoughts
and memoranda upon paper, he found and flew off with the great
Mimster’s address, which we give in extenso: —
TO THE ELECTORS OE KILMORE.
I have come among you again to receive your approbation and ap-
plause ; to tell you what I have done, and what I intend to do. The
custom of those people in England, which Duffy is always stuffing
down our throats, they tell me is, for the Prime Minister to lay his
future policy before his constituents, as the most proper place to
give information to the public. You know that I do not like to copy
those Saxons, and I have been looking to see what any Irish Minister
has done. Castlereagh is the only one I can find ; only fancy the in-
justice to old Ireland. To say that Irishmen are not the best of
Ministers in England proves, by its very lie, how we have been
always treated. There is no one capable of'being the first Minister of
the Crown in these colonies but me. Castlereagh I cannot quote, for
did he not sell his country to the Saxon ? I have not been able to
make out what the practice of the Irish Parliament was, for those
enemies to our country, who governed us, have left no account of
the fine speeches that were made in those days to the electors. As
I go back into history, it is evident it has also been written by our
enemies, for all is confusion and quarrelling ; so that if you were to
believe those authors, instead of the Irish being the very best of
statesmen, as they are of every thing else worth being in the world,
they are no statesmen at all. They are basely represented as fluent
talkers, but no actors; a great deal of froth, and no substance ; splendid
in their imaginary flights, imbecile in the execution of facts ; as if
their only merit was in being hospitable and kind-hearted. You
know better, for you know me. Is there any man in this colony can
come up to me ? Am I not going to settle 'the Land Bill ? I! for
do you suppose, or does he suppose, because I have put his heavy
logic into the Land Office, that the “learned Theban” is to exhibit his
classic lore, as they call it; humbug! I like plain speaking, and I only
wish I could let out my mind a little plainer in the House, that’s all;
and if he flatters himself, and has been turning his thousand leaders


into one long speecli, ready, he may as well shut up, and smoke his
pipe in peace, as he "will in silence, unless he is prepared to say that
all that I say is right. Do you not know —for I have said it often
enough—it is not my colleagues and I, hut “ I and my colleagues.”
The people here don’t know me. Do they fancy that any man who
has risen himself as I have done; I don’t thank that miserable fellow
Brown for saying that I had been a butcher’s boy. I do
not think anybody cared what I have been, whether what
they say is true or false. Does he know that I called
C 1 “ a spirit-selling son of a ,” within the very walls
of the House, and I will call him so too, without them. I was
saying, when that —you know what—came across my mind, that no
man who has risen himself from nothing knows exactly his own
standard—uneducated in the discipline of the schools in youth, or of
the world in mature life, he reads, he sees, he feels of himself, to
himself; he knows nothing but himself. With every great man he is
greater, Tvdth every clever man he is more clever still; the greatest
hero is small in proportion to himself. With the good he is better,
he out-Herod’s Herod in all his thoughts and views; he sees himself
ever through magnifying-glass, all the world besides microscopically.
How can any man, who reads only on one side and settles every
question by his own ideas, discern anything correct in the differing
opinions of another ? I, then, I, J. O’S , what do I care for the
rough reading of the world ? What matters it to me that wisdom is
born of knowledge and experience, founded on learning, and brought
up with society in all its differing phases and idiosyncracies ? What
do I care for all the learning Dr. Evans is said to possess, his Grre-
cian and Homan recollections ? What good do they do him ? Should
I be the Prime Minister of this Colony, would Sir Henry call me
friend ? would he dance with my wife, and till she came too ?
if I knew as much about the ancients as my classic colleague, and
were I as elegant in manner and gentlemanly in all my halnts as—■
who —I am thinking first, of course, among the Executive, l4t me run
them over ; just wait a minute. It is certainly not the L.L.D., it is
not C , nor burly I , nor H r, there’s the other H ,
who certainly has as pretty tolerable an opinion of himself as any
boy over twenty could have, and M is trying to do the amiable
and gives parties, but whatever my own private opinion may be, I do
not think the public will believe in that any more than they do in
M ’s overflowing heart. No, if I want to know anything that I
do not know already, there’s my friend at Williamstown, spiritual
or temporal —he can tell me everything in the world, though he
may have been more than twenty years in this small corner of it.
The question I was asking you, when I got out of breath with that
learned disquisition, was, did you ever know a self-raised man satis-
fied with his position ? Carried by the caprice of popularity—which,
singularly enough (as all history tells us), the lowest are taken to
the highest place in power. Kings have made ministers of them in
autocratic times, as well as have the people; the very best, the
wisest have completed but half their desires, fulfilled their mission,
and have fallen —the Arteveldes and Eienzis, with the Wolseys and


a host of others. What is my mission ? If it he not Irish and
Roman Catholic, it is nothing. Mixed with others, I should be lost.
Above and foremost, wliat may I not achieve ? What object can I
have beyond myself, my pay, my place ? Patriotism is not plebeian ;
it takes a high, a noble, an unselfish view of aU things ; it may spring
out of oppression, but it will not germinate from the tree oi liberty
ah'eady planted and of flourishing, luiclipped proportions. Every
rnan must have a goal to run to, a purpose to accomplish —education,
high mental cultivation, the loftiest model, worshipped as an idol,
may arouse the enthusiastic young scholar into action —but in this
material age, in this self-dependent country, who could stand alone
simply for his country’s good ? His country’s good ! simple, but the
most extensive meaning words that man could put together. What
is our country’s good ? to make men happy here; to carry them to
Heaven! How, oh ! tell me how! is there any but one way, and that
way—is through B .
Le Diable would not leave the address to be finished, for fear it
should contain revelations he would not wish the world to know. We
must therefore give it incomplete to our readers, for stady and
reflection.
TO THE ELECTORS OE THE IMPORTANT DISTRICT
OE BALLAARAT.
Gentlemen, — Having ascertained that your mining district is the
head-quarters of the Tipperary boys, from whence are drafted off at
every rush a very large percentage of those who roam from place to
place, as gold is found; who kick up rows, as j oily Irish boys should
always do, wherever they may be, as it is the duty of their country-
men to do, to the hated Saxon—destroying his peaceful labors,
rendering night hideous and unsafe. Einding also that a man may
be as jolly as he pleases when among you, let his position and the
importance of the duty he is on be what it may—where, in fact, the
whiskey-toddy levels all distinctions. Oh ! how many nasty stories
have I added to my stock, to the infinite delight of , whose
elevated rank among us is evidence in itself that he must be grave,
serious, and severe. Gentlemen, you don’t want a long story about
politics, the land and all that. Haven’t I told you aU about it long
ago; and haven’t I talked so much, that people say that I had better
have held my tongue. Don’t that big Coriolanus chief of ours, the
big brother of all his countrymen, who weighs his nineteen stone,
and tells us of it too—does not he give me a grasp of his great
mutton fist, from which I think the sledge hammer was first con-
ceived ; that regular Philistine, who taunts the people on the other
side, and would slay them all with the jaw bone, but you know all
about that, and it will not do to quote the Bible, even in a jest; for
even among us, there is always some humbug of a fellow, that puts
on a long face, and you must recollect that I am not only the first
criminal lawyer in the Colony, and counsel to the Sheriff, but I am
also crown prosecutor ex officio ; and an officer of that grave impor-
18


tance, in the absence of a grand jury, requires all the steadiness of
mind that Boman Cato did possess —only he was a fool and a teeto-
taller ; he was not an Irishman, and that condemns him at once, and
though he lived to a jolly old age, and, for a man who enjoys himself
in this world as I do, that’s something you know. No ! eat, drink,
and be merry, say I. I’ll leave those Borna]! humbugs and the
Grrecian too to that slow old coach who does the Lands; he may give
himself the virtues of Cato, the eloquence of Cicero; he may imagine
the philippics of Demosthenes —he certainly does not utter them—
for when M——e gets up, and uses the biting satire of Cassius, he has
no Brutus’ reply, let alone the poignant wit and lofty dignity of
words, the periods and the sense of the famed Athenian orator. But
we Avill leave that old cove to Cutt-er and to Batten —I must say
nothing about Wilson Gray, for we are very great friends, and he’s
a great deal too close and knowing for me. Only I was just going
to tell you that when I came in for Castlemaine—ah ! now there’s a
slip, the devil a word I intended to say about that place—sure, now
you’ll be asking me why I don’t go there again. A man is always
under an obligation to those who once returned him; an honourable
man feels it, and so do I. There is no doubt that they respect me,
as a representative should be respected. No man has any business
in either house, whose talents, education, honest truthfulness of pur-
pose and high moral character, do not make him respected above his
fellows, among all classes. No man has any right to represent others in
a district, the country as a whole, unless he is competent to make
laws, and sets a good example to his fellow men; whose word’s his
bond; who makes no promises he knows he can’t perform; who
flatters no prejudices; who is straiglitforward in every word and
deed —;]’ust such a man am I: and yet those men at Castlemaine say
that I have done nothing that I said. Between you and I—you
understand my wink, ain’t I used to it: haven’t I been wiping to
a jury aU my life ? what’s the use of fine Milesian eyes, a man
can turn both men and women as we please ? They talk of broad
Milesian shoulders: sure I’ve got them too. Use them, my boys,
when I want you —but give me the eyes. What I was going to tell
you, when that horrid place that is going down hill so fast —ah! well
thought of—that is the reason I leave them —that constituency is
not half important enough, for such a man as I. I always stick to
the gold, and, as I can’t go at present to the Back Creek, I come to
you, for here you appreciate all my experience of mining and public
companies—-here I can exercise my power in favor of whom I please;
there they are only rowdy, and haven’t come to leases yet. Still I
have them in my mind; we owe them a debt of gratitude, for keep-
ing us in. office; for had it not been for their petition, which they
cared nothing about themselves, and those self-sufficient nobodies of
the Convention, we should have had the elections in June, and we,
some three months less of pay. Hurrah for the O’s of the Conven-
tion, and the self-elected delegates from the peaceful Back Creek
miners. But the little secret I was about to tell you, is, that when
I became a member I intended to have ])ut down Mi e ; and
while E was to smother in cumbrous classic lore, I was to show


my deep reading, in a ricli vein of humour, to hury him altogether.
How we have both succeeded, all the world doth know; it was the
question of the cudgel and the single-stick, the broad-sword and the
rapier; and we have learnt that the sharp prick of a small needle
will inflict a sharper wound than a big skewer. I went into the
House, and put my temper and my knowledge against Shakesperian
reading, and the Dickens’ style—my thick vinegar against the lime’s
thin juice ; and I have learnt a lesson, which I have not the good
sense to profit by —but this is quite a secret between you and I, my
countrymen; and as I don’t intend to bother your brains about
politics, let us talk of the virtues and the merits of the ministers.
Do you know anything about O’Connell ? —Sure you all do ; well
then, when that old cock began to crow too much for himself, and
for the priests, and did not turn his rebellious talk into bloody action,
three Irish papers started in Dublin’s sweet city—one The Nation,
by our friend Dufiy here ; and although a professed rebel to the back-
bone and spinal marrow —even where the Irish are only atomic por-
tions of a large whole, he was too cautious to go the Mitchell length,
or that silly, well-meaning mistake Smith O’Brien, and he is now a
would-be-leader of the people, and bides his time. Now, as he and
O’Connell could not pull together, neither can he and the O’Connell
of this Colony, as the one has seen too much, and knows too much to
be priest-ridden, and defer to priestcraft. As two lights cannot shine
with equal brightness, one must pale before the other—as two kings
cannot smell the same nosegay, and draw the same perfume from it
—so cannot the broad Celtic face and “ the pale brow ” —though, by
the way, the lines were not wnitten about him —exist on the same
measure of the public, to do their public duty. Now, gentlemen, I
have no idea of long addresses, unless the fee is certain —yours cer-
tainly is marked £ISOO, but I want £2OOO, and to be “ minister of
mines.” Here you have seen and felt the benefit of my “ mining
leaseshere you can understand the value of my astute statesman-
ship —uniting the profound lawyer with the far-seeing politician—l
prepare all legislation for an enduring time ; you will find no blunders;
not the slightest error in anything I do; you will thus perceive lam
much too good for Castlemaine. My friend Humphrey is a sharp
fellow, and if he reads, and marks the times, and studies human nature,
he may, in time, become a useful man ; and everybody hopes to see
him in again. Grentlemen, I think that I have praised myself sufii-
ciently to your satisfaction; I have explained, in the most candid
way, all that you could wish to know. I do not care what a man is,
so long as he votes for me; and when he wants the law, gives me a
brief —don’t forget that among you; for though politics are very good
things, and profitable in office, stiU the children must not be forgotten.
Here the learned candidate fell into the Miller state, and with his
tenth toddy, left the effusion of his soul to our wicked imp, who was
up the chimney with a merry laugh; and we found the papers smell-
ing of whiskey and tobacco,
20


TO THE ELECTOES OE WEST BOUEKE.
Gentlemen, —Have I not spoken so mncli and so well in your
behalf? Have I not helped to keep in O’Shanassy ? And is not
that doing the best duty I could do ? Hid I not open my mouth with
eloquent oration, when that silly young chap Wilkie wanted to divide
our district, and the Catholic party that returns me ? Sure, some of
them feUows, who are always railing against the true-hearted Irish,
say I look like some heathen savage god, in stone or wood •, that I am
stolid and never even smile ; a’int I to know better than to be grin-
ning, and walking about the house, as some of them do, never sitting
still for a moment —fuss! fuss! as if they were somebodies, that every-
body wanted to observe; whispering into one ear and then into ano-
ther, as if they really had anything to say after all, let alone of the
importance they would wish the Speaker and the members all to think ?
I feel the serious nature of my legislative position ; I am grave and
thoughtful, in imitation of the owl, the emblem bird of wisdom.
Gentlemen, the Eomans must be represented; they are one-fifth, the
census says ; I think they are the better half—l do not mean the wo-
men, whom they call men’s better-halves, although I could never see
the wit of it, but they is the best that is the Irish part. And I am
the best man you could have, for I never make any mistake by talk-
ing, like some I could name. I vote as lam told, and that saves a
great deal of trouble. Wilkie tries to talk, but he does not know the
gamut yet, and before he can keep in time, I fear, he must have new
strings and keys and aU. Now, is it not better to say nothing (that’s
true Irish), than to talk nonsense? Now, gentlemen, yours is a very
large district, and possesses in its all shades of interests and of wants;
nobody can know everything —mining, agriculture, railways, grazing,
and the ITemington and Footscray peculiar requirements ; is it not
better then to know nothing ? lam sure there was evidence last elec-
tion —there was a ruck of asses in the race and the young tuner won,
Could anything be worse ? We stuck to the man of pots pans,
and who would not, after hearing him explain his political views ?
I heard that one man said, that if the duties of a representative were
not of too important and serious a nature to be turned into ridicule,
that election would have formed a comedy for Aristophanes ; I don’t
know who he is ; his name is not in the Directory, but I supjiose he
lives in Bacchus Marsh, and perhaps, he is a Miller. Gentlemen,- we
must be represented; education, talent, oratory, and all that nonsense,
we don’t care about —O’Shanassy does all the Irish and Catholic poli-
tics of the Colony, and that’s enough^^—Duffy’s a Young Ireland man,
and we don’t believe in him—at all events, while we’ve got the t’other.
Tlie electric member here found he had expended every spark he
could arouse, all the batteries in the Colony were too weak to elicit
one more, and M‘Gowan having given it up in despair, Belphegor
rushed off with the telegram.


TO THE ELECTOES OE W L.
Me. Chaieman,— Sir most candidates in their folly and their
rudeness to the Chair address direct the “ OUy Polly” under the proud
title of gentlemen. I Sir take a better course Sir gentlemen Sir
will do Sir when you want a period but Sir stands Sir for all
punctuation it serves Sir for comma colon semi and full stop it
answers for an interrogative and note of admiration it draws atten-
tion too. I have come Sir to seek Sir the renewed favour Sir
and confidence Sir of my old constituents Sir. When last Sir I
came Sir to he re-elected Sir it was to add Sir to my income Sir.
In the depth of my love for my country Sir I had supported on my
own shoulders Sir all the heavy burthen Sir of both Lands Sir
and Sir a task Sir so Herculean Sir that no other man
Sir but me Sir could have undergone the labour Sir. I tell you
Sir the great Victorian line of railway Sir line Sir before which
Sir all other lines in the wide world Sir will pale into mere thread-
papers Sir not Sir that I know Sir what a threadpaper means
Sir as reels have been in use since I was born Sir. I merely Sir
mention it Sir to show my ancient reading Sir. We have heard of
war Sir and my fellow attorney Sir is to retire Sir to make way
for mo Sir to comixiSiiKi our tiriuy Sir. youtli S/ud ©xpcrioucG
combined Sir entitle me to demand Sir the highest place in the
tented field Sir. The very reason Sir I sheathed my sword with
threat and dreadful oath Sir on that famed Separation Hay Sir
which separated me my ambition and my uniform Sir in which Sir
not even J S t looks half as well, though he is tolerably con-
ceited too Sir was Sir that I was the proper person to command
I the only man to receive the colours to speak Sir the high
emotions of my warlike soul Sir —a soul Sir on fire and ready
to insult a sold, at war with all and every that come near me and
annoy me Sir. But a war Sir wiU prove Sir the mettle of our men
Sir and you will see my spirit in its proper place. I hope Sir the
constituents of our district are “of correct opinions” Sir not that I
fear Sir for the safety of the Ministry Sir the public Sir know Sir
they cannot do without me Sir. There are but three men in Aus-
tralasia who understand railways Sir—l Harbyshire and Ward Sir.
I of course Sir know the most Sir and proved my knowledge on
Cornish and Bruce’s day. No station-master in the world not even
from the Hobson’s Bay Eailway could have managed better than I
did Sir. The Sir must be carried out Sir and if I Sir go
out Sir with the Ministry Sir the railways will stand still Si r. Nobody
in England Sir will take another debenture Sir all confidence will
be lost Sir here and there Sir, Harbyshire made all tlie midland
lines _in England Sir and they have been at a standstill ever since.
Binding his error Sir in the weakness of all his works in that ignorant
country he is doubling everything here Sir. Bridges Sir that should
cross the puddles in the way cost Sir £BO,OOO Sir when £20,000
would have done everything we wished. The fact Sir is Sir that’ for
so numerous and so great a people Sir the works of other countries
Sir are puerile Sir impotent Sir and ridiculous Sir. I hope Sir


that the jealousy of England Sir will not Sir call our Darby shire
from us Sir. No Sir nor our Ward either if we three Sir are only
left quietly Sir in office Sir this Sir will be Sir the greatest nation
upon earth Sir for public works Sir. Captain Clarke Sir thought
Sir that nobody knew anything Sir but himself Sir and I will not
Sir appeal to his jealous feeling for my testimony. But Sir there
is another gentleman here Sir under me Sir who though with much
of the jealous feeling of his corps if his indolescent nature will allow
will still Sir say Sir that I am the greatest Minister of Works this
Colony has yet produced Sir. The Batteries Sir are under me too
Sir and being a lawyc)' Sir must I not understand assault and bat-
tery Sir and damage too Sir. J. tliink Sir as I have so lately Sir
been before you Sir 1 need now Sir only impress upon you Sir
not only for ine Sir but for the sake of the country of our choice
Sir to use your influence Sir to return Sir persons Sir of the
“ correct opinions” Sir and always recollect Sir that Public Works
Sir bring Sir much, patronage Sir. And now Sir having kept my
temper Sir for so long a time Sir for fear Sir that anybody should
differ Sir or contradict me Sir I would still Sir remind you Sir of
the “ opinions ” Sir and my merit Sir as a minister Sir.
Poor Belphegor got sick, and could hardly take the trouble to
bring this piece of egotism to be added to the labors of his collection;
so without its passing through our sanctum —where it certainly
would have been condemned, he slipped it into the hands of the
printer’s devil, and w'e are not answerable for its appearance among
the eloquence, the oratory, the patriotism of his other thefts.


TO THE ELECTOES OF THE WHOLE CITY.
Gentlemen—
“ Pity the sorrows of a poor old man.
Whose trembling limbs have borne him to your door ;
His days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief and Heaven will bless your store,”
I do not require alms, the relief I want is rest and quiet for my
remaining days. Having been one of the iron pillars of this Colonial
state, in mine old age I have taken refuge in a soft-goods store.
Having from the anvil driven many a spark, I am too happy to receive
the blanket’s warmth. Gentlemen, it is high time I took my leave of
you. There is no wisdom so great as to know one’s self, and if I have
honestly performed my part, and done my portion of good service to
the country we have adopted, were it not proof of my good remain-
ing sense, I left to younger men the harassed duties of the State,
In these most troublous times, Europe in a blaze, leaving our infant
nation to its own care, to try the vast experiment of freedom, unre-
strained by property or station, leaving each man to be a man, if he will
so behave himself. Are we not destined to teach the older world the of-
fices of mankind, and prove that every man is entitled to a voice in all
that appertains unto the public welfare ? Is it not here that nature’s
noblemen will cast their own mould ? Look around! where have you
united so much intelligence, talent, and high resolve; where such
patriots, such self-denial, such Spartan and Eoman virtue, such abne-
gation of all personal benefits, such indifierence to relationshij)s and
those dear friendly ties that unite men in thought and very soul
together ? Show me in this wide world such another city, from the
late eternal Mayor to my own furnace property, of such good cha-
racter as this. Every man loves his neighbour as himself; trade is the
mere exchange of articles of relative value; honour and honesty reigns
friends if you will only bury me, not under
the first sod of the canal—no—not that—but, when it’s opened—
Here most mischievons Diable, having been in Spain, used
its benediction, “ May you live a thousand years,” and left the good old
man humming, “ There’U be no luck about the house,” &c., &c.


Efie ißtjcttrt aaii«£(s.
TO THE ELECTOES OE
Gentlemen Electors oe the District oe , —Oli! to whom
shall I address myself ? Who will have me ?I, the A y G 1
of this most important colony, to he with no constituency to apply
to—nobody whom I shall honor by representing them, or be honoured
by being their representative 5 what matter words and terms. A
seat, a seat, is that which I require ; let me see, where can I
safely go ? The gentlemen of St. K say they will not have
the Baker’s man again, and that they would rather have the
Baker of the two. The Convention cannot return us both ; mine
old enemy and rival has made such a split in the councils of
our land, dividing friends, that no place will again tolerate two of
us; and between yon and I, as lam speaking to myself oHe is too
many, if he really hold Convention principles. Now let me open up
iny soul, and freely with myself discuss the past, the present, and
future. Of the past —what was I? A merchant in the Canadas,
connected with the Press; sub-agent, I helped in London the
clever but dangerous E . Then seeing that Zealand
was a favorite Colony with the general public, more highly
patronized than any other, I helped and wrote in the New
Zealand Gazette; eating my terms; I do not only mean my
own words when necessary, but legally to the bar ; bamboozled old
E s, while quietly smoking his short pipe, and got a Judgeship
in New Zealand. After nine years’ experience among the highly
civilized natives, amassing an amount ot legal knowledge, criminal,
civil, and commercial, discovering as I went that the code criminal
was much too severe, the code civil much too doubtful, the code com-
mercial dependent mainly upon usage. Did Ido all this ?
discover that the law of nature in purls naturalibus was not exactly
that which fits a man to take the first position at the bar—to be a
Jud«'e among men of higher education, talent, professional experience
and knowledge of the world ?No matter what I discover the
Government found out I was not wanted, and I became Colonial
- Secretary in . Now in the vale of life, let me review the
past, for better governing the future. AVhat did I there ? A penal
island from end to end, under martial law—paid by the Imperial
State—a positive servant of the Crown, unchosen by the people, i
scented at no distance off; I saw looming before me the termination
of transportation to those shores. The neighbouring colony had cask
from its harbour the very first approach of criminal contamination. _i
opposed my master, and my master’s representative ; 1 hoped to gam
popularity ; I mutinied ; I was not hung, as some two hundred years
ago I might have been ; and I was only very cmlly recommended to
appeal to Downing Street in Downing Street I did so, and was told,
“ Thou art no longer oflicer of mine.” Painful recollections these,
cradled in rebellion, I took the lightning with my own small thunder,
and was received with acclamation by the enlightened citizens, es-
pecially the attorneys. Deceit and disobedience were considered


patriotic; I had taken place and pay without, scruple, my con-
science only touched me, when I fancied I might benefit by it.
What will he the result ? The future —that future which
leads so closely to the grave, and leaves a family behind. I
was received in triumph; the Courts were opened, causes
which had waited my arrival came on ; my large red bag was filled to
overflowing, and I said, “Oh ! soul, am I not right ?” I stood for the
Council, and beat the bully of the bar. I wore my credit out; those
sagacious lawyers, whose clients’ interests is in their keeping, found
that I did not possess a Cambridge, Oxford, or Trinity education;
I had not even a Stinkomalee*; that, without that, my experience was
nil, and my bag diminished, so as not to weary my poor trembling
hmbs. I fell into a Chamber counsel. True I took some revenge;
I wrote against a knighted member of the profession to the Times.
I have kept him still in labor, but not in briefless work : that I
cannot do. The Council found me prosy, and all my hopes were
flitting from me, under this New Constitution Act, from which I had
anticipated so much. One constituency had returned, under the
mischievous guidance of one man, a member, no honor to the House.
Here was my chance again, and at my own most convenient leisure,
I took my way to that very pretty place. There were already two
Eichmonds in the field ; one I cared not for, and he retired in my
favor ; the other, however, required all my tact and cunning. I asked
him, to his great surprise, but to me most natural question, as
between gentleman and gentleman, “ That if he were not successful,
did he wish that I should be.” I said he was surprised, he did not
comprehend the motive of my question; then answered, surely,
“ Yesand with you, reversing the event, when I explicitly replied,
‘‘ Yes,” also. Did I act up to my most unnecessary enquiry ?
most positively. No! Two gentlemen, acquaintances, opposed in poli-
tics, may always meet on friendly terms, and not interfere with each
other’s plans ; how did I act, when I promised on my election, for my
present seat, and I wanted to secure a future one in case of
accident and a warming pan until then ? Did I act up to my pledge,
when the room and meeting were courteously conceded to me, and at
once gracefully, as I had solemnly promised I would do, acknowledge
publicly the fact and obligation ?—No, Oh! no, that would have
been unnecessary refinement. I was under pledge to Wilson Gray;
the Convention had given me a seat, so I put myself on a footing
with the man who had written his retirement to his rival candidates,
and then returned, and left to him my character and friends. AVell
then. Gentlemen Electors of the District of , as I have
proved myself as worthy of your confidence as the other members
you have chosen—although it is very true I begged that you would
consider me as “ your second member,” as I promised to bring the
waters of the river G- to the top, say, of B Hill, know-
ing full well the influence of L and' N on that reef, as
I agreed to the propriety of reducing the export half-crown, one-half,
and as I have forgotten all about it, as you see it is my wont to do,
♦ University College, Gower Street,


with, all such promises and professions. Surely I have earned your
entire confidence ; falsehood is not unknown among you at elections;
there is a man who talks big of his father and his Tory principles, and
lies through thick and thin to return the greatest democrat—if the
member knows the difference, or can explain it. Grentlemen, I think
I have earned the suffrage of the majority among you at H ;
I’m not so sure of R . Your present member has, I hear, turned
shopkeeper among you, and created some small jealousy thereby. Can’t
you let me in instead ? I’m talking in my sleep ; I dream and fancy
in those unconscious midnight thoughts that I may be cut off of my
present handsome income, received most regularly every month ; I
found the sandy sea-shore beach unstable to my foot, I felt I had no
standing there ; I wandered on and on to rural Mornington, here the
vision came of rest and safe return. Scarce had I settled in my hopes,
when two staunch men warned me from the field, the place was rushed
already. I met a man, notorious for dressing down his governesses
and his grooms, and fearful of his pugnacious habits, I strove and
strove to ease myself of the heavy weight upon my empty chest, and
found myself in the arms of —J. O’S ; where then shall I go ?
prosy and worn out, I still must find some place to keep myself* in.
A fight, they tell me, there will be ; all our cunning and our art will
be required; without me they can do nothing- can explain, and
prose, and weary out the House, as no other one can, except, perhaps,
that fellow B r, who can weary them full well, but has some sense
in his long speech withal; albeit, he pumps it up with his shoulders.
Electors of St. K , of Mornington, of R , of every place and
all, who win indorse a brief to H.M. A Gl 1 ? Think,
only think, of my patronage and power —if my own great merits will
not move your pity —who will have me, a perfect Nestor in my wis-
dom, a very Mercury in habits, though rather a lame one ?
Members of the Convention, past, present, and to come, help me ! I
am Canadian, and I will declare that the land system of that Colony
is the very best on earth, though every body knows it is not: I will
swear by that of the IJnited States, and selection before survey,
although I know it is illegal; bring me but in, and I wilT—forget every-
thing. Oh ! why do the Judges look so plump andVell? AYilliama
should have resigned ; what business have men in office to go home,
as they call it ? as for M , he grows both young pd merry;
the Chief had a tumble, t’other day —he did not break his neck. If
but a vacancy would fall in, while I can give it to myself, I’d care for
none of your plebeian elections, and let my brother B take care
of himself. What is the use of my talking of the future ? AYhat
will the future be ? Not in the House. I hear the Ministry’s not
popular ; I don’t believe it; it must be the very best, for I made it;
and although I allow my big brother minister to take the credit to him-
self, to me the honor does belong.
Here the old gentleman’s feelings overcame him, for the idea of
the soft-hearted H M—^ — came upon him, tears ran down the
channels of his fine Roman nose, dimmed his golden glasse.s, and
the devil ran away with what we have here printed.


FEINTED AT THE HERALD OEFICE, MELBOURNE,


#
#
29


."M■ . , ’''s- ‘ V/
■.-> 'M,. ..■*•■■ -A'V-
'/ " ■ - . ‘ .
V " ‘■ ' ' V V >,^'sl*'' I ’/-J' -.*«».
<-'l-’-. v:-.. -■»-.;4-'-: ■-'^-'^l'f'
■»■&" •■> ' . ,A? , '-Vi'" V"" ' '
’.' ' >'-' '. . .’ '. ■ - -,Vii*-»«
