





SUBSTANCE
OF
A SERMON
AGAINST
Drunkenness,
PREACHED TO THE CATHOLICS OF DIVERS
PARTS OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY W. ULLATHORNE, D.D., V.G.
SYDNEY: PRINTED BY WILLIAM JONES.
LONDON:
REPRINTED WITH THE AUTHOR’S PERMISSION AND
PUBLISHED BY KEATING AND BROWN,
38, Duke Street, Grosvenor Square,
and 32, St. Martin’s-le-Grand.
1838.
Price Threepence, or 2 s 6d. per dozen.




A
SERMON.
“He that is temperate shall prolong life .” Eccles.
37, v. 34.
u Let us cast off the works of darkness and put on the
armour of light; let us walk honestly, as in the day,
not in rioting and drunkenness St. Paul to the
Romans, c. 13th, v. 12 ; and Gal. c. 5.
“ Take heed to yourselves lest your hearts he over-
charged with surfeiting and drunkenness, —and that
day come upon you suddenly” Luke c. 21, v. 34.
IVhat is a drunkard? A Christian is one who
follows and practises the virtues of Christ. An angel
is a pure creature, that contemplates and enjoys God.
A man is a creature that thinks and reasons. A
brute is a creature that follows its appetite indeed,
but never goes to excesses beyond the bounds of order.
A 2


What is a drunkard ? I have gone through the whole
of creation that lives, and I find nothing in it like the
drunkard. He enjoys no happiness, like the angels :
he is not preparing himself for happiness, like the
Christian : he does not think or reason, like a man :
he keeps not his appetite within the bounds of nature,
like the brute. What then is the drunkard ! The
drunkard, is nothing but the drunkard. There is no
other thing in nature to which he can be likened.
This is not a subject on which we can be allowed
to soften down the truth in our words until it becomes
falsehood.
The drunkard is a self made wretch, who has de-
praved, and gratified the depraved cravings, of the
throat of his body, until he has sunk his soul so far
that it is lost in his flesh; and has sunk his very flesh,
beyond comparison, lower than that of the animals
which serve him; a self degraded creature, whose
degradation is made manifest to every one but himself;
a self made miserable being, who whilst he is insen-
sible to his own misery, afflicts every one else with
misery around him or belonging to him. He differs
from the madman only in this; because, the madman
has not caused his own calamity, whilst this man has:
because, the madman is innocent, whilst this man is
guilty. The madman is an object for pity, and com-
passion, and all the cares of humanity ; whilst the
drunkard is an object of ridicule, scorn, and contempt:
a butt for the world to play its follies at: a stock for
the world’s laughter; a ball for its game of mockery :
a tool for the knave’s cheatery, and the harlot’s wilery:
an instrument in the hand of Hell’s malignity. The
madman is placed in security, he can be guarded


against injuring himself or others. The drunkard is
let loose upon mankind like some foul, ill-boding and
noxious animal, to pester, torment and disgust every-
thing that reasons or feels; whilst the curse of God
hangs over his place, and the gates of Heaven are
closed against him. “Be not deceived,” says the
Apostle, “ neither fornicators, nor idolators, NOR
drunkards, shall possess the Kingdom of Heaven.”
It is not I, it is. St. Paul who classes the drunkard
in such company and shuts the gates against him.
An outcast! The woes of Heaven fall thick and
fast upon him. “ Who hath woe?” asks Solomon,
“ whose father hath woe? Who hath contentions?
Who fall into pits? Who hath wounds without cause?
Who hath redness of eyes ? Surely they that pass their
time in wine and study to drink up their cups” “ Woe
to you,” says Isaias, “ Woe to you, that rise up early
in the morning to follow drunkenness, and to drink
until the evening to be inflamed. Woe to you that are
mighty to drink wine, and are stout men at drunken-
ness. Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkenness
of Ephraim: the drunkenness of Ephraim shall be
trodden under foot.” Are not these woes written on
the face of the drunkard? Are they not heard in all
his acts? Knows he what he says or what he says
not? Has not prudence left the guard of his tongue?
Is there any gate to his mouth, any bar to his lips ?
Are not the secrets of the past, and the follies of the
present, and fetid fumes of the liquor, and the foul
thoughts of the tempter, mingled together, and poured
out upon all around him? The very animal powers
sink under drunkenness. It darkens the senses as
well as the soul, and deadens the feelings as well as


the mind. Weakens, stupifies, sickens, shatters the
frame of the animal man as well as the frame of the
rational man. Deprives him of God, deprives him of
heaven, deprives him of honor, cuts him off from
human respect, casts him away from the friendship of
men, destroys his fortune, ruins his family, deprives
him of himself, kills all his good here, and all his
hope hereafter, and bloats his body with premature
disease, to fatten the worms and enrich the rankness
of the grave yard.
A Holy Father has described this condition as
truly as briefly. “ Drunkenness,” he says, “is a
willing fury, a traitor of thoughts, a ridiculous
calamity, a voluntary demon, a state worse than
madness.” Would you know how the drunkard is
worse than the demoniac? We pity the tormented
demoniac, we abhor the drunkard. We condole with
the one; we are indignant and irritated at the other.
The snares of an enemy have possessed the demoniac;
his own councils have possessed the drunkard. With
the demoniac he is driven about a slave by his posses-
sor ; with the demoniac he is fallen from his state of
mind and manhood; with him he staggers, falls, rolls
a disgusting eye, foams and exhales nauseousness.
He is disagreeable to his friends, ridiculous to his
enemies, contemptible to his servants, loathsome to
his wife, scandalous to his children—odious to all.
Whilst all that call him acquaintance are indignant,
and all that call him friend are distressed; whilst his
nearest relations are miserable, and his children are
squalid from neglect, wretched, perhaps, from want
of care, wicked from example; the drunkard sits in
the house of crime, at the table of infamy, with his


cup of weakness, his draught of poison before him,
and is there contending with his brother drunkard
which shall most defame himself: which shall show
the greatest folly, which shall exhibit the meanest
baseness, which shall best shatter his nerves, and
destroy his nature, and abuse and anger their common
Lord and Creator.
St. Chrisostome has well described the effects of In-
temperance, —“ Paleness, weakness, laziness, folly.”
Pale hanging cheeks, red ulcered eyes, trembling
hands, furious dreams, restless distracted sleep : like
murderers and persons of an affrighted conscience, so
broken, so sick, so disorderly are the slumbers of the
drunkard, who wakes to misery. Shew me a tempe-
rate man, and I will shew you a prudent man; shew
me a temperate man, and I will shew you a virtuous
man ; shew me a temperate man, and 1 will shew
you a prosperous man; shew me a temperate man,
and I will point out to you a wise man. for intem-
perance is the root of folly : intemperance is the seed
of madness : intemperance is the fountain of unclean-
ness : intemperance is the well-head of injustice:
intemperance is the poison-spring of unbelief : intem-
perance is the stream where each virtue drowns
herself: intemperance is the cloud of fleshy vapour
which rises over and darkens all the soul. “ Wine,”
say the Proverbs, “ is a luxurious thing, and drunk-
enness, riotousness. Whosoever is delighted therewith
shall not be wise.” Wine drunken with excess,” says
Ecclesiasticus, “is bitterness to the soul.” “ The
heat of drunkenness is the stumbling block of the soul,
lessening strength and causing wounds.” Y es, lessen-
ing strength. There is an idea abroad, that strong


drink strengthens. Never was there a more fatal
error. All stimulants to excitement when taken to
excess, strengthen at the moment, but leave the body
weaker ever after. “ Look not then” says the wise
man, “on the liquor when it is yellow, when it
sparkleth in the glass; it goeth in pleasantly , but in
the end it will bite like a snake, and spread abroad
poison like a Basilisk .” Like the honey with the
sting in it, both go down together. The sweetness
soon leaves the palate, but the sting has only com-
menced its work.
See the drunkard begin, but watch him till he ends
his career of intoxication. He has sat at table, he
has tilled his cups, he has invoked the companions of
his guilty joy, his mirth has maddened into riot, then
fevered into criminal passion, then lowered into
obscene drivel, then sunk into stupor ;he has uttered
folly and thought it wisdom, he has profused curses
where he should have uttered blessings ;he has poured
out filth and mistaken it for wit; the Christian has
now left the scene, and human nature is fast follow-
ing him; reason fades away as folly grows more
boisterous; the madness of folly glides off too, and
stupidity remains the only companion of drunken
insanity ; the room reels; the table moves ; the man
has fallen away and a beast lies in his place. And
even this brute is dead, all but the throat and belly,
and these are sickly. Like the Banquet of Sisara, it
ends with driving a nail through the man’s head.
The very infidel, who in old times wrote against
Christianity, could say this much of drunkenness,
“ That it knocks down the man, and nails him to the
sensual intermixtures of the body.”


What man loves to be despised ? Which of you
will endure patiently the contempt of another ?
And yet every drunkard crowns his head with mighty
scorn. Putting himself beneath the lowest; de-
grading himself under the meanest. The boys laugh
at him, children hoot him, and the criminal scorn
him, as he is led home like the cripple, lisping the
imperfect noises of an infant, or babbling with a full
and spongy tongue, an empty head, a foolish heart.
Woe and alas! God of Heaven ! Dare I appeal
to Thee from amidst such a scene ! Thy creatures
too ! Whither has thy image departed from them !
To see a sensible man dishonour himself like the
foolish; disgrace his friends like the impious; im-
poverish his family like the unjust; bring degrada-
tion on those who are dearest to him like the heart-
less; bring reproach on religion like the prophane ;
destroy his body like the murderer, and his soul like
the infidel; become an appellation of scorn and a
scene of derision to all, and of forgetfulness to him-
self. Where, O God, is thy image in this man!
Where, divine Lord, are the marks of his baptism !
Where, sacred heavens, are the features of your
child ! And call you yourself still a Christian? And
name you yourself yet a man? Where then are the
commands of the Gospel ? Where the precepts of
the Church? Where even the laws of nature, the
ties of humanity, and the instincts of self-preserva-
tion ?
You have not gone so far, you are perhaps ready
to tell me. You have not come to these excesses.
Nor are you so abandoned, the heavens forbid, in
your excesses. No. Put you have made a begin


ning nevertheless. But you have already gone a
certain extent —you feel yourself going further. And
where, and when did the drunkard ever stop,
and say, “ I will go no further,” and did not go
further: unless death, in compassion, destroyed him
in the flower, before he had ripened into all those
fruits which I have described. Drunkenness is a
vice which the more it is indulged, the more the
palate sickens and languishes; the less the appetite
enjoys, from its satiety—the more it craves. Pro-
vidence has kindly limited the possible extent of
indulging this degrading habit, or it would never
stop till'it had, as far as possible, turned every thing
salutary and healing in nature into the means of self-
destruction.
You have not gone to all the excesses which the
constitution of your nature will allow of. But you
have sown the seeds of those excesses. The habit is
already, perhaps, planted within you; it has reached
a certain bulk ; it is increasing; it is striking its roots
deeper and broader; it is entwining its fibres more
closely round your heart; you have no effectual will
to stop its progress: it will allow of no check unless
plucked out altogether :it will of itself make increase
—the difficulty of rooting out the habit is weekly
greater by its weekly growth. Nothing grows upon
human nature like that most abject of its propensities,
that most degrading of its habits—drunkenness. And
is it not a law of our fallen nature, that the grossest
and rankest productions grow most ripe and abundant
with the least care? If, then, you have not reached
all those excesses, you are in the way to them; and
your readiness to excuse yourself is the surest proof


that you love the vice; and that, unless arrested in
your career, by that cold hand which stops all our
vices and brings them to their punishment, you will
yet exhibit yourself a spectacle of all those excesses:
deprived of the powers of body and of mind; a mere
living vegetable corruption ; your soul dead and en-
tombed within your body, and your body itself with
only a few useless organs left to be destroyed. Not
in the grave indeed, but still on this side of it, only
to infect and afflict every thing near you with wretch-
edness. And if the drunkard finished in his vice be
such a spectacle before man on earth, what must he
be to the Just made perfect? What, before those
Angels of Light, who look down upon human deeds?
What, to the sacred eyes of Him who dying redeemed
our wickedness ? What, to the all-pervading con-
templation of the Omnipotent God ? Will he not
again, at this spectacle, be moved inwardly and re-
pent that He ever made man? And if he does not
again send a deluge to destroy him here; will He
not reserve him for the deluge of fire, which will not
be quenched? “Do not err,” says St. Paul, “nei-
ther fornicators, nor the servers of idols, nor adulterers,
nor the unclean, nor thieves, nor misers, nor drunk-
ards, nor cursors, nor plunderers, shall possess the
Kingdom of God” Into what a crowd St. Paul
casts the drunkard. With the impure, with idolaters,
with harlots, with adulterers, with cursers, with
misers, with plunderers. What! some proud mind
is ready to ask me, is the drunkard one with the
impure? Is the drunkard one with the idolater?
Do not object, O man! You have heard the Divine
Laws. Do not interrogate me. Ask the Apostle,


anti he will still answer you, that both are equally
shut out from the kingdom of God. As this then is
clear, why need you ask me to take measure of the
enormity of your sin? As he stands without the
gates, as he is excluded from the possession, as he is
lost to salvation, as he is consigned to eternal tor-
ments; why need you reach to me the scales and
weights to balance and show the proportion of iniquity
between these vices ? And why so anxious to ascer-
tain the enormity of drunkenness, separate and alone,
when it is never to be found alone, and unaccom-
panied by some, if not all, this crowd of horrid crimes?
Is not drunkenness the fertile mother in whose womb
all those vices are engendered ? Are they not the
accursed offspring of this accursed parent? And
shall not the mother Vice carry the curses of her
brood ? Go to the house of the drunkard. Consider
his family. Look at his affairs. Listen to the sounds
that proceed from the house of drunkenness, and the
house of infamy, as you pass. Survey the insecurity
of the public ways and of the night streets. Go to
the hospital, to the house of charity, and the bed of
wretchedness. Enter the courts of justice, the prison
and the condemned cell. Look at the haggard fea-
tures of the ironed criminal. Ask all these why they
exist to distress you ? and you will every where be
answered by tales and recitals of the effects of drunk-
enness. And the miseries, and the vices, and the
sorrows, and the scenes of suffering which have
harrowed up your soul, were, almost without excep-
tion, either prepared by drinking, or were undergone
for procuring the means of satisfying this vice and the
vices which spring from it.


Mere intoxication is but the starting post of the
drunkard’s course. To what a train of roads does
drunkenness point, like some portentous finger-post,
erected upon earth by the infernal powers to conduct
to their dominions. Drunkenness dissoluteness,
debauchery, disease, the hospital, death. Drunken-
ness—evil company, cursing, swearing, gambling,
prophanity, infidelity, death in impenitence. Drunk-
enness—idleness, carelessness, destruction of property,
ruin of family, poverty, destitution, death in abandon-
ment. Drunkenness—riotousness, quarrelling, in-
juries, insults, inhuman fightings, sudden death.
Drunkenness—lawless companions, thefts, robberies,
plots, murders, the gaol, the iron gang, the gallows.
Drunkenness—weakness, gloominess, wretchedness,
melancholy, wild fantasies, black horrors, madness.
These are but a few of the courses of the drunkard.
But, whilst the drunkard himself totters or crawls
along his destined path to his destined end, without
a sense of his shame, or a feeling of his condition, or
a regard to his friends, or a thought for his family, or
a reflection towards his soul, or one glimpse of his
destination. Is God silent? Are the heavens without
knowledge ? Does no eye see ? And no hand take
note? God is silent, but not inactive. The silence
of God is the sinner’s worst punishment. He no
longer troubles the conscience; he has ceased to
warn: he is silent. He contemplates the drunkard’s
course, patiently collecting his wrath, like smoulder-
ing fire; and his vengeance, like black clouds into
his bosom : why should He be in haste ? God’s time
is eternity; and still as the drunkard heaps crimes,
God heaps vengeance. Why should He hurry?
B


God is all powerful. What can escape him ? The
hour comes, and the tempest of God bursts. Why
should it be visibly ? There are other drunkards to
be handled by the same judgment. Hear Himself,
speaking by the mouth of Isaias — “ I have been silent,
I have held my peace, I was patient ; my words shall
break forth as one in labor, I will scatter them: I will
wrap them up together in a whirlpool!” But the
hour is not yet come, though every cup of intoxication
hurries it; on goes the drunkard, thoughtless, sense-
less, despised, to his destruction. Look at that
creature, how can I call him man when he has lost
all the qualities of manhood ? See him as he staggers
on his way; his frame shaken with excess; his head
failing, floating heavily on his body, or falling over
his side ; his squallid appearance; his mouth of folly;
his eyes of wild, guilty insanity; his unmeaning look;
his incapable fury. He has come from the house of
drunkenness. All that can be done for him, for some
time to come, is to treat him like an helpless idiot;
to put him to his bed, if possible, until he recovers
his existence, and a feeling of melancholy, jaded
wretchedness of mind and body, which he again seeks
to drown and forget in another fit of intoxication;
until he at length rounds out his miserable remnant of
life, and is dissolved in the grave. Look at that
fury. She, once, was a woman; dear to some;
beloved by many; amiable to all. See that face,
once meek, and lovely with the pure beams of inno-
cence, now convulsed with all the diabolical passions
which issue from the infernal pit. Hearken to the
impure, obscene, ungodly flow of her lips. She too
has come from the house of drunkenness, and is has


tening to the den of infamy: or, like some unnatural
monster, is going home to her family to suckle her
children with her vices. See that young man. At
present, he is honest, useful, thriving; esteemed by
his friends and respected by all who know him. But,
he is entering the house of drunkenness. He reads
his lessons in the school of And every one is
beginning to be uneasy with apprehension; to look
towards his future; to prophecy his course and give
him over as lost. He begins to suspect himself neg-
lected, then to feel himself disregarded, then to know
himself deserted, then abandoned, then shunned; and
he reasons foolishly on the subject, for he has drunk
the wine of madness, and abandons himself.
I know of no disorder so difficult of cure as the
disease of confirmed drunkenness. Few recover.
The vice, become habitual, has eaten away too much
of their mind and reason to leave sufficient nerve and
vigour for a strong and steadfast resolution. Far be
it from me to discourage even those who have gone
so deep. There are sufficient examples to shew that
they may recover, if they will but take the means.
But I must not dissemble the truth. I would warn
the beginner, and those who are tempted to begin.
I would entreat them to consider how difficult and
rare it is to recover into habits of sobriety after having
reached a certain point. Let the beginner draw
instruction in time. Let him take to himself thought;
arrest the beginnings; pluck out the habit whilst its
roots are young and green; and shield himself with
caution. Let him draw lessons from bad, as well as
from good, examples. There was a nation of heathens,
the ancient Spartans, who held this vice in such hor


ror, that though they never drank to excess themselves
they intoxicated their slaves; that they might show
their children, by example, to what a condition
drunkenness brings our nature. You, alas! have no
occasion for such an expedient. In every street and
on every road, men calling themselves Christians will
read you this lesson: the land reels with drunkenness.
Consider it well and take profit to yourselves. Turn
over in your minds the anathemas of the Apostle and
the woes of the Prophet until they inscribe themselves
in your heart, and the fear of them becomes a portion
of your being. Mark them written on the brow of
the drunkard. Watch him in his career until you
see them all accomplished. Write them over your
door, inscribe them over your chimney-piece, in your
chamber, on your table, in the bottom of every glass";
utter them in your devotions; hear them in the sounds
of every tavern as you pass; and read them on every
sign board. Better you should pass your whole time
in studying the woes of drunkenness, than spend your
life in feeling them and your eternity in suffering for
them.
Do you ask me, how you are to break yourself of
this degrading habit? The general rule is very simple.
Have a willing mind : shun the occasion : fly idleness.
Fix for yourself a measure in your friendly domestic
meetings, beyond which you are never, whatever be
the occasion, to exceed, and never see the inside of a
tavern. Be fully assured, that you cannot go beyond
your measure, however little, on one occasion, with-
out going beyond it always. Consider in what places
and with what persons you are most tempted, and
avoid them. “ Those that love the danger shall perish


in it.” Let no motive, no wish to appear hospitable,
no cruel invitations, no pressings of seeming friendship
induce you to forget the friendship which you owe
yourself. Repeat your resolution each morning when
you rise, and pray for strength to keep it. Examine
how you have kept your engagement each evening
when you go to rest. If you have failed once, be not
discouraged: try again. Nothing delights the eye of
Heaven more than to see us wrestling manfully with
our infirmities; rising courageously after our falls*
drawing humility from our weaknesses, and caution
and strength from our humiliation. Only he who
gives up in despair is conquered. Renew your reso-
lution; strengthen it with prayer; observe the occasion
of your past fall and remove it. The last advice which
I shall give you is one of great importance. Put
yourself, with all obedience, under the guidance of a
spiritual director. There is a sort of fascination about
this vice which often renders the drunkard powerless
for his own deliverance; temptation acts upon him
like a charm, he requires the hand of another to free
himself from her enchantment. Fly, then, to your
pastor. The grace of God will not be wanting. And
let the consolations and the blessings of a conscience
healed, of health recovered, of character restored, of
affairs retrieved, of a family made happy, of friends
returning with gladdened hearts, of the revival of life
now, and the future hopes, which await your redemp-
tion from intemperance, be your encouragement.
THE END.


APPENDIX.
Donations for the Australasian Mission will be re-
ceived by Dr. TJllathorne, or at the bank of Messrs.
Wright and Co., London; also by the following cler-
gymen in various parts of the kingdom :•—The Rev.
Dr. Baldacconi, Rev. Mr. Rolfe, Rev. Mr. Hepston-
stall, London; the Revs. Dr. Youens, V. Glover, and
G. Gibson, Liverpool; V. Rev. B. Rayment, York;
Rev. J. Worswick, Newcastle; Rev. J. Render,
Hull; Rev. H. Brewer, Brown Edge; Rev. Messrs.
West and Connolly, Preston; Rev. R. Thompson,
Weld Bank, Chorley; Rev. J. Crook and Rev. W.
Turner, Manchester; Rev. G. Brown, Lancaster;
Rev. H, Warmsley, Leeds; Rev. J, M. M'Donnel,
Birmingham; Rev. L. Barber, Salford House; Rev.
W. Willson, Nottingham; Rev. Mr. Cooper, Bath;
Rev. Mr. Shann, Cheltenham; V. Rev. Dr. Weedall,
Oscott; Rev. J. Brownbill, Stonyhurst; Rev. Dr,
Brown, Downside. Contributions in books, vest-
ments, altar plate, &c., are requested to be forwarded,
addressed to Dr. TJllathorne, care of Keating and
Brown, 38, Duke-street, Grosvenor-square, and 32,
St. Martin’s-le-Grand; Booker and Dolman, 61,
New Bond-street, London, or to 42, Ranelagh-street,
Liverpool.


PUBLISHED BY KEATING AND BROWN,
THE
WAY OF SALVATION.
MEDITATIONS for EVERY DAY IN THE YEAR,
TRANSLATED FROM THE ITALIAN OF
BLESSED ALPHONSUS LIGUORI.
BY THE REV. JAMES JONES.
12mo. 3s 6 d. cloth bds.
I. Our most important affair is that of our eter-
nal salvation; upon it depends our happiness or
misery for ever. This affair will come to an end
in eternity, and will decide whether we shall be
saved or lost for ever ; whether we shall have ac-
quired an eternity of delights, or an eternity of
torments; whether we shall live for ever happy, or
for ever miserable. O God, what will my lot he 1
Shall I be saved, or shall Ibe lost 1 I may be
either. And if I may be lost, why do I not em-
brace such a life, as may secure for me life eter-
nal ] 0 Jesus, thou didst die to save me 1 yet have
I been lost, as often as I have lost thee my sove-
reign good: suffer me not to lose thee any more.
Way of Salvation, p. 1.


JUST PUBLISHED,
BY
KEATING & BROWN,
38, DUKE STREET, GROSVENOR SQUARE,
AND
32, ST. MARTIN’S-LE-GRAND,
With permission of the Author, Price Eight-pence,
THIRD EDITION,
THE CATHOLIC MISSION
IN
AUSTRALASIA.
By W. ULLATHORNE, D.D., Y. G.
“ Suffer me to weep a little my sorrow ; for I shall go,
and shall not return, to a land of misery and of darkness,
where is the shadow of death, and no order, but eternal
horror dwelleth.”— Job.
IN A FEW DAYS WILL BE PUBLISHED,
By the same Author ,
OBSERVATIONS
r *'o
ON THE
, v r. , USE AND ABUSE
Off 1 ! ■ OF THE
SACRED SCRIPTURES,
As exhibited in the discipline and practice of the
Protestant and Catholic Communions.
“ Who also hath made us lit Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the
letter Uilleth, but the spirit giveth life.”—2 Cor. iii. 6.




