

SIR JOSEPH BUNKS’ RIEHIfII FORD
Executive Committee:
president:
Thk Hon. Sir FRANCIS B. SUTTOR, President of
the Legislative Council,
Australian Club.
honorary Creasurer:
A. LENEHAN, F.R.A.S., Acting Government Astronomer,
The Observatory.
honorary Secretary:
H. MAIDEN, Government Botanist and Director of the
Botanic Gardens, Sydney.


The foil Giving letter appeared in all the Sydney daily
papers on ij.th February , 1906. The Executive Committee
have decided to reprint the letter and to invite consideration of
the proposal to erect a memorial to “ The Father of Australia
A Stattie for Banks.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —To-day is the anniversary of the birth of Sir Joseph Banks,
who has been affectionately and truly called the ‘ ‘ Father of Aus-
tralia,” and, under the auspices of the Executive Committee of the
Banks’ Memorial Fund, I venture to ask permission to bring the
matter of a memorial before your readers. The late J. B. Durham
wrote to the press for a number of years in favor of a statue of Banks,
and Sir Francis Suttor, Canon Boyce, Messrs. Huntington, Bladen,
and Edward Brown have all made scholarly contributions with the
same object.
Many of your readers are well acquainted with the main in-
cidents in the life of Banks, but as others have had no opportunity
of acquiring such knowledge, the Executive Committee have made
arrangements for the preparation of a brief, popular life of the great
man, and a lantern lecture, which can be delivered in various parts
of the State. I will therefore content myself with giving a brief
account of the man whom we wish to honour.
Joseph Banks was born at Revesby, in Eincolnshire, in 1743,
and inherited considerable wealth. After leaving Oxford, he became
imbued with the desire for foreign travel. In 1768 Eieutenant James
Cook, having been appointed to the command of H.M.S. Endeavour ,
to observe the transit of Venus, and to make geographical discoveries,
Banks decided to accompany him, and, at his own expense, took
with him his naturalist-librarian (Dr. Solander, a pupil of Einnaeus),
three accomplished artists, and a number of attendants and servants,
besides supplying equipment for collecting natural history specimens
on a scale which was probably unprecedented, and which was
destined not to be repeated for many years.
The Endeavour left England in August, 1768, and the east
coast of New Holland having been sighted, and, indeed, discovered
by Cook, the Endeavour put into Botany Bay (called by Cook
Stingray Harbour) from April 28 to May 6, 1770.
A number of interesting observations were made by Banks, who
wrote a journal of the voyage, and duplicates of the identical plants
collected by him at Botany Bay were presented by the trustees of
the British Museum to the Botanic Gardens last year.


The ship then headed north, and Cook named the principal
features of the coast. She struck on the rocks, and was with diffi-
culty brought into the Endeavour River, near Cooktown, but this
delay was a blessing in disguise, in that it gave Banks an oppor-
tunity of recording valuable information in regard to the botany,
zoology, and aborigines of Northern Queensland.
They left Australian shores on August 27, and went home via
New Guinea, Java, Cape of Good Hope, St. Helena, and Ascension,
arriving at Deal, England, on July 12, 1771.
Banks employed engravers to depict the Australian plants
which his artists had drawn, and it is a remarkable fact that these
fine engraved plates were not printed until five or six years ago.
One cannot read Banks’ Journal without being impressed with
the fact that he was a most observant naturalist and a broad-minded
man. The heir to wealth and luxury, he underwent the hardships
and perils of the tiny E?ideavour from the pure love of knowledge.
In 1772 he went to Iceland with Solander, a far more formidable
undertaking than it is at present, and this voyage also resulted
fruitfully.
The matter of transportation of convicts being suggested, he
attended a Committee of the House of Commons, gave evidence in
regard to this great Southern land, and, doubtless as a result of his
advocacy, the colonisation of this country was decided upon. What
followed is a matter of history.
Banks was practically the founder of the colony. He was
president of the Royal Society, an intimate friend of the King, and
a persona grata with Ministers. He held a unique position in these
early days, being habitually consulted on Australian affairs.
He was a sort of general adviser of everybody on everything
concerning the welfare of the colony, and the early Governors
wrote to him frequently, and deferentially asked his advice in
regard to matters of importance. In the dark days Banks’ re-
freshing optimism in regard to the future of the colony was like a
ra 5 f suns hi ne > an d was the more remarkable since his oppor-
tunities in the Endeavour of penetrating the country had been very
limited. He consistently advocated the exploration of the colony.
His researches in regard to the botany of Australia would take
too long to do justice to at this place. His purse was ever open for
the advancement of botanical science, and thus he successful!} 7 em-
ployed Solander, Dryander, the great Robert Brown, who was in
Australia for three years, and who was the most eminent botanist
of his age ; also the Bauers, whose skill as botanical artists has never
been excelled. Peter Good, George Caley, and George Suttor were
also botanical and horticultural proteges of his.
His Australian collections formed the nucleus of the celebrated
Banksian herbarium, which, with the Banksian Library (chiefly
botanical, and valued for insurance purposes in 1827 at .£7300), is


in the British Museum at the present day. As the years roll on
Australian botanists will visit England to study it with increasing
zeal.
Banks virtually acted as director of the scientific operations of
Kew, and appointed collectors of plants for that establishment on
behalf of the King, whose personal property it was at that time.
He appointed Allan Cunningham, afterwards in charge of our
Sydney Botanic Gardens, whose reputation as a botanist and an
Australian explorer will never die. In fact, Banks had the knack
of making good appointments.
He appointed Bligh and Flinders to important offices, and when
they got into trouble he was a good friend to their disconsolate
wives. Banks was indeed the most loyal of friends, and, although
he rarely indulged himself in that direction, he could be an un-
commonty good hater on occasion.
Altogether, his personality was a unique one. His wealth r
his great influence, his unbounded zeal, were ever called into requis-
ition for the development of the struggling colony of ‘ ‘ Botany Bay.
He was the only man of rank and wealth who, to use a homely
expression, “stuck to” the place, and this at a time when the
conduct of some of the colony’s responsible officers did not tend to
lighten his labours, or to make Botany Bay a fashionable subject.
Australia was fortunate in having such an unselfish, noble-
minded patriot to look after her'interests in the early days, and I
am sure that, when the situation is properly explained, she will not
allow the man to whom she owes so much to be uncommemorated,
especially as she has so honored men of inferior calibre and
achievement.
It took ten years to provide the funds for the statue of Captain
Cook in Hyde Park : I hope we shall not have to wait so long for
a statue of Banks. A definite proposal is now before the public,
and I appeal with the utmost confidence to Australians to contribute
the necessary funds.
A trait of Banks’ character which always charms me is the
kindness and patience with which he deals with such of his friends
as were in humble walks of life. He writes at greater length to a
working man than to the Secretary to the Admiralty. He haa the
knack of getting the best services out of a man for the benefit of
Australia. His, indeed, was a fine character, and I am confident
that my fellow-Australians admire a good man —a “white” man.
Subscriptions (and I hope friends will remember that we shall
be very grateful for the smallest contribution) may be sent to our
Hon. Treasurer, Mr. H. A. Lenehan, the Acting Government As-
tronomer, at the Observatory. Sir Francis Suttor is President of
the Executive Committee, and your humble servant —
J. H. MAIDEN,
is Hon. Secretary of the Banks’ Memorial Fund.
February 13.
