

CJ7V F p
& 1 o
&7S
Report on White Men’s Graves
in the Interior.
Reprinted from the Proceedings of the
Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
South Australian Branch.
Adelaide
J. L. Bonython & Co., Printers, “ The Advertiser” Office, King William Stree




Report on White Men’s Graves in the Interior.
Reprinted from the “Transactions of the Royal Society
of Victoria ” —Vol. Vi , 1865.
(Read 10th October, 1864).
In accordance with instructions received from the Ex-
ploration Committee, we have the honor to submit to the
Royal Society the results of our enquiry into the evidence
brought forward by Mr. W. G. Conn and Mr. W. Giles, at
the meeting on 29th August last, in reference to the sup-
posed graves of white men found in longitude (approx.)
142 deg. 35 min. E., latitude (approx.) 28 deg. 45 min. S.
From the tracing which accompanied Mr, Conn’s route,
from the detailed account contained in the published letters
of these gentlemen appended,* and from their explicit ver-
bal and written statements, which the committee received,
it is perfectly clear that the graves can in no way what-
ever be identified with those of any traveller known to have
perished in or near the locality indicated, the burial places
of Dr. Becker and some of his unfortunate companions at
Bulla (a locality, moreover, also visited by Messrs. Conn
and Giles), being the nearest to the spot where the graves
of the supposed white men have been found.
We, however, cannot withhold our impression that the
evidence of these graves really containing the relics of
white men is solely based on the assertions of natives, who
did not even themselves witness either the death or the
burial of the supposed travellers. The young natives,
who led Messrs. Conn and Giles to these burial places, may
have received a misconstrued intelligence through the
aborigines of other tribes on the subject, not having seen
* Vide Mr. Conn’s letter to The Argus of January, 20th, 1862, and to Dr.
Mueller on September sth, 1864, and Mr. Giles’ letter to The Argus, in August,
1864.


the parties of whites said to have succumbed in this locality
under the hands of the savages; and, notwithstanding the
emphatic denial by the black boys, that these graves were
those of aborigines, we are inclined to regard them as such,
these graves corresponding sufficiently, except perhaps in
size, to ordinary native tombs, recorded by Mr. Augustus-
Gregory as seen in his expedition along Cooper’s Creek.*
Moreover, no signs of the employment of an axe or other
European implement on the wood covering the graves, nor
any other vestige giving a clue of Europeans having visited
the locality, were observed.
Did not Messrs. Conn and Giles describe these graves
as several years old, at the time they passed the spot in
1861, we would have been induced to consider the place as
possibly covering the remains of natives, who were
wounded when repelled by Mr, Wright, Dr. Beckler, and
Mr. Hodgkinson, in their attack on the camp at the Bulla,
an encounter which took place a few months before Messrs.
Conn and Giles went to the Unutra Creek; and the account
of this conflict might have been misconceived by the
natives.
Nevertheless, we recommend not only a close investi-
gation of the spot indicated by Messrs. Conn and Giles,
and the disinterment of the bones for scientific inspection,
but more particularly that this enquiry should be con-
nected with an interrogation of the natives occupying the
surrounding country, in order to secure the fullest pos-
sible information on the origin of these burials.
Reflecting on the possibility that the graves noticed
by Messrs. Conn and Giles might prove the burial places of
white men, we are at once led to contemplate from whence
and under what circumstances' could the supposed travel-
lers have reached that lonely spot, since no party, as far
as we are aware, is missing in that direction.
According to Messrs. Conn and Giles’ surmise, which
is shared by Mr. John Neilson, these graves might perhaps
be the last resting places of some members of Dr. Leich-
hardt’s exploring party, and hence we deemed it incum-
bent on us to weigh the whole evidence hitherto extant of
the fate of that great explorer, in order to ascertain, in
* Vide A. Gregory’s report, published in the papers of the Legislative Council
of New South Wales, 1858, p. 677.


first instance, how far it bears on the facts immediately
before ns.
In thus far extending our scope of action, we have,
moreover, been impelled by a deeply-felt persuasion that
it is a holy duty of all Australia to leave nothing undone
which might shed light on the destiny of one who stands
second to none, and above most of the explorers of this
country—a man who unfolded first to the astonished world
the treasures and resources of a vast extent of this great
continent, the richest dependency of the British Crown.
The first tidings of the recorded awful termination of
Dr. Leichhardt’s enterprise were obtained in 1850, by Mr.
W. Ogilby, P.M., at Surat, and Mr. Gideon Lang, now of
this city, through a blackfellow, at Surat.
This latter had met a wild native, according to whose
account a party of white men and two aborigines, corre-
sponding exactly to the number of Leichhardt’s party, had
been massacred by the wild blacks, beyond the Maranoa.
To accomplish their design, they had watched the party
from the very moment of their arrival in the country of
these tribes, had sent messengers ahead to arouse the neigh-
boring hordes of natives, had gradually closed upon them
without Leichhardt and his companions having been seem-
ingly aware of the impending danger, had finally and un-
observedly surrounded them in large numbers, and in the
dawn of morning, when the travellers were asleep, crept
stealthily on the camp in the bend of a creek, threw a vol-
ley of spears on the previously ascertained positions of the
sleepers, and killed all except one, who, resting a slight dis-
tance apart, had sprung up, fired one shot, and killed a
native, but was then immediately speared. The oxen,
horses, and mules, it is said, were then killed, the latter
not without a desperate struggle to break their hobbles;
but the native related that two of the bullocks succeeded
in breaking their hobbles, and that these were the only ani-
mals which escaped the slaughter. The savages perpe-
trating this destruction were beyond the intercourse of
white men, and when plundering the camp left the tobacco
and flour, then unknown to them, scattered on the ground,
but displayed a particular eagerness to possess themselves
of the bright red blankets, known to have been provided
by Leichhardt for his party.


After hearing of this catastrophe, Mr. Lang at once
resolved to set ont from Mount Abundance, in long. 148
deg. 40 min. E., and lat. 26 deg. 50 min. S., where Dr.
Leichhardt finally quitted the settlements, in order to test
the truth of these tidings.
Mr. Lang took with him the man Walker, who after-
wards was engaged for Mr. Hovendon Hely’s party, and
was accompanied by two stockkeepers and two blackfel-
lows, the stockmen availing themselves of this opportunity
to search for cattle. Mr. Lang, unable to pick up Leich-
hardt’s then obliterated track at Mount Abundance, struck
across to Sir Thomas Mitchell’s Depot Camp at the Mara-
noa, found on that river Mitchell’s as well as Kennedy’s
tracks, but no traces of Leichhardt, and examined the
Maranoa for seventy miles on both sides, without obtain-
ing any further clue beyond some information from the
natives, which corroborated circumstantially the first ac-
counts received, and placed the death-scene further to the
westward. The two stockmen then determined to return,
and Mr. Lang was reluctantly obliged to relinquish his
search, being,, like Walker, greatly reduced in strength
by extreme hardships undergone immediately before they
set out on this journey, although they calculated to be able
to reach the place of Leichhardt’s supposed fall in ten
days from the Maranoa.
Their provisions also at the time were exhausted. If
the same high-minded energy evinced spontaneously on this
occasion by Mr. Gideon Lang had inspired others to imitate
his example, the fate of one of the most glorious explorers
of Australia would doubtless long since have been ascer-
tained.
Mr. Lang, who verbally narrated these recorded facts
to Dr. Mueller, felt at the time, and is still satisfied that
Leichhardt and his companions perished under the circum-
stances related by the natives; and when it is remembered
that Leichhardt started with seven horses, twenty mules,
and fifty oxen, as animals of burden, the travelling pace of
which would necessitate his stages to be so short as to per-
mit the swift natives to collect around him; that long sub-
sequently Mr. Walker found the natives on the Patrick
River in possession of axes; that Mr. Isaacs, a former com-
panion of Leichhardt, and many others, were informed of


that unfortunate traveller’s intention to bend his course to
the Alice; and when, moreover, we consider the atrocious
disposition of the natives of the whole district about Mount
Abundance, and west of it, where many Europeans were
killed by them, and even many stations were abandoned
at the time as untenable, we must admit that Mr. Lang was
fully justified in arriving at the conclusions he drew from
the information originally and soon afterwards obtained
by him from the natives.
The fact of the blacks pointing rather to the west than
north-west as the locality in which the encounter took place,
does not, in our opinion, much invalidate the evidence, be-
cause the hunting-ground of their western neighbors would
likely extend through several degrees of latitude, and they
would only perhaps be generally aware of the travellers be-
ing destroyed in the territory of the western tribes.
The 'Government of New South Wales having obtained,
through Mr. Lang and through other sources, this infor-
mation of the probable fate of Dr. Leichhardt, prompcly
dispatched a party, under the command of Mr. Hovendon
Hely, to investigate more closely these sad circumstances.
This enquiry was instituted by Mr. Hely undoubtedly with
a deep appreciation of the duty devolving on him at the
occasion; and although the results derived from his jour-
ney materially strengthened the evidence obtained through
Mr. Lang, Mr. Hely failed to ascertain with absolute cer-
tainty the fate of the missing explorers, and it is only to be
regretted that this gentlemen’s researches were not fol-
lowed up immediately after his return, before the vestiges
of the lost party faded away.
Mr. Hely reported, under date 22nd July, 1852, from
Surat, the results of his mission.*
The evidence thus gained left unfortunately hardly
any doubt that the poor explorers had all lost their lives
by a brutal and treacherous attack of the natives, although
a series of circumstances, which are best learnt from Mr.
Hely’s report, prevented that gentleman from reaching the
locality where the death-scene took place, and although he
found the accounts of the blacks as regards the precise
spot of the catastrophe to be greatly at variance. It is
easily understood why the natives, whilst without hesita-
Vide papers of the Legislative Council of New South Wales.


tion they generally admitted the destruction of the party,
and brought to bear an undeniable amount of corrobora-
tive and circumstantial evidence on the facts, were natu-
rally reluctant to lead the friends of the fallen men to a
j)lace where the contemplation of the spot of horror, and
of the relics of the unfortunate victims, might so easily
arouse in the white men feelings of the most intense indig-
nation and of fervent vengeance. Hence Mr. Hely was
readily enabled to find two of Dr. Leichhardt’s camps at
the sources of the Warrego and Nive, bearing as marks
XVA in the lower portion of the capital L, but was con-
stantly deceived by the blacks in their statements about
the spot of the massacre. Had the guides acted other-
wise, they would indeed have exposed themselves, and this
without protection, to the retaliation of those tribes whom
they had, may it be with ever so much justice, accused ; thus
the natives, ever eager to gain rewards from the travelling
party, conducted it to Sir Thomas Mitchell’s depot, and
other spots, and finally vanished secretly. The inscrip-
tion on each of the two Leichhardtian camps found by Mr.
Hely has never yet been satisfactorily deciphered, and al-
though, by the subsequent discovery of two other trees dur-
ing Gregory’s and Walker’s expeditions, indicating camps
of Leichhardt about 80 and 87 miles further to the north-
west, the interpretation of these marks became of less im-
portance, and although no interpretation is likely to shed
any light on his fate, there is still attached a melancholy
interest to these, as some of the very last signs we have of
his movements. We wish, however, to observe that the
Rev. W. B. Clarke, the venerable and ever active geologist
of New South Wales, has sought to elucidate these figures
as indicative of Kennedy’s camp, in a letter (published in
the “Sydney Morning Herald” of August, 1858), in which
he with the warmth of personal friendship for Leichhardt,
cherishes the hope that evidences so contradictory as those
hitherto obtained leave still ample room for the opinion of
Leichhardt’s not having ended his luminous career under
the circumstances related by the natives.
We have appended to this report a valuable memoran-
dum from Mr. Giles/" 5 in which he demonstrates from ex-
perience how part of the inscription of one of the trees
might have become obliterated by the overgrowth of bark.
8
REPORT ON WHITE MEN’S GRAVES IN THE INTERIOR.


Otherwise it is difficult to understand why two camps
of Leichhardt should bear precisely analogous distinctive
marks, unless we suppose that the Roman letters were in-
tended for a day of a month (April t), and that evidently
an error had been committed in fixing the date of one of
the camps. Mr. Giles deserves much credit for the vivid
interest he evinced throughout this enquiry, and we share
the hopes of his experienced fellow traveller Mr. Conn, of
seeing Mr. Giles’ services secured for any future enterprise
to be organised to find vestiges of Leichhardt, and simul-
taneously to examine the graves at Unutra.
Mr. Gideon Lang entertains the opinion that, whilst
the numerals indicate the number of the camp, the A, as a
convenient letter, was added to distinguish the place from
others Leichhardt might be encamped at in any retrograde
direction and possible return journey.
Most important seems to us the assertion of one of the
fugitive guides to another of his race, that Mr. Hely had
still to cross four creeks; next, a large plain of three days’
travelling distance; and then again three creeks, before
he would arrive at the spot where the disaster occurred.
The discovery of the extensive natural distribution of
gold through South-East Australia at about this period ab-
sorbed universal attention, and diverted the thoughts of
all colonists so much from other subjects as to render it
not surprising when we find that for several years no fur-
ther direct efforts were made to fully solve the mystery
which involved Leichhardt’s fate; the more so, since in
1855 and 1856 the expedition sent for geographical dis-
coveries by the Home Government through tropical Aus-
tralia was in the field; for it was thought that fortunate
events might bring its movements in contact with the traces
of the lost explorers. No farther tidings, however, having
been obtained, the Government of New South Wales, in
1858, entrusted the command of a special search expedi-
tion to Mr. A. C. Gregory, with a hope that the well-known
skill and experience of that tried explorer would dispel
the mystery. But, although this expedition solved some
most interesting problems in the geography of Australia, it
left that of Leichhardt’s fate unsolved; still, Mr. Gregory
discovered, not distant from the junction of the Alice River
with Cooper’s Creek, a marked tree indicating a Leich-
t Leichhardt left Mount Abundance early in April. 1848.


hardtian camp, in lat. 24 deg. 35 min. S., and long., 146
deg. 6 min. E., the huge but simple L being evidently in-
tended as a conspicuous lasting mark by the unfortunate
traveller to signify the spot where he intended to leave
the line of Cooper’s Creek, the letter measuring fully
eighteen inches in length.*
From the discovery of this L, the only one which at
the time extended our knowledge of Leichhardt’s move-
ments, the inference has been drawn that the accounts
given by the natives of the destruction of Leichhardt be-
yond the Maranoa were unreliable or truthless.
It would have been a source of deep gratification to
the committee, if in endeavoring to penetrate this chaos
of conflicting evidence they could give their concurrence
to this inference.
But on reflecting how vague all information in this
sad event of Leichhardt's death has proved throughout,
as far as the indication of the spot is concerned, we think
that the discrepancies of some of the statements may be
reconciled by the vagueness characteristic of the ideas of
the savages on distances, numbers, and time; hence we
had arrived at the conclusion, that the various accounts
given to Mr. Hely by the natives, as far as they admitted
generally the annihilation of Leichhardt’s party, were
thereby not invalidated; and we even conceived that the
locality referred to by those natives on whose statement
Mr. Hely could place most dependence, is still quite with-
in the reach of the spot where Mr. Gregory discovered
the huge L. In this conclusion the committee has subse-
quently been strengthened by the testimony kindly prof-
fered by Mr. Gideon Lang, who, after a lengthened con-
versation with several natives in 1851, calculated the dis-
tance of the spot where the tragical occurrence took place
still to be ten of his days journey from the head of the
Maranoa.
We are not surprised at Mr. Gregory having found no
further indications of Leichhardt’s presence on the spot;
that gentleman visited the locality ten years after the last
explorers, and found the banks of Cooper’s Creek for
nearly a mile on either side bearing the vestiges of one of
those tremendous inundations, the torrent of which would
* Vide Gregory’s journal printed by order of the Legis’ative Council of
New South Wales,


probably carry away any relics of a river camp, or bury
them in the subsiding debris.
No additional disclosures concerning Leichhardt were
obtained until the year 1861, when the services of Mr.
Frederick Walker were secured by the Exploration Com-
mittee of this Society, to conduct one of the expeditions in
search of Mr. Burke and his companions.
On his way to the Gulf of Carpentaria, diverging to
Cooper’s Creek, he found seven miles below the Leich-
hardtian camp discovered by Gregory, another tree bearing
a smaller L, testifying Leichhardt's presence.!
AVe fully acquiesce in the sagacious explanation of Mr.
AValker, who points to the probability of Leichhardt having
been compelled to retrace his steps to the river and
descend along it until he could skirt the scrubs, which, to
a party so peculiarly fitted out as his in regard to
animals of burden, would prove still more impervious than
to any other expedition since in the field in that direction.
If the vestiges of tracks noticed by Mr. Walker on the
Patrick River, about sixty miles north of Leichhardt’s last
known positions, can in future be connected with any
camps in the vicinity, we would have proof of consider-
able weight that the universal accounts given by the natives
of the destruction of the party further south could not be
true, unless we admit the great improbability of Leich-
hardt’s having fallen back on Cooper’s Creek for water,
after an unsuccessful attempt to penetrate northward, or
his having retraced his steps for any other reason un-
known.
The supposed tracks of Leichhardt indicated still fur-
ther north on Mr. Walker’s chart, and recorded in his jour-
nal, lead seemingly to the tree marked L by Mr. Lands
borough (in lat. 22 deg. 45 min. S., near the Thompson
River*), a point reached by that traveller anterior to his
most creditable Carpentaria expedition.
On the other hand, this would give no clue to the
statement of a native woman, who was understood by Mr.
Walker to have seen white men W.S.W. of the Barkly
River, Burke and AVills’ track being distant about two hun-
dred and eighty miles in that direction.
t Vide Gregory's journal.
Vide Landsborcugh’s journal, p. 90,


This closes onr enquiry into the more or less tangible
evidence of Leichhardt’s fate—an enquiry which neces*
sarily was surrounded with difficulties, and which will
continue unsatisfactory as long as it mainly rests on the
fluctuating traditions of the natives and on positive tes-
timony so faint.
In furnishing our report, we have not quoted verbally
all the statements bearing on the subject, but appended
quotations from various documents. We found it hope-
less to bring to bear on Leichhardt’s fate, the statements
recorded by Mr. McKinlay during his skilful and daring
expedition,! which informs us of human remains interred
at Lake Massacre, and not yet fully identified with those of
Gray’s of Burke’s expedition. We are of course equally
unable to bring within the reach of our investigation the
record of the famous J. McDouall Stuart, of having crossed
what appeared horse tracks before he reached Tennant’s
Creek, near Macdonnell Range, in latitude (approx.) 19 deg.
30 min. S., and long. 134 deg. 25 min. E,, or the vague
tradition of Western Australia natives, according to which,
white travellers coming from the east had perished on a
lake in the inland wastes of that colony.
But as long as all such accounts reawaken our thoughts
of the missing travellers, we are earnestly and ever anew
reminded that we have not fulfilled the dictates of
humanity and of gratitude to one of the early pioneers of
Australian discovery, whose name will ever be identified
with the history of this country.
The spot where, in his philanthropic endeavor to ex-
pand our knowledge and to widen the area peacefully con-
quered for civilisation, Leichhardt is said to have sunk,
is almost now within the reach of settlement; and what
to those who formerly went on his path proved unattain-
able, is a task now portrayed readily to be accomplished.
We would therefore recommend that the localities on
Cooper’s Creek which bear the last indisputable marks of
Leichhardt’s movements should again be examined, and
that a party sufficiently strong to resist any attempted
attacks should scrupulously, through reliable interpreters,
interrogate the natives, to set the question finally at rest,
whether Leichhardt and his brave little band met their
t Vide his journal, p. 10.


death on the spot originally recorded, and if this should
be affirmed, to secure such relics of the perished travellers
as will place the fact of their annihilation beyond doubt.
The forbearing and judicious manner in which Mr. Hoven-
don Hely acted towards the natives must have inspired
them with confidence that his followers will deal with them
in the same clement spirit; and whilst now more than six-
teen years have elapsed since the probable destruction of
Leichhardt’s party, it is likely that the perpetrators of the
murderous deed will now display no greater reluctance to
reveal the features of the sad tragedy than the natives
of the Bogan, when questioned, to narrate the circum-
stances under which Richard Cunningham lost his life.
If this recommended enquiry verifies our just fears,
one duty alone remains to he performed—to mark by a
monument the spot which must be holy to all of us and all
future generations, and which would ever remain a historic
landmark. If, however, and let us cherish the hope, the
destruction of the poor explorers on that spot can be dis-
proved, we ought not to rest until, by successive and sys-
tematic enquiry amongst the native tribes, we learn what
became of the lost men, should it involve a sacrifice ever
so great; for whenever Leichhardt’s fall beyond the Mara*
noa should be disproved, the assumption that he and his
faithful followers number with the dead could likewise no
longer be vindicated on any tangible ground, and we could
no longer dispute the possibility of any of the unhappy
men still having lingered on from one tedious year to the
other for relief, and to have lingered in vain. The im-
probability of such a fact is great indeed, but its absolute
impossibility, from evidence hitherto extant, cannot be
demonstrated, and future ages will then pass on Leich-
hardt’s Australian contemporaries their judgment. Those
on whom the burden of exploration has fallen heaviest
amongst us have earned almost throughout but poor re-
wards for their self-sacrificing labors. But let it not be
said of us, in addition, that we have been unconscious of
our duties towards humanity.
And here we must contend, that on the rising colonial
community, occupying the vast extent of magnificent land
which poor Leichhardt under so many privations dis-
covered, so lucidly described, and so faithfully mapped
(and which now yields millions annually to a highly pros-


perous population), more particularly devolves the duty
of initiating the final steps for disclosing Leichhardt’s fate;
moreover, the country to be traversed, for instituting at
least the earlier of these enquiries, lies within the precincts
of Queensland, a colony deeply indebted to Dr. Leich-
hardt.
By patient perseverance the fate of Leichhardt can now
be ascertained, if the enquiry is supported by the resources
which this great country can well afford to devote for an
object so noble.
Future generations ought to have no cause or oppor-
tunity to east on the present citizens of Australia, the re-
proach of having been unconscious of the claims of Ludwig
Leichhardt —a man who has never yet been replaced
amongst us —a man of imperishable greatness.
David E. Wilkie, M.D., M.L.C.
Fred. Mueller, M.D., F.R.S.
Melbourne, October 10, 1864.
Note. — The appendices referred to in this paper were not
included in the “ Transactions of the Royal Society of
Victoria,” and consequently are omitted in this reprint.
Mr. A. C. Macdonald, the veteran and indefatigable Secretary of the
Victorian Branch of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
solicited the assistance of this Branch in obtaining free railway passes
for two members of a small search party who wished to visit Cooper’s
Creek to examine some old graves which were reported to contain the
remains of white men, supposed to have been killed by the natives in that
locality at about the same time that Leichhardt’s party would have
reached Cooper’s Creek.
The Council’s application to the Government was promptly acceded
to, and railway passes from Serviceton to Oodnadatta w r ere forwarded to
Mr. Macdonald.
One member of the proposed search party had resided for some years
in the Cooper’s Creek district, and claimed to have personal knowledge
to attain the object of his visit. To assist in the investigation, this
Council had reprinted this paper on “ White Men’s Graves in the Interior,”
and Hovenden Hely’s report, “In search of Leichhardt’s party.”
Mr. Macdonald's hopes for a thorough search of the locality
referred to were for some unknown reason frustrated, and the passes
were returned. The mystery surrounding Leichhardt is therefore
destined to continue. The papers now reprinted are of historic interest
as evidences of the fruitless attempts that were made over sixty years
ago to find traces of the lost Expedition.




