

pE’TH $h»n / 1 t t /?
I ■
- (




[From the Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London,
February 14; 1865.]
Description of Two New Australian Birds.
By John Gould, Esq., F.R.S., etc.
1. Malurus leuconotus.
The entire head, neck, under surface, rump, and tail deep blue;
back, shoulders, greater and lesser wing-coverts, and secondaries silky
white; primaries brown ; bill black; feet brownish black.
Total length 5-| inches; bill ; wing 2 ; tail 3|- ; tarsi f.
Hab. Interior of Australia ; precise locality unknown.
Remark. —In size this new species is very similar to M. lamberti,
while in its colouring it assimilates to M. leucopterus; from both,
however, it may be at once distinguished by the whiteness of its
back, which has suggested the specific name I have assigned to it.
2. Artamus melanops.
Lores, face, rump, and under tail-coverts black ; stripe over the
eye, ear-coverts, sides of the face, throat, and under surface delicate
vinous grey; two middle tail-feathers black, the remainder black
largely tipped with white; upper surface of the wings grey, their
under surface white; bill leaden grey, darkest at the tip ; feet
blackish brown.
Total length 6f inches ; bill f ; wing 4f; tail, 3 ; tarsi f.
Hab. Central Australia.
Remark. —This large and fine species is unlike every other known
member of the genus. It is most nearly allied to A. albiventris, but
differs from that bird in the jet-black colouring of its under tail-
coverts, and from A. cinereus in its smaller size and the greater
extent of the black on the face. The specimen from which the
above description was taken has been kindly sent to me by Mr. S.
White, of the Reed-beds, near Adelaide, South Australia, who
informs me that it was shot by him at St. Becket’s Pool, lat.
28° 30', on the 23rd of August, 1863, and who in the note accom-
panying it says, “ I have never seen this bird south. It collects at
night, like A. sordidus, and utters the same kind of call. It seems
to be plentiful all over the north country. I saw it at St. Becket’s
Pool, feeding on the ground, soaring high in the air, and clinging in
bushes, like the others. The two sexes appeared to be very similar
in outward appearance. The stomachs of those examined were
fleshy, and contained the remains of small Coleoptera.


*
. •




