

AUDI ALTER! PARTEM.
HTTHCK
PROTESTANTISM.
ARCHBISHOP REDWOOD’S SERMON
AT THE DEDICATION OF
gtt* duitijeimtl (|MD.)
AND
REPORT OF THE
INDIGNATION MEETING
HELD IN THE
Town Hall, Sydney.
Re-Printed from the Daily Pi ess.
1900.
J. SCOTT, PUBLISHER, PITT ST., SYDNEY".
E, T. & J. RADCLIFFE, PRINTERS, 21 UNDERWOOD STREET, S?DNEY.


▼
Uncle Toby
KING ! !
Uncle Toby’s Rolled Oats
ARE WOELD-FAMED FOE MAKING
BONE AND MUSCLE
, . AND
Beautifying the Complexion.
The Only PERFECT Food for Summer or Winter is
Unde Toby’s Rolled Oats.


THE DEDICATION OF ST.
MARY’S CATHEDRAL.
SUNDAY, 9th SEPTEMBER, 1900-
Admission was by Ticket—2os., lOs., and Ss. Each.
SERMON BY THE ARCHBISHOP of WELLINGTON, N.Z.
“ He shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of His kingdom
there shall he no end.” —lst Luke 32-33.
WE are here assembled in thousands to hold a grand celebration
and to inaugurate a great event of ecclesiastical history—great
in the memories of the past, great in the bright hopes of the future
—the First Australasian Catholic Congress. For many years, and
under three successive Archbishops, conspicuous for their zeal,
ability, and success, you Catholics of Sydney, emulating the piety of
your forefathers in those ages of faith which created the noblest
religious edifices, grey with venerable age, in the old world, set your-
selves the noble task of perpetuating in this fair Austral land the
glorious traditions of the past. This beautiful cathedral, now suffi-
ciently completed to make us envy the eyes that will see it in its
finished magnificence, this structure so grand in design, so solid, so
majestic, and so rich in every architectural grace and detail, is your
gift to the Almighty, worthy of your traditional faith and devotion.
It is the triumph of your faith and generosity. It will stand on its
commanding site a principal ornament of your queenly capital, a
splendid landmark to be hailed with joy by the pilgrim from distant
shores as he sails up your incomparable harbour, I remember that,
18 years ago, at the first opening of this noble pile, my theme was
the Divinity of Christ, and I see no reason to change that theme to-
day. Christ did not found a school by science, nor an empire by
might, nor a sect by the passions of men —He founded a religious
society, or Church, by His own Divine power : He set up a spiritual
kingdom to last for ever. This glorious kingdom, this spiritual
world, immeasurably superior to the material world around us, is the
work of His Divine creative power, employing for that mighty pur-
pose human instruments, humanly speaking, entirely inadequate.


The Church, being the work of Christ, was made to His|image and
likeness. The Church is one with Christ. She is His spouse, His
mystic body, Through her, therefore, he is always visible, always
speaking, always acting in the world. She is, so to speak, his pro-
longation through time and space. His threefold functions of
prophet, priest, and king he discharges by means of his mystic body,
the Church, Christ gave infallibility to his Church. But—still
greater gift —he gave her indefectibility. Not only will she never
err in the domain of faith and morals, but she will continue always
to the end of the world, and as long as she exists she cannot err.
She is indefectible, and she claims this property in the solemn and
reiterated promises of Christ her head. He promised that the gates
of hell should not prevail against her ; that he would be with her all
days even to the consummation of the world, (Matt.—xviii.),
Hence her failing would make void His promises. Infaliability is a
mighty and awful gift, but necessary to meet and overcome a gigantic
evil, the lapse of mankind into error, the total loss of revealed truth,
the extinction of the supernatural in the minds and souls of men.
Consider for a moment the number and nature of the Christian
dogmas ; consider the catholicity of the Church; consider the
infirmity and malice of men ; consider the universal solvent of truth,
man’s proud, restless, and perverted intellect; consider men’s pro-
clivities to sects and divisions ; consider all this, and you will readily
admit the wisdom and necessity of this special providence and
assistance of God called infallibility. Christ is a priest, and He
imparted His priesthood to His Church. Declaring Himself a high
priest according to the order of Melchisedech, Christ as a priest for-
gave sin. He is the “ Lamb that taketh away the sins of the world.”
That power of forgiving sin He also left to His Church in the person
of His priests, who in the Sacrament of Order receive from him the
power which, after His Resurrection, He gave to His Apostles,
saying : “ Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose sins you shall forgive
they are forgiven them, and whose sins you shall retain they are
retained.” Finally, Christ, as a priest, gave to His Church His
sanctity, with the power to create, increase, and propogate it in His
members by the seven channels of His sacraments, by His perfect
law or standard of life, and by His Divine example. Christ also
wished His Church to be catholic or universal. Finally, Christ made
the Church apostolic, because she has her origin and her doctrine from
Him througn His Apostles, and because she has the succession of her
pastors uninterrupted from them to our day. Contrast the
true Church, the body and bride of Christ, with the multitudinous
pretenders around her. Look at those hundreds of contradictory de-
nominations which swarm in the British Empire and in some other
parts of the globe. Have they any of the^ marks of the true Church,
unity, sanctity, catholicity, and apostolicity ? Surely not. They
have no unity. Look not for sanctity in those separate sects. I
speak not of individuals, but of systems. Tke authors of the Greek
schism, Photius in the ninth century and Michael Oerularius in the
eleventh, had no motive for their separation but blind ambition and
Just of power.


The leaders and founders of Protestantism, Luther, Galvin,
Zwinglius, &c. s were notorious for their vices-
Among the Greek schismatics the clergy are badly trained for
their sacred functions, and live in a state of pitiful abjection and con-
tempt; they receive little or no consideration or respect from the
people, and they neither spread nor fulfil the Gospel teaching. Among
Protestants the most effectual means of sanctification have disappeared
• —abstinence, fasting, mortification, confession, communion, &c.
Both the Greek Schism and Protestantism have rather
obstructed than promoted true civilization- The first has
brought despotism upon the East, the second covered Europe
with blood and ruins in the sixteenth century, and has ever
since been the helper and instrument of the worst foes of
Christianity. It desecrated the home, it polluted the nuptial
bed, it lowered the dignity of womanhood, it devastated the
school, and stopped the progress of science-
In fine, neither Protestant nor Greek schismatics have shown
that the action of the Holy Ghost is with them. No examples of
heroic virtues, no saints in their ranks at all comparable to the
martyrs and missionaries of the Catholic Church ; and they have
never been able to obtain the sanction of a miracle for their work and
their doctrine. That they have no catholicity is glaringly evident.
The Greek Church is confined to a part of the Bast—chiefly Greece.
Russia, and Turkey ; and Protestants are circumscribed
within determinate limits —Lutherans in Germany, Calvinists
in Geneva and Prance, Anglicans _in English possessions,
All are national and none Catholic. Neither have they
apostolicity. They are separated from the Pope, who is the
heir of St. Peter, the chief of the apostles ; they have a purely
human and in no sense an apostolic origin. Their ministers have no
lawful mission, and they cannot say that they have been sent by
Jesus Christ to teach and baptise all| nations. Privileged children
of this Catholic Church, and standing on the threshold of the
twentieth century, we may appropriately take a retrospect of the
outgoing nineteenth century. From the jaws of a revolution, the
most fearful in history, Christ drew his Church unscathed, robust,
and purified by the fire of persecution. Many have been her
struggles during the century all over the globe ; but many, too, her
victories, many the events which have consoled her children in their
dire conflict with the world, the flesh, and the devil. We may
instance the emancipation of the Catholics throughout the British
Empire, brought about by the genius and eloquence of the immortal
Liberator, Daniel O’Connell; the glorious reign of Pius IX.; the re-
establishment of the hierarchy in England ; the Oxford movement
and its harvest of illustrious converts, the Mannings, the Newmans 4
the Fabers ; the definition of the immaculate Conception, and the
great spread of devotion towards the Blessed Virgin Mother of God
which have merited for this century the name of the “ Age of Mary
the Vatican Council and the. proclamation of Papal infallibility;


the triumph of the Catholic Church in Germany over the State
despotism, called by sad irony a fight for civilization, Kulturkampf ;
the wonderful and yet present Pontificate of Leo XIII., a truly pro-
vidential man. He stands out like a lighthouse over our stormbeaten
age, the ambassador of a higher power, the representative of a
greater moral force, the chief teacher pointing out to a world en-
shrouded in darkness the luminous path of true progress and civilisa-
tion. Will the world listen to great Leo’s voice ? Will it accept
his unerring guidance and paternal counsel, or will it spurn the
guide and rush headlong into the abyss? Time will tell. Mean-
while, what are the Church’s hopes and fears for the century before
us ? Besides the widespread perversion of minds caused by the
numerous theories of rationalism, besides the systematic war waged
in several countries against the Church, God’s representative on
earth, she has to contend with the materialistic tendency of the day.
Then calculate the opposition raised against the Church from heresy
and schism and all the means at their disposal. Great as are her
perils, the Church has adequate power from her Divine Founder to
meet and overcome them. In this country, at all events, her pros-
pects are bright, while her progress has been wonderful. All honour
to the founders of this flourishing Australian Church ! Hail, Com-
monwealth of Australia, youngest in the family of nations ! God
speed thee in thy great career ! Be virtuous ;be free ; be prosperous ;
be eternal: Precede 'prospers et regna , esto felix, esto heata, esto
perpetua ! I venture, in conclusion, to congratulate you, my Lord
Cardinal, on the achievment of the great object for which you and
your predecessor have worked so hard and so well. I congratulate
your excellent and devoted clergy—secular and regular —who have
so nobly co-operated with their illustrious leader. But how shall I
congratulate in adequate terms the happy Catholics of Sydney and
the whole diocese ? Great indeed is the work you have done, and
great accordingly your joy and pride at its success, and greater still
will be your reward. The rich with their wealth, the poor with
their hard-earned wages, the widow with her mite, you have reared
this splendid edifice for God, for yourselves, for your children, and
many generations yet unborn. All honour to your faith and devotion.
All honour, too, to those many generous and liberal persons of other
denominations who have helped to erect this imposing monument,
and I assure them that God will bless them a hundredfold for con-
tributing to build this house of prayer, this temple where Jesus
Christ will be adored and praised, His doctrine taught, His sacra-
ments administered, and the principles of His civilisation preserved
and inculcated. In their inmost hearts they respect the Catholic
Church, and, if her credentials are fairly set before them, they will
learn to embrace and love her who was the life and glory of England
for over a thousand years. 1 hail thee, O young and flourishing
Church of Australia—so fitly represented by this stately pile, grand,
fresh and new from the builder’s hands. I hail thee as the earnest
and warrant of countless blessings for the future children of men.
And I hope that, in God’s mercy, thou wilt long enjoy the leadership
of the great Cardinal who now guides thy destiny, and that thy
march will be from victory to victory until thy final triumph is con-
summated in the land of the living, in the bright realms of eternal bliss


MONSTER DEMONSTRATION IN
THE TOWN HALL, SYDNEY.
24th SEPTEMBER, 1900-
SEVERAL RESOLUTIONS CARRIED.
Never perhaps before in the history of the city of Sydney has such
an enormous gathering assembled in the Sydney Town Hall as that
which filled it last night in response to the invitation of the Evangelical
Council “ to protest against the attacks on Protestantism and vice-regal
presence at the dedication of St. Mary’s Cathedral.” Such was the
eager desire of the citizens to be present that at 7 p.m. thousands
assembled at the portals of the Town Hall and clamoured impatiently
for admittance. As the time went on the crowd became larger and
larger, and by half-past 7at least 6000 people were gathered. Directly
the doors were thrown open the people crowded in, and, of course, in a
very few minutes every portion of the hall was filled, whilst yet there
were hundreds unable to gain admittance. Indeed, the hall was so
crowded that it was found absoultely necessary to close every door.
Nevertheless, the people continued to approach the Town Hall from
every portion of the compass, and, disappointed at their inability to
gain admittance, they flocked to the Pitt-street Congregational Church,
where an overflow meeting was held under the chairmanship of the
Rev. E. B. Boyce. The platform at the Town Hall was crowded with
the leading clergymen of Sydney and suburbs. Sitting side by side
with them were a large number of members of the Legislative Council
and Legislative Assembly ; whilst occupying a prominent position were
the Right Hon. G. H. Reid, M.L.A., Mr. Perry, Minister for Public
Instruction, and Mr. Fegan, Minister for Mines and Agritulture.
In view of the fact that the hall was filled and the doors closed
at half-past 7 o’clock, the audience, directed by the chairman, the
Rev. W. M. Dill-Macky, president of the Evangelical Council of Hew
South Wales, engaged in singing hymns.
The meeting was opened with the singing of the 100th Psalm.
The Rev. N. J. Cocks, M.A. (Chairman of the Congregational Union),
read a portion of Scripture, and the Rev. W. Atkinson (President of
Ahe Primitive Methodist Church Assembly) engaged in prayer.
APOLOGIES AND LETTERS READ.
The Rev. B. Price (Baptist) read apologies for non-attendance.
The Archbishop of Sydney wrote as follows, dated September
20th: —
“ Sir, —I do not find myself able to take part in the proceedings
of your meeting on Monday next; and I cannot entirely concur with
the reference made in resolution 1 to the attendance of the Governor
at the opening of St. Mary’s Cathedral,


“ But I desire to state that I sympathise with the protests made
in resolutions 2 and 3 against the utterances and action of the Roman
Catholic authorities on the occasion named,
“ The assertions made by Archbishop Redwood*may assuredly be
termed ‘ libellous,’ unhistorical and needlessly offensive ; and the fact
that they were withheld from the audience when the sermon waa
delivered, and yet communicated to the Press for circulation as if they
had been then read, has proved misleading and mischievous,
“ The proceeding was eminently unfair.
“ Yours faithfully,
“WM. SZ. SYDNEY,
“ Archbishop.
The following letter from the Premier, Sir. W. J. Lyne, to the
chairman, was read :
“ September 24th, 1900. Rev. Sir, —In reply to your invitation
to attend the Protestant demonstration to-night, I notice that His
Excellency the Governor’s name is brought in question. I regret the
publication, and do not sympathise with statements which have hurt
the feelings of such a large section of the community.”
The Right, Rev. Dr. Chalmers, Bishop of Goulburn, wrote
“ I thoroughly sympathise with your protest against the outrageous
falsehoods contained in the sermon of the Roman Archbishop of Wel-
lington, at the opening of the Sydney R.C. Cathedral. But reckless
and unhistorical statements seem to be the settled policy of R.C.
prelates where other Christian bodies are concerned. They throw
mud in the hope that some may stick. I trust that your proposed
meeting may serve the interests of truth, and show that the records
of history cannot be tampered with unchallenged even by Roman
ecclesiastics of high position among their own sect. What they are
endeavouring to do is to make capital out of the prevalent ignorance
on historical questions, and to make people believe that unscrupulous
assertion is equivalent to proof, and should be accepted as such. The
more one gets to know Roman methods in controversy, the less one
feels inclined to believe a word their controversialists say. I hope
intelligent people are coming to feel this.
Rev. John 0. McDonald (the Right Rev. the Moderator
of the Presbyterian Assembly), in apologising for his inability
to attend, wrote: —“ To us who look at the matter calmly
from the distance of a few hundred miles the whole action of the
Roman prelate seems so contemptible as to be hadly worth taking
any notice of. Our indignation is largely tempered with contempt.”
Archdeacon Langley wrote : —“ lam verr sorry that I cannot be
at the meeting on Monday night, though I join with you in indignant
condemnation of Archbishop Redwood’s conduct as well as his printed
statements about Protestantism and great Protestant leaders. If this
persistent continuation of violent attacks upon what is dear to our
hearts is to be indulged in, it will be necessary for men who love the
truth to combine and act in defence of truth and liberty.”


Mr. Dugald Thomson, M.L.A., wrote : —“ I quite agree that the
attacks made justify indignation and public protest.
The Rev. Canon R. Taylor, Revs. W. Finlay Brown and
Benjamin Law (of Parkes), and the Rev. Joseph Best (of Croydon),
also wrote apologising for their inability to attend, and expressing
sympathy with the object of the meeting.
THE CHAIRMAN'S OPENING SPEECH.
The Chairman, in stating the object of the meeting, said he was
sure they all regretted that a necessity had arisen for the calling of
such a meeting . (Hear, hear,) They all wished to live in harmony
with their Roman Catholic fellow-citizens; they had no quarrel with
men, their quarrel was with principles. (Cheers,) They wanted to
live in harmony, but if such invectives were thrown at their common
Protestantism as were written and published in the special Roman
Catholic papers as well as in the daily Press as having been spoken
by the Rev. Dr. Redwood at St. Mary’s Cathedral—although they
now knew that they were never uttered—but if such invectives as
these were written with the intention of being uttered the writer of
them should have had the courage of his convictions, and uttered
them. (Cheers.) While these things were done they could not
stand by in silence and without protesting and challenging the
statements—without contradicting them, confounding them, and
refuting them. (Cheers.) It was also a painful thing to have to
call attention to the action of His Excellency Lord Beauchamp in
attending at the dedication of the Cathedral and attending at mass—
(hear, hear) —as Representative of Her Majesty the Queen. (Hear,
hear.) As Representative of Her Majesty His Excellency might claim
to do as he had done, but they challenged that right. No Governor
had a right to do, as Representative of the Queen, what the Queen
herself could not do. Now, it was high time that this thing was seen
to, and they would not stop at that meeting. They would arouse
the Protestantism of New South Wales on this subject, and by-and-
bye those who said they, as Protestants, had no unity would see to the
contrary.
THE FIRST RESOLUTION.
The Rev. W. H. Beale (President of the Wesleyan Conference)
moved the first resolution, —“ That this public meeting of citizens
expresses its surprise and regret that His Excellency the Governor,
as representing Her Majesty the Queen, and His Worship the Mayor
(hear, hear) —as representing the citizens of Sydney, should have,
by their presence in official uniform and state, lent the sanction of
their high offices to the ceremonies connected with the celebrations
of the mass on the occasion of the opening of St. Mary’s Cathedral
on September 9.” He said he stood there with some misgiving and
reluctance. His reluctance arose from two reasons —his inadequacy
of voice to fill the hall, and also from the object to which the
resolution was directed. Attention had been directed in two letters
to the unwisdom and impropriety of submitting a resolution like this.


He said it appeared to him that as English free men they had
a right to inquire in a becoming way into what they deemed to be
a mistake or impropriety on the part of those who represented
them in high positions of State. (Cheers.) The significance of this
meeting could hardly be over-estimated. As Englishmen they were
profoundly loyal to the person of the Sovereign, and profoundly and
intelligently respectful to the person of any gentleman who repre-
sented her. (Cheers). It was always with extreme reluctance that
Englishmen would speak in remonstrance or in expostulatory terms
towards those who constitutionally ruled over them. Hence the
more the value of a great meeting of this character. It showed how
it estimated an act of the Governor of this colony in misrepresenting
his Royal Mistress and their beloved and honoured Sovereign.
(Loud cheers). They were the sons of sturdy forefathers who wrung
the great Charter from the ’craven John. (Cheers.) They were the
sons of stern and wholesome Puritans, who had maintained that the
King was not hedged round by divinity which rendered him immune
from the laws which he was sworn to uphold. (Cheers.) The
source of their loyalty sprang from their loyalty to the Divine
Sovereign, the head of the Church, and when they had to make a
choice with an earthly ruler they did so. (Cheers.) It was not an
act of disloyalty. (Cheers.) It was because they were loyal to
their Queen —(loud cheers) —that they declined to stand by and see
her high office lowered. (Prolonged cheers ) They declined when
their dearest interests were involved in the maintenance of the office
she held to stand by and allow anyone who filled her place here to
misrepresent her. (Cheers.) What a man might do in his private
capacity they had no concern with. (Hear, hear.) They had no
concern with what Sir Matthew Harris might do in his private role
as a citizen of this city, but in the case before them, on the one hand
His Excellency represented Her Majesty in official uniform, and with
all the accessories of State which belonged to the highest functions of
State, and when Sir Matthew Harris in his robes of office represented
the great mass of citizens of this city, appearing to be engaged in the
sacrifice of the mass, then it was time for them to protest. (Loud and
prolonged cheers.) They would be invited to express their opinion
in another resolution as to the explanation by which it was sought to
explain away the gravity of these official acts, but he ventured to say
that the explanation lent an added gravity to a first offence. Until
the conspiracy of silence was broken the public had been led to be-
lieve that all the people in the Cathedral had listened to Archbishop
Redwood’s accusations without protest. The silence was broken by
the Evangelical Council. (Cheers.) They were not assembled to
examine the great question which lay between them in controversial
theology, but to pass protest on an act which compromised them, and
which compromised their Queen —(loud cheers) —and was a menace
to our common Protestantism. He therefore begged to move with all
confidence the resolution which he had read in their hearing, (Loud
and continued cheers.)
Mr. John Wheeler, Grand Master of the Loyal Orange Institution
of New South Wales, in seconding the motion, said he must express his


Mneere regret that the utterances of the last few weeks had called them
together as loyal subjects of Her Majesty and citizens of Hew South
Wales to protest against the action of the Governor and the Mayor of
this city. (Applause.) As loyal subjects of Her Majesty they had a
perfect right to challenge the doings of her Representative if those
doings were contrary to what Her Majesty herself would do as the
ruling Sovereign over Great Britain and its dependencies. (Loud
cheers.). Her Majesty was particularly careful when she visited Scot-
land to worship in the Scotch Kirk (Applause.) His Excellency
could not be unaware of that fact, nor could he be unaware that Her
Majesty was the defender of the Protestant faith. (Loud cheers.) They
did not wish to find fault with Earl Beauchamp, but they had a perfect
right to find fault with him as the Representative of Her Majesty the
Queen. (Loud applause.) They also had a right to find fault with
the Mayor of Sydney for placing the citizens of New South Wales in a
compromising position. (Loud cheers.) If those gentlemen had
attended St. Mary’s Cathedral in their private character, the citizens
would have had less right to find fault with them. The citizens of
Sydney did not forget that a short time ago a vile calumny and assault
was made on Protestant missions, and a vile assault was also made
against Americans in connection with the Cuban war, but the American
representative, Colonel Bell, stepped into the breach and silenced Car-
dinal Moran once and for all. (Loud cheers.) They found that
certain gentlemen were trapped into a very peculiar position, because
the words were not delivered by the preacher ; but a worse thing was
done —the words were handed to the Press and published as having
been uttered in the presence of the Governor, the Mayor of Sydney, the
Chief Justice, and even the Right Hon. G. H, Reid, M.L A. (Loud
applause.) It was said that the Evangelical Council was the first to
move in the matter, but, as a matter of fact, the great Protestant body
he represented forwarded a resolution to the Governor telling him that
as Representative of Her Majesty he had no right to compromise Her
Majesty by attending High Mass in St. Mary’s Cathedral. (Loud
applause.) He was pleased to see on the platform Mr G. H. Reid, M.L.A.
■ —(loud cheers) —and hoped he would make his position clear and
show that he stood on the platform of Protestantism and was not
drifting towards Rome. He was satisfied that the people would not
tolerate the assault made from St. Mary’s Cathedral upon Protestant
principles and Protestant people generally without a protest. (Loud
cheers.)
The Rev. W. W. Rutledge, iu supporting the motion, said that
whether the Governor or the Queen had a right to attend such a
meeting as that, there seemed to be no doubt; but of this he was
quite sure —that if the Queen could she would not, (Loud cheers.)
He made bold to say that the Governor, in attending in state as he
did at a dedication of the Cathedral, attended also the sacrifice of the
Mass, and in doing so compromised his Queen and his own high
position as the Queen’s Representative. He also compromised the
Protestant religion, to which he professed to belong. His (Mr.
Rutledge’s) quarrel with the Governor and Sir Matthew Harris was


not for attending the service, but for doing so in their official?
capacities. (Hear, hear.) Archbishop Carr had said that it was
wrong to attack the Governor, and compared him to a fair lady.
Yet the Catholic Press had not scrupled to attack the fame of a
woman. In conclusion, he would say that they, as Protestant
citizens, intended that such a thing should never be repeated.,
(Cheers.)
The resolution was then put and carried unanimously.
THE SECOND RESOLUTION.
The Rev. J. "W. Gillett, B.A. (Church of England), moved the
second resolution:—“This meeting further protests against the
assertion reported to have been made by the selected preacher, Arch-
bishop Redwood, in his official dedication sermon relating to the
moral character of the leaders of the Reformation and the effects of
Protestantism upon civilisation and morality. It declares those
assertions to be libellous in character, contrary to historical fact, and
repugnant to a community enjoying the inestimable blessings that the
Protestant Reformation has secured to our nation and the world.”
Archbishop Redwood, he said, had made some bitter statements con-
cerning the Protestant faith. He had accused the leaders of the
Reformation of immorality, but he did not propose to take up their
time in endeavouring to disprove that charge, because it required no
word of his to disprove it. (Cheers.) There was no evidence in
history to support the charge against the leaders of the Reformation.
(Loud cheers.) Those who lived in glass houses should refrain from
throwing stones—(cheers and laughter)—because if there was any-
body who should shrink from bringing a charge of immorality
against the leaders of any denomination it was the Roman Catholic
Church. (Cheers.) Let them think for a moment how history had
regarded some of these infallible Popes of Rome—(cheers) —and they
would wonder how grace could be supposed to flow through such a
polluted channel. They were told that the popes were not allowed
to get married, but if they believed history Pope Alexander YI. had.
one daughter and four sons. (Cheers and laughter.) Then, again,
Dr, Redwood accused the Protestant Church of want of sanctity, but
where was the sanctity of the Church of Rome ? (Applause). How
much of it had been connected with the convent system ?
(Cheers,) Think what Mr. Coghlan, a member of the Roman Catholic
Church, had said in his statistics of crime, and the position the
members of the communion held therein in this colony. Then again,
compare the criminal statistics of Great Britain with those of
Catholic countries in Europe. Moreover, Dr. Redwood’s
charge of the lack of unity of Protestantism was untrue. There-
was a difference between unity and uniformity. He believed in
liberty of thought and conscience. They agreed to differ, but when
ministers of every Protestant denomination were assembled, as they
were that night, on the same platform, it was sufficient proof that
there was unity amongst the leaders of the Protestant Church. (Loud
cheers.) How did Rome obtain her unity p Because she would not
allow her adherents to have any liberty of mind or conscience. Thn


result of Rome’s system was to produce illiteracy and ignorance
amongst the people. (Applause.) Perhaps they would consider the
next charge was one of the most absurd preferred by Archbishop
Redwood, He said Protestantism was a foe to progress. He (the
speaker) would like to tell Archbishop Redwood that Protestant
countries were always far ahead of Roman Catholic countries.
(Loud Cheers.) If all that the Roman Catholics said about their faith
was true, and what they dared to say about Protestantism was true,,
how was it that Protestant England was far ahead of any Roman
Catholic country ? (Cheers.) It was a falsehood to say that Roman
Catholicism was ever the religion of England. The Popes tried to
establish Papal authority in England, but their encroachments were
always resisted. Lord Macaulay, the great historian, said that
throughout the whole of Christendom whatever progress had been
made in science and civilization and things tending to the uplifting
of men had been made it spite of Roman Catholicism. (Loud cheers.)
Spain was a Catholic country, and look where it was to-day. (Cheers.)
Had it been ruled by a Protestant dynasty it would have been one of
the foremost countries of the world to-day. (Cheers.) A blighting
curse, a curse of God, rested on it, because Spain was the instigator
of that diabolical institution, the Spanish Inquisition. (Loud and
continued cheers.) They wanted no weak-kneed Protestants. (Cheers.)
They must speak out. Were they to sit still and allow statements
damaging to the truth to be uttered and make no protest P (No, no.”)
They would fail in their duty to God and to themselves if they
declined to do it. (Cheers.) They had no quarrel with individual
members of the Catholic Church—they wanted to help them. But
they were justified in entering their emphatic protest againt those
unjust and fabulous statements made by Archbishop Redwood. (Loud
cheers.)
The Rev. E. T. Dunstan, in seconding the motion, said that,
while he regretted that the necessity for this protest had arisen, he
stood with his brethren who had voiced the outraged feelings of their
fellow-Protestants. A few days ago he received a letter from a medical
man in a provincial town, who asked and answered a question which,
as far as ha had seen, had not yet been touched. He asked what were
the motives which actuated these constant attacks upon the Protestant
faith, and said, in reply to his own question, that Rome knew what she
wanted, and went to work in her own way to get it. Her chief diffi-
culty out here was that the members of her Church, especially the
native-born, were not sufficiently militant ; they were inclined to live
in peace with their Protestant neighbours. Rome’s policy was a policy
of pinpricks and exasperation, by which to close up the ranks in their
own Church, and, by breeding strife, stimulate the denominational
enthusiasm of their followers; He could not help feeling that there
was a great deal of truth in that suggestion. It was as difficult to
understand the diplomacy of Rome as to understand the diplomacy of
Russia in the Far East; but, if the action of the ecclesiastical leaders
in stirring up strife was premeditated, it was a crime which would
assuredly meet with its own reward. The weapon was a dangerous


one to use. Already the best element in the Roman Catholic Church
was expressing its disgust. Ha had received an anonymous letter from
a Roman Catholic priest. There could be no doubt as to the personality
of the author, He protested against a reference by himself (Mr.
Dunstan) to Archbishop Redwood as an “ Irish ” priest, Well, be
would admit the mistake, and would admit freely that many Catholics
were not with their leaders. This priest said: “ Neither the priests
here nor the laity are responsible for Dr. Redwood’s remarks ; they
raise a storm against them.” Certainly, and when the storm came
those who raised it must not blame Protestants for the sectarian strife.
They wanted to make it clear that they were anxious to live at peace
with their neighbours, whatever their faith. There was work for all
to do, and they wanted to do their share; but when their faith was
attacked they must defend it, and when the sanctity of their homes
was attacked they were not men if they did not defend it. Regarding
this resolution, it was too late in the century to be called upon to
defend the moral rectitude of Luther and Calvin and Zwinglius. One
of our newspapers took the ground that history was uncertain and
contradictory, and then passed on to say that bad men had sometimes
done good work. He held that there was no uncertainty at all
in this regard. Some of the best testimonies concerning the moral
rectitude of the Reformers were given by their enemies. It was too
late for a modern priest to blacken their characters. As regarded the
influence of Protestantism upon civilisation, facts spoke louder than the
thunders of an archbishop. He did not rely upon figures but upon
general facts open to the observation of any man who cared to use his
faculties of observation.
The chairman then read telegrams from meetings in the country
to the effect that the first resolution had been carried unanimously at
these meetings.
The Rev. T. W. Dunn (Presbyterian) supported the motion, and
said the reporters at St. Mary’s were placed in a seat where they
could not hear what was said. After the sermon was over Arch-
bishop Redwood gave copies of his sermon to the reporters for them
to publish. They could not say that the words were not uttered, and
therefore published them, When Archbishop Redwood spoke of
Protestants polluting the nuptial bed he forgot the teachings of
history, how Henry VIII, was granted a dispensation for the taking
of another wife, though the Pope could not grant a dispensation for a
divorce ; and other historical evidences of the same kind. The reason
why Luther became the Reformer was through his desire to purify the
existing condition of things, and he did so. He quoted the writings
of an historian showing the state of the priesthood at that period.
The resolution was carried with cheers.
The Rev. F. Colwell made an appeal on behalf of the collections
which was then taken up to pay for the expense of the meeting and
for assistance in starting a Protestant truth society. The response
was a most hearty one.


THE THIRD RESOLUTION.
The Rev. Dr. Rosebj moved the third resolution as follows; —
“ That this meeting expresses its abhorrence and condemnation of
the tactics pursued by Archbishop Redwood and countenanced by
the authorities of the Roman Catholic Church, in publishing the
statements objected to as having been made in the presence of his
Excellency the Governor and other officials, and without protest on
their part; and, in view of the denials given as to the utterance of
these statements by his Honor the Chief Justice, the Right Hon. G.
H. Reid, P.C., and others present, calls upon the authorities of the
Roman Catholic Church as honest and truthful men to withdraw
these statements from the published official reports of the
proceedings, and to publish a disclaimer in the daily Press.” They
had heard a great deal about Archbishop Redwood’s expurgated
sermon. (Laughter.) It only needed one thing more, and that was
it should be fumigated. (Laughter.) The case had not been made
much better by what had been said by the Roman Catholic
authorities about it since. The Cardinal said they should have
ascertained that the words were actually uttered. Those present
had heard of the charge of forging and uttering. A man might forge
a document, and be silent in passing it on. That was uttering.
And so it was that, although the words were not uttered by
Archbishop Redwood, they were passed on in order that the lie might
circulate. (Cheers.) They had to-day the last act in this
comedy, because they had a kind of lame and belated dis-
claimer, but Archbishop Redwood’s words would not admit
of the gloss and the interpretation put upon them by Cardinal
Moran. (Cheers.) He claimed to have some knowledge of the con-
struction of English sentences, and the language employed by
Archbishop Redwood would not admit of such a construction. His
words were : —Protestantism has ever since been the helper and in-
strument of the worst foes of Christianity.” The words “ ever since ”
goverened the whole sentences. They asked in this resolution that
these words be publicly withdrawn from the public records—the
official record of the proceedings—and so make it a true record.
They called upon the authorities of the Church as men of truthful-
ness and honour, to make the disclaimer as public as the insult was.
This last insult reminded them somewhat of the John Williams
slander, but it was worse —it was worse to be told that their family
life was desecrated, and the honour and integrity of women attacked;
but what was more, the statements were a wicked falsehood. . The
insinuation made by those words had not been retracted, and they
called for its retraction. He believed that a large number of their
Catholic fellow-citizens had no sympathy with such words as had been
uttered. (Cheers.) He had himself received a letter from a Roman
Catholic lady who assured him that the majority of Roman Catholics
had no sympathy with the intended utterances of Archbishop Red-
wood, and said she could not understand how a Christian minister
could use such language. That showed how one at least of the
Catholics regarded it. They called upon the authorities of the
Church not to continue the words by printing them in their official,
record.


The Rev. George Lane (Wesleyan) seconded the motion, and
said that controversy for controversy’s sake was not his delight, but
he could not sit by and hear in silence the calumnies heaped upon the
Protestant Church in a Christian cathedral by a Roman Catholic
dignitary —a visitor to this colony, and one who had received the
hospitality of Government House. The Archbishop did not utter
them, but if he kept them back and yet published them that they
might be read in the other colonies and all over the world he should
withdraw them, and the mistake made should be apologised for and
corrected. (Cheers.) The man who entered a pulpit with the
intention of using words that imputed immorality to Protestants was
guilty of an unpardonable offence. Cardinal Moran had said that it was
only a storm in a tea-pot. (Laughter.) It was a tempest that would
sweep over the country —(Loud cheers) —that would rouse the indig-
nation of every lover of fair play. (Loud cheers.) That great meet-
ing was assembled in the interests of truth, justice, honour and
charity, religious liberty and toleration to protest against such unjust
and uncharitable assertions as those that had been made against
Protestantism. (Loud cheers.) He believed that Archbishop Red-
wood’s sermon would do a good he never intended. (Loud cheers.)
It would bring home to them the conviction of the baneful influence
of Roman Catholicism, and of the truth and blessing of their own
Protestantism, (Loud and continued cheering.) The Roman
Catholics said Protestants had no men or women of heroic mould or
saintly spirit. Was that so? (Loud cries of “No!”) Was
Elizabeth Pry no saint? (Cheers). Was Sister Dora no saint ?
Was Florence Nightingale no saint ? (Loud cheers.) Was Bishop
Hannington, who was killed in South Africa, no saint ? (Cheers.)
What about Latimer and Ridley, who stood side by side at the stake at
Smithfield, where Latimer said :—“ Cheer up, Master Ridley. By
the grace of God we shall light such a candle in England this day as
shall never be put out.” (Loud and continued cheers.) Was not
Archbishop Tindall a saint and hero ? (Cheers.) It had been well
said that those who lived in glass houses should not throw stones.
(Cheers.) They had no quarrel with their Catholic brothers and
sisters, but Protestants were compelled to stand up against the
assumption of tyranny, misrepresentation, and distortion of truth by
modern Roman Catholicism. (Loud cheers.) Let not the feeling
that had been aroused that evening evaporate in the streets— (loud
cheers) —but let it influence their whole life. Let them take as their
motto, “Defence against the assumptions and would-be tyrannies of
Rome, and defiance against all her encroachments and misrepresenta-
tions of truth.” (Loud and continued cheering.) Let them also
remember the motto of a century ago, “ A barred door to Popery, and
no peace with Rome.” (Loud cheers.) Cardinal Moran said they
should not take notice of the matter, as it was a very little one. The
man who could say that Archbishop Redwood’s insult was a little
matter to men of English, Irish, Scotch, Welsh, and Australian blood
did not know what he was talking about. (Loud cheers.) He must
either be a man without domestic ties or domestic affections, or else
he was a man without that fine sensibility of honour which they


might expect in the chief pastor of a great church like the Roman
Catholic Church, He seconded the resolution, but he had very little
hope that the calumny would be retracted.
The resolution was then put and carried, amidst loud cheering.
THE FOURTH RESOLUTION.
The Hon, W. Robson, M.L.0., moved the fourth resolution, —
“ That copies of the foregoing resolutions be forwarded to His Ex-
cellency the Governor, to his Worship the Mayor, and to the Secretary
of State for the Colonies,” He said it was not intended that this
movement and these resolutions should be confined to the Australian
public; they intended that they should be read from the Throne
itself, and it was one of the great privileges of Englishmen that they
could get there through the Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Taking the attack in conjunction with the attack on Protestant mis-
sions in the South Seas, he thought that as far as these colonies were
conceimed they might readily discover that there was a great signifi-
cance in these repeated attacks. There were utterances made, too,
in the course of the Congress, which were to his mind a plain indica-
tion that in the near future the Roman Catholic Church was going
to make demands upon the Governments of these colonies in the
matter of State aid to education and charitable institutions,
A voice: They won’t get it.
Mr. Robson: No, they would not get it. They did not want the
battle of State aid to denominational schools fought over again, and
he was of the conviction that the people of the colony would never
tolerate State aid to religion in the form of State aid to denomina-
tional schools. (Loud cheers.)
Mr. W. Wood (Secretary of the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales) seconded the resolution, and briefly reiterated the
arguments which had been generally advanced during the evening.
The resolution was carried with prolonged cheering.
MR. G. H. REID’S VINDICATION.
Mr. G. H. Reid, who came forward in response to calls and
cheers, said he did so to propose a vote of thanks to the president of
this great gathering—(Hear, hear) —and he had taken that duty at
the request of the gentlemen in charge of this meeting. He was not
accustomed to obtrude himself upon any gathering of his fellow-
citizens. He came to the meeting in order to show his sympathy with
the stand which had been taken upon this occasion. (Loud cheers.)
A remark had been made about the conspiracy of silence before the
Chairman of the Evangelical Council had addressed a letter to the
newspaper. That remark did him an injustice, which he wished to
explain. He did not become aware of the existence of the words in
the newspaper report of Archbishop Redwood’s sermon on the Mon-
day morning, for the good reason that after he heard a sermon he had
never been known to read it afterwards—(Cheers and laughter)—but
the remarks of Dr. Redwood were brought under his notice late on the
Tuesday evening by a gentleman who was on the platform. He


asked that gentleman to see him on Wednesday morning. In the
meantime he read the sermon, and told the gentleman referred to
when he heard that it was intended to call a meeting of the citizens to
protest, that he intended to goto the meeting. ('Cheers.) He did
not wonder that some of their enthusiastic friends were a little
unfriendly upon this occasion, because in his public life he must have
met with some disapproval, but he had tried for the last 20 years in
his public career to keep himself free from matters of a religious
controversial character. (Cheers.) But he had Scotch blood in his
veins—(Cheers) and although not like the grave and reverend gentle-
men who had addressed the meeting —he could only admit he was
one of the chief sinners—be felt that the most unworthy member of a
Protestant denomination would be something less than a man if he
stood by and allowed that foul and false calumny to pass. (Prolonged
cheering.) The previous speakers had been wise. Hot one had
insulted Romanism by going into any laboured refutation of these
infamous slanders, though some of them had been tempted to throw
a few stones at the glass-house. (Cheers.) Well, one of the results,
of these things was that one was led to study a little bit of history,
and he had turned to his new edition of his “ Encyclopedia
Britannica ” —(Cheers and laughter)—to see how things looked
about the time of the first and second centuries of the Christian era.
If he had known such words had been sent to the
Press of the city he would have considered himself a craven
hound if he had sat down quietly under them. (Loud cheers.)
What did he find in those early centuries P A state of ecclesiastical
authority very much similar to that prevailing in the Congregational
and Presbyterian Churches. They were all pontiffs over their own
congregations. He found that when the Roman Emperor took
Christianity under his protection the time came for its greatest
danger. (Applause.) The greatest glory of Protestantism was that
in its hours of persecution it was greatest— (Cheers)---whilst its
grandest triumph was that when it reached the summit of Imperial
power it showed an absolute and beneficent tolerance of other
Christian denominations. (Loud and continued cheers.) He heartily
rejoiced that some of their trusted Christian leaders had drawn a
sharp distinction between men who slandered Protestantism, as
Archbishop Redwood had done, and the great body of the Roman
Catholic communion. (Applause.) He regretted that the incident
had occurred, but now that it had occurred the responsibility must be
put upon Protestants of the country to vindicate the faith in which
they believed. (Loud cheers.) He came forward as a man before
the people of this country to say that in this attempt to vindicate the
Protestant religion from these infamous slanders he preferred to serve
in the rank and file. (Loud cheers.) In conclusion he proposed a
hearty vote of thanks to the right reverend chairman for his services
in the chair.
At the conclusion of his speech three cheers were given for Mr.
Reid.
Mr. Perry, Minister for Public Instructon, seconded the motion.
He said the Protestants had been accused of want of unity because
there were different creeds, hut when Protestantism was attacked
then Protestants would show their unity.
The motion was carried, and the meeting concluded with the-
singing of the National Anthem.
E.T, & J. RADCLIFFE, PRINIER?, 21 UNDERWOOD STREET, SYDNEY.
16


i- CORN FLOUR. A
ship Brand * •
Corn Flour
TREBLE - REFINED;
THEREFORE
Purer, Lighter and Whiter
THAN ANY OTHER BRAND.
SUITABLE FOB THE
NIOST ROBUST or DELICATE STOMACR
/i> <iv<iv vk riv^^viv^viv^ivy'Kvivvivviv^iv'
SHIP BRAND m Stands Easily *
yfiv
CORN FLOUR I - - first.


BEST ON EARTH I
CLIFTON’S
JILY-WrilTE * *
-g> §TAR©ri
WILL NOT
STICK M
TO THE IRON.
GOES FURTHER
THAN ANY OTHER STARCH
<AV *i> <i\ ✓i'v <IV /*> nV /!> *AV /i> /JV /'i'v ✓!> /i> VK
DLIFTON’S
LILY-WHITE
STARCH.
I3r INSIST ON GETTING IT. *.s
