

Clarson, Shallard, & Co., Printers, Melbourne and Sydney.




LIGHT FOR THE MILLION.
RELIGION OF GOD
l\r O T OF IVE E l\r •
THACT No. I—To1 —To be followed by several others, for the continuation of
the work nobly commenced by the authors of the Essays and Reviews and
by Dr. Colenso, in his books on the Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua.
By TH. BERIGNY, M.D., &0.
[STEREOTYPED EDITION.]
MELBOURNE AUSTRALIA:
F. F. BALLIERE, 85 COLLINS STREET EAST.


CLASSOJf, SHALLAKD & CO,,
PRINTERS,
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY.


INTRODUCTION.
The Author intends to bring forth before the British Nation
a series of Lectures upon various subjects, and thereby present
in their own language, of which he was ignorant when twenty-five
years of age, how he has come to the conclusion that, civilization
being upon wrong foundations, no reform will be fraught with
permanent benefit, unless the primary cause of social evils he
eradicated, i. e.. Superstition.
He is not of the class of philosophers who acknowledge that
the people must have something false to believe when they cannot
have the truth : he holds scepticism as the most fertile ground
for the cultivation of knowledge, truth, and wisdom, and he
believes that evidence has no authority where there is no honest
doubt. Popular- faith that indolently contemplates itself as
Narcissus at the fountain, is the atrophy of men’s higher faculties,
the baneful virus inoculated into the blood of human childhood ;
it has been the Harbinger of a gospel of fatality, despair, and
offensive exclusiveness, for the defence of which, men have wasted
their valuable energies, and carried on destructive wars. Know-
ledge on the contrary, being the impressions received by
substantial, real, and intellectual evidences, will alone restore
religious harmony throughout the world.
It will be noticed, he apprehends, that his dictionary of the
English idiom is rather limited, and the French phraseology
disagreeably prevailing; his object, however, is not to exhibit
literary attainments, but to avow fearlessly, his sentiments in a
pertinent and significant language, to which he has been driven
by public injustice, and the love of truth.
127 Collins Street East, Melbourne.
July, 1863.




FIRST LECTURE.
(DELIVERED BEFORE THE TRUTH-SEEKERS’ FREE DEBATING SOCIETY,
ON MAY 28, 1863, BY DR. BERIGNY.)
GOD;
CONSIDERED SCIENTIEICALLY, MORALLY, k PHILOSOPHICALLY.
All weak minds move with the atmosphere of public opinion. Whilst a force of
attraction keeps them irresistably at a fixed distance, they will maintain, at all cost,
that black is white, and right is wrong, et vice versa A good shaking to public
opinion from the torpor of religious conservatism, and millions to exclaim, i
thought so.”—(My meditations upon Dr. Colenso’s refutations.)
Thanks to the courageous authors of the celebrated essays and
reviews, and more recently to an honest Bishop of the Church
of England, Dr. ColensOj'Hhe subject of religious enquiry is
creating great alarms among the votaries of popular “ theology,”
and the ecclesiastical fabric is trembling upon its very foun-
dation. As these noble deserters have met with some encour-
agement from a philosophical press, it is to be hoped that the
credulous mass who supply the bricks and mortar of sectarian
edifices will also enquire into the veracity, reability, and -au-
thority of the old Jewish records.
. Modern Protestantism has in reality less vitality than Catholi-
cism, because deprived of unity, the baleful advantage of that pro-
genitor. Protestantism is as much a mock protestation against
popish superstition as Catholicism, since the council of Nice is a
mock teaching of Christianity. It is true that Protestantism has
gloriously protested against individual infallibility ; but since its
partial triumph it has protested against the spirit of Christianity
with no less hatred than its foe. Protestantism proscribes the
very elements that brought it into existence, i.e., enquiry and
protest: its only endeavour is to supplant its old enemy, and to
fasten another set of chains upon the new converts. In fact, the
ipse dixit of a civilized man, called Pope, would give place to the


dead authority of human print, and the cupidity of a set of am-
bitious men called Cardinals would give place to theological
tyranny were Protestantism to be the haughty queen of Christ-
endom, instead of papal supremacy. It is now the mission of
philosophy to consider Christianity as a moral reform, and to
expose the present old, erroneous systems of “ theology,” that de-
moralizes humanity; and the object of this discourse is to com-
mence a strong battle against prejudice and ignorance. I shall
seize upon truth whenever iound, on Christian or heathen ground.
My efforts will be not only to clear the vapours of “ theological”
darkness, but to cultivate man’s religious aspirations by a doc-
trine of affirmations. To pull down the idol of others is not
my ultimate desire, for when the trick of happiness will be lost,
the sectarian will do that part of destruction himself, like the
unlucky gambler abuses the cards instrumental to his ruin.
Religious reconstruction is my aim ; —if not attainable, it is
nevertheless searchable.
The object of religion is twofold : First, —Inquiry into the
knowledge of God and his attributes ; secondly,—The highest
standard of worship owing to Him by the human family. The
first question only will occupy me this evening. Is there a
Deity ? Who is He ? If I were to say to my most pious friends
that I do not believe in the existence of God, they would cry blas-
phemy ! and stay my speaking, yet my sentiments would be can-
didly expressed, though, I apprehend, misunderstood; such as
if I were to say that I do not believe in the existence of the sun,
when its light is so intense that I cannot penetrate it. I say
that the existence of God is no matter of belief, but of know-
ledge, as it is with the knowledge that one and one make two.
No one believes in a mathematical px’ohlem so simple because he
know's it So it is with God ; the existence of a universal Ruler,
Sustainer, or Providence is answered by the presence of the
smallest atom in the creation, as the existence of a manufactured
article reveals the existence of the manufacturer; or as the ex-
istence of a force pre-supposes the existence of a superior force.
I may now say, without giving offence, that I do not believe in the
existence of God, since you understand that I know from the
evidences of my senses that He is ! But Who is He? This is
a more difficult question.
God admits of no human definition: He only knows himself;
and all speculation upon His divine character will pi’ove to
be an incoherent rambling, and terminates by the creation of
an ideal being, the reflex and exact likeness of the over-
stretched brain in painful labour. The character of God
pourti’ayed by Moses or Joshua, compared with the sublime
conception of Jesus, differs as much as cruelty from love.


Vindictiveness,* cruelty, f and wrath § are the excellencies
attributed to Jehovah by war-disposed reformers, as universal
love is the attribute of the Deity taught by the peaceful Jesus.
It is evident that the two characters of God differ as much as the
two personal teachers differ from each other; and so it is with
every one of us who has to use the telescope of his own mental
organization to catch a faint glimpse at the Deity.
To represent the Deity for our adoration as a des-
potic patriarch, is a form of idolatry more pernicious than
the veneration of an inert image as a symbol of his person-
ation. Christendom seems to ignore that the idolatry of the
Hindoo is not the direct adoration of a wooden idol: their idol
is a visible symbol of the universal God. If you accept, instead
of this material representation of the Deity, the invisible indi-
viduality of God—which Moses proclaimed in the age of force, —
whilst worshipping this individuality associated with cruelty,
rohbery,|| massacre,lT prostitution,** &c., you manufacture to
yourself an invisible idol more mischievous than the dumb sym-
bolic idol. Eam, of the Hindoo, never was alleged to say, through
a lifeless representation, “I am a jealous God; I wax hot in my
wrath !”§§ The Deity thus misunderstood and represented, has
never been believed to commend wholesale murder, nor to suggest
The relation of cause to effect explains the present war
in America, as the British subjugation of India is the natural con-
sequence of a national torpor. At the present time the
American war has already cost nearly half a million of lives to
the contending parties : go to the remotest cause of this human
calamity, and you will find that the invisible individuality of a
god of Slavery is associated with it. What was the au-
thority of the primitive English slaveholders who created this
shocking institution ?—The Bible. What was the argument of
divines in favor of the chattel of human beings ?—“ The sanction
of the Bible.” The benevolent and intelligent mind believes
that national calamities are traceable to erroneous religious
institutions breeding superstitions, as diseases and sufferings
are entailed upon the violation of organic laws. When the
causes of our evils and vices are discovered, it will be found that
* Genesis, ix.; Leviticus, xxxvi. ; Numbers, xxi,; Isaiah, xxxiv.; &o.
+ Exodus, xix. ; xxiv. ; &c.
§ Exodus, xxii.
I Exodus, XX., xxxiv.
II Genesis, xxxiv.; Exodus, xxii.
Numbers, iii., xvi., xxv.
** Genesis, xii., xix., xx.
§§ Exodus, xxii.
J J Genesis, xvii., xxxi; Leviticus, xix., xxii., xxv.


popular “ theology,” vicious systems of education, and tyrannice’
institutions are answerable for all the iniquity of society, and
not the human heart. This platform is accessible to all benevo-
lent minds who can throw what they believe light upon the
causes and cure of evils: whether friends or foes, they will be
welcome.
If it is beyond the human power to give a definition of God,
it is, I hope, within the capabilities of the human mind to
express a conception of God, which, though limited and inade-
quate, is nevertheless consistent with nature and reason.—
Humanity, in spite of sectarian organizations, is advancing in
that direction as in every human science ; the salaried divines—
alone mortgaged to religious conservatism, are left far behind their
thinking laity ; and religious emancipation comes from out the
doors of the Church, as political liberty proceeded once from the
ranks of the people, in spite of privileged aristocracy. The man
that dares to think for himself will not adhere to all such con-
ceptions of God that emanate from more ignorant men than
himself.
The Bible is a faithful revelation, and a living monument that
Moses and Joshua were more ignorant of the knowledge of God
than the emancipated intellect in the nineteenth century: yet
there is perhaps no modern thinker who shines so brilliantly in
this luminous age as those great patriarchs did in the dark ages of
humanity. They are not to be judged as they appear to us on
a more advanced plan, but for the relative merits they possessed,
and good reforms they worked. In spite of great imperfections
they have probably deserved much from humanity, and were the
highest intellect of their time; —they claim their due and no
more.
My conception of the great Deity is either scientific,
moral, or philosophical, but not “theological”; scientific re-
searches and discoveries reveal a God of stern and unchanging
laws, forces, attractions, repulsions, associations, affinities, &c.
God is the centre and originator of all forces and changes —the
least ripple that disturbs the still waters is originated in the
force of forces. To call God nature is not incorrect, but it is a
conception of his material aspect only. Essential Atheism
cannot exist, for its definition is a conception of universal effects
without cause. It is a philosophical reaction against the person-
ation of God, with form and human imperfections. No man has
ever denied the existence of a Supreme Force, or Power, though
he rejected another definition of God. Atheism would never
have been known if ideal idolatry had not usurped our moral
and religious government.
Morally considered, God is the embodiment of eternal princi-


pies and wise designs; the attributes of love and universal fa-
therhood taught by Jesus is the naost sublime conception ever
arrived at.
Contemplating God as the great fountain of love, we cannot
entertain the least doubt that his designs do not tend to the ulti-
mate happiness of all His children. The doctrine of predesti-
nation and total depravity can only find credence in those
diseased minds which are haunted by gloomy thoughts that lead
to the lunatic asylum.
Philosophically considered, God is the infinite intelligence,
the focus of infinite wisdom and knowledge,—a most compli-
cated combination of perfections inconceivable to the human
animalcula that crawl upon this planet. Philosophically consi-
dered, God governs our mind by fixed, stern principles, as he
governs the Universe by immutable, eternal laws. I'he human
mind has its wheels and pulleys, as our system has its internal
laboratories of digestion, secretion, excretion, &c.
Therefore, to my individual conception, God is not a personal
potentate —a King of kings—a judge holding sitting, and at-
tended by aide-de-camps, or angels. Shall Ibe called an atheist
because this conception, essentially material, is as obnoxious to
my mind as gross animal substances are refused assimilation by
my digestive apparatus? Scientifically considered, I contem-
plate God as the great mathematician, geometrician and archi-
tect of the universes ; the great chemist, artist, musician, that
inspired genius. Morally considered, I contemplate God as the
universal Father whose love is secured to all his families for
ever and ever. So impartial J believe him to be that I would
not say he loves more the godly man than the criminal on his
way to the gallows. Philosophically considered, I contemplate
the Deity as the Divine influence—penetrating all the universe,
and reaching the centre of the smallest atom.
I never importune God with prayers couched in the form of a
demand, solicitation, or favor, &c., as I am fully aware that he
knows my requirements better than myself. Where sectarians
find the work of their imaginary devil, I discover the voice of
God giving me a Divine warning. All mental sorrows are men-
tal transitory disturbances leading to improvements, as volcanic
eruptions improve the surface and fertility o-f the earth. All our
social misfortunes and calamities are the lessons of His Holy
Gospels ; thus rectifying our artificially perverted functions, they
constitute the infallible method of His teachings.
There is no such conflict upon the conception of God, viewed
very differently by great philosophers, moralists, mathematicians,
naturalists, physiologists, chemists, artists, &c., as there is
between theologians of various sects. All sciences are engaged in


the search of the laws and principles of God, and whenever there
is one discovered, its enunciation constitutes a truth which
will harmonize with all previous discoveries. “Theology” will
never blend with philosophy, because repulsive to reason, the
eyes of the developed understanding, and to nature—the only
revelation of God authoritative to men.
Now that we have casually examined the most apparent at-
tributes of God, it remains to determine His most appropriate
name in the English language. I object to the word Creator, as
being associated with a misconception of the Infinite Being.
No mind can comprehend the possibility of creation, either of the
primary elements of matter, time, or God himself. Alpha and
Omega, and the First Cause, create another riddle that confuses
the mind. The Alla of the Mahometan (the Only), is preferable,
and also the Hebrew name (meaning The Eternal, or the one
befoie now, and after). But the word God may remain, though
so mnch misused since its origin.
What is God, considered theologically? If it takes a great
artist to comprehend another great artist—a Socrates to compre-
hend a Socrates—a Newton to comprehend a Newton, &c., it
will also require Another God as Omnipresent, as Omniscient,
and infinite as the Deity to comprehend him Theo-logically. How
can that be? we comprehend the Deity as a Unity incomparable
to any other unity. God only can consider himself Theo-logically
or God-logically. Priests have considered him ecclesiastically,
--through the opaque mirror that reflected the requirements
of and ambition, —but theologically, never. Their
“ Theology” is a piece of greater sacrilege than the infalli-
bility of the Pope, or the assumption of absolving sins.
Their “Theology” has represented the world to be under
the divi“d government of Four Deities, viz. : First, there
is the G“ of Moses, who sanctions war, slavery, human
massacre in cool blood, female degradation, incest, polygamy,
“d all other cruelties and monstrosities which Moses thought
indispensable to carry on to succeed in ruling over a barbarous
horde. The same Deity is in our day invoked by the richly
salaried divine, to protect military ferocious thirst for blood,
when a “ Christian” nation prepares herself for great human
slaughter. Secondly—There is the wicked, gay, joyous, alter-
nately clever and foolish, but hideous and mischievous deity,
called The Devil; always setting traps for poor, weak, frail
humanity, and frightening grown up children as the hob-
goblins do the younger ones. Thirdly—There is a good,
divine, merciful Lord, who is his own son and father, in
spite of all mathematicians so obstinate as to maintain that two
entities can never make one entity. That gracious god is so


good that, in order to reconcile the human family with himself,
his own father, he came to be barbarously put to death. Here
is an example of reconciliation for fathers (that have sons,)
who wish to make peace with an enemy ! And fourthly
There is the god Ghost, who never does or did any thing at all.
Is it so? Divines, make that a subject for “ Theological” sub-
tilities, for which you are salaried
That assumed “ Theology” has been and still is the worst
enemy of mankind. Its crimes are beyond computation, and
its atrocities pass all human madness ; —it is a miserable myth,
that will follow the obsequies of its parent, the Devil. As an
exemplification of its mental aberrations, I will here give some
extracts of its inspirations. The “ Theologian ” Emmons, an
English sermon writer, gives vent to his religious acumen in the
following :—“ The happiness of the elect in Heaven will consist
in witnessing the torments of the damned in hell; and among
these it may be their own cliildren, parents, husbands, wives,
and friends on earth. One part of the business of the blessed is
to celebrate the doctrine of reprobation. While the decree of
reprobation is eternally executing on the vessels of wrath, the
smoke of their torment will be eternally ascending in view of the
vessels of mercy, who, instead of taking the parts of those mis-
erable objects, will say, ‘Amen ! Hallelujah ! Praise the Lord !’”
Who would like to be saved in such blessed company? Cer-
tainly not I!
Then follow some psalms, by a Rev. Dr. Watts :
There is a never ending Hell,
And never dying pains,
Where children must with demons dwell,
In darkness, fire, and chains.
Have faith the same with endless shame.
To all the Imman race ;
For Hell is crammed with infants damned.
Without a day of grace 1
Such are the “Teachers” of Christ’s doctrine, who once said
“ Let the little children come to me, for of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven ! ” That “ Theology ” has depraved
humanity, and called man totally depraved from birth. It
has been the hidden, malignant author of all contention and
hatred, and asserted that man is surrounded by invisible
enemies trying to lead him to perdition. It has ruined man’s
highest faculty, reason, and represents him as lost “ by the fall.”
It has persecuted with cruelty and vengeance the pioneers of
human progress, and kept humanity fascinated under the spell
of “ Divine” wrath. It has looked upon humanity as a rich reef,
to be crushed to dust for its own sanctimonious benefit. Thanks


to the martyrs of that Juggernaut, they have only penetrated
through the stratum of popular credulity, and our riches will go
to its legitimate owners. In all its contentions that “ Theology ”
has exhibited the insensibility of maniacs, and claims holy com-
munion with the great fountain of love. It has but I
must stop, for I do not know what it has not done, except good.
Ah ! they say, “ Theology is not Christianity.” What is
Christianity? “He that believes will be saved; he that disbe-
lieves will he damned.” Believe what?—the “Truth.” Saved
from what ?—eternal damnation. What is that truth ?—my
bible, i.e., Theology. Saved from what?—eternal damnation,
i.e., Theology. Now that we have gone round the vicious circle,
we must present the question in another form : What light do
the divine Revelations of Nature bring upon the words ascribed to
the messenger of good news ? Reason, in doing justice to the
Great Teacher, sincerely admits that all his teachings were
throughout harmonious with nature’s revelations. When he is
alleged to say, “He that believes will be saved,” &c.. His
true meaning, evidently falsified by translators, was “He that
believes what is true is saved from troubles ; he that disbelieves
is condemned to penalties pi'oportionate to the violation.” Again
he says, “ He that sinneth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven.” The Holy Ghost is another name for the Heavenly
Father, and it will be my endeavour to show that this noble saying
is in harmony with nature’s revelation of the will of God. No
violation against the laws of nature, and the moral laws of our
conscience can possibly be forgiven, and no one has power to
forgive an injury committed against him, however forbearing,
lenient, and charitable he may be. What is called forgiveness
is the promise not to degrade oneself by retaliation ; every
transgressor will meet with the adequate punishment that will
set the transgressor right, and lead him to reform—which is
the reconciliation with nature. But suppose that we disagree
upon what is to be believed in order to be saved, is there any
quotation to settle the riddle? I say yes; and then it is still con-
sistent with nature’s laws, but requiring some scientific explana-
tion out of place at present. Jesus Christ said ; — And these
shall follow them that believe, &c They shall take
serpents, and they will not hnrt them They shall lay hands
on the sick, and they shall recover.’’ Where is the divine or
the man who calls me an “ infidel,” willing to submit his ster-
ling belief to these tests with me ? I shall be the first to take
up any snake, or to lay on the hands over the sick: the result
will speak for itself.
What shall I say is Christianity? Christianity does not exist,
and never will, for the glory of Jesus’ immortal memory ; it is a


fiction to serve ecclesiastical cupidity. God made men to be-
come pure, not artificially altered. From the tenor of Christ’s
fragmentary language it can be proved that he never intended to
preach a particular doctrine upon which to engraft the creeds
that smother religion ; and this is his great merit. Human doc-
trines or systems are all founded upon hypotheses the counter-
feit of truth ; whereas, science is the discovery of immortal laws.
Moral cultivation is the research of those principles that develope
spiritual aspirations—the department in which Jesus excels, and
has found no parallel: “My doctrine is not mine,” said He,
“ but His that sent me. His doctrine is no mystery: there is
nothing covered that shall not be known.” Isaac Newton would
as well have said, “ The law of attraction is not mine, but of the
great manifest God, who has many others for discovery.” It
would be as absurd to call astronomy after the name of Coper-
nicus, as it is to term from Christ’s name the sacred immortal
religion which was promulgated by his teaching and example,
but not invented. Due veneration for his sublime character
ought to make every honest thinker hold enough to face that
idolatry that elevates him to the identity of the Almighty,
in violation of his own humble remonstrance:— “Why callest
thou me good? God is greater than I. There is none good
but God ! ” It is a mystery, will they say ? To me their mys-
tery is a palpable revelation of their gross ignorance. We shall
try to be his “ Brother,” by the will of his Father,” as
commanded by him, and stand or fall for it.
“He that believes will be saved.” —This is the boasted salva-
tion anchor of professed Christians, —the key to everlasting hap-
piness ; and disbelief the way to “ perdition.” The authority
that Jesus said so is that of the apostles, who disagree, as all
other honest men might do, in relating mere matters of fact.*
Can any intelligent man admit that Jesus was so ignorant of
the nature of belief as he is alleged to be. Belief is the reflex of
an involuntary impression of the mind, —as a bruise is the una-
voidable effect of a blow—as sight is subsequent to light. The
great teacher might as well be made to say that he that is not
blind can see the light of the sun, &c. That anchor of saving
belief will avail them as well as the heavy iron apparatus would
when a shipwreck is imminent, and the poor infatuated victims
rush and cling to it for keeping afloat, instead of depending upon
their self efforts of swimming.
* John XX., 1; Matthew xxviii., 1 ; Mark xvi., 1 ; Luke ixiv., 10.
Mark xv., 32; Luke xxiii., 39, 40.
Mark xvi., 2 ; John xx., 1.
Luke xxiv., 4 ; Matthew xxviii., 2,3,
Matthew xxvii., 5 ; Acts i., 18 ; &c., &c.


In conclusion, let me now appear with my own conception of
God before a jury of twelve thus impanelled : —a rabbi, an Eng-
lish bishop, a catholic cardinal, a Greek priest, a Swedenborgian
minister, a mahometan dervish, a mandarin, a brahmin priest,
a mormon, a shaker, and a wesleyan, presided over by the pope.
In order to be acquitted of idolatry the verdict must be unani-
mous. Can there be one of the jury w'ho would deny one of my
affirmations? But what would it be if I were to change places
with one of my judges, and the latter to be succeeded by another
to undergo the same ordeal, and so on to the last ? The verdict
would unanimously be that I only am not guilty of idolatry.
In all that we do, in all what we say, in all what we profess,
let us strive to prove that we are not wrong. Men will say that
we are not right; but it is only the privilege of the Great
Deity to say who is right or not, for He alone possesses the
standard of right.


SECOND LECTURE.
(DELIVERED BEFORE THE TRUTH-SEEKERS’ FREE DEBATING SOCIETY,
ON JUNE 7, BY DR. BERIGNY.)
SEVEN COMMANDMENTS OF GOD.
Sectarian aversion elevates the soul of its victims, and degrades its authors.
“ Religious" persecution is the handmaid that mocks the lash of ridicule whilst
clearing the path to aspiration ; it is the winter that bites the fertile prairies of the
soul, gives vigour to the mind, and promises a more luxuriant spring.— (iVly reflec-
tions when living among idolators.)
In my last Lecture I advaDced the following double proposition,
viz.,—that Religion is the Knowledge of the manifest attributes
of God, and the standard of worship owing to Him by the
human family.
In answer to the first question, I proved how I came to the
conclusion that God exists, but I repudiated as mental idolatry
all personations of God. I observed that when His individuality
is associated with human imperfections and cruelties. He is
made an invisible idol, more mischievous than the dumb
wooden one which the Hindoos venerate as the symbol of Ram,
the same Deity whom Christians call God, and the Jews Jehovah.
Although impossible to define, I considered God scientifically,
morally, and philosophically, to the best of my present mental
capabilities, through which I could obtain a faint glimpse at an
imperfect conception. At the close of my Lecture, in order to
engage a discussion, I made a clean breast of the idea of God
considered as being the grand organization of the
worst form of despotism—mental slavery, has entangled


and fettered humanity for ages. As I found no antagonism, I
hope that some champion of theology, in reading the mighty
questions involved, will make it a subject of oral argument,
attack, and defence.
Since I repudiated the authority of written testimony as the
standard of worship, we may be asked—What criterion of adora-
tion have you instead ? Answer : We also have the Command-
ments of God, “ Not written with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God; not in the tables of stone (or paper) but in fleshy
tablets of the heart.” The so-called infidels can use the lan-
guage of Paul to the Corinthians, as their religious relation to
sectarians is just the same. The Commandments of God, which
constitute the mighty authority of our adoration, are the pro-
pelling forces that stimulate man to go onwards and upwards to
purity, through incessant purifications. The law of motion,
latent in every man’s brain, by agitating his thoughts, will in
time enable him to read these indestructible commandments.
No sect, no chosen people, no favorite nation, no elected indi-
viduals monopolize the blessings of these Divine Command-
ments ; no arrogant parson dispenses its proclamation on
Sabbath day; and no system of theology will ever thrive upon
them, and keep an army of parasites.
The great teacher that reveals the Commandments of God
» written upon the fleshy heart,” is NATURE ! and man will
never be taught real lessons but through that truthful inter-
preter of the will and design of a Heavenly Father. All external,
verbal, and conventional teachings will be one day consigned to
the museum of superstitious relics, and give place to the
immortal authority of principles, discovered by the ever-living
facts of Nature’s Divine revelations. The knowledge of the
Divine will is not driven in man’s brain from the pulpit, but
comes out of man through his own development. As the rose
borrows not its fragrance from artificial perfumes, so the fragrance
of man is his own individual conviction of right and wrong.
Human conscience is the organ of moral functions, and truth
remains without authority unless it is felt there. My friends !
invoke the authority of that Divine Gospel, Nature, and you will
soon be purified of your artificial dross.
The Divine love is so manifest in His commandments that our
strict obedience to these injunctions are at the same time our
steps towards happiness. The first Commandment of God
revealed through nature is not the egotistical Mosaic “ Thou
Shalt love thy God first of all,” but ‘‘Thou shalt love
thyself.”
Self love is the first motive power of man : it is the mstmct
that prompts the infant to gratify his appetite to attach himself


to those that love him, whether parents or strangers ; and, when
a man, this first commandment dictates to him moral dignity,
temperance, cleanliness, activity, desire for knowledge, and will
protect his self esteem against the injury of slanders. If this
commandment be left ungratified, it will be indulged in the viola-
tion of higher commandments not yet learned. Eefuse a child
his daily food, and he will steal it. If the natural requirements
of this commandment are unprovided, the young mind takes a
tendency to get out of its natural track; and as an ungoverned
engine, it will be productive of social evils when unobstructed,
for it is a moral law as well as a physiological one, that every
faculty or organ must be exercised naturally to fulfil the designs
of God — i.e., to be useful to humanity. The pervertion of facul-
ties or organs by vicious functions is the mystery of all our social
evils and maladies. Human passions are precious energies un-
controlled by the commandments of God, and often a great
highwayman has the stuff of a hero. All our faculties are divine
gifts, and if naturally cultivated, we should all render service to
humanity. It is no fault of their divine origin if society is
injured by criminals, but the fault of society herself. Therefore
man is compelled, by the first propelling law of God, to go on,
although he may go wrong; and you see an instance of it in
children, who become mischievous if too long unoccupied. When
young men arrive at the thinking period of life, if their minds
be unprovided with useful knowledge, it will readily accept the
theology that clips their aspirations, and their condition
is a transitory torpor of the intellect, of which sectarians actually
present the image. But the time of rectification will surely
come : all vicious directions are to be obstructed by divine pro-
visions. and the great saviour. Reform, will triumphantly redeem
us.
The second Commandment of God is, “ Man, thou shalt
love a wife; woman, thou shalt love a husband.” Conju-
gal love is the fountain of life—the germ of future endless
generations—the most imperative obligation of nature, which is
always the faithful interpreter of God’s Commandments. The
great conquest of protestantism over Catholicism—for which the
reformation is to be blessed, —is the reconciliation of priesthood
with nature. Marriage of the clergy is the pride of the reforma-
tion, as the proclamation of a Supi’eme Being the glory of the
Hebrew. Matrimonial association dictates to husband and wife
the duties of mutual help, fidelity, respect, devotedness, &c. If
the requirements of that commandment are unlulfilled, honest
men and chaste women will become profligate, sensuous, if not
worse. A lonely disposition leads bachelors and maids to
melancholy, and an untimely end.


The third Commandment of God is Thou shalt love thy
Children Ihe love of offspring begets the most sublime
feelings; it is the soux’ce of a felicity impossible to express with
the vehicle of human language ; but if the duties imposed upon
fathers or mothers by this commandment be not wisely dis-
charged, its responsibilities will prepare heavy penalties for their
advanced age; for children, when parentally misdirected, will
become a scourge to society, in spite of good natural dispositions.
If an uncongenial marriage prevents the requirements of that
commandment, or the ignorance of parents be immolating tbeir
children on the altar of medical ignorance, their old age will be
deprived of its highest enjoyments, and they will leave this world
with a sense of regret, as one who did not fully fulfil the divine
use of nature.
The fourth Commandment of God is Thou shalt sustain
thy Parents in their declining age, and supply all their
wants, and its obligations are extended to all old destitute
teachers and benefactors who have once given help to our social
advancement. If these obligations are disregarded towards
parents, teachers and benefactors, such lack of veneration for
talent and matured age will pax’alyse our spiritual aspirations.
Many an old xnaxi is on the eve of being a beautiful angel of
light, who may serve us by his inspirations, if the soul be an
immortal individuality, and x'etain earthly memory ; —a question
for further lectux’e.
The fifth Commandment is Thou shalt love every man as
thy Brother, and be a true friend to thy associates. The prin-
ciple of fx’atexmal love is the great motive power that propelled
the enex’gies and pi’omoted perseverance in all x’eformers, whom
society has in all times persecuted. Our social and x’eligious re-
ox’ganization is their futui’e mission, and their daily occupation
is the discoveiy of the soux’ce of social evils, and their exposition ;
their actual duty is to give vent fearlessly to their ixxdignation,
and bx’ave all social consequences. Combined with knowledge
and wisdoxn, fi-atexmal love elevates humanity upon a higher plaxx
of x'eligious systems, but if associated with an impetuoxxs temper-
ament —an earnest heax't—a mind tx’anscending the ixxfluence of
infex'ior loves, —as max’tyx-dom has always restrained the efforts
of gx’eat reformex's, popular scoxm will likewise stifle its exxergies.
In our age of hidden sectax’ian x’ancour, the wisest man cannot
always be the best friend of society. Tlxe bold axxd honest sen-
timent of self-moral and mental development is attended with
social pex’il and x’eligious aversion,—a demon that threatens us
with the cold hand of poverty, and hax’asses the mind with pain-
ful appx’ehensions. The charge of “ infidelity ”is a heavy cx’oss,
and “X’eligious ” px’ojudices (better called ix’x’eligious), as the x’eed


that smote Jesus on the head, will flagellate your character in
the dark if you attempt to improve the condition of the mis-
guided infatuated brother. How to do good wisely and safely,
to an intemperate, vicious, superstitious society, that turns and
rends its benefactors, is a sei’ious question we shall examine.
If this fifth commandment is set at naught, every transgressor,
by promoting his individual aggrandisement at the detriment of
others, is also promoting poverty, selfishness, hatred, avarice,
war, &c. We stand in great need of obedience to this command-
ment, — “Every shouldkr at the universal public wheel.”
We want less ostentatious discourses upon our salvation, but
more examples of philanthropy. The Harvest truly is Plen-
teous, BUT THE Labourers ark Few. —So said Christ 1830 years
ago ; so shall we have to repeat it until the philosophy of this
excellent man is understood, his teachings comprehended to
harmonize with nature, and redeemed from the long profanating
association of “ theology.”
What are the needs of the human family ? To aid the ever-
inspiring religion of manhood—the soul of humanity—from
spurious counterfeits, viz., doctrines, creeds, dogmas, rituals,
coined by “ theology,” and taking the place of laws, principles and
truths. But what to do with the array of costly bishops, priests,
parsons, &c. ? Since they speak so much of new birth, let them
undergo the process themselves. Let them turn to nature; let
them bring us inspirations from their own bosoms instead of
the dried, worn, time-honored verbiage of ignorant ages; let
them become more the preachers of intelligible nature, and less
“ theologians,” splintering the meaning of text books. Let them
quote the book of life, not the book of the dead ; —let them be
awoke from the lethargy of biblical fetters, and study the laws of
mind, and appeal to psychological facts for authority. We
shall know that they are born again when they cease to preach
mystery, and rely upon logical demonstration.
The sixth Commandment is “ Man, thou shalt treat with
love every being in nature that may require thy assist-
ance for its useful maintenance.” No animal is so vile as
to be absolutely inimical to man’s existence. The most deadly
poison of snakes has divine uses, though unknown, which may
be precious to humanity when discovered. It is the province of
universal love to prevent cruelty to animals, and their unneces-
sary destruction. The disobedience to this commandment, by
rendering men brutal and cruel, will prevent the refinement of
their feelings.
I apprehend some of you are astonished that I should not
allude to the commandment which enjoins the love of God. In
answer to this good inquiry, I must say that I fail to discover in


nature that God has commanded man to love him. God loves
humanity, but does not claim back what he so generously
lavishes. You do not find that the earth radiates her rays
of darkness in return for the vivifying heat and light of the sun.
You do not find in nature that infants love and sustain their
pai'ents. If you wish to love God because He is the great ori-
ginator of all blessings, permit me to tell you that you do not
comprehend the meaning of love. Love means a sentiment—a
force which forcibly prompts to act. If action be unnecessary,
uncalled for, how can the principle be implanted by the Deity ?
What is termed love to God is really nothing else but gratitude,
which should be shown by adoration—the object of Religion.
There is another commandment, my friends, which the
mighty voice of the Divine Parent proclaims every day, not from
the rocky Mount Sinai, but from the stupendous height of divine
WISDOM, and echoed from the unfathomed depth of Love. The
sound of this Holy Voice was not only heard by a deputed pa-
triarch, —not only confines its benefit to the peculiar people of a
peculiar god, but is revealed to every human understanding
according to his degree of receptibility and growth. That
seventh commandment is now disturbing ecclesiastical pri-
vileges, as that of Jesus—“A new commandment I give unto
you: Love each other! ” —did with the Jewish priesthood then
contending for the old system of fat heifer sacrifices to furnish
dainty festivals. For my rebellion against orthodoxy in enun-
ciating this commandment, I dread no other expression of pious
horror than the futile cry of “ Infidelity.” That commandment
is think for for thou art ordained to be thy own
saviour; nay, thou art already thy own saviour from the penal-
ties inflicted on more ignorant men than thyself.
Strict obedience to this law, and you will have no other master
but the Deity ; you will never be evangelized ; no borrowed gar-
ment will ever suit you, for you will be, yourself, useful in a
congenial avocation, and equalled by no one for a particular
object; in fact you will be a man, a noble character, not the
counterfeit of others.
Take this commandment, my friends; try it, —use, and rely
upon it. If you try it you will have less credulity, but more
belief; if you use it you will have less belief but more know-
ledge : if you rely upon it you will have less popularity but more
wisdom and happiness ; you will develope your own individuality
—the divine design of God.
This commandment, enjoined by Jesus, but never adverted to
by theologians, “ Why do you not judge yourself what is right?"
was also foreshadowed by Confucius five hundred and fifty years
before our era, when he said “ What to do with the man who


luver asked the principles and reason of things.” If you disregard
this commandment by keeping a lawyer to exercise your sense of
justice and equity for you ; relying entirely upon your doctor to
regulate your system with filthy drugs detrimental to health,
but highly recommended by the faculty ; by employing a reli-
gious broker to manage your spiritual welf'ai'e, depend upon it
you will have to pay their i)ills when they are forthcoming.
Whilst these popular favorites bandage your eyes with tech-
nical jargon, you fall a prey to conventionalism, and miss the
end of life—peace, health, happiness. The violation of these
commandments must irrevocably be visited by adequate propor-
tionate penalties, which are increasing the moi'e they are long
suspended : for instance, a good stomach will at once resist the
invasion of poison by immediate vomiting, whilst the debilitated
gastric organ will be long to feel any ill effect from its invasion,
but when it does, the penalty (disease), is worse, and may not
possibly be overcome. So it is with mind : the first lie or
robbery creates immediate remorse—the second creates less
remorse, as the first was violently overcome, and ultimately man
ceases to feel the least remorse when he has become a consum-
mate liar; so it is again with all vicious, criminal habits, hut
there is a line where accumulated transgressions must meet with
a divine obstacle, and through a serious crisis—illness, misfor-
tune, calamity, &c., —the “ heart of man is changed to reform.
Law, law, law everywhere, and for all, for ever and ever. Search
and you shall find, for there is no vain fact in nature.
Our social adversities are the visitations of God in disguise;
the lessons of humility, the best tools of a Divine Lapidary.
Our most advanced condition is proved by the ordeal of suffering
passed through, investigation made and inquiries answered.
If you reckon upon the tragical death of Jesus Christ for your
individual salvation, the pangs of disappointment are inevitable.
To recapitulate self-love, conjugal love, parental love, filial
love, fraternal love, universal love, and truth-seeking are the
divine commandments revealed to man by nature’s divine reve-
lations. No one can deny them ; no one can suspend them ;
no one can avoid them ; and no one will ever take such liberties
with them as to discuss their merits and demerits, as the Bri-
tish nation is now occupied with the Pentateuch. A new edi-
tion of these divine gospels is published at the birth of every
child, and the problem of his life is to listen to the gradual pro-
clamation of every one of these divine dispensations, When
they have been all revealed, the kingdom of Heaven will be
realized by keeping wisely in equilibrium a general obedience to
every injunction the problem of man’s existence. Physical and
mental sanity are the j)rolics of general obedience to these


commandments : and strength and power are acquired by the
natural exercise of ah faculties entrusted by God, The pro-
longed concentration of all our energies upon a particular organ
will derange the mental functions, and atrophy the other organs ;
hence originate natural desires for change of occupation and
studies, provided by nature, but smothered by gloomy sectarian
teachings, hor instance, the doctrines of predestination and
eternal punishment have upset the minds of many innocent
harmless creatures, of which Scotland principally presents the
sad spectacle. Sir Bulwer Lytton, a philosopher in advance of
the age, records that a zealous student of divinity once committed
murder to get means to purchase theological "books. Is there
among iis such a human being who is thoroughly sane, physi-
cally, morally, and intellectually? I doubt it; and firmly
believe that the earth is a religious lunatic asylum in the uni-
verse. The less insane of us will be deemed the most alienated
by the rest that surround him, for divine wisdom is the standard
of folly to the untutored mind.
If your spirit of inquiry and fraternal sympathies transcend
all inferior love commandments, you may not fall a slain martyr
to ecclesiastical resistance, as Socrates and Jesus did, but you
shall cei’tainly be stigmatized as “ infidel”; and the head winds
of popular prejudices will stay your social course for sailing with
such brilliant colours.*
Let us pause here a moment to inquire what our unkind,
sectarian friends really mean by this social brand of public scorn?
By, infidelity, the world (that is, the credulous world,) mean
darlgerous. The question now arises, dangerous to what ?—To
orthodoxy. What is orthodoxy? The standard of truth,
righteousness, purity and holiness, chartered by public opinion,
forsooth I God alone is this standard of truth, righteousness,
purity and holiness ; gross sacrilege, paralelled by the Pope’s
infallibility. What is public opinion—the favorite and dupe of
* A fact! I suppose lam known for having been the principal promoter
and public defender of medical reform for many years in the colony. About
twelve months ago a sectarian gentleman, practitioner of the same system of
medicine. Dr. R , arrived in this colony to try his fortune. At his arrival
I called upon him to welcome him. As my visit was never returned, I made
some inquiries—some months after—about this lack of etiquette. I was
informed by him that the cause was that “ as he had heard I rejected the
great truths of Christianity, that he would not associate with me.” If he then
abstained from calling me, in my presence, by the right name, “ Infidel,” he
now indulges pretty fairly in doing so with the misdirected, weak-minded
persons, whose patronage he succeeds in disposessing me of. This is the reli-
gious freedom so much boasted by Protestantism. Many patients have
deprived me of their confidence, which I need to support a large family ; and
their parsons never remind them of that noble precept of Christ—“ He that
is faithful in little is jaithful in much !”


this outrageous assumption ? The flittering, changing, evanes*
cent colors of human creeds; the epidemical and contagious
effluvia of mental carelesness and social abjection. The fact that
yesterday a half-civilized Zulu savage, by questioning the veracity
of the hible with a bishop, prompts the latter to fresh inquiries
which ultimate in shaking the whole “theological” fabric, and
is now modifying the more enlightened public, is enough to ex-
plain the value of public opinion, termed “ Vox Dei ” in that age
when the “ holy ” inquisition flourished, under popular pa-
tronage.*
Public opinion—the logic of gunpowder; the awful brute
force that terms wholesale murder patriotism and glory—slavery
an institution—the massacre of the Huguenots the victory of
God over the devil! Public opinion,—that has twisted the rope
to hang men! public opinion,—that has patronized Judas, who
betrayed Jesus; the mob that cried “ Crucify him! crucify
him ! ” and now call “ infidels ” his true apostles engaged to
battle against idolatry;—this is the monster to whom we are
accused of being dangerous ! Thanks to Heaven, my friends,
that we are called infidels by its benighted patrons. “ Infi-
delity,” the last weapon of an old decrepid church in har-
lequin rags, the wounds she inflicts are the best credentials for
Heaven. “ Blessed are ye” said Jesus, “ when men shall hate you,
and separate you from your company.—Beware of men, for they will
scourge you in the synagogue,” &c. Say church instead of syna-
gogue, and you have Christ’s language adapted to modern time.
“ Woe unto you, scribes, pharisees, and hypocrites, for ye shut up> the
Kingdom of Heaven against men,” &c. Say theologians, parsons,
and priests, and you have Christ’s repudiation of the inventors
of hell, and manufacturers of predestination.
Another question : What is the definition of infidelity philoso-
phically considered ? Infidelity implies the negation of fidelity
or faithfulness. Where is the religious system to which we have
sworn fidelity, and forsaken our pledge ? Are we unfaithful to
our wife or to our creditor because we cannot assimilate into our
mind popular superstitions, which we have examined? Are we
wilfully unfaithful to the dictates of righteousness, because we
do not keep a pew in a sectarian church ? I ask again, who is
most faithful to the integrity of his conscience, either the free-
thinker, which “truth makes free,” in the language of Jesus, or
the sectarian, who professes tu believe what is incredible ? '^L’he
* Since we trace such great change in public opinion to an African Zulu, I
must also credit him for the origin of these pages, which would never have
been written had not public attention been awakened on the subject treat' d;
—and my work is not done, I hope !


affirmation in the belief of a mathematical impossibility—as the
trinity in unity—is nothing short but a lie, or infidelity to the
most sacred recess of tlie soul—conscience. In vain do
they take refuge in the dark cavern of mystery, the rays of
Jesus’s moral reformation will reach there; for “ There is nothing
covered that shall not be revealed ■ neither hid, that shall not be
known.”
By a law of nature, Avhere there is progression there is negation,
i.e., resistance. The force of disintegration explains the conflict
between reason and “theology”; and the cry of “infidelity” is
the foetid breath of disturbed public opinion, the last drop of a
filthy, gory sponge, squeezed too hard, and compelled to purifi-
cation by undergoing a good dipping in the clear water of fresh
inquiry.
What religion shall we observe ? That religion that has no
other name ; the eternal, true, never changing but always better
understood religion of God, not of men ; for it is obvious that
what men call religions are human institutions bearing the same
relation to the soul as the cha-ttel of man does to the individual
sovereignity of the enslaved. Popes, bishops, priests and par-
sons are soul slaveholders, like the planters of Cuba are physical
slaveholders. In framing the bye-laws of these institutions, they
might as well have met in convention to determine a set of laws
which nature should adopt for our physical and organic govern-
ment, and forbid diseases to be entailed upon tbe violation of
any other law not enacted by the said conventions, as to invent
systems of spiritual salvation when they are more ignorant of
the soul principles than of physiological laws. When they
condemned all investigation about the existence and probable
destiny of the soul, they passed a bill of indictment against
science, truth, and principles. Men might have wasted their
time less detrimentally to the public welfare by discussing
the supposed form of government carried on in the planet
Jupiter, as to speculate upon immortality in imposing bounds to
belief and aspirations, and preserving ignorance for tbeir
patronage. Religion admits of no plural, no distinct qualifica-
tion ; her domain is the infinite scope of the endless future and
the unfathomable unknown. Our positive sciences and psycho-
logical discoveries are but infant steps into the unlimited explo-
ration of religion: know more and obey, is the royal road to
religious progress. The drill-master is a religious teacher;
the professor of physiology a higher one; but the “ theologian”
is the iri-eligious teacher, obstructing God’s designs.
What religion shall we observe? That religion that has
no form, no creed, no ritual, no burlesque, no mock-
eries, no.eternal damnation, no devils—common to all vir-


tuous and philanthropic minds in all sects, all nations, all
times, —that religion, that has no “ ism ” and no universities
to sell the license of spreading its good tidings, but recruits for
its teachers those lofty minds that come from the daily school of
life, graduate with the mark of public injustice and persecution ;
that religion, that has for trinity, laws, principles, and facts;
that religion, that sees no total depravity in man, but seeks for
the concealed mark of his divine origin ; that religion, that has
no vindictive punishment to inflict upon the misdirected bro-
ther, but reformatory precaution to paralyse evil tendencies
and encourage the good; that religion, that inspires men with
the mightiest power to conquer evil and hatred—LOVE ! The
wheels of that Religion require no state aid to keep it going—
no ecclesiastical fortification against the invasion of the devil,
—for the Great Incompi'ehensihle Almighty reigneth everywhere,
governs everyone, and has left no room for the fiend of his
designs where to lay his satanic head.
Sigli, priests ; cry aloud; hang your pulpits with black;
Let sorrow bow down every head ;
Your good friend, who bore all your sins on his back,
Your best friend—the Devil—is dead.
The holy bible of that religion is not the book of the dead,
hut the book of life. Our religion looks upon sacred manu-
scripts as piles of cinders before the hurricane of Time, and
faces haughty public opinion as the sun does the mighty iceberg
insolently sailing towards the tropics.
The name of that religion, which is better understood by the
illiterate producer of society than by its learned parasites, is
obedience to all the laics of God revealed through nature's revelations.
The Sabbath day we have to keep holy commences with the
first breath of life and terminates with the last. The propitiator
of our sins, errors, and mistakes, is Reform; our baptism, a
firm resolution to preserve moral integrity; our new birth, death ; —
its pass-word, everyone for all, and God for everyone.
Where is our church ? Our church is in the wilder-
ness, under the canopy of heaven. It has no bell to ga-
ther its children, but the love of truth throbbing in every
human heart will in due time assemble them gradually
under its stupendous cupola ' The subjects of our ser-
mons are the beauties that abound in all natui’e. We have no
monasteries, no nunneries where the transgressors of conjugal
love may gratify their lust to satiety; we have no tract-mission
society to present the forged dialogues of two fools to a greater
one; but we seek for the occasion of rendering a practical service
to the needy, so as to appeal to his attention for instruction.


We have no divine pi’ivileges—no special providence to help ns.
—hut we are organizing universal brotherhood and sisterhood
hy the quiet, incessant substitution of improvements and reforms.
Our church is the gymnasium of all physical, moral, intellectual
and spiritual faculties; but one must be divested of the clumsy
garment of opinion ere he can climb its trapezium. The mem-
bers of that church are not holier than their misdirected friends,
but they stand in the relation of grown understanding to
deformed, crippled, undeveloped minds, and forbearance is their
characteristic feature. Their Lord’s Prayer is a constant desire
seconded by incessant efforts, to succeed in the active work
of reformation, for we believe that every natural desire will he
gratified by the wise Providence that implanted them in our or-
ganization ; nay, we can prophecy the gratification of the highest
aspirations, if they be only natural. Our religion depends as
much upon the authority of hooks for its diffusion, as the growth
of children depends upon a book on physiology, or the fertility
of the earth uj'on a learned treatise on agriculture. You may
light your pipe with these pages ; but this religion will continue
to be unfolded to the human family.
The death of Socrates —the crucifixion of Jesus, —we venerate
with the highest gratitute and veneration, are the great lessons
that teach this religion; and better lessons are they than all the
sermons ever preached by salaried parsons ; for no clap-trap
“ theology” can present to the mind the beauties of the kingdom
of heaven realised hy obedience to the commandments of God
revealed through nature. We have no second-hand, time-char-
tered inspiration, but every day we feel the fresh and new divine
influx that prompts us to move, to advance, to learn, to help, to
assist, to meditate, to aspire. Eternal salvation is not the in-
sisted theme of our conduct; we do not discharge duties to the
Heavenly Father for wages ; we thank him for the past—are
content with the present —and “ take no thought for the morrow.”
That religion will commence to flourish when there is no
army to keep, no arsenal required, no gunpowder manufactured,
no hangman to be found, and stone churches will remain the
standing monuments of dark, self-styled civilized ages Victoria
will have long repealed the national taxation on unchristian chi-
namen, and remember with shame the state aid to superstitions
that retarded her progress. The license for the hygienic allevia-
tion of diseases will not be prohibited, as it is in our days, to
the advocates of nature’s own resources, to the men who have
boldly exposed the folly of making the human stomach a depot
of incompatible drugs, and practically proved by their success that
small doses of medicine in assistance to nature are more effica-
cious than large doses in opposition to her efforts ; this license


to do good will not be only granted to those who sacrifice the
future health of their patient for momentary palliation, and de-
ceive the ignorant multitude with the prestige of titles that
qualify them to comprehend the laws of physiology, as royal
birth to become the greatest genius of humanity. But when
will that be? When !—echo answers “ When—when ?”
Where does that religion lead to ? We know not; but surely
towards the great centre of love and icisdom, —towards God ! who,
however incomprehensible, is understood enough to know what
he if. not; who, however distant, is near every human heart, and
before whom we are ready to stand or fall, for that religion.
Obedience to Nature.




ADDENDUM
TO THF,
FIEST CRITICISM REVIEWED.
[tract I.]
The following “review” of the foregoing pages emanated from
the Yeoman and Australian Accliniatizer of the 11th July. It will
be seen that this critic is indeed faithful to the title page of his
publication, for he is advising strong proceedings to secure the
acclimatization of foreign imported supei’stitions in the Austra-
lian climate, as well as the poor brutes and quadrupeds taken
from their congenial homes. But, as the era of theology is
decaying in Europe, it is not probable that our colony will prove
more px’opitious to the emigrating pious family of Scotch bigotry,
protestant arrogance, catholic servitude, methodist gloom, and
other chui'ch importations, that have satiated the pioneers of
progress, usque ad nauseam. The cause of universal brother-
hood must have its ‘ down ’ upon humanity atlast, and the future
is glowing with peace, in spite of this following sectarian
spleen, which I shall examine in detail.
“ It is difficult to say what, this writer wishes the British nation to
regard his peculiar doctrines ” —Answer : If my critic had read
this first tract with an unbiassed mind, he would have under-
stood (see page 9., line 5,) that I maintain no doctrine and
preach no system, but obedience to the laws of Nature, while
strongly recommending the necessity of searching them calmly
and scientifically, viz., to live a righteous life, to pre])are a righteous
death ? If ever I bring forth several volumes, as I intend, I will
repudiate the idea of having any disciples to call themselves
after my name, as a Wesleyan or Swedenborgian does. Though
I hope to bring fresh elements to human progress, I sincerely
c


wish the world to understand that my philosophy is to help or
inspire self-reliance, and to develope individual sovereignty. I
trust that, in telling my fellow men to examine and judge for
themselves, will not constitute a doctrine of my own.
Jhe critic goes on to say of me— “■ He is neither it deist, infidel,
nor unitaruin, but a little of everylhinfj.” I care not by what name
I may he called, provi(U;d I lieeji faithful to my conscience; I
want, to be myself—of a whole, unartificialized piece,— such as
nature and self-development have made me. If lam wrong I
wish to be rectified, and will consider myself as pernicious to
humanity if I wilfully mislead others. I sit in the company of,
arid fraternize with all sinners and ailing minds, but the society
of my predilection is that of free inquirers of all sects and all
nations. I acknowledge that I am never absolutely right with
my friends the Secularists, Univei’salists, Unitarians, Deists,
and the faithful “ Infidels,” but bold sincerity is a doctrine com-
mon to all, and mental courage is my system.
‘‘ He leaves its no doubt, howerer, as to his indulyence in hlasjthemy."
\\hat is blasphemy, Mr. Yeoman and (superstitious) Austra-
lian Acclimatizer ? To the self-called Christian the Jews blas-
pheme when they assert that Jesus Christ was the son of his
father and mother; and in the estimation of the Jews the
Christian blasphemes when the latter contends that Jesus of
Nazareth, the self-termed “ Son of Man,” is God, co-eternal
equal with the Creator of heaven and earth ; and in my humble
estimation, they both make an attack upon my leason when they
maintain that the Incomprehensible Deitv drank milk and ate
veal with Abraham—(Gen. xviii., 7,8.) The Jew is at least con-
sistent throughout, wdiile the Sectarist professes to believe this,
together with Paul’s inspir; tion, when he says of God—
“ For in Him we live, and move, and have our being,” and
No man has seen God at any time. How reconcile the
two ideas? Mill they say God changed since the times of
Moses to that of Paul, when it is further said in Malachi
that “He changes not.” But it is of no use Irving to rcmoxe
mountains ol superstition with the wheelbarrow of a sitigle
man’s reason ; the sectaidan will always “ return to his own vomit
again, as the sow to her wallcwirg in the mire,” and we must
\vait until the great cataclysm of future existence brings its expe-
rience to bear tipon the aigurnent. In all times the degree
of blasphemy is always measured by the intensity of discom-
fort Avbich the first proclamation of truth always excites, —thus
Galileo s blasphemy against the bible was the paramount one ;
and Newton s investigations of the laws of oy)tios, thereby
proving the non-existence of the rainbow, was another blasphemy
of gieat magnitude with the Beformation ; and now-a-days, with


our critic, it is a blasphemous outrage to prove clearly that it is
a gross libel against the character ot God to represent him as
having ordered and accepted human sacrifices.—((ien. xxii.,2 ; ii.
Sam. xxi, 8,9, 14 ; Judges xi., 30, 81, 32, 34, 38, 39.) Blasphemy
should certainly be an offence to God, if He be susceptible to be
offended, which I do not admit, because it implies a human feel-
ing, I believe far remote from the Deity. But who is the man so
presumptuous as to take upon himself to interpret the feelings
of God? If there be such, then he makes himself guilty of
sacrilege, for no man can exercise such right as to decide in
God s name ; even if he believes the bible to be his word, he
cannot proclaim a sentence in His stead, as “ God’s judgment is
not man’s judgment.”
“At the sixth jjage and top of page seven, occurs a sentence ivluch
we should be sorry to see disfiguring our columns —.” Please pi'ove
that it is not true, and I am ready to make a solemn recantation,
and destroy the stereotype. “ — And to ivhich attention of the proper
authorities ought to he directed, as against both author and publisher."
Where are these proper authorities to be found, since we have no
more ecclesiastical jurisdiction ? His worship the Mayor, who is
a Jew, with more Christian feeling than my critic, will not accom-
modate his conscience to suit theological vengeance. But has
not the British nation finally won the liberty of conscience?
Shall we have another Smithfield at the instigation of Messrs.
Yeoman, Fanaticism, and Co.? Let us pursue, for it savours of
the rack and flames.
“To a nation of heathens such language might be addressed ”
(Yes, if you kept far off!) — “ without censure, and ivithout incurring
penalty,”' —(Then are they a model to my critic) — “but it is an
outrage upon a civilized and Christian community to pervert and mis-
state the doctrine in which it believes.” Again, disprove the alleged
pervertions, and I shall submit to a Galilean retraction. What
shall I say of the civilized'Christian community?—Just what
Voltaire used to say of the petty states of the Church of Rome,
then called the Holy Roman Empire, — i.e., it was not Holy,
not Roman, and not yet an Empire ; but, except this the defini-
tion was correct. The “ civilized” community from London to
New Zealand, and from Moscow to Melbourne, is not civilized, but
corrupted, corrupting, and corruptible. The whole Christendom
from the Pope down to the sexton of a Fiji island missionary, is
not Christian (1 wish they Avere) but sectarian. With these two
exceptions, the definition of the civilized Christian community is
correct.
“ The whole of this production, ivithout the exception of a single
sentence, is a mass of crude rubbish.” This is cheap criticism, and
dispenses with the expenditure of argument. “It reminds us


of the ravings of a half-era,ched or ivholly cracked individual'' My
cntic reminds me of “ a certain man named Demetrius, a silver-
smith who made silver shrines for Diana,” as anxious for the
goddess as Mr. Yeoman for the doctrine of atonement, total
epiavity, and the existence of the devil and liis hellish empire
or eternal misery.
' ” We would recommend the author to partake freely of his own ho-
mceopatluc medicines ; who can tell hut they may perform the wonderful
cure of ministering to a mind diseased, and thus may be prevented if
the laws of the country cannot reach the case." —Very smart cut
indeed, but which medicines are to he so efficacious, for we have
several hundreds ? But with all his conceited charity, our critic
let the top of liis sectarian ear reveal the disguise, and the cure
he would like to apply to our diseased mind is the straight jacket
or the dungeon of La bastille. Let us pursue.
Further insults to the Deity, to the religion He has
VV Inch religion has He revealed ?—the Catholic, Anglican, Greek,
Episcopal, Scottish, Presbyterian, Congregational, Wesleyan,
Moravian, Baptist, &c., &c. ? Christendom has not yet been able
to determine, since fifteen hundred years of ‘‘religious” blood-
shed, massacre, of millions and millions of money to keep up the
church expenses, which is the genuine revealed religion ; for at
one place the Scriptures teach that ” God says he dwells in
light ’ (i. Tim. vi., 16); at another, “He dwells in darkness”
(1. Kings viii., 12; Psalms xviii., 11; xcvii., 2.)
one place it is said that “ God is all powerful,” (Jer. xxxii.,
27—Matt, xix., 26); at another place, “He is not all powerful,”
(Jud. 1., 19.)
At one place, “He is unchangeable,” (Jam. i. 17—Mai. iii., 6
—Numb, xxiii., 19); at another, “ And He is changeable,” (Gen.
vn, 6—Jonah iii., 10.) ’ v
At one pla,ce, “ The Lord is just and impartial,” (Ps. xcii., 15
Lent, xxxii. 4); at another, “He is unjust,” (Gen. ix., 25.)
“ He is no respecter of persons,” (Rom. ii., 11) ; and “ He
visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children,” &c., (Exo-
dus XX., 5.)
“He is warlike,” (Exodus xv., 3); “He is peaceful,” (Rom.
XV., 33.)
“He is cruel, unmerciful, &c.,” (Jer. xiii., 14—Deut. vii. 16
—i. Sam. XV., 2,3, vi., 19); “He is kind, merciful, and good,”
(Jam. V., 11—i. Chron. xvi., 34—Ps. cxlv., 9.)
“He is love,” (i. John iv., 16); “ His anger is fierce, and en-
dureth long,” (Numb, xxxii., 13); “ His anger is slow,” (Ps. ciii.,
8, XXX., 5.)
At one place robbery is commanded (Ex. iii., 21, 22, xii., 36
36); at another it is forbidden, (Levit. xix., 13, Ex. xx., 16.)


Killing is commanded, (Ex. xxxii., 27); Killing is forbidden
(Ex. XX., 13.)
The making of images forbidden (Gen. iv., 15); the making
of images commanded, (Exo. xxv., 18, 20.)
Slavery and oppression ordained, (Gen. ix., 25, Levit., xxv., 45,
46 ; Joel, cxi., 8); slavery forbidden, (Ex. xxi., 16.)
But the most offensive attack against my feelings is to ascribe
to a Beneficent Providence the following;—“ But all the women
that have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for
yourselves.” —(Numbers, xxxi., 18.)
The Bible has no end of discrepances and obscene language,
capable of sanctioning anything; yet if I dare to point it out as
unworthy of Divine love, 1 am the one that blasphemes, and the
tribunal I ought to be judged by, is not that of God but of men,
who have enacted what God should consider as an offence to him,
or the kind of adoration most acceptable ? My critic continues,
“ Our author has mistaken his viission altogether." —The future gen-
eration will judge when T have done, for I have only commenced.
“ This homoeopathic M.D. discourses about the Deity as if he were his
equal" —Another specimen of easy criticism : reader, see pages
2 and 4, and judge for yourself. “He is equally at home in mis-
representing the teachings of revelation, and in misquoting other
writers —[a proof, if you please]— he makes a pretence of quoting
from the work of the illustrious Dr. Watts, hut puts in words here and
there which the Doctor never used. One verse is ascribed to Dr.
Watts which ive do not believe he ever ivrote, for it has no sense." —
Dr. Watts really wrote the stanzas alluded to, but they are not
to bo found in the later edition of his hymns, because his I’evisers
have improved upon him, and it is to be hoped that a few years
longer, and the following will also disappear, as well as other
illustrations of the fancied pandemonium :
There endless crowds of sinners lie.
And darkness make their chains;
Tortured with keen despair they cry.
Yet wait for fiercer pains.
Awake, Almighty God ?
And call thy wrath to mind;
Give them like forest to the fire,
Or stubble to the wind.
They shall be taken from my sight.
Bound fast in iron chains ;
And headlong plunged into the lake,
Where fire and darkness reigns.
It is well known that John Calvin, the father of protestantism,
was a fanatic deprived of all human sensibility, the terror of the


catholics of Switzerland. Yet in our days he is eulogized in the
following terms by the Christian Treasury, which article is just
re-publislied in tlie Christian Review and Messenger:—“The great
dignity and majesty of his character appears in his steady appre-
hension of the loveliness of God All that he did had its
origin in his communion with God, and his wrestling with God
in prayer,” &c., &c. And this is not to be called an outrage
upon human reason and feelings, wdien history is a living mon-
ument of his cruelties, when he ordered Bishop Servetius to be
burnt upon a rack of green wood, to keep up the suffering longer
before his sanctimonious implacability? Let us see what his
doctrine is upon children’s damnation :
“ Children bring their condemnation with them from their
mother’s womb,” —[liow did he know it ?J —“ being liable to
punishment, not for the sin of another, but for their own ; for
although they have not yet produced the fruits of their iniquity,
they have the seed enclosed in themselves. Nay, their whole
nature is, as it were, a seed of sin ; therefore it cannot but be
odious and abominable to God ! ”
The first quotation (page 7) is from Emmons's Sermons, vol. 16,
but in Edwards's Practical Sermons, vol. xxii., Ave read the fol-
lowing :
“ The Saints in glory will be far more sensible how dreadful
the wrath of God is, and will better understand how terrible the
sufferings of the damned are, yet this will be no occasion of
grief to them, but rejoicing. They will not be soi'ry for the
damned ; —[how charitable I] —it will cause no uneasiness or
dissatisfaction to them, but on the contrary, when they see this
sight it will occasion rejoicing and excite them to joyful praises.”
Will you have some more of my misquotations ? The Kev.
Thomas Boston, an orthodox divine, in his Twofold State, page
336, says:—
“ The godly wife shall applaud the justice of the Judge in the
condemnation of her ungodly husband! The godly husband
shall say amen ! to the damnation of her who lay in his bosom !
The godly parents shall say ‘ hallelujah ! ’ at the passing of the
sentence on their ungodly child ; and the godly child shall from
Bis heart approve the damnation of his wicked parents who begat «
him, and the mother who bore him.”
The Rev. Mr. Ambrose, in his sermon on Doomsday, says—
“ When the damned drunken down whole draughts of
brimstone one day, they must do the same another day. The
eye shall be tormented Avith the sights of devils, the ear Avith the
hideous yellings and outcries of the damned in flames ; the nos-
trils shall be smothered, as it were, Avith brimstone; the tongue,
the hand, the foot, and every part shall fry in flames / ”


I trust it is enough ; if you want some more just open the
Cow/regationaUst at pages 68 and 69, and you will have some
more inspiration for Dr. Watts’s stanzas upon children’s damna-
tion, which will prove to Dr. Jonathan Edwards that he has not
merited the palm of price when he says that “ reprobate infants
are vipers of vengeance, which Jehovah will hold over hell in the
tongs of his wrath until they turn up and spit venom in his
face.”
But to our critic again— “ This writer" —(speaking of me) —
“ has also the impious presumption to frame a number of command-
ments, which he calls the Comm.andments of God." Gently, Mr.
Yeoman; it is not I who framed these laws, but Nature, which I
interpret to the best of my capabilities : it would have been fair
to add, “as revealed through Nature.” Prove that they are not the
commandments of Nature ; if they are, then they are also the
will of God, if we accept Christ’s teaching independent of your
fungoid doctrines, engrafted upon the New Testament to suit
ecclesiastical despotism.
“ But like the scribes and pharisees and hypocrites of ancient
times, he repudiates the idea that the love of God shoidd be included
in Jiis —(not mine alone) — list of commandments." I never repu-
diated such idea, but on the contrary, acknowledged the propriety
of it, and considered it a good motive of inquiry (see page 16);
nor is it true that the ancient scribes ever repudiated this idea.
My comparison with hypocrites is to be answered by those who
know me for years, either friend or foe, but not by a newspaper
editor who does not know anything of my private character, and
contemplates an easy triumph over me when the ignoi-ant mul-
titude is already enlisted on his side, and the interested promoters
of errors will approve his consolidation of social trammels. »
The whole diatribe is terminated with a cup of “Wine min-
gled with Myrrh.” Here is “ the drink” :—“ We are disposed to
think that in reference to all subjects men ought to think and inquire
for themselves," &c. Here is the gall: — “ But such latitude can
manifestly be permitted by society —[Oh, Smithfield ! Oh, Holy
Inquisition ! Why are you out of fashion ?] — only to those who
inquire fairly, reason logically, and keep within the bounds of mode-
ration ; and certainly not to a writer such as the one before us, who
does not reason, but indulges in half-lunatical oracular ravings, which
are outrageous to his fellow mm,—(those whose “craft is in danger
to be set at nought.” Acts xix., 9.) — insulting to the teachings of
revealed religion, —(Which? yours, his, hers, or theirs?) — amd
wantonly blasphemous to the Deity himself." Amen ! Great is the
Diana of the Yeoman. Our critic gives a specimen of his logical
reasoning throughout; a heap of abuse, not an argument faced,
and that is all! Perhaps he calls this a review ?


Festus telling to Paul that “ Much learning made thee mad,”
was a prodigy of Christian charity and courtesy compared to our
assailant. Not so mad, noble Festus, but speak forth the words
of truth and soberness.” Where are your divine credentials,
sir, to pronounce that my language is blasphemous to the Deity
himself? Where is your obedience to Jesus’precept, “Judge
not, lest ye be judged? Brother reader, let us pity him, “for he
knows not what he ” writes. “Let the blind lead'the blind, and
the dead bury the dead,” but I, who have light, I shall not put
it under a bushel, for “I am not afraid of them that the
body.” The far off intellectual world shall examine, and the
Heavenly Father shall judge.
32




