

4) A X, ~ /yUv /> )
// y , fr,y/?s
[I °
Soaif n
Qy "wvz Jf\C)P
SacJl I \
®lic IJflidlimi Umlumi|
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Mr. JOHN WADDINGTON’S Concession.
1 t-5o I
I 0 Olp
1- f




8k Ulidhiiul Uailicair
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Mr. JOHN WADDINGTON’S Concession.




FACTS BEARING UPON THE PRESENT CONDITION
llustralia,
IN CONNECTION WITH THE
PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION OF
THE MIDLAND RAILWAY
When it is considered that Western Australia is Introdnc
nearer the European and Asiatic markets than tlon *
any other portion of Australasia, that it is also
the largest of the Colonies, embracing an area
of more than 1,000,000 square miles possessing
vast tracts of land pronounced on the highest
authority susceptible of good and remunerative
culture, and in many districts abounding in
mineral wealth, it is at first sight surprising
that its many natural advantages have been
hitherto little appreciated. The discovery of
gold in the more eastern Colonies at the time
when the tide of emigration turned towards
the southern hemisphere, led to Western
Australia being passed over; but this and
other causes now generally understood to
have retarded the progress of the Colony have
been for the most part removed. Moreover,
there is at present a widespread conviction that
the want of interest hitherto felt in this country


is principally due to tlic absence of reliable in-
formation as to its resources and advantages.
Efforts are now being made by the Colonial
Government to promote immigration, and to
increase the facilities for internal as well as
foreign traffic by the construction of new roads
and railways ; also by the establishment of a
subsidised direct line of steamers between
London and Fremantle, by harbour improve-
ments at the latter port, and other public works.
Moreover, private capital is being devoted to
various objects tending to enhance the prosperity
and advancement of the Colony.
It is therefore thought advisable, in submit-
ting a scheme for the construction and work-
ing of a line of railway through a district,
perhaps the most promising of any, to offer for
consideration a few facts with regard to the
present state and future prospects of the country,
and especially to direct attention to its capability
for a ready and speedy development.
In a despatch, dated 9th April, 1884, the
present Governor, Sir Frederick Napier Broome,
K.C.M.G., gives a most satisfactory account of
the increased trade, revenue, produce, railways
and telegraphs of the Colony. With regard
to the smallness and slow growth of the
population, he says“ We are just now
making an effort to remedy this by spending
£20,000 on Immigration.”
An Immigration Board was appointed to
administer this fund. According to an official
report, dated 30th June, 1884, their labours
had then resulted in the arrival of 169 immi-
grants, and the nomination of 444 of
whom 121 adults were actually en route. The
immigrants introduced have been generally of
the operative class, labour being much m


demand in the Colony. The opinion of the
Governor is that the Immigration Depot should
be at Perth, which, it need hardly be pointed
out, is in dose proximity to the midland or
Central Districts.
In addition to the efforts of this Board there
is a great probability of a considerable increase
in the number of settlers, owing to the con-
struction of a land grant railway between
Beverley and Albany (King George’s Sound),
the concessionnaire of which is under contract
to introduce 5,000 adults within a period of
seven years.
The climate of the central portion of the Climate.
Colony may be described as being one of the
most salubrious in the world. The seasons are
divided into wet and dry, the former com-
mencing in April and lasting till September.
According to the meteorological observations
taken at Perth, the average temperature was
65° and the rainfall 82.83 inches per annum.
The average rainfall of the year for eight stations
in the central districts was 26.48 inches, or
practically that of England.
According to the Public Health Report for Health,
the year 1882, the death rate for the Colony
generally, was 13 per 1000. The low death
rates confirm the reputation for the general
healthiness of the Colony.
According to the official return for 1883 the Population
population exclusive of the Aborigines was com-
puted at 31,700. The portion of the Colony
most inhabited may be described as being south
of the Murchison River and to the west of an
imaginary line drawn north and south from a
point about 150 miles inland. The proposed
.railway will pass through the northern half of
‘this region. Considerable settlements of Abori-


gines exist at New Norcia and other stations
near the southern termination of the line,
where they are trained to agriculture and
similar employments.
The principal crops are wheat, barley, hay
and potatoes. The vine is also extensively and
successfully cultivated, producing wine of ex-
cellent quality. The statistical returns for
1883 shew that there were altogether (excluding
green forage and other tillage) 58,111 acres of
land under cultivation; 28,768 acres being de-
voted to wheat, 5,547 to barley, 1,395 to oats,
20,295 to hay, and potatoes 310. Most of
the tropical and sub-tropical fruits grow here
readily. The number of live stock was —horses,
32,884; cattle, 64,558; sheep, 1,315,155; pigs,
18,512. The Victoria Plains and Greenough
Flats through which the intended railway will
pass, are among the most fertile districts of the
colony, some of the latter lands producing with
slight cultivation thirty bushels of wheat to the
acre. Western Australia gained the first prize
at the Intercolonial Exhibition at Sydney (1873)
for the best sample of wheat.
The most important natural products of the
Colony are the grasses which form the food of the
herds of sheep, cattle and horses pastured on the
plains. The indigenous trees comprise the jarrah,
white gum and kindred trees, sandalwood, karri,
casuarina, various kinds of banksia, shea-oak
and wattle, the bark of the latter possessing
good tanning properties. It has been estimated
that the forest trees cover approximately the
following areas :—jarrah, 14,000 square miles ;
white gum, 10,000 square miles; York gum,
2,400 square miles; karri, 2,300 square miles;
red gum, 800 square miles. The jarrah wood
is especially useful for harbour works, piles,


&c., as well as for rafters, fencing and railway
sleepers, together with other purposes requiring
durability, since it successfully repels the attacks
both of the sea worm and the white ant, which
latter is very destructive in the Colony. Large
shipments of this wood are made to the other
Australian Colonies and India for railway pur-
poses. Sandal-wood also forms a valuable article
of commerce to Asiatic ports.
The pearl fishery on the northern coast is
yearly becoming of greater value to the Colony,
the amount of shells exported in 1872 being in
value £25,890, whereas in 1882 it was £37,870,
that of the pearls being £17,500. It may be
mentioned that it is chiefly to the value of the
shells (ranging from £5 to £8 10s. per cwt.) that
the fishery owes its importance, and not to the
pearls which are occasionally found in them.
These are sometimes, however, of great value,
one being reported to have recently sold for
£4,000.
The mineral resources of this Colony are as Minerals,
yet only imperfectly known and, from want of
capital and sufficient facilities for traffic, are
even less developed. Good specimens of au-
riferous quartz have been recently discovered
by the Government Geologist. Magnetic iron
is plentiful and is said to be equal to any in
Sweden. Copper is found extensively in the
Champion Bay district and on the Irwin, where
there are also several lead mines. Similar
deposits are also apparent in the Province of
Victoria, between lat. 28° and 30° South from
the Irwin River to the Murchison, and ex- '
tending about 30 miles inland. In this district
also coal has been found, and is believed to
extend over a large area. One bed was re-
ported six feet in thickness, but was judged


unremunerative owing to want of carrying
facilities.
, At present the chief export of the Colony is
wool, the value being £225,279 for the year
1883. Other exports, principally the products
and manufactures of the Colony, raise the value
to the total £444,764, —over £l4 per head of the
mean population for the year. The value of
the imports was £516,846, or about £l6 11s.
per head of mean population.
From the official returns prepared by the
Colonial Treasurer, showing the financial
position of the Colony on the 31st December,
1883, it appears that the receipts of revenue
amounted to £284,363, exceeding the estimated
revenue by the sum of £28,860, and the revenue
for 1882 by the sum of £33,991. The increased
receipts are chiefly found under Customs and
Land Revenue, the former having exceeded the
estimate by the sum of £9,169, and the latter
by £18,684. The expenditure for 1883
amounted to £240,566, the receipts of revenue
exceeded the expenditure by £43,797; to which
if is added the balance to credit on the Ist
January, 1883, it will give a balance of £76,152
to the credit of the Colony on the 31st
December, 1883.
The public debt of the Colony on the 31st
December, 1883, amounted to £607,791 ss. 6d.,
which sum has been almost entirely expended
qn railways, roads and other works of con-
struction and permanent benefit.
A further loan of £525,000 for Public Works
has been approved, and will provide the Govern-
ment with ample funds for the execution, during
the next three or four years, of many necessary
undertakings. Among these may be mentioned
Harbour Works at Fremantle (£105,000),


Government Railway extension (£260,000),
Jetties and Wharfs (£9,800), all of which have
an important bearing in connection with the
success of the proposed Midland Railway.
On the completion of the proposed harbour
works at Fremantle it may be reasonably ex-
pected that, owing to its proximity to the
Capital and to the great producing midland or
central districts of the Colony, this port will
derive a considerable accession of foreign traffic,
and a consequently increased importance. It
will become the first and last port of call
between.the Australian Colonies and Europe.
Western Australia has been described by its R o adg.
present Governor as, on the whole, a country of
good roads —of roads much better than those of
some more wealthy colonies. At the same
time, and especially on considering the vast
size of the country, it will be seen that without
railways it would remain ever in a backward
condition, and could not be developed as its
natural riches and capabilities require. This is
extensively felt in the Colony itself, where public
opinion strongly demands the construction of a
line through the Central District connecting the
chief town of the North and the intervening
fertile pastoral and agricultural lands with the
Capital, Perth.
The lines of railway hitherto constructed have Railways
been undertaken by the Government, with the {J on t S jJg UCted
exception of two short private lines owned Government
by timber companies. The following is a brief
description of the Government lines :
The Northern Railway runs from Geraldton Northern
to Northampton, a distance of 35 miles. The Kail W«
Government Director of Public Works reports
that it “was constructed with the primary
object of bringing down lead from the rich


mineral district of Northampton to the port
of shipment;” but inasmuch as only 1,279
tons of ore were raised during the year 1883,
the line has not yet proved a success. It is now
intended by the Government to extend it in a
southerly direction for about 25 miles to meet
the proposed Midland Railway, thereby giving
to the latter an entry into the mining districts.
Another railway, the Eastern, has been
described by the Director of Public Works
“ a magnificent property.” The first section of
this line is 20 miles in length, and runs from
the port of Fremantle to the city of Perth—the
seat of Government —and thence to Guildford.
The second section (21 miles in length) has
now been completed, and was opened for traffic
on the 11th March, 1884, when “ great difficulty
was at first experienced in satisfying the
demands of the public.”
The third section, completing a through com-
munication to the important town of York, the
centre of a district with a population of about
2,600, and distant from Fremantle 88 J miles,
is now being constructed, and will be completed
and ready for traffic about July, 1885.
The official returns relating to the first
section of this line —no returns have as yet been
issued with regard to the second section —show
very satisfactory results as regards the rapid
development of traffic.
As published to the 30th June, 1884, these
returns show that the receipts per mile of
railway open have been for the years 1881—the
first year of working—lBB2, 1883 and the first
six months of 1884, respectively, £33, £39,
£47, and £64 per month.
The cost of constructionup to thepresent time
including equipment, has been £6,553 per mile.


Further short extensions of this line eastward
and northward are now contemplated by the
Government, and are included in the details of
the New Loan about to be raised.
Land Grant Railways.
The West Australian alone, of all the Austral-
asian Governments, has recently approved
the principle of the construction and working
of main trunk lines of railway on the Land
Grant System, and this approval has been
endorsed by the Imperial Government. The
principle is one which, in the case of good or
even moderately productive country, would
seem so advantageous to the capitalist as to
sufficiently recommend itself, inasmuch as the
railway and the lands, both freehold and lease-
hold, put on the market tend each to enhance
the value of the other, while the successful
result of these two properties is of material
value to the commonwealth as a matter of
revenue.
The main points of this system, as shown
in the contracts already offered by the Govern-
ment are as follows :
(a.) The Concessionnaires to survey, con-
struct, equip, maintain and work the
lines, which are to remain their property
so long as they fulfil their agreement.
(b.) The lines to be subsidised by a grant of
12,000 acres of land per mile of railway
built. Such land to be within 40 miles
of either side of the line and not to
absorb more than half the frontage.


(c.) The surveys of the railways to begin
within twelve months ; construction
within two years; and not less than
60 miles of line to be built in each
year.
(d.) The Concessionnaires to introduce,
within seven years, 6,000 European
immigrants, receiving from the Go-
vernment payment at the rate of 60
acres of land within 40 miles of the
line, for each statute adult introduced.
( e .) The Concessionnaires each to deposit a
substantial guarantee.
concess^on as been already granted by
Concession, the Legislature to Mr. Anthony Hordern, of
Sydney, N.S.W., for the construction and work-
ing on the above terms of a line of railway to
extend from Beverley, some 90 miles east of
Perth and the intended terminus of the
extended Eastern Railway, to the southern port
of Albany. The length of the intended line is
220 miles.
Vogel’s* 118 proposal was made by Sir Julius Yogel,
Proposal. K.0.M.G., late Premier of New Zealand, and
Mr. Audrey Coots, Member of the Legislative
Council of Tasmania (who were afterwards
joined by Mr. Hordern), for the construction
of a line on the same basis from Beverley
eastward to Eucla on the southern coast. Sub-
sequent variations were made from the original
proposals which caused the negotiations to fall
through.


Mr. John Waddington’s Proposals for
the construction of the Midland
Railway.
In the early part of 1884 proposals were
submitted by Mr. John Waddington to the
Government for the construction, on the Land
Grant System, of a line from York—the then
contemplated terminus of the Eastern Railway
—to Geraldton, the port of the Champion Bay
Mineral District, and also the Southern ter-
minus of the Northern Railway to Northampton.
As an alternative route the line was proposed
to commence at Guildford, on the Eastern
Railway, distant from Perth, the Capital, about
eight miles. (These proposals will be found
printed in the Appendix, p. 21 et seq.)
A Committee of the Legislative Council was
appointed and favourably reported on the
scheme, choosing Guildford as a starting point
for the railway, the general route being from
Guildford via Gingin, Victoria Plains, Upper
Irwin, and Dongarra, to a spot at or near
Walkaway (Greenough Plats), the proposed
Southern terminus of an extension of the
Northern Railway. This extension is to be at
once carried out by the Government.
The number of immigrants to be introduced
in any one year they recommended should be
a matter for special arrangement, and that land
payments should take the place of money
payments for their introduction. (The report
of the Committee is printed in the Appendix,
pp. 30, 31.)
.In a communication (dated Perth, 31st Octo-
ber, 1884,) received by Mr. John Waddington
from the Colonial Secretary, it is stated that
the Colonial Government, in concurrence with


the Right Honorable the Eael op Deeby,
Secretary of State for the Colonies, are prepared
to enter into a contract upon the bases set forth
in the Amended Report of the Committee, and
that the Crown Agents are empowered im-
mediately to prepare and sign the same, on the
part of the Colonial Government.
The Railway will be connected at both termini
with the existing Government lines, in con-
nection with which it will afford facilities for
the accommodation and further opening out of
districts abounding in both mineral and vegetable
wealth, which at present remain for the most
part closed to the commerce of the world.
The line will pass through several townships,
which may be depended on as forming centres
of traffic.
Nearly sixteen million acres of land are held
in the Central District alone, under pastoral
leases and licenses—which are renewable an-
nually—all leases being terminable on the
31st December, 1887. These lands when opened
up by the proposed Midland Railway in conjunc-
tion with the existing and contemplated lines,
must prove exceedingly attractive to investors,
emigrants and others.
The return of live stock for 1882 in the
districts connected with the proposed line of
railway gives the following particulars :
Horses. Horned Cattle. Sheep.
Champion Bay 2,930 ... 2,860 ... 252,516.
Irwin ... 1,502 ... 4,561 ... 74,305.
Toodyay ... 6,347 ... 6,372 ... 118,505.
York 3,249 ... 1,989 ... 147,828.
The land to be granted in payment for the
line will be selected by the concessionnaire him-
self within twelve months after the section of
railway constructed is completed and opened
for traffic. The quantity of 12,000 acres per


mile is equivalent to a belt nearly 19 miles in
width the whole length of the line. These
lands being opened up by the railway will com-
mand greatly enhanced prices and will prove to
be a source of great wealth when developed by
cultivation or realized in the market. More-
over, the right of declaring town sites and
villages on the lands so granted will enormously
add to their value.
The extracts given in the Appendix tend not
only to add further support to the foregoing
statements, based on official information, but
will serve to indicate the views generally held
in the district on the subject of the necessity
of a main line of railway, and especially the
anxiety felt as to the carrying out of Mr.
W Addington’s proposals.
APPENDIX.
PAGE
A.—Extracts from a Despatch from His Excellency
Governor Broome, 0.M.G., to the Right Hon.
the Secretary of State, reporting his recent
journeys through the Colony . . .16
B.—Extracts from a Report on the Department of Crown
Lands and Surveys of the Colony of Western
Australia, for the year 1883 . . • . .19
C.—Copy of Mr. John Waddington’s Proposals for the
Construction, Equipment, Working and Main-
tenance of a Land Grant Railway . .21
D.—Report of Proceedings in the Legislative Council on
the Question of Mr. John Waddinqton's Pro-
posals for the Construction of a Railway
between Guildford and Geraldton . . .26
E.—Report (as Amended and Adopted by the Legis-
lative Council) upon Mr. John W Addington's
Proposals 30
F.—Extracts from Letters received from Colonists . 32


APPENDIX A.—Extracts from a Despatch
from His Excellency Governor Broome,
C.M.G., to the Right Honourable the
Secretary of State, reporting his recent
journeys through the Colony.
No. 16.
Western Australia,
Government Cottage, Rottnest Island,
28th January , 1884.
My Lord,
On the whole (and even including the stretches of
heavy sand which occur too frequently, and which, until
macadamised at great expense, compel slow travelling and a light
load) I should call Western Australia a country of good roads, —
of roads much better than those of some much wealthier colonies.
Except the Darling Range, and some other inequalities rather
than hills, the whole country is a plain; and swamps and marshes,
such as I remember in New Zealand, are scarcely ever met with.
In penetrating the forest, the impediment is the timber and not
the nature of the ground. A track is easily cleared through the
trees, and, when this has been done, alight vehicle can generally
proceed at a good pace.
For its made roads and bridges, and for many other facilities
and advantages beyond the ordinary means of a small and
scattered community, the Colony is, to a great degree, indebted
to special circumstances. Not the least of these are its forests,
which cover nine-tenths of the whole country, and which
supply excellent timber, frequently close at hand, ready to be
used.
The forests of Western Australia are of great variety, ranging
from scrub and thicket, or the small “ jam ” wood of the
Champion Bay Districts, to the gigantic “karri ” of the South,
most beautiful of Eucalypti, the aristocracy of the forest, whose
clear, straight, cream-coloured trunks, smooth to the hand, spring
a hundred feet to the first branch. I visited the Timber-mills .of
Bunbury, Busselton, and Hamelin Harbor. From what I could
gather, the timber-industry,though prosecuted with enterprise and
ability, and assisted by valuable concessions from the Govern-
ment, has not hitherto prospered. The karri saw-mills at Hamelin


Harbor appear a flourishing concern, and are stated to be worked
to advantage bj their owner, a South Australian capitalist. But,
of the five or six other enterprises of the sort, I did not hear a
good financial account. There may have been from the first a want
of therequisitecapital, or of the requisite experience. Of one thing
there is no doubt, namely, of the existence of a vast quantity of
excellent timber. The demand for this must become more press-
ing throughout Australia and elsewhere, as time goes on, and
must tend to place the industry more and more on a paying basis.
I have just authorised the Western Australian Timber Company —
established at Lockeville, near Busselton—to transfer its con-
cessions to another body of shareholders with a larger capital,
and I trust that by this, and by similar and other steps, our
splendid wood may be brought to a profitable market in increas-
ing quantity. I was glad to hear, at one mill, of an extensive
order for railway sleepers from the New Zealand Government,
and, at another, of a contract with the Admiralty to supply a
large number of karri piles, sixty and seventy feet in length, for
a pier at Hong Kong.
The crops at the Greenough Flats and about Dongarra, and at
some parts of the York District, were especially good. The
Western Australian Agricultural Society .... holds its
annual show at Guildford.
In most parts of the Colony I saw the vine flourishing luxuri-
antly. I have no doubt that Western Australia will one day be
a great wine country. Much of the wine now made is good ; but
the whole art and occupation of wine-growing is still in its
infancy.
I visited several sheep stations at shearing time, and was struck
with the great weight of the fleeces, which seem to preserve their
length and closeness of staple after a succession of years in a
climate where a very hot summer and mild winter would,. one
might think, militate by natural selection against a weight of
wool. Generally speaking, and except at a favoured locality or
time of year, the pastures of Western Australia are comparatively
poor; yet the extent of land is great, and sheep-farming is the
most profitable industry of the Colony. And, on the flats along
the Irwin River, near Dongarra, I think I rode through the finest
natural feed I ever saw in my life.
******
I regretted to find that the lead mines of -Northampton were
yielding, slowly but surely, to the continued fall in the price of
the ore. I have recently granted some leases for the working of
copper lodes in that district, which I trust may prove a
success.


As I went along, I tried to gather what had been the progress
of Western Australia during the last ten years. I found that
there had been much real advance, but that the development of
the Colony had been hampered at every turn by the smallness of
the population. The one great want is more people, of the right
sort of course; not only more hands to labor, but more capitalists
to employ them. I trust that the means we at length possess,
the measures we are taking, and the inducements we are now
able to offer, will secure for the next ten years a better record
than an increase of population of only twenty per cent. (25,734
to 30,766) which is the figure for the years 1872-1882. During
the same period the public revenue increased by 140 per cent.
(£105,300 to £250,372) while the Import and Export trade not
only rose 150 per cent. (£435,852 to £1,091,810) but re-arranged
itself so as to show in 1882 an excess of Exports amounting to
£74,300, whereas ten years before there had been an excess of
Imports amounting to £17,460. In the same decade, wheat-
growing appears to have decreased by 25 per cent.: and there is
also a decrease returned in the cultivation of vines, oats, rye,
potatoes, and maize. Hay and green crops, however, increased by
100 per cent., which points to the abandonment of agriculture
proper in favor of stock-raising, as before noticed. In the period
named, sheep increased by 80 per cent. (680,290 to 1,259,797)
and cattle by 50 per cent. (49,550 to 65,475). The total area of
cultivated land only increased by 7 per cent, (from 53,240 acres to
56,691 acres). In fact, what with an increase of only 20 per cent.
of people, coupled with the drawing away of young men to the new
districts of the Gascoyne, Nickol Bay, and Kimberley, there have
not been hands sufficient to till any more ground. In 1872, the
Government railways and telegraphs of the Colony were not in
existence; they have now extended, the former to 74 miles, the
latter to 2,300 miles; while, as your Lordship knows, very ex-
tensive additional railway schemes are in course of arrangement.
There has therefore been progress, and real substantial pro-
gress, during the ten years to which the above figures refer.
1 have, &c.,
F. NAPIER BROOME.
The Right Honorable the Earl op Derby, K.G., &c., &c., Ac.


APPENDIX B.—Extracts from a Report on
the Department of Crown Lands and
Surveys of the Colony of Western
Australia, for the year 1883, by the
Honorable John Forrest, C.M.G., F.L.S.,
F.R.G.S., F.G.S., &c., &c., Commissioner
of Crown Lands, and Surveyor General.
In submitting my report on the Crown Lands and Surveys
of the Colony, for the year 1883, I have the pleasant duty to
record a continued period of prosperity.
The estimated revenue for the year was £51,900, but the
revenue actually received amounted to £93,798, being an excess
of £41,898, while it exceeded the revenue received during 1882
by £27,879.
The following statement of the Revenue and Expenditure of
the Department during the past ten years is of much interest,
and indicates the increasing occupation and development of
the Colony :
Revenue. Expenditure.
1874 ... £27,485 ... £5,419
1875 ... 33,401 ... 7,283
1876 ... 32,275 ... 7,973
1877 ... 31,367 ... 7,264
1878 ... 31,245 ... 7,174
1879 ... 33,398 ... 7,287
1880 ... 35,752 ... 7,670
1881 ... 40,444 ... 7,201
1882 ... 65,919 ... 9,371
1883 ... 93,798 ... 13,881
Of this amount of £93,798 received during 1883, a sum of
£10,913 was derived from sales of country lands, £6,562 from
sales of town lands, and the balance of £76,323 from rents, &c.
The mineral resources have not prospered during the year,
owing to the low price of lead ore that still prevails. A valuable


lode of copper has recently been opened tip at Northampton,
which it is to be hoped will prove remunerative.
The industry that shows most vitality is wool, and it is
certainly at the present time the “ backbone ” of the country.
The trade in horses continues brisk and good, and from our
North-West territory a very large and remunerative export can
confidently be reckoned on in the future. Settlers in those
districts are turning their attention very much to horse-breeding,
and are importing good stock from the Eastern Colonies, and it
is quite probable that the Indian army may very soon look to
North-Western Australia as one of its principal sources for
obtaining remounts.
When a country is surveyed, lands at once have a value in the
market and become valuable securities on which money can be
borrowed to develop its resources ; but in a country not properly
surveyed, and therefore not with any certainty secured to the
occupiers, no one would be disposed to purchase or to lend. This
of itself is a very serious drawback, not only for the lessees but
also to the Colony, for it has been wisely said by a learned
authority that “ whatever facilitates the sale of land tends to
make it a more productive instrument for the community at
large : whatever prevents or restricts its sale subtracts from its
usefulness.”
JOHN FORREST,
Commissioner of Crown Lands,
and Surveyor General.
Crown Lands and Survey Department,
May 19 th, 1884.


APPENDIX C.—Copy of Mr. John Wadding-
ton’s Proposals for the Construction,
Equipment and Maintenance of a Land
Grant Railway.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OP
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
36, King William Street, London Bridge,
London, E.C., 16th May, 1884.
Sir,
I have the honor to refer your Excellency to my letter
to you, dated the 28th December, 1883, confirming in detail my
previous letter of the 16th November, 1883, which contained a
proposal made on behalf of a Syndicate of English Capitalists
for the construction of a line of Railway from York to Geraldton
in your Colony.
After deliberation with my friends, I have deemed it advisable
to make certain variations as to the proposed route, and the
terms upon which the Concession is asked for.
I have therefore to request your Excellency to allow me to
withdraw my letter of the 28th December, 1883, and to accept
the following proposal, which does not I think contain any
radically different proposition, with the exception of the question
of the proposed diversion of the line.
The Syndicate propose to construct the line on what is known
as the Land Grant System.
The district which the proposed line will traverse, is, as per
accompanying map, from York, via Northam, Newcastle,
Bejoording, New Norcia, and on to the Berkshire Valley, thence
to the River Irwin, traversing the same to Dongarra, and by a
course northward, through the Greenough Plats to Geraldton,
or, as an alternative route, from Guildford, traversing the Uppe.>:
Swan River to Bindoon, thence to New Norcia, and on to
Geraldton, as before described; whichever route your Govern-
ment may select, and as may be more definitely submitted to
you and the Surveyor-General of the Government for approva 1
lifter survey.


The Syndicate do not claim for this line of Railway an
importance it will not possess, in accelerating the means of
transport between the Australian Colonies and other parts of the
world, but on the admitted ground that nothing better serves
the interest of civilization, progress, commerce, and agriculture
than ready and rapid means of inter-communication, and for the
welfare of the present, and, it is hoped, very many future settlers
who may be induced to migrate into the Colony, they have
considered whether a line proceeding from Perth to Geraldton,
by taking somewhat near the existing Telegraph route, might
not better suit the interests of some of the colonists, but have
abandoned this plan in favour of one more inland, as possessing
greater future advantages to the Colony, and indeed, with the
lapse of time, to the Syndicate or Company themselves. A line
of communication from Geraldton well inland to York or Guild-
ford, appears to offer better guarantees of utility than one more
to the West, as it is not by clinging to the coast that all the
advantages of colonisation are to be obtained.
The Syndicate in framing the following conditions, are guided
and assisted by the terms of the report, upon the proposal of Mr.
Anthony Hordern, made by the Committee appointed for that
purpose, and dated in Perth, March 16th, 1883.
(a.) To construct, maintain, equip and work a Railway
for the transport of passengers and goods. Mail
trains to attain a minimum speed of twenty miles
per hour, and ordinary trains in any case not less
than the minimum rate in force on the Government
Eastern lines.
(h.) The route of the Railway to be such as may be agreed
upon and approved by the Government, and in any
section of twenty miles no deviation of more than
three miles, increasing the Railway by that length,
unless with the approval of the Government Engineer,
and supported by his opinion, that such deviations are
necessary on account of engineering difficulties.
(c.) The line shall be constructed on the same gauge as that
of the Eastern Railway, and the whole of the per-
manent way, plant and rolling stock used in the
equipment and maintenance and the working thereof,
shall be at least equal in quality to that in use by the
Government, and be subject to the approval of the
Chief Commissioner of Railways or Engineer of the
Government, who will also satisfy himself of the
sufficiency of rolling stock placed upon the line. The
Syndicate or Company, however, to have the right at
any time to submit for the approval of the Chief Com-


missioner or Government Engineer any modification
of the present plan of working that maybe discovered,
whereby economy may be obtained without loss of
efficiency.
( d .) The surveys to begin within six months from the time
of the signing of the Contract, plus the lapse of time
required in the transport ot the staff of Engineers to
make the Survey; and the work shall be commenced
within twelve months from the date of the definite
approval of the route of the line by the authorities
charged with that service. The Syndicate will require
t the power to commence the building of the Railway, at
such point or points as they shall deem best.
(e.) All rails, engines and rolling stock, and all the
materials for permanent way, required solely for the
use in the construction of the line, and all materials
for the working plant required to be imported, to be
conveyed over the Government Railways at a reduced
rate, and free of all duties and fiscal charges whatever.
(/.) The whole of the line to be completed within a term
of six years from its commencement. The Syndicate
or Company shall be at liberty during the construction
of the line to open any section of the same for public
traffic (say) from Geraldton towards the South, or
from York or Guildford northwards, that has been
accepted by the Engineer of the Government, should
they so desire.
( g .) On the completion of the line, and on its being opened
for general traffic, at least one train shall run from each
of the termini daily, unless the Government agrees with
the Syndicate or Company for a lesser number. The
tariff of charges to be agreed upon between the
Government and Syndicate.
(A) The Syndicate are willing to deposit with the Govern-
ment, as a security for the due performance of the
Contract, such reasonable sum as the Government may
require, which sum in the absence of, and until a for-
feiture thereof shall bear interest at £ per
centum per annum, and shall be returned to the
Syndicate upon the completion of the line, in con-
formity therewith.
In consideration of the construction of a Railway fiom York
or Guildford to Geraldton, it is proposed by the Syndicate to
apply, and they do hereby apply to the Government for the
following privileges—
(1.) Upon the completion of each section of twenty
miles of such Railway, the Crown to grant 12,000


(say) twelve thousand acres of land in fee simple for
every mile constructed. The said land to be selected
in the following manner —No land to be granted in
blocks of less than 12,000 (twelve thousand) acres in
extent, to be forthwith selected East or West of the
line, and within a distance of forty miles on either side
of the line; 75% (seventy-five per cent.) of the land
agreed upon as payment for the completion of each
twenty miles, shall be granted to the Syndicate
immediately upon the completion thereof. The
remaining twenty-five per cent, shall be granted upon
the completion of the whole line, and in the meantime
shall be held as a guarantee for the completion of the
whole line within the time laid down in the agreement,
unless such 'non-completion should be due to some
inevitable cause, or to some act of the Government.
All compensations for improvements on land selected
by the Syndicate shall be assessed by arbitration. The
Syndicate will require in respect of every sum of four
shillings paid by them for such compensation a grant
of one acre of land to be selected as before mentioned.
(2.) All unalienated lands within forty miles East or West
of the boundaries of the proposed line, shall from the
time of the signing of the Contract, be withdrawn
from sale until the full assignment of the amount of
land agreed upon shall have been made to the Syndicate
or Company, which the Syndicate will select within
twelve months from the commencement of the works.
(3.) The Syndicate or Company to have the privilege of
declaring Town sites or villages along the line of route
on the land granted to them.
(4.) The Syndicate requires a reserve of a strip of land
three chains in breadth along the line of route of the
Railway, for the purposes of the line, and parcels of
land of sufficient acreage as sites for stations, work-
shops, sidings, warehouses, etc. The Syndicate shall
be placed in full legal possession of the reserved land
for uses incidental to the working and maintenance of
the line and other kindred purposes, and such reserve
shall be made free of all claims or charges in respect
of compensation, for disturbance of tenure, improve-
ments, or of any other nature.
(5.) All costs or charges incurred by the Syndicate or Com-
pany in surveying, and in the necessary supervision and
engineering work during construction and working,
shall be borne bv them.


(6.) The -Syndicate or Company shall, in the event of their
introducing immigrants into the Colony, be entitled to
receive from the Government a sum of £lO (ten
pounds) per head for each statute adult under fifty
years of age; each emigrant to be duly passed and
authorised by the recognised agent of the Colony.
I take the liberty most respectfully, to suggest to your
Excellency the desirability in the present state of the money
market of bringing the negociations in connection with the terms
of the Contract to as speedy an issue as possible. It is to be
feared lest in the case of protracted delay, many of those who
have given me their adhesion might be induced to invest else-
where, rather than suffer their capital to remain idle, and that
thus the Colony might lose the opportunity now offered.
I have the honor to be, Sib,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN W ADDINGTON.
[Appendix D,


APPENDIX D.—Report of Proceedings in
the Legislative Council on the question
of Mr. John Waddington’s proposals for
the construction of a Railway between
Guildford and Geraldton.—Saturday, 13th
September, - 1884.
Sir T. C. Campbell said it was his duty to move the resolution
contained in the report of the Select Committee appointed to
consider Mr. J. Waddington’s proposals for the construction of
a railway on the Land Grant System between the Central
Districts and Geraldton. There could be no doubt from the
information he had been able to gather in Select Committee
from those Honorable Members, that this railway was likely to
lead to a large amount of useful settlement, and not only that, it
was a matter of great importance that the different districts of
the Colony should be better united than at present. He thought
these railway projects would be of immense importance and
contribute very largely to the welfare of the Colony. He con-
sidered that in the circumstances of Western Australia the
Land Grant System was the very best possible in the con-
struction of a railway such as this. The great desideratum was
population, and it seemed to him we were more likely to obtain
that population under this system than under any other. The
House having already affirmed the principle of the Land Grant
System the Committee felt that there seemed no valid ground
for refusing to follow the same course with regard to a railway
northwards as had already been adopted in respect to a railway
southwards. With regard to the route he thought there were
reasons why it would have been advisable to have carried the
line northwards according to Mr. Waddington’s first proposals; it
would have been a more direct trunk line through the Southern
half of the Colony than going at right angles from Guildford to
York and down South again. But, there were engineering
difficulties which induced the Committee to adopt the more
circuitous route, and there was another consideration : the settlers
in the districts about Gingin and Bindoon were greatly dis-
appointed because the Eastern Railway was not carried out in
that direction, and this line would give them those railway con-


veniences from which they Lad been debarred. In addition
the Comnaissionner of Railways pointed out to the Committee
the importance of not haying more traffic than was absolutely
necessary over the steep gradients of the Darling Range, and the
Committee therefore chose the easier route. The House would
no doubt come to the conclusion that they could not do better
than follow the conditions of the contract for the Albany line,
as regards this line. The Committee, however, suggested a few
modifications. He did not think it necessary to dwell upon the
first of these. He thought that the House would approve of the
next also, viz,, that the number of immigrants to be introduced
in any one year should be a matter for arrangement between the
Government and the Contractor. It was possible if this contract
were entered into within a short time that we might have a
large number of immigrants introduced under the Beverley-
Albany contract, and if under this second contract there should
be a large number introduced almost simultaneously we might
be in a position of some difficulty. The third modification would
also, no doubt, commend itself : that no money payments should
be made in respect of the introduction of immigrants and that
payment should be made in land. The only other suggestion
was that no lands should be reserved from sale in respect of this
railway until the contract was signed. This was recommended
in view of the great inconveniences in connection with the
promoters of another line, and as we had no certain guaranty
that the work would be carried out, it seemed highly desirable
that we should not repeat the mistake with regard to this line.
He now begged to move that an humble address be presented to
His Excellency informing him that with regard to Mr. Wad-
dington’s proposals, the House had agreed as follows :
1. That the construction, on the Land Grant System, of
a Railway between the Central and Victoria Districts is
desirable.
2. That the general route to be followed should be from
Guildford via Chittering, Bindoon, Victoria Plains, Car-
namah, Arrino, Upper Irwin, and Dongarra, to a spot at or
near Walkaway (Greenough Plats), the proposed Southern
Terminus of the Government Northern line.
3. That the Government be empowered to negotiate with
Mr. Waddington for the construction of this line of railway
on the basis of the contract entered into with Mr. Anthony
Hordern; subject, however, to the following modifica-
tions: — „
(a ) That the land taken for the purposes of the railway,
when passing through fee simple properties or town-
sites, shall not be of greater width than one chain,
except by special consent of the Commissioner of
Railways.


(6.) That the number of immigrants to be introduced in any
one year shall be a matter for special arrangement
between the Government and the Contractor.
(c.) That no money payments shall be made in respect of the
introduction of such immigrants ; land payments, how-
ever, being allowed, as in the Beverley-Albany contract.
( d .) That no lands shall be reserved from sale in view of the
proposed railway construction until after the signing of
the contract.
4. That, as in the case of the Beverley-Albany proposals,
the Contractor for the Gerald ton-Guildford Railway shall be
required to commence and carry out the work simultane-
ously from either terminus.
5. That on the bases above laid down, the Government
be empowered not only to negotiate, but to ratify and
complete the contract for the construction of the railway;
similar guarantees being entered into, and the same amount
deposited as security for the performance of the contract,
as in the case of the Beverley-Albany Railway.
Mr. V enn hoped the House would show by the amount of
consideration which it was prepared to give this important
subject that it was alive to the beneficial results likely to accrue
from Mr. Waddington’s proposals. Whatever might be said to
the contrary there could be no doubt in his mind that of the
two schemes for railway construction that had been before the
House this Session, this was the more important one. Personally
he thought that this line would run through a greater amount
of good land, and through country that had been populated for
many years, and bring more exports for shipment than any
other line that could be suggested in the Colony. He took a
very considerable interest in this work, as in every other work
which to his mind was calculated to benefit the Colony, without
reference to whether it was more particularly likely to benefit the
North or the South. He had no desire to pit the insignificance
of the North against the importance of the South, nor vice versa.
He preferred to look upon the Colony as a whole, as an integral
part of the future federated Dominion of Australia. With
regard to the proposals now before the House, he might state
that they did not emanate from the same Syndicate in any way
as the proposals for the Beverley-Albany line. Mr. Waddington,
the promoter of this scheme, had put it forward at the instiga-
tion and with the promised support of a large body of wealthy
men, who he believed there was no doubt had the means to
carry the work through, perhaps as soon if not sooner than the
Beverley-Albany line. The recommendations of the Committee
did not to his mind differ very considerably from the proposals
made by Mr. Waddington himself, other than that he left it an open
question whether the line should start from York or from Guild-


ford. With regard to the Northern Terminus, of course the
conclusion arrived at by the House with regard to the Colony
itself undertaking to construct a line Southwards from Geraldton
to Greenough rather than that Mr. Waddington should have
the Northern Terminus of his line at Geraldton, might have
some influence upon his proposals, hut he was in hopes that
modification might be accepted. The Select Committee re-
commended that no lands along this line should be reserved
from sale until the contract is signed. He was glad to think
that the proposer of this scheme had never asked for such
a concession. There was one other point he should like to
allude to, he referred to the rate at which compensation paid
for lands should be recouped to the Contractor. The Committee
recommended that the Contractor should recoup himself in land
as in Mr. Hordern’s scheme, bnt the report did not go on to say
as in Mr. Hordern’s case that the land selected in payment for
compensation should be valued at 10s. an acre. He hoped the Com-
mittee understood their recommendation carried that condition
with it.
Mr. Steere said that was so The conditions applying to
Mr. Hordern’s scheme would also apply to Mr. Waddington’s.
Mr. Loton spoke strongly in favour of the line touching the
southern part of the Victoria Plains.
The Surveyor-General said the Victoria Plains were not
easy to define.
Mr. Marmion thought that definite arrangements should be
made for the introduction of immigrants.
Mr. Venn said the introduction of immigrants was not a part
of Mr. Waddington’s scheme as it was of Mr. Hordern’s.
[A discussion took place as to the route, when it was proposed
to strike out Chittering, Bindoon, Carnamah and Arrino in the
2nd Clause and insert Gingin, so as to leave the rest of the line
to the Irwin and Dongarra open, so as to give an opportunity
to the Contractor to select the best line.]
The recommendations of the Select Committee were then
agreed to, the only alterations being the ommission of the words
“ Chittering, Bindoon, Carnamah and Arrino ” in the 2nd
Clause, the general impression being that the more desirable
route would be via Gingin, on account of the hilly character of
the country about Bindoon.
The report was adopted as amended (See Appendix E.)


APPENDIX E.—Report (as amended and
adopted by the Legislative Council)
of the Select Committee appointed to
consider and report upon Mr. John
Waddington’s proposals for the con-
struction of a Railway, on the Land
Grant System, between York or Guild-
ford and Geraldton.
I. Your Committee regret that so long a time should have
elapsed between their appointment and the presentation of this
Report; but it will, doubtless, be apparent to Your Honorable
House that until the question had been determined whether or
not the Colony should undertake the construction of a line of
railway southwards from Geraldton to the Greenough or
Dongarra, it was impossible for Your Committee to arrive at
definite conclusions upon the subject entrusted to them,
11. Your Committee consider that the connection of the
central districts with Geraldton, by means of a railway, is a
work of national importance which would largely contribute to
the welfare and prosperity of the Colony. And, seeing that in
the case of the Beverley-Albany Line southwards, the land-grant
principle of construction has been adopted, and that there seems
no valid ground for refusing to follow the same course in
respect of a railway northwards, Your Committee have arrived
at the conclusion that they are justified in recommending Your
Honorable House to advise that negotiations with Mr.
Waddington, in regard to his proposals, should be entered upon
by the Government.
111. Of the two southern starting points suggested by Mr.
Waddington, Your Committee are strongly of opinion that
Guildford is the better. For, if the line be carried from
Guildford northwards, not only will districts be served which
are excluded from participation in any benefit from the Eastern
Railway, but, further, the steep grades through the Darling
Range will be relieved of the traffic which would otherwise pass
over them from the North—a consideration, Your Committee
are advised, of no little importance.
IY. The negotiations with Mr. Anthony Hordern for the
Beverley-Albany line, lately carried through to completion, have
much simplified and reduced the work of Your Committee, and
they see no reason for departing materially, in dealing with Mr.
Waddington’s proposals, from the conditions of contract agreed
upon with Mr, Hordern. They therefore have prepared, and


'recommend for adoption by Your Honorable House, the
following Resolution :
That an Humble Address be presented to His Excellency the
Governor, informing him that this House, having con-
sidered His Excellency’s Message with reference to Mr. J.
Waddington’s railway proposals, has resolved as follows :
1. That the construction, on the land grant system, of a
Railway between the Central and Victoria Districts is
desirable.
2. That the general route to be followed should be from
Guildford via Gingin, Victoria Plains, Upper Irwin, and
Dongarra, to a spot at or near Walkaway (Greenough
Flats), the proposed Southern Terminus of the Government
Northern line.
3. That the Government be empowered to negotiate with
Mr. Waddington for the construction of this line of Rail-
way on the basis of the contract entered into with
Mr. Anthony Hordern; subject, however, to the following
modifications :
(a.) That the land taken for the purposes of the Railway,
when passing through fee simple properties or townsites,
shall not be of greater width than one chain, except by
special consent of the Commissioner of Railways.
(h.) That the number of immigrants to be introduced in any
one year shall be a. matter for special arrangement
between the Government and the Contractor.
(c.) That no money payments shall be made in respect of the
introduction of such immigrants ; land payments, how-
ever, being allowed, as in the Beverley-Albany contract,
(d.) That no lands shall be reserved from sale in view of the
proposed railway construction until after the signing of
the contract.
4. That as in the case of the Beverley-Albany proposals,
the contractor for the Geraldton-Guildford Railway shall
be required to commence and carry out the work simul-
taneously from either terminus.
5. That on the bases above laid down, the Government
be empowered not only to negotiate, but to ratify and com-
plete the contract for the construction of the Railway,
similar guarantees being entered into, and the same amount
deposited as security for the performance of the contract, as
in the case of the Beverley-Albany Railway.
V. Your Committee trust that their recommendations in
this important matter may meet with the approval of Your
Honorable House.
T. COCKBURN-CAMPBELL,
September 12th, 1834. Chairman.


APPENDIX F.—Extracts from letters re-
ceived from Colonists.
Edward Shenton, Esq., late Chairman of the Municipal Council ,
Champion Bay.
As far as I have seen myself it is very good agricultural land
all tlie way from here to York. The line [Midland Railway]
will pay the Colony far better than Hordern’s [Beverley-Albany
Railway],
H. W. Venn, Esq., Member of the Legislative Council, and a
large Squatter in the Bunbury District.
A railway from York to Geraldton is a thing that must be and
will be Public opinion may change at
any moment. The Colony now offers to capitalists her land in
return for railways. She may soon prefer paying in coin.
The land regulations as set forth in the leases
give the Government right to resume land for public purposes
whenever they like. This is an advantage this Colony enjoys
above the other Colonies, on the question of Land Grant Railways,
as it enables the Government to do as they like with the land
without fear of raising the legal question of compensation for
leaseholds 10s. per acre for such
lands as you may select is after all a very low price indeed.
A great deal of the land along the line will doubtless realize 20s.
per acre, and in the town sites declared by the contractors it
would be hard to say what figure will be realised
I think Guildford is a good starting point, in fact the very
best, and then by following the route near about the one
indicated by the Council the line would pass through very fair
country, and would be one easy to construct being tolerably
level, and escape the difficulty of the Darling range
This line of railway is really more valuable than the Albany line.
I feel sure there will be three times the traffic on it than on the
Albany line. On the Irwin there is some of the finest agricul-
tural lands in the Australias —splendid loamy plains that require
only a railway to develope them and make them the scene of
spreading cornfields. The Irwin plains alone I believe would
assure success to the railway.


E. H. Wittenoom, Esq., late Member of the Legislative Council
for Geraldton, a large Squatter in the Champion Bay district.
Allow me to congratulate you on getting your proposals
passed so quickly through the Western Australian Legislative
Council. I notice there has been some modification which seems
distinctly in your favour, as it does not tie you down to any
particular route, but leaves you a larger margin for selection,
whereby you may go through better country than along the line
originally contemplated. The rivers you will have to cross are
not very wide, the largest being the Irwin, and this is not more
than 50 yards wide, and in many places not even that. Your line
will also tap some of our finest agricultural land in the vicinity
of the Irwin and Victoria plains ; and although it must neces-
sarily pass through varied qualities, still little or none is
absolutely worthless. You will also have the advantage of a
Government Line of Railway at each end, which should materially
reduce the primary cost of transit of materials. The engineering
difficulties you will have to encounter do not seem very great to
my unprofessional eye ; in fact a large portion is almost a plain,
I may mention that water is easily procured in most parts of
Western Australia by sinking wells from 20 to 100 feet deep,
which, of course, makes all land more valuable and fertile.
I shall be glad to hear of your financial success in the matter,
as the Colony will be looking with great interest to the com-
mencement of this undertaking; and at its completion your
Syndicate should be in possession of a large tract of valuable
land.
H. J. Saunders, Esq., G.E., lately arrived in the Colony
from England.
I was introduced to Clayton Mason (Commissioner of
Railways); he thinks your Scheme a far better one than
Hordern’s and more likely to pay. The country is fairly easy
so far as the construction of the line is concerned.
Everybody out here considers your line the beat, as the
country is better and there will be more traffic than on
Hordern’s.


Geo. Simpson, Esq., M.E., Engineer, of the Western Australian
Timber Company.
Knowing that yon have applied for a Land Grant
Railway in West Australia, it occurred to me that as I am
acquainted with the route your line will follow, a few hints
might bo of service to you. I may state that when Manager
of the Brunner Colliery on the west coast of New Zealand, I
surveyed a line of railway from Cohden Greymouth River to the
Brunner Colliery, through a difficult country; I also acted as
Inspector on the “ Kapunda and North-West Bend Railway,” in
South Australia, and having surveyed and built the first line of
railway in West Australia, I may fairly claim to know something
of railway construction.
Some time ago I travelled in a leisurely way from Guildford
to Champion Bay, and vice versa , and as I travelled with my
own conveyance, I took my own time. This gave me the
opportunity to examine the country generally, both to the right
and to the left of the main overland route, and followed pretty
near the course your line will doubtless follow for the greater
part of it; and as I kept a journal of my observations, perhaps
the following remarks may be useful to you; I shall condense
them into the smallest possible space.
I may remark that, generally speaking, from Guildford to
Walkaway, nearly the entire country to be traversed will be of
the very easiest description for railway construction from an
engineering point of view, in fact, for the greater part of the
distance the line will be almost level.
THE QUALITY OF THE LAND.
For all practical purposes the land may be divided into three
distinct classes, namely, pastoral, agricultural and mineral.
1. I estimate that about 75 per cent, of the whole area of land
to be acquired by yon is well suited for agricultural purposes.
Generally speaking, the clearing is very light, and upon thousands
of acres there is just sufficient timber to form shade from the
sun in the summer, for cattle, sheep, &c.; nothing is wanted
but population.
2. I know of no better country in West Australia than the
remaining 25 per cent, for pastoral pursuits than the whole of
the land in the neighbourhood of Gingin, and with a few trifling
exceptions right on to Mr. Whitfeild’s station, A large area in
the neighbourhood of Whitfeild’s has the justly celebrated salt
bush growing upon it, which in itself constitutes one of the


best qualities pastoral lands can have; there is only one patch
of poor land on the route, known as “ Long’s Plain,” but I assume
you will keep to the east of it where the land is all good. Of
course, in almost every part of Australia, even in the most fertile
districts, there are patches of land unsuited for the plough, but
I repeat that three-fourths is well adapted for cultivation, and
the balance suitable for pastoral pursuits, and although sheep
and cattle are good in themselves, they will no doubt soon give
way to the agriculturist on the lands immediately adjoining
the railway when the line is built. The want of easy transit has
done more to retard the 'progress of West Australia than all other
causes combined.
The land varies, as a matter of course, but is especially good
in the neighbourhood of Lefroys and the Berkshire Yaliey, and
on the banks of the Irwin river.
•Water. —There are few big or permanent water courses, but
water can be obtained almost everywhere in the valleys, and gullies,
and flats, at a moderate depth, and although there is sometimes a
considerable spell of dry weather there is none of those long-
droughts to which New South Wales and Queensland are so
subject to; an entire season without rain is unknown; the
average rainfall in Perth is 30 inches, and you must remember
that Australia generally is rich in proportion to her rainfall.
MINERAL LANDS.
Copper. —l first came across several well defined lodes of
copper, about seven miles to the north-east of Berkshire Yaliey,
and collected both black and grey oxide of high percentage, at
infrequent distances right on to Mr. Whitfeild’s station.
From about five miles to the east of Mr. Whitfeilds home
station commences an immense area of copper-bearing country.
Mr. Whitfeild rode out with me a long way to the east, and
pointed out several well defined lodes; the green and blue
carbonates are lying on the surface on several hill sides; these
indications are also well developed on several parts of the
Irwin,
Lead. —Perhaps Lead is hardly worth mentioning, never-
theless, it may be useful some day, although low in value just
now; there are several lodes well defined in the upper Irwin
district, that I believe will come within the radius of your
lands.
Antimony. —l collected some very fine specimens of Antimony
in the neighbourhood of the upper Irwin, and feel sure there
must be lodes of this ore in the neighbourhood where I found
the specimens.
Plumbago. —There is no mineral in West Australia, so far as I
am aware, that covers such a large area as Plumbago, if we are


to judge by the large quantities to be picked up on the surface.
I gathered these occasionally over a very large area, along the
route between Berkshire Valley and the Irwin.
Dr. Bompas, J.P., told me that he also collected specimens of
the several minerals to which I have referred, Antimony
excepted.
THE RAILWAY.
To this I can only refer in general terms, as the object of
my journey was to examine the mineral country and the land,
I had no idea of a railway being undertaken at that time,
although its necessity and advantages were apparent enough.
1. There will be no tunnel required, nor so much as one deep
cutting on the entire route. _ ,
There will be many culverts, which in West Australia can be
built of Jarrah timber; no masonry is required in these, as the
Jarrah is the next thing to everlasting; there will be no large
bridges whatever, and only about seven throughout the entire
distance. I don’t think any will exceed 30ft. in height, nor
200 ft. in length; assuming these bridges to be built of Jarrah
timber, this can be obtained for the three next to the Guildford
end at an easy distance from the line. No expensive bridges after
the English fashion will be required; you may reckon on your
bridges costing you £2 per lineal foot. There is no part of the
line that will be subject to floods , nor are there any deep gorges on
the one hand, nor swampy country to pass on the other.
You have a grand opportunity to do good, both to yourself and
West Australia. Wishing every success,




