

p£k,ia;oo3
PAMS
/fL „ r
BOX //
©cntenarg papers.
THE WESTPORT.
“ The Stone which the Builders refused is
become the Head Stone of the Corner.
This is the Lord's doing: it is marvel-
lous in our eyes." — Psalm cxviii. 22, 23.
“ There has been but one Day of Pentecost,” it has been said.
Yes ! But you must remember that that Day—although often
clouded —is not ended yet. And when it does end, it will not be in
the usual way of darkening into night—but in the glorious way of
breaking into the perfect Millennial Day.
Meantime, you must also remember that the Pentecostal Blessing
and Gift of the Holy Ghost has never been withdrawn. The Promise
of the Father and Christ’s Promise to His Church were unconditional,
universal, and perpetual. “He shall abide with you for ever.” “Lo
I am with you alway, even to the end of the world,” And therefore
we, who are living in this nineteenth century and in this portion of
God’s vineyard, must set our hand to our work with the same confi-
dence of faith, and dependence upon Divine aid as inspired the first
Preachers of the Gospel, when the Tongues of fire fell upon them, and
they were filled with the Iloly Ghost.


And let us be thankful that in these days God is giving abundant
witness to the Power of the Cross to raise even the worst of men into
the light, and make them His own children. lam going to give you
an Example of the success that accompanied the “ Prayers and Pains”
of God’s servants in a certain well-authenticated instance ; —the most
remarkable example, perhaps, which the annals of modern Home
Missions can furnish.
Dr. Thomas Chalmers, praeclarum et venerahile nomen, used to
escape from the assaults of a weary spirit by promising to himself that,
when he reached his seventh decade, he would retire from the work,
and spend the closing period of his life in the quiet of a .Sabbatic
season. But, when he came to that point, he found it impossible to
slip his collar and enter upon the promised Rest. The dearest object
of his earthly existence had ever been —the elevation of the common
people, especially of the uncared-for but (as he believed) reclaimable
masses in the large cities. In the opening of his ministry he had
laboured at that work in Glasgow with prodigious energy and
astonishing success. And at the close of his life—just when his
hoped-for Sabbath rest had arrived —the old passion came down upon
him again, and he determined to make another effort to exemplify
his favorite method of territorial cultivation. Notwithstanding
the vast increase in the supply of religious ordinances which had been
made in Scotland between these two epochs of his life, he was aware
that there were thonsands of people in the heart of Edinburgh, who
were utter strangers to the habitual decencies of a Christian Land.
But as it was impossible to deal with them en masse, he announced
his intention of assuming a poor district in the most destitute part of
the Old Town of Edinburgh, and of “ working off an experiment
among them; —one normal specimen of the process by which a single
locality might be reclaimed from the desolate wilderness —such a
specimen as might be imitated and reproduced elsewhere.
Edinburgh is the Queen of beauty. She is beautiful for’situation;
for the grandeur of her broken outlines and the mass and loftiness of
her architecture ; for her crowned hills and Castle Rock. But she
has a basement story which goes deep under the ground ; and down
there —while all overhead is full of light and the comforts of happy
homes and the gladness of little children and the Praises of the
Most High God, —in that dark basement story, —right under these


happy people’s feet, thousands of their brothers and sisters live and
die in indescribable darkness and wickedness and misery. That was
the quarter to which Dr. Chalmers betook himself. In the lowest part
of that sunken storey he chose his parish and planted his machinery.
It was a compact block, containing 411 families and about 2000
people ; among whomjit would have been hard to find the ten righteous
men who would have saved Sodom. Forty-six families professed
themselves Protestants ; seventy were Romanists ; the remaining 296
families had no connection with any church whatever. The great
majority of the children were growing up in utter ignorance, although
Dr. Guthrie’s Free Ragged School was within a stone’s throw. One-
fourth of the inhabitants were Paupers on the Poor’s Roll. Another
fourth were street beggars, thieves, and prostitutes. The capabilities of
the place for harbouring and hiding depraved characters and crimes,
may be gathered from the fact that, before Dr, Chalmers selected it for
the scene of his operations, Burke and Hare had selected it for the
scene of theirs, and had wiled sixteen unsuspecting victims to its
nethermost depths, and murdered them for the anatomical value of
their bodies.
The habits of the people were in hideous conformity with the
horrors of the place. “In one tenement,” said the first Missionary,
describing his first visits, “ in five successive families I found both
husband and wife drunk. In another tenement, containing fifteen
inmates, I found every one of them drunk. I went to a funeral
once, and found the company assembled round the corpse so drunk
that I had to go and beg some sober neighbours to come and carry
the body to the grave. One day I found a man lying drunk on some
straw, his wife sitting on the floor nearly as bad, and the children
screaming for bread. I knew that Dr. Chalmers did not approve of
giving money in such circumstances ; and perhaps he was right. But
I was going home to my dinner. So I went into a shop and got six
penny rolls and sent them to the house by the baker’s boy. After
walking a little way I remembered something which took me back to
the same street, and passing a dram shop I saw the wretched woman,
to whom I had sent the rolls, bargaining with the publican and giving
them for whiskey. I darted into the shop and seized them. ‘ These
are my rolls,’ I cried; land running back to the house, I tore them in
pieces among the children, who ate them up like hungry wolves.”
But all were not so bad. Many of the houses even of the more decent


people were, however, pitiful in the extreme, —a whole family lodged
sometimes in a crib too small to allow them to stretch themselves.
“ And how do you sleep ? ” a shoemaker was asked. “ Oh, I sit on
my stool and prop my head against the wall, and sleep so.” And
some of these people were as honest as they were poor.
“ What keeps you out so late, my boy? ” a gentleman asked a
little fellow whom he found in the street at midnight. “I am selling
matches, sir.”
“How old are you ?” “ Don’t know: guess I’m 7or 8.”
“Is your father alive ? ” “ No —he’s dead.”
“ Your mother ? ” “ She’s living, but she’s ow’r auld to do
anything.”
“How many brothers and sisters have you?” “Two brothers
and one sister.”
“ What does your eldest brother do ? ” “He gets papers and sells
them.”
“ What does your other brother do ? ” “He sits in the house
with mother. He’s we’er than me.”
“ What does your sister do ? ” “ She sells sticks.”
“ What do you three earn in a week ? ” “ Three shillings.”
“ How many rooms have you ?” “ One.”
“ Does the Minister ever call upon you ? ” “He did once, and
left some tickets.”
“ Tickets for coals—or soup ? ” “ No —tickets to read.”
“Tracts?—What were they about?” “ We didna’ ken: none
of us could read them.”
“ Are any of you ever sick ? ” “ Yes —when my father was sick
we a’ took sick.”
“ What was the matter with him ? ” “ The Small-pox.”
“ How did you sleep when he was ill ? ” “ Some of us stood up—
we took turn about o’ the bed.”
“ How did you sleep the night that he died ? ” “We didna’ sleep
that night ava’.”
“And next night? ” “We stood up that night as week”
“ Did you go to bed when you got a coffin ? ” “ Yes—when we
lifted the body out.”
“ Does the Parish allow you anything ? ” “My mother gets two
shillings a month from it.”
What a picture of Family Life!—its way of working through the day,


and of sleeping through the night. Working, observe; —not begging ;
not stealing; but honest trading : —the biggest boy vending old papers,
the next matches, and the little girl sticks. And sleeping as horses
do, on their feet, at times; and then, when they had carried their
father to the grave, lying down and sleeping in the infected straw.
A blessing on that widow and her brave supporters! A curse on
those who have no bowels of compassion for the wants and woes of
riie honest Poor ; —who say :
“ A life of self-indulgence is for us,
A life of self-denial is for them.
For us the streets broad-built and populous,
For them unhealthy corners, garrets dim,
And cellars where the water-rats do swim.
For us green paths, refreshtby frequent rain.
For them dark alleys where the dust lies grim.
Not doomed by us to this appointed pain :
God made us rich—them poor—then why do you complain ?”
Such was the Parish of which Dr. Chalmers constituted himself
the Bishop; and such his Cure of Souls. “Of souls, indeed !” People
said they were swine, and counselled the Doctor not to cast his
precious pearls before them. And to tell the truth, it did seem a rash
and hazardous experiment. Rash, —not because it was an attempt at
saving these Chief Sinners, but because it was set up as a testing ex-
periment —wherein the Gospel was to be put upon open, almost
ostentatious, trial, and its unexhausted power to save men—all
sorts of men, from the* negatively bad down to the most
flagrantly base —was to be proved. Would it not have been better
to worked quietly on, and waited patiently for the Lord; and
then, when the face of the Parish had been washed from its filthiness,
and the workers of iniquity had been turned into workers of righteous-
ncss_time enough then to have asked the world to come and see what
wonders God had wrought among them. Further —and this was a
formidable objection—was it not the fact that there were half-a-dozen
churches within half-a-mile of the Westport, to which the people
would be welcome if they chose to enter them ? The Westport was
already under the pastoral care of the Established Church. It was
part of Greyfriars Parish, whose minister and kirk session were bound
to care for it. If Dr. Chalmers’ appearance in it was not an intrusion,
it ought, at all events, to have been unnecessary. The Doctor knew
all this. But he knew, at the same time, that the people down in
these lanes and dens were in such a state of spiritual blindness and
lameness, and utter darkness, that they would never come to the feast


unless they were carried. Then he knew that the over-tasked and
truly excellent minister of Greyfriars—even although his elders were
willing to help him (which was not at all likely)—could not overtake
the carrying work. But as to the rashness of the experiment and the
d priori publication of it, and the attitude of patiently waiting for the
Lord —which he was counselled to maintain ; —well, the Doctor was
not pre-eminently a patient man. I have no doubt that he would have
stood still to see the salvation of the Lord, if he had been at the Red
Sea on that day. But he could not stand still to see the destruction
of the Devil in the Westport. And although I never conversed with
him upon this particular topic, I have no doubt that he found full
warrant for his methods in the opening day of the Church’s history.
He remembered that the disciples were commanded to “ wait for the
Promise of the Father;” and that kind of waiting he joyfully ob-
served. But he remembered likewise that they had been commanded
—no doubt to their amazement —to begin their mission in Jerusalem,
and to open the Kingdom of Heaven first to the red-handed crucifiers
of Christ—those “ biggest sinners of Jerusalem,” as John Bunyan calls
them. That, surely, was a daring experiment—with issues of in-
finitely more importance than this little venture in the Westport.
For if that first proclamation of the Gospel had been a failure, the
Light of the World would have been extinguished, and Christ would
have died in vain. And so, however solid and however putrid the
mass of corruption with which he had to deal, he believed in the power
of the Heavenly Light to penetrate it and of the Salt of Divine Grace
to purify it.
His methods and his machinery were as follows :
First, —He surrounded himself with a number of Christian men and
women, (about forty),—firm believers, like himself, in the power and
willingness of Christ to save unto the uttermost; and put into their
hands a little composition of his own, in which, after a friendly saluta-
tion to the people, he announced his intention of coming among them,
along with a few friends, for the purpose of helping those who wished
help to be better and do better than they were doing at present; and
intimated that as a first step a school was to be opened for their
children. The Visitors —who went forth two and two —carried this ad-
dress to every family in the Parish ; and these visits were repeated by
them weekly, until they had made some kind of acquaintance and ex-
cited some amount of interest among the people of their district.


Then —when sufficient interest or curiosity had been awakened —
Dr. Chalmers made his first appearance among them and addressed
them in the loft of a deserted tannery. And five days afterward —when
the school was opened in that same loft—to his delighted surprise
there appeared in the day school 65 scholars and at night 57—in
all 122.
The third step was the establishment of public worship. The tan-
loft was an uncouth sort of church. But the Doctor thought that the
praises of the poor and the prayers of the perishing would not be dis-
dained on that account. And so, six weeks after the opening of the
school he celebrated the worship of God in that dark basement story.
There were sympathising friends present on the occasion from the New
Town of Edinburgh, aud I have no doubt that there were present also
unseen visitors from the celestial world —joyful witnesses of this pathetic
and sublime celebration. These two institutions for the enlightenment
of old and young were set up in 1844, on the 6th November and
22nd December respectively.
The fourth, and most critical, operation was the selection and settle-
ment of a minister. And never did prayer for a suitable labourer get
more signal answer than when Mr. Tasker was sent by the Lord of the
Harvest into this field. He was ordained over the little flock now
gathered in the Westport in 1845.
Things prospered. A commodious church and school-house —
chiefly built with moneys from outside —superseded the tan-loft, and the
following parochial agencies gradually came into existence : —(1) Public
Library; (2) Penny Savings Bank —which came to have a thousand
pounds regularly on deposit; (3) A Washing House for Women;
(4) A Tenement for Working Men ; (5) A Lodging House for Single
Tradesmen and Travellers ; and (6) A Self-supporting Coffee House
and Reading Room. The latter was established by the Society for the
Suppression of Intemperance.
These were the wheels of this ecclesiastical machinery—skilfully
fitted into each other, and worked by a living human agency which
would have attracted little notice in the world, but which pro-
duced great results in the Kingdom of God. Dr. Chalmers never ceased
to watch over its progress with prayerful interest. “ Other works of his
hands,” said Mr. Tasker, “may have been more laboured at; none were
more prayed for.” It lets us into the depths of his feeling when we find
him in his study at Morningside pouring out such prayers as these :
“Give me the foretaste and the confident foresight of this great
Christian and moral triumph ere I die.” “ Moving fearlessly onward,


may I at last obtain such possession of the Westport that the Gospel of
Jesus Christ shall have the moral ascendancy over a good many of its
families. Thou surely hast not forbidden this enterprise, and therefore
will we ever pray that Thou mayest prosper and extend it. We would
give Thee no rest, O Lord, till Thou hast opened the windows of
Heaven and caused righteousness to run down the street like a river.
“ O my God, give me the power of ordering things aright in the West-
port. Let all be peace and harmony. Direct all my footsteps in that
undertaking, and may I more and more be made to abound in such
suggestions as Thy Spirit will prompt and approve of.
The Doctor’s Prayers and Hopes did not make him ashamed.
On the 19th February, 1847, little more than two years after the
commencement of the enterprise, he opened the church which, as above
mentioned, superseded the tan-loft. One hundred pounds had been
contributed towards it by the people of the Parish ; and when the
sittings were appropriated, 270 of the 360 applications came from
Westport. On the 25th April following he presided at the first com-
munion. There were 132 communicants, of whom one hundred be-
longed to the Parish. Eighty of them had never been at the communion
before, or it was so long ago that they had forgotten the meaning of the
ordinance. After that communion, when all his fears and hopes had
merged in this fruition of success, he wrote to his bountiful friend, Mr,
Lennox, of New York “ 1 wish to communicate what is to me the
most joyful event of my life. I have been intent for thirty years on the
completion of a territorial experiment, and I have now to bless God for
the consummation of it.” And in a similar strain of joyful contentment
he remarked to Mr. Tasker, “ I have now got the desire of my heart :
God has indeed heard my prayer, and I could now lay down my head
in peace and die” In less than six weeks after that utterance, that
noble head was lying still —on the pillow of death.
But the good work went on. The church which originally held
400 hearers had to be twice enlarged till its capacity was doubled ; and
I am not sure that it has not been recently replaced by another and still
larger edifice.
The educational results were not less striking. Seven years after the
school was opened the 122 scholars had grown into 400 ; and in 1859
the statement was put forth that there was not a child in the whole place
who ought to be at school who was not at school. In no other parish of
Scotland—in no other country in the world—could a similar statement


have been made. In that respect the Westport had risen from its
degradation into a proud and unapproachable pre-eminence.
And that whole apparatus—ecclesiastical and educational—had been
constructed and has been carried on without costing the State a penny —
unless, perhaps, the schools are now in receipt of a Government subsidy.
Neither has the congregation weighed heavily on the funds of the Free
Church. On the contrary, it has gradually risen from being an aid-
receiving to being an aid giving congregation. In 1862 its outgoings
were £6OO, of which sum £7O were contributed to missionary and other
charitable purposes. I don’t know how things stand with them now,
but I observe that last year they contributed £213 to the General
Sustentation Fund; and assuming that the dividend received by the
Minister was £lBO, the congregation gave a free contribution of over £3O to
the General Sustentation Fund. Turning to the published lists of the sums
collected for that fund by the fifty-three congregations of the Presbytery of
Edinburgh, I was surprised and delighted to find that the Westport,
which began at zero in 1845, had ascended to the very centre of the
scale—twenty-six of them had given more, twenty-six of them had given
Jess.
§ 3.
But where did the people get all this wealth? By what subtle
economics did Dr. Chalmers raise so many of them from abject poverty,
and turn thieves and beggars into public benefactors ? When people
heard of the reprobate character of his parishioners, they asked him
how, in all the world, these people were to get their living, if he cut them
off from their accustomed sources of supply ;—and they assured him that,
however much good money he might pour into that bottomless pit of the
Westport, no machinery of his would enable him to pump any out of it.
Now, it was an unconfessed object of his heart to exhibit in this
Westport experiment two favorite principles of his—the one, that of all
machinery for improving and elevating men that of the Christian Church
is not only the most efficacious, but also the most economical ; and the
other, that the best elevators of the poor are the poor themselves.
Acting upon these principles, he would not allow his visitors to be
almoners. On their first visit they announced that they were not come
to dispense charity, but to put the people in the way of doing better for
themselves and their families. Extreme cases of destitution were
reported and attended to through another channel. But although he had
strong scruples in giving money to the poor, he had none in taking money
from them. At first, moneys were brought into the Parish to start and


maintain religious ordinances ; but the people were not allowed to or-
get, even from the first, that it was their duty to sustain their own
church. And he was not ashamed to put even this matter before God,
and ask Him to make them understand their duty :—“ Cause the
poorest to take part in the fellowship of Christian work ; make them
willing in the day of Thy power, that abounding in all that is good, they
may abound in this grace also.”
Does it seem to you an extraordinary procedure that, while he was
going among the people with his own pockets buttoned up as it were,
he should try to persuade them to unbutton theirs ? If that seems
strange, it will seem stranger still that he succeeded. And if you wonder
how,—it was in this way :—When he opened the school, he told the
people that all respectable persons pay for what they get, and that, as
they were going to be respectable, they must begin by paying a penny a
week for each child sent to school. That was the first impost that he
levied ;—that was the first step on the road to respectability to which he
introduced them.
If you say that it was a cruel impost, and ask again where these
paupers were to get their school pence,—l don’t suppose that the Doctor
was particular in enquiring where they got them. But I can tell you
where one poor woman got hers. There is a class of women in Edin-
burgh who get an income—small, but steady, and largest when most
needed, in the dead of winter —from the sale of cinders, which they take
out of the ash-backets which line the streets of the New Town in the
early morning. There was a friend of mine, who had such a kindly feel-
ing for these poor Cinderellas, that she used to get out of her bed in the
dark, and, from her window in Drummond Place, used to throw down
tracts to them, and, in order to ensure the descent of these airy things
and also to ensure their being picked up, she put a penny in them.
This was indeed a violation of Dr. Chalmers’ principle. Nevertheless
that was Miss Elizabeth MakDougall’s practice*. One of this cinder-
sisterhood was a parishioner of Dr. Chalmers. She was struggling with
all the earnestness of a newly-kindled hope to make good her footing on
the first stage to respectability, by paying the weekly fee of a penny for
* She was the sister of an old and very estimable Governor of Australia, Sir
Thomas MakDougall Brisbane. He was sole proprietor of the beautiful Tweedside
Parish of MacKerston—which he would not suffer to be spoiled by the presence of a
public house. Hence there was not a drunkard in that parish. There was one man,
I believe, inclined to tipple ; but as the nearest dram shop was four miles off, he was
sober under compulsion, which I have no doubt he resented as an intolerable infringe-
ment of the liberty of the subject.


her unfathered child at school. And how do you think she accomplished
it ?By tacking on an additional hour—or rather, by prefixing one—to
her cinder-gathering. There was policy in putting it at the beginning
of her work rather than at the end. It placed her earliest in the field.
She got her pick of the ash-backets and the cream of the cinders !
I wish that all the lazy, lie-a-bed women in Australia would think on
this—the ignoble way in which that penny a week was gained, and the
noble use to which it was turned.
But you think it was cruel to make such a demand upon that poor
woman. Why, you say, is it not the fact that the people of Victoria—best
offpeopleinall the world —whose tradesmen earn 65., 10s., 15s. a day—
can’t pay for their children’s schooling ? How could that lonely pen-
niless woman do it ? —Dr. Chalmers did not think that it was cruel.
He thought that he was doing that woman a kindness when he made
her feel that, worthless as she was, she mightyetdoa most worthy deed.
It awakened in her heart a sensation of indescribable delight, as the belief
came home to her that now her child, whom she greatly loved, would
have a chance of growing up into a better and happier woman than
her mother. When the incident was related to him, the Doctor struck
his staff energetically upon the ground, and exclaimed, “ Give my
best respects to that cinder-woman.”
O woman, thou didst a good thing that thou knewest not, when thou
wentest forth in the chill morning to thy work. Thou madest glad the
heart of one of the wisest and best of men. And surely there must be
joy among the angels of God, as they witness the toils of a forlorn
woman, striving to lift her child out of the dust and ashes of her own
poor state, and to set her on a path of higher and holier well-doing.
Many similar stories might be told. The chronicles of the West-
port,—if they were written—would be found to be about the most
picturesque and extraordinary in existence. Here are two incidents
which Mr. Tasker related to my old congregation in Melrose in
1859
“ One day, at the commencement of ray work, I was visiting from
house to house. Door after door was slammed in my face. I said to
myself that if I was denied admittance at the next door I would go to
Dr. Chalmers and tell him that my heart was broken, —that I could
stand it no longer. But then came the fear that it would be so ; and
how could I tell the Doctor that I was a beaten soldier ? And yet
with this there was the curious feeling that I must keep my word to


myself. Very anxiously I knocked at the next door. It was opened
by a tall Irishman, without coat or waistcoat, but with a leathern apron
on. His hair looked as if it had never come in contact with brush or
comb.
‘ What do you want ? ’ he asked, holding the door a little bit open.
‘ I am calling at each house, to speak to the people about being
saved,’ I said, * and I would like very much to have a talk with you.’
‘ But we don’t belong to the same religion.’
‘ Indeed ! I thought there was only one true religion. So, if we
differ, one of us must be wrong, and the sooner we settle that the
better.’
* I mean we don’t belong to the same church.’
* Well, I know of only one true church.’
‘ Whether is 11,000 or 300 years the best ? ’
< That depends on circumstances. But what has that to do with
religion ? ’
* Our church is 11,000 years old : yours is only 300.’
‘ You are mistaken there, my friend —for the world is supposed to
be only 6000 years old. Who was your Pope before Adam f Besides,
I thought that St. Peter was your first Pope.’
The man then said, ‘ You seem a fine fellow: won’t you come in ? ’
‘ That is just what lam wishing—but you won’t open the door.’
The door was now opened to Mr. Tasker, and never was happier man
than he when he got fairly into that house. For it settled the difficulty
about his promise to himself. He was not a beaten soldier now.
With the good help of God he had beaten down this rough Irishman’s
resistance, and got within his house. And it was one of Dr. Chalmers’
maxims that the first step into a man’s heart is into a man’s house.
It was so here. That man began to study the Bible; then he attended
Mr. Tasker’s prayer-meetings; and at length became a member of the
church. The last 1 heard of him was, that he was a prosperous trades-
man in Dundee —employing twenty men—a consistent Christian and
an office-bearer of the church.
It was in the days of the tan-loft, —(this is the other incident), while
the congregation was still struggling into existence, that Mr. Tasker
missed a family from church that had been regularly attending. On
Monday morning he went in quest of the wandering sheep. He found
the mother of the family weeping at the fireside. Her husband earned
17s. a week. On the previous Saturday night he had got a fortnight’s


pay. He did not return that night, but was brought home at three
o’clock on Sunday morning by a policeman and two neighbours. He
ought to have had 84s. in his pocket. He had three halfpence.
He had spent 335. 10£d. in a drunken frolic, reserving three halfpence
for the sustentation of his family during the next fortnight. On Sunday
morning the woman had pawned her Sunday gown, and bought some
food. “I do not like pawning, and Ido not like Sunday trading,” Mr.
Tasker said ; but in such a case what could I say, but ‘ Lord, lead us
not into temptation’ ? ” He sent one of the children for some meal
and coals, and set another to blow the fire, and put water in the pot.
When it was boiled he looked to the woman, expecting her to rise and
make the porridge. The heart-broken creature could not move, so he set
to work to make it himself, and for the want of a better porridge-stick
be stirred it with the clean end of his walking-stick. While he was en-
gaged in this somewhat unclerical work, the man came into the room.
He understood the whole case at once. Covering his face with his
hands, he burst into tears—and, with bitter self-reproaches, entreated
Mr. Tasker to go away. Without a word, he took up his hat and left.
That was the turning point in the history of that family. They became
a godly household —rose into comfortable circumstances —and the two
eldest sons eventually became Doctors, one at Greenock, the other at
the Cape of Good Hope. How they climbed so high was in this way :
Dr, Douglas McLaggan (a brother of the Bishop) asked Mr. Tasker
for a sharp, honest boy, who would do what he was bid, to assist
him in his chemistry lecture room. The eldest son of this family was
recommended, and acquitted himself so well that Mr. Tasker was ap-
plied to by another medical man for such another sharp, honest, and
biddable boy; and the second son was recommended. The two brothers
won such favour with their masters, that they encouraged and assisted
them to prosecute their studies—gave them free tickets to the medical
classes, and made gentlemen of them, and Doctors to boot.
Now, I don’t say that all the families of the Westport Parish have
been reclaimed. Ido not say that all the debaucheries and vile ways
of the people have been abandoned. You will not expect me to say
that, when I tell you that when Mr. Tasker began his labours there
was a public house for every twenty families in the Westport. That is
to say, the Publicans’ District and the Christian Visitor’s District were
exactly co-extensive. The Publican had twenty families to work upon
in the way of destroying them. The Christian Visitor had the same


number to work upon in the way of saving them. With conflicting
forces so equally matched it is little wonder that the victory was not a
complete one on either side. But here is a wonderful thing. Seven
years after Mr. Tasker’s advent —when his labours were beginning to
tell upon the habits of the people—they were becoming more industri-
ous, were making and saving more money;—in order to take advantage
of the economic improvement and to show what kind of countenance
and co-operation they were prepared to give to the work, the Licensing
Bench of the Old Town, with an infatuation and a wickedness which are
quite unaccountable—did make such additions to the public houses in
the Westport that there came to be one for every sixteen families. I
say, when I mention chat almost incredible fact, you will not expect me
to tell you that drunkenness, and profanity, and pauperism wholly
disappeared from the Westport. The marvel is, that with so many
gin-houses and open doors to hell, the whole blessed enterprize was not
blasted and every green leaf and fair blossom withered from the trees
righteousness. No ! the Westport did not grow into a garden of
Eden. How could it, with the Dramshop and the Devil so busily
at work? But it became a garden for all that —a garden that the
Lord hath blest, and which has produced some of the richest fruits
that ripened on the bosom of the Church during the first half of this
nineteenth century. The last fact, connected with its spiritual condi-
tion, which reached me was a significant one. Some years ago, when
a deep religious interest was pervading Scotland, Mr. Tasker found it
necessary—in order to prevent the awakening among his own people
from running into an unwholesome excitement, to break up the large
assemblies that came nightly to the church, and to distribute them
among the district meetings. To do this he required the assistance of
fifty men qualified to conduct such meetings : and we get a high estimate
of the spiritual state of the people and the fruitfulness of the work when
we learn that he found these fifty men within the congregation itself.
This Story suggests many thoughts. I shall respectfully submit a
few, for the consideration of all who are interested in the work of
God.
And, first, I protest, in the Name of God and of humanity, against
such places as the closes of the old-world cities being ever allowed to
come into existence in this large and good land. W T e must have no
Westports—no Glasgow Saltmarkets—no London St. Giles’s here.
We must not allow men. for greed of gain, to throw up those huge


piles, and to heap up men and women in them until they go to
putrefaction. And further, if we do not want to have a sunken popula-
tion, our wisdom is to see that there are no places under the ground
for men to sink to. If we make men live in the daylight and in decent
houses, it will go a great way to make them live in decent habits.
The gas lamp, Dr. Guthrie says, has made many a thievish corner
honest. And the sunlight will do as much. We must insist that all
houses of the poor shall be above ground, and shall be visited dai'y
by those healthfulest of all influences and best of all febrifuges—the
sweet air of heaven and the blessed sunshine.
In the second place, let me ask ray readers to come to a settled judg-
ment upon this “ Westport Experiment.” Dr. Chalmers hoped that it
might furnish an encouraging and imitable specimen of the true method
of dealing with the lapsed populations of our great cities. Ido notask
whether you consider it a success. The educational results testify to
that—and the sustained beneficence of the people testify to it. And minis-
ters, at least, will estimate the value of the last fact which I mentioned,
that, whereas at first the ten righteous men who would have saved
Sodom conld not be found, at last God’s demand for fifty men might
have been satisfied. Let me beg of you, then, to allow this picture of
territorial work to take deep hold of your mind, so that you may pro-
duce it in refutation of those who run down Home Mission work and
pronounce the Bible and the Christian Church to be effete and power-
less things, from which the world has nothing now to hope. It is even
possible that you may get a quickening impulse from it for your own
souls in the hour of despondency, Or you may get an inspiration of
hope for some poor wanderers, when you think of these outcasts
who were ready to perish—whose ways of living were as bad as
possible; and their likelihood of being saved as small as possible;
but many of whom are now adorning the doctrine of Christ by honest
and holy living, and some of whom have gone to their rest and are
even now walking with Christ in white.
In the third place, I entreat you to remember that the triumphant
success of this enterprise Mas not due to the magic of Dr. Chalmers’
name (you will never cast out devils by any other Name than that of
Chrift), but chiefly to the persistent, self-denying labours of Mr. Tasker.
He was not much to look at —a heavy, firmly-built man : strong-willed
and resolute—sagacious— earnest —kind-hearted and devout —a man
after the Doctor’s own heart. 1 recollect Alexander Smith, one of our
Scottish poets, once boasting that he M-as not going to wait upon this


world and be a servant of men. We have seen that Mr. Tasker
thought it no indignity—after the example of his Lord—to gird himself
to a homely piece of work and make a meal for some starving children.
And we have seen that that porridge-making of his did more for that
family than a thousand sermons would have done, or even a thousand
pounds. If that Westport garden has yielded good fruit to the glory of
God, it is due then, first, to the unceasing prayers of Dr. Chalmers, and
next to the unflagging labour of the humble, yet truly noble, WilUara
Tasker, But he could not have done the work single-handed ; and he
would not have allowed us to name him without referring to the
prayerful assiduities of his coadjutors, who performed the difficult, if
not repulsive, duties of District Visitors. Dr. Chalmers is at pains to
tell us how much he owed to the “ wheen judicious women,” who
assisted him in inaugurating the enterprise. And Mr. Tasker makes
similar acknowledgment to those who gave, not their time only to the
work, but the affections of pure and pious hearts, which drew them very
close to the people of their care. And he has told us with what thought-
fulness and tender love they strove to lift their poor brothers and
sisters from the dunghill, and to lead them into the fellowship of the
great family of God. One characteristic of these Christian workers
would surprise those of you who have taken up that district work
several times, and as many times have laid it down again, I mean the
constancy with which they kept at it year after year—till disabled by
death or some other inevitable cause. It would have astonished you to
hear how they talked of the people as if they belonged to them, and how
they treated them as if they were as much the creatures of God as
themselves—and entitled to as large a share of the unsearchable riches
of Christ. Why should we not have such persistent and perfectly
devoted workers and visitors here ? Why not Christian men and
women locating themselves among the poor, in order to operate upon
them by their presence and example, instead of by occssional visits —
as men and women of family and good estate are doing in London ?
May God in His g eat goodness give us a goodly company of such
loving, lowly-hearted workers.
In the fourth place, what an argument one might hold here with
statesmen, philanthropists, and all who are seeking with genuine
goodwill to serve the interests and heal the woes of humanity ;
an argument in regard to the most effective way -of recovering
the lost and raising them into the Light of God. You have
not, I dare say, forgotten the words which fell from Mr. Justice
Williams some months ago. After alluding to the remarkable


progress, which this century has seen, in the endeavour to fulfil the
great moral precept, “ Love thy neighbour,” and denouncing the
selfishness of those whose religion consists in the single effort to get
their own souls saved, he asked :—“ What, then, is the loftier and
nobler object which no* only makes life worth living, but which warms
and brightens life ? What is that Motive which may excite us to
think and reason, strive and labor, and act humanely and unselfishly,
with loving and willing minds ; which tends to make us bury self in
the vast vineyard of humanity ? It is this. By the best efforts of
our Reason, —by our honest and determined exertions by the willing
sacrifice of ourselves to minimise—and, wherever it be possible, to
eradicate—those moral and physical diseases and ailments which, on
every side and in every land, are weighing men down.”
These are noble words, and of incalculable value, if it can be
shown that there is a co-relation between words and deeds, so that
you can always, and at pleasure, convert the one into the other. I
have shown that under certain conditions the thing is possible ; that
in the case of the Westport the thing was done. These condi-
tions (which involve belief in Man’s Sin and God’s Salvation) Dr.
Chalmers accepted and worked under. Mr. Justice Williams rejects
them. And yet, you may ask, “ What higher motive could Dr,
Chalmers call into exercise than the Love of our Neighbour ? What
holier object than to lighten the sufferings of our fellow-men ? And
what more energetic and suitable means than the resolute purpose
of Reason at its best, and the self-devotion of hearts full of Charity ? ”
I reply, “ Suppose that a Doctor —looking only at what is visible
in your disease, and not looking at all at the hidden root—mistakes
its nature : is it any wonder that he misses the cure ? Mr. Justic*
Williams makes that fundamental mistake. He admits that men sin
against their fellow-men, but not against God. Dr. Chalmers held
that he must deal with his 2000 people, not as sufferers only—
but as sinners. For their sufferings, he believed that human sympathy
and gentle words and acts of kindusss could do much ; for their sins
and sinful hearts, next to nothing. And he never would have at-
tempted the experiment of the Westport, if God had not furnished
him with a remedy for man’s ruin—the Divine specific of Christ
and Him crucified.
But even in his ethics I humbly think Mr, Williams is at fault.
lam not sure that that love of onr neighbor—upon the remarkable
growth of which in these days he congratulates us—is altogether the
genuine thing, which both he and I would wish it to be. lam afraid


that it is, in part at least, the product of our refinement—running into
indolence, and aversion to give pain even where pain is due—that
softness which the London Spectator complains is creeping into the
strong fibre of our British manhood. Undoubtedly our modern
civilization is developing (with some glaring exceptions, such as
our brutal ncan-fights) the instincts of humanity. This is the case,
not only among Christian men, but among those also who have
fallen away from God, and who, although they may put the beautiful
Image of Christ upon their chimney-piece, refuse to acknowledge
Him as a Saviour to be supremely loved, and a Master to be unre-
servedly obeyed. But having discarded that Divine Object of Love,
they feel themselves bound to provide a substitute. And the substi-
tute which they offer us is Humanity ; —Humanity in its highest
types. We are to let our Love, and Reverence, and Worship go out
upon that. But I question whether there is any Love of our Neigh-
bor in that Religion of Humanity, My neighbor is not the man who
has risen to the highest summit of human excellence, but the man
who has fallen among thieves—who has been robbed and broken in
the place of dragons—and has become, it may be. a poor and very
loathsome creature. Will our Humanitarian friends pretend that
they can love a man like that ? They may pity him and stretch out
a helping hand to him—but will they love him ? If they retort,
that Christians cannot do it any more than they,—l shall not debate
that point. For —supposing that those kindly people, who made the
first approaches upon the wretchedness of the Westport, had found
the human motive failing them—they would, at the same time, have
found a higher and stronger motive coming,—not into existence, but
into conscious and energetic exercise. The Love of Christ would
have constrained them—and, after His - Divine example, and by the
aid of His loving Spirit, they would have opened their hearts to those
lost ones, whom He died to save. Here is the fatal defect in the
Humanitarian Creed. Men must have Something above them to love,
as well as Something beside them —a God in Heaven as well as a
Brother and Neighbor upon Earth. And this has not been withheld.
For before the commandment to love our neighbor, and above it,
stands the commandment to love God.—Not God in immensity—not
the unknown God ; but God in Christ. And he who tries to deprive
us of that noblest and dearest privilege, by putting God away from
us—outside the horizon of our knowledge, does us the same dis-
service, as he who should remove the blue dome of heaven from the
earth, with all its glory of sun, and moon, and stars, and should give


us, instead, a roof that we could touch,—low and flat; and should leave
us to such light as, by the best efforts of our Reason, we could extract
from our oil, and gas, and electricity.
But let us bring the matter to a test. Will Mr. Justice Williams
give us a practical example ot the regenerative power of his ethical
system ? Will he convert his noble words into still more noble
deeds, and show us how to bury ourselves in this vast vineyard of
Humanity ? Suppose he were to assume a waste portion of that
vineyard—say in Port Melbourne—and enter it at the head of some
forty fellow-workers—likeminded with himself in religious matters,
and sincerely anxious to assist him in overcoming the wickedness of
the place. He ought to have no difficulty in finding eager coadjutors,
if the growing love of our neighbour is a genuine, not a sentimental
thing; and no difficulty in finding a sufficient number of those like-
minded with himself, if, as we are assured, the overwhelming majority
of men of culture have given up their faith in the Divine Christ.
But how would he proceed with his work ? What substitutes would
he provide for the Church and its Sabbath services ; for the am-
bassador of Christ and his ministry of reconciliation, and his
messages of love? I would like exceedingly to hear His Honor
instructing his assistants on the methods and arguments they were
to employ. He could not tell them to begin with Dr. Chalmers’
argument, that respectable people always pay for what they get. and
therefore they must pay for their children’s schooling. For the
State, in its unwisdom, will not allow men Jhere to earn that badge
of respectability. Then, they must be warned to beware of stirring
up memories of olden times in the hearts of the fallen, lest these
should bring up the remembrance of parents who prayed for them,
and of other outworn superstitions—from which, let them be thank-
ful, they have escaped. And even when they appeal to their con-
sciences, they must be careful not to rely upon the Decalogue, or try
to convince them of sin as transgressors of any other law than the
law of the land—seeing that they have discarded the Bible, and have no
authoritative standard of Right and A\ rong by which to judge them.
Above all, they must not try to alarm them by the terrors of the
Judgment Day—nor to waken and soften them by the spectacle of
the Cross. The faithful saying, that “ Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners,” must not pass their lips—nor a single verse
of the Old, Old Story—nor that grandly-comforting word of God,
that “ the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth us from all sin.*’
And those poor souls that are covered with the shame and misery of


their wicked ways—they must speak no words of good cheer to
them; —no words of free forgiveness even to those that are broken in
their heart. But if not in that way, how are they to deal with these
forlorn creatures ? They are to reason with them. “ They have lived
worthless lives, and must suffer for it. They have been doing evil,
aud must eat the fruit of their own doings. That is Nature’s Law of
retribution, which can neither be arrested nor evaded. But although
they cannot touch the past, nor blot out one of those vile deeds that
trouble them —they can forget them all, and, breaking away from
their old habits, may start—if they will try it and will persist in it—
on a new and virtuous path.”
That is the Gospel of Reason —man’s only door of hope, and
of escape from the moral ailments which, all the world over, are
weighing men down—not men of low degree merely, but high men—
noblemen, we call them ; and are sinking them into the blackest
mire.
But who would not rather reason with God about his sins than
with the preachers of that poor gospel ? “ Come now, let us reason
together,” was God’s invitation to men, whom He had been charging
with deadly sins. And when the trembling culprits came out from
the trees of the garden in which they had been vainly hiding them-
selves —what did that Judge say to them ? What was the result of
the reasoning ?—A Divine sentence of condemnation ?—A Divine
promise of forgiveness for their scarlet sins, and a promise to wash
them whiter than snow, if they would submit to it, and would
wash themselves ; and put away the evil of their doings from before
His eyes, and cease to do evil and learn to do well.
0 when will men understand that in that very article in which
Rationalism glories, Christianity infinitely excels it. The distinction
between them is not that one is Reason and the other Unreason.
It is this ; that the one is of Earth and is full of darkness—the other
is of Heaven, and is full of Light; the one is the product of the
Human, —the other of the Divine Reason.
Is Christianity from Heaven or of men ? There is no question
as to its Existence, and no doubt about its wonderful History.
But men’s hearts are being searched, and Christendom divided, upon
the question of its Origin and its Author, Was Jesus Christ—the
Son of Man, also, and in very truth, the Son of God ? lam going to
speak to those who believe, and are sure that He was ; —who believe


that, although crucified in weakness, He was raised in power, and is
now set over all nations and kingdoms to do God’s will among them
upon Earth as it is done in Heaven—to build them up, or to cast
them down, as the jurisprudence of Heaven commands.
With all humility, but with all imaginable earnestness, let me
speak to the Christian people of Melbourne. They are often ad-
dressed upon topics of high civic and sanitary concern.—My topic
has an importance belonging to it which lifts it out of all comparison
with every other, and demands our deepest and most solemn atten-
tion. O that God would touch our hearts with something of that
unutterable pity which, in the sight of the rejoicing multitude, made
the Saviour weep when “ He beheld the city.”
Melbourne is rearing stately buildings —storey above storey,
going up into the heavens. But she is building a basement storey as
well ; which is growing wider and sinking deeper every year. Ido
not say—because I do not know—that, literally, there are any
underground houses, occupied by human beings. But, morally,
there are a great many—occupied by persons who are living in un-
wholesome ways ; hatching crimes; breeding vice ; propagating
disease and creating a foul atmosphere in the heart of the city,—
which will not be always kept there. Occupied, I say, by that sort
of persons, not owned by them. Who are their Owners ? Very
likely some well-to-do gentleman or lady living in the suburbs ; who
shudder at the recital of some brutal burglary or murder, of which they
read in this morning’s paper; not knowing that they were sharers in
the crime, inasmuch as it was committed by one of their tenants ;—not
knowing, because (this is their explanation) “ I leave all these
matters to my agent.”—As if that would clear them of responsibility
before God I If a householder lets his house to a thief—or lets it for
low and profligate uses—if he does that knowingly, he becomes a
partaker in the wicked things that are done in it and from it;—and
if he does not know the character of his agent, and through him the
character of his tenants, his ignorance is culpable—he ought to
know.
And then there are the Streets of Melbourne. We cannot prevent
men and women from living impure lives. But we can insist that
the streets shall be swept of the profligacy that flaunts itself there,
in the daylight as well as in the dark. Protestations against this
unblushing iniquity are coming from the Pulpit and the Press every
day. Still the evil goes on, till we are told to our face that “ the


vile things that are done in Melbourne exceed those that are done in
Paris.” This is a dismal outlook. The cry of Sodom which is
going up from our splendid capital may be unheeded by us —but
it will enter into the ears of the God of Heaven, and He will sweep
the city, if we will not, and purge it with fire.
Coaid we not anticipate the judgment of Heaven ? This may
be an unusual —but would it be an irrelevant —subject to engage the
attention of Her Majesty’s Ministers. If the government which they
administer is a Divine ordinance, it must have a higher function
than the care of Things. It must extend to men ; —not the good so
much, who need little guidance at its hands ; but the evil—the
fallen —the wicked-doers —who work such terrible mischief and loss
to the community. They may be very depraved persons indeed.
Yet they are God’s creatures —and the objects of His compassion.
And they are the subjects of our Queen —who has a pitiful woman’s
heart for them, am I would have them 1 ifted out of the mire if it is possible.
But if that is outside the province of the Government, this is not. They
can say to that most wretched class—who are at once the most cruelly
wronged, and the most cruel wrong-doers against our social well-
being,—that class whose very trade it is to spread loathsomeness and
ruin among the manhood of the city,—they can tell them that the
streets of Melbourne were not built to be doors and avenues to Hell,
and that, from this day forth, they must go out of Heaven’s sight,—
and ours.
It would be childish to say that this could not be done ; —it has
been done in Edinburgh ; and it would be still more childish to say
that no good would come of it. Whether Iniquity be made ashamed
or not, it is an unspeakable boon to the community when it is obliged
to hide its head.
But now, while the duty of repressing wickedness belongs to the
State, the duty of rescuing wicked men belongs to the Christian
Church. And, thank God, there are many Christian men doing
earnest work in Melbourne, for that end, just now. But they would
be the first to admit that larger and stronger forces must be brought
into the field, if the careless multitudes of this city are to be moved
out of their carelessness and brought to the feet of the Saviour. But
where are they to come from if not from the Churches of Melbourne ?
I may surely assume that not one of them will dispute Its responsi-
bility—will assert that it is not its brother’s keeper—or maintain that
a church can live in health, or live at all, if it lives unto itself. And
therefore I am encouraged to put this Story before them, and to ask—


if it would not be a good thing to try this experiment of the West-
port upon some of the spiritually destitute districts of the city. It
has been repeated in Edinburgh and Glasgow with very blessed
results. Why not repeat it here? Why should not each congregation
assume a low-lying district, and work it on Dr. Chalmers’ method
of territorial cultivation ? In which there are two main features :
First, concentration upon a definite and manageable locality; and
secondly, systematic and continuous work in it witli a definite aim ;
viz., to establish, in the heart of it, a House of God, holy and beautiful
in design and use, and a Man of God, who would be the people’s
F riend and loving Pastor. Why should not a dozen of those men
whom Melbourne has recently made rich—some of whom must be
even now considering in what best way they can acknowledge God’s
goodness, and give Him His Lordship of their unlooked-for wealth
why should not they set their hand to this work, and create a dozen
New Parishes in Melbourne ?
And let them carry it on in connection with their churches.
I know that some men distrust the churches. I do not wonder.
But our duty is, not to ignore either the- church or its pastorate,
which are gifts of Christ. If our church is sluggish, let us try to
stimulate it ; or if it is lukewarm, let us try to infuse some warm,
energetic life into it. And we can use no more powerful means than
en S a g* n g' its members in a vigorous work of well-doing for their
fellow-men.
In this work all the Churches of Melbourne should be one ; —one
for the purpose of arrangement, although not necessarily one in
subsequent action. For after the necessitous districts have been
discovered (and one ot the results of our Centennial Mission ought to
be the discovery of them) they may then be distributed among the
various churches, according to the capacity, and convenience, and
willingness 'of each. Each wdll then carry on its own segment of
the work on its own responsibility and after its own fashion. And
if a point of union is desired, it may be found in the Monthly Union
Prayer Meeting, at which the news of the work could be com-
municated, and special prayer asked for and offered.
I may be reminded here of certain wdse words which fell from the
late A. M. Henderson, of Collins-street Congregational Church, in
which he protested against the exaggerated and superior importance,
which some good men seemed to attach to work among the criminal
classes, as if their conversion were more eagerly to be sought for than
that of persons who, although within the pale of the church, are, even


by their own confession, not Christians indeed. With that radical
question I have nothing to do. I have told this Story—not to urge
the necessity, much less the superiority, of work among those who
are lying outside the churches, but simply to show that, when that
work is to be done, there is no more efficient way of doing it than
this territorial method, —with its organised band of Markers
sustained from month to month, and from year to year, in connection
with a Christian church which will feel itself committed to the work,
and will give C od no rest until He come and hless it.
Let no one say that such laborious and costly undertakings are
impossible to the Christians ot this nineteenth century.
Woe be to us if (hat is true.
For so w T e shall seal men in their unbelief; men who say that
Christ cannot he a living Saviour, because we treat him as if ho were
a dead one ; and contradict our magnificent beliefs by our mean and
sordid and selfish lives.
Oli I that God would rend the Heavens and come down. Ifow
would the mountains of difficulty melt at Ilis presence. And His
people, touched by His living Spirit, would spring to their feet with
the cry, *■ Lord, what wilt Thou have us to do ? ” —and would hasten
to join that great and ever-growing Brotherhood who, all the world
over, arc striving, with joyous self-devotion, to ring out the World’s
3lisery, and ring in the World’s Christ.
Geo. Mercer, Stationer, Printer, &c., Geelong.
