

fere
REPLY OF THE CHURCHES
ROME AND CANTERBURY.
iC,
BEING THE
Go*
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
Cbc Conarcss of Clnirtbes,
J A/ u o
lu connection with tlie
COUNCIL OF CHUECHES OF YICTOEIA,
1 )clivered at tlie Scots’ Church, Melbourne,
July 8, 1895,
THE PEESIDENT,
Rev. LLEWELYN 11. IVAN, 111, D.ll.
MELBOUENE:
T Y THEELEIGH & BAYNE, FEIN TEES & PUBLISH FES,
367 a Post-office Place West
18-95.




THE REPLY OF THE CHURCHES
ROME AND CANTERBURY.
Our age is notable for a very pronounced movement
throughout all parts of Christendom in the direction of Church
unity. The Reformation era was the birthtime of liberty. The
Individual became of account; and, as against both the State
and the Church, the liberties of each man in his own personality
have been asserted. Probably the individual never was so
free as he is to-day the world over, and especially in those
lands where the Reformation has gained its greatest triumphs.
The "development of individualism has become in some direc-
tions almost excessive, and a claim of rights was often over-
whelming, extinguishing the sense of the correlative duties.
Hence, while there has been the growth of the power and
privilege of the individual, there has revived a new sense of
community, of the fellowship into which all men enter by birth,
and of which the State and the Church are each expressions in
their respective spheres.
THE NEW SENSE OE SOCIETY.
Now, thus has arisen that very remarkable growth of the
communistic sentiment, on the secular side tending towards
Socialism, and on the spiritual side finding its expression in
the revived ecelesiasticism of the latter part of this century. It
is found in all the Churches. Rome has become aggressive in a
new sense of the term. The Anglican community has recovered
very much of corporate feeling, so that the so-called Churchman
is not merely a stickler for certain forms and rubrics, with a
strong dash of regard for worldly power and gain, but he has
endeavoured to develop a historic claim which almost equals that
of Rome for its continuity, and upon this bases the force of
ordinance and the energy of religion. The other Churches of
Christendom have all shown the revived feeling of the corporate
life of Christianity. The sense of the unbroken links with the
ages of the past expresses itself in hymn-book and psalter. In
some of the most radical of the Churches, you will find the most
catholic use of the methods of praise and forms of worship


while all the Churches are endeavouring to make their de-
nominational and general life more definite and orderly.
The movement in some cases takes the clear and practical
form of an endeavour to bring into closer harmony, and even
into organic union, the Churches which are, in fact, one, both
in doctrine and discipline, separated only because of some his-
torical event which exercises a ghostly power, even though it be
almost forgotten, or because of some institutional necessities
which have grown up in the' lapse of time. Thus, Presbyterian
union is being sought for in some of its more ancient seats, as it
has been secured to a great extent in this land. Methodist
union is almost at the point of realisation, and those numerous
bodies who would all regard John Wesley as father or grand-
father are endeavouring to find means of uniting their great
energetic forces. The magnificent meeting lately held this
city w-as a striking, a most Christian spectacle! Even the
necessarily separated communities of the Independents and the
Baptists are feeling after some more eonnexional fashion of
existence; and if they cannot secure union without sacrificing
liberty, they can at least come together in assemblies wdiich for
vastness of numbers and reach of influence, both individual and
Social, are w r orthy of the great histories of these tw r o spiritual
methods of church government.
But even these drawings together of the more closely
related Christian bodies do not seem to satisfy all the craving
of the spirit of the age for unity. Not only are the similar and
congener Churches seeking to join hands, but those communities,
the essence of whose eonnexional existence is absolutely different
in each case are endeavouring to find points of similarity and
bases of union by which they may join one another, if not to take
a new form and enter upon an absolutely united life, at least for
some of the purposes of the existence of the Churches, and their
common duties and activities.
SOME CHURCHES ALREADY FRATERNAL.
We do not propose to re-echo the criticism which sometimes
comes from lips that in all consistency should be closed, as to
the rivalries, and jealousies, and conflicts of the Churches of
Christendom; for, in the first place, the charge as made is
often not true. With the exception of the Eoman Catholics, the
Anglicans, and a few obscure and almost unknown Separatists,
the great Churches of Western Christendom are, except fer-
tile purposes of denominational life .and work, fairly in a common
fellowship of worship, doctrine, and effort. Omitting the close
communion Baptists, there is a complete unify of fellowship at
the table of the Lord. Presbyterians, Methodists, and Con-
gregation alists—using these, terms in their very widest sense—
are one at the communion table. Ministers of the different
Churches preside interchangeably. The tables are open to


members of other denominations, as to those of other Churches
or congregations in the sam'e denomination. The pulpit brother-
hood is complete, I might almost say universal. Given character
and orderly relationship of ministerial office, and there is no
barrier to the most perfect freedom of pulpit exchange. For
many purposes of social union, common ends of endeavour and
work, these Churches are united. Not one of them proclaims,
“The temple of the Lord are we.” No man says, “Forbid
them, Lord, for they follow not with us.” Critics of Church
separation and jealousy speak of what they do not know, and
the charges made are often untrue.
THEY MIGHT CO-OPERATE MORE.
At the same time, we are not blind to the evils which may
be found in our separate and divided condition. There is health
in rivalry; there may be an excess, which wounds the Master
in the house of His friends. The dearer interests of our own
denomination may intensify Christian zeal and quicken en-
deavour; they may also blind us to the larger circle of the
whole Church, and the claims of the whole brotherhood. All
human conditions have their peril; and the Church of Christ
must have its human as well as its Divine side, and there are
dangers .and evils which assuredly will come.
We immensely waste our powers, and multiply machinery.
We lose the impressiveness of a vast unity; and the world,
seeing the detached denominations, is unable to measure the
greatness of the Church. We can use neither men, nor wealth,
nor opportunities as we might if we could place them on the
vantage ground of all the Churches, and lend the help of
the mighty lift of an undivided Christendom. Now, often, to
summon all the Churches, "we must become unchurched, and the
union of all is secured only by the negation of each. A great
evangelist, a mighty preacher, a powerful institution, ought to
belong to all the Churches. There is much risk when they
find themselves compelled to declare that they belong to
none.
ALL REEL IT.
Hence the spirit of unity, which is undoubtedly abroad at
the present time. Each denomination is seeking to draw its
component or allied parts more closely together. In some direc-
tions there is considerable co-operation. The “ union of those who
love for the sake of those who suffer ” is more than a phrase. It
finds realisation and practical showing in some places. Councils
of Churches are formed, and give evidence that for some pur-
poses it is possible to bring together even the scattered frag-
ments of Christ’s Church, and weld them into a unity.
EVEN ROME AND CANTERBURY.
It is not, therefore, altogether strange that we should


find this desire for unity even in churches like those of
Canterbury and Some. Historic ae they are, and necessarily
governed by a historic spirit; they cannot fail to be in-
fluenced by the spirit of the age. No community can exist
with only a backward gaze. Finality belongs to the dead;
and the life which these churches have shown in modern
times compels them to enter into that mutual action and
reaction on the age which all other communions have ex-
perienced. It is, however, refreshing to find that earnest
thought is being directed by these churches towards the
other portions of Christendom, and that the language is that
of kindly affectionate interest, not that of commination and
judgment.
It will be within the memory of my audience here that
a few years ago a remarkable address was issued from Lam-
beth, expressing the desire of many of the leaders of the
Anglican Church for a reunion with the Christian bodies who
separated from her. It was not exactly an invitation,
but h was a project, a request, a kind of feeler as to the
possibility of reunion, and whether that reunion might not
be discussed, and a.basis suggested for its consideration. That
basis was virtually the recognition by the other Churches of
the historic Episcopate, _ presumably as the authority from
which would proceed ministerial order and church discipline.
But the interest awakened by this English movement is
not comparable to the attention directed to a later movement
proceeding from Some, and couched in the form of an
“Apostolic letter from the Pope to the English people,’' fol-
lowing an earlier address to the whole of Christendom, in-
viting the separated communities, and indeed all Churches
to the Eoman Church.
Before dealing with the material of these addresses,
there are some preliminary observations which must be
made.
THEIR KINDLY TONE.
In the first place, we, are bound to recognise the high
spiritual tone and L.e tender and affectionate character of
these movements. They are evidently dictated bj' a thoroughly
Christian spirit. Both the bishops of England and the Bishop
of Eome look forth upon the great world of Christian faith
and zeal and effort with sympathy and brotherliness. There
is no evidence of a proud and haughty and dictatorial tem-
per. The language used is that of true under-shepherds,
calling, as they believe, the flocks which have been separated
to those enclosures which they have been appointed to watch,
m the firm belief that they are the only true folds of the
Church. They recognise that the sheep, are Christ’s. Indeed,
in some cases there seems a willingness to allow of the


existence of the other folds, if only they are properly co-
organised and united with their own. The proposals, there-
fore, deserve respectful and sympathetic consideration. That
they should kindle controversy hot always edifying, how-
ever much it may interest or amuse the spectators, is
probably inevitable, but certainly it is not the object of those
who make them. They speak words of peace and affec-
tionate solicitude. Let our reply be equally kindly and
Christian.
LET US GO TO MEET THEM.
In the next place, I would say that in making a becoming
reply we ought to advance as far in the direction of Christian
brotherhood as our convictions and the conscientious consistency
of our position will allow. The possibility of an immediate
union upon the terms which would wholly satisfy any of the
communities does not require to be discussed for a moment.
But wdiat cannot be done to-day can be done to-morrow, or
perhaps the day after. In the past, neither England nor
Borne would have taken the positions occupied to-day. An
invitation to consider terms of union, an affectionate appeal
to fellow-Ohristians, with recognition of some Christian faith
and Christian standing, and a call to prayer, do not remind
us of the centuries of war and legal process, of the tyranny
of the magistrate, and the torture of the Grand Inquisitors,
We may regard the change in position. Perhaps we may
excuse the absence of any acknowledgment of change, cor-
dially as we should have welcomed it. Our fathers met force
with patience or strong resistance. Let us meet gentleness with
answering grace, and at least be willing to consider the posi-
tion. Perhaps when compelled to go a mile with our brother,
if we go with him twain, we win him with a better victory than
he who overcometh a strong city.
Let me briefly remind you of the Apostolic letter of the
Pope.
THE POPE TO ALL THE ENGLISH PEOPLE.
It is addressed, “To the -English people who seek the
kingdom of Christ in the unity of the faith, —Health and
peace in the Lord.” I presume that these words are ad-
dressed to all those English people who seek the kingdom
of Christ in the unity of the faith without any limitation of
the extent of these w T ords. It is not a letter to the faithful
of the Pope’s own Church. He speaks to all who love
Christ and look for his appearing. In the broadest sense of.
both soul and body of the Church, I presume His Holiness
would claim to be the supreme earthly pastor of all. Even
those wdio are not in the visible Church as he regards it
maj' be in the spiritual fellowship of which he would claim


to be chief earthly pastor; and therefore, when he addresses
the English people who sefck the kingdom of Christ in the
unity of the faith, the objects of his address cannot all be
found within the Roman communion.
One of the subjects which moves the Pope to gratitude
is the prolongation of his life so that he has been enabled
to make an endeavour in the direction of the reunion of
Christendom, and he invites all Englishmen who glory in
the Christian name to this same work, and especially for
this end to lift up their hearts to God together with the
supreme Pontiff himself.
He briefly refers to the “love and care for England”
which has been manifested “by the Roman Pontiffs,” from
the days of the Great Gregory and the mission of St.
Augustine. We will not now raise the historic question as
to whether Christianity was conveyed to Britain by this
Roman mission or whether there was not already in the
island a Church of considerable power and learning and
influence. Neither will wb look too critically upon the in-
heritance of Gregory’s love and solicitude by the Pontiffs
who succeeded him; nor into the -wholeness of devotion
with which the English race regarded the centre of Christian
unity divinely constituted in the Roman bishops. We avoid
the tempests of controversy when we seek to breathe the air
of Christian union. We give thanks for the “love and care”
which the present successor of the great Gregory is exhibiting
for our nation. May it never decline, and change only to
increase !
We must certainly agree with the Pope when he says
that in the sixteenth century England was “ wrenched from
communion ” with the Apostolic See; but whether that be-
reft her of the holy faith or not we shall not be so inclined
to acknowledge until -we have compared the state of Eng-
land’s religion succeeding that great dismemberment with the
religion of nations which continued in the Roman fellowship.
But here again we fear we enter upon the regions of de-
bate.
That the predecessors of the good Pope, under the try r-
ing circumstances of the Reformation, should have felt that
the best thing which they could do would be to urge the
faithful to special prayer for Divine compassion upon Eng-
land, is happy and pleasing information to those who have
themselves often engaged in prayer on behalf of the people
still allied to the Roman Church. And it may be that the
better spirit manifested in these later days, both by Protes-
tants and Romanists, is the answer which Heaven has vouch-
safed to the prayers of both—an answer which, like many
of Heaven’s answers, is not Exactly what the offerers of the
prayers expected, but what proves to be a great deal better


than their thoughts or desires, seeing that it is the reply to
foolish children’s asking by a Father all wise and good.
God’s pity on Borne, God’s compassion on England, are not
to be interpreted by the intentions of those who pray, but
are to be largely learned by the lessons of the Divine
granting.
ENGLISH CONVERSIONS.
It is natural that the Pope should regard the conver-
sions to Borne which are continual]}' occurring among some
classes of English people as an answer to the prayers which
have been specially offered for the return of England to the
Roman Church. But we are inclined to think that the sig-
nificance of these conversions is greatly over-estimated. Apart
from the fact that the eminence and influence of the con-
verts, with a few notable exceptions, are not very clear, and
that even in the ease of these exceptions themselves their
real influence of the ecclesiastical kind largely ceased on
their conversion, what we surmise is the fact is that the
“wonderful drawing of hearts and minds towards Catholic
faith and practice ” does not imply a drawing towards that
form of Catholic faith and practice which belongs to Borne,
but rather a willingness to relax the specific forms and
habitudes which shut out many of the Protestant Churches
from certain Christian modes perhaps of thought as well as
rite, and thus to admit some things which Pome professed or
practised, without for a moment approaching that thought or
action against which these Churches protest as strongly as
ever.
GROWING MORE CATHOLIC, NOT MORE ROMAN.
Let us, for example, take the relation of the so-called
free Churches of England to liturgical forms and to more or-
nate worship. I do not know whether the term Catholic may
be severely applied to these characteristics; but, ■ granting
that some of them belong to the larger forms of Church life
which constitute Christendom, we may say that in these re-
spects England has become more Catholic. Our fathers would
have deeply resented the symbolic architecture, the painted
window, the Gregorian chant, and probably some of the wider
interpretations of the ordinances which are found amongst us.
But we are no nearer the hierarchy, the sacerdotal claims,
the doctrines of indulgence, masses for the dead, the abuse of
respect for Mary, or honour to the saints. If the Holy Father
by Catholic means Roman, I think he greatly misreads the
significance of the changed opinions of the English people. If
by Catholic is meant a more generous and sympathetic spirit
in relation to some of those things against which the early
Protestants most powerfully reacted, it is true there is a


Catholic revival, a Catholic '-movement; hut it does not mean
the approach to that Ultramontane Church which Rome
lias become since Tridentian times.
FOR ALL MERCIES,
The Pope is much encouraged by the manifestation of
God’s mercy to England, and he is filled with hopes of a still
larger blessing when “the Word of the Lord may run and
be glorified.” What this may mean exactly in the mind of
the Roman bishop we cannot tell; but we know' how r English
Christians understand the running of the Di/ine Word. It is
an appropriate phrase for the freedom of the Scriptures which
England has so long enjoyed, and which the Pope’s own laud
is now beginning to understand, but certainly not through the
action of the Pope’s own Church. And the legislative and
other measures which aim at the amelioration of the people,
and which give effect to the laws of justice and charity which
receive the generous recognition of the Pope —it is hard to
discover how they tend towards any Romanising of English
life, though they may well be an answer to prayer for bless-
ing upon the nation, in which prayer doubtless many of the
ministers and people of the Roman communion have united.
We find it difficult also to understand how the social
questions of English life, the formation of benefit societies, the
development of popular education, the work of temperance
reform, the movement for social purity, and the elevation of
the position of woman, besides the proclamation of the rights
of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, as manifested in Eng-
land —and, we may say, among all the English-speaking
peoples —-can do anything but fill the good Pope’s heart with
grave misgivings as to the influence which his own Church
has exercised in such directions when compared to the Pro-
testant Churches of that island which lies so near his heart.
It would be an instructive contrast to lay England and the
daughters of England beside the nations who have devoted
themselves with an unbroken loyalty to the faith and practice
of Rome. Let Catholic Spain with South America tell her
story of social progress, and compare it with that of England
and North America and her colonies throughout the world.
Rome with the Protestant Churches around her is doing
noble service to humanity in many parts of the world ; but
Rome without those Churches looks upon nations which have
either revolted from her religion or have sunk into apathy
and sloth.
LET ITS TURN” TO HEAVEN,
And for all these blessings, together with those of the
Sunday and the Holy Scriptures, we turn, as the Pope most
devoutly bids us turn, to Heaven. We will take the Holy


Father’s language, and sa}' with him“ Our soul is raised
to the Origin of all power and the perennial Source of all
good things, to God our Heavenly Father most beneficent.”
These things have come from God. They are the gifts of
Him to Whom our fathers turned, claiming the right to seek
His presence with no intervening Mediator except the Lord
Jesus Christ, the only name of intercession and mediation
that we know ; and to Him we have sought for these bless-
ings, and they have come. If gifts and mercies and benefits
and grace be signs of the true Church, surety the true
Church has been among that English people to whom such
mercies have been given of God.
We are thankful to the Pope that he should invite the
English people to a continued and increased prayerfulness.
His reference to the words of Jesus is most apt. We
English-speaking people can never have too much of the
plain and direct Word of Scripture ; and we are inclined to
think that it is never so good as when it is given, as the
Pope himself gives it to us, undiluted by human inter-
pretation and unmixed with human authority.
SYMPATHY WITH THE POPE.
No one can read unmoved the pathetic reference which the
Holy Father proceeds to make to his own personal desires, and
especially to the time, which cannot be far distant, when he,
like all others, must render an account of his stewardship. The
Church of God is undoubtedly weakened by dissensions and
differences; but it has yet to be decided as to where is the chief
responsibility for the difference and the dissension. Suppose the
churches of the English-speaking world were to return to the
external unity of the Roman see—would that secure a real
spiritual unity? Would that stop the historical and the higher
critic? Would that teach the ignorant multitudes of Eoman
Catholic lands, or win to Christ and the Church the lapsed
masses of Protestant communities? Would that bring any
nearer to each other the child of the Covenanter, the descendant
of the English Puritan, the representatives of Georgian Epis-
copacy, or the admirers of the prelacy of Laud ? Protestantism,
it must be remembered, has its historic continuity, as well as the
Eoman or any of the pseudo Catholic communions ; and we have
our obligations to the immediate as well as to the more distant,
more uncertain past.
BUT WE CANNOT AOUEE.
I know not what may be the answer which those “ religious
and discreet men who sincerely labour much for reunion with
the Catholic Church ” will give to the Pope’s appeal. If they
are honestly convinced of the truth of the opinions and forms
which they hold and practise, their place, as consistent men,


will be within the Roman enclosure/ But lam sure that, how-
ever respectful and sympathetic may be the answer of the
Churches to the Pope’s appeal, it must be a firm negative. He
acknowledges difficulties —that the many changes that have
come about have caused the divisions to take deeper root; but
he does not give up hope of remedy, reconciliation, and peace.
Neither do any of us. But if there is to be reconciliation with
Rome, it must be remembered that Rome has changed, that we
refuse to recognise the catholicity of a Church which has been
administered for centuries by . a narrow college of Italian ec-
clesiastics, without the knowledge or the Sympathy which has
sometimes breathed in the heart of her greater leaders, and
seems to animate the spirit of the /present occupant of St. Peter’s
chair.
LOYALTY TO CHRIST AND HIS WORD.
For us union with Rome means disloyalty to Jesus Christ,
the Lord alike of Pontiff and humblest member of the most
unknown communion. We ask, Where is the Church? but we
cannot answer. Where are Roman rule and order, for there were
Churches which Rome herself recognised before she claimed
supremacy, and there was a Church before the Roman. Where
Christ is,' there is the Church, We reply. And to deny our
Churches and to join the Roman Church would be to deny the
Master’s presence with our fathers, and the Master’s presence so
often testified among ourselves. Peter denied the Lord, when
hard pressed. We cannot, though it be Peter’s successor who
bids us.
Neither can we be disloyal to the Word of God, which,
since we had less of Rome, we have had much more plainly
opened, and much more widely spread, as, indeed, the good
Pope himself acknowledges. We fear we should have to bring
many Ro nan ways, and teachings to the touchstone of that
Word of God-; and we have ‘grown familiar with our fathers’
method, and our own, and, as we read, the method of the folk
whom the Apostles themselves commended, to wit, searching
the Scriptures for themselves to see how men's sayings and
doings comported with the Book. We fear, therefore, we
should come ill by some of the matters that Rome would bid us'
accept. We should be a questioning, and a doubting, and a
disputatious part of the flock, and we fear the signs of unity
(even if indeed they now exist) would be altogether wanting
in that new-formed Roman Christendom.
NON POSSUMUS.
No, the answer which we make to Rome is possumus.
But perhaps time, and the age spirit, and the power of the very
prayer to which the Pope invites us, and which, without invita-
tion even, we trust we have not forgotten, may be working


changes that shall surprise all men yet. Ido not think we have
seen the last change in the Roman Church It is said she
never changes. She says so of herself. History tells a very
different story, and the future may reveal to us" a yet greatly
changed Rome. It is much that this great communion is called
to pray and not to curse, and that the call to prayer should be
extended to all. And, moreover, we greatlj'commend the Pope’s
counsel that all causes of offence should be avoided, and that
none of us, not even high ecclesiastics of Rome or elsewhere,
should suffer ourselves to be wanting in anything that pertains
to the grace and the fruit of prayer, such as, I presume, the ab-
staining from false witness against our neighbour, and the other
un-Christly things that often arise in controversy, from which,
with God’s grace, we will abstain. Perhaps to us, accustomed
to very different forms of prayer,' wherein we directly appeal to
God our Father and the Lord Jesrus Christ, the suggested prayer
of the Pope may seem strange and indirect, with a roundabout
appeal for help to various saints and to the holy Mother. But
we will not trouble about form. The reality is that we all should
pray.
STILL LET US PEAY.
And this is a great gain. Christendom united in prayer is
a new scene for the historian ; and, as we have said, who knows
what may ensue f There are none of us who are unwilling to
give honour to the venerable Churches. And when they purge
them of their errors, when they lay aside their pride, their
haughty claims, their prerogatives which are disloyal to the
Supreme Sovereign and hurtful to mankind, there are some of
us at least, and by that time, I doubt not, all of our Churches,
who will be willing to give the honour and respect which
greatness and holy service and hoary age may rightfully
demand, and will secure such co-operation and loving Christian
fellowship as will bring in the kingdom and glorify the Lord.
This, then, is our answer to Rome. We thank her for the
gracious words of her chief pastor. They fall fittingly from the
lips of so illustrious a scholar, so pious a man. As they invite
us to unity with Rome, we answer, No! we cannot. But as they
bid us pray, we heartily consent. We pray that all errors may
be taken away; that every cause of separation everywhere may
be removed ; and we go further, and say that we are prepared,
by charity, by justice, by liberty, by courteous fellowship so far
as we can go, to co-operate in all good words and works. We
believe in a more real unity, more akin to that for which the
Lord Himself prayed, than any external unity of creed and
identity of rite.
CANTERBURY.
And to the appeal of Canterbury our answer must be not


altogether different,’ though there are some circumstances
which make external unity in this case to he different from that
with Rome. The chasm which separates us is not so deep and
wide. Many of the historic and social conditions of all the
churches here concerned are alike. Perhaps if both sides would
yield a little there might be some prospect of union, if not unity.
The differences of the nearest are sometimes most repugnant.
Let us hope that it is not so here.
AUSTRALIAN’ BROTHERHOOD.
We have greatly desired the co-operation of our brethren
of the Episcopal form in our Council. We are so near to them,
we have such common interests, our brotherhood in Christ is so
evident, we so often do unite in social enterprises and at times in
religious objects, that we feel ourselves less blessed, less strong
by their absence from our midst. We look with envy at our
neighbours in New South Wales, whose Council has the Primate
for president; and we may truly say that it has not been any
fault of ours, even to the straining, as some may have thought,
of respect for our own position, which has held our Episcopal
brethren from taking part with us in our Council. We wait
patiently, with all fraternal and knidly sentiment.
ESTABLISHED.
But as to union with the Anglican Church in corporate
unity, how can some of our Churches, especially in England,
unite with a Church which, they hold, wrongs its spiritual
Head by its position as an establishment ? A free Epis-
copal' Church of England will invite the other churches
to unity with a much more powerful voice than one whose visible
head is the monarch, and the whole of whose spiritual life is
degraded and hindered by the secular alliance. Anglicans
entirely misunderstand the position occupied by the majority of
the free churches on this point. The objection to an establish-
ment is supposed to be its unfairness to those who are not
established, whereas the objection is to the secularization of a
spiritual community by such association in any form. Christ’s
Church is outraged in all its parts by the interference of the
State ; and until the Church be restored to the sole headship of
its Lord, all invitations to unity are futile.
BUT DIVIDED.
But there, is. another difficulty in acceding to the appeal
of Canterbury. What would be the real gain to the unity of
the Church of Christ if the Nonconformists were to return to the
Anglican fold ? Is the English Church such a home of union as
makes the invitation forceful 1 What is to be the rite which they
shall adopt ? What the character of their proposed service ?
Whose doctrine shall they accept ? How shall they teach their
children? There is no Church in the English speaking peoples to-


day which presents so torn, so diverse, so disunited an appearance
as the Anglican Church. The characteristics of our free,Churches,
though separate in their government (as one diocese or one
province might he separate from another), are incomparably
more homogeneous than those of the English Episcopal Churcn
in almost any quarter of the world. Our difficulty would be to
know to what party—we might almost say to what schism—
of that Church we should attach ourselves.
Some, I daresay, would find the so called historic episcopate
(discredited, let us remember, by some of the greatest authorities
of the Anglican Church), and even the three creeds, serious
difficulties. Others might be able, under certain conditions, to
accept these traditionary characteristics and accommodate them
to the new forms of a reunited fellowship ; hut I fear that the
historic and dogmatic difficulties are too many for the success of
anjdhing like an absorption of the rion-Episcopal Churches. Some
of them will feel, why should we be absorbed ? Is not our
ecclesiastical status as historic and more Scriptural than that
of the English Episcopal Church ? If we are going to sink all
other arguments in that of a historic episcopate, must we not go
farther, and has not Home the still stronger claim upon us ?
THE PRINCIPLES OF UNION.
In short, the position of union which the majority of the
English-speaking Christian peoples must adopt is that which
we represent to-day in our Council of Churches. And we are
glad to believe and hope that the changed relations of the
English Church in these colonies have removed some of
the difficulties which arise in England, and furnish, there-
fore, an opportunity of applying the principle of co-operation
with more facile and wider effect. Liberty of spiritual
fellowship must be recognised as one of the principles on which
our Church life depends. That cannot be sacrificed at invitation
of Pope or Prelate, Presbytery or Conference, Sjmod or Council.
But that liberty of fellowship involves also of co-opera-
tion. It demands from us, the recognition of the fraternity of
Churches. Thus in faithful loyalty to the Head of the Church,
and in brotherly recognition-of all who hold that Head, we unite.
We come as far as we can together. We share each other’s
services, we interchange each other’s ministries, we join in some
forms of Christian work without any mark of separate relation-
ship. We seek to come nearer to each other. If we can, we
destroy the things that separate us, apd we invite all who love
the Lord and who seek His kingdom to join with us.
May we hot ask, then, why should we join Pome or
England ? Is there not, in fact, in this mutual unity of ours a
more real Christian unity than can be externally defined or
maintained ? Where has been the increase of Christendom
in modern times ? Who have taught the ancient communions


their duty to the world, to the lost, to the real needs'" 'd perils
of the race ? We fearlessly answer, those Churches th_. will be
found in this free communion of Christian life and service.
Nothing has compelled us to this union but the love of Jesus
Christ shed abroad in our hearts ! And we await with faith and
hope, though often bitterly wounded, and cruelly repelled, the
coining of all who love Christ into this fellowship. We do not
define it. We do not thrust it forward. We will try to live it.
And we welcome all, Pope or Prelate, who will even go so far
as to pray with and for us. We must say yes to their call to
prayer, for it was for this the Master prayed —“ That they may
be one,” not in a false unity of homogeneous sameness, but in
that unity of the separate and the diverse which made
the eternal life of the blessed Trinity, the very differences
complementing each other and making up the harmony of the
perfect whole. “That the} - all maybe one, as Thou, Father,
art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may be one in Us.”
Tytherleigh and Bayne, Printers, 307 a Post-office Place W., Melbourne,
