

REPORT OF PROCEEDINCS
COMPLIMENTARY LUNCHEON
THENDERED TO
TENDERED TO
E. M. G. EDDY, ESQ.
WITH THE COMPLIMENTS
OF THE
BANQUET COMMITTEE








Report of Proceedings
IN CONNECTION WITH THE
COMPLIMENTARY LUNCHEON
TENDERED TO
E. M. G. EDDY. ESQ.,
CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF RAILWAYS
FOR
NEW SOUTH WALES,
SYDNEY, AUGUST 14, 1891.
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, GEORGE STREET.
1891.




COMPLIMENTARY LUNCHEON
TO
E. M. G. EDDY, ESQ.,
CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF RAILWAYS FOR NEW SOUTH
WALES.
Extract from Sydney Morning Herald,
July 30, 1891.
CT? OR some time past Mr. Eddy, the Chief Commissioner for
rf) Railways, has been periodically prostrated through over-
work. In the hope that a rest would act as a restorative,
the Chief Commissioner several months back made a short
tour through New Zealand, but the change produced only a tem-
porary improvement in his health. His medical advisers have,
therefore, to prevent serious consequences, peremptorily ordered
Mr. Eddy to take a long sea voyage and complete rest. The
Chief Commissioner has decided to obey this mandate by taking
a trip to England. Although the matter has not yet been brought
before the Cabinet, it is expected Mr. Eddy will leave Sydney for
London by the “ Orotava ” on her next homeward-bound voyage,
and remain from this colony until about the end of the current
year. At the present juncture he is reluctant to go away from the
scene of his arduous labours of the past three years. At the
same time, Mr. Eddy with confidence can leave the working of
the great department over which he presides in the hands of
Messrs. Fehon and Oliver, his brother Commissioners. It is
admitted on all sides that the railway system is now in efficient
working order, with every provision made for future public con-
venience and financial success. A large consignment of the long
required haulage power is to hand, better rolling-stock has been
supplied, and the permanent way has been greatly improved.
Some ten days hence the annual report of the Railway Commis-
sioners will be submitted to Parliament, and from what can be


gathered this document will team with statements of unexpected
successes The prediction of the late Colonial Treasurer, to the
effect that of profits for the past year would be obtained,
has been realised, and this will bring up the total profits earned
on railways and tramways since the Commissioners took office to
nearly ,£800,000, while for the three years preceding the change
of management the loss amounted to nearly £20,000.
Sydney Morning Herald, August 1, 1891.
As previously announced, Mr. E, M. G. Eddy, the Chief
Commissioner of New South Wales Railways, is about to pay a
brief visit to England. He has received from the Government
leave of absence for four months, during which time he hopes to
ensure complete restoration to health by absolute rest. Mr.
Eddy will leave Sydney by the R.M.S. “Orotava” on the 17th
inst. and proceed direct to England, reaching London about
the beginning of October. His stay in the old land will not
extend many days over a month, as he is booked to return b) the
(( Austral” early in November, and that vessel is timed to reach
Port Jackson between the 20th and 24th of next December. In
his journey home and back Mr. Eddy will be accompanied by
his wife. Miss Eddy will remain in Sydney.
MEETING AT SYDNEY CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE.
Sydney Morning Herald, August 11, 1891.
A numerously-attended meeting, called for the purpose of
deciding on some recognition being made of the services ot
Mr. E. M. G. Eddy, Chief Commissioner for Railways, on the
occasion of his departure for a trip to England, was held in the
Chamber of Commerce yesterday afternoon. Among those
present were the Hon. S. A. Joseph, Hon. G. H. ' Cox, Hon. P. A
King, Messrs. H. C. Fraser, S. Dickinson M. Gotthelf, Jas.
Inglis, M.L.A., J. L. Osborn, H. R. Smith, Alex. Wilson, C. H.
Hayes, J. Kilgour, E. Knox, John Keep, George Munro, W. J.
Weston," Thos. Buckland, E. Vickery, jun., J. H. Storey,
Brunton, A. Forbes Angus, John Woods, T H. Keigwm. J. M.
Sandy, T. H. Kelly, T. E. Joseph, and Henry Hudson
Apologies for non-attendance, and expressing sympathy with the
object of the meeting, were received from Hon. S. A. Step ,
Messrs. G. H. Reid, M.L.A., T. A. Dibbs, H. Gorman, A. A.


Dangar, Richard Jones, J. T. Walker, and others. The Hon.
S. A. Joseph moved, and the Hon. G. H. Cox seconded, the
following motion, which was warmly supported by several of those
present, and unanimously carried : —“ That this meeting is of
opinion that the eminent services rendered by Mr. E. M. G. Eddy
as Chief Commissioner of Railways in N. S. Wales are deserving
of some recognition, and that advantage be taken of his projected
trip to England to entertain him at a public luncheon, to be held
in the Town Hall at 1.30 p.m. on Friday, 14th instant.” The
following gentlemen were appointed a committee to carry out the
foregoing resolution : —Messrs. H. C. Fraser, A. Forbes Angus,
John Woods, George Munro, C. H. Hayes, John Keep, A.
Wilson. The Mayor will preside at the luncheon.
Sydney Morning Herald, August 14, 1891.
A complimentary luncheon to Mr. E. M. G. Eddy, Chief
Commissioner for Railways, will take place in the Town Hall
to-day. Gentlemen attending the luncheon are requested to
assemble at 1.15 to avoid delay. We are requested to announce
that no more tickets can be issued. Mr. Mathieson, Chief
Railway Commissioner for Queensland, arrived in Sydney last
night by the Northern express train. Mr. Speight, Chief Com-
missioner for Railways in Victoria, is due to reach Sydney about
noon to-day. It is understood that both gentlemen will attend
the public luncheon.
THE LUNCHEON.
The public luncheon to Mr. Eddy was given as arranged
in the Vestibule of the Sydney Town Hall—a noble apart-
ment—on Friday, August 14, 1891. Over 250 of the leading
business and professional men in the city attending as a practical
testimony of their appreciation of the value of the services
rendered by him to the colony in his capacity as its Chief Com-
missioner for Railways. The Sydney Daily Telegraph of the
following day said that “it was owing almost entirely to the
absence of more extensive accommodation that the gathering was
not much larger. The proceedings throughout were of the most
enthusiastic character. The Mayor (Mr. Manning) was in the
chair. On his right was the Premier, Sir Henry Parkes, and on
his left the late Minister for Railways, Mr. M'Millan. An address
was presented to the Chief Commissioner expressive of the high
regard in which he is personally held and acknowledging the


splendid work which he has accomplished in transforming and
reorganising, or, as Mr. M'Millan put it, re-creating the railway
service. The toast of the afternoon was proposed by Mr. M'Millan,
whose rising was the signal for an outburst of cheering such as
probably has not been heard at a similar gathering in the city for
years. Mr. Eddy, who seemed to be greatly affected by the
warmth of the proceedings, responded in a speech in which he
briefly sketched the more important features of the work which
the Commissioners have done since the administration of the
department was placed in their hands. He paid a tribute to the
loyalty and ability of his two colleagues, and added that from the
outset not a single difference of opinion had occurred among
them on any point affecting the management of the railways. ‘ I
trust,’ he said, in conclusion, c that before the end of the year I
shall be back again at my post full of renewed vigor and assisting
to make this great property yield the maximum amount of good
for the benefit of the country.’ ”
Full reports of the proceedings at the luncheon were published
in the Sydney Morning Heraid , Daily Telegraph , Australian Star,
Evening News , Echo , and other papers, from which the following
details have been principally obtained.
The vestibule of the Town Hall, where the luncheon took
place, proved inadequate to accommodate the whole of the guests,
and extra provision had to be made in the large hall. Over 250
tickets were allocated, and other applicants had to be refused.
To the right of the Chairman sat the Guest and Mr.
McMillan (ex-Treasurer and Minister of Railways), and to the
left Sir Henry Parkes. The other guests at the same table
included Sir Alfred Roberts, Mr. John Lackey, M.L.C., Mr.
S. A. Joseph, M.LC., Mr. Justice Stephen, Mr. Richard
Speight (Chairman of the Victorian Railway Commission), and
Mr. Mathieson (Chief Railway Commissioner for Queensland).
LIST OF GENTLEMEN PRESENT.
Appended is a fairly complete list of all who were present on
the occasion :
His Worship the Mayor (Alderman W. P. Manning), Mr. E. M.
G. Eddy (Chief Commissioner for New South Wales), Sir Henry
Parkes, G-C.M.G. (Premier), Messrs. C. N. J. Oliver (Commis-
sioner for Railways, New South Wales), W. M. Fehon (Commis-
sioner for Railways, New South Wales), R. Speight (Chairman of
the Victorian Railway Commissioners), J. Mathieson (Chairman of
the Queensland Railway Commissioners), M. Wiegand (City


Organist), the Hons. P. Gidley King, Richard Jones, S. A. Joseph,
C. J. Roberts, Charles Moore, Richard Hill, W. J. Trickett, H.
E. Kater, R. E. O’Connor, S. A. Stephen, A. J. Riley, E.
Vickery, Henry Mort, G. H. Cox, J. Lackey, John Smith and H.
C. Dangar, M’s.L.C, Messrs. C. J. Henty (Parbury, Henty and
Co.), A. W. Meeks (Gibbs, Bright and Co.), G. M. Merivale
(Gibbs, Bright and Co.), M. Baar, G. D. Mitchie (Pand and Co.),
W. C. Willis (T. and W. Willis), E. Chisholm (Brown and Co.),
C. B. Fairfax (,Sydney Morning Herald ) Robert Jackson (Har-
bottle, Alsop and Co.), H. Hudson (Hudson Brothers Limited),
T. H. Kelly, E. Wrench (Richardson and Wrench, Limited),
Louis Phillips (Moses Moss and Co.), E. M‘Donald (Federal
Bank), H R. Smith (Lorimer, Romer and Co.), E. W. Knox
(Colonial Sugar Co.), W. H. Rothe (Colonial Sugar Co.), J. F.
Burns, H. C. Fraser (President of the Sydney Chamber of Com-
merce), J. J. Weston, Francis E. Joseph (Montefiore, Joseph and
Co.), A. Forbes Angus, F. W. Jackson (Union Steamship
Company of New Zealand), J. Henderson (City Bank), A.
H. Collier, A. M. Severn, H. Harris (Harris and Ackman),
F. Adams (A.J.S. Bank), Fletcher Dixon (E.S. and A.C. Bank),
T. A. Dibbs (Commercial Bank), J. C. Remington (Mutual
Life Association), Captain Smith, J. O. Fairfax ( Sydney Morning
Herald ), E. A. Smith, E. P. Simpson (Johnson, Simpson and
Minter), Thomas Davis (R. Gray, Son and Co.), Alderman John
Taylor, James Martin, M.P., James Ewan (John Frazer and Co.),
W. Seward (Farmer and Co.), William McMillan, M.P., George
Munro (A. McArthur and Co.), Dr. Watson Munro, Messrs. H.
Wise (Government Savings Bank), Schofield (Lassetter and Co.,
Limited), C. C. Skarratt, H. Levy (Elliott Bros, and Co.), S.
Dickinson, G. A. Murray, C. A. Laurence (Laurence and
McLachlan), Richard Teece (A.M.P. Society), H. Minter (John-
son, Simpson and Minter), John Walker, C. J. Byrnes (Mount
Pleasant Coal Co.), C. H. Hayes (Secretary Sydney Exchange
Co.), Sir Alfred Roberts, Messrs. J. S. Mitchell (Tooth and Co.,
Limited), Henry Charles Mitchell (Secretary Sydney Chamber of
Commerce), Charles L. Cowper (Alfred Lamb and Co.), H. H.
Kingsbury, Professor Threlfall, Messrs. P. B. Elwell, L. A. Kim-
ball, Z. C. Rennie (New York Mutual Life Assurance Co.), T. A.
Underwood, G. Shrimpton, Thomas Rowe (Chairman Water and
Sewerage Board), E. Flood (Flood and Co.), H S. Bird, R. T.
Remington, W. Carrington, J. Simons, Captain Hesselton (Port
Jackson Steamship Co., Limited), Messrs. Alderman Dean, W. A.
Hutchinson, O. A. Ray son (Sydney Omnibus Co.), H. Badgery
(Pitt, Son and Badgery, Limited), James Brown, M. C. Cow-
lishaw (Cowlishaw Bros.), R. M. Pitt (Pitt, Son and Badgery,
Limited), J. Cameron (Mayor of Manly), J. Paxton, Thomas
Littlejohn (Scott, Henderson and Co.), T. F. Knox (Dalgety and


Co., Limited), W. Kilgour (Dalgety and Co., Limited), G. H.
Greene, Walter Hall, W. Curnow (Editor Sydney Morning Herald),
J. W. Johnson (Johnson, Simpson and Minter), A. Consett
Stephen (Stephen, Jacques and Stephen), W. Clark (Hill, Clark
and Co.), G. Maiden (Goldsbrough, Mort and Co,, Limited), A.
G. Milson (Union Mortgage and Agency Co.), G. S. Yuill (Orient
Steam Navigation Co.), Alexander McKellar, P. H. Osborne, J.
Rutledge, J. Wagner, A, Wilson (Alexander Wilson and Co,),
Thomas Buckland, J. B. C. Miles (Miles and Vane), James Burns
(Bums, Philp and Co., Limited), T. B. Lark (Lark Sons
and Co.), C. F. Stokes (R. Towns and Co.), G, H.
Reid, M.P., L. J. Harnett, C. J. Royle, E. C. Batt
(Batt, Rodd and Purves), George Downe, J. Wilmott (Wilmott
and Morgan), Morgan (Wilmott and Morgan), W. Friend (W.
S. Friend and Co.), H. S. Chipman, C. W. Long, J. H. Storey
(M. Metcalfe and Co.), J. W. Ferguson (Secretary Steamship
Owners’ Association), James McCabe (Partridge and McCabe),
R. J. Black (Jones and Black), J. M. Sandy (J. Sandy and Co.),
A. P. Bedford (Permanent Trustee Co.), C. Perry (W. Perry and
Co.), W. H. Perry (W. Perry and Co.), John Keep (John Keep
and Son), H. J. Lyell, J. S. Brunton (Brunton and Co.), R. Elvy
(Elvy and Co.), J. H. Keigwin, Captain Phillips, S. Daley, C.
H. Humphrey, Captain Eldred (Consul for Chili), W. A Cottee
(Australasian M. L. and A. Co.), A, Shannon, A. J. Sievers
(Dangar, Geyde and Co.), W. Laing, R. J. King (George King
and Co.), J. Duguid, T. R. Allt (North Coast S. N. Co.), W.
Smythe (H.M. Customs), R. Imray, P. N. Trebeck, A. J. Soutar,
L. P. Bain, James Milson, G. M. Pitt (Pitt, Son and Badgery),
W. Pritchard, W. Noakes, John Woods, W. J. Adams, J. N.
Vickers, R. Jones (Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Limited), W. A.
Greer, F. T. Lenehan (Talbot and Co.), W. M. Spear (Mount
Pleasant Coal Co.), R. G. Vallack (W. Gardiner and Co.),
Leonard Dodds, Charles Berghoff (Phipps, Turnbull and Co.),
A, R. Troup (Ford and Troup), A. J. Cape (Cape, Kent and
Gaden), J. T. Walker, G. S. Caird (Caird, Maxwell and Co.), M. J.
Macnamara (Macnamara and Nathan), J. Horbury Hunt (President
Institute of Architects), J. Roberts (Assets Realisation Co.), R. J.
Sheridan, Parry, Alexander, J. Inglis, M.P. (Vice-president Sydney
Chamber of Commerce), Samuel Cook, J. L. Osborne, W. Beau-
mont, H. Gorman (Hardie and Gorman), J. H. Geddes (Pas-
toralists’ Association), W. C. Watt (Gilchrist, Watt and Co.),
McDonald, J. R. Carey, J. E. Squier (Eastern Extension Tele-
graph Co.), F. R. McCabe (Osborne Wallsend Coal Co.), George
Hardie, Alderman Morgan, J. Carne, David Kirkcaldie, Alexander
Amos (A. and R. Amos), John Ahearn, R. P. Abbott, J. Harper,
J. J. Calvert, J. Angus, W. Monie, J. McElhone, Robert Carter
and H. McLachlan.


Before commencing the toast list, the Chairman announced
that he had received apologies from several gentlemen whom
business prevented from being present, namely, Messrs. F. A.
Brook, A. Brown, F. J. E. Holt, and R. H. D. White, M.L.C.
Mr. Alexander Brown wrote from Newcastle, as follows:
“ Kindly apologise for my absence, and say how much I regret
the circumstances which compel your guest to leave us for a short
period. I trust he will come back to us with his strength renewed.
As one of the commercial men in this city, I am delighted to bear
testimony to the capable administration of the Railway Depart-
ment so far as it can possibly affect our welfare here, and whilst
respecting the large claims which Sydney has, Mr. Eddy has not
forgotten the important port of Newcastle.”
Mr. R. H. D. White telegraphed from the Queensland
Express, at Wallangarra : —“ Delighted public recognition of Mr.
Eddy’s services. Best man colony has seen for years. Kindly
apologise for my absence. Must be in Brisbane to-night.”
ADDRESS.
The Chairman then read the following address to Mr. Eddy.
The address was afterwards signed by the gentlemen present: —
We, the undersigned, desire to express our regret that the state of your
health necessitates a lengthened holiday to avert the permanent injury which
your constitution would sustain if you continued to carry on your arduous
duties. We desire to express our sympathy with you, and our hope that the sea
voyage which you contemplate may have the effect of permanently restoring
you to health. We are aware of the great difficulties that surround a man at
the head of so large a department as that under your control, and we would
testify our appreciation of the way in which you have discharged the duties of
your office, and of our keen sense of the advantages which have occurred, not
only to those who travel by the railways, but also to the community at large.
It is impossible for anyone in such a position as yours to avoid adverse criticism,
but we believe that you have the sympathy, support and approval of an
enormous majority of the people of New South Wales in your administration
of the Railway Department. We believe that your efforts have been directed
not only to conduct the railway traffic of the country to the benefit of the
country at large, but also that your public utterances, as well as your actions,
show that you have constantly endeavoured to ameliorate the position of the
large staff under your control, and to bring about that harmony amongst all
those employed in the Department which conduces largely to the effective
conduct of its business. We think the colony is to be congratulated on the
successful efforts of yourself and your colleagues, who have been mainly instru-
mental in bringing about the marked improvement that exists in the railways.
We need only point to the late returns to evidence the success which has
attended your administration financially. We trust that ere long you will
return to the colony invigorated in health, and that you may be able to follow
the lines that you have laid down for the administration and organisation of
your Department with the knowledge that your efforts in the past are highly
appreciated by the public, and with confidence that your management win be
productive of further good to the colony. (Cheers.)


TOASTS.
The Chairman proposed the loyal toasts.
The Chairman said : —I now call on Mr. M'Millan, the late
Minister for Railways, to propose “ Our Guest/’ (Cheers.)
SPEECH BY MR. McMILLAN, M.P.
Mr. M’Millan, who received an ovation on rising, said: I
have been asked, and I consider it a very high honour to have
been asked to propose the toast of Mr. Eddy, Chief Commissioner
of New South Wales. (Cheers.) It is always a difficult thing to
speak personally regarding a man in his ow r n presence, but if
there is any man in this community who has a right to speak of
Mr. Eddy, and regarding the great services he has rendered to
this country, it is I, as ex-Minister for Railways. (Cheers.) We
are here to-day to wish Mr. Eddy “ God speed ” in his voyage
home. We are here to-day to tell him that he has the confidence
of the great body of the people of this country. (Cheers.) We
are here to pray that the voyage may lead to the complete
restoration of his health, and that he may soon return restored
to his usual vigour to give the full scope and energy of his mind
to that great service upon which depends the prosperity, the
happiness, and the safety of the people of this country. (Loud
cheers.) If I were to describe Mr. Eddy in a few words I should
say this : Mr. Eddy is to my mind one of the most perfect types
of that class of Englishmen who in the Indian and Colonial
Empire of Great Britain have made their mark for administering
affairs and placing British civilisation in the van of the civilisations
of the world. (Hear, hear and protracted cheering.) Mr. Eddy
has all the characteristics of our race—labourious industry, quiet
power, and that sensitive courage which cares not to be seen,
which docs not parade itself —(hear, hear) but which, when duty,
honour, rectitude, are at stake will rather die than give way one
jot or tittle. (Cheers.) Now it has never been my practice,
during my short political career, to attempt to slander personally
the character of any man. I have as trenchantly and as vigourously
as my powers would permit attacked systems and institutions
which I believed were inimical to the best interests of this country.
(Hear, hear.) It is natural in referring to the services of Mr.
Eddy that we should also refer to the past; but in referring to
those services we do not attack any of Mr. Eddy’s predecessors
or any man in the community—we attack a vicious system, a
system which tried to carry on a commercial business by the
State but did not at the same time allow the full fling of com-
mercial principles. (Hear, hear.) When the railways of this


country began to extend into an enormous asset, meaning the
expenditure of thirty millions of money, Parliament awoke to the
fact that governmental control and political influence were
absolutely killing out this great asset of the State. (Cheers.)
There are certain businesses and services which affect the welfare
of the whole community. It is not right for any government or
any country to allow those services to get into the hands of
monopolists, but if the State takes upon itself to carry out what
are purely commercial transactions they must be carried out on
commercial principles. (Cheers.) I am glad to see here to-day
Sir Henry Parkes, the author of the Railway Act. (Loud cheers.)
That one Act placed to the legislative career of a Member of
Parliament would be great enough for any individual man. That
Act was so wisely drawn, and all its provisions for political non-
interference were so completely made that with the administration
of the present Government, and with the able men who are now
Commissioners, that Act has answered every purpose, and the
great evil of political interference and non-commercial control has
been absolutely done away with. (Hear, hear.) I consider that
the work of Mr, Eddy and his fellow Commissioners during the
last three years has been the work of giants. (Cheers.) It has
been a slander or a charge against this, as against every other
colony, that we have been borrowing money and throwing it into
the sea; but we can say now that out of 46 millions of borrowed
money, 36 millions, representing the great railway system of this
country, pay per cent. (Cheers.) Mr. Eddy and his fellow
Commissioners have not merely re-created the railway service, but
they have sustained and absolutely consolidated the credit of this
colony, (Cheers.) These are services of which no money
valuation can be made, and I congratulate Mr. Eddy, and I
congratulate his colleagues, that here in the midst of this capital
city of New South Wales all the best men are gathered together
to do honour to one who has fully deserved this tribute. (Cheers.)
Mr. Eddy need not be afraid of the future. (Hear, hear.) Mr.
Eddy, with his wonderful power of organisation and his wonder-
ful personal courage, is a man of a peculiarly sensitive nature
(hear, hear), and I know it is not merely the work of the railways,
it is not the brain power exercised over that work, but it is the
wear and tear on his truly sensitive nature of the thousand slanders
and the most horrible obstruction ever placed in the way of an
individual man in any community. (Prolonged cheering.) I have
done my best whilst I was administrative head of that great
Department to sustain him in this great struggle. (Cheers.) I
have told him, although my case does not apply, because I have
the hide of a rhinoceros (laughter)—l have told him that so long
as he has ninety per cent, of the people of this country at his back
he need not care for the wretched ten per cent, remaining. (Cheers.)


I ask you with all honour and in flowing bumpers to drink the
health of Mr. Eddy, Chief Commissioner of Railways for New
South Wales. (Loud Cheers.)
The toast was received with musical honours.
SPEECH BY MR. EDDY.
Mr. Eddy, on rising to respond was received with much
enthusiasm, the audience rising and repeatedly cheering. He
said : Mr. Mayor, Sir Henry Parkes, and gentlemen,—l am at a
loss to find words adequately to express my appreciation of the
magnificent testimony of approval with which you have received
the toast that Mr. M'Millan has so more than kindly proposed.
I cannot deny the fact that the labours of the past two or three
years have been very great and at the same time apparently almost
overwhelming (hear, hear), and therefore it is extremely gratifying
to have so emphatic a testimony of approval of the work accom-
plished as has been shown by the assembling together of such a
distinguished and representative gathering as this. (Cheers). I look
upon the honour you are doing me as a tribute to the success of
the Railway Act, an Act which I venture to assert will in days to
come be looked upon as one of the greatest Acts ever passed in
this country. (Cheers). It is an Act with which the names of Sir
Henry Parkes and Mr. M'Millan will always be associated. (Hear,
hear), the former as the father of the Act, and the latter as the
Minister who during the infancy of the Act defended the spirit,
and stood out for the acknowledgment of the spirit, of the statute
in places and in ways where the Railway Commissioners themselves
could not be seen or heard. (Hear, hear). I have had the good
fortune to have associated with me in the work of reorganising this
great system two of the ablest and most devoted colleagues that
could possibly have been appointed. (Cheers). From the first we
have worked together practically as one man to carry out success-
fully the policy we agreed upon when we first undertook our duties.
(Cheers). We have never swerved from the straight line of duty
in pushing on to the goal we set before us. (Cheers). And I can
proudly say that from the day we took office until now we have
not had the slightest difference of opinion on the board on any
subject. (Renewed cheers). We are also fortunate in getting
about us able officers to assist us in carrying out our work, and
are gradually strengthening the heads of departments with sub-
ordinate officers. (Hear, hear). This will also be a very great
element in the ultimate success of the railways. (Cheers.) We
initiated two years ago a system by which some of our most
promising young men are selected from the service and sent to
the broader schools of Europe and America to learn what is going


on there, so that when they return they may bring to bear the
knowledge which they have acquired elsewhere. (Cheers.) Pro-
gress is the result of comparison and of rivalry. Here we have
none of that great rivalry and competition which forces railways
to continuously progress in other countries—(hear, hear) —and
therefore it is difficult to infuse into thousands of men the idea
that there is something better and greater than they now see which
we must attain to. (Hear.) It is therefore necessary to have
an efficient and energetic staff of subordinate officers to push
our policy right through to the bottom of the service, (Cheers.)
Although much has been done during the past three years to
improve the facilities and increase the comfort given to travellers
on the railways, and also to improve the financial condition of the
property, yet I can assure you that there are no three men in the
colony who feel less satisfaction with the state of things as they are
to-day than the Railway Commissioners. We trust that the progress
the railways will make during the next three years will be such as to
cause you to feel even more satisfied with our administration of
your property than you are to-day. (Cheers.) lam sure that the
property if efficiently and wisely controlled will become of enormous
benefit to this country in every possible way, not only financially,
but also in enabling our industries to be developed in such a way
that those countries where railway properties are controlled by
private companies will find it impossible to compete with us, where
our railways are worked simply for the benefit of those who use
them. I trust that during the remainder of our term we shall be
able to work the system to such a state of perfection that in what-
ever part of the world you may be travelling you will be able to
speak with pride of “ Our Railways.” (Cheers.) Until such a
state of things does exist you may depend upon it that the Railway
Commissioners will not be satisfied. The generous approval which
you have so spontaneously given to-day will be a greater incentive
to us to push on boldly and persistently with the same policy we
have pursued up to to-day. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, I thank you
again most sincerely and from the bottom of my heart for the
generous tribute you have given to me. I trust that before the
end of the year you will see me again at my post full of renewed
vigour, assisting to make this great property do the maximum
amount of good it can for the benefit of the colony. (Much
cheering.)
SPEECH BY SIR HENRY PARKES,
G.C.M.G., M.P,
Sir Henry Parkes (who was received with cheers) said:—
Gentlemen, I have been asked to propose a toast which is not on
the programme, and I am very glad to accept the duty for more


than one reason. It will enable me to pay a well-merited compli-
ment to the gentleman who occupies the chair to-day, and it will
enable me to say a few words on the character and work of Mr.
Eddy. (Cheers.) I rise to ask you to drink the health of “ the
Chairman. (Cheers.) ”1 he city of Sydne) r has had many good
men in that great civic office, and I venture to say that the
citizens of this opulent and great city cannot set too high a value
on the office of its first magistrate. We have had many good
men in that office, but unless I am very short-sighted, we have
never had a more capable man than the present Mayor. (Cheers.)
He is not perhaps so ornamental a man as we have had, though
he is a very good type of manly presence. But he has a sagacity,
a faculty for civic business, and a sturdy manhood, which com-
bined make him an admirable type of the British or the
Australian Mayor. (Cheers.) lam sure you will drink his health
with enthusiasm as a great citizen filling a great office, and filling
it in a way which reflects credit on this great city. (Cheers.)
This company has met to pay a well-merited tribute to the Chief
Commissioner for Railways. (Cheers.) I claim to have made
the acquaintance of Mr. Eddy in a certain way before anybody
else in all Australia. Mr. Eddy will recollect—l have no doubt
he recollects it vividly—that he received letters from me before
he left England, and at different stages on his way here, in
which I told him of the adverse criticisms which he would
have to face; and in which I told him also that he need
not fear because the penalty he would have to pay in that
respect would be the common penalty of every person whoever
lived since the days of Adam and Eve who has had any ingredient
of character which fitted him for great, useful work. (Cheers.)
And I told him that he would find hosts of men to appreciate the
hard, but the honourable, because the useful, duty that lay before
him. (Hear, hear.) He arrived amongst us and I don’t suppose
that any man who has any conception of human character would
see Mr. Eddy and converse with him for ten minutes without
discovering that he was one of the men—few in all countries, few
at all times who, wherever he might be, would carve out for
himself an honourable place by the masterful performance of what
he believed to be his duty. (Cheers.) I for one, after much
observation and no limited acquaintance, do not regard Mr. Eddy
as a great railway expert, but I regard him as a man with many of
the elements of greatness in his character and who, in any walk of
life, could not be a mediocre or commonplace person. (Cheers.)
I am satisfied that this assemblage represents the whole of the intelli-
gence of the people of the country. (Hear, and laughter.) Don’t
et me be misunderstood. It does not represent the advocates
of avowed or unavowed jobbery and corruption ; it does not
represent the persons who desire to suborn the public service of


the country; it does not look to every opportunity and the filling of
every office as only the means of serving friends. (Hear, hear.)
It represents the reverse of that order of colonists, if they are to
be called colonists. This assemblage represents the citizens of
the country who desire to see the public service filled upon the
principle which does not consider whether the office is suitable
for the person but whether the person is suitable for the office.
(Hear, hear.) We have a gentleman conspicuous in the public
life of the country who is for ever saying that he has a stern and
sacred duty to perform. The true citizen understands what his
duty is without talking about it; and his duty is not to sanction
or tolerate any office in the public service unless it is absolutely
wanted in the interests of the country. (Hear.) And if it is
wanted he recognises that it is not to be filled to oblige the best
friend in the world, however nice he may be, but by the person
who, beyond question, is competent to perform the duty. (Hear.)
If that standard is right, then if we search the world over I do not
think this country could have been more fortunate than it has
been in the selection of Mr. Eddy. (Cheers.) And, considering
the magnitude of our railway works, and considering the value to
every individual of the population of having those railways well
administered, the man who devotes high capacity to their admin-
istration with the only object of serving the country, and to make
those railways valuable, first in bringing out the utmost amount of
accommodation for the whole of the people of the country, and
also the best return to the Public Treasury—the man who does
that is a servant to this young Commonwealth whose services are
beyond all high price. (Cheers.) It is because I hold that high
appreciation of this great public servant that I have come here,
and I never go to any place of this kind now without great incon-
venience. And I have come here to bear my testimony, as in
duty bound, to the high merits of a most distinguished servant of
this country. (Cheers.) Returning now, after wishing Mr. Eddy
and his wife a pleasant journey to the Old World where, depend
upon it, his short sojourn will be turned to good account for us—<
(cheers) —and wishing them a still happier return to our shores ;
wishing him and that lady all imaginable blessings during their
absence, I must return to His Worship the Mayor. I was afraid
he might be forgotten in the effulgence of the glories of Mr. Eddy ;
and I must ask you now to try and gather up your worldly spirits
to fill your glasses and toast the Right Worshipful the Mayor of
Sydney. (Cheers.)
REPLY BY THE MAYOR.
The Mayor in reply said : Gentlemen, I am grateful to you
for the manner in which you have honored me to-day, notwith*


standing the very humorous way in which the toast was presented
to you, I do indeed think it an honour to preside here to-day
over a luncheon attended by so many influential gentlemen who
are determined to recognise the real and great work of Mr. Eddy,
and I think I can find the greatest honor in presiding at a meeting
of this kind without your bothering at ail to drink my health.
Really, Mr. Eddy’s services have been so great as to compel every
one of the gentlemen present, as well as many who are unable to
be present, to the proper appreciation of them, I am sure the
advent of Mr. Eddy in London will be of much value to us.
(Hear, hear.) You must not forget that he will be able to speak
with authority upon our railways, and at this juncture he will be
able to show the financiers of Europe that we have in our railways
a valuable asset, and that it is paying us well. (Cheers.) I have
been requested, in saying these few words, to inform Mr. Eddy
that the gathering, large and influential as it is, could have been
made twice as large. The committee have had to refuse tickets
even to-day to gentlemen who wished to be present, and I think it
is advisable I should make you aware of that fact. I must again
thank you for the kind way in which you have toasted my health,
and at the same time would announce that a short organ recital
by Mr. Wiegand will take place in the Centennial Hall at the close
of the gathering, at which I invite you to be present. (Cheers.)
The proceedings terminated with three cheers for the Queen.
The company then adjourned to the Centennial Hall, where
a recital on the Grand Organ was specially given by Mr. Wiegand,
the City Organist.
PRESS COMMENTS.
Sydney Morning Her aid } August 15, 1891.
The terms of eulogy in which Mr. Eddy was spoken of at the
public luncheon given yesterday in his honour almost forbid any
further attempt to give expression to the estimation in which his
services are held. Such a testimony as he received rarely falls to
the lot of a public servant in these colonies, and it may be regarded
as unique in this, that it is recognition of a service rendered in
circumstances peculiarly involving a liability to become the object
of jealousy, hatred and resistance. Mr. Eddy took over a great
public service, already fully organised, but on a vicious principle;
a service not only employing many thousands of people in various
capacities, but one regarded as amenable to the wishes, if not the
control, of every man, woman, and child in the colony, from the
Prime Minister down to the taproom politician. He had not only


to wrest it out of the hands of all these, and face their chagrin,
but he had to shake it into shape, dropping out the incapables,
moving about the square pegs and the round pegs into their right
holes, and make the whole machinery go. He did it, and he lives ;
and the result speaks more eloquently for his capacity than even
the eloquent tongues that nearly exhausted the language of eulogy
at the banquet. That dismissed servants should rail at him, and
that politicians robbed of their influence over the railway adminis-
tration, and bound to please their hangers-on, should seek to worry
him, should have evoked the keenest opposition of some, are
the strongest evidence that Mr. Eddy and his brother Commis-
sioners have done their work honestly and well, and Mr. M'Millan
spoke the simple truth when he said “You have the sympathy,
support, and approval of an enormous majority of the people of
New South Wales in your administration of the Railway Depart-
ment.” Mr. Eddy must appreciate such a feeling; but if he
views the whole he should appreciate not a whit the less
the impotent spite that shows itself from time to time in attacks on
his system of administration. But while every praise is given to
Mr. Eddy, it should be remembered that circumstances have been
favourable to success. If not a boom, we have had a steady
ascending progress all the time; while in other colonies, in which
similar systems have been on their trial, they have generally had
depression ; and above all, Mr. Eddy has been singularly favoured
in having had from the first and throughout the staunch and
unswerving loyalty of a Minister of Railways who heartily seconded
every effort to rescue the railways from the power of political
influence. When we see the confusion wrought in one colony by
the coming into power of Ministers hostile to the administration
of the railways by their Commissioners, we can realise what we
owe to the firm help given by Mr. M'Millan to Mr. Eddy, and it
is no disparagement whatever to the unquestioned ability of our
Chief Commissioner and his colleagues when we say that in many
things they have been more happily circumstanced than their
fellows in the sister colonies. To have every penny expended on
our railways now returning a market rate of interest of per
cent.; to have been able to say of his colleagues that they have
never had one division in their meetings since they first came
together, and that “they are two of the ablest and most devoted
colleagues who could have been selected; ” and to have given
general satisfaction to the customers of the Government railways
these are memories that stand to make Mr. Eddy’s trip to England
a very pleasant one. And it ought to give piquancy to that
pleasure to know that he leaves a small knot of chagrined and
disappointed people here, who will worry themselves all the time
in trying to harrass or malign a system which he can now leave
with confidence to the safe keeping of the people till his return.


Sydney Daily Telegraph, August 15, 1891.
The enthusiasm displayed at the complimentary luncheon
tendered yesterday to Mr. Eddy on the eve of his departure for
a well-earned holiday must be highly gratifying to that gentleman.
It is a proof of the esteem with which he is personally regarded,
and the appreciation which his successful efforts to place our
railways upon a sound commercial footing has met with. It was
at the same time a disproof of the aspersions which have been
cast upon himself and his administration by a few interested
agitators and party wire-pullers. No man, perhaps, who has been
called to an important public position in this colony has been
subjected to such hostile criticism, or has had his actions and
motives so persistently misrepresented and maligned, as the Chief
Commissioner for Railways. Before the advent of the system
which gave him control of our most important public industrial
department, the railway service was largely and injuriously affected
by political influence.
Ihe fact that the railway service was becoming a happy
hunting-ground for the impecunious friends and relatives of
members of Parliament at last suggested the necessity for the
Railway Act, which took the power of giving appointments out
of political hands altogether. Such a course was sure to give
deep offence in some quarters. What Mr. Eddy and his fellow
Commissioners were required to do was to consider first, last and
always the interests of the public, and to hold themselves quite
beyond approach by the “ influential politician ” or the fussy
delegate of any trade organisation which sought to take the
management of the department in some degree into its own
hands. J hey have done this firmly and conscientiously amid a
chorus of deprecation from lobbyists and a torrent of abuse from
mob parasites.
Yesterday’s function was a more than sufficient answer to the
self-interested critics w r ho have lost no opportunity to discredit
Mr. Eddy. Ihe meeting which so heartily and unanimously did
him honour Avas thoroughly representative of the best public
intelligence and most stable progressiveness of the country. It
did not, as Sir Henry Parkes said, “represent the persons who
desired to suborn the public service.” It did not “ represent the
persons who looked to the policy of every office as nothing more
than a means of helping their personal friends.” It was an
emphatic declaration of the most convincing kind that in the
opinion of those present Mr. Eddy had during his tenure of
office more than satisfactorily discharged the trust reposed in him.
The eulogistic speech in which Mr. M £ Millan referred to the
guest of the occasion, and dwelt upon the manner in which he
had fulfilled the important duties assigned to him, was but an


echo of what has been said on more than one similar occasion
before. At the farewell dinner given to Mr. Eddy by prominent
British railway officials prior to his departure for this colony, the
highest encomiums were passed upon his capacity, firmness and
honesty of administration by those competent to speak both from
knowledge of the subject and of the man. The chairman,
Mr. Findlay, general manager of the London and North-western
Railway, with which company Mr. Eddy had been connected
before his appointment to the Caledonian Railway Company,
referred to the regret they had felt at losing his services, and the
general respect which was felt in railway circles for his character
and ability. Mr, Findlay, who was aptly described by our London
correspondent at the time as the “prince of English railway
managers,” detailed how by the sole title of special aptitude,
trustworthiness and untiring energy Mr. Eddy had possessed
himself of all the details of railway management, and worked
himself up from a subordinate position to one in the very front of
the British service. He congratulated New South Wales upon
having made such a choice, and declared it to be his belief that
no better man could be found for such a very responsible position.
In reporting a very lengthy interview with Mr. Eddy shortly after
his appointment to his present position, our London representa-
tive, after detailing the principal circumstances of the Chief
Commissioner’s connection with the railways of Great Britain,
expressed the opinion that he fully realised the importance and
responsibilities of his new field of work, and would prove equal
to its demands.
It hardly needed the congratulatory speeches of yesterday to
prove how that opinion has been verified. The railway and tram-
way reports of the past two years contain the most complete and
satisfactory verification of it that could be afforded. Out of the
comparative departmental chaos that formerly prevailed Mr. Eddy
and his associates have evolved order. They have succeeded in
increasing the general efficiency of the railway service in many
important respects, and have firmly maintained absolute indepen-
dence of political “ buttonholers ” and labour cliques, to the
great gain of the department and of the colony. Wherever it has
been found practicable freights have been reduced and increased
travelling and freight accommodation provided. Reform has been
vigorously instituted in almost every branch of the department and
carried so far as already to yield excellent results. Economy has
taken the place of wasteful expenditure, and strict system and
supervision of looseness and reckless management. The railway
and tramway services have been very palpably improved so far as
public convenience and revenue are concerned, while at the same
time the Commissioners have been enabled to raise the wage rate
and in other respects consider the wellbeing of their employes.


To-day, because of the reign of efficient administration which
began with the advent among us of Mr. Eddy, our railways and
tramways can in every respect compare most favourably with those
of the other colonies. No one acquainted with their past history
and their present condition and prospects will grudge the Chief
Commissioner his holiday or the kindly congratulations which have
been so lavishly accorded him.
Australian Star (Sydney), August 15,1891.
The Chief Commissioner of Railways received a great ovation
yesterday afternoon on the eve of his departure. And it was
deserved. We do not consider that his administration has been
faultless; but undoubtedly he has vastly improved our railway
system in every direction, and has turned his resources to the best
advantage. According to his statement yesterday, the Commis-
sioners are only at the commencement of their reforms. They
hope to make our railway management equal to any in the world,
and doubtless Mr. Eddy will gain some further hints during his
visit to England, although the English system is not equal to the
American. Scientific improvements progress so rapidly nowa-
days that, though Mr. Eddy has not been many years absent from
the old country, he will find many important changes in railway
affairs when he returns, and of these he will avail himself as far as
possible. He takes a holiday now for the benefit of his health,
and while it is to be hoped that he may be benefited we trust that
his absence will not be prolonged. He has a great deal of valuable
work yet to perform in New South Wales.
Sydney Echo, August 15, 1891.
The ovation which Mr. Eddy received on entering the Town
Hall yesterday showed that the gathering was no formal compli-
ment. There was heart in those ringing cheers.
Bon Voyage, Mr. Eddy !
May you return with renetved vigour to carry on the work
so ably begun.


Sydney Morning Herald, August 17, 1891.
Taking a general survey of the relations of Mr. Eddy to the
railways and the people of New South Wales, and the ovation
tendered him on Friday last, one is forcibly impressed with the
reflection how little the tongue of slander can do when the public
has the opportunity of forming a judgment for itself. Not that
by any means defamation is an impotent weapon. Men have
been written down and talked down, and persistent reiteration
has succeeded many a time in fixing impressions, vague or vivid,
that have been injurious in the last degree to reputation and use-
fulness. But let the public be only given opportunity for finding
the baselessness of such charges, and they are not only just but
generous in their vindication. The vituperation with which the
Chief Commissioner was assailed from shortly after his taking
charge of the railways is a matter of history. It arose in some
cases from a mere spirit of individual revenge ; in other and more
numerous cases it came from that unhappy spirit of political par-
tisanship which infests our public life, and which inspires men too
often to do the most unscrupulous things with the object of
damaging the position of opponents. But far more generally
than from either of these causes it arose from resentment against
that system itself of which Mr. Eddy was the embodiment and
exponent, and which had abridged the opportunity for wirepulling
and jobbery and corruption that had become as the bonne bouche
of Parliamentary life to a large class of politicians and their
clientele. These forces joining hands, or carrying on an indepen-
dent and guerilla kind of warfare, directed their attention to the
chief administrator of the new system, and pursued him with a
persistency that was worthy of the highest cause. Libels the
most atrocious, and in some cases at least, invested with a cir-
cumstantiality calculated to give them credibility, were hurled at
him; and through the press, from the platform and the stump, as
well as in private conversation, he was maligned with a virulence
such that, if a tithe of the charges had been resting on even a
shadow of truth, would have been fatal to the position of any
public officer. And what is the result? Most of the accusers
have become silent for very shame; a few who are not gifted with
that refinement of sentiment that restrains most people from
indecency continue to fire intermittent shots at the railway
management in Parliament; but the contest with the railway
administration has utterly collapsed, and the whole public is at
this hour impressed not less by the absolute purity that has
characterised the administration of the railways than by their
splendid financial success. Nothing could more strikingly show
the powerlessness of slander when the public, which is to be
moved by it, has the opportunity of seeing and judging for itself.


The demonstration on Friday, which was eminently representative
and accurately voiced the sentiments of the people of New South
Wales, was not only a recognition but a refutation, and one of
the wholesoraest lessons taught us in this whole affair is that no
public man, however bitterly he may be assailed, if he is only
right in his conduct and firm in his purpose, has any reason to
doubt the verdict of the people.
PRESENTATION BY RAILWAY OFFICIALS.
Sydney Morning Herald, August 18, 1891.
On Saturday afternoon Mr. Eddy was presented with an
address by Mr. H. M‘Lachlan, the Secretary for Railways, on
behalf of the principal officials in the service. The presentation
was made in Mr. Eddy’s rooms, there being at the ceremony
all the prominent officers. The terms of this address,
which, with the other referred to, was designed and executed at
the establishment of Mr. John Sands, were as follow:—
We regret that your untiring efforts and great devotion to duty in connec-
tion with your office as Chief Commissioner of the Railways and Tramways of
this colony have demanded a temporary relief from your arduous labours.
We cannot allow the opportunity to pass without expressing our thanks for
the many acts of kindness we have received, and the knowledge we have
gained in our official intercourse with you, and we heartily congratulate you
on the great success achieved by yourself and colleagues in the administration
of the affairs of the great department over which you preside. We earnestly
hope that you and your esteemed wife will derive much benefit from the
change, and that you will return to us with renewed health and vigour.
Mr. Eddy, in reply, said he appreciated the kindness of
his officials as highly as any compliment paid him in his life.
No doubt at times he had been compelled to speak severely, but
he was convinced that one and all were earnest in their
endeavours to work for the best interest of the department. As
a staff, his officers were as valuable and conscientious in their
duties as any in any public or private department, and he trusted
the kindly feeling that had hitherto marked their efforts would
continue to exist.
DEPARTURE FROM SYDNEY.
Sydney Morning Herald, August 18, 1691.
Mr. E. M. G. Eddy, the Chief Commissioner for Railways,
and Mrs. Eddy, left Sydney yesterday for a brief visit to the old
land, and their departure was the cause of a marked demonstra-


tion of goodwill and esteem by a large gathering of friends, who
assembled on the wharf and steamer to wish them a pleasant
voyage and safe return. For sometime before the “ Orotava ”
cast off, Mr. Eddy was engaged in hand-shaking with the chief
officials in his department and many representative citizens. Mrs.
Eddy was also surrounded by numerous lady friends, most of
whom brought as a parting token bouquets of flowers.
A few minutes before noon several gentlemen representing
the commercial interests of the city presented to Mr. Eddy a
handsomely illuminated address, which bore the signatures of
most of the members in the Legislative Council, many members
of the Legislative Assembly, and a large number of influential
citizens.
To this expression of goodwill Mr. Eddy made suitable
response.
When the boat left the wharf yesterday, cheers after cheers
were given for Mr. and Mrs. Eddy, and as the vessel slowly
steamed round the bend from Circular Quay the cheering and
waving of handkerchiefs were continued. The steamer “Ivy”
acted as consort to the “ Orotava ” as far as the heads, and on
board of her were most of the principal officials in the Railway
Department. As the ocean-going ship turned in a southerly
direction, parting cheers were given by those on board the “ Ivy,”
and acknowledged by Mr. and Mrs. Eddy from the hurricane
deck of the mailboat.






