

hv
,.r 11 could never
'Hi.
' f acrbure)
"ovt,,," —.
“ly and
*
t *~
ML J*L}
>c\ M •
MAIN POINTS OP POLICY.
"It to the maintenance the econm-ic balance. ~ that the Labur
Government is pledged, and,upofi the .pollcle'g"'tn^ertsure that maintenance,
the Government takes it stand.” Page 2.
"Australia’s relations with Britain to-day are,..firmly based... Never
has co-operation with Britain been more realistic or more cordially
reciprocal.” Page 7*
”... Australia must,in future,make a larger contribution towards the
defence of the British Commonwealth...and.*.the approach to a common
scheme of defence... should be by agreement between Britain,Australia,and
N Z.. , and related to those of the U.S.and other nations with possessions
in 'his area,” Page 3.
"The future nature, strength and organisation of the forces id
dominated by...scientific Y velopments...and.,,future methods of warfare
and 'organisation for it,” — Page U,
"The way to assure Australia the protection of a virile 'aerial defence
force.,,is to maintain an industrial organisation capable of producing
most modern aircraft.”
Page 5*
"...with the development of government factories and fostering of
commercial industries, Australia is seeking to'provide the widest
base for- . . he Empire in the P B cific. .* * the Government hen derided,..
that its munitions production policy woult ’Je designed so that conditions
which faced the country at the outbreak of World Je r 11 could- never
recur.” Page 19*
"A Bill will be presented...providing for the
Defence Production Commission...” Page 20,
establishment of a
"I cannot say more about it (guided
that a joint effort is being discussed
projectiles
wi&h the Br
20,
this
"The Government has reduced it (war
expenditure) substantial
year will reduce it much further. This year it can probably be cjit again
£1 50,000,000. "—Page 11.
reductions in direct and indirect
Page 11,
a wondrous commercial industrial
industry’s future... I ask all
"The Government Will make further
t ration as circumstances permit.”
" ,/e now stand on the threshold of
The Government is confident of
age- The Government is continent ot industry s tuture... i asm an
Australians to play their part. ..in increase productivity,” Page 16.
I "The States and the Commonwealth have endorsed the policy of
entralisation. . . We are seeking a balanced economic and defensive
1 velopment of industry.” Page 16.
” ..plans .contemplate that,whereas, i ,only 10 percent of the wool clip
19 j been processed in Australia,it will be raised to 20 percent,,. The
Go varnrrent ’ s plans contemplate spending £6oo*ooo annually on research
th :;t will improve textiles made from wool, U ” Page 18.
"The Gov rnment is proposing to spend £5>000,.0.00 in developing mineral
cesources,” - Page 18.
"Approval has been given to a post-war programme of, , , workc.... to cost
£A'rt , 000,000. ” Page 29.
"It is the Government’s policy to stabilise primary industry,"—Page 22.
"The Labor Government has endeavored to give effect to the long-expressed
wish of wheatgrowers for organised marketing. It has provided a
stabilisation plan..."—Page 2h.
"Exports (to Britain)... will be greater than the average of the three
years,l936-37 to 1938-39." Page 22.
"Norther steps in the progressive abolition of the means test,,,will
b taken...” Page 27.


M ,..the Government will push on with a national medical scheme
Page 28;
"We have regarded the housing of the .low-income earner as a social
service... But the Government is also a firm believer in home
ownership," Page 30.
"The Government is prepared to render.. *■ assistance in an inquiry by
the Court into the basic wage," Page 31*
"...wage-pegging regulations will be steadily relaxed.. *with
eventual abolition.” Page 31 •
"One "’-of the first pieces of legislation.. . will be a Bill a
c cmpreheELsive revision of the present Arbitration Act." Page 31 *
"The Government has decided' to establish a peace-time authority for
the,..waterfront industry. * i" Page 33*
"The Government will make loncessions in respect of tariffs and
preferences only in return fof fully compensating concessions- by other
countries..." Page, 364
"The Government has agreed to.;,a committee to - report on the
financial relationships of the, Commonwealth and the States."
Page ii.
"The Government it prepared to assist development of intrs-State air
services by private enterpriser id" -- Page 33* /
"The Postal Department ib planning to improve facilities
particularly in isolated areas*" P a ge 37-
-•—■oo000oo ;
For additional copies of uhis speech,
kindly apply to the State Secretary
of the Australian L a bor Party,or to
D.K,Rodgers *PreAs Secretary to the
Prime Minister, Canberra*


INDEX
Page
1 ,«• ... Introduction
2,3,4,., Defence
5 ~, Aircraft Production
6,7 Foreign Affairs
7,8,9,, ,o, Re-establishment
10 ••• ••• War Service Homes
10,11,12,13,14,15 Financial policy
15,16,17,18., Secondary industries
19,20., ,«, Munitions production
21,22,23,24,25 Primary industries
26,27** , *«, Social Services
28 ,•, •*, —— Health
29 ,**,,, Works
30 ••• ~, Housing
Page
SI Industrial
32 Railways
Railways
33 -- Airlines
34 Supply Department
35 Shipping
36 Tariff
37 Postal Department
37 Northern Territory
37 External Territories
38 Education
38 Immigration
39 Information
39 Referendum
40,41- Conclusion
SUBJECT INDEX
Aircraft production ••• .T^
Aircraft policy ... ••• 5,6
Airlines Commission ••• ••• 53
Aluminium industry .«. ••• 20
Apples and Pears ••• *.*23,26
Arbitration Act •*. ••• 31
Banicing legislation «.-• ... 1.4
Barley industry *.*\ • 26
Basic Yrage **. ... 31
Britain ... 3*7*19,22
British Clth Occupation Force*.• 2
Coal- industry ••• 32
Culture ... *•• 38
Curtin, John *•• ... 1,40
Dairy industry ... ... 22,25
Decentralisation ••« ••• 16
Defence ... ••• 2,3,4
Deferred pay ... •*• 11
Demobilisation figures...' ... 7
Disposals . **• ••• 34
Employment •*• «•• 8,32
Exports ••• .17,23,36"
External Territories ••• . . 37
Fighting forces, benefits 8,9
Financial policy ... ... 10
Food. ... *•• 21
Foreign policy ••• ••* 6,7
Forty-hour Yfeek •**•■• 31
Government factories ... ..8,15,19
Guided projectiles ... ... 21
Health *«. ... 28
Housing ........ 30
Housing, servicemen ••• ..9,10,31
Immigration ••• .*.16,38
Information ... ... 39
Interest rates ... ... 15
Interim forces ... ... 2,3
Jet-propelled aircraft..., ... 5
Lend-lease ... ... *~llT~
Marriage 10an5,... •*. 39
Means test ... .* , 27
Lie at ...\ .i. 22,25
policy,.\ V. ... 19
National debt ... ( ... 12X^
national Works Council .- ~. 29
northern Territory i.. • 37
Pacificbases ■«.• 3
Peacje defence forces ... 4
Pensions ... ... 27
Post Office ... ... 37
Potato industry... ••• 26
Poultry ... ... 25
Prices ... ... 12
Primary industries ... 21
Prime I.iinistor’s conference 3
Re-establishment•• . ... 9
Referendum ... 21,26,27,28,31,39
Sales tax ... 4.. 11
Scientific weapons .... 4
Secondary Industries •••• 15,19
Shipping .... ... 35
Social Services,., . ... 26
Sold ier Settlement ... 9
Taxation ... ... 11,17*
Tariff ... ... 36
Textile s ... ... lo
Tobacco industry., .*, 26
Transport .... ... 32
Unemployment figures ... 8
•United Rations ... , ••• 6
United States ••• 4
War expenditure ~. 10,11
War Service Homes *•• 10,31
War-time forces ... 2
‘Wheat ... 24
Wool industry ... 18,23,'24-
Works • 29


Pello w extize ns,
This is twe first peace-time general elections since 1937.
Three years ago, the Labor Party’s policy was given by the late Mr.
John Curtin, whose untimely death is still being mourned by every
Australian who recognised his great war-time leadership and who
appreciated his unselfish devotion to duty* His work, and that of
the party he led, for Australia in war-must continue into the peace.
To that, I pledge my whole party.
Australia is about to enter upon the greatest era in her
history. This country of ours has come through tv/o World Wars and
weathered the miseries and. hardships of a depression, all in the space
of little over 30 years. Although it seems to be a paradox, the fact
i
is thotk-partlcipation in wars has hastened-:Australian development and
expansion. Forward steps have been/taken in would have
occupied much vTjigr i> lie re r
garded as normal times.
To-day Australia has become
tho great bastion of the British-
speaking race south of the Equator, Strategically and economically, oup
country has assumed a position in the Pacific on behalf of the British
Commonwealth of Hrtions of such importance that development and respon-
sibility go hand in hand.
It is my purpose to show that, since the Labor Party assumed
the duties of government in the crisis of 1941, Australia has been
successfully led through a -war effort, that -won world-wide admiration, on
to victory; and then for the past 12 months through a transition period
that has been passed with greater ease than in any of the United Nations,
It is also my purpose to show that that record of achievement in national
leadership - contrasted with the demonstrated ineptnoss of the Opposition
parties when the test of crisis found them '.wanting - justifies tho
people in entrusting to the Labor Party the government of Australia in
the groat years that lie- ahead.
As I have said, despite the strain of war, Australia has shown
groat advances because of two factors. One has been tho sterling efforts
of the men and women of this country whose spirit in war was unflagging
and whose ability to meet the changing circumstances brought about by
the transition from war to peace is being shown to be equally, praiseworthy.


The second factor has been that the Labor Government, irregardless of
pressure groups, has- maintained the economic balance to such an extent
that no other country can claim a more favorable position.
With the coming of peace, war-time controls have been lifted
widely and the National Security Act will expire on 31st December.
Measures to maintain a. stabilised economy' will be effected by legislation
in Parliament.
It is to the maintenance of that economic balance - in which
lias the true welfare of oil our people - that the Labor Government is
pledged, and. upon the policies to ensure that maintenance, the Govern-
ment takes its stand at this general election*
—"lt, has been the privilege e'f~trhe Labor Government to direct the
policy of the , /pu-s-tralian war effort during the greatest crisis in the
Commonwealth 1 s. history*, ydficliory was achieved, thanks to the gallantry
of the Australian and Allied Forces, the ability of the High Command, the
aid from Britain and the United States, and the efforts of the Australian
people.
The dimensions of the Australian war effort were in keeping with
the highest traditions of the British Commonwealth at war. In 1:K3? 72m
of Australian men i working age groups were in the forces or employed in
war production and other essential industries* The corresponding figure
for Britain was 75%* Similar figures for women were 13% in Australia and
26 % in Britain, the difference being’mainly due to the'large numbers of
Australian women who were helping to maintain the output of primary
production.
Australia is now in the stage of transition from the interim
post-war commitments to the determination f the ultimate strength and
rganisat." on .f the farces for the future defence of the Commonwealth.
Of the interim commitments, the chieh one, which has been
ljquidated,was the control of Japanese disarmed personnel in the islands
to the north of Australis, pending their return to Japan. The repatria-
tion of 14-2,000 Japanese has been completed with the utmost expedition.
Except for 1,700 men, all garrison forces in the islands have now
returned to Australia,
Another interim commitment, of more continuing duration, is the
Australian component of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in Japan
It c mprises naval, land and air forces of a total strength of 13 ? 000 men.


In addition; forces ere required on the mainland during the
interim period, for administrative and maintenance purposes, including the
storage and maintenance of essential stores and equipment, collection and
disposal of surplus stocks, and to provide a basis for carrying forward
the organisation of the peace time forces.
Total strength of the Australian defence forces on June
bO, 1946, was 150,000. The Government has directed that the strength
of the forces is to be reduced to the minimum compatible with
authorised commitments and that every economy is to be exercised in
expenditure. As mentioned Iryhrj financial statement last July •
\ 'Within the limits of its obligations to the nation for security
and for the re-establishment of former servicemen and women, the
Government, will curtail war, defence and associated expenditure to an
absolute mi ni-munn ’
Future defeucey"policy is governed by two fundamental considera-
tions, The first is the security system that can be developed by the
United Nations, Enthusiastic and sustained support of the United Nations
is the foundation of Australian foreign policy in common with that
of the other members of the British Commonwealth* Australia must be
prepared to place forces at the disposal of the United Nations for the
maintenance of peace and security* The second consideration is that tte
forces we maintain must be related to measures for co-operation in Empire
defence. The Government regards this as an arrangement for collective
defence, consistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
As such, it is a contribution to the power and strength of the United
Nations.
Following the Prime Ministers’ Conference in London, I stated
that Australia must in future make a larger contribution towards the
defence of the British Commonwealth, that this could best be done in the
Pacific, and that the approach to a common scheme of defence for this area
should be by agreement between Britain, Australia and New Zealand, and
related to those of the United States - and other nations with possessions
in this area.
During the war, the Pacific was a sphere of American strategic
responsibility, and the predominant factor in the strategy in this area
was American sea and air power. All members of the British Commonwealth
are agreed that co-operation with the United States is fundamental to the
maintenance of peace in the Pacific, and Australia welcomes an arrangement


for the joint use of bases on the principle of reciprocity.
At the Prime Ministers' Conference, it was agreed that a corollary
to Australian acceptance of a wider responsibility for empire and regional
defence was the assignment to the Australian machinery of the function of
developing the defence aspect of matters relating to regional security in
the Pacific, in which Britain, Australia” and New Zealand are concerned,
with provision for overseas representation. Action is now proceeding
along these lines.
The future nature, strength and organisation of the forces is
dominated by the overshadowing influence of the effects of scientific
developments on the types of weapons and armaments for the various
their efficacy, and the effects on future methods of warfare and
organisation for it. The invention weapons, and other discoveries
J
involve new concepts of inter-service*strategy and’tactics, and render
r
necessary the establishment oTuneans for keeping the services informed of
modern research relating to important scientific developments.
As a first step, the Government has approved of the creation of
scientific and technical bodies to maintain the closest liaison for
empire co-operation. It recently sent abroad strong missions to attend
empire conferences on the scientific aspect of defence, and on the future
tactical training of the forces. Time is wanted for the full effects of
scientific developments to be assessed and the future arming of the forces
to be determined. When this information is available, the Government's
service advisers will submit recommendations on the future strength and
organisation of the defence forces and-on all considerations involved in
their equipment and training.
In the meantime, Australia's defence effort will be the maintenance
of the strength and organisation necessary with existing weapons, to
provide for the interim commitments to which I have referred, pending the
transition to the future strength and organisation vrhen the future make-up
of our forces can be decided.
The aggregate future strength of the forces will be governed by the
proportion of our national income and resources that should be devoted to
defence. The size of each service will be determined by the blending of
air force
the navy, army/and supply services in a bdanced defence which provides in
the most effective manner for our self-defence, for co-operation in empire
and regional defence, and for the fulfilment of our obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations.


When ths war* began, Australia’s aircraft industry was virtually .
non-.xi tout. Th- R.A.A. F. had at its disposal no more than 250 air-
craft. Of that tiny air fleet, only two-thirds were operational machines
and man;/ were- already obsolete. They were able to operate only so
long as spar ;- parts could, be obtained from overseas.
Capacity for th: manufacture of the most
mod ern types of aircr 'ft was re.pid ly s I up in this country and steadily
expanded by the Lab or Cover cirient. - V/hen the war endr d, 52,000 civilians
were employed in woll-cquipped, modern workshops in the production and
re- Into nance of '• ircraft. Ever/ type from the single-engined trainer to
the Mustang fighter and. the twin-engined Mosquito and Beauf ightcr was
included i‘n the 5,500 aircraft delivered during the war years and pro-
duction of four- nginscq Lincoln heavy bombers was wall advanced when
the Japanese - sum nderod. Nearly 5,000 aero engines of throe types
were also manufactured in Australian factories during the war years and
production of Molls Roycc Merlin engines was in hand.
In brief, the Labor Government developed, under war-tira<
conditions, a highly skilled, we 11-organized menufacturing industry,
largely independent of overseas supplies, that was affectively backing
up the R.A.A,.?• and was engaged in the production of throe essential
operational types of aircraft on asc ale sulfide ntly large to meet‘s the
needs of the R.A.A
The important lesson learned from A.ustrs .■ ia’ s experience in the
Pacific war is that this country is no longer a peaceful outpost.
*
isolated by distance from war’s dostruetivoncss. Australia is vulrnradio
to attack and each year brings developments in the science of warfare
th t lessen still furth.r ou * chances of living unmo lens tod.
The way to assur' Australia tin protection of a virile aerial
d fence fore , the front-line fignting force in modern war -- is to
maintain t n industrial organisation capable of producing most modern
aircraft 'from oUr own resources and capable of rapid expansion in th
event of a threat. That is the Labor Government’s policy.
An trail in engineers have be on "broad for the last two years
studying end assisting in the development of gas turbin' power units.
Production in Australia of gas turbines and of jb, b-propdlod aircraft
will be put in hand when it is considered appropriate.


To .nrjur: that the Australian aircraft industry will continue to
enjoy th maximum benefits resulting from aeronautical research abroad,
discussions have been proceeding in London for some tin to determine a
satisfactory working basis for th: fullest possible co-operation be tv/-... on
the Australian aircraft industry and British aircraft manufacturers.
This policy will establish Australia as a vital link in a powerful
chain of bases protecting the British way of life throughout the world.
<
Closely linked with defence ,policy> in fact Interwoven in many in-
stances, are international relationships. For the first time
in Australian history, the Commonwealth has boon given a distinctive
foreign policy - and by the Labor •Government. Because it is a balanced
policy, is adapted to the urgency of the period, 'and is based oh an honest
and objective appreciation of current problems, it has won universal
recognition and respect.
The Australian nation 1 s interests and influence in th. peace should
not be loss than they wore in the war, and the foreign policy the Govern
mont is developing has the purpose of giving full expression to those
interests.
Australia has willingly undertaken and loyally sustained the various
international obligations and responsibilities which arc likely to contrib-
/
ute to the lasting achievement of the purposes for which the United Nations
wont to war. These'are manifold, and have been especially noteworthy in
/
the fields of helping to ostcb lish international machinery to secure world
peace, order and security.
Australia is widely regarded as one of the main architects of the
*****
Economic and Social C o uncil of the United Nations. The Australian delegates
fought unceasingly, and in the end successfully, to raise the status of
this council, to extend its powers and functions, and to have incorporated
t
in its tasks a binding obligation on all nations to ensuro full employment
and increased standards of welfare. The Australian Government has
** ‘-"K-
always regarded an international agreement on employment policies as the
bedrock of international economic collaboration, and as a positive aid to
general security.
Australia(s strong support of the International Trade Organisation,
which is expected to emerge from next year f s Trade and Employment Conference


emphasises the Importance she attaches to world economic planning; while
her election to the governing body of the -International Labor Office
was a .recognition of her consistent efforts in the field of -social
planning for a better world, 1
These efforts have been supplemented by Australia's material
help in alleviating immediate world distress. Voluntary as well as
official support of U.N.R.R.A. by Australia has considerably furthered
the- aims of that organisation; and, besides being the fourth largest
contributor to U.N.R.R.A., Australia is now a member of its Central
Committee.
In the field of colonial welfare, Australia's influence has been no
less marked. At London and San Francisco, Australia took the initiative
in securing a binding declaration by colonial Powers to promote the
economic, political, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants
of dependent territories, and to improve their administration’in such a
manner as to further peace, security and good-neighbourliness.
In the last five years, a new conception of the British Commonwealth
of Nations has emerged; no longer are the Dominions active only in time
of war. Collaboration within the British Commonwealth, now extends to.
peace as.well as to war. This development implies a fuller recognition
by the Dominions of their responsibilities, which has resulted in the
assumption of reciprocal duties by the Dominions and by Britain,
Australia's relations with Britain today are, therefore, firmly
based on the -hard realities of world politics, with Australia not only
giving practical expression to her rights but also assuming and effective-
ly carrying out the heavy responsibilities that belong to her new status.
Never has co-operation with Britain been more realistic or more cordially
reciprocal.
Practical recognition by Australia of her duty to act as guardian
of British interests in the Pacific -area dates from the early days of the
war against’Japan when the Australian Government took the initiative
in the establishment of the Pacific War Council at Washington. The Anzac r ...
Pact 0f'1944 with New Zealand was another manifestation of this y'
recognition of regional obligation, /
The appointment of Mr. Macmahon Ball as British Commonwealth
representative on the Allied Council in Tokyo illustrates Britain’s'
acceptance not only of Australia's growing responsibilities to the, British
Commonwealth but also of her special interests in the Pacific. An
Australia is Commander-in-Chief of all British Military Forces in Japan,
while another Australian, Sir William Webb, is presiding judge of the
War Crimes Tribunal in Tokyo. ’
The Government places its record'’ of demobilisation .and re-
establishment before the Australian people with confidence. Within
12 months of VJ Day, 500,000 out of personnel then in the
forces have been demobilised. This record of five out of every six
men and women discharged in one year meets world comparison favourably.


Speedy discharge is only half of tho Labor Government’s
demobilisation achievement. Equally outstanding is the fact that, despite
discharges at the rate of 10,000 a week, weekly unemployment has never
exceeded half of one per cent, throughout the year. What a contrast with
Australia ’s position before the warl In 19335 over 500,000 Australians
were out of work and, after six more years of anti-Labor Government,
Australia entered the 1939 war witji-250,000 persons on the dole.
The Labor Government’s achievement of full employment throughout
the difficult period of demobilisation and of transition to civil
production is due to several factors. These have been
The timel‘ r planning-and sound regulation of actual demobilisation.
The war finance policy, whereby a judicious combination of
• taxation, loans and bank credit, kept' tho whole economy
strong and upon an even keel. The financial burden of
war was fairly spread according to capacity to pay, prices
were kept in check, the value of wages and military pay was
sustained (and actually augmented by social security increases).*
By reason of th-t sound policy of war finance, few came out
of the war with their purchasing power impaired.
The rapid conversion or leasing of war factories for civil
production and by the negotiation of primary produce /“
marketing contracts for several years ahead,
War-time planning of a £248,000,000 national works and development
programme, with £1055000,000 worth in A-class priority and
40 per cent, of the latter ready for actual commencement,
providing a cushion against local packets of unemployment.
5 /
By constituting Re-establishment Commit ees and the Commonwealth
Employment-Service on a regional basis it has been possible to
detect and check any local relapses from full employment. The
Labor Government alone has ever attempted this comprehensive
and instantaneous attack on unemployment, h
During'the war, the Government raised pay and allowances,
extended moratorium, provisions, provided for £63,000,000 of war
gratuities and gave servicemen .€>0,000,000 of tax concessions, and
established an extensive legal aid service for the protection of members
of'the forces and their defendants.


'On demobilisation; a most diversified re-establishment
programme was ready for those-who were not able to step straight
back into old jobs. This re-establishment scheme v/as worked out
by the Government v/ith the advice of experts, of employers and
union leaders, professional men and ex-service representatives.
It is administered by regional, and local committees with similar
representation and local knowledge. There could be no sounder basis
for re-establishment.
Sixty thousand former service men and women, provided with
living allowances, have to date commenced free professional vocational
training,, on a full or part-time basis, at Universities and technical
colleges. Thousands have been enabled to .resume apprenticeships under
specially favourable conditions,, Over have been found jobs
through the Commonwealth Employment Service*
Over £1,500,000 have already been advanced in special rural
loans and another £1,000,000 at similar low interest rates in business
and professional loans. Over 1,500,000 acres have been approved for
ar Service' Land Settlement and work is completed or well advanced on
preparation of much of this land for immediate working by soldier
settlers upon allocation. Meanwhile, many intending settlers are
undergoing short training or refresher courses.
A promise of the exclusive allocation of 50of all new
<
government houses throughout Australia to ex-servicemen was made,
Latest figures available reveal that more than haVe gone to ex-
servicemen. In 1945, the Government granted 20,000 special occupational
releases’ of servicemen for the building and timber industries. They
enabled the Government to exceed its 1945-46 target of 84,000 houses
under construction by last June.
The Labour Government is spending a great deal of money on
re-establishment, It is spending it carefully and well. - It believes
this is no less than the due of service men and women. But it is
equally convinced that the nation will receive a more than equal return
in the form of greater skill and greater efficiency in all sections of
economic activity, as a direct result of that expenditure.


Tho Labor Government has on public record the appreciation of tho
responsible leaders of the Returned Soldiers’ League. In 1944, Sir Gilbert
Dyott, for twenty-five years President of the League, said : ’I do not think
we have ever had a Government more sympathetically disposed to tho interests
of ex-servicemen than the present Government.’ In Iky this year, with the
Government’s ro-ostabllshmont plans in operation. Sir Gilbert’s successor, Mr.
Eric Millhouso, K.Ctold a gathering that the Labor Government was handling
rehabilitation problems well* We shall continue to justify tho appreciation
of these men and those for whom they speak by our record in this difficult
and complex field of re-establishment'.
Ample fund shave been mo.de 'available by the Labor Government to give
effect to tho Gar Service Homes Act* During the year ended last Juno, 1,521
applications for loans were approved, totalling £1,500,000* Homes under
construction and approved applications totalled 900 at tho end of Juno. The
Labor Government has reduced the interest rate on loans end a further
rodubtion will be kept continually under review. In addition, the Government
reviewed the whole War Service Homos Act and, as a result, the scheme is the
nest liberal of all housing p rogralamos in Australia,
The problems of finance and economic organisation handled by tho Labor
Government during its term of office have no parallels in Australian History.
When the Labor administration was formed, tho war was close to its most /
j /
critical stage -and vrithin a matter of months tho entire economy had to be changed
over to a total war footing* Financial costs rose steeply. In 1940/41, war
expenditure was £170,000,000. In 1941/42, the year in which Labor took office,
it rose to £320,000,000. Within another year it had reached £562,000,000. This
sum was greater than the total war expenditure in the first three the war
It amounts to a cost of £7B per head of our population. During 1943/44, war
expenditure remained at much tho same level and then, in 1944/45, vij.oh saw a
change in the disposition of our forces and a greater emphasis on our task as
supplier nation, it began to fall.
All told, in loss than five years, the Labor Government has had to find
over £2,180,000,000 for war purposes. We obtained £837,000,000 of this from
taxation and other revenue sources, £1,040,000,000 from public loans and War
Savings certificates and £311,000,000 Treasury Bills discounted with the


Commonwealth Bank*
vfith the end of the w, it is'natural to expect that vmr expenditure will
fall. The Government has reduced it very substantially and this year will reduce
it much further r Bal ing 'M345/46, expenditure on war and associated purposes was
£82,000,000 less than in 1944/45 and £166,000,000 less than in 1943/44* This
year it can- probably be cut again by £150,000,000.
But the whole job cannot be done in a month or two* In 9 months, the
Government accomplished the greater part of the immense job of demobilising the
forces. However, the very fact that so much was done meant that more money had to
be spent. Dir;charged personnel had to get their deferred pay, an amount of
£72,000,000 and also their pay book credits. The cost of reinstatement, training
and pensions went up and so did the interest bill on the total of war loans which
1
had been growing all the time« Then there were the heavjr subsidies paid to primary
producers and the price stabilisation subsidies which keep basic foodstuffs and
clothing at a steady price for consumers. Actually these indirect costs of war
took nearly half of the total of what is called’ war expenditure* Meanwhile,
troops awaiting discharge or guarding prisoners in .the islands or on occupation
work in Japan had to be paid and maintained and a start was made with the
organising of permanent pwaoe time defence forces*
Despite heavy charges, none of which could be avoided or postponed or
whittled down, the Labor Government was able to make one cut in taxation last
financial year and is making another in this financial year. The two cuts in
income tax, taken together, make up a 22% over-all reduction on the 1943 rates.
They will relive taxpayers by over £37,000,000 a year.
In addition to income tax reductions, the Government has cut sales tax rates
on a wide range of commodities and the saving to buyers is £4,000,000 a year*
The Government will make further reductions in direct and indirect taxation as
circumstances -permit.
The Commonwealth has agreed to the establishment of a committee to report on
the financial relationships of the Commonwealth.and the States,


During tho Labor Govcrnnont 1 s tern of office, major taxation reforms have
boon offeotod by the establishment of a uniform income tax throughout tho
Commonwealth and the introduction of tho pay-as-you-oarn system of income tax*
Australia played a big part in the fighting overseas-* Australian forces
took part in many difficult campaigns- and obtained from abroad great quantities of
war supplies for the national effort* Yet when all accounts are squared, it will bo
i
found that Australia owes nothing abroad on-account of tho war* This is partly
because for everything supplied to us on a cash basis we have been able to pay
cash earned mainly by selling Australi nn commodities abroad, and partly because
of the great transaction of Lend-Lease‘-and Reciprocal Lend-Lease carried through
successfully between tho United Australia*
Under Lend-Lease, the United States supplied enormous quantities of war
materials, aircraft, tanks, ammunition and machines for our factories. On our
part, we supplied foodstuffs, clothing, footwear, transport and many other
services. On tho final reckoning. United States supplies to us are calculated
to have boon worth 1,500 million dollars. Our supplies to thorn were worth
£285,000,000. By agreement between the two countries, Australia will pay the
United States about £8,400,000 for aircraft, machine tools and other items of .
capital equipment which will be of considerable value to Australia. Beyond that,
the slate will be wiped clean so that the immense joint war effort between
Australia and the United States in the Pacific war will leave no claims outstanding
on either side. *
During the time Labor has been in office,• Australia*s governmental debt
in London has been reduced by £72,000,000 Australian currency. This has-been
accomplished by tho transfer to Australia of debt amount to £62,000,000 and the
redemption of £10,000,000 from the National Debt Sinking Fund. Moreover, very
largo overseas loans have boon converted to lower rates of interest and the
effect of this... combined with the reduction in tho overseas debt, has been to
reduce interest liability in London by £5,600,000 a year.
During the early war years, the broad principle followed in controlling
prices ms to permit genuine cost increases to take effect in prices with a fair
margin allowed for profits. Gradually, the scope of price control was widened and
its application made more strict, though a good deal of flexibility was still
possible. To the end of 1941, retail prices rose by 12$. Then cane a year of
dramatic changes. Vfitliin a few brief months, the Australian economy had to be
swung completely over to a total war footing. Service enlistments were doubled''.


Mar Production and defence works were stepped up tremendously and manufacture
and the allocation of vital supplies to essential uses "became the focus of the
economic problems In the drive to maximise output* pressure on costs increased
disturbingly,, Wholesale prices rose during 191-2 by 12% and retail prices by IC$.
It was clear that,, with little prospect of easing the strain on the economy* .
strong measures wore needed if inflation was to. bo held in check.
boon pegged early in.' 1942. and rationing of vital civilian
commodities established. The most decisive stop was taken in April*-19,43.
Maximum prices for commodities wore fixed at the level ruling on the 12th of that
month and only for a limited number of articles* chiefly of a perishable nature*
wore exceptions made-, These articles were to have specific ceilings of their own.
The ceiling set an upper limit to prices but beneath it prices could be
reduced. Per, by a second order* traders ‘were not allowed to sell at more than
actual cost, plus the money margin of profit made by then on the particular typo of
article a year earlier. Traders, thereafter could claim for genuine cost increases,
but would have to prove that their profits wore no more than reasonable and that no
further scope existed for efficient production.
Tlhoro.it could be shown that neither by higher efficiency nor by cutting
of excess profits could increased costs be absorbed* the Government would grant
a subsidy. Special subsidies- to reduce the price of tea and potatoes were given;
the sales tax on clothing and textiles was cut; and when the cost of living wago,
increase occurred* it was agreed to reimburse employers for the added cost..
Total, subsidies paid under this scheme amounted to some £lB*ooo*ooo up till the
end of war. , F
The Australian war effort probably reached its highest point in the latter
months of 1943. Thereafter it ran along at a consistent level for two years.. There
were changes in emphasis as the war situation developed - the strength of the
services was somewhat reduced* concentration on manufacturing and defence works
abated to some extent* and food production was stepped up. Annual war - expenditure'
foil slightly in the last year* But* in general, the strain on the economy did not
diminish* while, in some fields* the pressure on resources became much more acute.
Despite this severe and long-continued strain* basic prices and costs did not rise
further which marks price stabilisation as one of the outstanding successes of
war-time policy.
It is noteworthy that, as late as last July* the Leader of the Opposition
(Mr.Hensies) agreed that 'control of prices has been a triumph of war-time


administration 1 «
During 1945, ‘the Government brought down legislation to amend the
Commonwealth Bank Act an d to provide for the control of the banicing system.
In framing this legislation the Government wasj to a considerable extent-, guided
by the findings of the Royal Commission Y/hich Was appointed in 1935 by the Lyons
Government to inquire into the monetary and banking systems in operation in
Australia* ,*' "
The Commonwealth Bank Act of 1945 established the Commonwealth Bank as the
Central Bank of Australia* Under this Act, the Commonwealth Bank Board has been
abolished and the management of the Bank is Vested in the Governor* The Government
has restored the form of mans.goment under which the Bank was operated from the time
of its inception in 1912 until the establishment of the Board in 1924* However,
the amended Act provides that the Governor shall be assisted by an Advisory
Council of experts-*
The Act also provides machinery for the settlement of questions of policy.
If., after consulb ation, there are difference s> the Government may accept
responsibility in the matter and require the bank to give effect to the policy
favoured by the Government-* There is to be no interference by the Government,
in,the day-to-day administration of the bank*
Under the Act, the bank is required to develop and expand its general
banking business .When labor and materials are available many additional branches
will be established. Provision has also been made for special financial assistance
for housing loans and for industrial expansion at the loYj-est possible rates of
interest* Both provisions have ’boon made effective and already substantial progres
has been made*
Tha Banicing Act 1945 provides for tho Control of the banking system in
Australia. Under this legislation, the general business of banking may be carried
on only with the authority of the Governor-General.
Special provision is made for the protection of depositors. If any bank
becomes, or is likely to become, unable to meet its obligations, the Commonwealth
Bank may assume control of that bank’s business until all deposits have been repaid
or suitable provision has been made for thoir repayment. In this regard, the Act
makes it an/obligation/tho Commonwealth Bank to exercise its powers and functions
for the protection of depositors*
The special accounts procedure, established during the war, to prevent
’secondary inflation’, has been incorporated in the Bonking Act, In effect, the
Commonwealth, Bank is empowered to require the trading banks.to lodge in.gpeoial
accounts with the Commonwealth Bank the whole or any specified part of their surplus
investible funds. This provision gives the Commonwealth Bank a simple,elastic and


effective instrument of credit control*
The Commonwealth Bank is also empowered to mobilise the
trading banks’ excess receipts of foreign, currency and provision is
made for the control of foreign exchange and gold in conditions of
emergency. '
Control of interest rates by the Commonwealth Bank,with the
approval of the Treasurer, is also ..provided. • It has been the policy of
the Government to maintain a pressure on interest rates
in general and this has been .so successful that despite tremendous de-
mands upon the capital market all the principal rates of interest are
lower to-day than when the Government 'took office. The maximum rate for
bank overdrafts,for example,is at present set at :
In short, the G®vernment’s banking legislation has been
designed to adapt the banking system to present-day conditions and to
provide the Commonwealth Bank, as Australia 1 s central ‘bank,with adequate
powers to serve the national interest.
A picture of what achieved during the war can be gathered
from the fact that expansion -of manufacturing industries concerned not
only the construction of immense manufacturing works, but also of great
factories for the production of war material. While those factories
were being built, other factories were being erected to manufacture th
plant and materials used in the construction and equipment of such £a*c--
tories. It went further, because still other factories had to be builu
and equipped -for the production of raw materials needed for fabrication
in the new manufactures being established.
Only three tool rooms, outside of Government shops, were in
Australia at the beginning, of the w r ar, Irut by 1942 there were 188. Six
machine toolj* manufacturer s employing TOO men, grew to 200 employing
12,000 men. Over 45,000 machine tools were built; more than all the
machine tools.made In the country before the war.
New factories were constructed by the Government at a cost
of £55,000,000 and additions were made >y the* Government to 220 privately
owned factories at a cost of £20,000,000.
/Australia


Australia has expended tremendously her productive capacity,
7e now stand on the threshold of a wondrous commercial industrial
age., 7e have expanded our industrial capacity, developed our
industrial skill, broadened the scope and vision of our industrial
management, and fostered and stabilised our internal economy. The
stage is set,.
The' Labor Government is confident of industry’s future and
of the part is has played and will continue to play to ensure
maximum production. I ask all Australians to play their part, both
for the economic and defensive welfare of the nation, to increase
productivity.
The Government desires a high level of technical and managerial
efficiency under improved working conditions and tith extended overseas
and internal markets. The present level of factory employment, 730,300
persons; the high rate of applications for company registrations; the
pressure for new factory buildings; and the extent of recent overseas
investment in Australian industry, indicate that the work of conversion
and expansion to mass production is well under v/ay*
The States and the Commonwealth have endorsed the policy of
decentralisation to suitable provincial areas, and away from concentrated.
States to the outer States* 'e are seeking a balanced economic and
defensive development of industry. It is a gradual process and the ac/tua
location of Government factories transferred to industry will prove a
powerful factor in decentralising industrial activity. Mere existence
of factories, of plant and. employees-, of raw materials/and high hopes j
are- not in themselves enough. 7orld consumers will continue to be
selective. Production must .be .efficient- The Government is anxious
to afford to Australian industry full and free access to the results of
. s
technical jresestfch. The Government will use fundamental research
/
establishments such as the Council for Scientific and Industrial j
\
Research end the Munitions Supply Laboratories, of intermediate testing
houses, and the wider use of standards in rutelity.
In British-occupied Europe, and in Japan, oualificd Australian
scientific and technical missions are gathering data and information of
assistance


assistance to Australian industry.
I have referred elsewhere -to taxation, but I mention here
that in respect of the following, taxation concessions hfve already been
afforded by the Government: -
Exemption from income tax for visiting experts.
Amenities for employees to be subject to special depreciation.
<
Plant and machinery acquired within five years after 194-5
are subject to special depreciation allowances.
Expenditure on scientific research to be exempt from income
tax liability.
Taxation remissions in respect of plant and.machinery (war used)
For an export market for secondary industry, Australia can look
to the countries lying to the immediate north of -Australia
India,
China, Japan, South-East Asia, Malaya and the Netherlands East Indies
a thousand million people, whose living standards, if increased only by a.
fraction, would establish a market for all that Australia could manu-
facture. These,countries are looking to Australia for manufactured
goods, and delegations are here seeking to place orders for the products
of secondary industry on a scale■greater than can.be accepted at present.
The manufacturing resources now available and. being exploited
under the Governments policy for development of secondary industry, are.
based upon the war expansion already outlined not only as to the manu-
facturing capacity already crested, but also as to releases of a number
of Government factories to commercial concerns for employment in secondary
industry. Over• sixty factories have been made available, some ,of them
very large, and already many have been leased by some 100 different
concerns, a number being directly, from Britain and the United States,
while others represent an association between Australian interests and
well-known manufacturers in Britain, the United States or Canada.
Of the purely Australian concerns, the steel industry has in
hand an expansion programme of about £5,000,000, involving opening up
iron ore deposits, shipyards, coke ovens, mechanising coal mines, and new
rolling mills, almost all of which is being built in Australia, and the
non-ferrous metal industry is doing likewise, both as to mining and
fabrication. The paper industries have an expansion programme of about
£9,000,000, and a shipbuilding programme of 32,000 tons annually is
/designed


designed to provide a turnover of purely Australian needs for ships.
The wool industry is the basid industry of AUfetfalia, averaging
£74*000,000 annually for the national income, and the plans in that
respect contemplate that whereas up to now only 10 per cent, of the wool
chip has been processed in Australia, it will be .• raised to 20 per cent..
/
still leaving 80 per cent, of raw wool for export. This doubling of
the processing of the wool clip wiil add about £36,000,000 to the
national income, and provide employment for another 20,000 persons. The
Government’s plans contemplate spending £600,000 annually oh research
that will improve textiles made from wool, and on a campaign to expand
the uses of wool. The Government is proposing to spend £5,000,000 in
developing the mineral resources of the country.
While the secondary industries mentioned, and the satellite
industries dependent upon them - such as general engineering and textiles
clothing, footwear and food - are almost entirely Australian-owned, there
are Australian interests ‘affiliated with overseas interests in the
conduct of large industries. Of these, the motor car industry is the
most important, and General Motors, the Ford Motor Company, and the
International Harvester Company arp each working on programmes to spend
millions of dollars in extending their Australian subsidiaries. The
Nuffield and Rootes interests of Britain are doing likewise. These
developments are bringing numerous components manufacturers into
operation, some from overseas.
In the textile industries other than wool, cotton is well
established already, with four large concerns and several smaller almost
entirely Australian owned, ‘'One British concern is being expanded, and
several more British concerns are negotiating for leases of Government
factory properties. In synthetics, an American‘firm has taken a lead
in associating with an Australian ‘concern in setting up rayon mills at
Newcastle, while a Canadian firm of American origin is establishing
another mill at Wangaratta, For provision of rayon yarn, Australia is
looking to Courtaulds, Ltd., of Britain, Further developments in
synthetic yarns are anticipated,• The plastics industry is expanding
rapidly, and' for ths raw materials, works are being established by a
British and an. can British concern is affiliated
/with


with large .Australian interests in chemicals and fertiliser production.
Many other large industries could be mentioned but the foregoing will
indicate that secondary industry is becoming fully established in
Australia, That its continuance and further expansion can be regarded
with confidence is founded on. its achievements in the war effort. The
success of the Government’s economic policy in the twelve months of
peace as reflected in the stability of wages and prices and the reductions
in taxation and interest, warrants a firm Optimism that Australian
secondary industry will hold its place in the world’s markets.
On my return to Australia from the Prime Ministers 1 Conference
held in London last April, I reported to Parliament that I had submitted
to the Conference a statement on munitions and aircraft production, and
the relation of the post-war potential to the requirements of Australia’s
forces and those of the British Commonwealth, I explained that it is the
Australian Government’s policy to develop in peace, resources for the
manufacture of munitions, as well as the supply of raw material, so as to
make, the Commonwealth as self-supporting as possible in armaments and
munitions of war, including aircraft and shipbuilding, • I stated that,
with the development of Goverriment factories and fostering of commercial
industries, Australia is seeking to provide the widest possible base for
a supply structure for the needs of the Empire in the Pacific,
•In anticipation that the contribution of Australia to Empire
defence in the Pacific would be as I have stated, the Government had
decided, before the war with Japan had ended, that its munitions
production policy would be designed so that the conditions which faced
the country at the outbreak of the war could never recur. At the out
break of war there were five Government munitions factories. At the
peak of the war,' we had 47 Government munitions factories and 220
commercial munitions annexes.
Details of the manufacturing plants to be maintained as
permanent defence factories are still to be determined, because they will
depend on the obligations to be accepted as a partner in the British
Commonwealth of Nations. We have intimated our willingness to take a
full part in whatever is decided in that respect. This, I anticipate,
/will be


will be that, in 'addition to being responsible for the equipment of
our own armed forces, we shall be the supply base and provide the
munitions and supplies which may be required by the armed forces of
other nations of the British Commonwealth and of our Allies v/ho may
be associated with us in this part of the world. That we are
competent in provision of this kind has been demonstrated by the fact
that in World War II we provided services of the kind in Australia to
the British and American forces, end in addition shipped munitions
overseas to the value of £50,000,000 by way of assistance to the armed
forces of Britain and other Dominions.
Subject, as’ I have said, to further examination of details,
we have decided that we shall maintain in peace the original five
munitions factories and four of the more important factories establish-
ed during the war. In addition sections of two other of the important
factories will be maintained. We are arranging to continue a limited
number of the annexes, in the care of the commercial concerns which
managed them during the war, and maintained in a state of readiness.
The Government has decided that nucleus staffs of technicians
and operatives will be employed by way of assistance to commercial
industry, and already they ere doing useful work in that respect.
To give effect to the policy I have outlined, a Bill will be
presented in the first session of the new Parliament providing for the-
establishment of a Defence Production Commission to be responsible for
the administration of the factories and Annexes needed for production
of munitions and supplies, together with the supervision of the
Investment in industry which th£ Government has found it necessary to
make for the same purpose,’ The commission will be concerned with the
general development of industry which will be needed if Australia is
to be established as the advanced supply base for overseas armed
forces which may be deployed in the South Pacific defence rrea.
In addition to the legacies of the recent war in respect of
munitions production, two new projects- are in hand, of which one is
being actively developed.- aluminium production, A commencement will
be made shortly with the construction of aluminium smelting works.
The second project, of the greatest possible importance, is known as
guided projectiles, . I cannot say more about it at this stage
/except


except that a joint effort is being discussed with the British
Government 5 and we have placed our largest munitions factory under offer
for.the purpose. This project will carry with it many radical develop-
ments in munitions production, .
During the war,- Australia undertook colossal food obligations
as part of the pattern of total war decided on by the United Nations,
The manner in which those obligations were discharged is one of the
finest achievements in the nation 5 s history. The Government records
its appreciation of the splendid effort made by primary producers and
farm workers during, the war and since„ I n creased production of many
vital foods and the maintenance of others at comparatively high levels,
in -spite of shortages of materials and manpower, was obtained by great
personal effort and much- sacrifice. Food processors, factory workers, ■
transport workers and others -oho worked on the food front did an equally
commendable job.
The Govern;unit is asking electors to give the Commonwealth
Parliament powers for the organized marketing of primary products. If
+* n ~ Tr\rs n-panrar! *rV>c> •Kh ww i 1 1 Vic* Q*hl rn +n rlo ermnrl
be granted, the Commonwealth will be able to provide sound
and workable organized marketing on an Australia-wide basis and ensure
that those who produce the nation 5 s food arc justly rev/arded for their
services.
Before the war, prices for primary products were unstable and
often were too low.; -When prices fell contracting incomes forced
farmers into debt. When prices rose again creditors and not the
farmers benefited. During the war, the Government was able, by, the
National Security Act, to'provide organized marketing of farm products
and to stabilize prices at payable levels, is a result, fewer farmers
and farm workers prod’iced greater quantities of. many foods, and the
nation was able to discharge tremendous food obligations s
’Better prices have restored the purchasing power of the farmer.
This has benefited other sections of the community, including business-
men and workers in country towns, Another tangible effect is that the
dairy and wheat industries are now able to-pay-award wages for labour
employed on the farms.
/It is


It is the Labor Government's policy to stabilise primary
industry. It was the Government’s policy to provide adequate grower
representation on all marketing authoritis during the war and that
policy will be followed.
With the cessation of hostilities, the heavy obligations to
feed Australian, British and United States forces eased and the Government
was able to increase food exports/ The Government decided to make avail-
able to Britain, through the British' Ministry of Food, every ounce of
food which was intended for the services, and to ship at its direction.
War-time food restrictions hrve been continued and have been cheerfully
accepted by the Australian people, who arc keenly anxious to relieve food
shortages in Britain and elsewhere.
Australia’s exports for 1946 are expected to total 2,500,000
tons. Exports of meat, dairy products, eggs, flour, potatoes, processed
vegetables, jams and rice will be greater than the average of the three
years 1936-37 to 1938-39*
It is the Government's desire to foster assured markets for
Australia's export surplus of primary produce* Since the last elections,
the Labor Government entered into long-term agreements with the British
Government for the purchase of dairy products, meat, eggs and dried fruits.
Recently, the Commonwealth, as provided by the agreement, asked
the British Government for a review of the price for dairy products. As
a result of the review the purchase price by Britain has been increased
and is now 21.6/9 a cwt.
The agreement on meat purchases provided for a price increase of
between 15 and 30 per cent, for the various 'classes of meat. These
greatly improved prices, ensured-a floor price for the industry which was
substantially better than previous years*
The agreement with Britain in respect of eggs is for the 1945-46
to 1947-48 seasons.- The price at which eggs are purchased shows an
increase over pre-war prices and covers processed eggs.
The Government has arranged for tie sale to the British Govern-
ment of the available surplus of the 1946-47 and 1948 dried vine fruit
packs at satisfactory prices.
There has been the closest co-operation between the Department
of Commerce and Agriculture, the Prices Branch and the Treasury to assist
primary industries. The pattern of assistance included guarantse<l
* /minimum


minimum prices for a number of industries. In others, contracts with
producers for supplies to the services at. payable prices had the desired
effect. An increased price was given to the dairy industry through a
subsidy which, for the four years from 1942-43, cost £20,068,809.
Similar action was taken in respect to the potato industry which cost
£6,985,56?..
In the same period, the, apple and pear industry, which lost its
export market when shipments ceased at the outbreak of war, was granted
i
subsidies totalling £1,214,216. The wheat industry was given drought
relief during 1944-4? and 1945-46 amounting to £2,371,000. Total expend!
ture on wheat and other fodder for stock feeders and drought relief was
£13,343,312.
By subsidies on superphosphate of £7,435,000 and jute goods of
£2,142,000, the Government carried some of the increased costs of those
goods. Nitrate of soda and arsenic imported from overseas and used in
primary production were subsidised to the extent of £348,800 and £127,000
respectively.
New facilities for exporters and manufacturers have been pro-
vided by the Department of Commerce, by the Division of Overseas Trade,
It'is providing manufacturers and exporters with a flow of trade inquiries
from overseas importing houseswhich is at present greater than their
production can fulfil. It is also providing helpful information to
exporters on local and overseas commercial and financial practices.
During 1945-46, Australian exports of merbhandise totalled
£216,000,000, This represented an all-time record in value of exports
from Australia.
The Government has. expanded overseas trade representation and
will shortly have representatives in 18 vital markets, compared with nine
centres before the war., .
During the war, the Government encouraged the mechanisation of
farm industry and primary industries, • The Government now plans to bring
power-farming within the reach of the small farmer by machinery pooling'
and by direct assistance by the Government to agricultural contractors.
The Government has taken active steps*to secure additional tractors from
overseas. The number of -tractors in Australia in 1942 was 4?,000 but is
now 60,000,
In 1942, shortly after the Labor Government took office, the '
approval of the British Government was -secured to an increase of 1?$ in ,
the price of wool purchased under agreement during the war. Value of the
wool sold during the past four seasons was £262,000,000 and the industry
has benefited substantially from the higher price. en( j


At the end of the war, Britain had an accumulated surplus of
Dominion wool. The Australian Government and 1 the Governments of Britain
New Zealand and South Africa have agreed on a plan for disposal of this
surplus wool. ' In effect it amounts to underwriting returns to wool
producers for the next 14 years*
The net average return to wool growers at present is 1ry.24d.,l ry .24d.,
compared with 15,45 d. over the whole clip payable by Britain under the
i
war-time appraisement scheme i 1 Before the Labor Government t»ok office
the price was 13d. The disposals plan will stabilise growers’ returns
and will eliminate violent price fluctuations which occurred under pre-
war conditions.
In 1945, the Labor Government, recognising the major importance
of the wool industry to the nation, legislated for a Wool-Research Trust
Fund for publicity and research to which the Government contributes
£325,000 a year.
The Australian Wool Board was re-organised by the Government to
provide for representation of the Wool Producers’ Federation as well as
the Australian Wool Growers 1 Council.
The Labor Government has endeavoured to give effect 'to the long
expressed wish of the wheatgrowers for organised marketing. It has pro-
vided a stabilisation plan for five years which will give growers
a guaranteed minimum price of 5/2 d a bushel *f.o.r. ports. The Wheat
Industry Stabilisation Act was recently passed by the Commonwealth Parlia
ment and is now before the State Parliaments,.
Since it took office, the Labor Government has shown its desire
to protect the wheat industry against pre-war marketing methods and low
prices. It progressively raised guarantees until for the, last harvest
growers were guaranteed 4/4 d* a bushel first advance at sidings bagged
basis, for the whole crop.. This price contrasts favourably with the first
advance of 2/6 d. a bushel given by the previous Government,
I stress three points in .respect of the Government ’s wheat policy?
The Government does not intend to build up an excessively high, wheat'
stabilisation fund from growers' contributions. The provisions of the
measure to reduce growers’ contributions will be exercised if the fund
becomes substantially in credit. The Government desires always to main-
tain a guaranteed price for wheat for a reasonable term ahead and. the
present plan provides for reviews from time to time.■
The Government has accepted a recent recommendation of the Minister
tor.Agriculture.to appoint a commission of inquiry into the cost of pro-
duction or wheat., .
/In 1942


In 1942, the Labor Government laid the foundations of stabilise
tion for the dairy industry when it decided to legislate for a subsidy
to the industry of £1,500,000 for a period of nine months.
Average factory payments for the. period of 1936-1941 were
l/l. 56d. a lb,, commercial butter basis. In 1943, the Government in-
creased the rate of subsidy to give farmers returns equal to l/6d. a lb.
In 1944, the rate of subsidy v/as further increased to bring the average
price to 1/7.3 and finally in 1943, another subsidy increase brought
the price up to an average return of l/7-i a lb. It will be maintained at
that level until March 31, 1947. A committee approved by Cabinet and
representative of the Dairy Industry,’ has been appointed 1o inquire into
costs in the industry.
Responsible organisations representing meat producers are agreed
that the two important factors in the future development of the meat
industry are .assured outlets for the exportable surplus; and stability
of prices at remunerative levels.
Substantial increases!, in the original contract prices paid by
the British Government wore obtained in 1943 by the Labor Government and
the position was made secure when, in 1944q it entered into a long-term
purchase arrangement with the British Government for the purchase of
Australian's exportable surplus of meat from October 1, 1944, to September
30, 1948. The Tie w contract prices were from 15 per cent.-to 45 per cent
higher than the prides embodied in the Original contract negotiated
by the previous Government.,,
■Estimates of exports during the current year indicate that tliey
will exceed the average of exports in the three years immediately before
the war,.
In 1943, the Labor Government introduced machinery for the
organisation of the egg industry on a Commonwealth-wide basis.
In 1942-43, commercial production of eggs v/as 80,000,000 dozen.
In 1945-46 production reached 115,000,000 dozen and estimates of pro-
duction for the current season are 130,000,000 dozen. Exports this
season to Britain are expected to be 30,000,000 dozen eggs in shell and
the equivalent of 16,600,000 dozen in processed form. This will represent
a record.
The Australian Agricultural Council last February adopted a
plan for an Australian-wide organisation for organised marketing of eggs


This will necessitate legislation by the States- The Government
agreed, to continue control until the end of the present year,
by which time it is hoped that the States v/ill have passed their
legislation.
The Labor Government reconstituted the Australian Tobacco Board
and increased the number of growers’ representatives from three to
five. Subsidies amounting to £75,C00 on the 1944 and 1945 seasons’
i ' '
crops to assist growers to meet production difficulties and
increased costs were granted by the Government. The Government desires
the tobacco growing industry to be stabilised and encouraged. It is
collaborating with the State Governments to extend research and •
experimental work to combat disease and pests and has provided £lO,OOO
for that purpose.
Assistance to the apple and pear industry during the war
ensured orderly marketing of the crop and guaranteed the economic
stability of producers, particularly in Tasmania and Western
Australia. Contributions to the scheme by the Labor Government since
1942-45 total £1,214,816, It is the Government’s intention to
provide adequate protection-for the industry pending the full
restoration of overseas markets.
There is general approval of the Labor Government’s war-time
potato marketing policy and representatives of the industry have
asked for its continuance, The Government has extended the plan with
contracts to cover the current crop,- If the .marketing referendum is
carried, the Government would be able to continue to assist the industry.
The Australian Barley Board operated successfully throughout
the war. ' Barley growers in Sputh Australia and Victoria have been given
a minimum price guarantee which is being continued during ihe 1946-47
season. Barley growers have asked for stabilisation of their industry and
negotiations are now taking place with the States.
Despite the multiple cares of the Government involved in a war
threatening the very existence of Australia as a nation, the
Government never lost faith in ultimatVictory. The best evidence
of this is furnished by the Labor Government’s great extension of
social services and health benefits si,*ce it took office in October, 1941.
The Government has proceeded in firm Adherence to the belief that there
should be freedom from want for all our people. Sickness is a misfortune


that may come to anyone, and *ve believe that the full burden of it
should fall not on the individual hut on the community.
Here are the main points in Labor’s achievements in the
field of social services since October* 1941:-
By three successive steps? the invalid and old-age pension
has been raised from 31/- to 33/6 a week - an increase of more than
50/.
In the application of the morns test? the permissible income of
i
pensioners has been lifted from .to 20/- a week; the property
bar has been raised from £4OO to £650; and many anomalies in pension
legislation have been corrected*
The permissible income for blind persons has been mlsed from
£3 7 6 to £5 7 6 a week - an increase of £2 a week. •
The family means test imposed in respect of an adult invalid
has been abolished. This is an important recognition of the dignity
of the individual human being*'
’ ■ Allowances have been given for the wife and children of an
invalid pensioner.
Ohild endowment has been increased from 5/~ to 7/6 a week.
The. increase has been a boon-to people with young families and a
special contribution to the cause of child welfare.
Pensions for widows were introduced in 1942,
G-reatly increased maternity benefits were made available from
July * 1943.
Unemployment and sickness benefits .introduced in 1944 are an
important- step in social security.
Further steps in the progressive abolition of the means tests
applicable•to pensions will bs tafccto, in the light of the financial
position existing from time to time.
Arrangements have been made for reciprocity between Australia
and Hew Zealand in respect of invalid and old-age pensions. The
nationals of' one country passing to the other secure rights in these
matters. Arrangements ore, on the point of being concluded with Hew
Zealand for similar reciprocal arrangements regarding child endowment*
widows’ pensions* unemployment and sickness benefits.
The extension and adjustment of these measures of social
security - except in relation to invalid and old-age pensions - is


dependent upon an affirmative vote being given by the people to the
Social Services question at the referendum to be taken on September 2£t
I pass now to the Government’s activities in the matter of
health, Th© Pharmaceutical Benefits A c t, passed in 1944, was design-
ed to provide free medicine for the sick. The decision of the High
Court last year has, however, prevented the Government from proceed-
ing with this proposal. /
Through grants to the States, my Government has arranged
that public wards in hospitals throughout Australia are open to all
persons without the application of any means test and without any
charge whatsoever. *At the same time, the Government allows £2:2;-. a
week towards the charges made against a patient in an intermediate
ward of a public hospital or by an approved private hospital which
chooses to come into the scheme.
The Federal Government, by making available to the States
the annual sum of £lOO,OOO on a £ for £ basis for diagnosis and after
care of tubercular patients, has given substantial stimulus to the
campaign against the scourge of tuberculosis. The Government is also
making.available £250,000 a year to the States towards relief of
sufferers from tuberculosis and their dependants. Amounts expended
for this purpose are intended to induce sufferers to give up work,
undertake curative treatment, refrain from work until cured, and re-
lieve them and their families of economic need and anxiety in the
meantime* This approach, it is hoped, will do much to check the
spread of the disease in the community*
By carrying 1 the social services question at the referendum,
the Government will push on with a national medical scheme, providing
clinical, pathological, x-ray and specialist services throughout Aus-
tralia. Special attention will first be given to areas which at pres-
ent lack these facilities. There cannot be, and will not be, any com-
pulsion on doctors to achieve this* Those who wish to so may continue
in private practice. The doctor who joins the Government service will
take pride in rendering disinterested community service,* he will have
an adequate and regular income, recreation leave, superannuation
rights and opportunities for post-graduate study.
When the people confer the necessary power on the Commonwealth
parliament at the referendum, my Government will not be satisfied
until it has provided for the people of Australia a medical and den-


tal service that is complete, free, and of the highest technical
efficiency. Without the requisite power the Government’s vision of
such a service must remain anunrealisable ideal.
The Department of Works and Housing now functions as the
Commonwealth Government’s constructional authority, and will be respon-
sible for implementing the major portion of the Commonwealth post-war
works programme.
When the Allied Works Council was established, it was res-
ponsible for the execution of a gigantic constructional programme,
costing about £170,000,000# While a considerable proportion of the
works were dictated by pressing defence needs, projects such as roads,
aerodromes, hospitals, maritime and dock facilities, oil
storage depots and factories, have a very Teal permanent value
assessed at a figure approaching £loo,ooo^ooo*
The munitions plant construction programme undertaken by the
council was the largest building programme ever undertaken in Australia,
with every State represented and involving an estimated cost of more
than £20,000,000,
The airfield programme required the construction of runways,
scattered throughout the continent, to a total of 400, Strategic high-
ways and access roads covering a total distance of 5,000 miles were
built, reconstructed or maintained. Two graving docks of lasting
naval and mercantile value to Australia, have been constructed, one at
Sydney and the other at Brisbane, Other works of a rharitime nature
included the design and construction of berthing facilities, slipways,
harbour defences and associated dredging operations.
In 1943, the National Works Council was constituted to co-
ordinate and approve the various post-war public works programmes
being- prepared by the States and the Commonwealth, At meetingsof the
council, in 1944 and 1945, approval was given to a post-war programme
of Commonwealth and State works estimated to cost £248,000,000.
As the Commonwealth section of the post-war works programme
began to take definite shape, it was, apparent that a large construc-
tional agency would be required. Accordingly, the Department of Works
was brought into existence in February, 1945; its establishment being
the logical outcome of the Allied Works Council which had rendered
such magnificent service. In August, 1945, the functions of the
department were still further expanded as a result of the addition
of the Directorate of Housing,


In the formulation of the programme approved by the National
Works Council* the Department of Works and Housing has been called
upon to prepare the necessary plans and estimates associated with the
f * •
proposals* As the council required that approved proposals should be
planned to the stage at which work on the project could actually com-
mence, the department has proceeded with the necessary w r orking draw-
ings and the preparation of many sets of specifications and quantities
so that there will be an adequate reservoir of public works ready as
i
circumstances require. y
The primary Constitutional power over housing lies with the
States. But the Commonwealth Labor Government is not blind to an ex-
ceptionally difficult situation even though it has no direct powers
and even though the situation is in large measure, due to neglect in
pre-war years. During the worst period of the war, the Commonwealth
provided over 3,000 dwellings for essential workers, but the principal
effect of the war on housing was that the building of, homes was stopped
and'the labour diverted to urgent war needs. . But as soon as the acute
danger of invasion passed, the Commonwealth Government appointed a
Housing Commission and even before the receipt of its report certain
major tasks were put in hand, the effect of which will be to transform
Australian housing.
Pour big developments have taken place - the negotiation of
the Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement the setting up of the
Commonwealth Experimental Building Station, the establishment of the
Commonwealth Bank Credit Ponder Department and the commencing of a
training scheme for building labour which will provide 33,000 extra
jobs, • • ■ ’
The Commonwealth and Statdb have agreed to do their utmost to
maintain a level of activity sufficient to employ a labour force of
130,000 men. In the housing agreement, the Commonwealth Government has
established a new era in Australian housing-. We have regarded the
housing of the low income earner as a social service and have negotiat-
ed with all. States an agreement whereby rental rebates are available
to families *who cannot pay the full rent of the new houses. But the
Government is also a firm believer in home ownership. To ensure that
adequate finance on reasonable terms is available for the purchase of
houses, the Commonwealth Bank Act last year provided for a credit
t
section with the lowest practicable interest rate# This housing pro-
gramme is designed to cover all sections of the.community but the


returned service man has the greatest need. Under the Commonwealth and
State Housing Agreement, the serviceman is given a substantial preference
and in addition the Government has reduced quite considerably the interest
rates payable through the' War Service Homes Commission and also ‘expanded
the amount which it may lend.
In 194-6-47 9 the objective is to reach at the end of the year a
commencement rate of 50,000 dwellings Even this expanded figure, which
_ i '
is above anything reached before the war, will be inadequate and we hope
that research will yield unorth dox building methods which can be pressed
into service, '
Certain dangers remain to be,, faced, particularly the inflationary
possibility If there is relaxation of controls over the price of land .and
ever rent.
During the war, one f the major tasks handled by the Labor
Government 'was the organisation of the nation 1 s labor force. Previous
governments had failed and the Labor Government ordered total mobilisation.
With the co-operation f State Governments, employers and workers, the
complex fabric of Australian industrial life was interwoven with a total
war effort.
As Australia, entered the transition from war to peace, the Labor
Government was determined that Australian industrial conditions should
once again rank in the vanguard of the world.
Some time ago, the Government relaxed the regulations covering
wage-pegging to permit cf the Commonwealth.Arbitration Court considering
the shorter working week and the basic wage. The Commonwealth intervened
to assist the Court in t e inquiry now being conducted into the 40-hour
working week. It has intimated tc the Australasian Council of Trades
Unions that it is prepared to render the same assistance in an inquiry by
the Court into the basic wage.
The Government has already intimated that it is prepared to
establish a committee comprising* representatives of employers apd employees
to review the principles upon which the basic wage.is calculated end varied,
end to report to the Government.
As economic conditions return to normal, wage-pegging regulations
will be steadily relaxed, with the intention of their eventual abolition.
One of the first pieces of legislation by the Labor Government
in the new Parliament will be a bill tc make a comprehensive revision of
the present Arbitration Act, The extent of that revision will depend on
whether the industrial referendum is carried.


Another important recent development ha- been the re-organisation
of the Department of Labour and National Service on a permanent basis.
The Government attaches great importance to the improvements in effici-
ency vtiioh follow from the application of modern knowledge to the improve-
ment of working conditions. The Industrial Welfare Division will investi-
gate and conduct research into modern methods in the formulation of satis-
factory standards and to assist employers with advice and information,
and 'to collaborate with State Labor Departments in the adopti n of such
standards.
The Commonwealth Employment Service is now available to employers
and workers. It is organised on the basis of a central office with State
head offices in each of the metropolitan fcities and a large number of
district employment offices .and agencies in suburban and country.areas.
In addition 5 certain specialised sections handle the placement of higher
clerical, administrative, and technical personnel, the problems assoc-
iated with the employment of disabled persons, the employment of juveniles
and the difficult problems of ex-service personnel.
No Government has done more ■to solve the tfoal problem than has the
Labor Government. The recent Coal Industry Act,, passed through Parliament
Joins the Commonwealth and New South Wales legislatively in dealing with
a social and technical problem of complexity, which is common to all
countries where coal is. mined undergrounds Better working conditions,
increased mechanization and a way of life for the miner more nearly app-
roaching that of other Australian citizens may be' expected to bring even
greater quantities of coal. Modernisation ot industry is required to
meet the expanding needs of all industry. The coal output is, I remind
you, not negligible. But it must-be remembered that, concurrently with
our great industrial expansion grows a greater need for coal.. The resul-
ting social and technical responsibilities must be fairly shared.
Experience during the war emphasises the necessity for a stock-
taking and the need for planning the future of Australian railway, devel-
opment,. The Labor Government obtained a report on the subject
from Sir Harold Clapp and the Minister for


Transport began negotiations wi.th the States with a vie’/ to standardisation ol railway
covering, not only gauges, but typos'of trucks, locomotives and equipment so that in a
national .emergency the whole resources of the railway system can bo marshalled. Agree-
ment has boon reached with the now .South ..ales, Victorian and South Australian Govern-
ments regarding the conversion of their r
ilwr.y systems to 4ft# 8y in# gauge, mth the
Commonwealth and States sharing the cost of the ,:ork of standardisation. Expenditure
on the plan will not in any T/ay operate to the detriment of other great national works
such as housing and rater conservation, A Railways Council comprising the Commonwealth
and the States concerned has been established to deal with any question that night
arise,
The Labor Government took the initiative in the creation of the Australian
Transport Advisory Council so that railway, road, air and soa transport will be used to
the greatest advantage in their respective spheres and so that the most economic use of
all facilities will be ensured in the interests of the nation.
The Labor Government has set up the Australian Rational Airlines Commission
to operate interstate air services, and the necessary organisation is now being created.
The commission, operating -with the trade name of Trans-Australia Airlines, will open its
first service within a few weeks. The Government will support the commission in the
task of providing air services'to meet the full needs of interstate trade and commerce
with safe, economic and attractive services for> the benefit of the people. It is not
possible for the commission to engage extensively in intra-state air services, but the
Government realises the need for developing services to provincial, country, and outback
rroas* The Government is prepared to .assist development of intra-state services by
private enterprise in accordance with a rational plan of orderly development.
Aaoqur.+o landing grounds and air navigation aids are essential to airline
operation and much has been done by the Government, The Government will continue its
programme of development of aerodromes and airways in co-ordination with its plans for
the development of air services.
The’ Government has resumed assistance to aero clubs and intends to encourage
those clubs and the private ownership of aircraft*
Australia has boon represented at important international civil aviation
conferences - both world-wide and/within the British Commonwealth - and will continue
to play a prominent part in the formulation of international rules and practices and in
the actual operation of international services.
Arrangements have been made for the institution of a British service across
the Pacific, and an operating organisation has boon created in partnership with, the
British and Hew Zealand Governments* Australia•has entered into a partnership
arrangement with Britain for the operation of the air service between Australia and the
United kingdom.
negotiations are proceeding with the unibod States Government for reciprocal
landing rights for services between the two countries.


The Department of Supply was responsible during the war for
the purchase of all supplies, except actual instruments of war, and the
total value of goods procured to the end of 1945 was £452,000,000, of
which contracts to the value of £41,588,000 were placed on behalf of
the United States Forces*. The department’s purchases of goods for
the Eastern Group Supply Council, amounting to £32,000,000 represented
an important contribution to the war in the Middle East, Burma and
X
Indian theatres.-
To carry that programme through, the Department mobilized
production in a large number of fields, such as clothing, textiles,
knitted goods, canvasware ,'rubber, leather and footwear. So that
defence and essential civilian requirements could be met in the.face
of local shortages of manpower and materials, the elimination of many
overseas sources of supply, and shortages of shipping space, a consid-
erable number of controls over goods in short supply were introduced
and successfully administered.
Activities of the Department of Supply, introduced by the Labor
Government, were of paramount importance in the war effort and Australia's
economy.
The Minerals Production Directorate organised the mining industry
and stimulated the production and investigation of resources of strategic
minerals and metals. Excluding money spent in the search for natural oil
the Government provided £2,000,000 for those purposes.
The Allied Supply Council was a focal point and a clearing house
in matters relating to the availability of war supplies from Australian
sources and from overseas for the Allied Forces in the Pacific.
With the end of the war/ the Department of Supply has been
engaged in new activities.
It was faced with the task of terminating nearly 8,000 war
contracts, having an approximate value*of more than £7,000,000. This
war production was tapered off smoothly, and the process was carried
through without any industrial dislocation or unemployment, and with
the minimum payment of compensation.
The Commonwealth Disposals Commission is carrying out the
extremely important task of disposing of all surplus Commonwealth war
assets. It has ensured the speedy, widespread, and equitable distribution


of surplus goods at fair x prices. At the same time, the Commonwealth
i
i.
Treasury has benefited. Sales are now proceeding at the rate of more
than £1,000,000 a week, and to the end of last Junej surpluses to the
extent of £42,000,000 were sold. Immense quantities of war surpluses
have flowed back into the Australian economy, to the advantage of in-
dustry an 1 the community generally* The achievement has been outstanding.
The Government has decided to carry through a large scale •programme
for the re-establishment and development of the mining industry and the
intensive investigation of natural-resources of natural oil and metals.
An Australian Mining Council, comprising Commonwealth and State Ministers
has been' established to review problems o-f national importance in the
mining industry.
The Labor Government established the Department of Shipping,
responsible for the control and utilization of shipping, the Stevedoring
Industry Commission, responsible for the loading and unloading of ships,
and the Maritime Inchldtr.y Commission, responsible for the adequate and
efficient manning of ships. These bodies effected a valuable saving 4f
time in the turn-round of shipping in Australian ports, and in the
despatch of vital cargoes. In spite of the world shortage of shipping,
no essential industry in Australia was ever forced to close down owing
to lack of supplies brought about by insufficient shipping space. Perma-
nent improvements in seamen’s conditions and on the waterfront h§ve been
made. The Government has-now established the Australian Shipping Board,
which combined the functions of a number of authorities and so achieved
a considerable degree of economy in administration* Consideration is
now being given to future Commonwealth shipping policy, and to the future
of the Maritime Industry Commission. The Government has approved plans
to ensure the maintenance of the shipbuilding industry, which will not
be allowed to decline as was the case after the’last war. The Government
has decided to establish a peace-time authority for the control of the
waterfront industry, with powers similar to the Stevedoring Industry
Commission.


The future of Empire preferences is receiving close con-
sideration by the Commonwealth Government in connection with proposals
advanced by the United States fo;~ the establishment of an International
Trade Organisation. These proposals will be discussed at a series of.
International Conferences to be held in the near future.
The Commonwealth Government has accepted an invitation to
be represented at the proposed Conference on Tradv. and Employment, but
this does not carry the implication of any prior commitment or obligation
to reduce or eliminate any particular margin of preference which Australia
is at present entitled to receive t The Commonwealth Government is fully
aware of the importance of protecting Australian export markets and, in .
i
this connection, realises the benefits which have been received in the
past from the Empire preference system. . The Government will approach the
coming international discussions with a sincere desire- to see the intro-
duction *f rneamres which would free international trade from unduly
restrictive barriers, but it will be prepared to make •concessions in
respect of tariffs and pr-eferences only, in return for fully compensating
concessions by other countries which would enable Australian trade, em-
ployment and living standards to be improved.
The Government’s attitude towards the protection of Australian
industries was outlined in the White Paper on Pull Employment as follows-
"While the tariff ahd other methods of protection are legiti-
, , !
mate devices for building Up industries appropriate to our economy,
the grant of protection by the Government to producers is a
privilege whi«h carries with it the responsibility for maintaining,
the highest possible level-'of efficiency. Protection must not be
protection of excessive costs, inefficient methods and obsolete
e-quipm-. nt, nor should it encourage the practice of relying on
rings, cartels, tariffs and a guaranteed home market, rather
than on efficient production. Protection in the past has been
granted upon the advice of the Tariff Board; and the Government
proposes to continue -to rely upon this body."


Very few Commonwealth instrumentalities carried a heavier strain
during the war than the Postal Department arid the work done, both for
the armed forces and civilians, was a magnificent effort. With the
coming of peace, the department is planning to improve facilities,
particularly in isolated areas. Increased country mail services and
expanded house to house deliveries are' among the immediate objectives;
together with the erection of 450 new post offiie and telephone exchange
buildings and the extension of 350 existing premises*
War activities in the Northern Territory have provided the Depart-
ment of the Interior with developments enabling it to push on‘with
greater speed than otherwise would have been the case. Over £15,000,000
were spent in the territory on aerodromes, wharves, bores, roads, and the
like.’ It is planned to re-construct Darwin on a definite plan prepared
by town planning experts and the whole of the freehold land has been
acquired for that purpose. It will be a great undertaking, designed to
make/the doorway to Australia•for overseas visitors a city of which our
country may be proud. The pastoral industry will be placed on a sound
basis and assistance will be given to new settlers, particularly ex-
servicemen. Development of the territory getterally will be carried out
in close co-operatlbn with the Queensland and Western Australian Govern-
ments.
Pending determination as to the future-policy for the adminis-
tration of areas of New Guinea held under mandate, the Papua-New Guinea
Administration Act was passed by the Labor Government in.1945 to provide
for one administration of the former territories of Papua and the Man-
dated Territory of New Guinea. This is a tentative arrangement until
the future policy for the administration of the mandated areas is de-
termined. The major points of the Government’s policy are the fullest
possible development of the Territory and the social, economic and
political advancement of its inhabitants, both native and non-native, :
The government proposes that facilities be provided for better health
and education and for greater participation by the natives in the wealth


f 38.
of their country and' eventually in its government. Australia has dec-
lared its intention to negotiate an appropriate trusteeship agreement
bringing the Territory under the international trusteeship scheme. In
addition, the aims and intentions of the trusteeship system, as they
apply to the advancement and welfare of its inhabitants, will continue
to apply to Papua as well as New Guinea.
»
The Labor Government is now spending £5,000,000 annually on
education and research. The .previous government spent less than
£l*ooo,ooo, The Labor Government has established a programme of Federal
aid to open the way to higher education.
The increase in the current number o r ‘ full-time students at
universities to 14,000, as against 8,000 in 1939, is entirely due to the
Labor ’Government ’s financial assistance to outstanding young students
and to ex-service men and women. About 10,000 full and part time students
arc now receiving assistance from the Universities Commission. That
commission and the Commonwealth Office of Education Were established by
■ /
Government.
Despite the. distractions of war and its financial commitments,
the Government has not lost sight of the value of,culture in the comm-
unity. It has continued active and practical support for the Common-
wealth Literary Fund. The Government will provide £1,000,000 to estab-
lish a National University* Proposals for a National Theatre, put •.
forward by enthusiastic groups, will receive sympathetic consideration
from the Government.
Australian literature, music and art will prove a national asset
as our country develops a culture of its own.
The Labor Government is the first Australian administration to
establish a De-partment of Immigration. Further, within a month of it
coming into being, a comprehensive policy and programme were announced.
It is the Government’s settled policy, by agreements with the British
Government in the first place, and, by other means, embracing desirable
immigrants from other countries,'' to build up a net gain of r ro,ooo a year


in Australia’s population.
Immigration is to be a properly planned undertaking, avoiding the
heart-aches, failures and loss of national prestige that marked the
activities of the previous governments. The Government gives an
assurance to those persons desiring tb dome to Australia* that they
will have a reasonable opportunity of a secure economic future.
The agroemLnt with the British‘Government will operate as from
next January;
While the Government proceeds with a sound policy of immigration,
it also knows that a moat important factor in population is an improve-
ment in tfce birth rate* Many of the social service benefits introduced
by the present Government will assist materially .in this regard,. Invest!
gations are being made into the efficacy o t marriage loans, operating
in various countries.
The Government has re-organised the Department of Information,
which was an important adjunct to the armed forces during the war, into
a compact national publicity unit charged with the responsibility of
making Australia, her why of,life, industries and potentialities better
and more widely known abroad. This Department will aim at advertising
Australian goods fof dferseas markets; to win a full share of the world'
lucrative tourist trade; to attract overseas capital here and to secure
goodwill, understanding and respect for our country among the nations
of the world.
The policy presented tothe people by the Labor Government for
the general elections to be held on September 28 next, is linked with
three important questions upon which the electors are asked to vote by
•*
referendum.
The Government asks you to vote ’yes’ to all three questions so
that the Commonwealth Parliament will be able to legislate as follows-
To provide social services on the widest possible scale.
To provide for the organised marketing of primary products.
To deal with terms and conditions of employment in industry,
/-*S ***/


You will remember that the High Court render-eel invalid the
Commonwealth’s Pharmaceutical Benefits Act and, thereby, made doubtful
continued payments by the Commonwealth of social services such as
maternity allowances, child endowment, sickness and hospital benefits
and the like/' f ,The Opposition parties did not oppose a ’'yes 51 vote on
this * 4 . '
The question relating to employment specifically excludes any
power to authorise any form of industrial conscription. A ’yes’ vote ■
to this question will enable the Commonwealth Parliament to grapple
with all phases of Australian Industrial problems on a nation-wile .c-i
fcasis.
Organised marketing was a success during the war and the vast
majority of primary producers want it continued in the peace. A ’yes’
vote on this question is imperative to ensure the welfare of Australia’s
primary industries.
So.that, in addition to asking you to vote for the Official
Labor Party candidates for Senate and the House of Representatives,
the Government asks you also to vote ’yes’ to all three questions at
the referendum on September 28.
I have given you the record of the Labor Government in the last
five years, -It is really; the story of Australia* of a young country
exalted to nationhood in the testing fire of war by its people’s own
magnificent efforts. The world has praised Australia in War and gives
her,respect in peace in the-international councils where her voice is
ringing evidence of the sustained virility of the British' Commonwealth,
Were the late John Curtin alive today he would give praise to
the Australian peo'ple who, in 1943, endorsed all that the Labor Govern
ment had done and planned to do for Australia. Today, in 1946, the
Labor Government asks the people for further confirmation of its
policies for the advancement and development of our country. Imbued
with political honesty, the Government makes.no extravagant promises
and has a full realisation of the responsibilities of government.
Your alternative is a hotch-potch of two policies, presented


war and scjALt
separately by the Liberal Party and the Country Party. These'.two
parties c, uld not work together even in the compelling atmosphere of
asunder in October, They still remain apart 5
.other in many electorates, and speaking with different
‘policy issues# They are torn by personal jealousies
hostilities.
These parties, that once paraded a policy of "sound finance"
now attempt to corrupt the people and threaten our national economy
with promises tin t will not stand examination and, indeed, that amount
to unbridled election bribery on a scale that cannot possibly be paid.
The Labor Government is being opposed in this election by
parties that differ fundamentally on economic and social Questions.
The Conservative parties, led by Mr. Irenzies and hr. -Fadden, seek the
overthrow of the Labor Government for the benefit of privileged .
interests. The Communist Party, by opposing staunch Labor members,
is endeavouring to weaken the Government and ultimately destroy the
Labor P^rty.
I urge the people to unite in a. stirring effort to retain
the Labor Government. ' You, the people, trusted Labour - when all
others had failed - to save the country in the face of the enemy.
You, the people, can trust Labor to win the peace for the.greater
hapoiness and prosperity of all men, women .and children in our fair
land and for the secured welfare of those generations still to come.


'
) I
) * ~
) , T > M' - '
4M- - ■ ■
' ,* ! . # .■•-*-/■ „
- v • v £fc r ~ . *•■*• £" ‘ ' '■■'• ..
- ... " • ' "# /■ ■ • ■. .
; 1 -« , -
• -$ v * 2s* ' 1 • .. ••♦ • *• ■■-•* -t:,.
, , -; ,
> ... ■ & * -. v- ; - • ,. ' * .
-
; *
■ 1 J‘ ,
, ‘ * ’ ■$./ v • .... ■ • - r •;
: ■ * ■
..
. .. r , .
. ■ V "'•. ■ W • v .
, _■•_•+, . u r' vi
■ * 'V ' v '
•?;■ • .. &-
-it
* ‘
.
3 1508 01991656 3
