

LIKE
THE
MOLAVE
MAKATA 7
BY
R. ZULUETA DA COSTA
R. ZULUETA DA COSTA




LIKE THE MOLAVE
&
COLLECTED POEMS




LIKE THE
MOLAVE &
COLLECTED
POEMS
Makata 7
R. ZULUETA
DA COSTA
INTRODUCTION BY
SALVADOR P. LOPEZ
ALBERTO S. FLORENTINO
1973


Copyright 1940, 19J2, by R. Zulueta da Costa
Manufactured in the Philippines
Typography by Tirso Obispo
Cover design by Fernando Zobel de Ayala
Printed by Carmelo & Bauermann, Inc.
XI. XX. LII
LIKE THE MOLAVE —First published in book form
in 1940 and subsequently reprinted in part in
various publications, including anthologies in
the Philippines and in the United States of
America.
COLLECTED POEMS 1938-1941 —Originally published
in The Sunday Tribune, The Graphic, The Phil-
ippines’ Herald, The Philippines Free Press and
other periodicals.
COLLECTED POEMS 1946-1912 —First published in
Filipino: Contemporary Verse & Prose, Evening
News Magazine, Sunday Times Magazine, and
Weekly Women’s Magazine.


CONTENTS
LIKE THE MOLAVE
Page 1 5
COLLECTED POEMS
1938 - 1941
Page 45
COLLECTED POEMS
1946- 19J2
Page 79




FOR TELLY




INTRODUCTION
By SALVADOR P. LOPEZ
C RITICS are generally agreed that modern American poetry started
with Walt Whitman. Tracing the genealogy of the leading poets
during the past fifty years, they point out how the thread of the
Whitman tradition has run through every change of temper and
fashion to our own day. Whitman led the more vital poetic revolt
of two that shook American letters during the latter half of the nine-
teenth century, a revolt directed against the frigid intellectual clas-
sicism of the day and the stiff classical forms that were favored by
the later Victorians and by their counterparts in America. On the
other hand, the more spectacular Symbolist revolt, stemming from
Baudelaire and Rimbaud, was essentially a revolt of escapism, marked
by the half-scared, half-snobbish aloofness of the sensitive poet who
looks upon the world with an averted glance or a squeamish eye. The
revolt led by Whitman derived in a sense from Wordsworth, and was
essentially a revolt marked by challenge and affirmation on behalf of
the common man and the soil whence come his nourishment and
strength.
By a process of contagion that is by no means mysterious, these
two revolutionary traditions in modern poetry had, as might have been
expected, their repercussions in the Philippines. First came the Sym-
bolist influence or its equivalent belated, as most of the cultural in-
fluences upon the Philippines were belated, by reason of the natural
lag in the transmission through a strange language of the artistic and
intellectual values inherent in it. Poetry was regarded as strictly
amoral; that is, without any context in reality or any purpose what-
ever, apart from the highly personal and private intuitions of the
poet. From this sprang the ivory tower poetry of the twenties, in
itself constituting a two-fold revolt against the poetry of the preced-
ing period —a repudiation of the übiquitous moral or sentimental tone
of the latter, and a departure from the stiff verse forms that it favored.
The result was a poetry more firmly moulded according to the poet’s
strictly individual affirmations of his inner life.


This school produced in the Philippines a Jose Garcia Villa who
resembles, in his artistic predilections and in his career, the emigre
American poets who fled their homeland in order to find in the freer
atmosphere of Europe, especially in France, the hospitality, encourage-
ment, and appreciation that they craved. The native scene, heavy
with the musty odor of morality, and hostile to iconoclasts of every
stripe, flattered neither their vanity nor their pride. Their reaction
was not unexpected: a bitter disgust with the philistinism of those
who condemned the uncommon frankness of their speech, and a su-
perior disdain of the bourgeois mind that would not respond to'the
modem spirit of revolution that they were supposed to exemplify.
But this revolution was, and has always been anywhere, a fragile
and ineffectual revolution at best. The great revolutionary changes
in the arts have ever been directed against things of greater pith
and moment than mere matters of form and technique or even of
private morality. They have been directed against the condition of
man in a given society, and the philosophy of life which sustains
that condition. They have been harnessed, affirmatively, to great
human and social ends.
This is the type of revolution that ’Whitman typified and that
has persisted in American letters through three quarters of a century
in the works of Edwin Markham, Vachel Lindsay, Carl Sandburg,
and Muriel Rukeyser. By the process of contagion already alluded
to, it was inevitable that the area of this influence would eventually
include the Philippines or any other country that may chance to hear,
speak or write the American language. Even Villa, in mind and
temperament poles apart from the Whitman tradition, could not
resist the magnetic rhythms of "Leaves of Grass," any more than the
introvert and morbid Robinson Jeffers could resist the large and re-
sounding harmonies of the Whitman line. But Villa was never in-
tellectually or emotionally equipped to receive and transmit the deep
social passion and the expansive democratic vistas of Whitman, and
it is not to him that we must turn for the full-bodied realization
of the Whitman tradition in the Philippines. Villa comprehended no


more than the outward shell of this tradition; he was completely ig-
norant of the living seed of social significance that lay within, and
it has so far not struck any deep roots in his own poetry.
For a rich flowering of this tradition in the Philippines, we must
turn to a poet of larger vision than he. In R. Zulueta da Costa
we meet a legitimate inheritor of the best and sturdiest poetic tradition
in American letters, and Like the Molave is an earnest of his intel-
lectual affiliation and artistic communion.
In this long title poem of the collection, a Filipino poet speaks
on a difficult subject—difficult for any artist in any medium—in a
voice that rings true. For Like the Molave is essentially a patriotic
poem—a glowing celebration of the national destiny, an eloquent
statement of Filipinism. Few artists have tackled such a theme with-
out succumbing to either of two temptations which are fatal to art:
sentimentality which, in the Filipino poet, is a congenital weakness;
and declamation which becomes more blatantly histrionic still with
every accession of the patriotic fire. With very few exceptions, all
patriotic poems are of necessity third-rate, and this is because pa-
triotism is one of the shallowest and most artificial of the human
emotions, pandering to a group-feeling that is rarely sound and honest.
Like the Molave is one of these few exceptions, and it escapes
this summary judgment only because it stands up as an indubitable
work of art, as competent in execution as it is sound and honest in
thought. The patriotic passion is banked with a fine restraint, and
the affirmation of Filipinism is wisely balanced with the sharp satire
of genuine self-knowledge. The poet never flatters his countrymen
unduly; he tells them of the "marmoreal dream” of a great nation
that must be carved on the "silent cliffs of freedom," but he asks them
also whether they are ready to accomplish the task ".today . . . this
hour . . . this minute,” or wait "tomorrow and tomorrow.” We
can be a nation
like the molave, firm, resilient, staunch,
Rising on the hillside, unafraid,
Strong in its own fibre ;


or we can be
. . . soft
easy-going, parasitic, frivolous,
inconstant, indolent, inefficient
a nation
. . . forever and forever
Lighting candles in the wind.
Our poet wields a broadsword in one hand, and a scalpel in the
other—the broadsword against those who would speak ill and un-
justly of our people, the scalpel to cut up the festering sores that
afflict the nation. He celebrates and condemns, affirms and denies;
he challenges the distortions of the hostile critics but makes criticisms
truer and more penetrating of his own. He sees:
The youth of the land . . . an old man laughing through
a perpetual infancy;
. . . a bastard child of a thousand dreams,
masquerading and dancing;
he sees the citizen going to Quiapo church every Friday
Give me a raise and 1 will offer a candle
and another going to Antipolo every May—
. . . more profits for more candles-;
and he overhears the banal vulgarities which pass for wit among the
young people, and the vacuous conversation of the elite.
He sees and hears all these and excuses nothing. But if he re-
cords them with a sharp and unforgiving eye, it is because he would
look through them and beyond
I sec man standing up to the challenge of the centuries, head flung
skyward, proud, pushing darkness back with the fire of a
single candle . . .
In him I see a multitude of long accumulations and great
prophecies hastening into fulfillment.


The poet has achieved that rare equipoise which is only to be
found in artist minds of the highest order: perfect sanity within the
inexplicable domain of genius.
But he probes deeper yet into the social cancer; he sees beneath
the symptoms on the surface; he knows instinctively that there is more
to the disease by which the nation is afflicted than meets the eye.
He writes:
In the year before Christ there were whips.
In the year of our Lord there are also whips.
Other than leather—
and he asks:
The government builds for progress.
The capitalist builds for more capital ...
What does the worker build for?
Elsewhere, he gives the answer obliquely and not without that fine
satirical touch which makes the nerves tingle with a pleasant sense
of discovery:
Some day, some enterprising publisher will visualize
the business possibilities of human concern in the
humble, and resolve to uplift, inspire, elevate
the people with a rotogravure of the man in the fields
at Iris tomato and rice;
the fisherman hauling his net;
the teacher bent over lesson-plans;
the workers waist-deep in mud;
the miners choking in gold dust.
Here is poetry that is as large in its social sympathies as the
sweep of its resonant lines is large; poetry that is exultant because it
exalts the common man. Rarely has the Social Muse been courted
in language of surer accent and more irresistible persuasion. And
as if to complete and round off his extraordinary triumph, the
magnificent tour de force by which he has married politics unto
poesy, the poet digresses awhile in order to set forth his artistic
creed:


Poets, philosophers, painters, musicians,—artists all,
Your place is wherever and everywhere!
In you, advancement and regeneration!
In you, the sacred fire of a single candle
magnified into a nation!
In you, precipitations of the individual into people.
The magnitude of this achievement in Filipino poetry is not
diminished by any criticism to the effect that it is no more than
the adaptation to the local scene of a modern poetical fad, fashion
or craze. To make this all-too-familiar charge is to repeat what the
already discredited critics once said of modern art: that it is crude,
sensational, and barbaric. The answer to this is that the crude,
sensational, and barbaric Whitman, like his counterparts in painting
—Matisse, Gaugin, and Van Gogh—stands today at the very peak
of American achievement in poetry, and the calibre of that achieve-
ment is nothing to scoff at.
Every age, said Emerson, requires a new confession. Each gen-
eration speaks a language peculiar to itself, best suited to express its
ideas and ideals, its hopes and frustrations, and moulded more
cleanly for the newer and more manifold uses of man and society.
The language of our age and generation is the language of inquiry
and protest, of affirmation and challenge, and they must lack under-
standing who think that this is a mere fad, fashion or craze. Our
speech is a more public speech, and the language of our poetry must
approximate as closely as possible the speech of the common people,
not so much in the manner as in the matter thereof, with only this
difference: that it must of necessity retain the suggestive ambiguity
and something of the sheer incantation of verse which characterize
the poetry of every age and clime.
The charming romantic poetry of the feudal age, and the smug
neo-romantic poetry of the capitalistic era are gone forever, along
with the social systems of which they were the expression. A new
poetry has arisen, expressing and growing out of the predicament of


man in our time—of man earnestly seeking a way out of the terrible
chaos in which he is involved, of man in protest against an unendur-
able order of things and trying desperately to fashion a new and
happier world out of the ruins.
The poetry of Shakespeare, Pope or Keats, of Longfellow, Lanier
or Poe can no more be written today than the times in which they
lived can be restored in the England of Winston Churchill or the
America of Franklin D. Roosevelt. Poetry has rightly been called one
of the mainstays of the race, and it is not likely to be outmoded by
the progress of that science which is supposed to be its implacable
enemy. Man will outgrow poetry only if our poets remain aloof from
the mainstream of human life, if they insist in speaking an occult
language of their own, if they flee the raging battle around them on
the excuse that art is their only business and the life of man is not.
If poetry is to remain as the “ever surer and surer stay” of the race,
our poets must speak to us in a language that we know and can under-
stand; in a language, one might say, as modern as television and yet
as eternal as light.
R. Zulueta da Costa speaks this language to us and for us in this
book of poems. The language is not without flaws. It suffers in
places from a rhetorical exuberance that the reader may justly ascribe
to the prodigality of youth; the crashing harmonies of the long lines
coming wave on wave break upon him with a plenitude of music that,
thrilling at first, soon becomes somewhat tedious. On the other hand,
where he uses the standard verse forms, he is often compelled by his
fastidious regard for the rules of metre to use awkward inversions and
ellipses with such results as:
Above the heaving grass, the spirit rears
Its weeping unto prayer; body hears,
Intoned, continuing whisper, God-begun;
and this:
They will forsake
Your shrine; when ended is grief-holiday,
Pray’r will, with flags, be neatly tucked away.


The opening lines of Luts the Molave are pretty nearly spoiled
by the stilted apostrophe to the "spirits of the martyred brave,” and
the use of repetition soon becomes a mannerism that no longer fools
the accustomed ear. But the flaws of language are few and far be-
tween, and they detract but little from the excellence of the perform-
ance as a whole. For this excellence is not merely technical; it is the
excellence of substance, of something thought out, argued, and laid
bare—the excellence of
You in whose hands is government,
We charge you with the people:
Are your hands holy for the sacred trust?
Blaze fiercely, government; you are the way
Out of the wilderness of withered institutions.


LIKE THE MOLAVE


1 want out people to grow ttnd be like the molave
strong and resilient, rising on the hillside,
unafraid of the raging flood, the lightning
or the storm, confident of its own strength.
—Quezon


LIKE THE MOLAVE
I
Not yet, Rizal, not yet. Sleep not in peace:
There are a thousand waters to be spanned;
There arc a thousand mountains to be crossed;
There are a thousand crosses to be borne.
Our shoulders are not strong; our sinews are
Grown flaccid with dependence, smug with ease
Under another’s wing. Rest not in peace;
Not yet, Rizal, not yet. The land has need
Of young blood —and, what younger than your own,
Forever spilled in the great name of freedom,
Forever oblate on the altar of
The free? Not you alone, Rizal. O souls
And spirits of the martyred brave, arise!
Arise and scour the land! Shed once again
Your willing blood! Infuse the vibrant red
Into our thin anaemic veins; until
We pick up your Promethean tools and, strong,
Out of the depthlcss matrix of your faith
In us, and on the silent cliffs of freedom,
We carve for all time your marmoreal dream!
Until our people, seeing, are become
Like the molave, firm, resilient, staunch,
Rising on the hillside, unafraid,
Strong in its own fibre; yes, like the molave!


II
The youth of the land is a proud and noble appellation,
The youth of the land is a panoramic poem,
The youth of the land is a book of paradoxes,
The youth of the land is a pat on one’s back,
The youth of the land is a huge canvas of spectral colors,
The youth of the land is an epic tragedy-comedy,
The youth of the land is a crashing symphony,
The youth of the land is a child grown old in tears,
The youth of the land is an old man laughing through a
perpetual infancy;
A bastard child of a thousand dreams, masquerading and
dancing,
The youth of the land.


11l
Twenty thousand young men march
flags unfurled heads lifted high!
One two three four!
Twenty thousand young men halt
at the martyr’s monument.
Ha-alt! one two!
Silence and the President begins: My fellow countrymen.
The youth of the land listens, shifts uneasily, nudges his fellow
youth of the land: Say look at that dame, some number, not
bad at all.
The youth of the land listens: Christ, I hope he cuts the
blahblah short, I’m getting fed up; say, some legs; hell, it looks
like rain!
The youth of the land listens, stands erect, nudges his fellow
youth of the land: Say, that sonofabitching corporal’s got his
eye on us, one more demerit and I’m done for.
The youth of the land listens.
The President ends: We shall fulfill their dream. Applause.
Twenty thousand young men march
One two three four!
Compane-e dismissed!
Hell, that’s over; Christ, some dame!


IV
We, the Filipinos of today, are soft,
easy-going, parasitic, frivolous,
inconstant, indolent, inefficient.
Would you have me sugarcoat you?
I would be happier to shower praise upon
my countrymen . . . but let us be realists . . .
let us strip ourselves . . .
Youth of the land you are a bitter pill to swallow.
This is a testament of youth borne on the four pacific winds;
This is a parable of seed four ways sown in stone;
This is a chip not only on the President’s shoulder:
The nation of our fathers shivers with longing expectation.
Shall we, sons and daughters, brother youths of the land,
Walk up now and forever knbck the flirting'chip off?
Or will the nation of our fathers be forever and forever
Lighting candles in the wind?


V
The answer is tomorrow and tomorrow.
We shall give up our lives, tomorrow.
Today? this hour? this minute?
We are secure under the Stars-and-Stripes.
I went to a movie today gosh I cried.
I went to a movie yesterday gee I laughed.
I bought my laughter and my tears.
My horse gave dividendazo yesterday.
My new dress is the latest note.
My parents gave me the best of education.
I speak English and Spanish and French.
I speak foreign languages without accent.
I can lisp a little Tagalog.
I think the conga is divine don’t you?
I think Szostakowics is brilliant don’t you?
We Manilans are really cosmopolitan.
Was not Franco the word divine made incarnate?
Were not those leftist reds atrocious?
Federico Garcia Lorca? Never heard of him.
Punctually we remember our dead once a year.
Punctually we worship God on Sunday morning.
We are the only Christian nation in the Orient.


I donated a new organ to my parish.
I made a novena to Saint Anthony.
I give regularly to our missions.
Our missions cleared the jungle dark.
Our missions hoisted God upon the mountain-top.
Our Igorot child says give me money.
At the outskirts of the town the schoolhouse inspires.
The children inspire. Philippines my Philippines.
When Washington was a boy his father gave him a hatchet.
We must not tell lies. We have no money for education.


VI
My American friend says:
show me one great Filipino speech to make your people
listen through the centuries;
show me one great Filipino song rich with the soul of your
seven thousand isles;
show me one great Filipino dream, forever sword and
shield
speech eloquent and simple as cur Of the People by the
People for the People;
song grand, foreverlasting as our My Country ’Tis of Thee;
dream age-enduring, sacred as our American democracy!
Friend, our silences are long but we also have our speeches.
Father, with my whole heart I forgive all.
Believe me, your reverence.
Speeches short before the firing squad, and ye: of love.
1 want our people to grow and be like the molave.
A new edifice shall arise, not out of the ashes
Of the past, but out of the standing materials
Of the present.
Speeches short, blooming with hope on the threshold of the sun.
I want to be a plain Juan de la Cruz.
Speeches short, of a man remembering a man long and long.
Friend, our songs are legion but all songs are one.
Land of the Morning is but one;


the others are a kaleidoscope of tunes
rimmed by the pentagram of the Pacific —
of Luzon, of Visayas, of Mindanao —
songs lush with brown earth
and the tides of tears and laughter;
and all songs are one.
Friend, our dreams are rooted in the earth,
but all our dreams are wings;
rising in the first sweep of sunrise
tumultuously above the hills,
in the sinking wake of sundown
swift along the curve of shore,
from the hollows of dark silence
soaring up the astral solitudes;
and all wings are dreams,
and all dreams are peace.


VII
My American friend continues:
you are a nation being played for a sucker;
you are susceptible to lachrymal inducement:
a man comes to you with a sobtale and soon
you are a poorfish swallowing hook-line-and-sinker.
And I answer with parable of analogy:
one adventured into port and called us brothers;
we fed him with the milk and honey of the land;
he filled his pockets by the sweat of the little brown
brother and packed for home,
taking with him but one song for souvenir:
O the monkeys have no tails in Zamboanga.
The lady visitor wishes to study Filipino culture and life:
our museums are open, our history rich with generations;
under her nose at every turn the vital life of a child-nation
beating its hopeful beat with eager avian pulse,
giving her tokens: a mestiza dress, a bamboo flute, a song.
She gives something in return: she pays an urchin to
undress and pose climbing a coconut tree for the folks
back home.
Over and over returning parable.
Friend, are these the ways of the West?
Friend, this is not the American Way.


The little brown brother opens his eyes to the glorious sound of
the Star Spangled;
dreams to the grand tune of the American dream;
is proud to be part of the sweeping American magnitude;
strains his neck upon the rising skyscraper of American
ideals, and on it hinges faith, hope, aspiration;
sings the American epic of souls conceived in liberty:
quivers with longing brotherhood of men created equal;
envisions great visions of the land across the sea where
dwell his strong brothers.
And then the fact. The crushing fact of a world no longer
shining through the exalted word;
the world where the deed is, the intolerable deed.
Across the sea the little brown brother is no longer a creature
terrorized by hatred, shamed by contempt and the sting of
prejudice:
he is a child fondling the smashed remains of a toy given
by mother and by mother shattered;
he is a child wondering, questioning, are these the ways of
a mother?
he is a child perplexed and hurt, yet fondling the ghost of
a toy;
hoping and hoping mother will mend the toy.
The repatriate returns sullen and broken: he is that child. We
know the story, the black looks, the scowls, the placards
in the restaurants saying: Neither Dogs nor Filipinos


Allowed; the warning at the fair: Beware of Filipino
Pickpockets; the loneliness, the woman denied.
Yet what say you, repatriate? America is a great land.
Dear child, hoping and hoping mother will mend the toy.
The emigrant thinks: surely if we welcome the big white bro-
ther blasting the gold out of our hills, surely, the little
brown brother will not be grudged the picking of lettuce
leaves from his fields.
Dear child, hoping and hoping.
The Shanghai refugee arrives: this is the new home.
The Jewish refugee arrives: this is the new home.
The Hongkong refugee arrives: this is the new home.
Philippines, you are not a sucker.
Philippines, you are the molave child, questioning,
wondering, perplexed, hurt;
the molave child hoping and hoping mother will mend
the shattered toy.


VIII
The Philippine canvas is flushed with heroic hues;
The Philippine canvas is not one vicious daub of machinations,
politics, pot-bellied softnesses and youth gone waste.
Our dead heroes have been mummified into books for youth
to read and say, some guy!
Our dead heroes have been pigeonholed into dates we make
public show of remembering.
What are dead heroes if from the wells of their lives we draw
not the water to slake our long thirst?
What, if from the springs of their spirit we drink not of faith
and the strength of our days?
Where are the living heroes? Who are they?
Close your books and come with me where tread unsung, heroes,
great men and women standing up to the challenge of
life.
Not in books alone are gods; not in newspapers: the roto-
gravures do not reckon them of human interest.
The newspapers must portray Miss Social Satellite picking an
olive with finger-tips in the latest nail- tone;
The newspapers must depict Mrs. Social Service mahjongging
for the fleeing in the city of Whocares:
They are of human interest; they are big business to be splashed
across the pages for the veneration of the faithful.


Some day, some enterprising publisher will visualize the business
possibilities of human concern in the humble, and resolve
to uplift, inspire, elevate the people with a rotogravure of
the man in the fields at his noonday tomato and rice;
the fisherman hauling his net;
the policeman beating his beat;
the teacher bent over lesson plans;
the hospital doctor and the nurse asking not:
race? color? creed?
the clerk at his constant figures;
the workers waist-deep in mud;
the miners choking in gold-dust,—
yes, the living heroes, bluepenciled,
wastebasketed, heaped on dumping ground.
Only, I have an inkling such newspaper items would be circused
in some special tent;
really, an amusing sideshow.


IX
From hinterland holes and seacoasts, barrio wastes and city
slums they come;
From profound darknesses they come rubbing their eyes in the
light of government.
You in whose hands is government, .
We charge you with the people:
Are your hands holy for the sacred trust?
Blaze fiercely, government; you are the way
Out of the wilderness of withered institutions.
From schoolrooms, factories, offices, mine-holes and sewers they
come;
From pits of drugged sleep they emerge remembering wild
dreams and angry winds;
On the tides of dark and light they stand with brave assertions:
Once you struck fear in our hearts.
We can no longer listen to you.
We have no faith in your vacuous promises.
From pulpit and pedestal shout yourselves
red in the face:
The sapling you would bend is grown like
the molave;
Yes, like the molave.


X
"Guilty!” said the judge, adjusting his glasses,
to the man who had helped himself to
an ounce of gold.
And, taking them off, he smiled an appeasing
"good-morning” to the man who had
pocketed tons of it.


XI
Brother poets, what is your lay?
I know the story well, the twofold struggle with riches of soul
and hunger of body,
yet you sing.
What is your message?
Because you would mobilize starved dreamers against too much
money in too few hands, wrong hands, are you charged
with waving red flags in your poems?
In Pampanga they wave little red flags
and they are no poets.
Because you would write flesh-poems, do they snarl?
Have they forgotten flesh is loving tabernacle of soul, and to
sing of flesh is to sing of soul?
In covert wilds and cloaked fastnesses
they also know, and are no poets.
Do you blush because you could pour'your faith, your hope,
your blood, into a poem, and tremblingly lay it at a
woman’s feet?
And do exalted poems confuse you at first, and finally become
embodiments of light?
After the tremendous impact of a poem with soul, have you not
felt a benediction released as from eternity?


Would security—a steady job, an insurance policy, a bankbook,
a pension—bribe you into smugness and finally buy you
off into silence?
If tomorrow heaven and all under it, earth and all over it, were
offered you in barter of a single poem, would you trade it?
Could you forsake home and loved ones to forever dedicate your
dreams to earth and the supreme goodnesses thereof?
Does every object you touch, every sight you see, every
pulsation and breath, every sound and every silence,
become a pang, a joy, and at last a poem uttered and
shining, or unsaid yet inwardly shining?
Do you not hear the haunting accents of the perfect poem still
to come from you?
Would it not be the grand epitome of all breath crystallized into
credo, the magnific utterance of you striding the earth,
gathering centuries gone and aeons to come, cupping the
bittersweet of a thousand lives and a thousand deaths, a
clinging armful of woman?
And, having been written, would it not be your last?
And, having written it, would you not surely die?
And, would death startle you more than the perfect poem,
being the poem beyond perfection, uttered in the silence
of becoming?


XII
Not the poet alone nor the poem:
remember the artist and his canvas.
The soul of the canvas is not art;
the body of the canvas is not art:
Body and soul are one prophetic surge of
wave on wave dashing across oceanic
solitudes laden with sargasso of tidal
dreams.
The canvas is not life nor its delineation:
The canvas must be alive with the throb of
boundless intimations,
And the artist who intimates beyond spirit
paints beyond the boundaries of sense;
And no frame can contain the infinite
extensions of art; wave mounting on wave,
height upon height.
What do you perceive behind the finished painting and beyond?
I see man standing up to the challenge of centuries, head flung
skyward, proud, pushing darkness back with the fire of a
single candle;
I see man naked and unshivering in the four winds, defiant and
arrogant in the clamoring blast, warm with the fire of his
single candle;
In him I see a multitude of long accumulations and great
prophecies hastening into fulfillment;


In him, the sinews of a billion years and divine energies poured
into the rearing of edifices not built of stoiie and steel,
and not with hands alone;
In him, illimitable horizons extending beyond and on.
Poets, philosophers, painters, musicians, —artists all,
your time is always and ever!
Your place is wherever and everywhere!
In you, advancement and regeneration!
In you, the sacred fire of a single candle
magnified into a nation!
In you, precipitations of the individual into people,
Strong as the molave!


XIII
The building is a landmark of progress.
The last stone has been laid, the last bolt riveted.
The big boss beams; the architect, the engineer smile.
Handshakes. Pretty speeches. The noble dedication.
The shining placard: Erected A.D. 1940.
Who records the history of an edifice?
Who tells the story from cornerstone to ceremony?
Who peers into the humanity of daily-wage earners?
Who rehearses the drama of diggers, pile-drivers, riveters,
masons, wood-workers and painters?
Who investigates their motives?
Who speaks the tongue of myriad interpretations?
The government builds for progress.
The capitalist builds for more capital.
The architect builds' for achievement.
The engineer builds for enterprise.
The holy one builds for the glory of God.
What does the worker build for?
In the year before Christ there were whips.
In the year of our Lord there are also whips.
Other than leather.


XIV
They also count, the masses:
buffeted and baffled, steady in routine,
wing-clipped somewhere in flight, and now
unconscious, unconcerned over wing beat
beyond the senses; lost, lost, lost.
They also count, these poets, philosophers,
artists in the nameless way that is the people’s:
little drops? Somehow, I think, the ocean;
and in the swollen waters of the people’s faith,
found, found, found.


XV
Out of the tangled threads of multicolored dreams the land
weaves intricate and undecipherable designs;
Upon the margin of forever shifting sands flesh fluctuates with
mute interrogations.
The city lights flare up, and from the sanctuary of shelter we
emerge with faces avid for the night-time mystery, poised
for the unexpected flight.
Who sells wings? Ten centavos a pair.
The orchestra explodes and there is flight.
Who sells wings? Two bucks a pair.
What do you say, hah? How about it, hah?
Who sells wings? Ten bucks a pair.
I want them highclass and hygienic, see?
Who sells wings? Fifteen bucks a pair. Plus drinks.
I gotta try a white some time, don’t I?
Who sells wings? A pair for every pocket.
The kitchen fires light up. Let us pray.
The radio barks. Spain, China, Africa, Finland,
Holland, Belgium, France. Time for a glass of beer.
Weep generous prayer. Join the Red Cross.
Fair weather generally with passing showers and
Thunderstorms. Catalog novenas and te deums.
Who sells wings? A pair for every pocket.


From sun to morning star, in Quiapo church there is
great praying every Friday.
Molave Christ, give me wings.
Forgive me my trespasses as I cannot forgive others.
Give me this day a little more than bread.
Make my husband a Saint Joseph with others.
Give me a child, boy or girl, but if possible.
Give me a raise and I will offer a candle.
Forgive me the sins by which I earn my living.
Black Nazarene, give me wings.
In Antipolo every May there is also great praying before
the dancing and the lovemaking.
Holy Mother, make him dance with me.
Holy Mother, a yearly pilgrimage I promise if only.
Holy Mother, I am not worthy of the grand prize,
Holy Mother, only a small prize and I promise.
Holy Mother, a good husband.
Holy Mother, more profits for more candles.
Holy Mother, give me wings.
The orchestra conductor raises his baton.
Give us wings.
The train careens into the night.
Give us wings.
The autocab speeds, the bus, the tram.
Give us wings.
This is my own my native land.
Give us wings.


On the threshold of enchantment youth stands graduate
with vision:
Where is the immutable scroll?
Where the unscalable altitude?
Give us wings not only for the heights.
Wings also for the depths and the descent.
Wings, wings, wings for every pocket:
Who sells wings for the pocketless?


XVI
For the pocketless, Elementary Psychology:
It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle.
For the pocketless, a resonant voice:
My countrymen the day approaches.
For the pocketless, the darkglasses of $ and P.
For the pocketless, Higher Psychology:
Yours is the promised land of Canaan.
You will inherit the earth.
Come follow me.
Children, if you behave well, a glorified lollypop.


XVII
Let the words fly and boom and crash.
Let the centuries spin and calculate.
The mathematical certainty endures:
Philippines minus (Spain plus America) equals molave
Who will decipher the Philippine hieroglyph?
Who, unravel the intricate formula?
Who, enter the jungle, mount the steep,
And find molave proud, knowing no death?


XVIII
They say the molave is extinct
But they are blind or will not see.
Stand on the span of any river, and lo!
Relentlessly to and fro, cross and recross, molave!
Yes, molave strikes roads into the darkest core!
Yes, molave builds seven thousand bridges in blood!
Bagumbayan planted the final seed.
Balintawak nurtured the primal green.
Molave, uprooted and choked, will not succumb.
Molave presses on and will not be detained.
Let Spain speak.
Let America speak.


XIX
Not yet, Rizal, not yet.
The glory hour will come.
Out of the silent dreaming,
From the seven-thousandfold silence,
We shall emerge, saying: we are Filipinos,
And no longer be ashamed.
Sleep not in peace.
The dream is not yet fully carved.
Hard the wood, but harder the blows.
Yet the molave will stand.
Yet the molave monument will rise.
Gods walk on brown legs.


COLLECTED POEMS
1938 - 1941


ALEXANDER LIPPAY
Mourn not for him: he was not poor whose hand
Reached out for stars and showered them to earth;
He is not dead whose love proclaimed the birth
Of deathless dreams upon the sleeping strand.
The hali is hushed. No more his magic wand
Shall conjure Russian grief, Castilian mirth;
No more. But weep for us: we face a dearth
As of the ocean, from the parched sand.
And other souls shall come; applause will rend
The passing air, for every sun must wane
Before a moon. But earth shall not contain
Its handful dedicated unto end
In beauty. Death for him forever be
As silence, after one great symphony.


THE LOVER
All suddenly, the mystery is gone
Before the breathless whisper into ears
Grown old in music of unending tears
On rock insensible. And night is done.
Alone and reverent under the sun,
Above the heaving grass, the spirit rears
Its weeping unto prayer; body hears,
Intoned, continuing whisper, God-begun.
And lover knows: he drinks of poisoned streams
Unhurt; rides on, tenacious, up the steep
And solitary cliff, until all beams
Are for his touching. Ultimately, deep
Fulfillment of foreverlasting dreams
That are no longer of the earth’s sad sleep.


THE SOLDIERS
I bring no flowers for the dead; my lips
Do not remember them. The weeping world
Makes holiday of death with flags unfurled:
Was not death victory for truth? Wax drips
In generous remembrance; tears eclipse
The run of blood; from pious censers twirled
With solemn dignity, behold: uncurled
The coils, the hate they call Apocalypse.
Defeated dead, here is a song-bouquet
I gathered from the slopes of silence. Take
This pray’r, full of the grace of earth, I lay
Before your fallen cross. They will forsake
Your shrine; when ended is grief-holiday,
Pray’r will, with flags, be neatly tucked away.


MUSIC
Out of the silent earth, the mystery
Unfolds its dreaming glory: there is sound
And man no longer is alone. Spell-bound,
He hears the wild enchantment of the sea;
The beat of earth and sky; the ecstasy
Of life, of love, of death, in his profound
And eucharistic heart forever crowned
In music. Called and chosen, it must be.
He builds a temple in the midst of men
With stone hewn from the cliffs of beauty; here
May worship saint and sinner, Magdalen
And Judas; here may man the secret tear
Weep forth —cry ultimate for gloriole
For music makes cathedral of man’s soul.


A SUITE OF SONGS
I
I live intensely. O how splendidly
The mystery unfolds its secret wings!
Out of the everlasting silence
There is sound, and all the suns rain fire
upon my breast.
And, mortal-born, love-made, I am alone
In darkling-vast embrace: love is my cry.
Swift from the mountains of white silence
Echo wings reply, and Promise springs
to green my world.
Unflinchingly, eyes closed, I take the bread.
A banquet this; a statue unto faith,
Sculptured of tears, conceived of silence.
Naked stands the form, and in her hand
the grape of death.
II
And this is music:
Soul-embodiment of beauty flung,
From heights where stars are born,
Upon the craggy pilgrimage of life;
A testament of heart above the clod
Outsoaring self in glorious, free wing-beat
Beyond the senses.


Yes, an eagle bird circling on high,
Alone upon a foreign strand—
Winged with the very stuff of godliness—
Earth-fed, confined to prison-fare; yet, eyes
Forever searching some lost altitude.
111
In this enchanted solitude of night
How shall I say the flower that is soul,
Triumphant bloom, victorious, white
As white of angels’ wings? A higher role
There is for flower: more than shimmering spray
Of scented music over fragile glass;
A trembling promise, in frail virgin way,
That all of flower shall not die, or pass,
Nor tender petal perish with the grass.
IV
And speak to them who are dead.
They do not know, so sodden is their grave
Their life, reft of eternity—they lie
insensate of sepulchral stone.
Breathe but the word on the stone.
And every Lazarus will rise, walk forth,
The wonder of the undiscovered in his eyes,
its music soundless on his lips.


V
Born again tonight.
Out of the black and burning sun,
Out of the black and blinding sun, —
Born again tonight;
Into the cool of outer star,
Into the quiet of frozen star, —
Born again tonight.
Around my head the circle white;
And heart, unsuffering, frozen white.
VI
Our lives are interlocked, our cry is one;
Knowing that only, and for all time only
Hyacinth under the bridge
All mooring cast away,
Bankless we drift and shoreless
Hyacinth toward the sea.
The last vow made, the last kiss blown away,
Knowing that never, and for all time, never—
Hyacinth under the wave—
Is poem virgin twice,
Take of the bread and fearless
Ere hyacinth is sea.


VII
There have been many true words said
With love’s strange breathlessness, and yet,
Elusively, the sand turned liquid
In your trembling woman-grasp.
You only stared: your hands were bare.
But in the silence of a tearfall,
Lonely, clad in nightliness,
You are become a child. The cling of sand
Upon your fingers is returning dream.
Thus close your eyes: your hands are full.


A SYMPHONY CONCERT
PRELUDE
The prelude to a symphony is like prelude
To any other social function: days ahead,
And weeks, perhaps, discerning ladies meditate
On coiffure and gown, until at last, the day.
Hairdressers sing and celebrate in croquignoles,
In ringlets, spirals, bangs and other things in vogue.
Now, with the first of dark, the magic of boudoir:
Hair nets removed, come silks and satins—tricky stuff 1 —
Suggestive symphony of pin and brooch and glass;
Impressionistic rhapsody of scent and flow’r,
Of clever eyebrows, lipstick, rouge, and powder puff.
Ah, yes, symphonic concerts are essentially
Affaires du monde feminin: they come into their own,
Resenting curtain-rise, for lights go out and they
Recede into the second fiddle of background.
It does not matter very much what will be played
Or who will do the uncombing stunt: it is enough
To be where the elect must be. Now, hopefully,
The touches finishing, the one last look at self;
And mirror reassures, consoles, rewards the pains.
Thus stoutly shod in faith and hope, they sally forth
To see and to be seen; and, incidentally,
To listen to the music. After all, the soul
Knows hunger, and the answer is not always bread.


ITALIAN SYMPHONY
Lights out. Away with private shows. Maestro bows.
Midsummer-night dream’s poet, in the name of ears
Fastidious, we apologize for horns and flutes
And woodwinds insensate in lower keys that smite;
But in return we give you military strings,
Precise and courteous, quite correct. Be tolerant
In heaven, Mendelssohn, if dull we find you
In anticipation of the iron foundry.
Now the conductor lifts his hands. At last your voice.
On wings of song the scene is shifted.
All alone
We face a once-upon-a-time. The dead return.
This is the strength and permanence of living art:
Head for a heart, serenely pulsing within breast
Of freedom; conscious, yet, unmindful of the new,
The different, sensational, the doomed-to-death
With the more different, more current, and more new.
But you speak on, and conjure not a king on throne
Without remembering a shepherd on the grass;
No pompous blare, but also solitary flute;
You see the pageantry, and yet recall the night;
Rejoicing noonsun, yet, nostalgic for the dew.
And thus your gentle accents, classical and clear,
Flow on; until at last, applause invariable.
Lights on. Remarks. A secret folding of great wings.


INTERMISSION
The curtains close. Behind them is reality.
On some meek flutist falls the storm. The glaring threat,
The promised thunder is fulfilled. There’s bitterness
In silent tears. O well, he will inherit earth.
But these are dreams. An intermission is an act,
A ceremony in itself, where tongue is priest
And eye is priestess. O how splendid is this show!
Ladies and Gentlemen, just as in fairy tales.
Aladdin lives. Transfiguration magical!
A lady,—teeth that grind in fury, shine in smiles;
A lady,—tongue that cuts and lacerates, in gentle tweet;
A lady,—lips of cruel twist, curl heavenward;
A lady,—hands that smite and sin, in cultured pose;,
A lady,—eyes that burn and cheat, in coyful glance;
Heart in her vanity,—a lady. This is rich!
A gentleman, the chap who stole his neighbor’s wife;
A gentleman, imported beggar, local king;
A gentleman, he stabs at backs and now shakes hands;
A gentleman, the drunk who beat his wife last night;
A gentleman, hip-hops the conga, loves Chopin;
Heart in his bank-account, —a gentleman. And so,
In cosmopolitan chit-chat of things correct,
They swirl and smoke and smile, Ladies and Gentlemen.
Outside, a shooting star comes close to earth and dies.


FIVE MOVEMENTS FROM BIZET’S CARMEN
The lady harpist, new upon the scene. Take note
Of dress and strain your eyes, senoras, senoritas;
Compare with self. Like food, like love, like anything,
So music enters through the eye. The strings are plucked.
Impetuous flute, in this duet, the harp is horse
And you are carriage; you forget it is the pull
And not the push that counts. Despite your stubbornness,
The whole of color is unrolled. There’s love in Spain,
Attendant flame of beauty fraught in smiles and tears,
Now bright, now dimming low, yet, burning endlessly;
Castilian fire, capricious, vibrant, really child:
All blood, no soul. Well, better so: in blood is all
Beginning and all end. On some plain of Navarre,
In blood of morning one is born, amazed at light,
Breath-caught at plenitude of good. But blood must rove,
Is never still; by leaps it wanders from kin blood,
Firm-shod in principle, not love; until one day,
The tragic unforeseen on some unhallowed spot
Where brother faces brother, each with thought to kill.
Confusion of el toro y el matador.
Dust clears away and, side by side, they lie. All blood
Is one, and death and only {kath asserts the truth.
But only stars behold the scene, and they are mute.
No longer fury will command. The music stops.


THE IRON FOUNDRY
By turn Italian, Spaniard, now Maestro is—
In wisdom of an artist who must live and give
The public what it wants, to please the hundred flags
Of international Manila —foreman to
Sovietic iron foundry, where the violin
Has cables for its strings; and cylinders
For clarinets and trombones, flutes, bassoons and horns,
Demanding pressure and more steam; where kettle-drum
Is boiler,—all in gear-precision; chug, chug, chug;
With steady rounds of lubricant to harmonize.
This art suggests fulfillment, moral lesson, hope.
Sibelius prophesies new instruments: tonight,
Debut of iron galvanized into the score.
Despair not of a public, prophet audienceless,
For your Quartet (the football match) for Saxophone ,
Trombone, Bass Drum and Cheering Squad: Manila is
The tolerant, the understanding, the all-broad.


RHAPSODY IN BLUE
George Gershwin, bless his soul, was never more surprised
To find himself among the masters: his voice
Was not for niches labelled Classics. No; he sang
Half-seriously of democratic beauty astray
In the Manhattan maze; he celebrates the boy
Forever going forth adventuresome with night;
The girl gowned in her salary —like many are,
Undoubtedly, right here—he assuages tears
In broken hearts with smile-bravado, laughter, fizz.
He shot his arrow into song: they pin it down
On epic. But the soloist, she understands;
Interpreting with more than fingers, heart, and head.
And soul no longer is a prison: there is flight
From Orchestra, Row L, across and far.


EPILOGUE
The symphony is ended. They stream out, the men,
The women. How they smile! After the carnival of sound
They drift away for more escape; some empty spot
Must yet be filled; another dream before the dawn
Of loneliness, —deferment of the pause; alone,
Remembering some glorious instant of the night
When they were bird, or angel.
Now the waters rise
Under the stars, and all is sea. The tumbling wash
Announces driftwood, restless, derelict on tide;
And hope, for driftwood is prophetic of the land.


EASTER ORATORIOS
I
Gethsemane is silent.
All about, there is great shouting.
Breathe but a prayer for men
Until the earth is one cathedral,
Vast and rising, reverent, under the sun.
There lies the city, proudly blind,
Afraid of darkness, fearing light.
Beloved man, your cross is heavy:
You must live because He lived,
And die because He died.
Lay down your weapons:
Without battle there is no defeat.
Armed with love you stand on rock:
You will go down victorious,
Loving, loving, loving.
Three crosses on any hill: one unto each.
Let not, let not the chalice pass away,
For every drop is death
And every death the resurrection
Of a consummated dream.
Here the broadways of the world
Contrive a Calvary of day,
Gethsemane of night.


The crown? Ah, yes, a rose for every thorn:
This thorn for Justice, this for Truth;
This nail for Beauty, this for Brotherhood;
And all for Wings, dearly beloved,
In the great name of End.
Lastly, let steel of Love
Find scabbard in your heart.
Thus earth:
Forever lachrymose with love and life and death,
Being of little gods and goddesses
Unremembering the clay and the salt.
Forgive them, Father, they know what they do.
II
Easter again: the rolling of a stone.
And with returning dream,
Behold, earth leaping out of the dark;
Rock, heaving, lonely, out of the sea;
The wild green surge of grass;
Great singing under the sun.
We remember the great tower
Flung defiantly against the stars!
We remember the great love
Behind your sails, O ships!
We remember flesh and bone
Upon the altar of earth!


They are not dead who fly the flag of grass:
Let soil proclaim the loving seed
Triumphant in her bosom,
Sprung of the mystic clay-and-salt
That shakes a fist against a tree
But shivers at the trembling of a leaf.
Unlikely thing that is!
O strong and unpredictable!
O would that every stone were rolled away!
O would that every Lazarus stepped forth
Into the great and lonely,
Into the blind and shining wonder of a crumb!
Easter again, poem of many riches.
Earth richer for the Cross.
There shall be richer seeds for richer sprouts.
There shall be richer sprouts for richer trees.
There shall be richer trees for richer crosses.
The dream is consummated.
The secret poem begun.


ALL SAINTS’ DAY
Let illumined dust speak:
under the yellowing marble,
under the hopeful crosses, —
breath arrested from body and sun,
breath reprieved from soul and night
clings to root and tree and grass
and the long suns and the longer nights.
And let stoic dust speak:
amen to the wept tears and the unwept tears;
amen to the found loves and the lost loves;
amen to the tides of young hot blood;
amen to the tides of blood abated;
amen to the greeting of birth;
amen to the farewell of death.
But dust is also silent
to sublime lying: this be truth!
to divine hating: this be love!
to the lying truth,
to the hating love, —
to the shouting and the shouting
chagrined dust is silent.


BERNADETTE
Bernadette, you are so ugly and so dull
With your asthma and your dead stare
And your dead limbs and yoyr dead brain.
Rustling in the grotto, silence in the leaves.
Bernadette, the Gave is kind with firewood,
Firewood is warmth, firewood is serious:
The river is firewood, foolish Bernadette!
Hail Mary, full of grace! Holy Mary, Mother of God!
Bernadette, what foolery is this!
Kneel for firewood, firewood is serious:
Prayer will not fetch firewood, foolish Bernadette!
Stone be my witness, Lady with the blue sash!
Bernadette, what goes on? Is it you?
No sunlight on your face, and yet so bright!
No music in your eye, and yet so quick!
Let them be healed and 1 forever sick.
Bernadette, we are so ugly and so dull
Kneeling for - firewood, our serious firewood,
With our firewood brain, beautiful Bernadette!
Not here perhaps but in the next.


ETUDES
I
All swiftly, from the closing span
of stilling waters, there is urge
for springs.
And reverently, priest is man
remembering once there was surge
for springs.
Blow gently, wind: there is no grass
To kiss in winter. Let him pass.
II
My shadow on the midnight grass.
My body planting shadow;
growing, shrinking, saying:
I am.
My shadow mocking the ache
of limbs, of running blood,
asking:
are you?
Body asserting eternity
because it must.
Shadow making no promise
because it’s best.


And I remember one day grass will harvest my body,
tuck my shadow under me.
And other shadows will sprout in other midnights;
growing, shrinking on grass,
the old grass;
always knowing,
green always,
always silent.
111
Because the book had to be read
she heard all comments,
scanned all reviews,
read chapters one and last—
sufficient was beginning and end —
and skipping the rest,
skipped life.
IV
Friend, stop with me this night.
I do not call on all for feasting:
You are not flattered, only understood.
Could I have passed you by,
Mysterious, wondering, shivering,
Musical as rain-on-leaf;
Mysterious, rich and expectant,
Womanly as sun-on-leaf,—and not say:
Friend, stop with me this night?


But will you understand?
Must I explain?
Before you sit down at my table,
Listen:
I offer unleavened bread;
I offer unsweetened wine.
Before you break the bread
Listen:
I offer no embarrassed apology;
Accept no smiling comprehension.
Before you drink the wine,
Listen yet:
I offer in the name of receiving;
Accept in the name of offering.
Will you eat?
Will you drink?
Will you stop with me this night?
Lay down the folds.
Spread forth the banquet.
No music, no music.
Only silence of amen.


NUANCES
I
Rain in the evening.
Remember?
She asked, what is a poem?
How could I speak the poem
Caught and trembling
In her throat?
She smiled, que chiquillo eres.
But there were tears in her eyes,
Shutting in forever
Rain in the evening.
Remember again
Until weeping is no more.
II
Music on the mountain-top,
Bodies in the sun.
Death will not be for us, we swore.
And laughter died upon the grass;
And sunflash sighed upon the leaf;
And water wept along the rock.


There was no longer need of lips.
Bodies were the sun.
Around us, night.
111
She said:
There will be greater love to come. Promise?
Swear priests and cowards, I shakespeared.
More sacred than the vow for life;
More sacred than the vow for death:
The pledge of love is consecration,
Holy, holy, holy, unto endlessness.
She said:
Que sentimental eres.
Her words were revelation.
I grieved for greatgrandfather’s father;
For my grandchildren’s children’s children;
For all wings clipped in flight.
And only angels understood: they chuckled.
IV
We shall speak in guarded silences,
heart be symbol of the crystal mind:
the heart’s proud mind will bear no more
and the mind’s poor heart no less.


Each word another stretch of road between,
each look another ocean stemming in,
each motion space precipitate:
what need of feet? of bridges? wings?
We are so brave:
we shall remember speech inviolate;
shrug the hour, flaunt the smile, and reassured
be proud again.
So let it be —
the unimpassioned blood will flow
and the keen soul see: earth is earth,
no more.
V
Words must be luminous, shining
like the chromatic chorus
of some great centre-song
ringingly bright.
But words can not be luminous, aflame,
unless the lover be himself
a song.
Words must be luminous, shining
like constellations flung
from some great centre-orb
spinningly bright.


But words can not be luminous, aflame,
unless the lover be himself
a sun.
VI
There will be death. Cling to your dreams.
We only dream into the great dream
Where all dreamers are met.
Is flower all of form?
Because body is of soul,
As darkness of the night,
It shall be darklessness of dark.
Is dreamstuff all of love?
Reality is dream and dream, reality:
Dreamers we, how could we cease to dream
Who, dreaming, went to sleep?
VII
We found us loveless in the lowshot light
Burning incense unto empty skies.
And promise incarnate spilled music on the grass.
There was prayer for all time;
There was worship for all space;
There was world without end.


The air was tremulous with wings.
And, Let us thank the earth, we said.
And, Amen, said the sea.
VIII
Soundlessly,
with downshot starspray
on our uplifted faces;
Soundlessly,
we who have breasted
upflung earth;
Soundlessly,
we consecrate our secret
to the sea.
And the great wind rises.
And the tide is full.


IMPROMPTU FOR AN UNHOLY ONE
I
In the eleventh hour
of my lovelessness
you are come.
I was the image standing
on the slope of silence
alone.
You are come.
Naked am I,
shaken with the gust
of your approach.
II
Speak, hands, for me:
this is the clay,
this is the dream
Speak, hands, for me.
111
I, too, am come
bearing my torch
into your dark.
Our voices will be one,
our feet will falter not
along the darkness.


IV
A million years ago
at some majestic hour
earth trembled on our lips.
A million years to come
we shall remember yet
lips quivering with earth:
this singing fierce white hour
is earth inarticulate of time.
V
No twilight for the gods:
we are the best of earth
shaking a fist at death,
laughing victoriously with flame
melting forever the quartered images
of waxen institutions.


EROICA
I
So now we are alone in this great waste
Of fragments of a lost and vanished world;
In this great vast where we, a million years
Ago, first heard earth-song at cool of dawn;
First felt the brush of godly wings; looked up
And traced the pattern of eternal stars
Full of the grace of mystery; beheld
The dreaming, mist-enchanted wild of earth.
So long ago, we have forgotten how
To weep before the miracle of beauty;
Forgotten how the running of our blood
Was one with running water of all tides,
Of all time.
You and I, so long ago.
There in the wind-swept sunrise, grass beneath
Our knees, we took the earth for all its glory
And dedicated all our dreams to earth.
We are become inebriate with the grape
Earth-scented with its twice two thousand years:
The taste of death is on our drunken lips.


II
Now is the godly hour when loving hands
Receive the earth anew. We shall awake
And tear the sunrise from the womb of dawn;
Until the running of our mystic blood
Becomes one with the running of the tide,
One with the white cathedrals of the sky,
One with the wonder of the bursting seed,
One with the splendor of the rising sap.
One with all glorious flow on glorious earth;
Until the running of our blood becomes
One with the whirlings of forgotten suns,
One with the heavings of forsaken seas,
One music with the all that is dear earth;
Until there is no more for armoured life
But, lovingly, to lay down arms before
The earth imperative, transfigured Earth;
Until we find night-breathing pray’r upon
Our twisted lips:
We are commemoration
Of a dead, but resurrected life.




COLLECTED POEMS
1946-1952


JULY FOURTH 1946: NOT FOR THE BOOKS
I
The date is for many islands
being alone each unto himself
a man a world
If Rizal and if myself are only
let be the pack O let be
the dogs
The gleeful kratzes howl
eighty million peso fireworks
and the dogs bark
Jabber chatter wag your scratch tail head
dream of stone and tomorrow
a monument
The time is to bird punctually
or beer and peanuts
and/or Christ
II
There is a darkness falls on the spirit of man
When mind overtakes the outracing heart
Only the inviolate fire ice of the mind
Pierces the spectrum splits the rainbow


And the truth of the heart is a candystick
Spiralled with Fourth-of-July red white and blue
As crumbs to the beggar bones to the dog
Friends and countrymen a noble speech
(Microphone the lump in the throat)
(Candid angle the tear in the sun)
"Our Forefathers Dreamed (gulp)
"The Altar of Bataan (sniffle)
"Our American Bell Friends (teardrop)
"Bastion of Democracy (sob)
"Freedom (loudspeakers)
(cameras)
(flashbulbs)
(bandburst)
Let the Judas kiss and many hands bless
Also let Pilate wash his hands
111
Plere in the shadow of three flags
and a grandstand
sleep Rizal
One came and pulpited soul
four candles at the bedstead
and a whip


Two elaborated skin
Jesus Christ is an Oriental
thumb on the nose
Three brought canned sardines
confirmed the liberated soul
850,000 tons of sugar
If tomorrow heaven and earth
and breasts unto the mango
wouldst buy and sell (?)
Choose again and only once
or Christ or red or beer
suicides three
IV
My father must have been a bird
the secret of life while say
bow wow the dogs
Hold your tongue


OF A DEAD ROSE AND THE SEA
I love thee with a dead rose and the sea
Salt washed my eyes
Found breasts alerted
For my coming
And the sea
Eleventh was the hour woke the sands
Marked footprints on the strand
Was Crusoe in. paraphrase
Many leaves dried my lips
Rock let blood
And thou among the pillows and the wilds
Let music from her majesty the ape
Propped with pyramid and hymn
Heaved leapt and rose
Her majesty the ape
Spent with love in the dawning I went
Where candles burn and incense
Blurs the eternal eye
(Shot geologic rapids)
And the seed
But the seed was a sprout was a root
Was a tree was a bud was rose
Was a bee was love


Was seed again
Was an ape
Came to desert and fog nowhere reached out
Knocked at the base of the skull
Jesus heard urgently and Beethoven
Inadvertently radar
Einstein shyly poet
(In a padded cell is a child fingers rainbow clay
To the image of flower and tombstone
He wears a Grecian mask
Now and then forgets
To be Christ)
The rain fell forty billion days and nights
Uprose a white cathedral in the sun
Tolling a knell and the bell
Was a dead rose
And the sea
I am he that comes with gravedust on my lips
Bearing secret tidings of the seed
Trembling there in petaldust
Of dead rose
And the sea


(HA, HA!) AND NO LEAF STIRS
They speak in undertones who shrieked their blood
Into the windless dark. Theirs the blind thrill
Of little understood and less to enthrall
A mediocre ignorance. They bleed
Religiously under the stars. The stars
Hold up their sides and make a courteous bow:
Farewell, sweet fool! Rock, water, suns obey
A will which wills (ha, ha!) and no leaf stirs.
With now, beside you and tomorrow his,
Ago is theirs to doubt and question, whose?
And, questioning, see bitter flowers bloom
Unwittingly, with only bee to blame;
And, doubting, let forgiving grass ordain
Remembered beauty in a hopeless dawn.


AFTER ONE O’CLOCK
These are the hands and this the mind embraced
Enchanted darkness musical with soar
Of wings. And this heart is a wild corsair
All blood and little ghost. Infirm and bruised
Of many mountains, sails where waters are
Pacific with the ravished alien rose
In the fair valley: one o’clock to raise
Victorious swan song of defiant ire.
And when o’clock runs out and waters freeze
And many mountains walk and rose is born
And blood and ghost are really nothing, burn
Me prayer in your feline soul, or phrase
Me deeply in your wing-tipped dark: this mound
Was lordly dwelling of a saintly mind!


HALF SONNET
Farewell to your be-
gining: you have shed
A mask and stone will
not survive unbled
Under the stroke of
light and shadow, flair
And grim obitua-
ry; you are aware
Henceforth is walking
on a tightrope where,
The net removed, you
face a hushed forlorn
Of crystal meanings
trembling to be born.


STILL LIFE
I
This half-spent bourn of my becoming, not fixed in time,
Is an afternoon of the river and many birds.
It is always so at the end of love, punctually a bird:
Many birds are my love in the rising wind.
Who will remember the mountains, not fixed in geography,
Between the nothing and the nowhere,
Between the nursery and the nail?
Un golpe de ataud en tierra es algo perfectamente serio.
The last clod the ascent of the next mountain, Machado?
The answer, in this now, is many birds and the river
Converged upon a commerce whose concern is death.
The mind has many tongues, not fixed in thought,
Whose Babel utterance is mostly fists of silence
Always against the brain. Once I thought,
Without battle there is no defeat, lay down your arms.
It was a moment without hope, like many other moments,
When stale drinks on a checkered tablecloth seem best,
With music box making hell through gritted teeth
And somewhere in the deep, tenebrous heart,
The knowledge that the endTs/a creeping away
From the foe, whose unrelenting approach will be stopped
By a bullet in one’s brain or by being exactly,
Not more nor any less, punctually bird.


That was in some distant now.
Too long the poets have been writing for the poets,
The musicians become highly skilled technicians,
The painters abjectly demoralized,
And all, of mercantile competence.
II
Will somebody finalize
A child perhaps or an old man
What is it to be born?
Twilight, now' remembers a child
In his intense twilight
Remembering the grave.
Whence a tree springs
The perfect equilibrium,
The angels can tell.
But the angels are dead: resolved
Into the glory of neon lights,
The perfectly perfect.
Even as the tree borrows the sea
In whose salt is the salt
Of a perfect becoming;
Putting forth definite eyes
From the secret skulls of birds
In an indefinite world:


So the poem, whose meaning is
An old man and a child
Trading masks.
11l
The desert is a nowhere as the sea or as the soul,
And nowhere—once an attitude or a state of the mind,
An elegant fad or a convenient lassitude
Nowhere is become a disorganized morality,
Another aspect of the organized kind
By which men live, but do not grow,
And die indifferently.
There was a man consorted with the desert,
Come with the terrible knowledge of nowhere.
His silence was becoming, being the perfect becoming
Of many gods essaying perfectly:
De capa a pie disfrazado pero sin mascara
Pues como prenda se la habia dejado
Entre las orejas de un burro.
IV
In the unmoving afternoon
The spirit moves a stone.
Birds inform urgently
In the impersonal afternoon.




MAKATA SERIES
Makata 1 Florante at Laura Balagtas (au-
thoritative edition with intro & notes
Carlos Ronquillo)
Makata 2 Mi Retiro & Other Poems Rizal
(Spanish-English texts)
Makata 3 Poems in Praise of Love Villa
Makata 4 Buhay at Pag-ibig Huseng Batute
(Jose Corazon de Jesus)
Makata 5 Bataan Harvest : War Poems Ama-
dor T. Daguio
Makata 6 Early Poets: 1909-1942, Laslo, D&to,
Bulosan, eds.
Makata 7 Like the Molave R. Zulueta da Costa
Makata 8 Love Sonnets Pre-War Poets
