

Second Series
PAPERS FOR WAR TIME. No. 23
The Price of Blood
BY
KENNETH MACLENNAN
Price Twopence
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY


PAPERS FOR WAR TIME
First Series. Already published .
1. CHRISTIANITY AND WAR. By the Rev. W.
Temple, M.A.
2. ARE WE WORTH FIGHTING FOR ? By the
Rev. Richard Roberts.
8. THE WOMAN S PART. By Mrs. Luke Paget.
4. BROTHERS ALL: THE WAR AND THE
RACE QUESTION. By Edwyn Bevan, M.A.
5. THE DECISIVE HOUR: IS IT LOST ? By J. H.
Oldham, M.A.
6. ACTIVE SERVICE: THE SHARE OF THE
NON-COMBATANT. By the Rev. W. R. Maltby,
7. THE WAR SPIRIT IN OUR NATIONAL LIFE.
By the Rev. A. Herbert Gray, M.A.
8. CHRISTIAN CONDUCT IN WAR TIME. By
W, H. Moberly, M.A.
9. THE WITNESS OF THE CHURCH IN THE
PRESENT CRISIS. By X.
10. THE REAL WAR. By the Rev. W. E. Orchard,
D.D.
11. LOVE CAME DOWN AT CHRISTMAS. By
Professor G. Hare Leonard, M.A.
12. AN ANSWER TO BERNHARDI. By the Rev.
Professor D. S. Cairns, D.D,




THE PRICE OF BLOOD
BY
KENNETH MACLENNAN
Second Series
PAPERS FOR WAR TIME. No. 23
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY
19 15




BASIS OF PUBLICATION
This series of Papers is based on the following convictions :
1. That Great Britain was in August morally bound to
declare war and is no less bound to carry the war
to a decisive issue ;
2. That the war is none the less an outcome and a revela-
tion of the un-Christian principles which have dominated
the life of Western Christendom and of which both the
Church and the nations have need to repent ;
3. That followers of Christ, as members of the Church, are
linked to one another in a fellowship which transcends
all divisions of nationality or race ;
4. That the Christian duties of love and forgiveness are
as binding in time of war as in time of peace ;
5. That Christians are bound to recognize the insufficiency
of mere compulsion for overcoming evil and to place
supreme reliance upon spiritual forces and in particular
upon the power and method of the Cross ;
6. That only in proportion as Christian principles dictate
the terms of settlement will a real and lasting peace
be secured ;
7. That it is the duty of the Church to make an altogether
new effort to realize and apply to all the relations
of life its own positive ideal of brotherhood and
fellowship ;
8. That with God all things are possible.


THE PRICE OF BLOOD
‘ Shall I drink the blood of these men that have put their
lives in jeopardy ? ' —King David.
1 It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task
remaining before us—that from these honoured dead we
take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the
last full measure of devotion ; that we here highly resolve
that these dead shall not have died in vain.' —Abraham
Lincoln.
The British Empire is pouring out without stint its
most precious treasure. Its best, strongest, and most pro-
mising young life is being freely sacrificed. No question
is of greater concern to the nation than what fruit it is
going to reap from this prodigal expenditure. What is
the real worth of that expenditure ? What gains may
it bring to us ? What results are we going to aim at so
that there may come out of it all some worthy equivalent
for the blood shed ?
The nations at war are paying a tremendous price.
Possibly in no equally brief period have any nations in
any time passed through so great a stirring of spirit to
high sacrifice as has come to Europe during these last
months. The two great parallel examples of modern
history are the French Revolution and the American Civil


War. In the dread days of the French Revolution the
Place de la Concorde witnessed moving scenes, the spilling
of much blood, and the sowing of seed-ideas which have
resulted in many bloody, and some bloodless, revolutions.
The American Civil War exhibited the strange spectacle
of men of one race and tongue engaged in a fratricidal
struggle in which the whole young manhood of the nation
was involved. But these events were slow-moving and
on a small scale in comparison with the present happen-
ings in Europe. Every day of this struggle is full of
dramatic intensity. Its magnitude leaves the imagina-
tion numb and the mind stunned. The British Empire,
France, Belgium, Germany, Russia, Austria-Hungary, and
Serbia are sacrificing their best young life on a scale of
prodigality for which we have no parallel.
How shall we think of our share of the sacrifice ? We
are bound up with the men who are fighting for England
in mystical bonds from which we cannot free ourselves if
we would. They are bone of our bone and flesh of our
flesh. Every British grave in Flanders means blood and
tears in the homeland. The fight they wage is ours. The
lives they lay down are for the land we love. The things
we are going to take out of the war are purchased at the
price of their blood. We are heirs to the fruits of their
victory and trustees of their sacrifice, responsible for seeing
that the price they have paid shall not be in vain.
The blood which is being spilt in Flanders and the tears
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


which fall at home are shed on an altar. The men who
have gone so readily to the front have, generally speaking,
gone under the moving impulse of a simple ideal. They
have felt that a blow has been struck at liberty, that
the maintenance of high ideals concerning international
right and honour has been threatened, and that a great
wrong has been done in the world. The youth of our
land are mostly simple, honest, strong-hearted men, accus-
tomed, in spite of all surface defects, to manly action, and
without hesitation they quietly put their bodies between
mankind and these things. Unconsciously they erected
an altar, and as unconsciously provided the sacrifice,
never questioning the end, but facing death and wounds
with a sublimely simple faith in the rightness of things,
and a calm trust in their own countrymen to see the matter
through. They did not wait even to consider how precious
was the price they were paying nor how great things it
might purchase. In unconscious trust they left that
to us.
Such an altar and such an offering call for a priest-
hood of no common order. The task of interpreting and
mediating to the world such a sacrifice is not to be lightly
undertaken by any people. The nation must touch that
tender responsibility with clean hands and pure hearts.
If Britons are worthily to fulfil the trust thus committed
to them, they must have a true appreciation of the great
price that is being paid and of the things it can purchase.
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


They must be keenly sensitive to the way in which the
trust may be defiled and to the grave danger that there
may be failure in fulfilment through slackness or neglect.
They must realize that the trust is not a passing and tribal
one, but is for the future and for all mankind, and that
those who have imposed it come back transfigured and
expectant.
The sacrifice is redeeming to us all that we love best :
our honour, our homes, our liberty, are being saved by the
blood of our sons. It will help to free Belgium and France
from the invader. These are the primary things, but
there is promise of a greater gain, for the issues and
potentialities are larger still. Mankind may be saved
from the possibility of such another cataclysm, if the right
forces are generated by victory. But that will be a much
bigger and infinitely more difficult task than the naval
and military operations, and one that will require more
patience, for it will mean not only a proper adjustment
of naval and military strength, but an ordering of influ-
ences, ideals, and tendencies. Every wrong left unrighted
in Europe, every sore left festering, will make for a re-
currence of war,* and it will tax all the wisdom of our
wisest statesmen so to adjust a settlement that nationality
and human right shall be respected in the days to come,
that predisposing causes to international strife are re-
moved, and that all roots of bitterness are destroyed. It
is not a day too soon to be thinking hard upon these things
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


and seeking to form purposes which shall not be unworthy
of the redemptive power of the blood spilt. If moral
forces are to wield any influence at the close of the war
they must be mobilized now. We have to ask ourselves
now in what sort of way we will enter into our heritage of
redemptive sacrifice. How are we going to use it ? What
kind of gain is going to be worth the sacrifice ?
The spirit of the action of our young men has already
given us two great gains. First, in striking contrast
with the indifference of other times, the mind of the nation
is keenly sensitive to the needs of our soldiers at the front
and of their dependants at home, and to the wants of all
those who, in our land and beyond it, have become the
victims of distress on account of the war. In the second
place, life has become a very real and strenuous thing for
nearly all our people. Senseless indulgence in pleasure
and offensive luxury have almost disappeared. Social
barriers have to a large extent been thrown down in face
of a common task and a common danger. All things
have been tacitly, swiftly, and drastically revalued. The
things that matter to most people in Britain to-day are
life, death, and duty, faith, hope, and God. There is a new
community of interest, helpfulness, obligation, and sacri-
fice, Notwithstanding some unlovely private profiteering,
we have come nearer the ideal of having all things in
common. And the most casual observer can see the
source of these gains. We have bethought ourselves of
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


our dead and of all the young life in daily peril; we have
experienced the redemptive power of that sacrifice and
been stirred thereby to worthier purpose and nobler action
than before. If the social revolution which has so silently
taken place with such unanimous consent be a real gain
(and who shall deny that it is ?), shall the nation be untrue,
after the war, to the dead from whom its impulse came and
drift back into the old indifference to social wrong and sin,
and the old class and party antagonisms ? Or shall each
of us resolve that :
I will not cease from mental fight,
Nor shall the Sword sleep in my hand,
Till we have built Jerusalem
In England’s green and pleasant land ?
But if there are already distinct gains in these directions
there is equally distinct danger in another quarter. In all
ages there have been men willing to accept a debased price
for* blood. The history of Israel contains some notorious
examples, culminating in the thirty pieces of silver. But
the Jews are not worse sinners than others. It is due to
the omission of the historian rather than to any special
grace, that the history of other nations does not recount
more numerous instances of equally sordid deeds. And
the spirit is by no means dead that would greedily drink
of ‘ the water of the well of Bethlehem that is at the gate
. . . the blood of these men which have put their lives in
jeopardy
There are things that men dare not accept as the price
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


of blood. If we are offered gold or territory or trade or
vainglory, shall we accept these as a worthy equivalent
for the sacrifice made ? It was not the trumpet-blast of
these things to which our youth responded, and if others
lay stress on such gains, shall we not protest against the
defilement of the sacrifice ? Which of our sons went to
Flanders that we might get gold or land ? Who of us
would sell the lives of our strongest and bravest for such
a base price ? Is the sacrifice to be so lightly esteemed
that it may be bartered for these things ?
The British people felt some disappointment that the
first protest on the subject of the war from our friends in
America related to interference with commerce. We felt
that the precedence of protest did not do justice to the
fine American character as we know it. We wanted their
primary concern to be Liege, Malines, and Louvain. And
yet we are characteristically unconscious that in Great
Britain to-day there is a feverishness about enrichment at
the expense of the enemy compared with which the
dignified protest by our American cousins about the injury
to their trade is highly virtuous. We have not gone to
war to enable our merchants to join in an unseemly
scramble for the trade of the enemy for the sake of the
ensuing gain. We cannot afford that it should be said
of us that ‘ Where the carcase is there shall the eagles be
gathered together
The needs of the hour demand from our manufacturers
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


and merchants the most strenuous service they can render
on behalf of the people. They demand also that those
who render such service should not grow rich thereby.
The nation is sparing no sacrifice. The rich and the poor
are brought into tribute. Every new privation, every
new hardship, every lessened resource is part of a sacrifice
in order that the Empire may live. We are all going to
emerge from this war much poorer. Is it right that any
shall emerge richer ; that some shall yield all service and
become impoverished for the commonweal and that a few
others shall grow rich because of their contribution to the
service of the State in the hour of its need ? That would
be a strange sharing of the national burden —it would be
drinking of ‘ the blood of these men that have put their
lives in jeopardy ’. Men may be placed in such a position
that they cannot help making money, but there ought to
be an honourable way of escape from the odium of growing
rich out of the needs of the present situation. All extra-
ordinary profits at this time are morally forfeit to the
nation ; and the Church should proclaim this before the
Chancellor of the Exchequer does so.
Lust for gain brings many evils in its train which
inevitably affect the whole community. The wise man
says, ‘ He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house ’.
The nation has inevitably to share the pernicious conse-
quences of individual greed. It breeds the temper that
makes for class war. Its unlovely fruit is sufficiently
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


evident in many aspects of the present social order. The
redemption price is too costly to be thus prostituted.
Some readjustment of territory will be one necessary out-
come of a victory for the Allies, even to secure bare justice
to the principle of nationality. Grave questions regarding
colonies and spheres of influence will emerge for settle-
ment. The call comes to us now to cultivate a spirit that
shall enable our statesmen to approach the settlement of
these questions without being urged forward by a public
opinion that is actuated by the spirit of gain, but rather
with the support and influence of a public opinion that
wishes the foundations of a new world laid.
Many strong men would scorn to soil the sacrifice by
accepting gold or territory as compensation, but they feel
that the situation demands vengeance of some kind.
They call for justice to France, restitution to Belgium, and
vengeance on the nation that has wronged these lands.
Full restitution to Belgium and justice to France
are worthy of the expenditure of our best blood and
treasure. It is a great thing to be allowed to heal the
hurt of any people. We honour our trust to the dead by
seeing that their sacrifice to that end shall not be in vain.
It is, however, dangerous to talk about vengeance. It
comes very near to the soiling of the sacrifice. Talk
of vengeance does not ennoble man, and all sacrifice is
intended to do so. Vengeance usually means the letting
loose of undisciplined and angry passion. The redemptive
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


power of the blood shed inFlanders should stem such things.
And it is well to recognize that in its naked ugliness any
revengeful action by a nation means untold vicarious
suffering, much misery and many tears for the innocent.
Nearly always in addition it means roots of bitterness
which foster a continually growing desire for retaliation.
The graves of our beloved dead must never be so desecrated.
The sacrifice made has the latent power to uplift and
ennoble our own land, and through us all the lands of
earth. The situation contains the possibilities of a new
world. This alone would give us something worth the
price, and the price would be well worth it. In loyalty
to the dead we dare not aim at less without betraying the
trust reposed in us. In duty to the living and to the lives
that are to be, we dare not miss the full fruit of this time
of suffering. For what shall it profit the nation if it gain
the whole world of gold, trade, territory, and vainglory,
and deliver France and Belgium, and preserve our own
Empire and liberties, if we fail in the name of our dead
to deliver a mortal blow at those forces which are arrayed
against the unity of the nations and the brotherhood of
mankind ? Precious shall their blood be in our sight, and
we were craven to let the utmost it can win for the world
go by default. Slackness or neglect would be treason to
the trust we hold from the dead for posterity.
Such a conception of the possibilities of the situation
would enable the nation to lift the heavy end of the load
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


confronting Europe in the days that are to come after
the war. Thousands of millions of pounds are being
wasted; but when other nations shall have spent their
uttermost farthing, we shall still have spending power,
and if the war is waged to the bitter economic end, we
shall come out unbeaten, though with sadly wasted re-
sources. Is our first act to be a demand for a big share
of any money restitution that can be given ? The biggest
possible indemnity will be a mere trifle when set against
the total wastage, and the claims of Belgium and France
cry out for priority. Let us not lessen by any claim of ours
the fullest restitution for their grievous wrongs that can
be extracted from an exhausted enemy. That would be
an ill fulfilment of the task of deliverance which we volun-
tarily accepted. Indeed do we not owe more to Belgium
than mere deliverance ? Nobly and at terrible cost did
she stay the blow dealt at Europe, and should we too
not help to repair her loss ?
Shall we go further ? If we are really fighting for the
brotherhood of mankind we must not forget that if one
member suffer, the whole body suffers with it. The ex-
haustion of the enemy’s economic resources, the paralysis
of his trade, the poverty of his citizens will react on his
neighbours. An indemnity intended to crush would
merely have the effect of artificially stimulating exports
from the oppressed country without conferring any cor-
responding capacity for import trade. This would be
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


disastrous both to that country and to labour classes in
other lands. It would be bad economics, but it would
be a worse sin against our own ideals, to crush the enemy
utterly. It would mean the sowing of seeds of lasting
hatred between us and those who are now our foes, and
that would prevent the realization of our aim that out
of the war should come a new order of things in the world
under which Christian nations at least shall dwell together
as brothers. Is it possible that the time has come in
history when a nation shall say to its fellows : We laid
our all on the altar for the sake of mankind, and mankind
being delivered and brotherhood proclaimed, we prefer
that we and our dead should alone bear the sacrifice it
has cost us ? We should witness to a wondering world
that we had waged war not for gold or territory or trade
or vengeance, but to redeem men from an intolerable ill.
We should be purified by the choice, and the proud dead
looking on with their white shields would be satisfied
because our shields were white also.
If from the supreme Sacrifice there came life more
abundantly, may we not dare to hope that from the
altar on which our young life is laid down there may
also come redeeming influences that shall live on, ever
bringing forth fruits worthy of the sacrifice ? If love
and goodwill and brotherhood and unity and forgive-
ness came to men through the sacrifice of the Son of God,
in order that all human wrong might be righted and all
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


human sin cured, can we not reverently hope for, pray for,
work for these same fruits from our sacrifice ? Unless
these fruits come there can be little hope of a permanent
peace. Force will never remove international menace.
Constructive moral forces with an adequate motive and
a sufficient dynamic can alone do so. This is going to
be the hardest task of all, but for the sake of the fallen it
must be undertaken. History has already thrown up in
Abraham Lincoln a great man who earned the unique dis-
tinction that while he fought for one side he was thinking
of and working for the good of both. We see the result
in a unified America, where the North and the South
respect each other. We are fighting strenuously for a side,
but we can even now think and work for the ultimate good
of all. If we do, men and women in the agony of bereave-
ment may possess their souls in quietness and confidence,
cherishing the certain hope that from their loss there will
blossom new life for stricken Europe. Then the pain of loss
will be healed and the worth of the sacrifice understood.
The discipline of any road of redemption is severe, and
if the British people set out deliberately to seek a worthy
price for the blood we are now pouring forth, there are
many fierce tussles of spirit ahead, many acts of bitter
penitence, and much purifying of hand and heart. Are
we to aim at rebuilding the broken bridge after the war
is fought and won ? Are we to aim at a reconstructed
brotherhood of mankind in which love and unity and
THE PRICE OF BLOOD


goodwill and forgiveness shall be the dominating notes ?
There will indeed be an Armageddon in the soul of the
nation before such questions are settled, but dare we salute
the sacred dead and answer these mighty questions in the
negative ? We hold the matter in trust for them. We
are stewards for those who walk in dyed garments. If
blood cries out, does it cry for vengeance, hate, or the
perpetuation of animosity ? does it forbid forgiveness ?
When all the cruel wrong of the war flits before the
mind, it is hard to think of an afterwards in which we
and our foes shall dwell together in unity. The suffering
has been very grievous, but there are worse things than
suffering. The throwing away of a redemptive power
given to us in trust would be a debasing thing.
The opportunity for the exercise of redemptive power
is for perhaps the first time given to a nation. The cost
of this war in blood and treasure is appalling. The blood
may mean a new birth for the world. It may win for
mankind a new consciousness of their unity. It can pro-
duce new thoughts, ideals, and purposes in the human
heart and set a-going new springs of action in the human
will. It may ring out death to the law of the jungle. It
may purchase goodwill and confidence between the nations.
It will do all these things if British men and women mean
that it shall do no less. And choosing the highest path-
way for ourselves, we choose too for those who have made
the sacrifice, for in the full fruit of it they will live on in the
power of an endless life.


PAPERS FOR WAR TIME
Published at the rate of two papers each fortnight under the
auspices of a Committee drawn from various Christian bodies
and political parties,the editor beingtheRev.W.TEMPLE,M.A.
Price 2d. each; Is. 6d. per dozen; 2s. post free, each series.
Second Series. Already published .
13. PATRIOTISM. By the Rev. Percy Dearmer, D.D.
14. SPENDING IN WAR TIME. By Professor E. J.
Urwick, M.A.
15. CHRISTIANITY AND FORCE. By Professor A. G.
Hogg, M.A.
16. GERMANY AND GERMANS. By Eleanor
McDougall, M.A.
17. PHARISAISM AND WAR. ByF. Lenwood, M.A.
18. THE CURE FOR WAR. By A. Clutton-Brock.
19. OUR NEED OF A CATHOLIC CHURCH. By
the Rev. W. Temple, M.A.
20. WAR, THIS WAR AND THE SERMON ON
THE MOUNT. By Canon B. H. Streeter, M.A.
21. THE REMOVING OF MOUNTAINS. By the
Author of Pro Christo et Ecdesia.
22. INTERNATIONAL CONTROL. By Professor
W. G. S. Adams, M.A.
23. THE PRICE OF BLOOD. By Kenneth Maclennan.
24. BIOLOGY AND WAR. By Professor J. Arthur
Thomson, LL.D.
Third Series. Ready April s:
25. THE VISIONS OF YOUTH. By the Bishop of
Winchester.
26. BERNHARDISM IN ENGLAND. By A. Clutton-
Brock.
Further papers are in preparation.
OXFORD ! HORACE HART, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY
