

ftCfelCtOUS
Ui O
Box 3
THE OPERATIONS OF THE CHURCH SOCIETY
AS WITNESSED BY
THE BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
f- hoJMUS
DURING A RECENT VISIT TO THE WESTERN PORTION OF THE
DIOCESE OP SYDNEY,
DELIVERED AT A MEETING OE THE
st. |mtffs Jamptl
FRIDAY, JULY 26TH, 1867.
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR JOHN YOUNG, BART., K-C-B,
IN THE CHAIR.
Sgtmeg;
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 870, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALKS.


■


ADDRESS.
My object on the present occasion is to bring before the
members of the Church of England the work of the Church
Society as observed by me during my recent visitation tour to the
West.
I have, as you my hearers will readily suppose, a further object
in view, which is to enlist your sympathies by the information I
afford, that you may bo encouraged to continue and increase that
measure of support to the Society which many of you have
heretofore given.
Moreover I think it due to the subscribers to inform them of that
which without this Address they might not know, and I am further
desirous of embracing this public opportunity of expressing my
gratitude to Almighty Gron who has put it into their hearts to
sustain this work, and has so manifestly marked it with His
approval and blessing.
Before I enter upon my narrative, I wish to reply to an
objection which has been made to the time selected for this
address, on account of the pressing claims of the Bloods Belief
Bund. I do not suppose that these objects will interfere with
each other. My experience would lead me to a contrary conclusion.
It is now nine years since I laid the foundation stone of the
Pitt Town Church. The Hawkesbury was then in flood. It was
with difficulty that Pitt Town was reached at all, and only by
being guided over the higher grounds that lay behind the town,
could I gain access to it. The following morning a wild waste of
waters met the eye. Windsor and Wilberforce could only be
reached by boats, and it did seem a somewhat hopeless undertaking
to commence a Church when the farms of so many who would be
contributors, lay beneath the flood. But troubles and afflictions
and losses do sometimes nerve men for the work that lies before


them. The value of eternal realities is more deeply felt when
the cherished things of earth and time are passing away, and it is
at such seasons that men feel what are in truth the great things
to be aimed at and to be done. The lesson was not lost upon
the inhabitants of Pitt Town. Their Church was to be built “in
troublous times.” But the work did not therefore fail, nor were the
people discouraged, and in this still greater flood and far heavier
calamity it stands secure, a place of refuge to some, a source of con-
solation to many. I believethat thegreat trial which has fallen upon
so many of our fellow colonists will npt be the less liberally relieved
because we now meet for the purpose of supplying those means
of grace and ordinances of religion which convey consolation and
peace to the sorrowful and sorely tried. I believe that in extend-
ing the blessings of true religion we are ministering largely to the
temporal well-being of the community, and that they who are so
engaged will be amongst the most liberal contributors to the
necessities of the poor.
The Church Society during the last year expended upwards of
£7OO in grants to the Western portion of the Diocese, and I now
propose to show what has been done and also to point out the
openings for usefulness which are ready for our occupation.
By the kind assistance of the Minister for Public Works, we
were enabled to cross the Blue Mountains in a much shorter
space of time than heretofore, and on the third evening after
leaving Sydney I was assisting at a tea meeting held in a building
erected at the main Camp of the Railway works near to Bowenfels.
This building which is to serve the purpose of school and
Church has been put up at the sole cost of persons connected
with the Railway, and their friends. The President on the occa-
sion was Mr. Andrew Brown, and the principal speakers were
the clergymen and his two catechists, the Rev. R. IT. Mayne and
Mr. Williams and Mr. Dalrymple. The Church Society
contributes £175 per annum to the salaries of the first and
second, the third is paid through the Church Society by the people
themselves, and by the Mission fund of St. Barnabas’s Church in
this city. The work going on is of a very useful and satisfactory
character. Regular services are held along the line, and soon I


hope the numerous children will have suitable schools,
both Sunday and week-day. The object of the tea meeting was
to raise funds for the erection of another school building at the
Zig zag, or descent from the mountains along which the Eailway
is carried, to the lower level into which it descends, in order to
reach the Bathurst plains.
The work is one of a most extraordinary and interesting nature.
The mountain upon whose top the Eailway runs, is compelled to
act the part of a winding stair down which the trains descend.
It is pierced with tunnels, galleries are hewn out of its side, or
are supported by retaining walls rising from the depths below,
thousands of tons of rock displaced by the aid of galvanic
batteries serve to fill up the vallies, or supply the means of
bridging them over. It is a marvellous exhibition of audacity
regulated by skill, both in its design and execution, and together
with the rest of the line passing through the wonderful scenery
of the Blue Mountains, will constitute one of the wonders, not
only of this hemisphere, but of the world At the Zig zag, there
is a population of 500 souls. It was to their benefit, that the
proceeds of the tea meeting were to be applied. Considerable
interest was felt in it, the attendance was good, and the net
proceeds about £2O. Encouraged by this, they undertook to
have the building ready for opening in six weeks, if on my return
I would hold service there, which I promised to do. The promises
were kept, though under somewhat difficult circumstances, as I
shall hereafter relate.
Before I proceed, let me observe how all this is connected with
the Church Society. Hartley was one of the first places which
received aid from the Society. The clergyman had £IOO a year
given to him. The contributions to the building of the Church
amount to £2OO. When the Eailway works reached the neigh-
bourhood of Hartley, a catechist was sent there, principally at
the cost of the Church Society, and working under the clergyman.
A further extension of the Eailway, by which nearly 5000 souls
were added to the population, demanded increased ministerial
help, and this also has been provided in the manner I have
described. The Church Society is ready to supply the necessary


agency, to pay the travelling expenses, to act as the treasurer and
paymaster, and thus to remove many of the practical difficulties
which are in the way of making these arrangements when
attempted by private individuals. It would have been difficult
without the help of the Church Society, to bring all these
movements into harmonious action.
The following day I left Bowenfels for Kirkconnell, in the
neighbourhood of which the first stone of a new Church was to
be laid. The locality is familiar to all travellers on the Bathurst
road and to those who heard the last address I delivered, as
Frying-pan or Tetholme. It is one of the small wayside town-
ships planted by the high road for no other reason apparently,
than that there is a little land about it capable of being cultivated,
and the usual buildings which form a township have been erected.
It is about 12 miles from Bathurst, and was formerly under the
charge of the Eev. William Lisle of Kelso, who told me that he
considered the idea of building a church at Frying-pan to be very
Utopian indeed. It is now in the district of the Bev. John
Vaughan of O’Connell, who came over the evening before to
hold Divine service in the neighbourhood.
On the morning of Friday, about 100 people assembled on the
ground. The plan and specifications and contract were all
prepared. One hundred pounds were already in the Bank.
The stone suspended between three saplings, was waiting to be
lowered, and accompanied by four clergymen and a goodly
company of people, the ceremony of laying the stone was
performed in the usual manner. The sum of £l5 was laid upon
the stone. A public luncheon was given, at which three relays
of guests sat down, and after the luncheon a public meeting ; the
result of the whole day’s proceedings being in performances £25,
in promises about £3O. The Church Society had promised £5O
to this church, and as this was looked upon as being as good as
cash, they considered that they had only about £l2O more to
obtain in order to complete their suitable and substantial brick
Church.
Late in the evening I reached the neighbourhood of Bathurst
and left the following morning for Orange, where I had arranged
to spend the Sunday.


I was accompanied 10 miles of tlie way by one of my clergy,
and was met not far from Orange by a party of the inhabitants.
The Grold Field of Lucknow to which a Catechist was sent
last year was not in a very flourishing condition, but the services
continue to be well attended, and the payment to the Catechist
on the part of the people has been regularly made.
At Orange I spent a very interesting Sunday. In addition to
the morning and evening services at which collections were made,
I held a confirmation in the afternoon, when 52 persons were con-
firmed, many of them adults and married and all apparently
earnest and devout. They were exhorted amongst other duties
to contribute to the Church Society, and the greater part of
them would I was assured become members.
The following day a meeting was held for the Church Society
and for the Bathurst Bishopric fund. It was very well attended
and I consider that a great impulse w r as given to the movement
for endowing the Bishopric by the meeting at Orange. The
feeling on the subject was well and pithily expressed by one of
the speakers who after hearing my address said, “ I think the
Bishop is right; he has got too many flocks, and he wants
another superintendent.” An opinion which he supported by the
promise of £lOO towards the endowment. Orange is a district in
which the Church Society has done a good deal and has yet more
to do. The Parsonage is built, but not all paid for, and the pres-
sure of the times has led our friends there to make an appeal to
the Society for aid towards the stipend. With a good season
they will soon recover their former ability to maintain their cler-
gyman. Molong which has now its resident clergyman at a cost
to the Church Society of £lOO per annum, is separated from
Orange, and I did not on this occasion visit it, but turned West-
wards to Forbes, which I reached in the middle of the week after
halting for one night at Q-oimbla. It is a long ride from Orange
to Forbes 75 miles, and there is no clergyman between the two
places. This is a state of things which I hope will e’er long be
remedied, by placing another clergyman in the district.
The meeting at Forbes for the Bathurst Bishopric was marked
by great warmth and liberality. The Police Magistrate took the


chair, the local speakers were very earnest and the subscriptions
at once reached the sum of £3OO. Having visited one or two
stations down the river, I spent the Sunday at Forbes and hold a
Confirmation there. The large pine Church built in the time of
the Hold Fields prosperity of Forbes is about to be properly
enclosed and protected, and if a Clergyman can be placed in the
town itself the members of the Church of England will be able to
mamtain him. At present the town and a country district of
immense area are placed under the charge of one Clergyman
whose residence is nine miles from Forbes. The Church Society
has contributed liberally to the work of the Church and at the
present time pays £IOO per annum to the stipend.
From the Lachlan I turned south to the new diggings at Emu
Creek which the Surveyor had pronounced to be a few miles to
the north of the 34 th degree which divides the Diocese of Sydney,
from Goulburn. I was accompained by the Clergyman ofEorbes,
and was met on the way by the Clergyman of Young or Lambing
Flat, from whose district many of the Grenfell miners had gone.
And here I had a practical proof of the advantage of the for-
mation of the Diocese of Goulburn, a clergyman from that
diocese was at hand and willing to take charge of those who
though not in his district were nearer to him than to any of my
own clergy, and as a temporary arrangement he is provided with
a payment of £IOO per annum, the Church Society of Sydney
giving half the amount. Emu Creek has been spoken of by the
correspondents of the public papers as remarkably free from
many of the disorders which are commonly found on new-
diggings. This may possibly be accounted for from the fact that the
earliest diggers on the Gold field were men from Young and
Eorbes, who had been settled in those places for some time, and
were of steady orderly habits. Many whom I saw were anxious
for the regular supply of the ordinances of religion. Several
places of worship were commenced, there was a school full of
children, and a well constructed hospital, built by the contribu-
tions of the diggers, was nearly finished. A tea meeting was
held, and afterwards a public meeting in a theatre. The object


was to raise funds for the purpose of building a Church and £lB4
was promised towards the £4OO which would be required. I
stated that I would ask the Church Society to give £lO for every
£IOO contributed by themselves, and I sincerely hope that I
shall not be found to have raised expectations which cannot be
realized. I trust that at Christmas the Church will be ready, and
that I shall then be able to relieve Mr. Pownall by sending a
clergyman to reside in the district and to take charge not only
of Grenfell but of the pastoral country between it and Cowra.
In pouring rain I travelled the greater part of the day from
Grenfell to Young, which I had formerly visited in its earliest
days as a Gold Yield, when it formed a part of my diocese and
was ministered to by one of my clergy. Such as I left Grenfell
I at that time had found Young, a town of canvass tents and
bark huts, a remote cattle-station suddenly occupied by a swarm-
ing population, in which there were as many idlers in the streets,
as labourers in the mines. All this had passed away, the sub-
stantial buildings conspicuous amongst which are the Memorial
Church of St. John and Schools, give a settled and prosperous air
to the place. The land is good and the country was looking green
and fertile, while the steam mills shewed that besides gold there
were other and more valuable products of the soil to be found in
the flat. I shall be glad when Grenfell presents such a sight as
Young. The Church, the School, the resident pastor and other
residents caring for the young, the sick and the poor are the best
evidences of progress, and the best securities for its continuance.
I preached in the beautiful Church for the Goulburn Church
Society, and was glad to help in this slight degree in carrying on
a work begun by our own Society, which had contributed £5O to
the Memorial Church at Young.
From thence after a halt of one day I turned northwards to-
wards the Lachlan Eiver, which I crossed at Cowra.
I vras met on the way by the newly appointed clergyman of
Carcoar whose district is vastly too large for any one man to
work. Years ago when I passed through Cowra it was a
very poor miserable township in which there was neither
Church nor school, the latter being closed because the


teacher was in trouble as I was told “ about a saddle,”
which I afterwards learned had a horse beneath it. The morals
of the district were not likely to be improved by a horse-stealing
schoolmaster. I fear there is a good deal to unlearn all through
the Colony on this subject, and it becomes the Government to
be very careful whom they place on the bench, and that equal
justice is meted out to all classes of offenders. At Cowra, there
are now three places of worship and a large public school. The
Gold fields have brought a good deal of business into the town as
it is here that the Lachlan is crossed, and some of the land in the
neighbourhood is very good, and produces excellent crops of hay
and wheat. A bridge is being built over the river, which will
have the effect of bringing a large tract of country on the south
side of the river into occupation, and under the direction of their
new clergyman, the members of the Church of England will I trust
supply all that is required. A new Church and in time a
parsonage are among these requisites. As an illustration of the
progress of Cowra, I may mention that I found here one of the
best inns in the colony, at which I may also add, I was most
hospitably and gratuitously entertained. I preached for the
Church Society, and after calling on some of the residents the
following Saturday morning and fixing upon the site of the
proposed church, I rode 32 miles to Coombing near Carcoar, to
be ready for the confirmation and services of Sunday.
The usual services and confirmation were held at Carcoar, the
collections being for the Church Society. On Monday morning a
meeting was held and the affairs of the parish were discussed, and
the subject of the Bathurst bishopric brought forward. As the
clergyman of Carcoar has no longer the assistance of State aid,
his stipend is paid through the Church Society, the parishioners
being responsible for two-thirds of it. The Church Society also
gave £25 towards, the expenses of the clergyman, and has been
asked for further aid towards the repair of the parsonage, which
at present it has not been able to afford. A subdivision of the
parish was agreqd upon, by which Cowra, distant 32 miles should
be separated from Carcoar, and be joined to Grenfell, at least
for the present.


Promises of aid to the Bathurst Bishopric endowment fund
were given and satisfaction expressed at the existing arrangements
in the parish.
After the meeting I visited the well managed Hospital of
Carcoar, about to lose the justly valued services ot Dr. Rowland,
and then ascending the hills above the town, we set out for No. 1
Swamp. The whole of this week was passed in somewhat
notorious parts of the colony. The deep ravines at the back of
Mount Macquarie had enabled the bushrangers to baffle the police.
Almost every hut had its history. The list of candidates lor
confirmation contained names which have acquired unhappy fame,
and I looked with deep interest upon some of the younger
members of families whose elder relations had suffered, or were
suffering, the penalty of the law. I looked I say, with deep
interest upon them because in them I saw the first-fruits of
efforts made by zealous, active clergymen on behalf of the
population of these districts. There has not been much time for
the trial of this evangelical experiment, but the evidences of
success are already there ; and I believe that if we can only carry
out all that is desired and designed by those excellent men, the
success will be complete.
At No. 1 Swamp a congregation of 120 persons assembled,
many from considerable distances. Twenty-seven were confirmed
in the building used for a church, erected by the schoolmaster of
the township. Great interest was excited, this being the first
confirmation held there, and the first visit of a Bishop to the
district. The site of a new church was selected on a suitable
piece of rising ground near the principal road.
As the weather had become broken and the days were short,
we found it impossible to reach our intended halting place that
night, and striking deeper into the ranges, were very hospitably
entertained by one of the farmers of the district. Here also I
held an evening service and confirmed a young person who had
been unable to reach the place where the confirmation had been
held.
Accompanied by two of the clergy of the district, I sot out on
Thursday morning for Caloola 10 miles, and passed a small town-


ship called “ Teapot Swamp.” Divine service is held here once a
month, and an excellent public school is established. There is
some good land in this district, and the crops of wheat are fine.
At Caloola also there is a monthly service, and a Sunday school
as well as day school. Here we were met by the clergyman of
O’Connell whose district adjoins this, and passed the night at
Foster’s Yalley on the way to Hockley where the first stone of a
new church was to be laid.
On the following morning we proceeded to Eockley. The day
was unfortunately wet, but this did not prevent a large number
of persons from meeting us.
The situation of Eockley is very beautiful, in a deep valley,
and the fine hills which rise above the town were at this time
clothed in a rich mantle of green. The site of the church is on a
slope of the hill overlooking the town. The stone was laid with
the usual ceremonial; an abundant luncheon was provided and
despatched, and a public meeting held in the Scotch Church
adjoining, which had been kindly lent for the occasion. The
arrangements were admirable and successful. The design of the
church is a very good one, a portion of the cost had been
collected, the meeting produced £6O, and so encouraged were
they by the result that they now hope to complete the whole of
the work at once. The efforts of the clergyman have been well
seconded by Mr. J. Clements and, the other residents at Eockley.
It had long been dark when we reached O’Connell, a distance
of 21 miles, the road lying through a wild and difficult part of the
country.
The next day was Ascension Day, one of the happiest in our
Christian year. It was suitably observed in the fine new
Church at O’Connell, built since my last visit there, and filled
with a large attentive congregation. Twenty-two young persons
were confirmed on the occasion. After the luncheon I was re-
quested on behalf of the people to discharge a very interesting
and somewhat painful service. The excellent schoolmaster and
mistress of the O’Connell school were about to leave the colony
and return to England, They had been greatly and deservedly re-
spected and beloved. They had been the parents of the orphan,


the physician and nurse of the sick, the kind Christian friends of
all. I had known them long and valued them much, and could
hardly help being moved by the deep grief of the girls and young
women who had learned to regard Mrs. Johnson as a true
mother to them. The people had collected sufficient to purchase
for each of them a handsome gold watch which I was deputed to
present. Mr. Johnson whose circumstances will now be good,
requested from me an authority to collect money for the com-
pletion of the various works in which he had taken an active part
while resident at O’Connell. This closed the services of a
deeply interesting day.
The following morning it was necessary to make an early
start, for we had 21 miles of continued ascent between us and
our destination, Oberon, formerly Bullock Plat. This place lies
within the verge of the great mountain range near Hartley, and
is only 15 miles from the celebrated Pish Elver caves. It is in
the very heart of a district which has other celebrities attached
to it, and although the greater part of the Protestants were
originally members of the Church of England they had hitherto
been chiefly indebted to the Wesleyan body for any supply of
the ordinances of religion. After a continued ascent for 16 miles
the road passes through a gap in the mountains, and again ascend-
ing, reaches a flat swampy valley on the summit of a range, but
with a still higher chain of mountains beyond it. The fertility of
the soil has led to numerous small settlements as well as to sheep
and cattle stations being formed here. Arriving about 12 o’clock
we found upwards of 200 people assembled. The usual tripartite
division of operations was carried out. Eobing in the open air
we had first the laying of the stone and the collection thereat.
The 100th Psalm was sung under the lofty gum trees with hearty
good will. Then followed the public luncheon with its abundant
supplies of joints, and turkeys, and ducks, and fowls, and ham,
not omitting the array of plum puddings and tarts of every kind,
apparently an unlimited supply, all of which being gratuitously
provided and yet destined to disappear under the assults of three
relays of guests, paying 2s. 6d. each, gave a handsome sum for the
Church. Then in the third place followed the public meeting


with its speeches, collection and promises of aid. The whole
amounted to £64. And so the Church of St. Barnabas, Oberon,
was begun.
It has however, to be finished, and to encourage the promoters
I promised two things. The first, that I would ask the Church
Society for £5O. The second that I would ask the Incumbent of
St. Barnabas, Sydney, to allow me to preach a sermon and have a
collection in his church for the namesake in the wilds of the Fish
Biver district. I hope that my requests will be granted. For a
favourable response to the first, I must look to you. I do not
think my friend and Mr. Vaughan’s friends at St. Barnabas, will
refuse the second.
The day had closed some time when we again reached O’Connell.
A review of the work of this somewhat busy week affords much
to encourage our friends of the Church Society.
Much is due to our excellent friend, the Eev. Edward Synge,
who by his diligent and persevering visits, made it possible to
send a clergyman with a reasonable hope of his being maintained.
The clergyman is now there, and already there is a prospect of
a second being supported. Four events had taken place in his
district, at Yetholme, at Eockley, and at Oberon, three new
Churches commenced, and at O’Connell itself the completion of
a new school. On those occasions upwards of £3OO had been
raised in the district. It is not however merely the raising of
money and the building of churches, but the daily going in and
out amongst the people, the knowledge obtained, the influence
gained over at least some one or two of even the least hopeful
families, the instruction for confirmation, the. Sunday school, the
evident desire for the highest good of the people, seeking by all
means to save some; this which is the leaven working in the
measure of meal, the good seed taking root and springing up,
inspires hope for the future, and causes thanksgiving to abound.
Now of all this work I affirm that the Church Society is the
main spring. It could not be undertaken without the support of
the Society. It could not be maintained, and it could not be
extended without the encouragement which the Society holds out.
One-third of Mr. Vaughan’s stipend is paid by the Church Society.


In every scheme for the people’s good, the Church Society has a
principal share. Its resources are known not to he large, hut
there is entire confidence in its sympathy and willingness to aid,
and this alone is a great encouragement both to pastor and people.
One of the most important works in which I was to he engaged
on this visitation, was commenced in the following week. I spent
the Sunday at Bathurst, preaching for the Church Society morn-
ing and evening, and distributing the Sunday school prizes in the
afternoon.
On Thursday there was a confirmation and another collection
for the Church Society. A committee meeting was held, and all
the necessary preparations made for the public meeting on the
following day. Thirteen clergymen assembled, and both on
Thursday evening and Wednesday morning we met for counsel
and for reading the Scriptures, and for prayer.
It was I think the feeling of all, that our subsequent success
was graciously vouchsafed as an answer to the prayers offered up
on those occasions, and by many others elsewhere.
A very important declaration was drawn up and signed by the
clergy, expressing their conviction of the necessity for a Bishop
in the west, and their readiness to receive and obey any one set
over them in that capacity.
The Public Meeting was held on Wednesday, the sth of July.
It was presided over by W. H. Suttor, Esq. M.L.C., and addres-
sed by myself, by six clergymen, and sundry laymen. A Tea
meeting was held the same evening, and a committee meeting the
following day. The town was afterwards canvassed and at the
present time the subscription list reaches £5,000 and upwards.
Many doubts and apprehensions had been expressed, but when
the matter had been fairly placed before the public, and fully
discussed, the unanimity of sentiment was remarkable, and the
success of the movement complete.
Obviously it was impossible to expect that on the principle of
Episcopal government as carried out in this colony, the remote
parts of the diocese could be reached by the Bishop of Sydney.
In six or seven weeks I should have ridden as many 100 miles,
and yet had only skirted the borders of the pastoral districts. In


September I shall be employed for four or five weeks in the same
way in another portion of the West, and yet leave as large a
portion unvisited. If the rapidly extending population is not to
be left in practical heathenism, clergymen must be sent and
maintained, and they can neither be sent nor maintained without
a Bishop who can give time for personal superintendance. The
town of Bathurst also having a larger population than Q-oulburn,
requires that kind of aid and counsel and protection which the
presence of a suitable Bishop will supply.
On the Friday morning I held Divine service in the Gaol and
spent some time in the cell of a prisoner condemned to die.
I then proceeded with two of the clergy to George’s Plains,
where a new Church is being erected. It is well placed, and will
be a handsome country Church. Fifty pounds has been given
towards it by the Church Society, and in the month of September
it is proposed to open it, when I have some hope of being there
to assist. I held service in the afternoon in the house of Mr.
Joseph Smith, where a good congregation assembled and upwards
of £4 was contributed to the Church Society. I deemed it
advisable on all occasions to bring forward the claims of the
Church Society and to urge upon the young persons confirmed to
become subscribers, and the direct result was more than £l5O,
while I hope for a permanent addition to the income of the
Society.
The following Sunday was spent at Kelso and O’Connell, at
both places sermons were preached for the Church Society.
On Monday the new church at Peel was consecrated. It is a
suitable and commodious building, and owes its existence to the
exertions of Mr. Suttor, his family and friends. It is a great
boon to the neighbourhood, and the large attendance showed the
interest with which the occasion was regarded. Divine service is
held in it once a fortnight by the Rev. 'William Lisle.
The day following, Sofala was visited, a service being held on
the way at 3 o’clock in the afternoon at Wattle Flat, when a
good congregation assembled, and a collection was made on
behalf of the Church Society. The benefits which the Church
Society has conferred on the Sofala district are of long standing,


and of considerable amount. The clergyman’s stipend, the
parsonage, and the different places of worship at Sofala, Tamba-
roora, and Wattle Mat all have received aid from the Society’s
funds, and it is hardly too much to say that the continuance of
the ministrations of religion amongst the Gold Melds population
is due to it. On the discontinuance of the Gold Fields grants
from the public revenue, most of the resident ministers withdrew,
and it would not have been possible for the Church of England
clergyman to hold his ground if he had not been supported by the
Church Society.
Here also the Society maintains a Chinese Catechist. He bears
an excellent character, and devotes himself to the work of
enlightening his heathen fellow-countrymen. Two of those who
had been baptized by the Dean were to be confirmed. The others
had gone to the Lambing Flat Gold Field, which had recently been
thrown open to the Chinese, and it was the wish of the Catechist
himself to visit that place. It is a little doubtful however whether
they will remain, and we wait for further information. We had
a large congregation in the Church on Wednesday evening, and
a collection for the Bishopric Endowment Fund. The following
day we rode to Tamharoora and I held a confirmation at 3 o’clock,
and service in the evening, at which an overflowing congregation
was present, and £l2 contributed for the Church Society. Eleven
persons were confirmed. The following morning after visiting
two schools we returned to Sofala. Tamharoora has a consider-
able settled population, and the quartz reefs afford the means of
maintenance to many. At Hill-end where the range on which
Tamboroora stands suddenly drops into the Turon, a site for a
new Church was selected.
Between Tamboroora and Sofala a few settlers have congrega-
ted near a little good land and a public house. I have always
halted here and been very hospitably received. The settlers are all
Roman Catholics, but finding that they were anxious for a school
I recommended them to draw up a list of names of families and
children which I engaged to forward to the Inspector of the
Council of Education. On my return the next day the list was
ready and has been sent in, the Inspector has promised to visit and


report, and I trust this poor isolated district may find that
the promised benefit of the Public Schools Act was extended to it.
The following day the Burial ground at Sofala was consecrated
in the presence of a numerous and interested body of spectators.
There is something very touching in the simple service on
these occasions. The Psalms in which David and Moses the Man
of G-od set forth the brevity and uncertainty of life, and express
their hope in the enduring mercy of the Lord, the few verses
sung to “ Martyrdom,” the prayers and the address, all tend to
solemnize the feeling and to make the soul desire to share in that
blessed hope which despoils death of its sting and wrests its
victory from the grave.
The situation above the town with the river Turon winding
below, and the great ranges stretching around on every side, and
the deep shadows of the short day closing in vpon the scene,
served to make this Saturday evening a prelude to the bright
Sabbath which followed, even as through the grave and gate of
death the redeemed soul passes to a glorious rest.
A fine Sunday for a confirmation is in the country one may say
essentially necessary, and on this occasion it was all that could
be desired. The church is tolerably large and being of early and
simple construction it has this advantage that those outside can
hear equally well with those who are within the walls of slab
and under the roof of bark. On this occasion as the congrega-
tion had come from great distances, and Sofala itself is able to
supply a considerable number, the outside worshippers were
necessarily numerous. In the afternoon the Hospital and
Sunday school were visited and in the evening the congregation
was as large as before. The collections were for the Church
Society, and including Wattle Plat and Tamboroora, £3O was
collected for the Society and £l7 10s. for the Bishopric.
This was one of my last services and in company with the
clergyman 1 left Sofala early on Monday morning. It was the
week in which the recent fearful floods occurred, and as we
reached the high ranges and looked towards the east, the signs
of the coming storm were apparent enough. By the middle of
the day the rain began to descend. We reached our halting
place for the night and separated the following morning, he to


visit some of the scattered members of his extensive flock, and
to hold service at a place many miles distant from a Church, —I
towards Bowenfels, and the Zigzag, to keep the appointment
made as I went up, and to open the School Church if it should
be ready. I was met by Mr. Mayne and the Catechist, and in-
formed that the Church was so far completed that it could be
opened. Accordingly through pouring rain, and boggy roads,
and rising creeks, we made our way to the Railway works which
the rain had now suspended; we were most kindly entertained by
the Contractor Mr. Higgins and his officials, and succeeded in
holding service in the building which was covered in, but as may
be imagined was very far from dry. However they had done
their part, and Mr. Mayne and I did ours as well as we could.
The attendance was not very large and unless a promise had
been made, it certainly appeared a somewhat quixotic enterprise
under the circumstances to attempt to go there at all. Having
reached the place much earlier than had been arranged we were
able to have the service at 3 o’clock, and to return to Bowenfels
before day-light had quite disappeared.
The following day in still continuing rain, a service was held
at Hartley, and the few who could get there were confirmed.
Thursday was worse than ever and it was well for us that the
Railway bridge spanned the Napean, and the embankment along
which we led our horses crossed the flooded lands, or else we
must have sought shelter at Emu Plains. Something of this kind
did happen to my travelling companion Mr. Stiles on his return
to Sofala. The Turon rolled between him and the parsonage,
and within sight of his own house he was compelled to seek refuge
in another.
Thanks to a gracious superintending Providence, I was enabled
to reach my own house on the day and at the hour on which seven
weeks before I had arranged to do so. During a journey of
upwards of 800 miles, performed for the most part on horseback,
I had been permitted to keep every engagement, had not met
with any accident or inconvenience, and had by the blessing of
Gron accomplished far more than I had ventured to anticipate.
And now on looking back, what is the result of the
Church Society’s work ? It is very considerable and it is


very satisfactory. I find in the district I have visited eight
Clergymen connected with the Church Society all receiving their
stipends through it, and six receiving £IOO each in order that
their stipend may be brought up to £3OO per annum. Four
Catechists are maintained, eleven Churches have been built or are
being built to which the Society contributes, and three School
Churches have been recently erected in addition to three or four
more which have been in existence for some years. Four Parso-
nage houses have also been built.
It is impossible to estimate the value of the social and religious
advantages which have been conferred upon the country by the
men, the means employed, the Churches and Schools both
Sunday and daily, which have arisen from the efforts of the
Clergy.
And this be it remembered, relates only to one part of the
Diocese. Similar work by the same help, and with the same
results, is going on in other parts.
And yet how much remains to be done ! and how much more
may be done if with G-od’s help and blessing we resolve that it
shall be done. It is a period of great anxiety to the Committee
of the Church Society. Each month the claims accumulate, and
the debt does not diminish. We owe £BOO and upwards, and at
least £6OO is required to meet the calls for additional help.
Taught by former experience, I have been slow to hold out hopes
to those who are looking to the Church Society for aid. And yet
what can we do when the people are willing to do so much if only
they have a little encouragement. Shall we not find £5O to help
Oberon and Eockley and Evans’s Plains and Cowra and Grenfell,
when all these places are raising their hundreds to carry on our
■work and theirs.
And there is much required nearer home. In two districts,
half the stipend of a Catechist is ready, the men are ready, but
the Church Society’s funds are low. in Lord’s Forest, and that
wide district beyond Cook’s Eiver to G-eorge’s Eiver and down to
the South Head of Botany, a Catechist or a clergyman or both,
are required. The scattered settlers on this side of the Shoalhaven
Eiver, from Broughton’s Creek to the Kangaroo Ground, are


ready for a Catechist, the money is subscribed, and the Church
Society is asked to do its part, its promised part, of the engage-
ment, to provide £75 per annum for a Catechist there. There are
some other claims, small in amount, yet to those who make
them, of great moment.
We want at once £6OO, of this £450 would be for grants, and
£l5O for stipends, the latter being a permanent charge. The
debt we may probably manage to clear off because we shall soon be
getting to the latter part of the year, when our larger contributions
come in. But for the new grants what shall be done ? My heart
is sad sometimes when thinking of the work that might be done
and ought to be done by a little, a very little, more vigorous and
systematic aid. But it is useless to repine and find fault. This
work ought to be done and may be done and therefore we should
attempt it. I was very glad to hear of a proposal which fell from
his Excellency at a late Committee meeting at which I was unable
to be present. The list of obligations and the list of claims were
there, the debt too was there, and what, asked one member, was
to be done. “ I think ” said his Excellency, with that kind
consideration and practical wisdom which has ever marked his
advice, “ we had better all go home and see if we cannot get some
new subscribers to the Society.”
Precisely so. Let us get new subscribers to the Society. But
before we go home, let ns see whether some cannot be found
here, in this room and at this time. I fear it would be too much
to suppose that all present are subscribers to the Church Society.
I imagine it would be nearer the truth to suppose that many are
not subscribers to it. And I believe that if we could only this
night arrange to get the names of all who are disposed to aid
placed upon a subscription list, and the money collected, we
should get our £630, and might leave the debt to the
Committee and the ordinary sources of income. At all events, I
am sure that the St. James’s Association may do this and I am in
great hopes that they will. I have two reasons for thinking this.
One is, to use a common expression, a new broom is brought into
use. The former was very good and very valuable, but latterly
it had got into the habit of directing its efforts towards a
certain new church, rather than to the Church Society.


This Church is now fairly and happily at work and one of its
first objects will be to aid the Church Society. A public meeting
on behalf of the Church Society will be held at St. Peter’s,
Wooloomooloo, on Monday evening next. This then is another
reason for believing that we shall soon see the end of our difficul-
ties. We are opening new sources of supply. If only we can
keep well at work for a couple of years more, we may hope to see
the Diocese of Bathurst formed, and this work carried on by
moans of associations in the district which we are now aiding to a
very large extent, and which like the Diocese of Goulburn, will
do far more for itself than we at this distance can do for it.
I take a hopeful view of the prospects of the Church of England
in this colony. I believe it is making steady and in some places
rapid progress. It is uniting its members and calling forth their
energies by the men who are ministering amongst them. The
number of young people for confirmation is on the increase, the
services are well attended, the supply of candidates for Holy
Orders does not diminish, and the work I have recently witnessed
is in most instances of a satisfactory character. I expect that much
good will arise out of the action of our Synod; the intelligent in-
terest in the affairs of the Church will be ever on the increase, and
if we are kept in peaceful and active union, aiming at the highest
good of the community in which our lot is cast, and are faithful to
our trust, holding communion with our Head, reforming what is
evil, following after that which is good, we shall see our beloved
Church an ornament and a blessing to the land, beautiful in its
order, and a means under God of bringing many wanderers back
to the fold of the Good Shepherd our Loed and Saviotje Jesus
Cheist.
9
9
Joseph Cook and Co., Printers, 370, George-street, Sydney.


