

/ •■. Pi
mH / pZv..
■
-
•
■
Hi
K,


>
I'


CLASSIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION
OF SOME
NEWLY-DISCOVERED FERNS,
COLLECTED IN
THE NORTHERN ISLAND
NEW ZEALAND,
IN THE SUMMER OF 1841-2.
WILLIAM COLENSO, Esq.
Eauuccston, U. B. EanD;
PRINTED AT THE OFFICE OF THE LAUNCESTON EXAMINER.
1845.


\
*


F I Ll€ E 8 N O V ,
\OV.H ZELANDIiE.
A Classification and Description of some newly discovered
Ferns, collected in the Northern Island of New Zealand ,
in the summer of 1841—2,
It is now nearly seven years since a monograph on the then
known botany of the islands of New Zealand, from the pen
of the late Allan Cunningham, Esq., first appeared in the
pages of the second volume of the Companion to the Bo-
tanical Magazine, which paper was continued and completed
(on the discontinuance of that work) in Vols. I.—IV. of
Annals of Natural History. This “ precursor ” of the botany
of this increasingly interesting country contained 639 species*
of plants, nearly the whole of which have hitherto been de-
tected only in these islands. This enumeration embraced the
published discoveries of those truly eminent men, Sir Joseph
Banks and Dr. Solander, who accompanied our illustrious
* “ If to this aggregate number of species thus got together and here
enumerated sixty be added, as in all probability comprehending the re-
maining number of plants of the first voyage of Cook, which are pre-
served in the Banksian Herbarium and continue yet unpublished, seven
hundred distinct plants may he said to be the number at present known
of the flora of these islands.”—A. Cunn, in Comp. Bot, Mag., vol. ii.,
p. 230.


circumnavigator. Cook, on his first vovage to these seas in
1709 ; as well as those of the Forsters who also accompanied
Cook on his second vovage of discovery in 1772 ; of Men-
zies, who, in Vancouver’s ship, visited these islands in 1791;
of M. Achille Richard in 1822 ; of D’Urville and M. Lesson
in 1827 ; and other later botanists. More, however, than a
fourth part of the w hole number, comprising several new and
interesting genera, was discovered by the two brothers,
Messrs. Allan and Richard Cunningham ; of whom, inde-
fatigably attached as they both were to the pursuit of their
favourite science, it may be truly said they fell victims in their
laudable attempts to make known the botanical treasures of
a fair portion of the southern hemisphere. To this number
Mr. Allan Cunningham in his last visit to New Zealand, in
the year 1838, made an addition of several plants peculiar to
the northernmost part of New Zealand.
The number of species of Ferns published in the “ Precur-
sor” amounts to eighty-five ; from which, I venture to hazard
an opinion, at least two species— Niphobolus bicolor and Doodia
caudata —will have to be deducted ; as, I believe, these will
be found to be merely varieties of N. rupestris and D.
aspera. To the total number Mr. C. added four more on his
last visit; namely, Gleichcnia arachnoidea and three species
of Lomaria — L. crenulata, L. gigantea, and L. polymorpha.
During the few remaining months of Mr. C’s. life I had the
pleasure of discovering and forwarding to him a few ad-
ditional species of the following genera, Nothochlcena, Chei-
lanthes, Aspidium, Adiantum, Lomaria, Marattia, and
Hymenophyllum. Since that period I have been fortunate
enough to discover a few others, which have been sent to
England to Sir W. J. Hooker, by whom they have, without
doubt, been fully investigated and published ere this. It was,
however, in a journey which I undertook in the summer of
last year that I discovered the majority of these contained in
this paper.


1 am not aware of any one of these Ferns now described
by me ever being seen by any botanist; they certainly'are
not mentioned in any works on botany at present in my pos-
session ; and considering the localities whence they were ob-
tained, together with my never having noticed them in the
many parts of New Zealand in which I have at various times
travelled, I can but deem them new to science.
The arrangement I have adopted is that of Sir W. J.
Hooker and Dr. Lindley, as given in the second edition of A
Natural System of Botany by the latter gentleman.
The total number of New Zealand Ferns now known, ex-
clusive of varieties, is about 140 species, of these 1 have very
nearly 120 species in my herbarium.
Order —POLYPODIACEiE.
(T. Nudce.)
§. Polypodies, Bory.
Polypodium, Sw.
Sporangia venis iraposita, in soros subrotundos sparsos
seriatosve collecta. Indusium nullum. Endl.
1. P, sylvaticum, n. sp. Plant, few fronded, erect,
villous, terrestrial. Frond, lanceolate, acuminate, acute, bi-
pinnate, 16—24 inches; colour, dark green. Pinnules;
primaries, oblong-lanceolate, acute, subacuminate, petiolate,
alternate, remote: secondaries, trapezio-falcate, setose, cu-
neate at base, petiolate, alternate, sub-pinnatifid, 7 —9 lobed :
lobes, oblong and somewhat falcate, mucronate, serrate, less
serratures on lower edge than on upper, decurrent, alternate.
Sori, rotund, Aspidium-like, thickly set, 2 —3 on a lobe.
Rachis, Stipe, and Petioles, channelled on upper surface,
and densely scaled. Stipe, G—B inches long. Scales, at
base, very long and bordered. Root, fibrous.
Hah. In rich alluvial soil, low, shaded, and damp woods,
near Tolaga Bay, E. Coast; Dec., 1841.
Ohs. A smaller variety of this Fern was also obtained by
b 2


the discoverer from the forests on the mountains near Waikare
Lake, the fronds of which (including stipe) measured only
6 9 inches in length ; it was, moreover, more acuminate,
and serratures of lobes more spinous.
This Fern has very much the appearance of an Aspidium ,
to which genus it was supposed it must belong. From a
close investigation, however, of several fronds in different
stages of fructification without meeting with any vestige of an
zndusium, it has been referred to Polypodium . It possesses
several characters in common with Aspidium Waikarense r
(n. sp., vide n. 7, seq.) with which plant it is very likely at
first sight to be confounded.
viscidum, n. sp. Plant, sub-erect, drooping,
somewhat lax, thickly tomentose, viscid and villous, terres-
tial. Frond, oblong-lanceolate, sub-acuminate, bipinnate,
® 24 inches; reddish-green. Pitmules; primaries, oblong-
lanceolate, acuminate, sub-acute, broadest at base, petiolate,
alternate, very remote ; lowermost sub-opposite : secondaries,
linear-oblong, sub-acute, alternate and sub-opposite, distant,
somewhat reflexed ; uppermost pinnatifid ; lowermost petio-
late : segments, oblong, broadest at base, crenate, sessile,
sub-opposite, sub-revolute; veins, transparent. Sori, ro-
tund, sub-marginal, regular, bifariously disposed on each
segment of frond ; generally a sorus at every sinus. Stipe,
4—B inches, channelled on upper surface, brittle, reddish
brown. Caudex, creeping, thickly tomentose.
Hah. Dry sandy places, on mountains near Waikare Lake i
Dec., 1841. Also, neighbourhood of Bay of Islands, in ele-
vated and dry spots, margins of woods; 1838.
Ohs. I have, with some hesitation, referred this Fern ta
Polypodium ; from its not having, however, any indusium,
&c., I have been led to assign it to that genus. Both this
and the preceding species differ widely in habit from the
species of Polypodium hitherto discovered in New Zealand.
The whole plant is very glutinous, from which cause it is ge-


nerally found covered with the Cypscte of Composite, small
moths and flies, and other insects ; insomuch that it is rather
a difficult matter to procure good specimens for an herbarium.
In general the lower pinnules on the fertile fronds are found
in a withered and circinnate state, whilst the upper part of
the frond has scarcely gained maturity.
$. IIEMiONiTiDEiE, Freyc. et Kaulf.
Gymnoyramma, Desv.
Sporangia venis primariis furcatis pinnatisve imposita, in
soros lineares oblongosve collecta. Indusium nullum. Endl.
3. G. Nov.® ZelandljE, n. sp. Plant, small, caespitose,
erect, glabrous, terrestrial. Frond, ovate or ovate-lanceolate,
or deltoid-ovate, obtuse, membranaceous, bi-pinnate or pin-
nate-piunatifid, 6—20 lines long. Pinnules ; primaries,
trapezio-ovate, obtuse or eraarginate, petiolate, margined,
alternate, remote : secondaries, flabelliform, mostly deeply
three-cleft, alternate petiolate; petioles short: segments,
bifid : lobes, somewhat cuneate-linear, emarginate or obtuse,
entire; veins, simple, forked. Sori, oblong, forked, thick
and confluent, on furcate veins of lobes, nearly covering the
whole under surface of segments. Sporangium, obovate,
reticulated, sub-sessile, membranaceous, whitish ; annulus,
incomplete, cinnamon-coloured. Sporules, sub-deltoid, tri-
angular, obtusely angled, dotted, glossy, blackish. Rachis
and Stipe, semi-terete, brittle, deeply channelled on upper
surface, shining, red ; Stipe, I—2 inches. Root, fibrous ;
fibres, densely clothed with long silky hairs.
Hab. In sheltered grassy spots among scoriae, on dry vol-
canic hills, between Manukau Bay and Tamaki Creek, about
ten miles from Auckland ; 1842.
Obs. This elegant little Fern is the only species of Gymno-
gramma yet discovered in New Zealand. It grows plentifully
on those hills, where it is an annual, being invariably withered
up and destroyed with the heats of summer.


Grammitis, Sw.
Sporangia venulis simplicibus v. bifurcarum cruri superiori
imposita, in soros lineares v. subrotundos collecta. Indusium
nullum. Endl.
4. G. Ciliata, n, sp. Plant, small, caespitose, sub-
membranaceous, epiphytical. Frond, simple, linear-lanceo-
late, obtuse, much attenuated at base, sub-sessile, I—2 inches
long, 2—3 lines broad, margin entire, sub-revolute, and beau-
tifully ciliated with white translucent hair; upper surface
slightly, and lower thickly, villous, with long white hair;
colour, light green : mid-rib, sub-flexuose, blackish. Sort’,
oval or oblong, large, thick and crowded. Iloot, fibrous and
tomentose.
Hah. On trunks of living trees, humid woods, Bay of
Islands ; 1841. And, in similar situations, shores of Wai-
kare Lake, in the mountainous district in the interior, five
days journey W. S. W. from Poverty Bay, E. Coast; Dec.
1841.
Ohs. A species, in affinity, very near G. australis, R. Br.;
from which, however, it differs, in being villous and ciliated,
m having its sort more prominent and crowded, as well as in
its being a much smaller plant. The fine ciliated hairs on its
margin present a most beautiful appearance in the living plant,
but unfortunately they fall off with the most, careful handling.
(11. Indusiatcc.)
§. Aspide.®, Bory.
Aspidium, Sw.
Sporangia receptaculo columnar!, ex apice, medio v. ana-
stomosi venularum tumescenti imposita, in soros subrotundos
sparsos seriatosve collecta. Indusia receptaculo continua,
subrotunda, pellata, margine undique libera. Endl.
■). A. Cunninghamianum, n.sp. Plant, climbing, few-
fionded, pendulous, coriaceous, glabrous, epiphytical. Frond,
triangular or rhombic-ovate, acuminate, bipinnate; length.


fourteen inches ; breadth at base, nine inches ; very remote
from each other on caudex ; colour, light green. Pinnules ;
•primaries, ovate or triangular-falcate, acuminate, acute, pe-
tiolate, alternate, distant; lowermost sub-opposite ; upper-
most pinnatifid and decurrent: secondaries, oblong-lanceolate
somewhat falcate, acute, not crowded, petiolate, sub-opposite;
upper ones sessile, crcnate, and lobed : segments and lobes,
bi. tri. and quadri-fid, acute and obtuse. Sori, semi-sphaer-
oidal, very prominent, on extremities of smaller veins, not
marginal, pitted, sub-opposite, not crowded. Indusium,
peltate, corrugated. Capsules, numerous. Petioles and
Itachis towards apex, margined and scaled. Scales, very
long, light brown. Stipe, smooth, brittle, channelled,
scaled, 12—14 inches long ; colour, light yellow-brown :
base of Stipe and Caudex, densely clothed with large scales
imbricated and adpressed. Caudex, creeping, succulent.
Hab. On small living trees in the shaded dense and damp
forests near Ruatahuna, a village in the mountainous district
in the interior, five days journey S. S. W. from Wakatane,
Bay of Plenty, E. Coast; Jan., 1842.
Ohs. This climbing Fern, by far the largest yet detected in
New Zealand, (some fronds measuring, including stipe, near
three feet in length) appeared to be very scarce, a few plants
only being seen. It has been named by the discoverer in
memory of his much lamented friend, that amiable and inde-
fatigable botanist, the late Allan Cunningham, Esq.
0. A. pulcherrimum, ii. sp. Plant, well fronded, tall,
somewhat squarrose, flaccid, terrestrial. Frond, lanceolate,
bipinnate, sub-membranaceous, villous underneath, 24—30
inches. Pinnules; primaries, linear-lanceolate, acute, mu-
cronate, petiolate, alternate, remote, brachiate; uppermost
much flaccid ; petiole, channelled and densely scaled : se-
condaries, trapezio-rhomboid, slightly falcate, cuneate at
base, acute, mucronate, cut-serrate, petiolate, alternate, re-
mote, regular; lowest lobes, bi-tri-serrate and obtuse ; upper-


most confluent and decurrent ; slightly striated on upper
surface. Sori, small, ranged alternately in two rows, one
row on either side of mid-rib of segment, 5—7 on each seg-
ment, not crowded. Involucre , orbiculate, peltate, delicately
wrinkled. Rachis, channelled, densely covered with hair,
and large and beautiful scales. Stipe, thickly scaled, 9—15
inches long. Scales, ovate, acuminate, bordered, those at
base laterally plaited ; I—2| inches in length. Root,
fibrous.
Hah . In decomposed sandstone soil, dense shaded forests,
on the mountainous range near Waikare Lake ; Dec., 1841.
Ohs. This beautiful Fern grows to a large size in its native
forests, some fronds measuring (including stipe) near four
feet in length. The outer fronds of the plant spread out-
wards, depressed in a most graceful manner, while the inner
young and very flaccid fronds retain an elegant sub-erect po-
sition. One of the most enchanting woodland scenes I ever
witnessed was on those mountains where this beautiful Fern,
with its elegant congeners, Todea superba, (n. sp., vide n.
33, seq.,) and Lomaria rotundifolia, (n. sp. vide n. 22,
seq.,) heightened with their lovely foliage the surpassing
beauty of the scene.
7. A. Waikarense, n. sp. Plant, few fronded, erect,
coriaceous, terrestrial. Frond, lanceolate, acute, bipinnate,
7—lo inches. Pinnules; primaries, oblong lanceolate,
acute, broadest at base, petiolate, alternate ; lowermost sub-
opposite : secondaries, sub-rhombic-ovate, falcate, cuneate
and slightly auricled at base, mucronate, unequal, petiolate,
pitted, bi-serrate; serratures acute and obtuse ; glabrous, or
very slightly villous, above ; slightly villous underneath ; low-
ermost pinnatifid, flat and sub-imbricated on rachis. Sori,
large, crowded, ranged alternately in two rows, mostly five on
a segment, sometimes o— 2. Involucre, peltate, orbicular,
and wrinkled. Stipe, Rachis, and Petioles, channelled,
villous, and densely scaled to apex. Stipe, 2—4 inches.


Scales, large, ovate-acuminate, glossy, striated longitudinally,
revolute and sub-imbricated on Stipe and Rachis. Root ,
fibrous.
Hah. In forests near Waikare Lake, with preceding ; Dec.,
1841.
Nephrodium, Mich.
Sporangia receptaculoe medio venae intumescenti imposita,
soros subrotundos, seriates formantia. Indusium reniforme,
bine sinu affixum. Endl.
8. N. pentangularum, n. sp. plant, few fronded,
erect, pilose, terrestrial. Frond, five-angled, acuminate,
sub-acute, bipinnate, 7—lo inches ; nearly as broad across
at lateral angles as long. Pinnules; primaries, oblong-
lanceolate, acuminate, acute, broadest at base, petiolate, al-
ternate, unequal, decurrent near the top ; uppermost con-
fluent; upper half of uppermost pinnae largest, lower half of
lowermost pair largest; secondaries, oblong-lanceolate, bifid
and acute, petiolate, alternate, decurrent, pinnatifid and
deeply lobed ; lower secondaries of lowest pair of pinnules
sub-pinnate and very long : lobes, opposite, serrate, bi-trifid,
obtuse and acute. Sori, thick, sub-marginal, bifariously dis-
posed on lobes, one being at each sinus. Stipe, B—l3
inches, channelled and villous, thinly squamose towards base.
Root, creeping and fibrous, scaly.
Hah. Low wet grounds, margins of shaded woods. East
Coast; 1841. And, in similar situations, near the Bay of
Islands, where it was originally discovered in 1837.
N. pentangularum ; W. C’s., M$S-, ined. ; 1837.
§ AspleniEjE, Frey et Kaulf.
Asplenium, L.
Sporangia venis transversalibus imposita, in soros lineares
collecta. Indusia membranacea, e vena lateraliter orta, ver-
sus costam libera. Endl.
9. A. Hookerianum, n. sp. Plant, small, flaccid, ter-
restrial. Frond, oblong-lanceolate, bipinnate, 4—5 inches.


Pinnules ; primaries , rhombic-ovate, obtuse, petiolate ; pe-
tioles long ; alternate, very remote ; uppermost pinnatifid :
secondaries, fan-sbaped or obovate, cuneate at base deeply
crenate or slightly lobed, petiolate, alternate, distant; lobes ,
2, 3, 4, in a segment, emarginate obtuse or slightly acute ;
glaucescent. Sori, oval, very thick ; lowermost 2—3, up-
permost 1, on each segment. Involucre, membranaceous.
Rachis, Stipe, and Petioles , dry and somewhat chaffy.
Stipe, —2| inches long, fimbriated at base; whitish.
Root, fibrous.
Hob. Under volcanic conglomerate rocks, valley of
Hinuera, between Tauranga (Bay of Plenty) and the River
Waikato; January, 1842.
Ohs. I have done myself the very great pleasure of naming
this graceful Fern in commemoration of J. D. Hooker, Esq.,
M. D., &c., &c., who, as assistant-surgeon and botanist,
visited this island in H. M. S. Erebus, in the winter of 1841 :
and with whom I had the unalloyed gratification of botanizing
in the woods of New Zealand.
10. A. Colensii, n. sp. Plant, small, sub-erect, caespi-
tose, terrestrial. Frond, lanceolate or (when old) oblong-
lanceolate, bi- or sub-tripinnate, fioccosely-villous, especially
underneath, 3—5 inches. Pinnules ; primaries, oblong-
lanceolate, acute, petiolate, alternate or sub-opposite, some-
what remote; lowermost bipinnate ; secondaries, pinnatifid,
acute, bifid, entire, alternate, rather distant; lowermost pin-
nate, 14—4 on a petiole ; uppermost confluent, decurrent;
sub-divisions, oblong-ovate, bi-tri- and quadrifid, 5—9 lobed ;
lobes, ovate or linear-lanceolate ; light green. Sori, oblong-
lanceolate, lowermost 3—4, uppermost I—2, on a sub-divi-
sion. Involucre, membranaceous. Rachis, Stipe, and
Petioles, very villous. Stipe, I—2 inches long ; whitish.
Root, fibrous.
Hub. In clefts and on shaded rocks, dry places, on the
borders of Waikare Lake; Dec., 1841.


Obs. In affinity this Fern approaches very nearly the pre-
ceding. The fewer and wedge-shaped segments, thick
incrassated sori, lax appearance, more distant pinnse, and
much less villosity of that species, sufficiently distinguishes
it from this.
11. A. Forsterianum, n. sp. Plant , very long, pendu-
lous, sub-coriaceous, scaley and floccosely-ramentaceous;
epiphytical. Frond , oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, pinnate,
24—30 inches. Pinnules, rhombic-lanceolate, somewhat
falcate, much acuminate, caudate, sub-acute, cuneate at base,
petiolate, alternate, distant, unequal, veined, cut, 14—20
lobed ; lowermost pinnas sub-opposite : lobes, sub-pectinate,
decreasing in size and number of teeth to apex ; middle lobes
of pinnule sub-opposite: teeth, in each lobe, upper half of
pinnule, 15 — 1 ; lower half, 6 — l, decreasing proportionately,
sub-acute. Involucre, linear, very long, entire, diagonal
with mid-rib of pinnule, dehiscing in pairs one against
another. Petiole, Rachis, and Stipe, densely woolly and
scaly ; the two latter deeply sulcated on upper surface;
brittle, red-brown. Root, fibrous.
Hab. On trunks of living trees in the dense forest between
Tauranga and Rotorua, near the Bay of Plenty, E. Coast ;
Jan., 1842.
Obs. Only one frond of this truly elegant Fern was brought
away by the discoverer ; who, at the time of gathering, sup-
posed it to be a fine specimen of A. falcatum, Forst., on
careful examination and comparison, however, it was found
to be a new and distinct, though closely allied, species. It
has been named after that celebrated botanist, who did so
much, under such very great disadvantages, in making known
the botany of New Zealand.
12. A. oblongifolium, n. sp. Plant, sub-erect, terres-
trial. Frond, somewhat cordate, five-angled, pinnate, gla-
brous, villous in dots on under surface and margin, 6—B
inches long. Pinnules, 4—5 pairs, linear-oblong, obtuse,
c 2


crenulately-serrulate, petiolate, opposite, remote, patent,
slightly unequal at base, upper half largest, margin incras-
sated, revolute, —2| inches long, 4—6 lines wide: termi-
nal pinnule, very long, acuminate, serrate, 3|—inches :
veins, pinnate, opposite, simple, rarely forked. Sori, linear,
thick, distichous, confined to upper pinnae, intra-marginal.
Involucre, vaulted, glossy, slightly wrinkled, membranaceous
at margin, brown-red, black at base. Fachis, slightly mar-
gined, villous. Stipe, sulcated on upper surface, 4
inches, somewhat succulent, blackish-green.
Hah. In ravines and dells among scoriae, on the dry vol-
canic range of hills near Manukau Bay; 1842.
Ohs. In affinity this species of Asplenium approaches
very near to A. ohliquum, Forst., from which, however, it
may at first sight be known, by its being a much smaller
plant with narrower pinnae. That species is, moreover, de-
scribed as possessing pinnules “ acutis basi oblique cuneatis
obtuse serratis utrinque striatis.” 1 have never yet detected
A. ohliquum in any of my wanderings. A. Richard con-
siders it as identical with A. lucidum, Forst. ; yet, A. Cun-
ningham states, his having met with it “ in dense forests at
Wangaroa.”— Vide, Comp. Dot. Mag., vol. 2, p. 364.
§ Freyc. et Kaulf.
Pteris, L.
Sporangia apicibus venularum, in receptaculurn nerviforme
frondis marginem arnbiens combinatis imposita, soruni mar-
ginalem continuum formantia. Indunum margini frondis
continuum, scariosum, introrsum liberum. End I.
13. P. Montana, n. sp. Plant, few trended, erect,
glaucous, glabrous, somewhat coriaceous ; terrestrial.
Frond, lanceolate, bipinnate, 12—18 inches. Pinnules;
primaries, ovate-triangular, acuminate, obtuse, sub-opposite,
sessile, very remote; uppermost pinnatifid, confluent; ter-
minal lobes acuminate and sub-caudate : secondaries,
cuneate-falcate, obtuse, broadest at base, entire, sessile.


opposite, much veined ; uppermost confluent; lowermost on
lowest pinnae, largely crenate and imbricate on rachis ; those
nearest to rachis on upper pinnae diverging from it. Invo-
lucre, membranaceous, entire, continuous on either side of
segments, but not at apex, sub-revolute, gaping. Stipe,
6—9 inches, brittle, red-brown. Root, fibrous.
Hah. On exposed mountainous situations, in sandy soil,
near Waikare Lake; Dec., 1841.
Ohs. In affinity this Fern certainly approaches very near
to P. Brunoniana, Endl., which, however, is “ tripinnate,”
and a very much larger species ; notwithstanding it may
possibly prove to be a stunted variety of that plant. I do
not, however, recollect seeing a single specimen of P. Bru-
noniana, (a common Fern in many parts of New Zealand)
in the whole of that hilly district.
Cheilanthes, Sw.
Sporangia apicibus venularum discreti imposita, in soros
subrotundos, margini frondis approximates collecta. Indu-
sium, spurium, e margine frondis reflexo. Endl.
14. C. pellucida, n. sp. plant, few fronded, tall, sub-
erect, sub-membranaceous and flaccid ; terrestrial. Frond,
oblong or ovate-lanceolate, acute, tri-sub-quadri pinnate,
24—36 inches ; light green ; villous on petioles, ribs, and
veins. Pinnules ; primaries, ovate-lanceolate, sub-acumi-
nate, obtuse, petiolate, sub-opposite, distant, confluent
towards apex ; lowermost opposite ; petioles, somewhat tor-
tuous : secondaries, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, broadest at
base, petiolate, somewhat remote ; lowermost opposite : ter-
tiaries, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, sessile, opposite, not
crowded; lowermost pinnate-pinnatifid : segments, oblong,
somewhat falcate, bi-serrate, obtuse or tridentate, sessile,
opposite. Sori, sub-rotund, sub-marginal, solitary on upper
edges of sinuses of tertiary pinnze; sometimes 2 4on a
segment, when so, bifariously disposed. Involucre, spurious,
large, somewhat cordate, acute, sub-membranaceous towards


apex, irregularly and slightly laciniated, converging and re-
flected from margin of frond. Rachis, deeply channelled on
upper surface, scabrous, orange-brown. Stipe, 30—40
inches, rough, hairy and shaggy at base. Hairs, flattish,
tapering, corrugated, pellucid, and jointed. Root, fibrous.
Hab. On clayey declivities in dry woods, between Cape
Brett and Wangarei Bay, E. Coast; 1839 and 1842.
Obs. I can but consider this plant as intermediate between
the two genera, Lonchitis and Cheilanthcs ; and as a link
uniting both ; possessing as it does, the simple venation of
the latter, with the sinus-situated sori of the former genus.
After some hesitation, however, I have concluded to place it,
for the present at least, among the Cheilantkii.
This species appears to be a very scarce plant, I only
having seen two or three specimens, and these only in that
district, near the sea-coast.
§ SchizolomEjE, Frey et Gaud.
Lindscea, Dryand.
Spoiangia apicibus venarum imposita, in soi'um continuum,
marginem frondis ambeuntem collecta. Indusium membra-
naceum, continuum, frondem ambiens, extrorsum liberum.
Endl.
15. L. viridis, n. sp. Plant, somewhat tufted, sub-
erect, lax, drooping, membranaceous, glabrous, terrestrial.
Frond, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, bipinnate, 6—9 inches,
colour, an agreeable light green. Pinnules; primaries, tra-
pezio-ovate, somewhat falcate, truncate, bifid, petiolate, alter-
nate ; lowermost opposite : secondaries, triangular-falcate,
truncate, petiolate, alternate, sub-pinnatifid : segments,
cuneate, linear-spathulate, entire, decurrent, bifid, emarginate,
toothed and mucronate, I—2 veined. Involucre, emargi-
-11 ate, somewhat praeraorse, dilated, slightly plicate. Rachis,
flexuose, deeply channelled. Stipe, semi-angular, 2—3
inches long, brittle, slightly scaled at base. Root, fibrous.
llab. On wet rocks in stony ravines, in the dense forest


between Tauranga and Rotorua, E. Coast; Jan., 1842.
Obs. A truly elegant species, evidently possessing near
affinity with L. trichomanoides, Willd. ; from which, how-
ever, it is very distinct.
§ Blechne®, Freyc. et Kaulf.
Lomaria, Willd.
Sori lineares continui dorsum frondis contractae tegentes.
Indusia marginalia conniventia. Spreng.
16. L. latifolia, n. sp. plant , few fronded, erect,
somewhat furfuraceous ; terrestrial. Fronds, pinnate.
Barren frond: pinnules, s—lo, linear-oblong, somewhat
falcate, sub-acuminate, obtuse, sessile, alternate, remote,
serrate, margined, somewhat undulate, slightly villous, length
2 inches, breadth B—98 — 9 lines ; lowermost petiolate and sub-
opposite ; terminal pinnule, acuminate, abrupt, mucronate ;
colour, dull brown-green : R achis, 4 inches ; Stipe, 5 inches,
channelled and scaly ; sooty-coloured. Fertile frond : pin-
nules, 9 —ll, linear-lanceolate, caudate, alternate, distant,
villous, length 3, 4, inches; lowermost sub-opposite and
petiolate : Rachis, 3—5 inches ; Stipe, 7—9 inches, striated
and slightly villous on upper surface. Root, fibrous.
Hah. Dense humid woods, mountains, near Waikare Lake,
and in rich vegetable mould, near dry woods, Ruatahuna ;
Jan., 1842.
Obs. In affinity this Fern is very near L. procera, Spreng.,
from which every-where-common species, however, it differs,
in its pinnae being much broader, more deeply serrated, fewer
in number, and not decreasing in size downwards, as well as
from its much longer stipe, and solitary habit.
17. L. HETEROPHYLLA, n. sp. Plant, solitary, coriace-
ous, sub-furfuraceous, dependent, drooping, terrestrial.
Barren frond, 9—26 inches, pinnatifid, irregularly lobed or
laciniated, margin thickened and entire : lobes, linear-oblong,
acuminate, pointletted, decurrent and alternate, 3—6 inches ;
lowermost lobes very small and serai-orbicular; terminal lobe


long, 5—9 inches ; some fronds, simple, lanceolate, acuminate
and entire, slightly undulate, B—l2 inches; colour, dark
dirty green ou upper, and discoloured on under, surface.
Stipe, channelled, glabrous, black, 5—9 inches, scaly at
base. Fertile frond, B—2o inches, pinnatifid : lobes,
linear-lanceolate, very caudate, sub-acute, irregular, decurrent,
alternate, 4—B inches, twisted in fructification : Stipe, chan-
nelled, glabrous, 6—12 inches, scaly at base.
Hab. Shaded woods, in decomposing vegetable soil, in
the Ruatahuna district; with preceding ; Jan., 1842.
18. L. nigra, n.sp. plant, depressed, prostrate, spread-
ing, terrestrial; colour, dark-green approaching to black.
Sterile frond, oblong-lanceolate, lyrate-pinnatifid ; length,
6 8 inches ; breadth, 12—15 lines : lobes, oblong, obtuse,
broadest at base, very irregularly toothed and jagged, sub-
revolute, veined, blistered, roughish, and alternate, 6—9 lines
long, 3—4 lines broad ; two next to lowest the smallest; ter-
minal lobe, I—2 inches long : Eachis, tomentose, s—6|
inches : Stipe, channelled, hairy, I* 2| inches; dark
brown. Fertile frond, pinnate: pinnules, linear, obtuse,
tomentose on upper surface, sessile, alternate, 12—15 lines
long, 2 lines broad ; terminal pinnule much caudate, 2| —3
inches long; Eachis, tomentose and scaly, 3 —4 inches :
Stipe, cylindrical, fibrous, hairy, scaly at base, 3—4 inches.
Eoot, fibrous.
Hab. Low and shady humid spots, in the dense forest
between Tauranga and Rotorua, E. Coast; Jan., 1842.
19. L. linearis, n. sp. Plant, caespitose, terrestrial.
Fronds, linear-lanceolate. Sterile frond, pinnatifid, often
decumbent, spreading, 4—6 inches: lobes, somewhat oblong,
obtuse and sub-acute, revolute, opposite, confluent, smooth,
entire, and veined, 4—6 lines in length ; lowermost smallest
and semi-circular; colour, yellowish-green, sometimes red-
dish : Eachis, smooth, with here and there a long scale :
Stipe, smooth, obtusely angled, scaly at base, 3—4 inches,


red-brown. Fertile frond, pinnate, very erect, 4—B inches :
pinnules, oblong or oblong-ovate, obtuse, entire, smooth ;
lowermost, sub-petiolate, opposite, distant and small ; upper,
sessile, alternate, and crowded, 2—3 lines in length ; colour,
browm-black: Rachis, smooth: Stipe, smooth, obtusely
angled, channelled, brittle, very closely covered at base with
large, light-coloured, half-clasping, obtuse, and membrana-
ceous scales; 7 —lo inches. Root, creeping, ramentaceous
and downy.
Hah. Plentifully in alluvial soil, on margins of woods near
Te Waiiti, a village in the interior, two days journey S. E.
from Rotorua ; January, 1842.
Ohs. A smaller variety was also found growing in great
abundance among grass, on dry heaths near Wakapunake,
two days’ journey from Poverty Bay, E. Coast; December,
1841. The fronds of which, including Stipe, only measured
from two to four inches in length.
20. L. deltoides, n. sp. Plant, solitary, erect, terres-
trial. Fronds, somewhat deltoid or oblong-triangular, sub-
caudate, pinnate. Barren frond, B—lo inches : pinnules,
ligulate-oblong, somewhat falcate, obtuse, broadest at base,
margined, entire, undulate, veined, puckered, sessile, alter-
nate, and close ; slightly hairy on the veins of under surface,
15—21 lines long, 4—B lines broad ; lowermost pair oppo-
site, auricled, and deflexed ; uppermost pinnae confluent;
colour, pale green : Rachis, upper surface smooth, under
thinly haired : Stipe, channelled, smooth, roughish towards
base; base densely clothed with long acuminate brown
scales; 10—12 inches; straw-coloured. Fertile frond,
much caudate, 6—B inches: pinnules, linear, obtuse, smooth,
entire, slightly decurrent, ciliate at margin, sessile, alternate,
distant, 1| inches long, 3 lines broad ; lowermost opposite ;
upper surface, dull green ; midrib of pinnae prominent and
yellow-coloured : Rachis and Stipe, channelled, smooth;
lower part of Stipe rough, and thickly set with long hairs


and scales ; 11—14 inches long ; colour, light yellow : scales,
crowded and sub-fascicled, shining, brown. Root, fibrous.
Hah. In hilly situations, dry woods, in Te VVaiiti district,
in nearly the same locality as the preceding ; January, 1842.
21. L. deflexa, n. sp. Plant, small, solitary, abruptly
deflexed, glabrous, terrestrial. Barren frond, pinnate-pin-
natifid, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, sub-acute, 4—7 inches :
segments, ligulate-lanceolate, obtuse, somewhat falcate,
bioadest at base, margined, entire, or slightly crenulate,
veined ; lowermost pinnules, pinnate, opposite, sessile, un-
equal, broadly cordate at base, auricled upwards and imbri-
cated ; upper pinnae, pinnatifid, alternate, divided almost to
rachis ; colour, light red-green : Rachis, flexuose towards
apex, channelled : Stipe, smooth, hairy towards, and thickly
scaled at, base, 2—4 inches long : veins, pinnate, bifurcate,
clavate at apices. Fertile frond, pinnate, 3—4 inches long:
pinnules, ligulate, obtuse, falcate, broadest at base, decur-
rent upwards and downwards, sessile, opposite; uppermost
confluent; terminal lobe caudate: Rachis and Stipe, chan-
nelled ; Stipe, smooth, hairy, and densely scaled at base ;
3—4 inches long. Root, fibrous.
Hah. Dry clayey banks, sides of rivers, country between
Turanga and the River Wairoa, E. Coast; December, 1841.
Ohs. A curious little species, in affinity apparently very
neai L. dcltoides ,* from which, however, it differs, in not
being ciliated on the margins of its pinnae, in being much
smaller, in its different venation, and in its very peculiar
habit of growth, the barren frond being, almost invariably,
abruptly deflexed (as if broken) from the lowermost pinnules.
The difference between these two apparently closely-allied
species, is easier perceived on comparing them together than
described.
On re-examination it has occurred to me, that this species
may be yet found to have an alliance with the genus Blech-
num ; as, in some young fronds which I have examined, the


involucre appears scarcely marginal. With that genus, how-
ever, I am totally unacquainted, never having seen a specimen.
22. L. rotundifolia, n. sp. Plant, spreading, squar-
rose, terrestrial. Fronds, linear-lanceolate, pinnate. Barren
frond, sub-defle\ed, patent, G—2o inches : pinnules, sub-
rotund or oblong, membranaceous, slightly crenulate, sessile,
opposite, 6—9 lines long, uppermost alternate and confluent;
colour, light green : Rachis, densely clothed with long scales :
Stipe, cylindrical, I—4 inches ; brown. Fertile frond,
very erect, 4—14 inches : pinnules, linear-lanceolate, obtuse,
entire, sub-sessile, alternate, distant, 6—12 lines long, 2—3
lines broad ; lowermost petiolate ; brownish red : Rachis and
Stipe, channelled, and thickly covered with scales; 2—9
inches ; light brown. Root, fibrous.
Hah. Dense humid woods, nearWaikare Lake, in decom-
posed sandstone soil; December, 1841.
Ohs. This Fern in its native forests, presents a very grace-
ful appearance. It there attains a large size, some fronds
having been observed between two and three feet in length.
The fertile fronds, generally three in number in each plant,
are invariably very erect, ascending directly from the centre ;
while the numerous barren fronds spread out horizontally in a
half-procumbent manner, enchant the eye -of the observer
with a most elegant circle of delicate and ever-living green.
A smaller variety of this species was also detected in allu-
vial soil, in the low woods in the first day’s journey from
Turanga towards Waikare.
§ Freyc. et Kaulf.
Dicksonia, L’Herit.
Sporangia apice venarum imposita, soros subrotundos
marginales formantia. Indusium duplex, verum membrana-
ceum venae continuum, spurium e lobulo frondis reflexo alte-
rum equitans. Endl.
23. D. fibrosa, n. sp. Plant, arboreous, terrestrial.
Frond, oblong-lanceolate, apex acute, bipinnate, 5—7 feet;
d 2


colour, light green. Pinnules; primaries, oblong.lanceolate,
acuminate, sub-acute, broadest at base, petiolate, alternate :
secondaries, oblong-lanceolate, acute, slightly approximate,
deeply pinnatifid, petiolate, alternate : lobes, oblong-ovate,
somewhat falcate, acute, bi-trifid, serrate, sessile, alternate,
decurrent, revolute, glabrous; lowermost, sub-petiolate;
veins, pellucid. Sori, sub-marginal, mostly four on a lobe,
bifariously disposed. Involucre, inflated, entire or slightly
uneven. Rachis, Stipe, Petioles, and Ribs, densely tomen-
tose ; Rachis and Stipe, channelled ; Stipe, I—2 feet.
Caudex, erect, bulky, 12—18 feet high. Cortice, fibrous,
dry, and enormously thick.
Hab. In rich alluvial soil, on the banks of rivers, in Te
Waiiti district; January, 1842.
Obs. This fine arborescent Fern attains in its native forests
to the height of eighteen feet. In affinity it approaches very
near to D. squarrosa, Siv.; from which species, however, it
may, even at a distance, be readily distinguished ; its trunk
not being studded with broken-off and decayed petioles, as
in that species, but, on the contrary, thickly covered with
fibres, which resemble those of the fibrous interior of the
husk of the cocoa-nut. This fibrous epidermis increases in
thickness with the age of the plant; and, in time, causes it
to appear unusually bulky. Some trees were noticed from
fourteen to sixteen inches in diameter. The natives cut away
the fibrous outside in thick slices, which they use for many
purposes in the construction of their dwelling-houses, and,
especially, their stores for food. Being easier cut by them
than wood, a peice resembling a small plank may speedily be
obtained. It is also found much more effectual than such
timber as they with their limited means could cut, for ex-
cluding of rats and mice ; as these animals cannot gnaw
through this dry fibrous substance so readily as through wood.
Its living fronds are few' in number, spreading, and deciduous.
When dead they remain hanging for a long while thickly around


the trunk, giving the plant a peculiar bushy appearance. Its
foliage, when living, is much softer than that of D. squar-
rosa, which is very harsh and spiny, and much more deeply
veined. The natives call this species, Wekiponga ; a word
worth noticing, as showing the acuteness of their observation
of natural productions ; it being evidently derived from Weld,
the name given by them to D. squarrosa, and Ponga, their
name for Cyathea dealbata, Sw., the common arborescent
Fern of New Zealand. D.fbrosa, being, according to then-
idea, intermediate between those two species : or, possessing
characters common to both. Which, undoubtedly, it has in
general appearance, uniting the softness of the foliage of the
one, with the rough caudex and deciduous fronds of the
other. It has been named from the very dense fibrousness of
its cortice, combined with the admirable uses to which that
substance is so efficiently applied by the New Zealanders.
24. D. LANATA, n. sp. Plant, sub-erect, somewhat
drooping, coriaceous, terrestrial. Frond, ovate, bi-tripinnate,
densely woolly on veins, ribs, and rachis, 12—30 inches;
colour, yellowish green. Pinnules; primaries, ovate-lance-
olate, acuminate, sub-acute, petiolate, alternate, crowded ;
uppermost, pinnatifid ; lowermost, bipinnate : secondaries,
lanceolate, somewhat falcate, sub-acute, broadest at base,
petiolate, alternate ; uppermost, confluent: segments, ovate-
oblong, sub-acute, serrate, sessile, decurrent; crenate, when
fruited ; lowermost, sub-petiolate. Sori, sub-marginal, bi-
fariously disposed on segments of frond, numerous ; base of
frond most thickly fruited, seldom any on apex. Involucre,
sub-globose, inflated, converging, somewhat refuse. Stipe,
deeply channelled and furrowed on upper surface, succulent,
very woolly, thickly matted with shaggy hair at base ; 9—16
inches long. Hairs, regularly articulated, deciduous ; yellow-
brown. Root, fibrous.
Hub. Declivities, cleared woods, on the high shores of the
E. side of Waikare Lake; December, 1841.


Ohs. 1 lie old fronds of this plant become, in time, quite
glabrous, and pinnse more distant.
f at . hispida ; a variety which is much larger, grows on the
mountain range of Wananake, near Wanganei Bay, E. Coast.
This vaiiety attains to the height of 5—6 feet, including
stipe, and is nearly quadripinnate ; its pinnules, too, are more
distant, segments oblong-linear and pinnatifid, and hair of
stipe and frond much more rigid, and of a dark brown-black
colour. lam almost inclined to consider it a distinct species,
but wait the examination of better specimens than those at
present in my possession. Observed at Wananake, 1839 ;
and, again, in 1842. MSS., W. C.
Davallia, Sm.
Sporangium apicibus venarum imposita, soros sub-rotun-
dos, margini approximates formantia. Tndusiumve nae con-
tinuum, lata basi v. etiam marginibus adnatura, vertice
extrorsura liberum. Endl.
25. D. NovjE-Zelandi#:, n. sp. Plant, few bonded,
sub-erect, lax, sub-membranaceous, terrestrial. Frond,
ovate-lanceolate or deltoid, bi- tripinnate, upper surface gla-
brous, under slightly villous, 7—lo inches. Pinnules ; pri-
maries, ovate-lanceolate, somewhat falcate, acuminate, acute,
unequal, petiolate, alternate ; petiole, channelled, margined
towaids apex : secondaries, oblong-lanceolate, acute, unequal,
petiolate, alternate ; uppermost decurrent, margined : sub-
divisions, falcate-lanceolate, cuneate at base, slightly petio-
late and pinnatifid : lobes, entire, acuminate, acute, decurrent,
somewhat bordered : veins, pinnate-pinnatifid, simple, ter-
minating abruptly within margin. Sori, sub-marginal, on
inner margins and near apices of secondary and lower lobes,
uevei terminal. Involucre, triangular-ovate, membranaceous,
truncate, laciniated ; laciniations sub-acute; apex of lobe
levolute, sub-laciniated, and converging. Rachis, channelled,
slightly flexuose,glabrous. Stipe, brittle, channelled, roughish
hispid and scaly at base, s—B inches. Caudex, creeping.


Hah. In shaded damp woods, in Te Waiiti district; Jan.,
1842.
Ohs. A variety of this graceful Fern, possessing a much
smaller frond, was gathered by the discoverer in the woods
between the E. Cape and Poverty Bay, in November, 1841.
Only two or three plants were observed in both those locali-
ties, and, as it has not been noticed growing in any other
parts, it is concluded to be a scarce species.
Order— GLEICHENIACEiE.
§ HymenophyllejE, Bory.
Hymetiophyllum, Sm.
Sporangia circa venam ultra frondis marginem in colu-
mellarn subclavatam productam sessilia, indusio frondi con-
tinue bivalvi cincta. Endl.
2G. H. Franklinianum, n. sp. Plant, climbing, fronds
numerous, pendulous, regular, pellucid, silky, epiphytical.
Frond, ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, bipinnate, margined,
3 —5 inches long, I—lJ1 —1J inches broad ; colour, reddish-green.
Pinnules; primaries, oblong-falcate, obtuse and bifid, pe-
tiolate, sub-opposite, margined : secondaries, cuneate, 2, 3,
and 4-lobed ; lohes, linear, forked and obtuse. Involucre,
small, sub-globose, shallow, supra-axillary and terminal,
solitary and in pairs, densely bearded and ciliated ; orange-
coloured. Itachis, downy. Stipe, cylindrical, filiform,
tomentose, brittle, I—2 inches long; brown. Hairs, arti-
culated, coloured, branched into 3, 4, and 5 rays; rays
acute. Caudex, brittle, creeping, and villous.
Hymenophyllum Frankbniae. W. Colensoin Tasm.Jour.
Vol. 1. p. 378.
Hah. On living trees in shaded forests, on the banks of
Waikare Lake; December, 1841.
Ohs. This truly elegant and new species of Hymenophyl-
lum, literally clothes the trunks of the trees on which it lives
in its native woods, with the excessive profusion of its fronds.


On several fine trees of Lauras and Ixerba, it was noticed
as having attained the height of 20—25 feet. Viewed
through a microscope, the cellular tinue, pores, and branched
hairs of the frond, present a most splendid appearance. It
has been named by the discoverer, in order to commemorate
the condescending and intrepid tour made by Lady Franklin
in New Zealand, as well as the kind patronage ever afforded
by her ladyship to the different departments of natural
science.
27. H. spathulatum, n. sp. Plant, climbing, fronds
numerous, pendulous, membranaceous, glabrous, epiphytical.
Frond, ovate, acuminate, obtuse, tripinnale, margined,
serrate, 6—B inches. Pinnules ; primaries, ovate-lanceo-
late, falcate, acuminate, obtuse, margined, petiolate, alternate,
unequal: secondaries, rhombic-lanceolate, cuneate at base,
obtuse or slightly truncate, margined, petiolate, alternate, and
unequal: tertiaries, cuneate and linear, sessile, alternate,
pinnatifid, 2—6 lohed ; lobes, obtuse and slightly truncate,
serrate, margined, decurrent. Involucre, obovate-spathulate,
inflated, entire, pedicelled ; pedicel, winged ; supra-axillary
in axillae of sub-divisions and sub-terminal, solitary, some-
times in pairs, very numerous : Valves, large, open ; Recep-
tacle, short, included. Rachis, slightly flexuose, margined:
margin less serrated than lobes of frond. Stipe, filiform,
cylindrical, brittle, 3— 4\ inches. Caudex, creeping.
Hab. On living trees, shores of Waikare Lake, (with pre-
ceding); December, 1841.
Obs. This handsome Fern is very subject to a peculiar
disease, which appears in black botryoidal masses on the
under part of the lower and terminal lobes of the frond,
sometimes at the base of the involucre, giving the plant a
curious appearance. These clusters are chiefly found on the
barren fronds. At first glance, I supposed I had gained,
indeed, a prize, and that my discovery would prove the type
of a new genus. But, after diligent examination with such


means as 1 have here at command, 1 arrive at the conclusion,
that these clusters (which are evidently formed beneath the
cuticle) are, in all probability, analogous to the galls on the
oak and willow ; and like them, too, may owe their origin to
the punctures of some yet unknown insect of the Hymen-
opterous order. •
28. H. villosum, n. sp. Plant, climbing, few fronded,
reclinate and pendulous, glabrous, epiphytical. Frond,
ovate, sub-acuminate, tripinnate, 3 inches long; colour,
tawny green. Pinnules ; primaries, somewhat trapezio-
Janceolate, acuminate, obtuse, petiolate, alternate, unequal;
midrib, sub-flexuose : secondaries, somewhat rhombic-ovate,
obtuse, petiolate, alternate : tertiaries, sub-pinnatifid, cuueate
petiolate, alternate : segments, deeply incised, 2—6 lobed :
lobes, linear, entire, truncate or slightly emarginate- Invo-
lucre, ovate, sub-acute and obtuse, solitary, sometimes in
pairs, axillary in axilla? of tertiary pinnules and lobes, pedi-
celled : Valves, large, entire, and much open. Rachis,
Petioles, and Ribs, villous underneath, and margined;
margin, entire, and slightly ciliated; Rachis, flexuose.
Stipe, two inches long, winged to base, brittle and villous.
Caudex, creeping.
Hub. On reclining and prostrate trees, dense shaded
forests near Ruatahuna; January, 1842.
Obs. This Fern has a peculiarly strong smell, especially
when dry. It appeared to be a scarce species, a few plants
only being detected, and these in one locality.
29. H. pulcherrimum, n, sp. Plant, climbing, fronds
numerous, sub-erect, spreading, pendulous, glabrous, very
membranaceous, epiphytical. Frond, rhombic-lanceolate,
lax, margined, tripinnate; grass-green. Pinnules; pri-
maries, rhombic-ovate, sub-acute, petiolate, alternate, remote,
unequal: secondaries, triangular- or trapezio-ovate, retuse,
petiolate, alternate : tertiaries, trapeziforrn, cuneate, and
pinnatifid : segments, entire, linear, bifid, emarginate and


retuse. Involucre, small, globose, sub-pedicelled, solitary,
sub-terminal in sinuses of tertiary pinnules and segments,
numerous, scattered : Valves, large, and entire. Rachis,
winged, B—ll inches ; margin entire. Stipe, semi-terete,
flattish, somewhat fleshy, brittle, winged to caudex, glabrous,
densely fimbriated at base ; margin* entire. Caudex,
creeping.
Hah. On reclining and prostrate trees, humid woods,
shores of Waikare Lake ; December, 1841.
Ohs. This fine and very beautiful species becomes circin-
nate as it gets old. In alfinity it somewhat approaches H.
flexuosum, R. Cunn. ; from which, however, it may at first
sight be discriminated, by its being tripinnate, and by its
winged stipe and rachis being destitute of undulations, &c.
30. H. revolutum, n. sp. Plant, small, climbing, few
fronded, sub-erect and spreading, glabrous, epiphytical.
Frond, ovate or oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, pinnate-pinnatifid
or sub-bipinnate, 2—5 inches; dusky green. Pinnules;
somewhat trapezio-falcate, petiolate, alternate, distant, pin-
natifid, 3—12 lobed : lohes, linear-oblong, truncate, deeply
serrate or sub-laciniated ; serratures acute and somewhat
hooked ; mostly four laciniations at apex, decurrent, revolute;
lowermost wedge-shaped and deeply bifid. Involucre, ob-
ovate or sub-rotund, inflated, laciniated, supra-axillary, soli-
tary, pedicelled ; pedicel, margined : Valves, large, open :
Receptacle, exserted. Rachis, flexuose, margined towards
apex; margin, serrate ; serratures, distant. Stipe, filiform,
cylindrical, brittle, finely striated, tortuous, I—l| inches
long. Caudex, creeping.
Hah. On sides of prostrate and reclining trees, shores of
Waikare Lake ; December, 1841.
Ohs. A species possessing very close affinity with H.
Tunhridgense, Sm.
31. H. atrovirens, n. sp. Plant, small, few fronded,
erect, glabrous, terrestrial. Frond, oblong-ovate, sub-acu-


ruinate, obtuse, tripinnatifid, 2—3 inches ; colour, blackish-
green. Lobes, linear, bifid, sub-retuse, decurrent, entire.
Involucre, deltoid-ovate, obtuse and toothed, in pairs, ter-
minal : Valves, gaping. Rachis and Stipe, margined,
entire; Stipe, somewhat succulent, I—l| inches. Caudex,
creeping.
Hah. On rocks and stones, in low places and water-
courses, in wet woods, shores of Waikare Lake ; December,
1841.
Ohs. A species apparently very near H. fiexuosum, R.
Cunn.; from which, however, it differs in the involucre, &c.
The involucre in that species being “ orbiculate”.
32. H. imbricatum, n. sp. Plant, small, very czespitose,
creeping, reclining or pendulous, glabrous, glaucescent.
Frond, sub-pinnate-pinnatifid, oblong or ligulate, very obtuse,
B—l3 lines long. Pinnules, sub-flabelliform or cuneate,
somewhat falcate, obtuse, sub-sessile, alternate, decurrent,
much imbricated on each other, lower margins somewhat in-
volute, lobed ; lobes, secund, 4—5 on each pinnule, linear or
sub-cuneate, bifid obtuse or slightly emarginate, entire. In-
volucre, large, orbicular, compressed, terminal on upper seg-
ments, solitary, half immersed in lobe of frond : Valves,
large, entire : Receptacle, included. Rachis, sub-flexuose,
margined. Stipe, cylindrical, filiform, flexuose, glabrous,
I—2 inches. Caudex, creeping, slightly villous.
Hah. On edges of rocky precipices, in dry spots over-
hanging water, at Pataua, near Wangarei, E. Coast; 1842.
And on reclining timber, in woods between Wangarei and the
Bay of Islands ; 1840.
Obs. A small species, having close affinity with H. secun-
dum, Rich., and H. semibivalve, Hook.; differing, however,
from the former species, in not being “ serrated,” and in not
possessing an “ oval involucre and from the latter, in its
frond not being “ lanceolate,” and in not having an “ urceo-
late involucre with short lips,” as well as from the very pe-
E 2


culiar and close manner in which its pinna: overlap one
another.
At Pataua, E. Coast, it grows abundantly in dense patches
on the edges of the indurated clayey cliff’s overhanging the
sides of the salt-water inlet. Its fertile fronds, arc, however,
very few.
Order— OSMUNDACEiE.
§ OSMUNDEiE, Hook.
Todea, Sw.
Capsules globosae pedicellatae reticulatae, gibbere dorsali
pellucido, lateraliter dehiscentes, venulis frondis infer, insi-
dentes. Sprevg.
33. Todea superba, n. sp. Plant, large, sub-erect,
spreading, membranaceous, crisped, terrestrial. Frond,
lanceolate, attenuated at base, sub-acuminate, acute, bipin
nate, 20—40 inches, dark green. Pinnules ; primaries,
linear, elongated, sub-acuminate, bifid, broadest at base, pe-
tiolate, alternate and sub-opposite, not crowded, 4—6 inches
long, 6—lo lines broad, decreasing in size towards base,
lowermost very small ; base of pinnule appendiculated on
upper surface of petiole with a large sub-capillaceo-multifid
segment, somewhat adpressed on rachis ; petioles short:
secondaries, somewhat trapezio-falcate, bifid and obtuse,
deeply pinnatifid, sub-petiolate, alternate, appendiculated at
base with a bi-tri- or quadrifid linear cut segment, sub-de-
pressed on petiole : Segments, narrow, linear, bifid or forked,
sub-acute, decurrent, sub-opposite, entire, glabrous, some-
what crisped and curled. Capsules, small, clustered on
lower segments of pinnules, numerous, never terminal. Stipe,
Rachis, Petioles, and Ribs, densely villous underneath,
canaliculated and sulcated on upper surface, dark green.
Stipe, somewhat fleshy; dilated, winged and half-clasping at
base, I—l| inches long. Caudex, erect, short, sub-coales-


cent. Root , fibrous, — Todea superha , (IF. MSS.,) in
lett. to Sir W. ./. Hook. ; July, 1841.
Hah. In dells, in shaded forests, on the mountainous range
near Waikare Lake, in decomposed sandstone soil; Decem-
ber, 1841. And, on Tongauro Mountain ; 1838.
Ohs. This truly magnificent Fern has only hitherto been
met with in those mountainous localities, where it attains to
a large size, some fronds measuring upwards of four feet in
length. The old fronds spread outwards, forming a complete
circle of dark perennial green, while the younger ones,
(generally three in number) circinnate and of a lighter green,
rise in the most graceful sub-erect manner from the centre.
Words, however, fail to describe the elegant appearance of
this plant, heightened by its numerous multifid crisped-and-
curled moss-like segments, meeting across and partially con-
cealing its petioles on which they grow. I passed through
those secluded mountainous recesses where these lovely plants
abound, in tremendously heavy rain, which, as if caused by
the guardian Dryades of these woods, almost precluded my
bringing away any specimens ; notwithstanding, however, I
succeeded in securing and drying two dripping-wet fronds,
which I brought in safety to the Bay of Islands. One of
these has subsequently been sent to Sir W. J. Hooker, for
his herbarium.
Paihia, January 3, 1843.
Note. —Six species of Ferns contained in the preceding list have
already appeared in the Tasmanian Journal, Vol. 1, pp, 375—9, but it has
been deemed desirable to republish them, in connexion with the other and
allied species, from Mr. Colenso’s amended MS. Those already pub-
lished are Aspidium Cunninghamianum, (as A. Cunninghamii,) Lomaria
nigra, L. linearis, L. deltoides, L. rotundifolia, and Hymenophylhm
Franklinianum, (as 11, Franklinice.) —Ed.


»


*
♦


»
/




