

im 1872 ' ___ @s
• 1 ~^ r (SM
v
t- . . . ...ifU ,




fkoij
SPIRITISM
THE GREAT
ANTI-CHRISTIAN DELUSION
OF SCRIPTURE.
“And for this cause Glod will send them strong delusion, that
they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.”
2nd Thkss. ii. 11-13.
BY ROBERT ANGUS.
MELBOURNE:
PERGUSSON & MOORE, PRINTERS, 48 FLINDERS LANE EAST,


PREFACE.
The Author of this Work is well aware of the incomplete-
ness of it, but. as it would be impossible to write a complete
work on this subject (even did he possess the ability to do
so) in so small a compass, he has endeavoured to make it
appear to the best advantage. And if he has succeeded in
bringing before the public mind what he believes to be the
true side of the question, he considers that he is amply
rewarded.
R. ANGUS.
2


hizsyfex If
io
SPIRITISM
Spiritism is not a new ism, but, on tbe otber hand, is a very
old ism.
. „ T his doctrine was practised by the Greeks and Romans in the
fifth or sixth century before Christ. According to Herod, ii. 180,
v. 62, it first originated at a place in Greece called Castri, the name
of a people and of a town of Phocis, celebrated for the oracle of
Apollo. Its original name was Rytho; even Homer does not call
it by its modern appellation, which seems to have been derived
from the cavern where all the prophecies were delivered.
The oracles were delivered by a priestess, who sat upon a tripod
placed oyer the mouth of the cavern, and who, having exhaled a
certain kind of vapour, through its influence prophesied, either in
verse or prose. It is said the oracle was first suggested by the
effects produced by the vapour upon some goats, and the man who
attended them. (Pansan. Phoc. 5.) The great reputation of the
delphic oracle made it the richest shrine in Greece, because every
person who was satisfied with the response which he received, made
it a point to give a very costly donation to the temple. The first
stone temple of Delphi was built by Trophonisis and Agomedes,
this having been destroyed by fire B.c. 548 years; and so great was
the miracles performed by the oracles of this shrine, that a new
temple was built by the Amphietyons from the proceeds of a
voluntary subscription, to which Amasis, king of Egypt, largely
contributed. The “Alemaonidoe who contracted to build it, very
liberally substituted Parian marble for the front of the building,
instead of common stone, which they agreed upon to construct the
edifice.”
I could refer the reader to several great miracles accomplished
by the Olympic, Delphic, and Apolloic oracles, but I forbeay to


do so, because I wish and shall endeavour to prove in a logical
way, from a Scriptural stand-point, that the power which animated
those oracles in the days which I have alluded to, and in the days
of our primitive Christians, is tantamount to American Spiritism,
and is nothing else than demonology, Eusebius, one of our
primitive Christians, and a bishop of one of the Christian churches
in the second century, declared that those shrines were very
popular in his day, but more especially the oracle of Olympi; and
that he had a good many disputes with Porphyry, who was one of
their chief philosophers. Porphyry generally hurled in the teeth of
Eusebius the inability of the Christian Church to work miracles,
and boasted of the great miracles which had been accomplished by
the Olympic oracle. As witness the satisfaction given to Croesus by
the Delphic oracle concerning his famous expedition, the visions of
Xerxes and Artabanus; and the famous oracle concerning the
wooden wall and Salamis. Eusebius also declares that in his
day they did work great miracles. Their form of worship was
similar to the Jewish ceremony. They had a high priest, who was
dressed similar to the Jewish high priest, who also wore upon his
breast precious stones set in a case, which was called the oracle.
He says that they actually made a statue, and the statue spoke,
and caused all who did not believe in the power and manifesta-
tions of the oracle to be put to death. So great did those devil-
worshippers oppress the Christian Church from the days of the
Apostles until the reign of Constantine the Great, Emperor of
Rome, that over 2,000,000 must have been put to death in the
most cruel manners.
How, from the fact that those oracles prophesied against the
Christian churches established by the Apostles, and who denied the'
doctrine of the Bible, proves clearly from whence their power
emanated. _ This is the hellish Anti-Christian church in its earliest
stages manifesting to the world its power and terrors. The church
of the devil never alters its disposition; it may appear and be
established under different phases to suit ancient and modern times,
and accommodate itself to the fashions and dispositions of the
nations, but it is as black and hellish as ever. But the church of
the dragon did not always demonstrate spiritual manifestations to
the world. Mahomet, who established the faith of Islem at the end
of the sixth century after Christ, did no miracles, and therefore it
may be termed a literalism. Islem, and a host of other creeds of a
literal character, have had their day, and served the purposes of the
devil well; but none of those creeds can be referred to by the
Apostle Paul, when he wrote the second epistle to Thess. ii., 1-13.
it is very evident that St. Paul must have been informed by the
Holy Ghost, that towards the end of this Christian dispensation
God would allow the devil to establish an awful delusion in Chris-


tendom —so awful—so consummate will be this delusion that the
very elect would believe in it, were it not for the Spirit of Truth
dwelling in them. St. Paul says that even in his day, “ for the
mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth
will let, until he be taken out of the way: and then shall that
wicked be revealed whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of
His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of His coming:
even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all
power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the
love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause
God shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a
lie; that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness.” The language of this prophecy
of St. Paul conveys no metaphor whatever ; it is purely emphatic,
and, as a matter of course, must be received as such; therefore we
cannot stumble as to the true meaning of this prophecy. It adduces
no argument on the subject, but plainly informs the world—but
more especially Christendom—that a more hellish and a greater
miracle-working church will be established at the end of this dis-
pensation than the world ever saw since its foundation; and if
God’s elect scarcely escape its damning influences, God help those
who are halting between two opinions, because the Book of Holy
Writ declares that there is no neutral ground, neither in this world
nor in the world to come. And, in order to prove my assertion,
Christ said to some of his Apostles when they informed him that
they saw a man casting out devils in his name, and forbade him
and he would not hearken to them, nor forbear to cast them out,
“forbid him not; he that can cast devils out in my name cannot
speak lightly against me; he is for us, and he that is not for us
scattereth.” I think that language like this, spoken by the highest
authority, cannot be gainsaid, or taken in any other light than an
emphatic one, seeing that it conveys neither metaphor nor parable.
Christ was not in the habit of speaking parables to his disciples;
therefore the New Testament, from one end to the other, advocates
only two places—Heaven or Hell —for the spirit of man.
For the benefit of those who are, or rather imagine that they are,
standing upon neutral ground, I have written this pamphlet; for
the time is at hand, and the Great Delusion has dawned upon our
globe under the appellation of American Spiritism.
The light and easy literature of the nineteenth century, and the
apathy of the Christian clergy has, to a great degree, paved the
way for the great falling away from the Christian Church, and the
re-establishment of demonology. But the word of God cannot be
disannulled; for it is contained in Holy Writ:—“Heaven and earth
may pass aw v but my words shall not pass away.”


But before I endeavour to prove that American Spiritism is
animated by tire same power that animated the oracles of Greece
and Rome, although it has been re-established under a modern
garb, and with a modern name, I maintain that it is impossible for
any creed, unless one that could work miracles, to scatter the
votaries of the Christian Church ; because the Christian religion is
a spiritual one, and none other than a miracle-working religion
could induce Christians to believe in their demonstrations. One
would think that it would require a very great delusion indeed to
lead men to disbelieve the Bible; but such is not the case with
regard to the new philosophy, as it is termed by Spiritualists.
To those who wish to satisfy themselves as to whether the
Elusinian mysteries and the oracles of Greece were actuated by the
devil, I refer them to certain authentic works written by some of
our primitive Christians : —Euseb. Preap. Ev., books 5 and 6;
Cion. Alex., p. 722; Theodoret. Sherap. Serin. X., p. 623, &c.;
Augustin Dedivin. Demon, op. 5, p. 371, et seq., &c.
Having glanced at Spiritism in its early days, it will be necessary
to review it in its modern aspect or phase.
Some years ago, an individual called Andrew Jackson Davis,
was born in 1824, in a country settlement called Blooming Grove,
Orange County, State of New York. Through his peculiar organi-
sation, and before he was acquainted with the science of electro-
biology, he must have been practised upon by the devil, through
revelation, whilst in a trance. According to Washington Irving,
Mahomet wrote his Koran whilst in a trance, and Mr. Davis and
other mediums deliver all their revelations after the same manner.
So captivating and so seductive is this new philosopy (as it is called
by its votaries,) that no less than 16,000,000 in America are staunch
believers in its power, manifestations, and divine mission. “It has
its conventions of men and women in the States, discussing questions
appertaining to its interests, apj)ointing lecturers and missionaries,
and energetically propagating its principles in all directions.” It
has forty or fifty organs of public opinion, but their chief one is
the Banner of Light (which ought to be called the “ Banner of
Darkness.”) This paper has actually attained to its thirtieth half-
yearly volume, and it is published in Boston. Those organs, or
rather the matter contained in those organs, chiefly treat on revela-
tions made known by and miracles worked by spirits. Spiritualists
believe that those spirits who signify their presence at their various
ceremonies are the spirits or ghosts of the dead ; in fact, it is quite
a common occurrence to hear, or read in their organs, of individuals
receiving letters from spirits, who affirm themselves to be the
departed spirits of their departed friends who receive those letters.
In describing the way whereby Spiritualists have been enabled to
converse with the supjmsed spirits of their dead relations, is the


introduction of an instrument called tire planchette. “ This instru-
ment is a little piece of wood, shaped like a heart or triangle, about
7in. long by sin, broad; at the apex is a hole, in which a lead pencil
is tightly fixed, leaving about an inch of the pointed end of the
pencil below the wood or board; at the broad extremity are two
castors, upon which, and the point of the pencil, the planchette
travels. It is used in the following manner ; —A circle is formed
around a table—male and female sitting alternately is said to be
best—and a planchette, upon a large sheet of paper, is placed before
each couple; the right hand of one person and the left of the other
are lightly placed on the planchette, which, after a little while,
commences to travel slowly over the paper. Communications in
some length are thus obtained, independently of any action or
knowledge on the part of the persons whose fingers touch the
planchette. Some of these bear no signature, others have attached
to them the names of well-known authors and philosophers, while
some of them purport to come from the departed relatives of the
individuals forming the circle. Thousands upon thousands of these
writings have been made public in America of late years.
Now, in order to elucidate my argument more clearly, and in
endeavouring to prove that Spiritism, as it is so called, is pure
demonology, and the great Anti-Christian delusion of Scripture, I
beg to call the reader’s attention to a conversation (too well known
to be refuted) between Andrew Jackson Davis, the apostle of
Spiritism, and the spirit of a great .Grecian lawgiver, called Solon.
I will insert it in full, just as has made known to the
world. It runs as follows :
“ Prayest thou for knowledge concerning that sublime resurrection
which mankind has misnamed death ? Prayest thou for light upon
a process which has been, and is now, on the earth robed in the
darkest horrors and mysteries, bedecked with the funeral pall, and
veiled by ignorance ? Yea, thou mayest not reply; the earnest and
truest desires of thy mind are very distinct, being well defined.
Let thy spirit, therefore, withdraw from the various objects and
influences of earth, and let it comprehend and faithfully record the
sweet and silvery notes which, through me and thee, may musically
instruct the earth’s inhabitants concerning life and its diversified
phenomena.
“ Many centuries have rolled over earth since I, as one among
numerous inhabitants, lived and moved upon its surface. My
thoughts and experience while residing upon that planet seems to
me now like the shadows and outlines of some unmeaning dream;
my earth life seems like a brief and uneasy night when contrasted
with the perpetual and peaceful day which pervades the interior
souls of those who dwell on the higher planes of the neighbouring


sphere. Yet my experience as I neared the termination of my
residence on earth was a perfect history of, and commentary upon,
the influences of ignorance and mythology.
“ Greece was my country —my idol; her inhabitants I loved as
my children; and her beauteous institutions seemed to me like
monuments of instruction and philosophy. But, as among children,
there came discord there. The government of the country was
divided into numerous republics, and the people looking favourably
upon my temperament and attainments placed me at the summit
of their aspirations; wherefore I became the governor, the in-
structor, and the lawgiver of the once adored and beloved Athens.
The laws framed by me were none other than the desires of my
own understanding.”
This conversation, purporting to flow between the spirit of Solon
and Mr. Davis, I publish as much for the purpose of elucidating to
the world the blasphemy and hellish sophistry contained in it, as
much as to enable me to bear out my assertions; and I think that
I will not find it very difficult to prove from Solon’s own words,
without the aid of Scripture, that modern Spiritism and the
doctrines delivered by the oracles of Greece are tantamount, Not-
withstanding, I will be compelled to slip parts of this spiritual
conversation, as I wish to make this work as original as possible.
“ Mythology, though begemmed with unnumbered diamonds of
truth,’had robed my spirit in darkness. I sought and invoked the
gods to preside over me when death frowned upon and claimed
me as its victim. Nothing discoursed more forcibly and fearfully
concerning the dreadfulness of my metempsychosis than the long
and still nights, which I endeavoured to illuminate and animate
with constant wakefulness. But the words of the Judsean shepherd
sounded loud in my soul—Death is an everlasting sleep!’ Whether
in the forests of the Isle of Salamis, whether consulting the habita-
tions of the gods, or whether contemplating the deep murmuring
music of the Grecian Gulf; yea, everywhere I heard the voice of
the Judsean shepherd, saying, ‘Dark is the valley of the shadow of
death !’ ‘ Death is an everlasting sleep !’
“ Three years subsequent to my dethronement, I was made aware
of my approaching dissolution. In view of this final termination
to my existence, my spirit sank into the depths of melancholy, and
was veiled in night. I was imperfectly aroused from this darkness,
when there streamed to me a recollection of the doctrine which
supposed a resurrection of the souls of the good that die, to live on
some fair and heavenly isle for ever; and this favoured spot of
earth—the beautiful retreat I had oft chosen for my meditations—
was known as Salamis, out of which was to be bom again that


fairer isle anticipated and named by Plato the ‘ New Atlantis.’ At
the request of my few but faithful friends, I dictated, to be written
upon parchment, that my ashes should be scattered upon the sea
that so constantly embraced and moaned about the fertile but
solitary shores of the Salamis isle.
“ Being prostrated with disease for several weeks, it was easy to
mark the progress of those physical changes to the final change
which is termed death. This final change came upon me as my
spirit was audibly deploring the fate of my dearly beloved country.
The sun had not yet disappeared in. the west, when I was prompted
to bid my friends farewell; and the change, like slumber, crept over
me. As my sleep deepened, the room I occupied, together with
the objects and persons therein, gradually faded away. The more
I strove to maintain a consciousness of things about me, the more
unconscious I became, until every avenue which appeared to con-
nect me with the outer world was entirely, and, as I thought, for
ever, closed. Fear and desire constituted the last links in the chain
of life, lengthened to the end, which seemed about severing for
ever. I feared lest the waves should not give up my ashes and
waft them to the ‘New Atlantis’ isle; and my desire was unto the
gods, that their celestial presence should attend my death and
revivify the divine power which animated my bodily frame. Imme-
diately upon analysing these oppressive thoughts, I experienced a
sudden rush of all the divine power (which dwelt in my hands and
feet) into my encephalon, or head. This, accompanied with a soft,
tranquilising sensation that pervaded my entire nature, which
peaceful calm was speedily followed by a state of total unconscious-
ness.”
And so the ghost goes on to inform Mr. Davis that he died very
sweetly; but as the story of his death is too long for insertion, let
us pass on to what the ghost saw after death, and whether it found
out the “N ew Atlantis.” Solon goes on to narrate to Mr. Davis after
this strain:—
“ Shall I tell thee that I realised the divine resurrection which
the gods had promised the early inhabitants of earth ? Shall I
tell thee that I,stood upon the new ‘Atlantis’ isle? Yea, I believe
the gods were faithful, and that the glorious republic of immortal
duration had arisen from out of the divine Salamis.”
Now this very Solon—this eminent Athenian lawgiver—accord-
ing to ancient writers, and according to the revelations recorded
to Mr. Davis by the ghost or spirit of Solon, proves that Solon was
a staunch believer in the power and manifestations of the oracles
of Greece. The ancient writers which I have referred to affirm


that those oracles delivered a prophecy concerning the Isle of
Salamis, and as Solon himself said, or rather the spirit of Solon,
that Plato also believed that out of the Isle of Salamis (a beautiful
island which stood by the Grecian Gulf) would be born a new and
immortal world, and Plato called it the “ New Atlantis.”
I think then it is not difficult to recognise in American Spiritism
the doctrines of Plato, Solon, and the Grecian oracles to be one and
the same thing; for we find, according to Mr. Davis’s conversation
with the spirit of Solon, that after Solon had promulgated Spiritism
in Greece by endorsing the doctrine of the gods and the prophecies
of the oracles of the Olympic, Delphic and Apoloic shrines, his
spirit cannot remain quiet in the immortal Salamis, or Atlantis,
as Plato calls it, but appears upon the stage of action in our days,
and mildly and sophistically crams into Andrew Jackson Davis’s
head the doctrines of that infernal, mythological and spiritual
church of the devil, which persecuted the Jewish Church, according
to Scripture and history, and made the Christian Church, from the
days of the apostles until the reign of Constantine the Great,
Emperor of Pome, a target to wrack its malice upon.
Pagan Rome endorsed the principles of this blasphemous church,
and even demonstrated a fiercer disposition towards the Christian
Church than the Greeks did. As a proof of this assertion let the
reader peruse the works of the authors which I have quoted; they
are considered to be the best authority, because some of them were
bishops of the Christian Church about 200 years a.d. From the
days of Polycarp, one of our primitive Christian bishops (who was
sawn asunder by these demonologists,) until Constantine the
Great, no less than ten general persecutions took place against the
Christians in the Roman empire, beside a number of minor ones.
According to chronology, the first general persecution of the
Christians took place by the order of Nero, emperor of Rome, in
64 a.d. The following year after Nero put St. Peter and St. Paul
to death. Eleven years after the death of St. Peter and 131. Paul, a
great pestilence came upon Rome, and 10,000 per day died of the
plague. A dreadful persecution of the Christians in Rome and in
the provinces took place in 95 a.d. In this same year the Apostle
John wrote the Apocalypse. The emperor Trajan forbade the
Christians from assembling together in A.D. 98. Adrian, Emperor
of Rome persecuted the Christians in a.d. 118. Another perse-
cution took place in a.d. 177; the fifth persecution of the Chris-
tians took place in a.d. 202; another in a.d. 236; the seventh
persecution was in a.d. 250; the eighth in a.d, 257; the ninth
in a.d. 272; and the tenth in a.d. 802. Constantine, the first Christian
Emperor of Rome, put a stop to Christian persecutions in a.d. 306.
So it is plainly seen that Pagan Rome who adopted the doctrine
of Solon, bore a greater hatred to the Christian Church than even


Pagan Greece did; and we find a spirit, purporting itself to be the
spirit of Solon, actually propagating and establishing this hellish-
persecuting Church in the very midst of Christendom; this is the
beautiful harmonious philosophy, as it is called by its votaries.
Is it really possible that the inhabitants of America, who boast
themselves to be the most enlightened people of the world, would
allow themselves to be practised upon in this manner by a devil,
personating itself to be the spirit or ghost of Solon ? Where is the
ghost of Hamlet’s father? I wonder why it has not put in its
appearance in order to inform and satisfy the curiosity of the world
as to whether he was actually put to death by his brother in the
manner Shakespeare describes. We have often heard of ghost
stories, but here is a ghost story with a vengeance, and ghosts in
profusion. Numbers of individuals, by way of mediums, have
allowed those spirits to make use of their bodies, that by entering
into them, and by using their tongues and organs, or intellectual
faculties, they may be able to communicate to the world their evil
desires upon mankind. Even Mr. Davis himself, in all his writings,
advises individuals not to hearken unto him, affirming that - the
spirits themselves will condescend to teach men, either generally or
individually ; and so accommodating are those demons, that the forty
or fifty organs which they possess in America, and three or four in
London (England,) are principally full of spirit communications.
The spirits have a peculiar liking for female mediums. A lady
medium, called Mrs. H. Conant, communicates to the Banner of
Light (one of their chief papers) all the particulars which relate to
spirit life. A regular seance is held periodically by this lady, in
connection with the Banner of Light. She receives all kinds of
communications from all kinds of spirits, while in a trance. The
communications partake largely of the “ missing friends ” character
known to spirits in the flesh, and by their means the editors claim
to have opened up communications between the departed and their
relatives throughout the whole of the States; and here is a speci-
men of their silly enthusiasm, from the Banner of Light : —
Spiritism in Boedentown.
“ Dear Banner, — It may be interesting to your many readers to
know how the good seed sown in this place some months since by
Dr. H. T. Child, Mrs. Susan Waters, Mrs. Emma Hardinge, Thomas
Gales Foster, Moses Hull, and, if it be thought proper to say, your
humble correspondent, is taking root in the spiritual soil so long
abandoned to the shallow tillage of orthodoxy. It is not a year
since the first spiritual lecture was delivered in this town, by Dr.
Child, to a full but sceptical audience, which assembled
more out of curiosity than from any love or appreciation of the
beauties of the harmonial philosophy. This was followed by a


newspaper discussion between Mr. Jacob Ford, orthodox, and Mrs.
Susan Waters, through the columns of the city paper, in which the
former came off not only unplumed, but, to speak plainly, f soundly
whipped.’ This was followed by Mrs. Hardinge, who delighted the
people with her logic and eloquence, as she always does. Moses
Hull next almost silenced the growing opposition by his style of
treating the subject. Bro. Foster endeavoured to convince the
people that opposition was useless. His was the last lecture in the
place (last May,) since which the spirit-world seems to have had the
work entirely in their hand; and, as an evidence of their power and
interest in the reformation, there have been developed several
physical mediums, in whose presence heavy bodies, such as meal-
chests, weighing over two hundred pounds, with one or more persons
on them, have been moved about the floor, smoothirons taken from
their resting-places and conveyed across the room, garments mis-
placed, persons handled by hands not mortal, and other like
manifestations. Besides these, there are now in this place several
trance mediums, as well as those controlled to write. A few even-
ings ago I had a sitting with three very intelligent young men, who
but a short time ago knew nothing about Spiritism or mediumship.
Two of them, taking a pencil between them, wrote freely, and gave
me one of the best tests I ever had. The name, Dr. Redman, was
written out very legibly. There were seven persons in the room at
the time. No one knew who Dr. Redman was, and the mediums
were somewhat astonished that a stranger to them should control
them to write. I asked, ‘ls it Mr. George Redman ? ’ and an
affirmative answer was given. Said I, ‘ How about the bones you
had brought to you?’ Immediately was written out, ‘ Old negro,’ and
then they went on and gave several incidents of the wonderful fact
of carrying those bones to New York, which I distinctly remembered
as published at the time of the occurrence, satisfying me beyond
doubt that it was neither the medium nor myself who was dictating
this communication, for all the facts related were entirely out of
mind till my memory was refreshed by their recital. But I am
making my communication quite too long. It is indeed cheering
to know that the work goes so bravely on, and that we have thus,
when we least look for it, such striking evidences, not only of the
constant presence of the spirits of the departed, but that, in those
unexpected moments when the heart is almost sunk beneath its
weight of sorrow and despair, to feel their interests in our welfare
by timely aid furnished for our relief. I could relate some very
remarkable instances of this kind last referred to, which have of late
occurred, but I forbear. Thank Heaven for Spiritism ! Let those
who have sowed the seed in Bordentown bless God and take
courage.
“Bordentown, Dec. 1, 1870. J. G. Fish.”


This is a true picture of the blind and enthusiastic way Spiritism
is received almost in every district throughout the Union; besides,
they are establishing lyceums, or schools, and instilling into the
young minds of the rising generation this hellish delusion all over
the States.
Before I attempt to try Spiritism by the Bible crucible I shall
insert another small paragraph from the Banner of Light. This
insertion is a comment upon part of a sermon preached by a
Wesleyan minister of the Gospel, at a camp meeting. It shows, in
a few words, the awful gulf that stands between Spiritism and
Christianity. ,
Before I insert the Banner's reply, it will be necessary for me to
insert a small portion of that part of the sermon which was most
directly attacked; it runs as follows :
“We announce to the world the startling fact— ‘ Behold, the
bridegroom cometh.’ His advent will cause the noiseless tread of
time to cease; and as the earth, with sin and curse weighed down
by convulsions terrific and awfully grand, receives her doom,
chaotic confusion reigns again; and while the earth is without form
and void, and mountains tremble, and all the hills move lightly, the
sun looks on ashamed, and the moon confounded at the presence of
the Lord of Hosts (Jer. iv. 23-26; Is. xxiv. 19-23.) Groaning
creation, like the tottering inebriate, falls. ’Tis her funeral. But
when the storm clouds of vengeance shall disappear, order will
again prevail, and the garnishing hand of Him who, in the
beginning, created the heavens and the earth, will create them
anew (Is. ixv. 17.) And when the earth in great sublimity is wrapt
in her glory, the King of kings, and the redeemed of the Lord,
triumphantly enter the Eden of God.”
Reply of the “Banner.”
“This is sublime indeed, as well as terrific; but, unfortunately for
those who expect it, the calculation is not well based, and utterly
fails of fulfilment in every instance. It is strange our Christian
brethren cannot see that one failure in the Scriptures involves the
whole, as he who is lacking in one point, is counted guilty of all
by that authority. Whosoever maketh calculations on such visions
as those of John of Patmos, or Isaiah, or Daniel, or Jeremiah, and
expects them to be literally filled nut in this world, is doomed to
disappointment as much as those who expect to find the castles and
. treasures of Aladdin’s lamp, or to realise Sinbad the Sailor’s fortunes
at sea. Milton’s fancy visions have done much to create a wild
and reckless faith iii the marvellous realisations of ideal painters.
It is the work of Scientists, Spiritualists, and Rationalists, to cure
this religious mania of Christians, and they are doing it rapidly.”


This sceptical and blasphemous reply of the Banner of Light
to these passages of Scripture speaks volumes, and publishes to the
world the true disposition of the Spiritualistic church towards the
Christian Church. It exhibits the intensified hatred the church of
the dragon always bore against truth and the Christian world.
This is the hellish, beastly system, or second beast, which John of
Patmos (as they style him) saw in the Isle of Patinos; and American
Spiritualists, both literally and spiritually, are fulfilling the vision.
The Apostle John says it looked like a “lamb, but it spoke like a
dragon.” The words of the Apostle, in this respect, are borne out
by Spiritism to the letter; because they have set themselves to
oppose the Church of Christ in every respect; their writing, or
rather, the tone of their writings, exhibit a determination on their
part to destroy the Church of Christ, and to build the church of the
dragon upon her ruins, notwithstanding their emulations of the
devil, in establishing his church in those days, according to the
doctrine of St. Paul, is only fulfilling Scripture. Its mild aspect at
its origin was so calm and gentle, that every one was captivated and
in love with its ceremonies. Its infernal blind sympathy and
charity in establishing missionaries for the purpose of evangelising
Pagan Christendom, made it appear, at a cursory glance, to look like
a lamb, and, I think, in its opposition to the Christian Church, it
speaks like a dragon indeed. Scarcely would it be thought possible,
that the enlightened inhabitants of Europe and America could be
carried away with such a gigantic ghost story as this; in fact, it is
nothing but Buddhism in the extreme.
The Chinese, who indorse the doctrines of Buddhism, believe
that the ghosts or spirits of the dead wander about this earth; but
they don’t appreciate the idea of allowing those ghosts to enter
again into their bodies to publish lies to the world; therefore, the
Chinese mythology is greatly in advance of Spiritism.
The fact that Buddhists believe in the return of the spirits of
the dead, shows a strong link connecting the two mythologies
together; and, if the dragon has held the Chinese for 2000 or 3000
years in mental chains—l ask Spiritualists, Are you prepared to
bear the yoke and brand of the devil? And now it will be for
me to prove whether Spiritism is a real ghost story, or, whether it
-emanates from hell! Let us see what the Apostle John says
respecting the quality and disposition of spirits. Ist John ii. I—61 —6
“Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they
are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the
world. Hereby know we the Spirit of God: Every spirit that
confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: And
every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh is not of God: And this is that spirit of Anti-Christ, whereof
ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in


the world.” And now, I ask rational beings—l ask the world—
whether the Apostle has not pronounced Spiritism to be the real
Anti-Christian and hellish church which was to come ? The Apostle
plainly and emphatically infers that even in his day Anti-Christ was
in the world. It is true that every system that is opposed to
Christianity is Anti-Christian, and all systems of religion—such as
Buddhism, Brahmaism, Zoroasterism, Islemism, &c. —who opposed
the Church of Christ, are akin to Spiritism; all have their source
from hell.
The Apostle distinctly declares that there are only two kinds of
spirits; and it can be inferred from the language of the Apostle,
that prior to the general establishment of this great Anti-Christian
delusion, the spirits of the devil will signify their presence near to
men, and in various ways initiate men into the mysteries of events
past, and of events to come.
The Apostle produces a good criterion whereby we can detect
the spurious, or, evil spirits of the devil from the spirits of truth.
And this is the great standard —“Every spirit that confesseth that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: And every spirit that
•confesseth not that Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: And
this is that spirit of Anti-Christ, whereof ye have heard that it
should come.”
Nothing could be plainer than the language of the apostle; by
adopting or using this criterion in spiritual matters, no man can go
.astray. According to this criterion we are instructed to ask spirits
when they come, whether Christ is come in the flesh or not; and I
am positively sure if those spirits who pretend to be the spirits of
deceased relatives were interrogated after this manner, they would
•either be dumb or evasive in their answers. I would advise every
one who has an inclination to become a Spiritualist to put the
spirits to the test and see whether they “ are of God.” I make no
•doubt but such a test as this will put the spirits to their wits ends
—devils though they be; it will constitute the greatest difficulty the
spirits ever had to contend with. Because, if they admit that
Christ is come in the flesh, they undermine the foundations of
Spiritism; because they deny the fundamental principles of the
Gospel. And, on the other hand, if they become sulky, and will
not answer, it will then appear very suspicious; and if they admit
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, and was crucified for the sins
of man, then they are not devils, but in reality the spirits of truth.
One thing is very evident, they cannot be the spirits of departed
relatives, therefore they must be demons, for Scripture in hundreds
of places declare that after death the spirit of man either goes to
heaven or hell; and reason alone, without the aid of Scripture, is
sufficient to teach us that from the fact that there are only two dis-
tinct dispositions in men—good or evil—there must also be two


distinct places or habitations for the spirits of men hereafter—
namely, heaven or hell. There must also be two distinct powers,,
or supreme heads, because no government without a ruler can
stand, therefore the “ God of Jacob rules in heaven, the god of
Spiritualists rules in hell.” This argument is fraught with the idea
that the devil must also possess a number of angels or spirits to
serve his hellish purposes. Yes, the apostle says in Rev. xii. 7-10,
that he saw the dragon and the third host of the angels of God
cast out of heaven for endeavouring to usurp the throne of God.
And he said that he heard voices in heaven, saying, “ Woe to the
inhabiters of the earth and of the sea ! for the devil is come down
unto you, having great wrath because he knoweth that he hath but
a short time.” The true and upright angels of God forsaw the
sufferings which men would have to endure from the persecutions
of those damned spirits, and their language is full of sympathy and
lamentation. St. Paul also declares that we have “to contend with
principalities and powers, spiritual wickedness in high places
therefore, according to St. John’s and St. Paul’s words, it is very
easy to perceive the source from whence this spiritual wickedness
comes. The only conclusion which can be derived from the words
of the apostles is, that the devil will send those wicked spirits which
were cast out of heaven with him, to palm themselves and their
blasphemous manifestations upon the intellects of men, and lead
them into hellish error; and the delusion will be greatest towards
the end of this dispensation, because, the Apostle says, that the devil
will be in great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time. And,
as St. Paul declares in his epistles, that God would make men, or
rather the bodies of men, his temples, so will the devil, through
evil spirits, dwell in men in order to propagate this awful delusion:
For Christ said to the Jews in his day, “Ye are of your father the
devil, he was a liar from the beginning, and the father of it.” And
St. Paul says, in his epistle to Ist Timothy, iv. 1, “Now the spirit
speaketh expressly that in the latter times some shall depart from
tire faith, giving head to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils.”
And Ist John, iv. 6 says, “We are of God: he that knoweth God
heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us; hereby know we
the spirit of truth and the spirit of error.”
I think it requires no further argument to substantiate the fact
than the above passages of Scripture, that Spiritism is demonology
and the great Anti-Christian delusion which is to come upon the
world. It is nothing new for evil spirits to make the bodies of men
their habitations—Christ cast them out of men in his day, and they
spoke and declared that he was the “ Son of God,” —a sufficient
evidence that they were devils. And, in order to prove that rt will
be a miracle-working delusion, the Scripture passage on the frontis-
page will furnish sufficient evidence in that respect.


I have often heard of people selling themselves to the devil for
a sum of money, hut Spiritualists have brought the old story to
light upon a large scale, and, I dare say, pecuniary interest has a
good deal to do with it. The only way that I think it could be
accomplished is, by allowing the devil to take possession of our
mental faculties through the means of electricity and magnetism.
The idea of an individual selling himself to the devil appears very
erroneous indeed, but there is nevertheless a great deal of truth in
it. I am confidently assured, that this would be the most per-
manent and direct way to strike a bargain with his Satanic majesty.
I am under the impression that the devil can exercise his power upon
men in no other way than by electro-biology. St. Paul says, “by the
earthly things we know the heavenly things;” that is to say, the
earthly things, or the aspect of things upon the earth, symbolizes,
the things of the spiritual world. Well, we will take, for example,
the serpent All snakes are serpents. Serpents do not take their
prey in the manner that other animals do; —they catch their prey
by the electricity and magnetism of their bodies. A snake causes
the electricity of his body to pass or dart out of his eyes towards
the victim it wishes to electrify; and if a snake can, with his eye,
rivet the eye of a bird upon his eye for a very short space of time,
the electricity of the snake and of the bird become mixed—the eyes
being the windows or doors of the body; and in this manner a current
of electricity flows between the snake and the bird. The snake
then has only to wish that the bird might come towards it, and it is
soon accomplished, because the snake possesses more magnetism and
electricity in his body in proportion to other animals ; therefore, a
small bird is soon brought under coma. The magnetism in the body
of the snake furnishes it with the power to draw its prey towards
it; therefore, the electricity and magnetism of the body are subservient
to the mind, and is ever ready to obey its injunctions. Birds have
often been seen falling into the very mouths of snakes, their piti-
ful screaming is truly heartrending; the mind of the bird, or victim,
is not destroyed nor taken away, but it is neutralised, because it is
robbed of its servants- —namely, electricity and magnetism. Neither
does the serpent eat its food with its teeth, as other animals do, but,
on the other hand, swallows all its prey.
Well did the Apostle name the dragon the serpent, and the
devil; the word serpent could not be more appropriate. The devil
is truly the spiritual serpent, and this world is the spiritual
bondage. The Egyptian bondage was the literal type ; this, or the
present dispensation, is the spiritual realisement. All men are
indirectly under the bondage of this spiritual serpent, and those
who are directly under his bondage, he makes them his temples,
and they serve him as earnestly as do the children of the God of
Jacob serve him; and much more so, because the children of God


have to contend against the hellish opposition which is brought to
hear against them, demonstrated by the children of the devil. The
power of mind over matter is illustrated in the science of electro-
biology. This science is well known to the world, or, at least, to
the scientific world. Professor Croakes a short time ago had been
witnessing some of Mr. Daniel Home’s (an eminent Spiritualist)
demonstrations in the spirit-rapping line, imagined that he had
discovered a new force in nature, which he calls “physic force.”
He published a long account of this—what he believes to be a
new discovery of a great power in nature—in some of the leading
papers of America. But Professor Croakes must be greatly in the
dark in this respect. This force in nature I have endeavoured to
show, as illustrated by a snake and a bird, is nothing more or less
than Electro-Biology, and it is truly a great force in nature. I
believe it must have been first discovered by the operation of a
snake upon its victims. Since its general discovery it has to a
certain extent been carried to perfection, as witness the demonstra-
tions of several eminent Electro-Biologists in both this country and
in other parts of the world. Before I became acquainted with the
science of electro-biology I was as staunch a disbeliever in its
powers as any one could be. I had often heard of its demonstra-
tions, and of its power to reveal secrets, and to tell of things past
that were done in secret, and of things to come. But nothing
would induce me to mentally swallow such things until I was
requested by a friend of mine to come to a seance. I was prevailed
on to go; and, to use a phrase, “go I went,” (which certainly is
not the best of grammar.) A small cedar table was produced, and
placed in or near the middle of the room, half-a-dozen chairs were
placed around the table. We sat down, three males and three
females; but, before we commenced operations, I was informed
that if I did not believe in the power of Electro-Biology, not to
disbelieve, otherwise I would frustrate the demonstrations of the
table, but rather to say within myself, “ I’ll believe when I see the
table rise.” On this occasion the medium was a female, and the
youngest of the circle. I was also informed that during the seance
I must not only believe, but I must give my mind to the pleasure
of the medium, and whatsoever she said I must wish that it would
take place. We placed our hands flat on the table, our thumbs
touching each other, our smallest fingers resting on the smallest
fingers of the individuals nearest, and in this way we formed a
circle. We sat for about ten minutes, the medium then com-
manded the table to rise, but the table would not obey. I forgot
to state that the table was a square four-legged table. After sitting
five or six minutes longer the medium commanded the table to
rise; that is to say, that the table should turn over and remain
standing on two legs only. At this epoch of time I felt a very


strange sensation passing, not only through my fingers but also
through my arms, which put me very much in mind of the effect
of a galvanic battery. My fingers would scarcely remain quiet
upon the table; in fact, my hands and fingers were more agitated
than any of the others which constituted the circle. Having read a
little on scientific works, I discovered the circle which we made by
touching one another’s bodies constituted a perfect electric battery.
The medium informed me that, from the fact that the electricity
acted stronger upon my hands and arms than on the others which
formed the circle, proved that I would constitute the most powerful
medium of the circle.
The table was again commanded to rise. After we had sat about
twenty minutes, it obeyed, but very slowly, two of the feet rising
from the ground about a foot. I was under the impression that
the medium pulled the table upwards with her hands, but I was
soon satisfied as to the contrary. The table being commanded to
arise, until its two legs were raised more than one foot from the
ground, two of the individuals who formed the circle were told to
press the table down towards the ground, and the medium informed
them that she, by the power of her mind, would hold, or prevent it
from doing so. The medium told the table to resist pressure. The
two individuals pressed with all their might, and adopted all their
ingenuity to press it down, but all to no avail, they could not stir
it. The table was instructed to rap three for yes, and two for no; the
table rising off two legs and falling down again constituted a rap.
It actually told the ages of several of the parties in the room
and elsewhere. It affirmed that a certain individual in the room
(who was very bashful in sweetheart matters) had two sweethearts,
and that one resided not very far away, and that the other lived a
considerable distance, to which the person alluded to owned, with
astonishment, that such revelation was correct. It also declared
that he would marry the one which resided near by. This seance
took place three or four days before the last Werribee encampment
took place. The table was asked whether the weather would be
wet or dry during the days of the encampment, and it replied that
the weather would be very wet, and it is a well known fact that the
encampment never took place because of the weather being so very
wet. It told many other things which were very correct. After we
had been operating with the table about an hour and a half I dis-
covered that the table was perfectly hot, and if at this stage of the
proceedings I wished it to rise it would bound upwards. It rapped
very good time to a song which a lady sung. But should any of
the individuals forming the circle round the table suggest anything
to the table after the medium or speaker had instructed the table
to perform or relate anything, it would always obey the last
injunction.


Having acted as medium myself on several occasions, I am per-
fectly satisfied that neither ghosts nor spirits had any hand in those
demonstrations; and that nothing but the electricity or the animation
of our bodies animated and actuated the table. The only way that I
can account for the truthful revelations manifested by the table is—
That there is a law of truth established by the Supreme Ruler of
the Universe, and upon this law all His works are established, and
it is impossible that it can be destroyed, because He is the God of
truth, and St. Paul says “He cannot lie.”
The grand key which opens the door of truth, or this law, is Faith,
which becomes impregnated with our minds. If those who operate
upon a table in the manner I have described,unless they exercise faith,
and believe that the table will rise, it will never stir. And from the
fact that the table obeys the injunction of any one of the indi-
viduals who form the circle, proves that the minds of all the human
family are one in nature and constitute particles from a great source,
or mentor-mind, which must be the mind of God. But consult this
lavj for evil purposes would be sorcery or witchcraft; but Electro-
Biology is better illustrated in the light I wish to convey it, as
the earthly semble of the dragon or serpent’s influence upon man,
when Electro-Biology is applied to an individual. Some Electro-
Biologists mesmerise or electrify their subjects in the same manner
that the snake takes its prey, others again give their subjects cards
to rivet their eyes upon, and while their eyes and minds are intensely
employed with their object or card, the operator takes the advan-
tage of this opportunity, and suddenly passes his hands from the
heads of his subjects down each side, and says within himself, “I
have got you,” and in this manner, while their minds are engaged,he
takes possession of their mental faculties; nevertheless, they still
possess their minds, but of what service is their minds to them,
when the servants of their minds are taken from them. The
Electro-Biologist has extracted or taken possession of the electricity
and magnetism, or motive power, which puts the bodies of his sub-
jects in motion; therefore, during his pleasure their bodies are.his
servants, and are ready to do whatsoever he wishes.
While under this influence he has power to give his subjects all
the physical force which is contained in his own body, and, on the
other hand, to extract out of their bodies the portions which belong
to them. This is what is called the science of Electro-Biology.
Now, the student will see a broad line of demarcation between
Electro-Biology and Spiritism; I allude to entranced mediumship.
Just as an Electro-Biologist uses, or takes possession of, the bodies
of his subjects by the power of his mind or spirit, so do those
foolish Spiritualists allow devils, purporting themselves to be the
spirits of their dear departed relatives, to enter into their bodies to
propagate this awful delusion—this beastly system—which, was in


Greece in the days of Plato and Solon, and was endorsed by the
Romans, according to John Chrysostom, St. Augustine, Polycarp,
Dionysius, Eusebius, and many others, who were bishops of the
Christian Church in the second century, and also in the following
two centuries. This hellish beastly system went on persecuting the
Chistian Church (as I have shown) in ten general persecutions,
beside many minor ones, until Constantine the First, who put a
stop to Christian persecution in 306 a.d. Constantine becoming a
Christian turned the tide of persecution against this hellish beastly
system of religion, or rather, those who endorsed its principles, to
such a degree that he almost stamped it out. But, although he
grievously wounded the beast, yet it “lived,” and it lingered on till
now; nevertheless, in the general sense, it was not. So great were
the persecutions on one occasion, that Tertullian, one of the bishops
of the Christian Church, wrote a very sharp letter to the Emperor
Tertullus, telling him that if he did not prevent the devil-
worshippers from persecuting the Church, they would put ropes
around their necks and come up before him, the same as two
thousand did on a certain occasion, to be put to death; because
death was much better than life and the suffering they endured.
And Eusebius also says, the Christians died triumphantly. He
gives an account of a lady who was brought before the tribunal in
order to cause her to renounce Christianity. He says, so great were
the sufferings she endured, that she came to the tribunal gladly,
expecting that they would put her to death out of her misery.
She was told that if she renounced her persuasion, she could go
home again; but she refused to do so. They put her on the rack,
until she fainted, then she was taken off and restored again to her
senses. She was asked again if she would renounce; but she would
not. They put her on the rack again; and she died upon it, rather
than renounce her faith in God. And truly did the Apostle John
say, “They loved not their lives to the death.”
And now, when I see [Spiritism, characterised so minutely by
Scripture and also by a devil, purporting itself to be the spirit of
Solon, the devil-worshipper, I confess Spiritism looks rather
suspicious, and I find no hesitation in pronouncing it to be the
beast who “was, and is not, and yet is.”
It is no wonder that God will send this Anti-Christian delusion
upon the world. Is not the Word of God dishonoured and trampled
upon and cast into a corner out of the way all over Christendom ?
The Bible is despised by the majority of professing Christians, and
condemned by Spiritualists; therefore, it is no wonder that men,
with their apathy and Laodicean disposition, should stink in the
nostrils of God. St. Paul says, the delusion will come, because men
had “ pleasure in unrighteousness.” The light and easy literature
of the “ day,” as I said before, has, to a great extent, paved the * way


for this beastly system. The world runs greedily after the pleasures
of the senses; but Christ said in his day,—“ The Father seeketh
men to worship Him in spirit and in truth.” But truth is not
appreciated in these days. The apathy of a large majority of the
clergy of the Christian Church has done much to pave the' way for
this awful delusion. While they profess to be the true shepherds,
who feed the lambs of Christ, many of them are nothing but wolves
in sheep’s clothing, feeding their own bellies; and instead of preach-
ing Jesus Christ, they preach themselves into the good graces and
admiration of their congregations, receiving large salaries and bonus
purses as the fruits of their labours, and the worship of men. So
did the false prophets in the days of Ahab, King of Israel. The
word of God is not taught in its simplicity, as it was in the days of
the Apostles.
The hireling shepherds of the nineteenth century have made the
clerical profession a very good trade; and in smoothing the Word
of God to the ears of their hearers, and making use of poetical high-
flowing effusions, studying elocution more than the salvation of the
souls of their hearers, they are held in admiration by their
audiences. So was Herod, king of Judah, until the angel of God
smote him to death, because he took the worship to himself, I
suppose bishops must blush, if ever they preach from the following
passage of Scripture:—“Be not lords over God’s heritage.” I am
afraid they would not trust themselves with that passage for a text;
if they did, they surely would feel very uncomfortable; seeing that
bishops who monopolise two or three parishes, and ride in their
carriages like princes, lord it over the poor curate, who has got to
do all the drudgery work, for a small pittance of perhaps £SO to
£7O per annum. It is no wonder then that the Great Delusion has
dawned, when the veil of spiritual darkness covers the understanding
of the majority of the clergy in Christendom. However, the apathy
of the clergy, or their most earnest desires for the salvation of the
souls of men, could not prevent the coming, or the establishment of
the devil’s spiritual church; because the word of God must come to
pass. And hearken to the voice of the dragon’s church. Spiritu-
alists make it their boast that they will soon stand side by side
with the Christian Church; and I perfectly believe it too; it will
not take many years to accomplish it either. And from the fact
that the Apostle said it had “ two horns like a lamb ” (that is, the
second beast which the Apostle saw) indicates that Spiritism will be
universal; the two horns semblancing the eastern and western
hemispheres. Neither will Spiritism be satisfied to remain side by
side with the Christian Church; for the devils who enter into
entranced mediums will command the minds of those mediums,
who will become prophets. Those prophets, and the devil, and the
third host of heaven, who were cast out of heaven upon the earth,


will constitute the power which the Christian Church will have to
contend with. These are the two rival spiritualistic churches—the
church of God and the church of the devil. In this persuasion will
appear the individual “Anti-Christ,” or “Man of Sin,” which St.
Paul alludes to. He will be a devil incarnate, just as Christ was
God incarnate. But whether born of a virgin or not, I cannot say;
but it is unnecessary that this false prophet should be born of a
virgin; because the devil has every opportunity to enter into the
body of some enthusiastic medium, and thereby accomplish all his
hellish designs. But the Church of Christ will suffer great
persecution from her rival before the great Anti-Christ appears.
But when he appears several leading nations will have adopted
demonology for their religion. And when the Anti-Christ comes
this dispensation is near an end. The reign of this demon in a
body will, I believe, be three years and a-half, as is mentioned in
Scripture—“ forty and two months.” So greatly will this impostor
persecute Christians in his reign; and be allowed to do so in order
to try them; nevertheless, Christ himself will come down with the
angels of God and destroy them. The Anti-Christ will endeavour
to establish the Jews in the Holy Land again, and will proclaim
himself universal God. After the advent of Christ the devil will
be bound for a thousand years, and the millennial dispensation
begun.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, Flinders Lane East, Melbourne,


■
