

1907.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
EFFORTS MADE BY WESTERN
AUSTRALIA
TOWARDS THE
Betterment of Her Aborigines
Compiled from Statistics, Records, etc.,
By DAISY M. BATES, F.R.A.S., etc.
(Under the direction of the Registrar General).
PERTH;
BT AUTHORITY : FRED. WM. SIMPSON, G. PRINTER.
1907.


Efforts made by Western Australia towards the
Betterment of her Aborigines.
Florence Nightingale, in her pamphlet on the “Sanitary Sta-
tistics of Native Schools and Hospitals” (1863), asks the ques-
tion: “Can we civilise the aborigines without killing them?” A
question seemingly simple, yet the most difficult problem that could
have been propounded, since, up to the present, no conclusive
answer has been given.
It is a melancholy fact that the progress of European settle-
ment in those parts of the world inhabited by the dark races
generally means the extinction of the native inhabitants.
In Australia, the gradual disappearance of the natives, who,
before the advent of the white man, had existed for ages upon the
land, continues without ceasing, notwithstanding the many and
constant efforts of the respective Governments towards reclaiming,
civilising them, and arresting their downward course. Various
religious bodies have vied with each other in their attempts to
rescue the aborigines from oblivion, but with doubtful success.
The utmost that can be said of these efforts is that the native
exists, or, perhaps the better word would be, suffera a little longer;
his ultimate disappearance is only a matter of time.
Medical men of the highest attainments acknowledge that, so far
as their physical ailments obtain, the natives are still a mystery
unsolved.
Florence Nightingale was forced to admit that “the hospital
returns threw little light on the causes of the disappearance of
native races.” Post mortem examinations have frequently been
made by doctors on the bodies of natives whose diseases baffled their
skill, but the result made them no wiser, only revealed to them
their utter ignorance of aboriginal diseases. Many medical men
in Australia have made a study of the natives’ physical system,
and have taken sick natives under their special care, devoting all
their skill and much of their time in the effort to understand and
so combat the various maladies, but to no purpose; they only
succeeded in killing their swarthy patients all the sooner. “The
natives,” they conclude, “cannot stand our remedies.”
Civilisation, humane or otherwise, has no permanent beneficial
effect upon the Australian native; indeed, it only seems to bring


in its train, pneumonia, bronchitis, syphilis, liver complaint, and
many other fatal ills.
It is true that the natives were subject to some of these
diseases before the advent of the white man; but their ,untram-
melled bush life mitigated any tendency to pulmonary and other
icomplaints, and deaths , from these diseases seldom took place
amongst them. But the arrival of the white man, bringing with
him the abundant energy of the pioneer; the wonderful powers
of endurance; the excessive activity, the ways and methods of
civilised life —houses, clothing, foods —above all. the extraordinary
adaptability possessed by a race that calls itself British, but
which is in reality a mixture so complex as to be enabled to
accustom itself either to Arctic cold or tropic heat —the influx of
such a race could not help being the signal for the disappearance
of the indigene! Setting all these new and strange forces in the
midst of a people who were only energetic “by fits and starts,"
or when hunger assailed them; who possessed no physical stability;
whose activity entirely depended upon the mood of the moment;
who alternated between long fasting and great gorging—yet, who
rendered all these “drawbacks" almost nugatory by the open, free,
desert life they had lived for untold ages, is it any wonder that
such a sudden, violent and complete change should be the main
factor in their gradual extinction ? They had no houses, there-
fore suffered from no draughts; never, having been clothed they
caught no “chills” with the changes of temperature —these did not
affect them, for their break-wind shelters sufficed, with their small
fires, to give them the necessary warmth on the few cold nights
of the Australian winter. Their food was not made dyspeptic
with the addition of “appetising" condiments, and never suffered
from overcooking. Their roots, seeds, and fruits afforded them all
the vegetable diet required, and their open air life in such a
magnificent climate as that of Australia was in itself a most vitalis-
ing element. Deprived, with the white man’s arrival and occupa-
tion of their hunting grounds, of their native means of subsistence,
'their vegetable foods, suited, through long ages of use, to their
system ; obliged to change completely their mode of life; to clothe
their bodies in cast off garments of unsuitable texture, wearing
probably thick woollen “sweaters” of doubtful cleanliness in a
temperature of some 120 degrees iu the shade; conforming in this
respect to the exigencies of civilisation by day, yet under cover
of night relinquishing the unaccustomed apparel; eating foods that,
however palatable they might be to European taste, were yet as
new and unsuited to them as a quick change from European to
native foods would be to the British pioneer (indeed, more unsuited
for, as has been said before, the variety of races which mingle in
the Briton, adapt him in a wonderful manner to all climes and
foods), and worse than all these, exchanging their sandy or leafy
couches in the open healthy air for the supposed advantage and


comfort of houses; the natives had no chance in the alternative
existence meted out to them, and however humane the efforts may
be in their behalf, however great the devotion of good men and
women towards the amelioration of their unhappy condition, there
is nothing the most devoted labour can attempt that will replace the
mode of life that advancing civilisation forces them to relinquish
and possessing none of the characteristics of their supplanters,
they are simply pressed out of existence by the weight of civili-
sation. .
As earlv as 1833 the Government of this State began to give
its attention to the betterment of the aborigines, and many schemes
were formulated, the first one being to establish a native village
at the head of the Swan River which, however, for various reasons,
was not adopted. From the very beginning of the settlement of
King George’s Sound in 1826, a uniform system of conciliation
and kindness was adopted towards the natives, and steadily per-
severed in, until a perfect confidence and cordial amity were es-
tablished between the natives of that district and the new settlers,
such as no individual injustice towards sthem ever afterwards
lessened. Governor Stirling issued a proclamation on Ist June,
1833, in which he endeavoured to guard the persons of the natives
from wanton outrage. The proclamation concluded with these
words:
in a fraudulent, cruel, or felonious manner towards the aboriginal
lace of inhabitants of this country, such person or persons will
be liable to be prosecuted and tried for the offence, as if the same
had been committed against any other of His Majesty’s subjects.”*
Many private persons were also interested, even at that early
period, in the welfare of the natives. A proposition was put
forward by “Veritas” in the Perth Gazette of August 31st, 1833,
advocating the establishment of a native village on Rottnest Island
which, however, met with the same fate as the proposed “Swan
River Native Village.” In the meantime, a settler named Francis
Fraser Armstrong was studying the language, habits, and customs
of the natives with the object of acting as interpreter in the
disputes arising between the natives themselves, and also with the
view of becoming an intermediary in their conflicts with the white
settlers. On the 13th December, 1834, Governor Stirling appoint-
ed Mr. Armstrong interpreter and also superintendent of an in-
stitution for the protection and civilisation of the natives.
The rules laid down by the Governor were that—“ Protection
was to be afforded all natives from violence, wfliether from each
other or from white people; that medical aid was to be given in
time of sickness, and a regular supply of food issued by cautious
guidance and provident superintendence.” Mount Eliza' Bay
(Goonininup) was the place chosen for the institution.
* Perth Gazette, June 15t,1833.


At the outset, the natives were made to understand that they
were to procure their own means of subsistence, either by hunting
or working for white settlers; they were not to be supported in
indolence. A boat was provided by the Governor for their use in
fishing and the surplus fish disposed of for their benefit. They
employed themselves in fishing and other work, and were free to
go away and return as they pleased. The only stipulation was
their good behaviour while inmates of the institution.
The scheme worked well; the natives cleared certain portions
•of the land round the house, planted pumpkins, melons, and other
•seeds, and watered and tended the growing plants. They now
and again made bush excursions, just as the Beagle Bay (R.C.)
Mission natives do at the present day; but usually returned during
the dry season and complied with the regulations so far as good
behaviour was concerned. Disputes as to stolen property, etc.,
were settled by Mr. Armstrong, in whom the natives felt they
possessed a friend and protector.
The Perth dazette of May 28th, 1836, contains a leading
article on the institution, stating that the objects aimed at in its
inception had been attained, and that consequently the settlers
and aborigines alike had benefited from it. Not only were the
Perth natives aware of the protection afforded them by the exist-
ence of the institution, but the natives from the Murray and Pin-
jarra districts also understood that if they did wrong they would
be brought to punishment, and that if they w r ere wronged justice
would be meted out to them.
When one of their number was mortally wounded by a white
man, instead of resorting to their usual method of revenge (i.e.,
spearing the offender), they brought the wounded man in the
dead of night to the institution, made their complaint, and patiently
awaited investigation, assuring the interpreter that they would not
kill a white man if justice w T ere shown them. Inquiries proved
that they had cause for complaint and their demand for “fair
play ” was fully met.
In 1834 some friends of missions in Glasgow made a proposal
to the Church Missionary Society to send a missionary to the West
Australian aborigines, the expense of the mission station to be
borne by themselves and other friends who would become interested
in the subject.
A similar proposal was made from Dublin in the winter of
1834, but the C.M.S. declined both proposals, assigning as a
reason that they had chosen China as the station to which they
proposed to extend their operations. The failure of these appli-
cations led to the formation in Dublin of a Society called the
“Sw T an River Mission,” having for its object the sending out of
missionaries of the Church of England to the aborigines. It was,


however, eventually decided that London was the most suitable
place for the position of the parent Society, the Dublin’ committee
engaging- to raise £IOO annually towards the purpose.
On the 23rd September, 1835, a society was formed in Lon-
don for the establishment of a Christian Mission (in conformity
with the principles of the Church of England) to the aborigines
and more destitute of the settlers of W.A. Its designation was
the “West Australian Missionary Society,” and its system, which
was to include the instruction of the aborigines in the arts of
civilised life, was on the plan pursued by the Moravian Missions.
The Rev. Dr. Giustiniani was the missionary chosen by the society
for the' purpose of inaugurating the mission, and he arrived with
his wife in July, '1836 and proceeded to Guildford, where he
preached his first sermon on July 31st, 1836. Dr. Giustiniani does
not appear, from the accounts furnished, to have been successful
in forming any native mission, and therefore the care of the natives
temporarily, and in a measure spiritually, still remained with Mr.
Armstrong.
In November, 1836, the West Australian Mission was incor-
porated with a General Mission for Australia, and a branch in
India, but this arrangement seems to have given rise to much dis-
satisfaction, and what was worse, the natives did not appear to
have received the direct attention which was one of the first objects,
aimed at by the founders of the West Australian Mission. The
ultimate fate of both mission and institution may be gathered from
a paragraph in Ogle’s “Western Australia” (page 143), wherein
that writer records that “it was found wholly impracticable for
any progress to be made without incurring an expense greater
than the Colony could bear,” and so these endeavours gradually
fell into disuse.
Nothing apparently occurred in this connection until 1840,
when Sir George Grey submitted a report to the then Secretary
of State for the Colonies (Lord John Russell) on the best methods
for promoting the civilisation of the aborigines. The report em-
bodied many suggestions relative to British and native law.' Grey
was convinced that the chief cause against the civilisation of the
natives was prejudice. The Western Australian natives had been
represented as a very inferior race, almost on a level with the
brutes, and many years would elapse before that prejudice, so
strongly rooted, would be eradicated.
“In the meantime,” said Governor Eyre, in discussing the report,
“the natives vanished mysteriously out of existence, and by the time
the prejudice was removed, the native was removed also.” Grey
stated, after many years study of the native character, that “a
more unfounded prejudice than that entertained by the public
could not be imagined.”*
* Eyre’s discoveries, Vol. 11., p. 42t, etxeq .


Amongst the many evils which the natives suffered in their
contact .with the whites, Grey noticed three principal. ones: —Ist.
The uncertain and irregular demand for their labour. 2nd. The
absolutely insufficient reward for the services they rendered. 3rd.
The extraordinary position in which they were placed with
regard to two distinct sets of laws, British and native. They
only knew the British law as the means of punishment,
never as a code from which they could claim protec-
tion against the violence or cruelty of their own race. So much
importance w T as attached by Grey to this point that he was
convinced that as long as those native tribes which were in contact
with Europeans were allowed to execute their barbarous law's and
customs upon one another they would remain hopelessly immersed
in their barbarism, for the tendency of all their laws w T as to
prevent them from ever rising into a state of civilisation.
Many other excellent suggestions and recommendations were
embodied in Grey’s report.
Governor Eyre stated in 1845 that the strongest forces against
the complete civilising of the natives were “the natural ties of
consanguinity, the authority of parents, the influence of the
example of relatives and friends, and the seducing attraction which
their own habits and customs hold out to the youths of both sexes,
first by their offering a life of idleness and freedom to a people
naturally indolent and impatient of restraint, and secondly by their
pandering to their natural passions. With all these it is not to
be wondered at that so little has been effected towards ameliorating
their condition, or inducing them to adopt habits and customs that
deprive them of these indulgences.”*
These “forces” are as strongly in evidence to-day as they were
in 1845, and it is principally with these that the various missions
have had to contend, and that have made so many self-sacrificing
efforts failures.
Somewhere about 1840 a school for native children was es-
tablished in Perth, under the auspices of the Church of England.
Mr. G. P. Moore, then Advocate-General of the Colony, states in
his diary (Oct. 23rd, 1840, p. 417) : —“The Governor (Hutt) has
called upon me to accompany him to visit the school for native
children which has lately been established.”
The third annual report of this school, dated 1844, states that
“with regard to the physical condition of the native children, and
those who are approaching to mature life, it may be observed that
they are somewfliat improving, though slowly, w T e trust surely; we
find that to undo is a great work; to disassociate them from their
natural ideas, habits and practices, which are characteristic of the
bush life, is a greater difficulty, for notwithstanding the provision
♦ Eyre’s Discoveries, 11., jd. 427.


of sleeping berths in good rooms, also of tables, etc., for their use
. . . they naturally verge towards and cling to aboriginal
education, and hence to squat on the sand to eat, to sleep a night
ip the bush, to have recourse to a hoyly a duck man for ease fji
sickness ; these to them seem reliefs and enjoyments from the
restraints which civilised life entails upon them. With regard to
the mental improvement of the native children, we cannot say
much. As to the religious state of the Institution, we have signs
improvements, encouragements, which say to us “go on.”
Schools must have been established about the same year in
York and Guildford, for in a despatch to Lord Stanley in January,
1843, Governor Hutt said: “I regret most deeply the total failure
of the school instituted at York and the partial failure of that at
Guildford, both of which at first promised so well. The fickle
disposition of these people, in youth as in older years, incap-
acitates them from any long-continued exertions, whether of
learning or labour.”
Governor Eyre again wrote in reference to the attempts made
in Australia towards the improvement of the aboriginal population;
“The efforts hitherto made (have not) succeeded in arresting that
fatal and melancholy effect which contact with civilisation seems
ever to produce upon a savage people ... In all the colonies
. . . the aborigines are gradually decreasing in numbers, or
have already disappeared in proportion to the time their country
has been occupied by Europeans ...
“Of the blighting and exterminating effects produced upon
simple and untutored races by the advance of civilisation upon them
we have many and painful proofs ....
“In Sydney, the Port Jackson tribe, which in 1788 numbered
about 1,500 had in 1839 become entirely extinct. In Tasmania the
last aborigine died in 1857. In South Australia the same process of
extermination is gradually but surely going on amongst the
tribes most in contact with Europeans.” In Perth, the last female
Swan River native died on March 20th, 1907. In Guildford
(W.A.) but one old native (Joobyteh) remains of the once
numerous Guildford people, and all along the Western Australian
coast-line, where the closest settlement has been, the aboriginal
population is slowly but steadily vanishing.
In the Perth Gazette of November 12, 1836, F. F. Armstrong,
native interpreter, stated that “the total number of natives, in-
cluding women and children, who are in the .habit of visiting
Perth, Fremantle, Guildford, and Kelmscott is estimated at nearly
700.” This statement is confirmed by an extract , from “Papers
relative to the Colony (1837),” w T hich says that “the number of
natives known to have been then visiting Perth from within a
radius of 40 miles was 750.” “The nearest estimate of the
population,” the record goes on to say, “appears to be that which


assigns one native to each portion of ground of two square miles.”
Unofficial statements place the native population at 1,000 and
1,500. The old native woman (Balbuk), the Swan River native
above mentioned, was the last member of this once numerous
people. Joobyteh and his half-caste wife and family represent
all that remains of the once thickly populated Guildford district,
and three old men whose wives and children are long since dead,
are all that are left of the Gin gin district aborigines.
The tribes along the whole line of coast from Champion Bay
to King George’s Sound, have almost entirely disappeared, and
everywhere in the State where the settler has established himself
the former inhabitants have gradually been effaced, not from any
wanton cruelty on the part of the white man, but simply in
obedience to one of Nature’s mysterious laws, unexplained as yet
by the scientist, which makes the very atmosphere the white man
breathes fatal to the aborigine. “A miserably diseased condition,”
wrote Eyre in 1845, “and the almost total absence of children are
the immediate consequences of contact with Europeans . .
Nor is it in my recollection that throughout the whole length and
breadth of New Holland, a single real or permanent convert to
Christianity has yet been made amongst them by any of the
missionaries engaged in their instruction, many of whom have been
labouring hopelessly for many years.”*
The Rev. J. E. Threlkald, in New South Wales, was compelled
to give up the oldest and longest established mission in Australia,
not from want of Government support, but simply because the
natives there had become extinct.
An institution known as the “Swan River Mission” was estab-
lished by the Rev. George King, L.L.D., in 1841, under the auspices
of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and also the
Government of Western Australia. A grant of £SO per annum
was given by the Governor as a commencement, and with this sum
and the assistance given by the S.P.G., Dr. King set to work. In
the ease of the adult aborigines, a peculiar difficulty was encoun-
tered. The paucity of food in the bush, the time and labour
spent in procuring it, rendered the habits of the natives so ex-
tremely erratic that the same individual seldom came within reach
of the missionary for more than two or three days at a time.
Dr. King determined to establish an institution for native children
and going personally amongst the natives collected 18 children
from five or six years of age to about ten. A suitable house was
obtained for their accommodation, and a matron appointed to
live with them and teach them the elements of English education.
Under the supervision of Dr. and Mrs. King the little school pro-
gressed satisfactorily, and after the expiration of twelve months,
the children having become quite domesticated and not one lost
* Eyre’s Discoveries, 11., pp. 417-420.


by returning to the bush oi’ otherwise, Dr. King prepared to
receive them into the Church by baptism.' The difficulty in the
case of the female children, who had all been betrothed to native
men in the bush, was overcome by Dr. King collecting all the
future husbands of his little charges, and having found that
all of them were already in the possession of one or more wives,
he proposed a dissolution of the tie of betrothment on their own
terms. The men asked for a few pieces of silver by way of com-
pensation which Dr. King at once paid them, and a formal docu-
ment of renunciation was duly made by the impression of a cross
opposite the name of each man in presence of, and duly attested
by two magistrates of the Colony.
Dr. King stated that the covenant entered into with' these
natives was most scrupulously and religiously observed by them.
The children were then formally received into the church and
attended the catechetical class with the European children, and
formed one of the classes at Sunday school. The girls were
taught needlework, and the boys gardening, and all soon learned
to read and write tolerably well. They took great delight in learn-
ing to sing, and proved a valuable auxiliary to the church choir
of those daj 7 s. Want of funds prevented the extension of this
good work.
With the Government grant of £SO Dr. King provided all the
necessaries of life and education for the 18 children under his
care. The fees of his five churches were also contributed to the
funds of the school, Mrs. King providing clothes and provisions
from her own domestic economy. The design was to teach the
boys trades and the girls needlework, that they might be able to
maintain themselves and to have them married and settled in life;
this purpose being in some measure accomplished.
Bishop Hale, on his first visit to Western Australia, married
three of the girls to three aboriginal young men who had been
baptised and instructed, and the young married natives were estab-
lished as industrious settlers on the mission farm at Wanneroo.
The girls had then been seven years in the institution. These
marriages turned out very happily. During the first year of his
ministry in W.A., Dr. King laid the foundation of four churches
in four widely-separated districts, all of them being carried to
completion within the year. The first church in Fremantle was
also erected through the efforts of this missionary, the services in
Fremantle having been, before this period, held in the Courthouse.
After seven years’ devoted labour Dr. King’s strength failed,
through incessant fatigue caused by his long journeys to his five
distant churches, and he was compelled to leave West Australia
for Sydney, taking with him one of his pupils, whom he appren-
ticed to a tradesman in that city. John Kirby, as this native was
called, became a very good shoemaker, but a fondness for the sea.


developed during' his voyage from W.A. to Sydney, and also a
keen desire to see Queen Victoria, caused him to ship for England
in the sailing ship “La Hogue,” but his desire was not gratified,
for he caught cold just before reaching England and died in the
Greenwich Hospital.
The five churches which the Rev. Dr. King was instrumental
in erecting were: —Guildford, Piujarra, Maudurah, Yasse, and
Fremantle. Dr. King left W.A. in 1848.
(The above notes were supplied from MSS. of the late Dr.
King, by his daughter, Miss Georgina King of Sydney.)
In the W.A. Almanac for 1842 (the only copy available of
which is in the Sydney Library), there is an interesting report
furnished by C. Symmons, Superintendent or Protector of the
Native Institutions at Perth and Guildford. The Guildford in-
stitution was apparently established in 1842, on somewhat similar
lines to the Perth school.
“The period included in the report has not elapsed with-
out evident proof of the advantages accruing from the present
system of management and its influence over the minds of the
aborigines .... I have also reason to believe that our mild treat-
ment, our undeviating good faith in all transactions with the natives
have. . . . combined to produce the good effects here alluded to.”
Of the efforts made towards reaching the aboriginal children
Mr. Symmons wrote: “Our Day and Sunday schools now number
upwards of 33 children of either sex, all of whom have made con-
siderable progress in spelling and reading. Sand-boxes for teach-
ing the rudiments of writing on the Lancasterian principle have
been introduced, and promise to prove a source of future improve-
ment. The children in the employ of the inhabitants of Perth con-
tinue to give perfect satisfaction. ... A school of nearly a similar
footing has lately been established at Guildford, where 21 native
children are in daily attendance, nearly all of whom are in the
service of settlers at Guildford or in the vicinity. The teacher of
this school is Mr. Abraham Jones to whom an allowance of £2O
per annum for a schoolroom has been granted by the local Gov-
ernment.
“The first native Christian marriage was performed in the last
quarter of the year 1842, the Government announcing its intention
of presenting the young couple with ‘a town allotment in fee simple
unalienable, and to devolve to their legitimate descendants.’” The
death of the young husband occurred through influenza on the
3rd of January, 1843, and thus destroyed Mr. Symmons’ hope for
“a future generation of native legitimacy.” Where the Crown
grant was situated or what has become of it I am unable to dis-
cover.


The excessive mortality from influenza and other causes at
Canning, Murray, Australind, Leschenault, Perth, and Fremantle
is mentioned by Mr Symmons, who stated that “the deaths had
occurred chiefly among the aged and young children.”
“To attempt to extract anything assimilating to daily or sys-
tematic labour for the adults.” concludes Mr. Symmons, “ . . . is
hopeless. The good, however, is . . . surely progressive, . . . and
the day is not far distant when the colonists will .reap the fruit
of their exertions, and of that kind treatment which, with few
exceptions, invariably characterised their relations with the
aborigines.” , ,
A Wesleyan native mission was established in Perth in 1841
by the Rev. John Smithies. In it native children of both sexes
were received, clothed, boarded, and taught to read and write; the
girls were well instructed in various household duties; the boys
were taught gardening and fanning. The institution was placed
under the superintendence of Mr. F. F. Armstrong, the native
interpreter before mentioned, who had about 100 children under
his care; of those a large number learned to read and write: all
were quick in receiving instruction, their memories being so good
as often to surprise their teachers, and they sang sweetly; live
hours of each week day were devoted to religious and secular
teaching. Children were received at an early age, and when old
enough were sent out to service in various parts of Perth, returning
each day to school. All admitted were children of aborigines.
A serious mortality prevailing amongst the children, the
school was removed to Wanneroo, as being a more suitable locality,
yet the mortality continued, and the native parents in consequence
refused to give up any more of their children “to death” as they
called it. The school was afterwards removed to York, and
shortly after discontinued. It had lasted 14 years, and a sum of
more than £12,000 had been expended upon it.
In 1846, a Roman Catholic mission was started by the Spanish
Benedictine Order at a large pool on the Moore River, some 80
miles distant from Perth. The native name for this pool was
“ Mow’-era, ” which was replaced by the present name “New
Norcia, ” bestowed upon it by Fathers Serra and Salvado, the two
pioneer missionaries.
At that time there was a very large number of natives belong-
ing to the district, now known as Victoria Plains, and the two
Spanish priests decided to inaugurate the mission in this well-
populated spot. Therefore, in company with two lay brothers
they journeyed on foot from Perth and came to the Mowera pool,
beside which several natives were camped ; these were conciliated
almost at once with the gift of some sugar, and on the mis-
sionaries deciding upon a suitable spot for the erection of a hut,


the natives assisted them to clear the ground and construct the hut
of sapling’s and branches.
The hut and the missionaries’ slender stock of provisions beijig
completed simultaneously, with the assistance of the aborigines, the
latter resumed their usual hunting life, accompanied this time by
the two priests, who roamed about with the natives for some months
subsisting on the game and roots which the natives collected. All
this time the priests were making themselves acquainted with the
language of the aborigines, and during their wanderings with
them they learned much concerning native habits, customs, etc.
Perceiving that the locality of Mowera pool was one well suited
for the purpose for which it was intended, application was made
to the Government for some land, which was granted, and then
came the necessity for more provisions, as well as agricultural
implements for tilling and cultivating the land. The Roman
Catholic Bishop of those days being unable to supply the mission-
aries "with the necessary funds, Father Salvado, who was an excellent
musician, gave a concert in Perth for the benefit of the Mission,
the hall, piano, lights, and all other accessories having been gener-
ously loaned for the occasion by members of the Church of England,
Wesleyans, and others. This concert was such a success that the
priest was enabled to return to the Mission with an ample supply
of provisions, and also a couple of bullocks, a kindly Anglican
lending a dray to convey the goods to New Noreia.
On the Ist March, 1847, the foundation stone of the first
Monastery was laid in the presence of many of the Mowera natives,
and in July of the same year 34 acres of land had been ploughed
and sown. The first little native girl was brought to Perth at
this time and placed in the care of the nuns.
In 1848 there were six native Christian boys at the Mission.
Meanwhile Father Salvado purchased 2,560 acres of land, at 10s.
per acre, for agricultural purposes, the amount being subscribed
by patrons and friends of the Mission. Allotments of agricul-
tural land were assigned to some natives during this year, under
conditions specified to them by the missionary.
Meanwhile Father Serra had returned to Europe for more
funds and missionaries, taking with him a native boy named
Benedict Upumera.
On the Bth January, 1849, Father Salvado, who had come to
Perth with the first bullock load of mission wool, was ordered
to Europe by his Bishop on important business, and he took with
him two more native boys, who had expressed a desire to become
monks. Three other natives followed later, but all except one died
in Europe, and the remaining boy died soon after his return to the
Mission. The little girls who had been taken to the Convent in
Perth also drooped, and many of them died—the confinement, the


unaccustomed food, habits, and the sudden change from (heir wild
life to the restraints of civilised existence developed consumption
in most of them, and one by one they faded away. No other
female children were sent to the Convent, the priests and brothers
(superintending their education until the arrival of six Spanish
nuns in 1904.
At .the end of 1849, Father Serra, who meantime had been
made a Bishop, arrived in Perth with several priests and lay
brothers, but owing to some misunderstanding with Bishop Brady,
the cause of which does not concern this work, Bishop Serra
all his missionaries returned to Europe, and work w T as not again
undertaken at New Noreia until 1853, when Father Salvado, who
had also been raised to a bishopric, arrived with more auxiliaries
and the Mission was re-opened.
The temporary abandonment of the Mission rendered Bishop
Salvado’s work, on his return to New Noreia, extremely arduous,
but by degrees the natives once more approached the Mission and
helped in the clearing and tilling of the land ; they cleared,
ploughed, sowed and fenced about 50 acres, assisted at the shearing,
helped the Brothers to cart the wool to Perth and made themselves
useful in many ways to the missionaries. During this year the
Mission sheep numbered 2,600, and from the sale of the wool, etc.,
the Mission began from this time to be self-supporting. Later in
the year (’53) Dr. Salvado was appointed Acting Bishop of Perth
during the absence of Dr. Serra, who had succeeded Bishop Brady,
and although visits were paid to the Mission from time to time,
Bishop Salvado did not again reside at the Mission until February,
1857. Under his personal direction, however, the Mission flourished
and prospered, for his active mind was continually seeking new
outlets for its energy; and his priests and lay-brothers, fired by his
example, worked and toiled in the fields and vineyards. Some few
there were amongst the missionaries who became fainthearted
and returned to the world again, but these were very few 1 .
Of the spiritual benefit to the natives Father Garrido speaks
thus after 20 years work:
of the ‘Mamman Kumbar’ (big Father) or great Creator "who
sends the kaby, or water, the kangaroo and the opossum
they appear to have very little or no idea of religion, and are so
accustomed to lead a wandering life that they invariably return
again to their native woods, where they so easily find abundance of
food for themselves, and far prefer its other very great inconveni-
ences to all the advantages and comforts of civilised life . . . They
have their own standard of right and wrong, which no argument
of the white man can change. Good actions and morals they
acknowledge and praise as huoba —right; but whatever is bad
they evidently regard or express as winda —wicked.”


Notwithstanding this discouragement the missionaries perse-
vered. In 1857 there were, according to Father Garrido, about 50
aborigines of both sexes and various ages at the Mission being
taught various avocations by the monks and priests.
Long experience amongst the natives showed that hard work
of any kind, mental or physical, would not agree with their con-
stitution, and the system established by Bishop Salvado was emi-
nently suited to the savage nature, and under his supervision the
mission prospered., In 1860 an epidemic of measles broke out
amongst the natives which carried off a considerable number of
young people of both sexes.
In 1865 Father Garrido states that there were 33 males and
26 females residing at the mission, an increase of nine only in
eight years.
Dr. Salvado continued to superintend the mission until his
death in 1901, when Dr. Torres, also a Spaniard, was appointed
Abbot. The new Abbot brought with him some four or five
priests, and in 1904 six Spanish nuns arrived to take charge of
the young girls and women who had till then been in sole charge
of the monks.
Foui- hundred and fifty pounds has been paid annually by
the Government for the support of the mission, at least since 1896.
There are, however, very few pure-blooded Mowera natives now
living, the following names representing the only pure-blooded
descendants of the once numerous Mowera people. The remainder
of the children and young people now residing at the mission are
almost entirely half-caste or come from other parts of the State.
The descendants of Mowera natives are:—
Ngyl-goo (husband of Wabberan) Ballarruk.
Placedor, a Tondarup.
Harry Jandoo, a Tondarup.
Kag’gaburda, a Ballarruk.
Jak’keemurra, a Tondarup.
Mon’nop, a Ballarruk.
Brothers—Frank Nar’reea, a Tondarup; Jeeb Nar’reea,
a Tondarup.
Michael, a Tondarup (working for Lanigan).
1 daughter of Kag’gaburda, a Tondarup.
1 son of Kag’gaburda, a Tondarup,
and one or two others whose names are not remembered. Not-
withstanding the devoted labours of Bishop Salvado amongst the
Mowera natives, in spite of his life-long efforts towards the
amelioration of their condition, and his strong desire to bring
civilising influences gradually into their lives, the results have
proved his inability to cope with unknown forces. That mysterious
law of nature which seems to doom all savage races to disappear


on the advent of the, white man amongst them continues to
exercise its inscrutable functions, and through that law the ultimate
disappearance of the aborigines is apparently but a matter of
time.
No one can question the singlehearted devotion of Dr. Salvado
to his beloved natives. Everything was subordinate to their wel-
fare; the full force of a cultured mind was directed towards their
material and spiritual happiness, yet even Dr. Salvado was
moved to acknowledge the presence of this mysterious force when
he stated the following case in a paper submitted in 1864 to Gov-
ernor Hampton: —“A strong and healthy young native, whenever
in his life knew what strong liquors or European vices were, is
admitted into a private house, mission, or establishment; for some
time he goes on well; is gay and full of life, but in a few months,
or perhaps a couple of years, a fatal melancholy takes possession
of him. Being asked what is the matter with him, he answers
‘Nothing.’ ‘Do you feel sick?’ ‘No, Sir.’ ‘Do you suffer any
pain?’ ‘No, Sir.’ ‘Why are you not so cheerful as before?’ ‘I
don’t know.’ He takes his meals as regularly as ever, he has
no fever, yet he daily and almost visibly loses his flesh, strength,
and health. What is the technical name for such a disease? Per-
haps consumption, perhaps liver complaint. Is there no remedy
for such diseases ? Are there no preventives of their causes ?
Yes, there are; but nevertheless, that native died shortly after.”
Dr. Salvado consulted many of the chief medical men of Europe
over this and other similar cases and almost every one of them
came to the conclusion that “nostalgia” or “home sickness” was
the name of the malady.
The New Norcia Mission is at the present day, and has been
for 12 years, receiving an annual Government grant of £450, but
the natives now resident at the mission belong to other parts of
the State, with the exception of those mentioned in a previous
page. Kag’gaburda’s daughter is the only Mowera female now
living, and she is married to a Nort-West native.
The grants to this mission were as follows: —
From 1861 to 1870, £IOO per annum; from 1871 to 1891,
£l5O per annum; from 1892 to 1893, £2OO per annum;
in 1894, £300; in 1895, £375; from 1896 to 1906, £450:;
in 1906-7, £350. Total amount being £10,225.
It may be interesting to relate from what apparently trivial
circumstances the inception of a native. school at King George’s
Sound arose.
In June, 1852, the King George’s Sound natives one day went
off on a long bush excursion leaving Kojonatpat, a solitary, naked,
little girl, about three and a-half years old, to wander about the
settlement at Albany. Every morning the poor child went to the


nearest house to beg', and at length the inmates mentioned her case
to Mrs. Camfleld, the wife of the then Resident at Albany. Mrs.
Camfield took the child into her house and afterwards obtained
the consent of the child’s mother to keep her, the father having-
been killed some time before. From this beginning- Mrs. Camfleld
inaugurated her native school, a pure service of love, since she
neither applied for nor received Government assistance. In 1858
a report of the school was issued. There were then 18 children
in the establishment, thirteen girls and five boys, the six elder
girls being from ten to sixteen years of age. The bigger girls
-were taught all useful domestic work, as the school routine did not
extend beyond reading, writing, and a little arithmetic. Little
Kojonatpat, who became a favourite with all who knew her, died
suddenly three years after Mrs. Camfleld took her. Four of the
girls, three black and one half-caste, married Europeans and made
excellent wives and mothers.
In 1865, Mrs. Camfield, with the approval of Bishop Hale and
the then Colonial Secretary, tried the experiment of obtaining
husbands for her grown-up girls amongst the Christian natives
at some aboriginal missions in the Eastern States. The Rev F.
A. Hagenauer, formerly in charge of the Moravian Mission at
Ramahyuck (Gippsland, Victoria), kindly furnished a report of
the result of Mrs. Camfleld’s experiment.
“Forty years ago,” wrote Mr. Hagenauer, “ . . . the black girl
named Rachel was sent by Mrs. Camfleld from Albany school to
Mr. Spieseke, missionary at Ebenezer, in the Wimmera district,
and was married there to a Christian young man named Philip.
This was the first Christian marriage at that station. ... I knew
Rachel for some years until she died, shortly after her husband.
The fruit of her good religious education was always observable
.... and the effect of her good teaching and training was notice-
able in her until her death. She was buried in the little cemetery
at the Mission Station, Ebenezer, which is now closed as all the
blacks are dead.
“ In 1866, two other girls, Annie and Caroline, were sent by
Mrs. Camfleld to be married to two young Christian black men at
Ramahyuck, Gippsland. The girls, however, caught fever on
board ship and had to be taken to the hospital, where they both
died shortly afterwards.
“Mrs. Camfleld, however, still desiring suitable husbands for her
girls sent in July, 1867, the following five: Bessie Flower, Ada
Flower, Norah White, Emily Peters, and Rhoda Toby. They were
received by me and brought to Ramahyuck without delay. Shortly
afterwards Rhoda was married to Fitchetl. They lived happily to-
gether, and died as Christians about 15 years after their marriage.
Norah White was married to Charles Foster, and both died some
years ago, leaving three children behind, who are still alive.


Bessie Flower married Donald Cameron; she died leaving three
children, who are living with their father at Ramahyuck, and
doing well. Ada Flower married James Clarke, but both are dead.
Emily Peters married James Brin die, and they have a small farm
at Orbost, on the Snowy River, and have two sons who work on
farms for their own living. A boy, Harry Flower, also came to
Ramahyuck, but settled in Poonindie, South Australia, where he
died a Christian death.”
Mrs. Camfleld, having commenced her good work unaided, had
been enabled to continue and enlarge it by the help of a yearly
grant from Government. The custom of early betrothals has
always been a great stumbling block to the permanent improve-
ment of the native children, and it is the necessary fulfilment of
these imperative family contracts which is the cause of so many
disappointments connected with the female children, who, as soon
as they reach marriageable age, leave those who have brought them
ii]) and go back to the bush again.
None of the inmates of Mrs. Camfield’s home ever ran away
from it. She really loved the natives and their children, and
treated the latter in all respects as she would her own children,
and this was the secret of her great influence over them. Miss
Georgina King wrote to say that Mrs. Camfleld paid her mother and
father —the Rev. Dr. and Mrs. King—a visit in 1858, bringing
with her the native girl Bessie Flower, whom she asked them to
“treat in all respects as if she were her daughter,” which they
gladly did.
Under Mrs. Camfield’s personal care her little institution pro-
gressed. Ultimately, however, owing to ill-health, she was com-
pelled to relinquish her devoted task, and in consequence of her
withdrawal the little school suffered, there being only 14 inmates
in 1870. About this time, too, the Government withdrew its aid,
and the circumstances weighed so heavily on the mind of Bishop
Hale, then Bishop of Perth, that he endeavoured to resign his
bishopric in order to take up the good work which illness inca-
pacitated Mrs. Camfleld from continuing. The Bishop, however,
was so unanimously requested to withdraw his resignation that he
felt bound to yield to the strong desire of his people and relin-
quished his intention. By his efforts, however, the school was
removed to Perth in 1870, and in 1873 there were 18 children at
the new institution, superintended by two females. The young
people received a suitable and useful education; the girls being
taught domestic duties; the boys outdoor occupations, gardening,
etc.
Some exception was taken to the Bishop’s action in sending
young females who had grown up in the home to another institution
outside the colony (Poonindie, S.A.), but the Bishop ably defended
his action in this matter, and instanced cases from Grey, Eyre, and


other writers as to the need for companionship - amongst the natives,
no matter how great their civilisation, and that in order to secure
them suitable companionship it was necessary to send them where
it could be obtained.
Bishop Hale’s twenty years’ experience of civilised and
Christianised natives enabled him to state most positively that such
natives “had no taste whatever for savage life. Given suitable
companionship and suitable occupation, the native was as happy
and contented a man as any oil the face of the earth.”
In, 1883, the Rev. D. MoNab, a Roman Catholic priest, was
sent to Rottnest to “give instructions in the principles of civilisa-
tion to the native prisoners.” Judge Wrenfordsley was at that
(time Administrator of the Colony. In a lengthy letter Father
McNab propounded rules for their preservation, provision, pro-
tection, and education, and enumerated sp'ecial laws for their
benefit, many of which were adopted. Father McNab afterwards
made an attempt to establish » Mission near Disaster Bay, but after
a short trial abandoned the effort, owing to “want of supplies
both of men and means.” Father McNab soon after left the State
for Sydney.
Nothing further is recorded until 1884, when Governor Broome
appointed a Commission to inquire into the treatment of the native
prisoners of the Crown. The subjects dealt with by the Com-
mission were: “The present state of the aboriginal race, medical
and poor relief, missions, and Rottnest Island prison.”
The Commission reported that “in what may be termed the
Home District of this Colony, which is bounded on the North by
the Murchison River, and on the East by a line parallel to the
coast, and from 60 to 100 miles from it, and on the South and
West by the sea, a great part of which has been occupied nearly
50 years, the fact that the aborigines are fast disappearing is
apparent on all sides, and it is a mournful truth that whatever is
done it appears to be an impossibility to avert this downward
course.”
Information was supplied to the Commission by the repre-
sentatives of two principal Native Missions —Anglican and Roman
Catholic. In the native and half-caste home in Perth, Bishop Parry
stated that the number of children in the Perth home was 25—14
girls and 11 boys, and a small branch home at the Masse contained
12 —6 boys and 6 girls—making in all 37. The number of deaths
at this Mission from 1870 to 1884 was 10, all of them full-blooded
natives, most of whom had been sickly when admitted.
At the Roman Catholic Mission, New Noreia, the Adminis-
trator, the Rev. Dominguez, stated that in 1884 there were 84
natives, 35 of whom were pure blood, the others half-caste. Ten
children died here in one year from measles.


These facts were very discouraging to the members of the
Commission, and led them to place orj record their doubts as to the
efficacy of any institution as such. They stated in their report
that “after over 50 years there has not been a single instance of a
free native cultivating the soil for any length of time, nor of
living in a house with his family except at a Mission station, and
even then only under the strictest discipline, but • nearly always
having a longing desire to return to their natural way of living . .
The experience of 50 years finds us at a point as if we had never
begun, notwithstanding that good and able men have devoted their
lives and means to attempting their improvement.”
After a thorough inquiry into the subject of the aborigines,
the Commissioners summarised the result thus: —“Bishop Hale
devoted his time and his means to the work for a quarter of a
century in this Colony, but without doing any great and marked
good. The New Norcia R.C. Mission, under Dr. Salvado, has
attempted and done more than any other institution, and has
existed for about 40 year's; but at the present time there are only
84 natives (35 pure blood, 49 half-caste) at the mission, and
there is no striking evidence of its good effect (outside of the in-
stitution itself) in the neighbourhood or in the Colony.
“It appears certain that any changes from the natural way
of living soon shows its injurious effects; and we cannot, in the
face of such evidence, recommend any great change from the
natural habits of the natives without feeling certain that it will
result in harm to the race, and that we are accelerating their
speedy removal from the earth.
“Fifty years of settlement by Europeans has had the effect
in the “Home District” of causing the gradual disappearance of
the native race.”
In 1885 a Select Committee consisting of the Hon. John
Forrest, Messrs. Brockman, Burges, Mcßae, and Randell, elected
by the Legislative Council to consider the report of the Com-
mission, recommended “that all Government Residents, Resident
Magistrates, and Police Magistrates be appointed Protectors of
natives, also such Justices of the Peace and country settlers as
the Governor may please to appoint as honorary protectors. . . .
That the native protectors be empowered by the Governor to ex-
pend such sums of money as may be allotted to each district from
the grant in aid of Aboriginal Department. . . . That where a
well-devised scheme of private mission w 7 ork for natives may be
proposed or established, that grants of land may be given, and
also some assistance from the public revenue. . .”
All these recommendations were adopted.
On the 16th August, 1885, the Rev. J. B. Gribble arrived in
W.A. from N.S. Wales as an accredited missionary of the Church


of England. Gascoyne was the district fixed upon. for a native
settlement, and with the assistance of Mr. Foss, R.M., Mr. Gribble
chose a site some 2% miles distant from Carnarvon. The mission r
however, lasted but three months, as it was found that even at
that time there were very few native children about, and apart
from the aborigines on the stations, there were no natives within
a reasonable distance who could come to a mission established in
this pla,ce. Various conflicts having arisen between the missionary
and the settlers, Mr. Gribble left West Australia after a stay of
only five months in the State.
In the year 1890 a Trappist Mission for the natives was
founded at Beagle Bay under the direction of Bishop Gibney.
The Rev. Ambrose Janny, from the Monastery of Sept Fons in
France,,was the first Abbot. The place chosen by Bishop Gibney
for the mission station was a spot some nine miles inland from
Beagle Bay, containing some excellent swamp lands and having
numerous “mound wells” scattered over it.
In his first journey overland in company with Pere Ambrose,
Bishop Gibney carefully counted the number of natives met with
who would, he hoped, eventually come under the influence of the
mission. They amounted to about 250.
As soon as the stores, etc., were brought to the mission site
the work of clearing the ground and planting fruit trees and vege-
tables was at once proceeded with, and the natives were gradually
approached.
In 1892 eight missionaries, under the superintendence of Abbot
Ambrose Janny, arrived at the mission, having amongst their
number blacksmiths, carpenters, gardeners, shoemakers, etc.
There is no doubt that the Trappist missionaries worked well,
but the unaccustomed labour of forest clearing, the absence of
suitable implements, the fitful assistance offered by the natives,
and many other drawbacks, rendered the Trappists’ work un-
usually arduous, but as patience and again patience was their key-
note their uphill work received the reward they looked for in the
love and confidence given them by the natives.
Buildings of paper-bark and saplings were erected for the
natives and burned down, again erected and again burned, and at
my visit to Beagle Bay in 1900, in company with Bishop Gibney,
the natives were living in their bush mias, sleeping in the sand,
and except in being fed and taught to worship in the little chapel
built by the missionaries, they pursued their old open-air life.
Some few corrugated iron huts were built to accommodate married
couples, most of whom were Manilamen married to native or
half-caste women, but the natives preferred their own methods of
sleeping in a hollow made in the hot sand, roofed over by a break-
wind of paper-bark. The books of the mission showed during'


these ten years an expenditure of nearly £II,OOO, all subscribed by
friends and patrons of the mission in the State and abroad. This
sum was, I believe, apart from the grant given by the Government
for the support of the children and old people on the mission.
Some few of the younger men and women worked in the fields
and gardens, but to the end of their stay, the Trappists were never
able to inculcate voluntary cleanliness into the lives of the natives.
Various punishments were inflicted, such as giving them no break-
fast, etc., but the natives preferred going without breakfast to the
discomforts of cleanliness, and the kindly natured Trappists could
not continue the punishment.
Tribal fights wore discouraged and the principles of honesty
and morality were explained. Of the honesty of the natives of
these parts, Bishop Gibney gives ample testimony, for upon
his first visit there in 1890, when the exigencies of tides and land-
ing places caused the stores to be landed in distant and out of the
way parts of the country, the Bishop never found the smallest
article disturbed, no matter how long the stores remained unpro-
tected nor how many natives there might be in the vicinity.
The Trappist priests were careful to first study the laws and
customs of the natives, these being made the subjects of special
investigation, consequently at an early stage of their missionary
labour they were able to discern the pairing classes, and made no
errors in this respect.
It was the aim of the Trappists to interfere as little as pos-
sible with those native laws whose observance was compatible with
the tenets of Christianity, and in this respect they succeeded.
Occasionally fugitives from other districts who had wilfully
broken the marriage laws arrived at the Mission expecting im-
munity from punishment within its precincts, but they were
promptly undeceived, and either conformed to their native laws or
left the Mission.
Commercially speaking, the Trappist Mission was a failure.
Unpractical to a degree with regard to the material wants of the
Mission, the Trappists’ chief study was the native character and
how to bring that under the influence of civilisation and Chris-
tianity, and this was their work during the ten years of their
Mission. The various trades were pursued by the Brothers—shoe-
making, blacksmithing, saw T milling, and gardening, and such of the
natives as manifested a desii'e to learn any of these were received
and taught, and the banana gardens and sugar cane fields were
tended by monks and natives.
In the meantime, the expenses totalled over £I,OOO yearly, and
there was no income. This expenditure had been mainly con-
tributed by the Sept Fons community. In the year 1900 the
Mission was abandoned by the Trappist fraternity, which then


consisted of five priests and seven lay brothers. The little com-
munity, with the exception of one priest and two brothers, departed
to another Monastery at Jaffa, after having devoted the best ten
years of their lives to the service of the natives. The stock, etc.,
was purchased from the Trappists by a new order of German
missionaries, called Pallotines, who undertook to continue the work
of civilising- and Christianising the natives. A fee simple of
10,000 acres—-8,000 at Beagle Bay and 2,000 at Disaster Bay —
was given to Bishop Gibney by the State Government, and a later
grant of 300 acres was applied for by Bishop Gibney, at a place
called “The Point,” three miles distant from Broome, for the
purpose of forming a native settlement there, but it is question-
able whether its contiguity to such a town as Broome would not
materially affect its success. The inadvisability of forming a native
settlement in close proximity to any township has been acknow-
ledged by all missionary bodies, the temptations held out to the
natives being altogether beyond their power to resist.
Even at Beagle Bay, the priest in charge had the utmost diffi-
culty in keeping members of the coloured crews of the pearling-
luggers apart from the natives. The difficulty was increased
through the fact of there being some coloured men at the Mission
who were married to native women.
Father Walter, the present Superior of the Pallotine Mission,
stated that during the laying up of the pearling boats at Beagle
Bay the natives deserted the Mission, and all his entreaties failed
to move them until crews and boats had departed.
A police constable is now stationed at Beagle Bay during the
laying up season.
An annual grant of £250 was made to this Mission in July,
1800, increasing to £250 from July, 1900, to July, 1904, to £545
10s. from July, 1904, to July, 1906; and since then of £SOO per
annum.
In 1896 the Church of England determined to again start a
Mission in the North, the Mission at Carnarvon having been given
p.p owing to the very small number of children in the vicinity.
The place chosen was Wyndham, and Mr. Harold Hale was ap-
pointed, on the suggestion of the Bishop of Tasmania, to under-
take the work. Mr. Hale went to Yarrabah, Queensland, to study
the management of the Mission there, and on his return went to
Wyndham to manage what was to be called the “ Forrest Eivei
Mission,” named and established by the Corresponding Committee
of the Australian Board of Missions.
The scene of operations was a reserve on the Forrest River,
about 10 miles from its mouth and 30 miles by water from Wynd-
ham. The reserve was selected after very careful thought on the
advice of Mr. H. S. Ranford, Government Surveyor.


The Mission party consisted of Mr. Harold Hale, a son of
Bishop Hale, the first Bishop of Perth (leader), and Messrs.
Lennox, Gathercole, and Ormerod. The outfit included a cutter
and a couple of dingeys. The Mission house was erected about a
mile from the river, and formed the only settlement on the West-
ern side of Cambridge Gulf. All efforts to come in contact with
'the natives proved for a long time fruitless. About eight months
after the foundation of the Mission Mr. Gathercole resigned from
the staff to undertake similar work in the Northern Territory.
His place was taken in June, 1898, by Mr. Sydney Hadley.
■ The natives round the Forrest River had long been notorious
for their ferocity. In the April following the establishment of the
Mission, Mr. Hale, while endeavouring to interview a native who
had approached the Mission house, had four spears thrown at him
by other natives concealed in the long grass, which in this locality
often grows to a height of several feet. On May sth, some natives
stole the cutter from the boatshed and removed portions of the
ironwork to make tomahawks with. About a week afterwards
they stole it again. While endeavouring to recover it Mr. Hale
was speared in the arm. The spear had been tipped with glass,
which broke in the wound, and rendered a visit to Wyndham
for medical treatment necessary. As a result of this
visit the local sergeant of police and several constables visited the
station and arrested 10 natives on a charge of spearing Mr. Hale
and stealing the cutter. Five were released, two received two
years imprisonment for being concerned in the attack, and three
got six months for stealing the boat. This association of police
with the Mission was undoubtedly unfortunate for its interests.
Shortly afterwards the boat-house was again broken into and
a dingey stolen. Two of the party started off in the cutter to
search for the missing boat, but without success. While they were
away, Mr. Hadley, who was left in charge, was speared. Soon
afterwards the most serious of the misadventures which befel the
Mission took place.
The following account is taken from Jdr. Ormerod’s letter to
the Board reporting the occurrence: —“Four boys had been living
with us for about a week, and we had known them for a longer
period and had begun to have a certain amount of confidence in
them, and so decided that we should all, except Mr. Lennox and
these four boys, start to do up the cutter, and Mr. Lennox said he
w r ould send up our lunch by these four youths. By two o’clock
nothing had turned up, so one of Mr. Hadley’s boys was sent down
to find out the cause, and in about half an hour returned stating
that, Mr. Lennox was nearly dead, • and that he could get nothing
from him and that the boys had vanished; We, therefore, returned
immediately and found him in a terribly battered condition, with
bis face covered in blood. He could not speak and we could get


nothing from him for five days. This occurred on August 22nd.
I took him to see the doctor, who says the case is serious.”
From this time onwards there were no further attacks upon
the missionaries.
On receipt of the news in Perth a meeting of the Missions
Committee was held, and after very careful thought the following
telegram was despatched to Mr. Ormerod, in Wyndham: —“Com-
mittee decided under the circumstances that withdrawal of mis-
sionaries from present locality is justified, but pledges itself to
continue mission elsewhere. Suggest removal materials and re-
erection on Wyndham church property. From there, work amongst
prisoners, native children, and natives near town.”
The expenses of this Mission from 1896 to 1899 were £924.
The old Aborigines Board voted £BOO for the Forrest River Mission.
Another Mission was then started by Mr. Hadley, associated
with Mr. Ormerod, at Sunday Island. It was under the entire 1
control of Mr. Hadley, who carried it on at his own expense until
June, 1903, when a grant of £IOO per annum was made to him
in recognition of his untiring efforts and considerable success
with the aborigines.
Regarding the working of this Mission, the Resident Magis-
trate at Derby sent the following report to the Chief Protector of
Aborigines after a visit to Sunday Island in 1904“ Regarding
Mr. Hadley’s Mission I cannot speak too highly. It has been the
aim of the Mission to educate the aborigines without abolishing the
tribal customs, rites, and ceremonies; to inculcate some religious
training, and to teach the younger children to read and write as
well. I have not seen before such intelligent natives. . . They
are not fed by the Mission unless they work, and all work is paid
for in kind. These are practically the terms under which they
live together. The men can do as they like —hunt, fish, get dugong,
come and go as they like. They need not work unless they wish.
. . . The women look after the watering and the garden, and
in return are fed. . . . Apart from the house and kitchen, and
store, there are two buildings, one for the men on one side and
another for the girls on the opposite side There is also a general
encampment composed of the shelters of the married blacks. The
whole place is clean and comfortable. The garden is a great
success; the banana plantations having been a source of considerable
income during the past year.”
Dr. Wace pointed out the militating evil of the pearling
crews who encamped on the mainland at Cygnet Bay, just opposite
Sunday Island. The “laying up” place for the boats is situated
between Beagle Bay, Disaster Bay,* and Sunday Island, and has
been a constant source of trouble to the Missions. Young girls are
claimed by husbands to whom they have been promised, taken from


school and then prostituted for liquor by the brown crews of the
luggers, coming back, when they do return, suffering from con-
tagious diseases.
There were 23 children attending school in 1904 —13 girls and
10 boys —and Mr. Hadley expected that when the new school build-
ing was erected they would have more than 30 children on their
school books, as there had been a considerable increase of natives
at the Mission during the first half of 1904, the increase being
mostly children from the mainland.
England, and il*<rt!aer the direction of the Bishop CT^Bunbury.
The missionary work so devotedly entered into by Mrs. Cam-
field in 1852 has never been allowed to lapse. It is still being
carried on under the title of the “Swan Native and Half-caste
Mission.” “For many years,” states the manager, “the Church of
England has made provision for the training of native and half-
caste children at the mission, Middle Swan, near Midland Junc-
tion. Here those children who are handed over to the Church
sometimes as infants, are housed and educated until able to go
out and earn their living. At present there are 36 in the institu-
tion, ranging in age from 5 years up to 17. When the boys reach
7 years of age they are usually transferred to the Swan Orphan-
age—a neighbouring institution of the Church—where they have
exactly the same status as their lighter-coloured companions. . .
A matron and a teacher are resident at the mission. The girls
do the work of the place, including the gardening and dairying,
and frequently gain excellent reports from their mistresses when
they go out to service. Old girls, several of whom are married',
are continually to be seen at the mission which they consider they
are privileged to regard as their home. . . It is not always pos-
sible to induce native women to consign their little ones to the
care of others, however much it may be to the advantage of thenv
selves as well as of the children.”
In 1888 the mission children were brought from Perth to the
Middle Swan where the mission now is. 24 children were then at
the Perth mission house and these were all transferred to the new
institution. Since their removal to the country only two deaths
have occurred up to the present time, three from consumption, four
from typhoid (brought to the mission by some children from
Katanning), one from spinal trouble (the girl having been de-
formed from childhood), one, an infant, from teething and rickets,
and one from blood poisoning.
The girls branch under the devoted care of the Misses Macin-
tosh (who have had charge of the institution for the past 19 years)
have made excellent progress in their studies, and have obtained
very good results in the annual examinations held by State school
inspectors.


The methods pursued by Mrs. Camfleld are here followed, and
under such a system of loving kindness, the children really look
upon the mission as their home, and are indeed loath to leave it;
and no girl has ever yet run away from the home since its founda-
tion, thus establishing a record in this respect in mission work
throughout Australia.
A per capita grant of Is. per day has always been allowed by
the Government for these children.
In his report for the financial year ending- June 30, 1904, the
Chief Protector stated that although Parliament had voted the
sum of £0,500, which was £1,500 more than had been voted the
previous year, he had been compelled to ask for an additional
£1,405 to enable him to meet all claims. In 1904-5 a grant of
£9,000 was. asked for in addition to the £5,000 voted by Statute.
The Government allowed the increased grant in the same year.
A most comprehensive Bill, dealing with the aborigines, has
been passed by Parliament, the chief and most .necessary clause
being the power given to the Chief Protector to prohibit whites
from frequenting native camps, and other useful measures in this
connection. The enforcement of these laws will prevent much of
the immorality and degradation of both whites and aborigines,
with whose illicit practices the Chief Protector had hitherto no
special power to deal. Another necessary clause appoints the
Chief Protector guardian of all the half-caste children in the
State.
The expenditure of the Aborigines Department from its in-
ception in 1898 until June, 1906, has been £108,972.
An aboriginal reserve about SVg miles east of Canning-ton
was obtained from the Lands Department in 1900, as a refuge
for the old and destitute natives of this part of the State. The
reserve, which contains about 300 acres, is situated on an elevated
plain near the foot of the Darling Range and about 3% miles from
Cannington Station. Seven cottages have been erected, some one-
roomed, others three-roomed. Two wells have been sunk and
small paddocks have been fenced round some of the houses.
From time to time families have resided in these houses.
Lately, death has carried off two of the old natives who had lived
for some years on the reserve.
It is proposed to make this the nucleus of issue of relief at
an early date. The situation of the reserve is open and healthy,
although much of it lies under water during the rainy season;
there is plenty of wood and water, and in the bush close to the
hills there is small game. The chief difficulty to contend with in
this, as in other reserves and missions, is the ineradicable nomadic
instinct of the native who, however comfortably he may be placed
as regards warmth, shelter, and food, must wander abroad when


seized with the desire to do so, arid will travel long distances on
foot and endure privation and cold, at these times and until com-
pelled by feebleness and old age to retire into the place reserved
for him.
A Farm Home was inaugurated by the Chief Protector at
Ellensbrook, for such natives and half-castes as cannot, for some
reason, be lodged in the other recognised institutions. The pro-
perty belongs to Miss Edith Bussell, who is allowed from 6d. to
Is. per head per day for those children entrusted to her. Some
are with her only for a time and until situations can be found
for them. At the present time there are 1 adult and 8-children.
The older children were taught reading and writing, indoor work
for girls, sewing, and milking. Vegetable gardening and all the
small farm industries are taught so as to enable the young people
to become useful farm hands, both male and female, in a practical
manner. The place is far removed from other farms, is near the
sea. in a very healthy situation facing the Indian Ocean. A per-
manent brook runs through the property, and the children are en-
couraged to bathe frequently. They spend every Sunday on the
sea beach, and have plenty of milk, vegetables, and meat food.
Within the last 12 months two of the elder girls were married,
one to a half-caste, the other to a pure-blooded native, both of
good character', and have now establishments of their own in the
neighbourhood, living the lives of ordinary country labourers.
Mrs. Donald McLeod of Minilya Station, near Carnarvon, feel-
ing deeply the need for instruction and guidance amongst the
young native and half-caste children on the station, started a home
and a school for them at Minilya. The girls were taught to read,
write, sew, and make themselves useful in many ways. Mrs.
McLeod laboured for years at her task of training and teaching
these children, and at one time had as many as 20 children under
her personal supervision. All the expenses connected with this
good work were borne by Mr. and Mrs. McLeod. During the latter
pari of the year 1906, Mrs. McLeod was compelled through ill-
health to abandon her good work. Many of the young girls have
obtained situations as domestic servants, nurses, etc., amongst the
residents of Carnarvon and district. The majority, however, still
reside on the Station, though the progress of their training is
temporarily stopped.
When it is remembered that the population of Western Aus-
tralia has been and still is a mere fraction as compared with that
of any of the other States, it can be safely asserted that she comes
out easily ahead in the efforts she has continuously made to grapple
with the aborigines problem, and her expenditure on their behalf,
if taken on a white population basis, will probably be found on
comparison to have exceeded that of any other State for the same
purpose.


The. New South Wales, Queensland, Victorian, South Aus-
tralian, and Tasmanian Governments have battled with the native
question, and the sums of money contributed by each Government
for the betterment of the aborigines has been large, but to Western
Australia must be given the credit of not only dealing conscien-
tiously with the aborigines question from the very first years of the
Colony’s existence, but probably also of having expended, as above
mentioned, proportionately to her population, the largest sum of
money of any of these States. As an instance, indeed, the amount
expended by Victoria for the same purpose, between the years 1851
and 1906, is £338,524,* whilst an official return places the W.A.
Government expenditure between the years 1837 and 1906 at
£223,000 ; this sum being exclusive of the Government grants of
the preceding years, and also of the efforts made by private persons
and religious institutions from almost the first year of the Colony’s
existence.
The Wesleyan Mission donated £12,000 to the work; the
Trappist Mission (Roman Catholic), £ll,OOO ; the New Noreia
(Roman Catholic) Mission, approximately, £15,000 ; Mrs. Cam-
field, Albany (approximately), £l,OOO ; S. Hadley, Sunday Island
(approximately), £1,500 ; Mrs. McLeod, Minilya Station, Nor’-
West (approximately), £l,OOO ; Swan River Native and Half-
caste Mission, £lO,OOO ; and others accordingly.
Every equitable and liberal system proposed by the various
religious denominations for the betterment of the natives in this
State has been encouraged, and the failure of many past measures
has by no means lessened the activity, both of the Government and
other bodies in their endeavours to improve the circumstances of the
aborigines, but a perfect system has yet to be evolved—a system
which will lead not only to the natives becoming creditable members
of society, but which will also afford some definite opening to the
young man or woman who is brought within the pale of civilisation,
so that when school or institution training is finished, he or she
may be able to look forward to some hopeful end other than the
melancholy one of either returning to their people, or, as Sir
George Grey said, leading a joyless solitary existence amongst a
people whose character and disposition they understand as little
as their own peculiar nature is understood by the majority of the
white people.
Eyre said that the two great principles to be relied upon in
dealing with the natives were conciliation and kindness, and when
Grey appointed Eyre as manager of a Government post at Moor-
undie (S.A.), these two factors were adopted, and so great was
their success that Sturt said it was entirely owing to the system
pursued by Eyre that he was enabled to travel unarmed amongst
the various tribes he encountered in his explorations.
* Figures kindly obtained for me by Mr. A. C. Macdonald, from the Government
Statistician of Victoria.


Civilisation, according to Brinton,* an American writer, does
not enlighten the aborigines; it consumes them. The history of
missions in America has been summed up as failure and yet again
failure. The Jesuits and Moravians succeeded in reclaiming the
natives from their wild life. . . Ten years after the expulsion of
the Jesuits from Paraguay, their extensive “reductions” were a
heap of ruins, and the converts dispersed to the four winds, and
this after nearly two centuries of training!
Brinton advocated a missionary enterprise combined with a
broad secular education, the inculcation of sound principles rather
than respect for ceremonies and dogmas, the retention of the good
that there certainly is in many of the native religious and moral
codes, the encouragement of independence of thought, and the
principles of religious and political freedom. All doctrines neces-
sary to the reception of civilisation.
* Brinton, Races and Peoples, pp. 289, 290-
By Authority: Fred. Wm. Simpson, Government Printer, Perth-
