

1860.
RUTHERGLEN
Mining Resources.
1904.
PRINTED AT SUN OFFICE, RUTHERGLEN,
Reprinted from the Rutherglen "Sun," July, 1904.


1860.
RUTHERGLEN
Mining Resources.
o
1904.
PrinTTO AT SuN‘~i}l‘f(CE RuThERGLEN,


RUTHERGLEN MINING RESOURCES
THE PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE.
A FEW FIGURES AND FACTS.
[Re-peinted peom the Rdtheeglen Sun, July, 1^04.]
AT this period of our history, when the pioneer alluvial mines of this dis-
trict are weekly giving handsome yields of gold—and those mines which for
some years have been in the development stages are gradually, week by week,
drawing nearer to what is known to mining men as payable, when shareholders
who have stuck so manfully to their ventures will be relieved of call paying, and
see the prospects of dividends looming in the future—we are justified in bringing
before the whole of the Commonwealth the golden resources of the Rutherglen
dis:riot. In doing so, however, it is not intended to alone advertise the miles of
main lead that remains still to be worked, but to impress upon our readers that,
in our opinion, although the alluvial has been good, is good at the present time,
and will probably continue payable for the next twenty or thirty years, there
are still greater golden resources to be developed wii hin the municipal boundary
of the borough than has ever came out of the leads, in the form of quartz lodes,
In a series of articles it will be our aim to show what our quartz probabilities
are, and also what has been the opinion of experts as to their possibilities.
In endeavoring to lay these probabilities before the public, it is first neces
sary to detail on the formation of the Rutherglen field from a geological point of
view, and we cannot find any better authority than Mr R, A. Murray, F.G.S.,
Government Geologist, who at the close of the year 1895, at the instance of the
Government, made an inspection of the Rutherglen district with regard to the
possibilities of quartz mining. The report reads :
“ A reference to the geological map will show that around the town of
Rutherglen, and surrounded by widely spread alluvial deposits, is an area
of several square miles of low ranges, composed of silurian rocks, intersected
by gullies and flats which merge into the wider alluvial areas on either side.
These gullies and flats trending in all directions from the central portion of
the range, contain auriferous leads, which were worked with good results
many years ago while comparatively shallow, and which pass into deeper
main leads, some of which are being successfully developed at present. On
all the ranges where the Silurian rocks are near the surface,
quartz reefs are frequent, and it is evident that from their


denuded portions the alluvial gold was derived. Many of these
reefs have been more or less worked, rmt only in the hills, but in the bed-
rock under the alluvial deposits at various depths. The belt of strata which
contains these reefs has a north-westerly strike and in 'he vicinity of Rut-
herglen is fully three miles in width. As a rule the reefs are small
but in many cases have proven exceptionally rich, though the
general experience has been that the rich stone ran out at compara-
tively shallow depths, »nd nothing: has yet been done to prove the
existence of new makes of auriferous quartz below ”
“ Of the reefs traversing the group of ranges south of the town I did
not obtain any definite information, though many of them have been worked,
and rich alluvial deposits head from them in all directions. There is,
therefore, in this quarter a most promising field for the quartz pros-
pector. Northwards of Rutherglen, adjacent to the three chain road
going towards Carlyle, is a group of reefs concerning which I was able to
obtain information which certainly furnishes a strong incentive
to further exploration.”
Mr Murray then comments on the Garibaldi, Cooper, and Campbell’s line of
reefs which are included in the lease applied for by Messrs Gollings, Drenen
and Rees, also the Pipeclay, Great Eastern and others, and when we come to the
portion of our articles dealing with these lines of reef Mr Murray’s remarks will
be includ'd, but it is only right at this juncture to publish Mr Murray’s closing
remarks, which read as follows :
“It will be seen by the foregoing descriptions that though the reefs in
the Rutherglen district are small they are fairly persistent in length and
may be expected to continue in depth. There is no reason why the ex-
perience of other fields should not apply here, and new makes of auriferous
quartz to be met with at deeper levels. I consider, ther fore, that the
district is one to which the attention of capitalists might
warrantably be directed as a quartz reeling’ field as well as
alluvial, in which latter its reputation is already established.”
To practically prove to our readers that Mr Murray’s description of the
locality is almost letter perfect, we will carry them to a hill on the south of the
town, known as the Sugar Loaf, the foot of which is not far from the borough
boundary. From the summit of this hill the whole of the mining panorama of
the distiict can be taken in at a glance, and the belt of silurian rock referred to
by Mr Murray is visible. The view at once gives the impression that the forma-
tion of Rutherglen is like an Octopus, on account of the many leads coming
away from the main bed of quartz. While viewing this phenomenal
formation, one naturally thinks what a bonanza the first mine will be that strikes
the main lode that has fed all the tributary leads and quartz outcrops.
Looking from the summit of the hill in a south-westerly direction, the poppet
heads of the Barambogie mine, on the other side of Chiltern, is visible, also the
gravel heaps of the old Chiltern Yalley then the trend of the great


main lead can be followed along its course to the Murray, picking up its innu-
merable tributaries which have fed it so well. Along the course of this lead the
plants of the Valley No. 2, which at the present time is a most consistent gold
producer, and with its parent claim, the Chiltern Valle} 7 , has returned on a
j£30,000 capital £189,155 in dividends to the lucky shareholders since 1885 ;
the Valley Consols, the Wallace Consols, the Valley United, and here the famous
Indigo Lead is to be found wending itself between the low hills into the main
lead. Almost at your feet you have the Southern Consols, then further on the
Great Southern, Northern Extended Consols, Southern No. 1, North Prentice,
and away in the distance the Prentice and Southern mine, thus showing an
almost continuous lead, varying in width from 200 to 700 ft for close on 20
miles. It is not the course of these leads that is to be followed, but the forma-
tion with Rutherglen as a centre. Almost from the foot of the Sugar Loaf hill
the first tributary is found making its way from the hill—the Commonwealth
lead —which was payable when worked, then the New Eldorado and the Kelly’s,
two leads almost together ; the latter has junctioned with the main lead, and is
being worked with profit. Following to the northward a series of three leads
are making away in a north-easterly direction—the Hibernian, Clydesdale and
Newcastle—and a little to the east of them, the Southern Cross, while on the
west there is the Garibaldi. These five leads, with two others, which take their
source from the depression between the Garibaldi and Campbell’s Reef— the
All England and Glencoe leads—form the rich lead that the Southern No. 1 is
at present working. To the westward is the Rose of Sharon lead, which at its
source is crossed by the Garibaldi Line of Reef, and to its right the Rose of
Victoria lead, which takes its source from the Great Eastern Reef. Just over
a small hill, to the west of the Rose of Sharon, are th« White Star and Young
Wahgunyah leads, trending south-westerly until they junction with the
Wahgunyah, or the pioneer lead of Rutherglen, which has its source almost in
the centre of the town, and runs north until it is turned north-west by the line
of low hills on which the Garibaldi and Pipeclay Reefs are situated. Over the
next ridge to the west a clump of workings indicate the position of the
Lanarkshire Line of Reef, and again there is the alluvial lead trending
away from it. A little further to the west the Bobbie Burns lead comes down,
having taken its rise from the west of the low range that sent the Hibernian and
Newcastle leads north-east. Turning sharply round, on the summit of the hill,
there are on the west the Perseverance and Glamorganshire leads, and further
west, from another low silurian hill, on which Meadows Cowper’s reef is, two
other small leads break away—the Clare and Chinamen’s.
It will thus be seen that within an area of about three square miles, there
is a b“lt of low ranges, of which Rutherglen is almost in the centre, and from
which no less than 21 leads have their source. Strange to say there is not one
of these leads that can be called shallow, as there are only one or two less than
100 feet, most of them being from 100 to 150 feet, and quickly dipping away to
greater depths. This is a peculiarity that is found in few districts, for in such
centres as Ballarat, Bendigo, Creswick, Mclvor and Beechworth alluvial gold, in


many instances, was found almost on the surface. This, however, will be dis
cussed at a later stage.
The history of the Rutherglen Goldfield da' es back to 1860. During the
month of August in that year three brothers named Dean, and John and Harry
Mitchell, Ift the Chiltern field with a view of seeking their fortunes further
towards the Murray. They, from previous reports, shaped their way to what is
now known as the Rutherglen hills, and after a short survey of the place,
selected a site for a prospecting shaft, the site selected being in the valley that
comes down to the Rutherglen Park, and very near where the embankment is
erected. The prospectors first hole was a duffer, and they decided to move a
little further down, the second shaft being sunk about 20 yards up from the
culvert at the lower end of Main-street, and this one bottomed on gold. In
sinking the hole that was the forerunner of so many leads being developed, the
prospectors, after their first failure, and not r aching bo tom at the depth they
anticipated, were on the point of giving up their task, as they had run out of
provisions. They confided their troubl stoMr R. Turner, who had a butcher’s
business in Wahgunyah, and had been supplying them with beef, that they wer*
going to give it best, but Mr Turner advised them to hold out tor a few weeks,
and on returning to Wahgunyah coilecied a quantity of flour, tea, sugar and
other necessaries, and about £2 in cash. He handed thu over to the prospectors
and also told them he would supply them with beef until they bottomed.
On Saturday, September 9th, 1860, he visited Rutherglen - although there
was no town or settlement then —and on visiting the claim Mitchell
asked him if ho was in a hurry, j.nd receiving a reply in the negative, told Mr
Turner he thought they had bottomed, and as he (Air Turner) had been so good
to them, he should have the pleasure of washing the first prospect. He waited
about an hour, and then the bucket of was brought up and put through the
dish. The prospectors handed over the gold to Mr Turner, and he took it to
Wahgunyah and showed it around. The result was a rush from Wahgunyah,
and a great number of people pegged out claims, but by some inscrutable means
the news reached Chiltern, and before the Wahgunyah people could take out
miners’ rights, the field was rushed, on Sunday, September 10th, 1860, and the
Wahgunyah people did not get a claim. On the outbreak of the rush, Mr Turner
started a butcher’s shop where the late Mrs F. Gill resided, and in a short space
of time an extensive mining township sprung up. Amongst the rich claims at
that end of the rush was the Lanarkshire reef, from which great quantities of
gold were taken, Mr John Foord (popularly known as the Emperor of Wahgun-
yah) taking from £ls to £2O per week as a sleeping partner. To follow the
whole of the workings and doings in connection with early mining would occupy
a large volume, therefore we are compelled to be brief on the matter. So soon
as the result of the first rush was made known men began to flock to Rutherglen
from all parts of Au-dralia, and before long there was between Indigo and
Rutherglen a moving population of some 10,000 miners, their wives and families.
Mining commented in real earnest, workings going on at the north, south, east
and west of the town.


The year 1861 was one of life and bustle on the Rutherglen field (then
known as Barkly, named after the Governor of the day—Sir Henry Barkly—
but it was not a name that was destined to last). Barkly, as the field was first
known, was situated along Drummond-street and on the hill where Mr Geo.
Bcott resides ; it extended on to the hill in the park overlooking the Lanark-
shire, and it was on the park hill that the Government had the first Police
Station—a very different construction to the present buildings. Lead after
lead was quickly discovered, and the field attracted the attention of all the
leading magnates of the district, and the late Hon. J. A. Wallace, who had
at that time an almost endless chain of Star Hotels throughout the North-
Eastern district, arrived on the field. Finding that all the choice building sites
were occupied, he conceived that it was not going to he a field of the mushroom
type, but one that would assist in adding to the importance of Victoria in more
ways than one, Mr Wallace, after consulting with a few friends, moved eastward,
and selected the present site of the Star Hotel as the most imposing for the
establishment of a new town. The late D. G. Hamilton, who was one of those
present, turned to Mr Wallace and remark'd “You shout John and we will call
it Rutherglen after your native town ” Mr Wallace replied “ Right you are
Davie,” and the eastern s ttlement of the field became known as Rutherglen,
and the two principal streets were called Argyle (now known as Main) and
Elizabeth (now known as High). The importance of the field was recognised by
the Government, and the Borough Council was incorporated in September 1862,
the first members of the council being Alexander McCleary, John B. Sanderson,
William Shenstone, James Hopkins, Wm. Smith, Dr. H. B. Wilson and John
Orr. Mr McCleary was elected first Mayor, and Mr J. B. Wedfield, the pro-
prietor and editor of the “ Murray Gazette” (a copy of which paper we have
before usf town clerk, and in the following year the councillors were advocating
a water scheme on a gigantic scale for the purpose of mining and other opera-
tions. The Shire, or old Road Board, was constituted in 1862, with the following
gentlemen as members:—Messrs Lynd'ay Brown, John Foord, Dr. McKay,
George F. Morris, Hugh Main, John Graham, Robert Turner, Benjamin Slater
and Charles Chandle-, with an area of 212 square miles. This is drifting slightly
from our subject, but it is nevertheless necessary to show the rise of the town.
As we stated leads were being discovered in all directions, and were
apparently worked for a number of years with profit. One of the drawbacks in
the pioneer year was want of water, and in summer the washdirt was frequently
carted to the Lake to be treated, and water was sold at so much per bucket. As
the leads trended and were followed from their source towards the main channel,
they got deeper and beyond the control of the windlass and bucket and horse
and whim. When steam had to be introduced there became a rapid decline in
the mining population. The main leads had been worked until they required
greater capital to develop, the result being that claim after claim was aban-
doned, and from the end of 1879 to 1886 there was very little mining being
carried on except on the hills among the reefs, the one bright spot being the


Great Eastern Reef. In the early part of 188 G there were not more than
50 or 60 miners in the Rutherglen portion of the district; compare that with
the number at present employed.
Although the water had got beyond the control of the companies, there were
in those days energetic speculators in the town and district who made a grand
and noble struggle to keep up the mining reputation of the district, and more
than one attempt was made to form companies, in fact, several. Therefore the
latter day prophets of the Dowie type, who have recently sprung up in our
midst, and imagine that by their effusions they have stimulated the people into
action, are only rehearsing what was placed before the Rutherglen people before
they were thought of. This, however, is away from the subject, but honor to
whom honor is due.
Having before us a copy of a prospectus of the “Murray Valley Gold
Mining Company,” proposed to he formed under the Companies’ Statute 1864
(limited), we would remind our readers that in those days the companies were
not of the no-liability order. The capital was £lO,OOO in 1000 shares of £lO
each ; deposit 10/- per share on application, and £1 per share to be paid on
allotment; the calls not to exceed £1 per share, to be made as required at
intervals of not less than one month. This prospectus appears in the “ Murray
Gazette” of January 12th, 1865, and we are pleased to note that the promoters
were all Rutherglen men, included among whom was one of the original pros-
pectors—Mr H. Mitchell. The prospectus will be interesting to many of our
readers, and as it deals with past mining we will re-publish it.
Pbospectus.
Provisional Directors :—William Smith, Esq. (Smith and Harris), Mayor, Ruther,
glen; J. A Caughey, Esq. (Caughey's and Co. 1; D. Hamilton, Esq. (Masterton, Hamilton
and Co.); C Buahell, Esq. (Roberts and Bushell) ; T. Nott, Esq. (T. and W. Nott) ; Win.
Booth, Esq ; H. Mitchell, Esq. (original Rutherglen Prospecting Co.) ; H. B. Wilson, Esq.,
J.P ; James Daddo, Esq. (Cooper and Daddo). Secretary—Mr. C. S Westfield
The Murray Valley Gold Mining Company is projected for the purpose of purchasing
the lease of and the interest in and to the ground at the continuation of the workings of
the Clydesdale Lead, Rutherglen, formerly occupied by the Havelock Company, and now
held by Mr William Shenstone. The ground held by the lease consists of thirty acres, and
has been laid off in such manner that it contains over 2,000 feet along the course of the lead.
It is believed by practical miners that within the limits of the ground proposed to be worked
the Hibernian, Newcastle, Garibaldi, Southern Cross, Lucknow, and Clydesdale leads form
a junction ;or that they continue to run through the ground in separate leads. If this
latter hypothesis should prove to be correct, it would make the ground even more valu-
able than the former
To those who are acquainted with the character of the leads mentioned, nothing need
be said as to their richness. For the information of those not so acquainted, it may be
stated that the upper portion of the Clydesdale Lead worked at depths varying from 150 to
200 feet, with the simplest and least economical mechanical appliances yielded at the lowest
calculation an average of £6 per man per week. The Hibernian and Newcastle were
famous for the richness of their yields ; in some extraordinary instances as much as 300
ounces to the machine having been obtained. The last claim now working on these leads,
namely, that of the Surprise Company, have recently struck “ wash” of a highly payable
character, averaging 14oz to the machine. The All England Lead (which absorbs the


Glencoe) has also been traced by the Independent Company to within a short distance of
the lease ; a fact which cannot fail greatly to enhance the value of the ground.
The depth of sinking in the ground proposed to be worked by the Company is 280 feet.
One thousand feet of the lead has been proved. In putting in the drives, only between
April, 1863, and April, 1864, gold amounting in value to £3,003 9s 10d was obtained ; and it
is worthy of notice that for the four weeks previous to the breakdown in the machinery,
which ultimately tesulted in the cessation of work in the mine the yield of gold exhibited
a steady increase The value of the gold raised during these four weeks was as follows ;
March 26... ... ... ... ... £llO 9 0
April 2 139 3 0
April 9 ... ... ... ... ... 210 16 6
April 16 ... ... ... ... ... 243 7 0
And it must be borne in mind that there has been no blocking out whatever ; the above gold
being got in putting in the drives.
The causes which led to the stoppage of the Haveock Company are sufficiently
apparent to those who have watched the working of the mine. The length of time which
was taken to prove the ground, the want of capital by the miners, the absence of that
systematic and economical management which can only be secured by the command of
capital, and the complete failure of the pecuniary resources at a time when they were most
needed, afford ample reasons for the failure.. Indeed, it is now generally admitted that in
such a description of ground, isolated efforts of individual miners can rarely lead to success-
ful results.
The provisional directors have every confidence in submitting their scheme to the
public The ground has been so prospected that a new shaft can be sunk with a certainty
of striking the lead ; and under efficient management a dividend would be payable within a
very few months of the commencement of operations. The directors believe that share-
holders will receive returns on their capital long before the full amount of the shares will be
called up, as a very much smaller yield of gold than that obtained by the Havelock Company
in their trial workings would give a large return on the capital proposed to be invested.
The lessee has agieed with the provisional directors to dispose of his interest in the
lease for the sum of £1 500, the whole of which he is willing to take in paid up shares of the
Company. At the same time the machinery and mining appurtenances on the ground,
which the provisional directors-without questioning its efficiency—decline to purchase
until the company and permanent directors are satisfied that it is of sufficient power, is
offered by the lessee (which offer is to remain open until the company is formed) at a price
tor the w'hole amounting to £2 500 and any portion may be taken at prices specified in a
schedule handed to the provisional directors ; payment for the same being made, one half in
cash, and the balance in paid up shares.
The provisional directors would suggest that in addition to the shares allotted to the
lessee, only 500 should at present he open for allotment viz,, 250 in the district, and 250 in
the Melbourne market On allotment of the number the Company to be considered formed,
and the remaining shares to be allotted amongst the shareholders, or to be disposed of as may
be necessary for the benefit of the Company.
In conclusion the provisional directors have every confidence that they are opening up
Joint Stock enterprise a gold field peculiarly adapted for extensive and systematic mining.
Looking at the success which has attended the simple method of mining which has been
pursued in the comparatively shallow ground, they fully believe that with proper appliances
an equal amount of success will attend the working of the deeper and more difficult mines.
They confidently expect that the present Company, once formed, will set these facts beyond
all doubt, and will open a field for the establishment of many others.
The preserving of the paper which contains this prospectus is due to our
esteemed townsman, Mr It. Holman, who some three years back presented the
Natives Association with three copies, from one of which we take this extract.
This venture did not prove the bonanza that it was expected to, and from


that date up till 1879, several attempts were made to successfully work the-
lower ground (he ground towards the Southern No 1) in which Mr Geo Audley
took a prominent part. [The claim referred to as the “ Surprise” in the
prospectus is the one known as the Golden Gate” in recent years].
In 1879, when the town was getting near its lowest ebb from a mining
point of view, a prospecting association Was formed, and the late Messrs T. H.
Harris and Robert Briggs were commissioned to prepare a report and gather
statistics relative to the work done and yields obtained on the Rutherglen
fields, and ;>s a result of their labors, the following valuable and interesting
report was published :
Approximate Statistics of the Various Leads and Quartz Reefs of
the Rutherglen Goldfields.
Rutherglen, 27th September, 1879. To the Chairman and Members of the
Rutherglen and Wahgunyah Prospecting Association—Gentlemen, — We beg to
hand you our report of the approximate statistics of the various leads in the
Rutherglen district. We have been assisted in our undertaking by R. Brough
Smyth’s work on the goldfields of Victoria, and we have obtained from local
miners information which from our knowledge we can vouch for as reliable.
Thomas H. Harris, R. R. Briggs. We have roughly measured the courses of
the different leads mentioned and scheduled below, and in every instance find
Mr Robert Arrowsmith’s report correct, with the exception of two—the All
England and Hibernian, or Clydesdale. Those leads were in full work at the
time they were measured, and continued to work for some considerable time
after.
Leads.
A—The Perseverance lead w.is poor at the source, but became richer as the
miners worked down towards the water. The only engine claim was worked
with fair success, the claim holders each receiving about £3 or £i per week.
B—Glanmorganshire lead was not at any time payable, owing to the water
being struck near the source; hence all the claims had to be abondoned for the
want of proper machinery.
C—Clare lead was very rich for the distance worked. The gravel on the
bed-rock was very hard, yet most of the miners were remarkably well paid for
their labor.
D—Hibernian Lead, from its source was very rich; and, where it
functioned with the Newcastle Lead at Gloom’s claim, there were 4000 ounces
taken out in about 200 feet of the lead. 360 ounces was the result of cleaning
up for one week’s work. Altogether there were about 35,000 ounces of gold
obtained from this lead. It has been a matter for argument amongst miners
which of the leads, Hibernian or Clydesdale, continue the course towards the
Murray. We are of opinion that it was the Hibernian, and that the claims
Black Ball, Havelock and Lucknow were situated on this lead.


E—Newcastle lead was very rich and junotioncd with the Hibernian at
Olcorn’s claim.
F—-Garibaldi lead, although worked from the same source, did not yield any
very large returns. The Township claim was good, and most of the gold taken
from the lead was got at this claim.
G —Clydesdale lead, above what was known as the Prospectors’ claim, was
not worked with success. The ground immediately below, occupied by claims
Nos 1,2, 3,4, 5, and 6, for the amount of gold taken from it, will compare
favorably with any ground of a similar length in the colony of V ictoria.
H —Robert Burns lead in many places was very rich. It was remarkable
that in many claims there was not a speck of gold got from boundary to
boundary, but, as a whole, it was a good payable lead. A party of eight men in
No, 2 below the prospecting claim had as their returns £1,200 per man.
I—Lanarkshire lead for the distance worked (about one-third of a mile) was
very rich ; and, after being worked out by the European miners, was taken up by
the Chinese, and worked by them successfully for a great length of time.
J—Wahgunyah lead proved highly auriferous from the source. It' is a
matter of fact that it contained the coarsest and finest, gold in the district. There
was one piece seven ounces in weight taken out by No. 2, south. At the
“ Lankey’s ” claim the gold was so fine that they had to run all the dirt over
blankets for the purpose of saving it. The last claim worked by that party paid
good wages, and had to be given up from the fact that their machinery was not
powerful enough to work the ground ; and as they hid to pay £5OO for working
in the paddock (the lease having nearly expired) tlmy concluded to accept an
offer made by Mr John Graham to work the “ Lanarkshire lead ” in his private
property, which the machinery then in their possession was capable of doing.
Mr Arrowsmith’s report, pages 204 and 205'.
K - Young Wahgunyah. The chief peculiarity in this lead was that it com-
menced very near the ranges, in about fourteen or twenty feet sinking, the bed
rock dipping very fast in places—one foot in three. It was a very payable lead.
L—All England was thoroughly worked out from its source, and gave
equal, if not better, returns than any other lead in this place. (See Mr Arrow-
smith’s notes, N, page 203.
M—Glencoe—Remarks about the All England apply to the Glencoe.
Reefs.
N—The Great Eastern reef worked about 400 yards in length, depth from
80 to 140 feet. This is the largest reef in this district, averaging two feet in
width. There has been about £40,000 taken from this reef, which is at the
present time in the possession of Messrs Harris and Hollow.
O —Pipeclay reef has been good, and worked a distance of 500 yards ;
depth, 60 to 120 feet; average width, 9 inches ; return, 2oz. to lOoz. to the
ton
P—Baby reef, situated on Mr William Burrowes’ private property. The
reef has been worked about 150 yards in length; depth, 140 feet; width, 20
inches ; with an average yield of loz. sdwt. to che ton.


Names.
Length
Worked.
Length of
Suppos.d
Course.
No. of ounces from
each lead.
Re-
marks
Leads.
Miles
Yds.
Miles Yds.
Perseverance
1
40
2
12,000
A
Glamorgansh ire
70
2
300
B
Clare
40
1
1700
C
Hibernian
2
40
35,000
D
Newcastle
1
40
11,000
E
Garibaldi
1060
1060
1800
F
Clydesdale
1
60
26,000
G
Robert Burns
2
60
22,000
H
Lanarkshire
1
24
14,000
I
Wahgunyah
2
40
37,000
J
Young Wahgunyah
2
70
2500
K
All England
2
70
40,000
L
Glencoe ...
1040
1040
10,000
M
Quartz Reefs.
Great Eastern
400
10,000
N
Pipeclay
500
6000
O
Baby Reef
150
1000
P
Garibaldi
200
600
Q
Campbell’s
150
1600
R
Cooper’s
3001
3000
8
Q —Gatibaldi reef. Length worked, 200 yards; depth, 40 feet; average
width, 15 inches ; yield, loz to 4oz. per ton.
R—Campbell's reef worked 150 yards ; depth, 50 feet to 100 feet. This has
been one of our best reefs, returning from 2oz. to 16oz. to the ton. Messrs Lord
and Rue are working on ihe north end of this reef; last crushing giving 7oz. to
the ton. They have at the present time 25 tons of stone at the surface, from
which they expect to get 120 oz of gold.
S—Cooper’s reef has been good, having returned as much as 50oz. to the ton;
width, 3 or 4 inches. The claim is now occupied by Messrs Hooley and Waldron.
At the north end it is returning large yields of gold. Returns show 4oz. 3dwt.
to the ton.
In the Surprise alluvial claim there was a reef discovered 300 feet from the
surface, well defined, two feet wide, and returned Joz to 3oz. of gold to the ton
of quartz. This, in our opinion, proves that our reefs contain gold at deeper
levels than have been sunk on or worked. As the other reefs mentioned have
all been worked from the hill surface, the greatest depth reached by them would
be little, if any, below the surface of the “Surprise ” claim.


In conclusion, we have only stated about the different leads and quartz reefs
that have come under our own knowledge There were large quantities of gold
taken from the various and different leads by the Chinese, they having paid very
large sums of money to the European miners for these supposed worked-out
claims, which were worked by them successfully for years.
All the leads and quartz reefs mentioned are trending tu what is called the
Murray lead, and which (if the Government will assist us in finding) we have no
hesitation in saying will be the richest lead that was ever worked in the colony.
Thomas H. Harris.
R. R. Briggs.
Having made use of the foregoing report, it will not be out of place to follow
it with a short history of Mr Harris’ famous
GREAT EASTERN REEF.
The Great Eastern Reef was discovered some 32 years ago by Messrs Burns
and Hainsley very shortly after the Rutherglen gold-field was opened up. It is
situated in the parish of Carlyle, about two miles from Rutherglen. It is the
largest and best defined gold-bearing reef yet discovered in the district. It was
found outcropping on the top of a small hill, and was traced from this outcrop
for a distance of 75 yards before payable gold was found. At this point payable
go d made on the hanging wall side of the reef, which was two feet wdde, and
£12,000 worth of gold was taken out by Burns and Hainsley before they ceased
operations. This shoot of gold proved to be 250 feet long, and it continued
downwards to a depth of 90 to 115 feA, at which point the reef changed its
underlay gradually from one foot in six to one foot in two. Here the track is
still well-defimd, but it is mostly filled with slate, only a very thin layer of quartz
remaining on the hanging wall by way of an indicator of what might be again
found at depth for those who are prepared to seek. From the point where Burns
and Hainsley’s shoot of gold terminated, the reef was traced by many parties
for a distance of some 200 yards with varying success. The reef was always gold-
bearing, sometimes payable, sometimes not. It varied in size from 10 inches
wide to 2| feet. Some 10 years after the reef was discovered, the northern end
was taken up by Harris and Hollow, and they set to work to vigorously prospect
the ground. They sank a series of shafts along its course, always finding the
hanging wall side of the reef gold-bearing, and after tracing it along for a dis-
tance of 100 feet they were rewarded by coming on another shoot of gold which
totally eclipsed Burns and Hainsley’s shoot. They won something over 3,000
tons of quartz in the space of three years, which yielded the magnificent return of
9,0000z5. of gold, which produced £38,000 sterling. The reef averaged from two
feet to 12 f et in width, but true to its character ths underlay changed here
also, and the quartz pinched at 120 feet, and as the reef got smaller its gold-
bearing qualities deteriorated. This shoot of gold was 400 feet in length, and
terminated at the point where the Rose of Victoria lead crosses the line of reef.
In addition to the known quantities of quartz crushed from this reef, there have
been many smaller parcels crushed by other parties, of which an accurate state


ment is not available, but the writer would not be in error in stating these parcels
as returning at least £I,OOO sterling. Quite recently Harris and Hollow’s tail-
ings were cyanided, and returned £2,500 of smelted gold. After these shoots
of gold were worked, the ground was taken over by a company which put a plant
on it and sunk a shaft to a depth of 290 feet. The reef passed through the shaft
at 200 feet deep, and was Here found to be two feet wide, and the company took
out several crushings, which went an ounce to the ton. The reef, however, was
mostly pour at the point where it was sunk on, and after the usual vicissitudes
the company was wound up without doing anything to test this magnificent gold-
bearer at depth. In the bottom of the deep shaft, however, they found a leader
four inches wide, which gave excellent dish prospects, and which showed gold
fr< ely in a nicely laminated well mineralised stone. Strange to say the company
never prospected this development at all. The Great Eastern reef has always
been consideied by experts to he a true fissure lode. It is set in sandstone
country, and has a good backing of slate on the foot wall side. Below the line
of decomposition the country is hard blue sandstone, which itself contains iron
and arsenic d pyrites. Nothing in the nature of a lava, however, as far as the
writer has been able to ascertain, has ever been found either following in the
vicinity of or accompanying this lode. The whole of the ground which confined
these two magnificent shoots of gold is vacant, and is still awaiting the enter-
prise and capital necessary to disclose its richer treasures at depth. Quite
recently the ground to the north has been pegged out by one of our townsmen,
who is endeavoring to pick up the reef beyond the alluvial ground which has for
the time being obscured its course.
THE REVIVAL IN ALLUVIAL MINING.
The next chapter in the mining industry of the district is that
which led up to the development of the deep leads by the present com-
panies. The second revival in mining was owing to the discovery of
the famous Northern Lead, and how this lead was re-discovered cannot
be better told than in the words of one of the. prospectors (Mr J. McKay).
When interviewed on the subject in 1898, Mr McKay said—
“ln January, 1886, when we starte 1 the Great Northern (this is
the mine which is affectionately styled the ‘ Little Northern’ in the
Rutherglen-Chiltern district.—Editor), there was no mine working in the
entire district except the Chiltern Valley. My mates in the undertaking
were John Hicks, jun., R. Hicks, D. Oats, R. Rowe, S. Brierley, H.
McKay and G. Webb.
“ Some years previously a party of Germans had sunk a shaft in
the ground, and left it, baffled by the inflow of water, at a depth of
216 feet. This was where we began. We raised our first capital by
a call of £2 per man. As there were eight of us, that made £l6.
Well, we put up a whim, cleaned out the old shaft, did six feet more
sinking, and struck payable gold.
“ Then we opened out ; and in three menths from the time of


starting each man in the party received a dividend of £6B. But by
this time the water was becoming too strong for the whim, and machinery
had to be obtained. Then profitable work was resumed for about four
years, and after that a Ballarat company purchased the claim for
£14,000 and worked it out. During the last year each man of the
eight original partners received a dividend of £IOOO. This was the
commencement of the Great Northern lead.”
It was only to be expected that the splendid yields that were being
obtained by Messrs McKay and party would attract the attention of
other mining men, and it was not long before the ground to the north
of the co-operative party was pegged out by Messrs John Cock, T. Peel,
P. Weedon, J. Hicks, sen., James Corry and James Wilson, residents of
Chiltern and Cornishtown The ground obtained by this party was placed in
the hands of the late John A. Wallace, and the Great Northern Extended mine
(which proved the best alluvial up to the present time in the Rutherglen
group) was floated. Boring operations were carrh d out, the trend of the lead
located, a shaft site selected, and operations were commenced during September
1887. The first gold was won during October 1888, and for a number of years
it was one of the principal alluvial mines in Victoria. The output of gold from
this mine was 107,227 ozs., and the dividends declared £190,500 on a capital of
£20,000. The Little Northern, as it was generally known, after being pur-
chased by the Ballarat Company continued to yield well, and from 1886 to 1894
no less than 30,268 ozs. of gold were won and £49,096 paid in dividends.
The years 1888, 1889, 1890, and up to 1895, saw many mining leases
pegged out in this district; in fact lease pegs could be seen in every direction.
Shortly after gold was struck in the Great Northern Extended, the Prentice
Freehold was pegged out by the late James Prentice. This was followed by the
pegging out and commencing of the Rutherglen Company (otherwise known as
the Lankey’s) by Messrs Longbottom, Thurling, Butters and others. The
North Prentice lease was one of the next, then followed the Hunter’s, the
Glenfern, Great Northern Extended Consols, and the North Prentice Extended.
In fact nearly the whole of the Parishes of Gooramadda and Carlyle were under
lease, the pegs extending out to Milthorpe’s property in a north-easterly direc-
tion, and Lake Moodemere in a north-westerly direction. Many of the ventures
never went beyond the securing of the lease.
The Prentice Freehold, with the two Northerns, were the mines that gave
Rutherglen its second mining fillip. The Freehold, which was commenced
during 1889, was worked with vigor. It was first managed by the late Wm.
M anners, but before it finally closed down in 1898 there were several changes
in the management. During its life history 59,254 ozs. of gold was obtained,
and £68,950 paid in dividends. The capital of the company was £30,000 in
30,000 shares of £1 each, with 8000 paid up. It is not to be wondered at that
these three mines did so much towards the development of the district when the
following records are set forth :


Name.
No. of ozs.
Dividends.
Great Northern Extended
107,227
£190,500
Prentice Freehold
59,254
68,950
Great Northern
30,268
49,096
These three mines may bo classed as our second pioneers, and it is
interesting to note that the famous Northern Lead, during its course to the
Freehold workings, picked up several tributary leads. The original shaft was on
one of three leads going out. like the prongs of a fork, which came together just
ahead of the second shaft. The lead, before it took its turn westward, was met
by the Mona, and further on by the Western Lead. The rich tributary on
which Hicks and Party are now working also joins the Northern Lead in the
old Freehold workings. During the working of the Great Northern several
o O c*
excellent quartz specimens were found, and although repeated endeavors were
made to pick up the reef from whLh they came the prospectors were unsuccessful.
The Northern Load and its tributaries took their source from a series of small
ranges containing silurian rocks, with numbers of quartz reefs running through
them with a north-westerly strike. The principal of these were the Maiden
reef, situated near Cornishtown, and the reef at the head of the Rose and
Thistle Lead.
During mining operations at the Freehold the cap of a reef was passed over
in working the alluvial, from which several nice specimens were obtained.
W hen the company was about to close down, several local tradesmen ■ bought
that Ihe reef was worthy of a test, and a local syndicate was formed. The
capital of the company was £2250, in £lO shares. A portion of the Freehold
plant and lease was purchased for something over £I6OO, which left a few
pounds over 600 for prospecting. The reef was found to be over 2800 feet from
the shaft. Operations were started from the lower level, and a crosscut put in
cut a body of quartz 17 feet through, which, however, was not gold-bearing.
This was driven on north and south, and after a few feet had been driven north
a vein of gold-bearing quartz was struck, but it did not continue. The syndicate
endeavored to sink a winze on the vein of gold-bearing quartz, but were beaten
by the water. The body of quartz was driven on for some distance until it
eventually pinched out. Not satisfied with results a drive was started further
north in the lower level of old workings to go east, and after a few feet had been
driven the track of the quartz was again picked up, and found to contain a little
gold, but very narrow. There were about 50 tons of stone on the surface, and a
trial crushing of 20 tons s nt to Chiltern returned between 4 and 5 dwts. to the
ton. There were some who were not satisfied with this return, and a later
crushing of 12 tons of the stone at grass only gave 4 dwts. of gold. The
syndicate was under heavy expense, and operations accordingly ceased without
the reef being thoroughly tested.
During operations at the foregoing mines, the North Prentice, Southern No. 1,
Prentice United, Wahgunyah, North Prentice Extended, and Kelly’s Freehold


Name. Total Gold Yield.
Dividend.
Southern No. 1
53,173
£34,000
Great Southern
32,653
2,700
Great Southern Cons.
25,875
60,000
Prentice & Southern
603
To these may be added-
North Prentice
18,565
3,000
Prentice United
10,206
Southern & C.Y. United
8,195
Kelly’s Freehold
2,012
The following will show the amount of gold
won from the Rutherglen
Chiltern district during the various years :—
Year.
Ozs.
1888 ...
• » • ||, •■ •
14,115
1890 ...
* ••• • ••
21,509
1894 ...
••• ... ,,,
46,330
1895 ...
• •• ...
41,930
1897 ...
,,, ###
61,480
1902 ...
• •• •••
35,551
1903 ...
...
45,443
The increase of £9,892 ozs. for the year 1903 over the previous year is an
were all working and producing gold. The Great Southern, Great Northern
Extended Consols, Southern Consols, Chiltern Valley United, and others were
carrying on development works.
The Great Southern, from the onset, was looked to as the mine that would be
to Rutherglen what the Chiltern Valley has been to Chiltern. The mine had a
great many ups and downs, but mostly “ downs,” owing to the large volume of
water that was continually met with, and this necessitated years of pumping.
It is gratifying to note, however, that the mine, under the management of Mr
Thomas, is now having its “ ups,” the weekly yields being handsome and the
shareholders are receiving dividends. The Consols has also had an uphill fight,
but its prospects never looked better than at present, and it is more than
probable that before long it will see the dividend list again. The Southern No.
1, worked on the continuation of the Rutherglen leads, has been a good mine,
the shareholders having received £34,000, with the prospects of a few more.
The Prentice and Southern (or otherwise the big mine) is being opened up well
under Mr Visick’s management, and the yields are gradually increasing. This
tends to show that the mine will, at no distant dat*% be able to pay its way, and
after this is achieved shareholders may look forward for dividends. The water
trouble has been a great drawback to the development of the mine.
To show the productiveness of the mines, we quote the following from the
Mines Department quarterly returns, dated March 1904 :


indication that our alluvial mines are now in a spLndid belt of wash, and with
the drainage of the main Southern Lead, which has taken years to accomplish,
there are very encouraging prospects ahead. From those results residents may
rest assured that there are yet many years of profitable work in this great lead,
and its resourcefulness will play a large and important part in the advancement
of the town.
It is also very encouraging when the number of men, about 1250, now
employed in the district mines is compared with the number engaged in mining
at the time the old Great Northern Lead was rofound.
Although our present and future prospects are exceptionally good
from an alluvial point of view, they are insufficient to build the town
up solidly. It has been shown that the Great Northern Extended and
Freehold were worked out in about 10 years, and although the present
gold-producing mines have very large areas of ground, it must be borne
in mind that each year the ground is got over more quickly. New
inventions and appliances have come into use, and if the present high
pressure of work is kept up for the next 15 or 20 years, there will not
be much of the alluvial left. With this knowledge ahead of us, is it
not time that the business people and others who have acquired property
and who have an interest in seeing the town prosper, began to turn
their attention more seriously to quartz raining.
The find of Messrs Walker Bros., only a few weeks bask, should be
sufficient food for reflection, and each business man should ask himself
the question—“ What would our district be like if the alluvial was
backed up with quartz 1” The present time appears very opportune for an
endeavor to be made to prove our quartz, and when the residents are calhd
upon to assist in the floating of one or two of the known reefs into com-
panies, wo trust that they will realise the importance and subscribe to the
share list liberally.
There has already been enough said about the alluvial, so we will now
deal with another of our quartz reefs, giving extracts from experts
reports thereon.
The Garibaldi Mine.
The first portion of the history of this mine cannot be better dealt with than
byre-publishing the reports that were issued with the prospectus of the old
company in 1892. The reports are from John T. McKenna, mining engineer;
William Yawdrey, mining manager, who in after years met his death in Western
Australia; Mr Norman Taylor, Government geological surveyor; and a certifi-
cate of Mr W. 0. Bayliss’ in reference to the amount of gold won prior to June,
1892 :
John T. McKenna’s Report.
G. Hood, Esq., Rutherglen.—Sir,—ln accordance with your instructions I have
examined the ground held by Brown and Rue, and the underground


workings done by them in it, and beg to report as follows :—Brown and
Rue’s claim is situated at Rutherglen, about one mile from the railway'
station. Its extent is about 32 acres of Crown lands held under a mining
lease ; also a registered road to machinery site and permanent water. These
are three lines of reef in the claim. The Garibaldi, or main line, runs
through the centre of it; the Pipelay reef through a portion of the west side
of it; and the Perseverance reef on the eastern side. On the Pipeclay and
Perseverance, some work has been done from time to time by small parties
of men, and in a very primitive fashion. Good returns are, however, stated
to have been got from them—up fo 18oz. per ton from the Pipeclay, and
Boz. per ton from the Perseverance reef. The greatest depth to which either
has been worked was 70 feet. Within the claim on the Garibaldi line, and
north of present workings, a total of 500 oz. are said to have been got by
various parties close to the surface in the early days. From the present
workings Brown and Rue (a party of two working) have got in the last
eight years over 500 oz. of gold. They state their average yields have been
from joz. to loz. per ton. The yield from their last crushing of 75 tons was
Ifidwts. per ton. The reef or lode formation in tlie claim is, I believe, one
peculiar to this district, and may bo described as rubbley, bunchey, and
blockey, with numerous spurs or feeders coming in from either or both walls,
and making occasional breaks, faults, and fresh makes. The quartz is freely
interspersed with decomposed pyrites with the go'd showing in the solid
stone, in the pyrites, in the rubble, and in the casing of both walls. The
average thickness of the quartz at the upper level is from 2ft. to 2ft. bin.,
in the winze, depth 177 ft, it is 2ft. Gin. to 3ft. thick. The proprietors state
that their last crushing from this place was taken out over ift. thick. I saw
gold in the stone at both ends of the winze, and washed fine gold out of
the rubble and the casing from the same place. The country rock so far
as seen is yellow-brown slate, and only moderately hard—ground that can
be worked with or without blasting. The present shaft is small and in a
bad condition, the reef having been blocked out about it. For the future
and proper working of the mine, a new shaft is necessary. M y sketch plan
annexed shows the lease and adjoining claims, the lines of reefs and position
of old workings, Brown and Rue’s underground workings, and the battery
site and dams. The surface at the shaft will, I think, be about 70 or 80
feet above the dams, leaving plenty of room for a proper battery site. The
water in the dams is permanent, and abundant for all purposes. The Pipe-
clay reef—like the Garibaldi—has an easterly underlay, while the Persever-
ance reef has a westerly underlay, so that at a little depth these reefs will
be within the boundaries of the claim through its whole length. I consider
Brown and Rue’s claim a very good thing and worth investing in.— John T.
McKenna, Mining Engineer.
Rutherglen, June 13th, 1892.


William Vawdrev’s Report.
To G. Hood, Esq.— Dear Sir, —As requested by you, I have to-day inspected
Messrs Brown and Rue’s mine, situated at Rutherglen, and known by the
name of the Garibaldi Gold Mining Company. I have to inform you the
mine is situated about half-a-mile north of the township of Rutherglen on
the Garibaldi reef. The lease contains 31 acres 2 roods 16 perches, and
includes allotments 6,7, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, and part of 18 in Section
XLI, and covers the line of reef a distance of 29 chains. For the last 25
years mining on the quartz reefs and leaders in the vicinity of this mine
have been carried on successfully, but near the surface there is no defined
lode but a series of quartz leaders, most of them containing gold in paying
quantities, Messrs Brown and Rue having acquired a lease embracing the
crown of the hill, and which includes all the most important leaders, have
worked them with varying success until a depth of 175 feet has been
obtained, and has proved the majority of the veins are branches of the
Garibaldi lode, which at the present depth have formed themselves into a
compact lode running north west and south east, or through their lease from
one end to the other. Two shafts have been sunk on the line of the reef,
one to the depth of 100 feet, and the other to a depth of 120 feet, but
beneath the deepest shaft a winze has been continued 55 feet deeper, where
there is now a compact lode of solid quartz fully 3 feet thick, and recently
72 tons of quartz have been crushed therefrom, which yielded 560 z. 7dwt.
smelted gold, which realised £4 2s. per oz., and equal to 15i dwts. per
ton. The mine is perfectly free of water, air good, and the ground easy to
work. Mining on the Garibaldi lode has been extended fully three-quarters
of a mile in length, and crushings have been obtained up to 12oz. per ton,
and some of the best alluvial leads in the district have taken their course
therefrom, including the Rose of Sharon and Little Wahgunyah leads. I
consider the mine is looking better at the present time than at any previous
period, as the leaders at the depth obtained are junctioning into the main
lode, and although the main lode has not good defined walls at the present
depth, I am of opinion good walls will accompany the lode when the ground
becomes more solid. To work the ground more efficiently it is necessary to
sink a new shaft. This should be put down on the eastern side of the lode,
and carried down at least 250 feet perpendicular, which would give 75 feet
of backs to work of solid ground, and I believe that depth will be attained
before any water will have to be contended with, and I see no reason to
believe but that a continuation of the Garibaldi lode will be met with for a
considerable distance from the shaft, and if it continues so good as at the
bottom of the winze, it will be a profitable investment. There is a small
crushing plant about a mile from the mine, where trial crushings may be
had at a reasonable price. When the mine is fully opened it will be much
better policy to erect a new crushing plant on or close to the mine. In con-
clusion, I beg to state the prospects of the mine are very encouraging indeed,
and I am of the opinion that if a new shaft is put down as I recommended,


the mine will soon become payable.— l am, Sir, ycurs respectfully, William
Yawdeey, Mining Manager the Rutherglen Gold Mining Co.
Rutherglen, June 13th, 1892.
Norman Taylor’s Reports.
Godfrey C. Hood, Esq., Rutherglen.—Sir,— At. your request I have made an
examination of the Garibildi reef, in Mining Lease No. 2917, held by Messrs
Brown and Rue, and situate in the Parish of Carlyle, County of Bogong,
and about a mile to the north of this township. The reef has been followed
down from the old workings to a depth of 177 feet. In the upper levels it
was rather broken and mullocky, being a mere network of quartz veins ; but
at the depth now reached, it assumes a more settled appearance, and is about
3 feet thick and widening apparently under foot, as well as going down
more vertically. It cuts diagonally across the bedding planes of the country,
which latter appear to dip to E 35 degrees N, at an angle of 45 degrees.
This is considered a good characteristic as the reef is continually passing
through different beds, and not confined to one, which might or might not
be auriferous. The reef at 177 feet stiikes N3O degrees W, end dips at an
angle of 70 degrees to E 30 degrees N with leaders coming in on the hanging
wall. At 100 feet the strike is N2O degrees W ; and at 60 feet it turns for
a short distance to S.E. and N.W., and again resumes its former course.
From this latter level it has been worked to the surface, yielding generally
loz. per ton, and often 2oz. At 40 feet it gave l|oz. per ton. The country
consists of soft satiny slates on the east, and soft sandstone on the west. It
is much cut up by joints in every direction, which have the appearance of
slides and faults. These will not aflect the reef itself. Numerous veins
have been worked from the surface to the east and west of this reef with
satisfactory results, till the working became too expensive for the unaided
miner. I have been informed that Metsrs Brown and Rue have, for a con-
siderable time, been taking about £6 per week per man out of this claim,
and there can be little doubt but that the Garibaldi reef will—with better
crushing power and proper management—realise the high expectations of it,
which are pretty general in the district. A small handful of quartz, roughly
crushed in a mortar and washed, gave, I should say, about a 2oz. to the ton
prospect. I have the honor to be, Sir, your obedient servant, Norman
Taylor, Geological Surveyor.
Rutherglen, June 13th, 1892.
G. C. HoOd, Esq., Rutherglen.—Dear Sir, — I to-day paid another visit to the
Garibaldi reef to set at rest a doubt I had about the underlie of the country.
I have now come to the' conclusion that the reef is situated on the eastern
side of an anticline in the strata, and that it must be the eastern leg of a
saddle reef, the western leg being further over to the west, and the dip or
underlie of the country at the railway cutting being to the west. On
examining the lowest level carefully, I saw evidences of a wall—a foot-wall—■
which includes a quantity of slates, which, under close inspection, disclose


a remarkable quantity of very fine gold. This gold could only be obtained
by some of the wet processes—either the McArthur Forrest or the Chlorina-
tion—but that may be left to further enquiry, and there is no doubt but the
lessees have lost a lot with their rough appliances. —Yours very truly,
Norm an Taylor.
Rutherglen, 14th June, 1892.
Previous to the operations of the Garibaldi Company there Was a con-
siderable amount of work done by Messrs McQueen and Kuffle and Brown and
Hue. The best way to give an idea of their work is to show the amount of gold
that these parties won from the mine, and that is obtainable from the records
kept by the Bank of Victoria. In 1892, when the Garibaldi mine was floated,
Mr W. C. Bayliss, manager of the Kuthergleu branch of the Bank of Victoria,
compiled the following report;
W C. Bayliss’ Report.
G. C. Hood, Es<j., Rutherglen.—Sir,—ln answer to your request, I beg to
inform you l hat this bank has at different times during the last five years,
purchased from Messrs Brown and Rue, gold won by them from their
Garibaldi claim to the amount of 47-loz. Before Messrs Brown and Rue’s
operations, the bank purchased from Messrs McQueen and Keuffi 1, who
were then working the ground, 130 oz. The gold is of excellent quality,
averaging £4 2s per oz.—Yours truly, W. C. Bayliss, Manager Bank of
Victoria Limited, Rutherglen.
Rutherglen, 17th June, 1892.
With the information that had be en gathered, it was considered advisable
to issue a prospectus and place the mine on the market. The prospectus was for
the formation of a company of 30,000 shares, at 10s. each, payable (id. per share
on application, and 6d. per share on allotment, with monthly calls. The vendors
at that time received £SOO in cash and 10,000 paid-up shares for their interest.
The provisional directors were Mr R. Rowe (directin' of the Great Northern
G.M. Co.), Mr S. R. Ceilings, Mr G. Hood, Mr John Wilson (director Midas
Consols G.M. Co.), and Mr 1). R. McGregor, J.P., Melbourne. The manager
was Mr Wakefield, 14 Temple Court, Melbourne. The information that was
available in reference to the mine evidently met with the approval of the public,
and the float was a success. If the information available in 1892 was suflicieut
to warrant the flotation of the mine, it should not be difficult at the present
time with the additional information and the main shaft sunk to a depth of,
at least 380 ft. to successfully float another company.
In reference to the old company, the Melbourne management did not
prove a success, and the office of the company was removed from Melbourne to
Rutherglen, and Mr H. Derrick appointed manager.
T 1 io public do not want to know the doings of the directors ; but what
work was done and the yields obtainable. This we intend to supply from the
books of the old company, the file copies of the Sun, and the various mine


managers’ reports ; but regret to state that one of the most interesting half-
yearly reports is missing. The others wi,ll give a fairly accurate knowledge of
the mine, and will show if it warrants a further trial or not.
The first half-yea rly meeting of the company was held on 24th February,
1893, and the following extracts are from Mr Brown’s (mine manager) report:—
“ In accordance with your instructions, I, on August 29th, 1892, took charge
of your mine, and continued the sinking of the winze, which, at the time
the mine was taken over by the company, was down 185 ft. Sinking was
continued to 194 ft,, when water was struck. I then proceeded to take
out stone by driving south 40ft., at the same time taking stone out of the
backs. Seventy two tons of stone were raised and crushed for 570 z.
Bdwt. 12grs., or an average of 16dwt. per ton.
“ The reef improved in character and size as sinking was continued, and at
190 ft.—water level—the reef underfoot averages 2ft, 6in., carrying coarse
gold, and would give from l|oz. to 2oz. to the ton.
“ After first crushing the south drive was continued and backs taken out.
After a few feet a sandstone bar was met with, extending 15ft., causing
the yield of gold to be much poorer. I drove north 10ft. Here the reef
intermixed with slate, carrying gold, and averages 4ft. in width ; it is, how-
ever, of poor quality, giving an average of Bdwt. During half year a total
of 134 tons were crushed, giving 77|0z., or an average of ll|dwt.
“ Driving south was continued 12ft., when a slide or fault extending Bft. was
met. The reef, however, is now again in face showing rich gold.
■“ The main shaft—loft. Gin. by 4ft. in the clear, and divided into three com-
partments—has been sunk and timbered 191 ft. 4in.”— Sun, March 3, 1893.
Between the first and second half-yearly meetings a change in the mine
manager was made by the appointment of Mr Griffiths, of Reedy Creek, in place
of Mr Brown, who joined the Board of Directors.
The directors’ report for this half states that gold to the value of £1,781
•was won, and that a battery had been purchased and its erection commenced.
From the mine manager’s (H. Griffiths) report, the following are
extracts :
“ North level extended to 64ft. from crosscut, and south to 108 ft., at water
level, thus showing 172 ft. along the reef at a depth of 191 ft.
“ During this period 507 tons were sent to the battery, yielding 4340z5. of
gold. In addition I have between 200 and 300 tons of seconds at grass.
“ Your x’eef still continues to show good gold, which is now in both ends.”—
Sun, Sept. 29, 1893.
At this period the company was in a splendid financial position, having
£612 17s. lOd. balance at the bank, and £433 in deposit receipts. The plant
was purchased at a cost of £703.
The directors did not appear to be pulling with the managers, for we find


another change before the third half-yearly meeting was held, Mr Griffiths
making room for Mr Wattis, from the Band and Albion mine, Ballarat.
The third half-yearly meeting was held on 30th March, 1894, and the
following extracts are from the directors’ reports :
“ Erection of plant was completed in January, and the battery started. Owing
to want of water little crushing was done. With deepening of the main
shaft this difficulty should disappear.
“ Good stone is now being taken out from bottom level at south end. This
stone comes from below the water level; and it should also be mentioned
that gold-bearing stone was met with in sinking the shaft. From result of
small crushings taken from 600 to 700 tons of seconds at grass this
should prove a source of profit.
“Main shaft is down 70ft. below water level, a contract having been let for
100 ft., which will make total depth 219 ft.
“March 24th, 1894.—Since preparing report 70 tons were yesterday cleaned
up for a yield of 770 z. sdwt. Stone has been cut at west end of the main
shaft at 76ft. below plat showing gold.”— Sun, April 3, 1894.
From Mr E. Wattis’ (mine manager) report the following information is
gleaned :—■
“ North drive extended 30ft. passing through several leaders showing gold in
stone; total drive, 127 ft.
“ On Nov. 17, 1893, a crushing of 128 loads taken from stopes over north
drive returned 930 z. smelted gold ; on Dec. loth, 1893, 138 loads gave
650 z. of gold.
“ The south drive was in 105 ft. from the crosscut, with a reef in the face about
3ft. wide. Have extended this level 48ft.; total 153 ft., the lode keeping
much the same in appearance the whole length. Gold has been seen in
various places of a payable character.
“On 18th January, 1894, company’s battery started on crushing seconds, and
after 10 days water ran out. One hundred tons gave 24|oz. On Feb.
16th 63 tons gave 12oz. lOdwt. These x’eturns were considered fairly
satisfactory, owing to the new copper plates absorbing a large percentage
of amalgam.”— Sun, April 3, 1894.
In answer to a question, Mr Wattis stated that the reef in the shaft was
at least 18in. thick, and from all appearances was not their old reef.
By their next half-yearly meeting another change of management took
place, Mr Wattis—through ill-health—resigning, and Mr Brown was re-ap-
pointed.
From the directors’ report presented to the shareholders at a meeting held
Sept. 28, 1894, as follows :
“Sinking main shaft to 300 ft. completed, and crosscut commenced at this


£
s
d
Prior to February 28, 1893
321
3
3
August 31, 1893 ...
... 1,781
8
2
February 28, 1894
...
... 1,208
18
0
August 31, 1894 ...
. .
... 1,599
15
11
>>
February 28, 1895
... 1,271
lo
10
)>
March 23, 1895 ...
39
O
0
£6,221
18
2
level, but owing to small quantity of stone, low yields, insufficient supply of
water, and lack of funds, was abandoned. Operations carried on have, how-
ever, proved the continuance of the gold-bearing stone below water level,the
reef carrying fair gold, having been followed down to a depth of 24Cft.
“ Mine manager’s report for this half only shows 180 tons having been crushed
for 81|oz. of gold. There is now in the backs a large body of stone showing
gold throughout, and I expect good returns from this.”— Sun, October
2nd, 1894.
Probably owing to the change of management there is an omission in the
amount crushed, as the company’s bolance-sheet in the ledger shows that gold to
the value of i 11,599 15s. lid. was sold to the Bank of Viccoria.
From this period the company appears to have got into financial difficulty
owing to being unable to get calls in. The overdraft at die bank reached
and an extraordinary meeting was held in December, 1894, and it was decided
to let the mine on tribute. One of the great troubles of the company was the
shortage of water for crushing purposes.
At the half-yearly meeting held on April sth, 1895, the balance-sheet
disclosed that gold to the value of £1,271 It's. l(Jd. had been sold to the bank,
but the mine manager’s report is missing.
Matters did not improve, and a few months afterwards, owing to inability
to get calls in, the mine shut down and the plant was sold to R. A. Stanley.
Thanks to Mr Gollings die ledger of the company was preserved, and
from it the actual value of the gold won during the company’s operations are
available. The following are the figures :
This amount at £4 per oz. would represent 1,5550 z. odd. Previous yield of
McQueen and Kuffell, 1300 z., and Brown and Rue, 4740 z., making a total won
from the mine of 2,1590 z.
When the mine was sold it was on the conditions that it should be
worked. The purchasers complied with the conditions by forming a syndicate
which started to sink the shaft to a greater depth. Shaft sinking was continued
for a few months, and a depth of from 380 to 4Ooft, reached, with gold-bearing
stone in the bottom. The syndicate finding that its funds were running short,
went up the shaft and opened out a plat, but before anything practical was done
work was suspended, and the plant, after a few months, sold and removed from
the Rutherglen district-one of the worst steps that ever took place for Rutherglen.


Mr Joseph J. Pascoe, of Violet Town, was the last to work in the shaft,
and the following is a copy of a letter received by Mr Rees from him :
“ Dear Sib, — I was the last to work in Garibaldi shaft, I picked up
several good specimens. . The reef to all appearance is there, and not where they
cut the bottom chamber. The shaft wants to be sunk another 100 or 200 feet.
Then you could open out and prove surrounding country. I believe Campbell’s
reef could be worked and proved from the bottom of the shaft, and it is a good
one.
THE PIPECLAY.
This line of reef lies about five chains to the west of the Garabaldi, and
comprises four distinct runs of gold-bearing stone, the last line, further west,
having only recently been discovered by Messrs Cooper and Son, and a crushing
gave the handsome return of 230 z. 13dwt. of gold from nine tons. The line of
reef was first worked in the sixties, and so close were the workings that many
strangers take the old workings for those of alluvial mining. Each of the three
lines, about apart, and all running about 20deg. west of north, were worked
with profit from the surface to 100 feet. The width averaged from an inch or two
to two or three feet, and the yields from 15dwts. to lOoz. per ton. As a general
rule, crushings from shoots of gold-bearing stone, with a width of nine inches,
averaged from 2 to 40z., Messrs Cooper and Sons’ last crushing going over 2|oz.
This line of reef, or reefs, is looked upon by many as a splendid site for a deep
shaft, the contention being that the whole of the runs of gold-bearing stone
worked at shallow depths will emerge into one good reef at a depth.
Some 26 years back a local company was formed for the purpose of sinking
a shaft and crosscutting the country. A prospecting shaft was put down—known
to local miners as Thorn’s—to a depth of 110 feet, and a crosscut put in to inter-
cept the eastern run at that depth, the shaft being put down on the middle line.
This venture was brought to a close by the death of Thorn, who was an employee
of the Bank of Victoria and secretary to the company. Thorn visited the
workings, and while ascending the shaft fell out of the bucket. No time was
lost in bringing the unfortunate man to the surface, when it was found life was
extinct. After this occurrence the ground again reverted to co-operative parties,
and for the past 20 years has been held by Messrs J. H. Cooper and Son, who
from time to time have had several good crushings. During 1892-3, when the
Garibaldi mine was giving good yields, the Pipeclay line was floated into a com-
pany of 20,<KK) shares under the name of the North Garibaldi, the promoters of
the company being Messrs J. S. Butters and R. Thurling, of Melbourne. A site
was selected for the shaft on the third, or then western line of reef, and a con-
tract let for the first 100 feet. The shaft was started with a view of the venture
being a permanent one, the size being 10ft. 4in. x 4ft. in the clear, divided into
three compartments and timbered. When the 100 feet was completed, owing to
the financial depression and the great inducements that West Australia was


holding out to speculators, shareholders failed to meet the first call, and the
directors decided to utilise the funds that they had in hand and started a crosscut
at that level to go east, but without success. Shortly after the winding-up
process was carried out without the ground getting a fair trial ; the .only good
that the company done was to leave 100 feet of a permanent shaft sunk for the
advantage of future prospectors. The ground again reverted to Messrs Cooper
and Son, and since then they have had several nice crushings, but like many
other prospectors have not kept a record. In Mr .Brough Smyth’s work on the
goldfields of "Victoria, the following appears in reference to this line of reef:—
“Pipeclay Reef has been good, and worked a distance of 500 yards ; depth, 60 to
120 feet; average width, 0 inches ; return, 2uz. to lOoz. to tlie ton.”
THE COOPER’S LINE.
Some contend that this line is identical with the Pipeclay, and is the
northern end of that reef, while others are of opinion that it is a distinct line and
will pass the Garibaldi main shaft about 200 feet on the east. Here again
records are hard to trace, but what is known of it was compiled by Mr Arrow-
smith when work was being carried on the line of reef, and Mr Arrowsmith’s
comments, which appear in Mr Brough Smyth’s work, arc as follow :—“ Cooper’s
Beef has been good, having returned as much as 50ozs to the ton ; width, 3 or 4
inches. The claim is now occupied- by Messrs Hooly and Waldron. At the
north end it is returning largo yields of gold. Bet urns show 4oz. 3dwt. to the
ton.” North of Cooper’s claim —the owner being a brother to Mr J. H. Cooper—
is what is known as the Woe Speck, which is reported to have been a good mine,
and Messrs Ifoi tune and party are now having work carried out with a view of
picking up the rich shoot of gold worked in this mine 30 years ago. Further to
the cast from the Garibaldi shaft lies the
CAMPBELL’S LINE OF REEF,
from which some excellent yields have been obtained. Messrs Harris and
Briggs’ report states : —“ Campbell’s Reef worked 150 yards ; depth, 50 feet to
100 feet. This has been one of our best reefs, returning from 2oz. to 16oz, to the
ton. Messrs Lord and Rue are working on the north end of this reef; last
crushing giving 7oz. to the ton. They have at present 25 tons of stone at the
surface, from which they expect to get 120 oz. of gold. On this line of reef there
was a company formed by a Mr Adcock, for the purpose of getting to a depth,
hut without result. The Adcock boom fell to pieces, and little or no work was
done below 100 feet ; even the shaft which was sunk by the company lias been
filled up. Although the traces of most of the workings have been obliterated,
the following reports obtained from local residents still remain in existence :
Mu Rue’s Repout.
1 was working with Mr Edward Lord on Campbell’s reef in 1879. We worked
to a depth of 70 to 80 feet; our first crushing was 330 z. from 14 tons, our
next was lOloz. lldwt. from 24 tons, next 630 z. from 7 tons, and last, 3oz.


lldwt. from 1 ton. These crushings were from the north end of Campbells
reef. The reef where we worked averaged one foot thick. After I left this
ground it was worked by Mr Edward Lord and Mr Harry Cooper. —James
Rue.
Rutherglen, 11th September, 1893.
Mr Harry Cooper’s Report.
I was working on Campbell’s reef about the year 1880; I followed Messrs Lord
and Rue, who were then before me, and I joined Mr Lord. I worked on
the reef about 12 or 15 months, during which time we got about 200 oz. of
gold, averaging about 2oz. to the ton. The stone was taken out from the
surface down to 100 ft. They were well defined walls.-
J. H. COOPER.
Rutherglen, 12th September, 1893.
Mr Archibald Mclntyre’s Report.
I have known Campbell’s reef for the last 25 years. Twenty-five years ago
Campbell, Sterry, and F. Schumar were working it, and were there for
about five years ; one of their crushings gave £290 per man, and they had
several other good crushings. They got their best gold from 60 to 90 feet.
During this time, lower down the reef towards the south, Mclntyre and
Party took out 11 lons from reef 3ft. thick, which went 13dwt. to the ton.
After them, Edwards, Goldsworthy, and Cornelius got £753 10s. from 24
tons of stone, at a depth of about 60ft. Reef about one foot wide.
Mclntyre Brothers, about the years 1881 and 1882, worked on the lease
at north end from 7ft. to 145 ft. in depth; average, loz. 12dwt. per ton.
Reef averaged 6 inches into permanent walls. Western dip lin6 at
bottom, showing plenty of mineral.-
ARCHIBALD MCINTYRE.
Rutherglen, 12th September, 1893.
Tub Bank op Yictokia (Rutherglen) Report.
The Bank of Victoria, Rutherglen, purchased gold from the undermentioned
parties, at the dates and in the quantities stated:
During four months ending 29th September, 1879—19 loz. from Lord and
Rue
From July, 1880, to March 1881—1650 z. from Lord and Co.
From July 1880, to May, 1881—1220 z. from Mclntyre Brothers.
Quality of gold of a high standard value, assaying up to 82s. 6d. per oz.
W. C. BAYLIS,
Manager.
THE GOLDEN GATE REEF.
It is necessary to again refer to the report of Messrs Harris and Briggs to
give the history of the Golden Gate Reef, in the early days known as the
“Surprise”: —“ In the Surprise alluvial claim there was a reef discovered 300
feet from the surface, well defined, two feet wide, and returned from |oz. to 3oz.
of gold to the ton of quartz. This, in our opinion, proves that our reefs contain


gold at deep3i’ levels than have been sunk on or worked. As the other reefs
mentioned have all been worked from the hill surface, the greatest depth reached
by them would be little, if any, below the surface of the ‘ Surprise’ claim.”
Some nine years back a company was formed in Melbourne, with Mr J
Hass as mine manager, to re-open and work this mine for both quartz and
alluvial. A new shaft was sunk and operations commenced, a crosscut being put
in to intercept the reef, but before the goal was reached the old complaint set
in—want of funds—with the result that the mine was closed down, and nothing
has since been done to develop the reef. This-about exhausts our comments, as
there is little or no information in regard to the workings to the south of the
town. On the west side, however, there is a line of reef,
THE LANARKSHIRE,
that is worthy of a fair trial. On this line there is one of the best formations in
the district. The Messrs Wilson have held the ground for a number of years,
and have had crushings at different times which gave good results.
GOVERNMENT BATTERY.
Since October, 1889, the Government battery has done the crushing in
Rutherglen, and from then up to August 14th (according to Mr E. Mole) 1110
tons of quartz were crushed for a yield of 6280z5. of gold. In the total quantity
crushed there was about 100 tons of mullock, which considerably reduced the
average per ton of stone, one lot of 12 tons from the Prentice Freehold reef only
returning sdwt for the lot. Included in the above are—lß6 tons for 1460z5.
from Rue and party (mostly from the Garibaldi line), and 35 tons for 25oza. from
Cooper and Son, off the Pipeclay. C. Bone also had 20 tons crushed for a return
of 7ozs.
In this series of articles we have endeavored to bring before our readers the
probable quartz resources that are within close proximity to Rutherglen. If the
figures that have been given by us are compared with the weekly yields which
appeared in the Melbourne papers, they will be found to compare favorably,
and if quartz mining has paid in other districts on yields, in many cares not as
good as those that have been obtained in the Rutherglen district, why should not
the residents, the business people in particular, make one determined effort to
prove quartz at a depth. If all were to unite it would only necessitate very
moderate monthly calls, and each person who has taken up a residence within the
two municipalities—Shire and Borough—should make it their business to urge
the development of the quartz. There is every indication that, with proper
prospecting, a permanent line of reef should be discovered and if the residents
only put their shoulders to the wheel, form a good local company, and develop
one of the many lines of reef, they will be doing something for the future stability
of the town, and probably at the same time enrich themselves. Our neighboring
town—Chiltern —for a number of years was going down under the weight of


depression. The alluvial mines were getting further away from them every day,
the trade of the town was gradually drifting, and if something had not been done
to develop the quartz, a still further drift would have taken place. As in
Rutherglen, Chiltern abounds on all sides with lines of reef that were worked
with profit in the early days to water level, and then left. For years the golden
quartz deposits were left untouched, and it was left to a local syndicate—the
Golden Bar—to he the pioneers. This syndicate, which was composed partly of
local and outside shareholders, was commenced in a small , way, with IDs. calls
per month. With this small call, which no business man Would'miss, the syndi-
cate were enabled to develop the Golden Bar, and the outcome is that outside
money is flowing in to develop other lines of reef. What lias taken place in
Chiltern would take place in Rutherglen if only one good reef w-as opened ujp.
We appeal to the residents of the district to make one united effort when thlf
are called on, which will be at no distant date, to give quartz mining their hearty
support, and let Rutherglen in the future he a sister city to Bendigo, noted for
both its gold and.wine.
Thomas Drcneu, Printer, Sun Office, Ruthergleu.
