

thcth rwo
-A — I^7
/ V/
Ir. Justice —'V
*./ UEl.ic.io J& PANS
ho* ' °
Higinbotham
The Orthodox Faith
A REVIEW AND A VINDICATION
THE REV. A. GOSMAN
PRINCIPAL OF THE CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE OF VICTORIA
HUlbournf :
STILLWELL AND CO. PRINTERS, 78 COLLINS STREET EAST.
S. MULLEN, 29 <fe 31 COLLINS STREET EAST.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




(ooa.l a
Mr. Justice
Higinbotham
The Orthodox Faith
A REVIEW AND A VINDICATION
THE REV. A. GOSMAN
PRINCIPAL OF THE CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE OF VICTORIA
Hldbourue :
STILLWELL AND CO. PRINTERS, 78 COLLINS STREET EAST.
S. MULLEN, 29 & 31 COLLINS STREET EAST.




MR. JUSTICE HICINBOTHAM ON THE
ORTHODOX FAITH: A REPLY AND
A VINDICATION.
I am quite prepared to admit that a good deal can be said
against taking any notice of the address of Mr. Justice Higin-
botham at the opening of the new Unitarian Church. The present
is not a controversial age. The vast majority of thinking persons
look with suspicion, and even dislike, on discussions and contro-
versies that have little or no apparent practical bearing. More-
over some of the issues raised by His Honour, have been debated
and thrashed out over and over again, by the apologists of the
Christian faith in answer to their opponents; and it is not possible,
even for the most original mind, to say anything new or fresh on
such themes. But that is not all. The charges brought by Mr.
Justice Higinbotham are so vague, and yet so sweeping in their
character, that they may with perfect safety, be left to answer
themselves. In the opinion of unprejudiced persons, and of all
who possess a calm judgment, such charges must surely sink by
their own weight. The insinuation, for example, that a certain
virtuous man was not perfect; that a few small vices still clung
to him, would carry a presumption in its favour, irrespective of
any evidence that may be adduced in its support; but to charge
him who is well-known for his honesty and his honourable conduct
with immorality and crime, would be likely to do the accuser
more harm than the accused. The orthodox Churches are too
well known to be seriously affected by His Honour’s furious
onslaught, simply for this reason that he hits so wide of the
mark. He plunges about in a very threatening style, dangerous
enough to any one within the swing of his arm, but as no one is
near, his execution does harm to no one. He simply exhausts his
own strength.
On the other hand, there are strong reasons why such charges
should be noticed and answered. Their refutation seems to be
demanded, not only in the interests of public enlightenment, but


out of respect for the reputation and character of him who has
made them. Mr. Justice Higinbotham is a gentleman of influence
and position in this province of the Empire. He was at one time
an active politician, a member of parliament, and a minister of
the Crown, and he now occupies the chief seat on the bench in the
Supreme Court of Justice. He is believed in for his honesty,
respected for his courage, and the integrity and blamelessness of
his private life have never been called in question by the slightest
uplifting of the finger of suspicion. The opinions of such a man
may pass for sound knowledge with those who do not care to
think too deeply for themselves, or to go beyond the doctrines
he promulgates; and such a result, we feel sure, Mr. Justice
Higinbotham himself would be the first to deplore. Hence the
necessity for some vindication of those churches and religious
systems that have come under the sweep of His Honour’s
displeasure.
Then, the orthodox churches themselves might possibly suffer
in the estimation of many persons, were a policy of silence to be
pursued. No one cares to lie under a charge of cowardice, or of
inability to do what he knows and feels to be within his power.
In fact there is an inherent love of fight in the human race, and
when a fair and honourable occasion presents itself, it requires
more than the platitudes of the Peace Society to restrain one from
joining in the fray. Mr. Justice Higinbotham’s declaration of
war is more than an empty thunder clap; and while the first duty
of a soldier is to defend the country he calls his own, no one will
grudge him the personal enjoyment of honourable warfare.
Furthermore, as all heat and light are but forms of motion, so it
is better that the waters of thought should be agitated, even by
the winds of controversy, than that they should stagnate and
become black and foul through inactivity. There is no truth
worth possessing that has not been got by hard labour and toil,
and he is its most successful defender who has, with heroic effort
and dauntless courage, forced his way through the entanglements
of error, and at last gained what he believes to be the fortress of
truth. Mr. Justice Higinbotham believes in the truth of his own
opinions, and if no one challenges him in this place of fancied
security, he, and many others, may have some justification for the
belief that his position is impregnable behind the fortifications he


has reared for his own defence, and from which he has just sallied
forth with the avowed purpose of showing by a vigorous assault
that the battlements of his orthodox neighbours are without
strength, being founded on the sand, and that they are in
imminent danger of being swept away by the flood waters of
advancing enlightenment.
In replying to the Chief Justice’s utterances, there are two
things I desire scrupulously to avoid. At the present time, I
have nothing to do with the distinctive doctrines of Unitarianism.
The Church in Melbourne belonging to that body has a perfect
right to hold its own peculiar opinions, and to take all honest
means to make these distinctive doctrines known to others. The
freedom of prophesying is as much their right, although a very
small section of the Christian community, as of larger organisations;
and, as no one now-a-days even hints that such right should be
taken away from anyone, we have nothing whatever to say
against the Unitarians of Melbourne making a confession of their
faith on the occasion of opening their new place of worship. Nor
have I any intention of making any adverse criticism on Chief
Justice Higinbotham’s confession of faith. It is, I confess, a
tempting subject to anyone who is not averse to a little harmless
and congenial controversy. To himself, a man’s religious opinions
are a sacred, and sometimes a secret, treasure, and to have them
dragged out of him, and held up to the gaze, and it may be
the ridicule of others, is a trial from which even courageous men
may well shrink. But, on the other hand, when a man steps
boldy out into the public arena, and unburdens his heart in the
ears of the community, and especially when he favours his hearers
with what he believes concerning them and all mankind in
general, he cannot expect to have his words passed over in silence,
and that is just what Mr. Justice Higinbotham has done. With
his religious creed and his sympathy for the Unitarian Church,
we have at present absolutely nothing to do, but when he turns
round and hurls grave charges against all Churches outside the
Unitarian circle, it would be equal to a confession of guilt to
allow judgment to go by default, and not say a single word in
defence of our faith and of our Churches.
I begin with the weakest charge made against the Churches
by Mr. Justice Higinbotham, It is contained in these words,


Speaking of the Unitarian Church, he says :-“As a Church it is
an outcast, hated and also feared by all other Christian Churches;
and it is so hated and feared, because it alone has clung with
unwavering fidelity to the great truths of the unity of God, and
of the relation of man’s mind to the Supreme mind.”
In this choice paragraph we have what is meant to be a statement
of fact; and also, a reason assigned in explanation of that fact.
That the Unitarian Church is an outcast, and is hated and feared
by all other Churches is the asserted fact. The ground of that
hatred and fear is said to be their attachment to the doctrine of
God’s unity.
Now, is it true, that the Unitarian Church is an outcast, and
is hated and feared by all other Churches 1 There is no evidence
whatever of the existence of such a feeling. What is it for a
Church to be an outcast 1 ? From what has it been cast out, or by
whom 1 The State has, during the last half century, been
pursuing a policy of separating the Church from civil authority,
giving it the power of self-government, and restoring to it its ancient
privilege of freedom. But to be an “ outcast” from State patronage
and control, is no grievance. In this respect, Congregationalists
value their independence as one of the greatest treasures in their
possession. Does His Honour mean that the Unitarian Church
is an ecclesiastical “outcast”? If a lodger in a boardinghouse does
not like his fare, and grumbles at the accommodation of the house,
and the price he has to pay for his lodging, and gives notice of his
intention to leave and seek quarters elsewhere, we should all look
very much surprised if we were to meet him with his pocket
handkerchief at his eyes, sobbing and saying that he was an
“ outcast ” ! Now, if the Unitarian Church is an “ outcast,” she
is an “ outcast ” in this sense, that as she cannot accept quarters
in Trinitarian homes, she is compelled for her own comfort
and peace of mind to make a home for herself. Is that a
hardship 1 In this respect, she is neither worse off, nor better,
than her neighbours. The attempt to make her believe that she
is a poor “ outcast ” tends to make that Church unnecessarily
an object of compassion, and such an attempt ought to be resented
by that body as an insult to its character and manly freedom.
The only torch bearer in a world of darkness ought not to
complain of being an outcast. But the Unitarian Church,


according to Mr. Justice Higinbotham, is not only an outcast,
but is hated and feared. In laying a charge against anyone, or
any society or institution, the first thing to be done is to supply
the evidence on which the charge is made. That is not only fair,
but strictly just. Vague generalities are out of court, and
His Honour is manifestly out of court in this matter. I cannot
recall a single utterance in any book, or any fact in history in
modern times, that would give the least countenance to the
statement that the Unitarian Church is either hated or feared.
Remember the charge is that it is “ hated.” A. boarding-school
3 r oung lady may say occasionally, when her school lessons give her
more trouble than she cares about, that she “ hates ” French,
or music, or even, perhaps, her teacher; but we all know that
her principles are better than her words might lead one to infer.
But when the Chief Justice of our colony says that the orthodox
Churches hate the Unitarian Church, it becomes necessary to
enquire what he means, and on what evidence he bases such
a grave charge.
In the absence of any evidence adduced, we can only meet a
vague general statement by one of an opposite character, equally
vague and not more specific. We then make bold to assert that
the Unitarian Church is neither hated nor feared, and until the
Unitarian Church herself, by the mouth of some of her acknow-
ledged repi’esentatives, makes such a complaint on her own behalf,
we have a right to treat all outside appeals to the commiseration
of the public not only as irrelevant, but without authority, and
utterly baseless.
But, perhaps, Mr. J ustice Higinbotham simply means that the
orthodox Churches do not agree with the doctrines of the Unitarian
Church, and because the orthodox Churches oppose the doctrines of
the Unitarian Church, for that reason, the Unitarian Church is
hated and feared. But that would be an extraordinary doctrine
which Mr. Justice Higinbotham would not like to apply to his
own case. If to differ from one is to hate him, His Honour must
be a splendid hater, for in some of his opinions he differs from
mankind in general to an extent which makes him stand almost
alone in some things. In fact, he not unfrequently differs from
himself; but no one would suspect that one part of Mr. J ustice
Higinbotham hated the other part.


But, if the facts are against the Chief Justice here, the reasons
assigned in explanation of the facts are not more happy or
satisfactory. If the Churches did hate the Unitarian Church, it
would not certainly be for clinging to the doctrine of the Unity
of God; for that, as we shall see immediately, is one of the most
deeply cherished doctrines of orthodox Christianity. If it were
possible for the Churches of Christ to hate the Unitarian Church,
it would not be for what that Church affirms on the Unity of
God, but for what it denies concerning Him as the Eternal Father ;
and Christ His only-begotten and well-beloved Son. But hatred
to anyone, or any body of men, on account of their faith, would
be a most ungodly and unchristian emotion, and I am convinced
that such a sentiment has no existence in the bosom of orthodox
Churches. The suspicion that such a dark and guilty thought
lurks there is ungenerous, and without a shadow of evidence to
justify it.
But if with mingled indignation and sorrow we repudiate the
charge of hatred and ill-will against the Unitarian Church, what
are our feelings likely to be when we come to consider the other
charges hurled at our head by this accuser of the brethren ? Let
me now quote his own words, as reported in the Argus : “In all
other systems of religious belief,” that is outside Unitarianism,
“ the reason of man, perplexed by paradox, stunned by contra-
dictions, and shocked by visions of arbitrary injustice and cruelty,
attributed by seeming authority to the character of God, is
reduced to a state of imbecile inaction. The human intellect,
to which, as well as to the human heart, the primary injunction
to love God was addressed by the Founder of Christianity, is
incapable of even making an effort to obey; and practical religion,
at its best estate, is little more than a highly artificial means of
stimulating human emotions, and directing them to unreal
inadequate, and unworthy objects.” Again, referring to the
doctrine of the Unity of God, Mr. Justice Higinbotham has this
choice sentence —“It was reproduced by the great Benefactor of the
human race, from whom Christianity derived its name, only to be
almost immediately again obscured. The traces of it are now scarcely
to be found beneath the legends that are not history, ecclesiastical
decrees that are without authority, and creeds and articles of faith
that cannot be understood, much less accepted by the human


mind ; but in some, or in all of which the Christian Churches
still vainly try, with the energy of despair, to discover an object of
worship, and a law of thought and action.”
Taking these two sentences together, and shaking ourselves free,
for the time being, from the influence of their oratorical ring and
sweep, I am constrained to say, that I never in all my life read
anything that contained more inaccuracies as to fact, and more
false reasoning as to argument, than in the small compass of these
two paragraphs. A daily newspaper said, that Mr. Justice
Higinbotham cut into the quick of the orthodox, by his sharp
logic. If I may be permitted to speak for myself, I have no
hesitation in saying, that I was cut to the quick, but for
a different reason than that which the writer suggested. I was
cut to the heart, that any man of ordinary education and common
intelligence, far less a man with the reputation of Mr. Justice
Higinbotham, should expose himself to the suspicion of being
inadequately acquainted with modern literature in its bearing on
those questions discussed by him with such startling vagueness
throughout his address, and more particularly in the words I have
just quoted. Before looking a little more closely at his charges in
detail, let me call the attention of the reader first of all to what I
shall venture to designate the stupendous indefiniteness of the
entire address, in so far as it refers to orthodox Churches. No
particular Church is named, but all are rolled up together in one
huge indiscriminate mass. No particular instance of a legend that
is not history is given ; and no particular doctrine is mentioned,
that cannot be understood or accepted by the modern mind,
whatever that means. And when he says that our emotional
nature is directed to unworthy objects, we are left completely in
the dark as to what these unworthy objects are. In reading these
sentences, there is a noise of thunder in one’s ears, but the sky is
clear; there is a cry of “ wolf,” but the sheep and the lambs lie
in peaceful security amongst the green pastures. There is around
us a sound of weeping and wailing, as of some lone wanderer in
the city of the dead, but when we look for the causes of his
disconsolate measures, we see nothing to justify such bitter
lamentation. Never was the question, “what is it all about?”
more appropriate, for it would puzzle even Mr. Higinbotham
himself, just to tell us plainly what he means, what in his


estimation is wrong, and how he would propose to put it right.
Having said this much in general, let us now come to particulars,
and deal definitely with some of the questions inferentially raised
by Mr. Justice Higinbotham.
When we come to arrange and classify his objections and
charges, we find that they naturally fall into one or other of these
three divisions :
1. That the orthodox Churches teach doctrines the modern
intellect cannot understand, far less accept.
2. That these Churches are all engaged in trying with the
“ energy of despair,” to reconcile the different articles of their
faith with each other, and with the results of modern thought.
3. That practical religion at its best estate, is little more than
a highly artificial means of stimulating emotion, and directing it
to unreal and unworthy objects.
If we are right in our division and summary of charges, it will
be at once obvious, that the whole field of theology lies open to
our view. The orthodox faith is attacked in its intellectual
stronghold, and almost held up to ridicule for holding and
defending doctrines inconsistent with reason, and obnoxious to
the culture of the age. It is attacked in its relation to our
emotional nature, and it is blamed for working up feeling, only
to direct it to unreal and unworthy objects. Orthodoxy is also
attacked, for the barrenness of its results, when estimated by a
practical standard. The “ energy of despair ” cannot be far off
the repose of dissolution.
This picture, it must be acknowledged, is a very gloomy one.
It might well appal the simple faith of one whose unreasoned
convictions have never felt the rude shock of doubt. The
marvel is, that Mr. Justice Higinbotham, after conjuring up such
a scene of awful desolation, should not himself have beaten a
hasty retreat, from what in his mind’s eye, was a land of darkness
and the shadow of death. But no, he appears to have been
drawn to it by a kind of fascination. He had been there before,
and still would go, and apparently he found a certain pleasure
in revisiting these dreary regions of theological thought, that are
in his estimation, wholly given over to barrenness. Had he shown
any symptoms of fear, one’s duty would have lain along the path
of comfort. He might have been assured, that although it was


nothing but a valley of dry bones he was contemplating, a spirit
of revival hung over it, for the passage from the sepulchre of
death, to the camp of living warriors is a short one, when the
breath of God’s spirit fills the valley with the prophetic murmur
of a new creation. But Mr. Justice Higinbotham is above all
fear, and it only remains for one to try and show him by a calm,
quiet process of reasoning, that his outlook is illusory, and that
his charges when openly looked at and considered, melt away
like the mist from the mountain’s brow, when lit up by the
morning sun.
Referring now to the first charge against the Churches, namely,
that of holding and teaching doctrines that the modern mind
cannot understand, far less accept, we encounter this difficulty at
the threshold—that there is not a single sentence in His Honour’s
address that indicates, even in a suggestive way, what the
doctrines are that perplex the reason by their paradox, stun by
their contradiction, and shock by their visions of divine injustice
and cruelty. The first and foremost duty of anyone who has got
a charge to make is clearly to put it in plain and definite language.
How important and necessary it is to cease from vagaries and
generalties, and come to the point ! How anxiously we inquire
what are those legends that are not history, and what that rotting
mass of inconsistency that creates in the helpless victims that still
profess to cling to it—“ the energy of despair 1 ” In the absence of
any direct reply to this most reasonable request, we have only
to conjecture, by putting some of the more important doctrines
of orthodox Christianity under review, in order to ascertain
whether any of them are open to the high-sounding censures that
have been hurled against them.
The faith once delivered to the saints, the essence of all modern
creeds, may be summed up in these few articles of belief, namely :
The Unity of God ; the Divine Fatherhood ; the Deity of Christ,
or the doctrine of the eternal Sonship; and the supernatural
element in the Old and New Testaments.
The Unity of God and the Divine Fatherhood are the common
property of the universal Church. The former in fact, in a very
emphatic sense, belongs to Mohammedanism as well as Christianity.
The assertion, therefore, that the Unitarian Church is the sole
custodian of this doctrine is so unexpected and so startling a


“ paradox,” that one seeks for its explanation in vain along the
ordinary road of rational theory. Its audacity is splendid. Its
recklessness is manifest on the very surface, and the problem is,
how a gentleman like Mr. Justice Higinbotham, with a strong
vigorous intellect, varied culture, and with daily practice in
judicial matters, should make such a statement, and his reputation
survive it. It would be a work of supererogation to adduce proof
in support of the claim of orthodoxy to hold with a firm and
intelligent grasp, the doctrines of the Divine Unity and the Divine
Fatherhood. If Mr. Justice Higinbotham means to insinuate
that the orthodox creed is inconsistent with itself, or that the
teachings of the orthodox pulpits are not in harmony with
orthodox creeds, the very least we have a right to is an instance
of such logical inconsistency in the articles of the creeds, or of
departure from them by the preachers of the day. But Mr.
Justice Higinbotham gives no such example, and in the absence of
all proof in support even of his indefinite charges, they must be
allowed to fall to the ground. Mr, Justice Higinbotham must
accept the declarations of the creeds over the entire area they
profess to cover. If they profess to embody the doctrine of the
Unity of God and the Divine Fatherhood, these statements have as
much light to be believed as their declarations on the Trinity, on
which Mr. Justice Higinbotham bases his charges; and yet His
Honour repudiates the existence of the one, and fixes his partial
eye upon the other. Every Church must be judged by its authori-
tative standards, and no orthodox Church has ever, even in
appearance, let go the doctrine of the Divine Unity.
From the Unity of God, and the Divine Fatherhood, we pass
on to those doctrines that are destinctive of the orthodox faith of
Christendom —the essential Deity of Christ, and the Supernatural
element in the Bible. Are these the doctrines, we should like to
know, that “ perplex with their paradox, stun with their contra-
diction,” and “ shock ” with their visions of Divine injustice and
cruelty 1 If they are, let Mr. Justice Higinbotham say so, and
we shall not complain, for it will enable us to know what is
attacked, what we have to defend, and with what weapons we
must fight in this conflict. It will be admitted by almost all
orthodox divines that the doctrine of the Deity of Christ, or the
eternal Sonship, is at once the foundation and fortress of the


Christian faith* and, as accepted by the Churches, it is as far
removed from paradox or legend as the historic facts of the
Elizabethan era are from the exploits of the Hound Table, or the
heroes of Arabian Nights. In the vindication of this doctrine
from the implied charge of legend, we are quite prepared to follow
the inductive or scientific method of investigation, and to prove to
the most exacting intellect that the Gospels, for example, are
genuine and authentic documents, irrespective of any claim they
may put forth as inspired or that hereafter may be conceded to
them. Their historicity in fact can no longer be called in question.
Modern criticism, even outside the orthodox lines, has cordially
recorded its verdict that these books are neither myths nor
forgeries, that they have as much of legend in them as
“ Macaulay’s History of England,” or “ The Records of our
Courts of Justice.” That is our first line of defence, from which
the enemy has retired years ago, and which at no past period in
the Church’s history is stronger than it is to-day. But the
second line lies also within rationalistic boundaries, and resolves
itself into a pure question of fact. Did Jesus, according to the
Gospel story as given by the evangelists, claim to be the Son of God,
or did He not 1 That is a question to be determined by a simple
grammatical appeal to these Gospel narratives. The Rev. G.
Walters, pastor of the Unitarian Church, Melbourne, in a state-
ment recently published in The Argus , distinctly denies that Jesus
ever made this claim. His words are these ;—“ He never even
hinted at such a thing, and surely he would have done so, had it
been a fact. The doctrine of his Deity was a corruption of later
times.” It is not my purpose to traverse his extraordinary
statement in this connection. The “later times” must have come
very rapidly, even if we were to admit that the Deity of Christ is
not in the Gospels at all, for a celebrated Roman found the
Christians singing hymns to Christ, as God, not so very long
after the last of the Apostles had joined his Master in the
spiritual world. Suffice it to say here, however, that the
orthodox Churches partly base their belief in the Deity of Christ
on His own claim to be the only-begotten and well-beloved Son of
God. Nor does this claim rest, as has been frequently asserted,
on the fourth Gospel alone, but on the other three as well, both
by direct statement and by innumerable implications. The relative


position of parties in this celebrated historic 'controversy, as
evidenced by the entire character and tendency of modern sacred
literature, is not that of doubt or difficulty as to the meaning of
Scripture, or the substance of its teaching on the person and work
of Christ, but whether His claim to be more than man is to be
admitted in all its fulness, or to be rationally explained on the
a -priori assumption that the supernatural in any form is an
impossibility, with the admission of the honesty and high moral
character of Christ himself. This is the second line of defence,
and not one single instance of paradox, inconsistency, or legend,
can be discovered throughout its entire length. Given the
undoubted historical character of the books of the Hew Testament,
it is simply a question of fact whether Jesus ever claimed to be
more than man. The verdict of history and of this living age is,
by an overwhelming majority, and the voice of the people is the
voice of God, that He claimed to have all power committed to
Him in Heaven and on earth, and declared on the very eve of
His crucifixion that He was the Son of God, who, in the ages to
come, would sit upon the throne of His glory, and judge the world.
How the orthodox Churches admit this claim, not alone
because they believe it was put forth by Himself, but on the
broader basis of the doctrine of Divine revelation. They believe
that God spake in times past unto the fathers by the prophets,
as well as by His only-begotten Son ; and they believe it, not as
a dogma which claims their assent by some kind of indefinable
authority, but on evidence they are called upon to investigate and
weigh. Hundreds and thousands of them believe that this
supernatural manifestation of the Divine will in its purposes of
mercy is not any fitful or exceptionable forth putting of Divine
power, but part of that mighty system of law and order that
pervades the entire universe, not only within its natural sphere,
but also in the moral and spiritual. The central truth of the
Bible is Christ, the Son of God, without which, as the true point
of view, the literature of the Old Testament, and the facts of the
Hew Testament, lose their meaning, and fall into chaos and mystery.
But outside the domain of Scripture and theology, the doctrine
of the Divinity of Christ is not without its vindication; and its
belief, even on philosophical grounds, is neither paradoxical nor
logically inconsistent with reason. To the very old threadbare


objection that Trinitarianism cannot be accepted by the intellect
that acknowledges the supremacy of reason, an objection that
has been dead and buried for centuries, there is the very obvious
reply, that as reason cannot possibly sound the depths of the
Divine mind, it savours of presumption and dogmatism to deny
the possibility of this three-fold distinction in the Unity of the
Godhead. To the Trinitarian this mysterious doctrine is part of the
negative contents of his notion of God ; and of the two creeds,
the Unitarian and the Trinitarian, that one is surely more in
harmony witli the limitation of our faculties, which believes
in the possibility of this distinction, since it forms part of a vaster
scheme of revelation, than the other which on rational grounds
alone asserts its impossibility. The Unity of God, when we try
to grasp it, is no more comprehensible in its fulness than the
Trinitarian theory. No one can get quit of intellectual problems
either bv accepting or rejecting the doctrine of the Trinity ; and
if Mr. Justice Higinbotham, or any one else, has attained that
peaceful state of mind when the notion of God, under whatever
form it may present itself, has cleared away all doubt from the
mind, and whispered his fevered spirit into the heathful attitude
of truth and affection, lifting the mind into a region where it is
no longer in danger of being perplexed by paradox, or stunned by
contradictions, we can only devoutly wish that he would make
known the secret of such absolute satisfaction and peace. The
majority of mankind are still groping their uncertain way by such
helps as history and their own consciences supply, and a very
considerable number of them believe that Jesus Christ is a light
to them in a dark place, by means of which they are enabled to
guide their footsteps out of this dark and sinful world to a better
one hereafter. For these reasons it is not only thoughtless, but
cruel, even to suggest a doubt, that this light is not light but
darkness, or worse than darkness—a false light, leading to
perpetual darkness.
But the doctrine of the Deity of Christ may be vindicated on
positive grounds as well as negative. If the knowledge of God
is necessary to the highest well-being of the individual and the
race, we can only think of Him under forms of thought, which
condition the exercise of our intelligence. Language is one of
those conditions ; and if revelation is conditioned by language,


the Incarnation is the necessary form of revelation. An abstract,
empty notion of God, this is a notion, without human contents,
both individual and social, cannot be a true notion of God ; and
the thought that most approves itself both to the reason and the
conscience is that unique character in history, who was the Word
made flesh, and in whom, as they inform us who knew Him best,
dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bodily.
The second charge brought by Mi-. Justice Higinbotham against
orthodox Churches may be expressed in these words : —That they
are still engaged, “ with the energy of despair,” in trying to
reconcile the different articles of their faith with each other, and
with the results of modern thought. It might be contended here
again that His Honour puts himself out of court by not
definitely stating what these doctrines are that are incompatible
with each other, and that refuse all logical reconciliation, although
the attempt is constantly made to bring it about “with the energy
of despair.” Moreover, Mr. Justice Higinbotham shows so little
acquaintance, not only with theology, but with modern thought,
that his opinions, were they not his, would not be worth serious
refutation. He is, as a matter of fact, half a century behind, and
it is sincerely to be regretted that he did not make himself better
acquainted with the subjects on which he speaks with such
emphasis and assurance. He would most certainly have found
that the orthodox faith was not in the last stages of dissolution,
and the only despair of which ic is conscious is, that of getting its
opponents to take an intelligent and sensible view of the evidence
on which that faith rests. The world, with its science and its
theology, like John Brown’s spirit, is ever marching on. The
days of the “Vestiges of Creation” are gone, never to return,
and the Bible has a stronger and firmer hold upon the religious
consciousness to-day, not in spite of, but also largely because of,
those rationalistic fires through which it has recently passed.
But let us look at this charge more narrowly. There are two
articles of faith that have been stumbling blocks in the way of
free religious enquiry from very early times until now. These
are, the miraculous element in the Bible, and the expiatory
sufferings and death of Jesus Christ. But notwithstanding the
vigourous onslaught that has from time to time been directed
against these Scripture doctrines, they are held as firmly and as


intelligently as ever, even amid the blaze of this boasting nineteenth
century’s enlightenment ", held also, not “with the energy of
despair,” but rather with that sunny hopefulness which comes
with the deepening conviction of their truth, and the rapid
approach of modern thought itself to the boundary line which
separates the region of scientific theology from the domain of
speculative free thought.
With regard to the subject of miracles, no modern Christian
apologist will represent them either as violations of natural laws,
or as temporary suspensions of them. There may still be a little
hankering after the theory of a higher law coming down, and for
the time being setting aside a lower law, but this hypothesis has
more opponents than supporters. The question of the supernatural
is narrowing itself to this simple issue, whether the Supreme Being,
if we are allowed to posit His existence, has ever made known
beforehand, by His chosen agents, His purposes of mercy to mankind.
This question cannot be satisfactorily settled by any isolated or
fragmentary investigation j as, for example, whether Moses was
right or wrong in his account of the six days creation, or whether
the sun did once stand still at the command of a man. To come
to a final and definite conclusion, we have to ascertain by the help
of historic criticism whether there is running through the entire
Bible a supernatural element of Divine revelation : a message of
love and mercy from the Father of infinite goodness, to his sinful
and ignorant children in this world, not by means of any breaking
through natural laws, but rather by means of them, and in strictest
harmony with Divine order. That is not a question of dogmatism,
or of authority, whatever may be meant by that word; it is simply
a question of fact, to be ascertained by the application of the scientific
method of criticism to these ancient documents, called the Sacred
Scriptures. And if belief comes to any one as the result of this
rational mode of investigation, in what sense can his faith be
described as inconsistent or illogical? On this basis, it is not in the
least necessary that the problem of the supernatural should be
fought out in detail, or that one’s suspicions about any one miracle
in particular, should throw discredit on the supernaturalism of the
Bible in general. Charity will dictate the necessity of giving, and
liberalism will not be excommunicated for taking, considerable
latitude in discussing and determining whether any particular


miracle belongs to the supernatural or not. So long as the sheet
anchor of our faith holds—namely, the doctrine that God has
spoken to us by His Son—the loss of a spar or two in a gale will
not in the least endanger the safety of the ship.
Nor is the attitude of science to this question less hopeful at
the present time. No one will now risk his reputation by the
unqualified affirmation, that miracles are impossible. With all
schools of thought, it is simply a matter of evidence. It is granted
that empirical laws, or mere orderly sequences, that have no
imperative necessity about them, can be modified, although the laws
that underlie such sequence, cannot be broken. It is also con-
tended by some, that even the physical sciences must ultimately
repose upon a supernatural basis. This at all events may be
conceded, that if there are final causes in nature, that is, Divine
thoughts wrapped up, for example, in the rocky folds of the
earth’s crust, and if the human intelligence can read these thoughts
aright, there is in that fact, a very near approach to the super-
natural. From this position it is but a step, and not a high one,
in the evolutionary development of the notion for one to believe,
that the same God who reveals Himself in His works, and in the
history of the race, has also poured the light of His spirit on some,
chosen by His infinite wisdom to be the prophets of the race ; and
that the religious consciousness, with its deep spiritual insight,
ultimately concentrated itself in one mind, whose relation both to
God and man, made Him a unique person in history, and that this
fact explains what otherwise is incomprehensible, that He should
not only claim to be one with the Father, but the Father’s visible
embodiment. Those who knew Him best, and untold multitudes
afterwards, firmly believed that He was the only Son of the Father,
full of grace and truth. The doctrine of the Divinity of Christ,
does not lie within the territory of the natural sciences, but
nothing in this department of knowledge, is inconsistent with that
doctrine. The claim to be more than man, is first of all, a
question of historic criticism. Its belief or acceptance, will depend
upon whether any one is satisfied with the evidence adduced in
support of it, and. when accepted, it is held by reverent reason,
and not “ with the energy of despair.”
The Scripture doctrine of the Atonement is evidently in Mr,
Justice Higinbotham’s mind when he represents the reason as


shocked by representations of injustice and cruelty attributed by
the creeds to the divine Being. How does it come about, that
the narrowest, the worst, and the most un-Scriptural theory of the
Atonement ever held or advocated, should be the only one seized
upon by the opponents of the doctrine, who, without enquiry and
apparently in utter unconsciousness that there are other theories
in existence, argue against it as if the view repudiated were the
only possible interpretations of Scripture on the relations of
Christ’s death to the sin of the woxdd 1 The doctrine of the
Atonement is objected to, and even held up to ridicule on the
ground that it makes God vindictive ; that it is wrong, unjust and
cruel to represent God as punishing an innocent person for the
sins of the guilty, and that to preach that God demands blood, no
matter whose, before he can exercise the prerogative of mercy is too
suggestive of the “shambles of heathenism.” These objections
proceed on an entire forgetfulness of the fact that no orthodox
Church has ever represented God as either cruel or vindictive in
sacrificing His Son. The Atonement as taught in the Bible, and
set forth in doctrinal standards, is attributed to the love of God.
It is an outflow of His eternal beneficence, and a righteous, not a
reckless, manifestation of His mercy. Theories of Atonement may
fail to reconcile the attributes of divine love and justice, but the
evolutionary theory of morals that posits a supreme intelligence
who is also infinitely good, staggers before that problem as much
as the speculations of orthodoxy ; but by whatever theories
explained, the doctrine of Christ’s substitutionary sufferings for
the world’s sin, orthodoxy believes to be taught in the Bible; and
ethical science is making it clearer and clearer that the moral
principles on which the Atonement rests are the data of
scientific morals. Ho one who has got hold of the notion of the
unity of the race, and the moral influence that may spring from
one grand moral effort and self-sacrifice requires evidence or proof
that the innocent do continually suffer on account of the guilty,
or that the growth and development of the moral world depend
upon the healthy and saving currents that are poured into it.
The orthodox faith teaches that Christ is a living stream of such
influence, now flowing in full tide through the world, and they
would repudiate with indignation the insinuation that they hold
that doctrine either superstitiously or “with the energy of despair,”


for even on philosophical grounds it is not only an answer to the
cry of the human heart for pardon, but an illustration of the
ethical problem, how to season justice with mercy.
The third charge in this formidable indictment of His Honour
Mr. Justice Higinbothom, is that contained in these words :
“ Practical religion at its best estate is little more than a highly
artificial means of stimulating human emotions, and directing
them to unreal, inadequate, or unworthy objects,”
The public worship of God in our Churches may be said
generally to contemplate these three objects ; —First, the instruc-
tion of our congregations in religious knowledge, and the doctrines
of Christianity. Secondly, the cultivation of devout feeling, and
the inculcation of reverence for everything holy and pure. And
thirdly, the direction of all legitimate emotion into channels of
practical benevolence. With regard to the first of these, will Mr.
Justice Higinbotham undertake, even by representative examples,
to prove that the preaching of the day shows any sign of
collapse into “ imbecile inaction ” on the part of those who fill our
pulpits, outside of that body alone privileged to carry the lighted
torch of truth along the dark highways of humanity 1 To speak
with accuracy and authority on a matter of this sort, one must
have a very extensive acquaintance with the inner life of
Churches, and the kind of sermons preached every week
throughout Christendom. In the absence of such information
and the facts of the case, it is simply absurd, and smacks of
presumption, for any one oracularly to declare, by implication or
otherwise, what modern preaching is as a whole, or what it is
not. But, although no one can possibly generalise modern
preaching, either under wholesale and indiscriminate approval
or condemnation, we may learn something about it from the
printed sermons of the day, a department of literature that is
extensively patronised by religious people. But here, again, we
have all sorts of sermons according to one’s taste, good, bad and
indifferent. But this much we may say with perfect safety, that
any charge of “ imbecile inaction ” brought against the vast
majority of them would be received, even by the learned, with
incredulous surprise. Such sermons as those of Beecher, Liddon,
Farrar, Maclaren, Parker, and Spurgeon cannot be charged with
shocking the reason of men by visions of Divine injustice and


cruelty. Such a charge would recoil with terrible force upon
its author, for criticism, after all, is but the measure of the
critic.
Whether the public worship of God, as conducted in the
Churches, is but a highly artificial mode of exciting human
emotion, will not here be discussed. There is no more difficult nor
delicate subject to touch and handle kindly than those forms of
devotion that connect the human soul with the Father of our
Spirits. To speak lightly, not to mention the harsh and
sweeping condemnations hurled against our devotions by His
Honour, indicates not only a want of human sympathy, but a
certain intolerance, which is the very essence of religious persecu-
tion. To look at the forms of piety even at what some may
regard as its worst aspect, requires careful handling. If the
Salvation Army, for example, by the beating of drums, the
waving of handkerchiefs, the singing of hallelujah lasses, or the
strong rough experiences of converted drunkards or thieves, can
awaken in some minds, steeped and almost deadened by the
crime and the atheistic secularism that hang, like a poisoned
atmosphere over large masses of our population, a sense of the
Infinite, and a hopeful prospect of a better life, is it in accordance
with that large charity which thinketh no evil for one not only to
stand aside from such modes of stimulating emotion when he
finds himself out of sympathy with them, but to condemn them as
artificial or impracticable ? The reverent spirit everywhere weaves
for herself the garments of piety in accordance with her own
taste, and the means at her disposal. In these she humbly
presents herself before God, and keeps her heart warm when
exposed to the biting frosts of sneering profanity ; and no one
who is not under the influence of a kind of religious vandalism
will do anything to wound her feelings by unkind or disparaging
criticisms of what she regards as beautiful and holy.
But the question whether emotional piety, when artificially
excited, is directed to unreal and unworthy objects is simply a
question of fact. Are the Churches doing good honest work, or
are they not 1 They are teaching millions of children and young
people the doctrines and duties of the Bible in their Sunday Schools.
Is that an unreal or unworthy object? The heathen world is
invaded by the soldiers of the Cross at every available point of access.


Is the conversion of the world an inadequate object 1 The charities
of the world without the aid of the Churches would wither and
die, and practical benevolence, which bakes the daily bread of the
poor, would be paralysed were it not for the enthusiasm of
humanity, which is only another phrase for the love of Christ.
The cessation for a single week of the voluntary and practical work
done by the Churches of the day would bring such a darkness over
the world as would require another creating word to scatter it,
and save men from the misery that comes of despair. The man
in the Gospel who was slowly recovering his sight, saw at one
stage of the process men as trees walking. Comparing this
deliverance with his former one on the same subject, Mr. Justice
Higinbotham is not recovering his ecclesiastical vision, for even
the men as trees walking have disappeared, and there is nothing
before him now but a dreary expanse of barrenness and death.
It may be an advantage sometimes to see ourselves as others see
us; but this picture drawn by His Honour is so hideous, that it
has not the merit of caricature. We are not indignant
enough to denounce it. It carries its own severest condem-
nation on its forehead, and any further vindication of the
orthodox faith in relation to practical benevolence would be
simply a work of supererogation.
But what is the remedy for this terrible and all biit hopeless
state of things existing in the Churches, as described by Mr.
Justice Higinbotham 1 He seems to think, with Dr. Martineau,
that the notion of God will have to go into retirement for a time ;
and, although this may lead to doubt, perplexity, and a plentiful
crop of evils, the most of which we have in abundance already, yet,
as this is the only road to the Millennium of Unitarianism, the
dark prospect must be faced for the sake of the advantages it
would be sure to bring. Now, with all seriousness, what does
this amount to 1 Is it not that the best, if not the only cure, for
partial knowledge is temporary ignorance ? If any one does not
know a subject as he ought to know, fully and accurately, let him
forget and lose what he knows, and he will come out from this
voluntary retirement with stronger powers of vision and ampler
stores of knowledge. But to put out the night lamp will not
bring the sun any sooner to the eastern horizon ! It is surely the
part of wisdom to give good heed to what light we already have,


without neglecting the higher duty of waiting for more light, that
comes sooner or later to every pious watchman.
Right or wrong, one cannot help a certain feeling of sympathy, and
of true pity for those whose religious outlook is as dark and gloomy
as that of Mr. Justice Higinbotham. Even at the risk of having this
feeling resented as another illustration of the conceit bred of ortho-
doxy, and these awful things the Creeds, we must give expression
to our suspicion that there is a thin vein of sorrow running through
his Honour’s strong words. Let him assure himself of this, that
doubt and conflict are not unknown even amongst orthodox divines.
Some of us also have been in the pit, with our feet sinking in the
miry clay, and much of traditional rubbish had to be cleared away
before we found solid footing on the Rock of Ages. But what cuts
us to the heart is the insinuation that we are not honest in our
beliefs, or that we want courage to give them utterance. In the
conflicts of opinion we can defend ourselves with the weapons of
reason, to which we are by no means strangers ; but it requires a
good deal of self-government to be cool and collected when we
have charges of mental weakness hurled at our heads. In
questions like those raised by Mr. Justice Higinbotham, free and
honest inquiry is like a draught of air to a furnace; it makes the
fires glow. But the man who elevates doubt into a religion, and
is propelled by his cold and unsympathetic nature, towards the
ice-bound regions of the sphere of thought, may find himself some
day like a polar bear afloat in mid-ocean on an iceberg, with all
he has to stand upon melting away from under him, and nothing
in sight to inspire the hope of deliverance.
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.




.
■


