

THE MILLENNIUM,
AND THE
MANIFESTATION OF THE SON OF MAN.
FOURTH PAMPHLET.
Containing Divinely authorised evidence con-
cerning the closing of the present Religious
Dispensation, by the introduction of the
Reign on Earth, in Person, of the Lord
Jesus Christ as the Son of God, for the
purpose of setting up the Kingdom of
God, spoken of by Daniel and other pro-
phets of both Old and New Testaments.
SEQUEL TO THE MIDNIGHT CRY.
the same Author.
PRICE SIXPENCE
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS,
Frearson and Brother, Printers, King William-street, Adelaide.




ARRIVAL
THE MILLENNIUM,
AND THE
MANIFESTATION OF THE SON OF MAN,
FOURTH PAMPHLET.
Containing Divinely authorised evidence con-
cerning the closing of the present Religious
Dispensation, by the introduction of the
Reign on Earth, in Person, of the Lord
Jesus Christ as the Son of God, for the
purpose of setting up the Kingdom of
God, spoken of by Daniel and other pro-
phets of both Old and New Testaments.
SEQUEL TO THE MIDNIGHT CRY.
the same Author.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS,




SEQUEL
TO THE'
MIDNIGHT CRY.
THIRD APPEAL
TO THE
Jutygnunt $ Sgmpt jrg 0f Staple d Uidcrria.
The author of the first and second appeal to the people of
Australia in making a fresh effort to awaken his Christian
friends to a sense of the enormous responsibility that now rests
upon them regarding this all important matter, does so with
feelings of regret that the last pamphlet produced so little
effect; but as the title page of this pamphlet explains, we are
advancing towards a time that must of necessity interest and
arouse the attention of every one. Now it will certainly be
expected that in making a statement, or may I be allowed to
say a proclamation, such as the one this pamphlet bears, that I
should also make known by what authority I presume to deal
in this manner with a matter of such sacred character, and
of a nature so universally important as the religion of the
English nation, that is to be the true religion of the world, that
is the principal object the writer has in view—for it is by the
nature of my evidence I hope to prove the truth of the pro-
clamation. Those of my readers who have perused u The
Midnight Cry” will remember that in all my statements I
declare to be guided and instructed by the Holy Spirit of God,
and such is indeed the truth, for so I am ; therefore, what
I hear I endeavour to make known, and it seems to me a
mystery how a man can keep on declaring great and important
truths in God’s great name, and concerning God’s great work,
and yet obtain no credence, friendship, or sympathy from any
one—especially from those who by their position, calling, and
influence are the very ones to whom this very interesting and
Divine work is sent unto. Here have I for the last fourteen
years been trying by all and every means in my power to make
known what is in reality Divine information—Divinely re-


ceived—of the greatest possible truth and importance to every-
one, and yet I have made the least possible progress ; and
why ? simply because I am not believed, and I am not
believed because my statements, important as they are, are
judged on the evidence of individual private opinion, and not
on the Divine particular evidence that I am furnished with.
But is this righteous judgment? Is this the proper way for
Christian gentlemen to receive Divine communications that
bear the stamp and signature of the Holy Ghost on every page
of their contents ? Can any reasonable man suppose for a
moment that it is possible for a man to persevere in the
manner I have done for the last fourteen years in trying to
induce leaders of the Christian Church by verbal, written, and
printed communications on this all important subject—ap-
pealing, as they do, to the special work of Jesus Christ, and
maintaining the Divine agency of the Holy Ghost, unless God
was with him and instructing him so to do ? I would most
respectfully ask my Christian friends if the whole matter, from
the very commencement, does not bear the stamp of God’s
protection and instruction ? or how could it exist in defiance
of the persecution, slander, and reproach that, through un-
belief, has been hurled against it ? Now, my friends, I tell
you candidly that your opposition to this Divine cause is
becoming a very serious case against your profession of Chris-
tianity, and since the last meeting of the so-called Christian
Conference of the Young Men’s Christian Association, I have
felt very acutely the manner in which my efforts to bring this
great work into prominence was met by men calling themselves
Christians, as if such a matter was in reality not fit for a body
of men to listen to, although it did concern the Second Coming
of Him they all profess to love ; and then when I attempt to
use a Christian’s right to address a meeting on a vital ques-
tion I must not be permitted because, forsooth, the chairman
does not believe in inspiration. But, my Christian friends,
this state of things will not be permitted to go on much
longer. It is you who are in the wrong, not me ; it is worse
than useless for you or any one to set up private opinion con-
cerning Christ’s Second Coming against the express Divine
instruction that has been set before some of you for the last
fourteen years, that it is express and specially Divine instruc-


tion that I am making known is the object I have in view in
writing this additional pamphlet, and as I sincerely hope a
great many interested Christian people will read this intro-
duction, and perhaps may not have seen “ The Midnight Cry,”
I will briefly recapitulate some of the evidence these pamphlets
contained. The writer came to Victoria, from Adelaide, some
eleven years ago to publish and proclaim the Divine informa-
tion he had there received concerning the Future Work and
Personal Reign of Christ on earth of the Lord Jesus ; and, in
consequence of the rejection by the leaders of the Christian
Church of my Divine evidence, I was compelled to make the
matter known to the Government of this colony, who at once,
and without the least consideration of my evidence, condemned
me insane, and subjected me to a long course of cruel and
painful imprisonment for over five years, but all this is con-
tained in the other pamphlets, and may be obtained at some
booksellers should anyone feel sufficiently interested. Now,
before I make known the startling and very important fact
that led to my imprisonment, and the particular statement on
which I was condemned, I should like it to be understood that
I make it very unwillingly, for I would much rather that the
fact had come out in a public and proper examination of my
evidence, but seeing I cannot arouse sufficient interest in the
Divine cause without making this important and interesting
fact known in a public manner, I have been led to feel it a duty
on my part, in the interests of the Divine work, to reveal the
very important fact, in the sincere hope that by doing so I
shall awaken in the hearts of many a sincere desire to know
how and in what manner the important fact I disclose was
committed unto me, and I may safely say I shall only be too
glad to give every information in ray power that may lead to
the vindication of the great and good work from the foul,
cruel, and blasphemous charge of insanity that has for so long
a time opposed its onward course. As the particular state-
ment I am about to make has been the cause of all my per-
secution and distress, which, of course, has been all the more
difficult to bear, as I was under the impression, and am so
still, that a high and heavenly honour had been conferred upon
me, and as this particular fact seems to be the stone of
stumbling and rock of offence unto many—when it should be


the guiding star of faith to all ; for what is the meaning of
the name of Christ but God manifest in the flesh, and as it is
highly necessary that the opposing mountain of unbelief should
at once be removed, I hope I may be pardoned for again
alluding to the great, high, and Divine authority under which
I act, and constantly receive instruction. Let me remind my
kind readers that it is none other than God Himself, for it is the
Holy Ghost, in conjunction with the instruction of the Word
of God, which tells us that He worketh in us to will and do of
His good pleasure. Now, if my statements are derived from
this Divine source of all truth, should they not in all reason
be believed ? Now I need not remind my Christian readers
that that Divine Being acts independently of man’s opinion
of what is right and wrong,—shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right ?
Now, having stated to my readers by what authority I act,
I will at once lay before you the information that, although
made known to many of the leaders of the Christian Church
during the past eleven years, has never been published to the
world until now, and, as I have stated, I make it now reluc-
tantly, for the fact ought certainly to have come out by the
elucidation of my evidence at the hands of interested persons ;
but as I find I have to act on the aggressive, I feel myself
Divinely instructed to make known the truth to the world at
large. The very important and interesting fact is this, then—
that I am the Son of God, created and regenerated so by the
Divine power of God the Holy Ghost, for the purpose of fulfilling
the promises and prophecies of the Word of God relating to
the setting up of the kingdom of God, and accomplishing the
personal reign on earth of the Lord Jesus Christ in accordance
and conjunction with the information and instruction contained
in the Word of God. Now, my kind friends, this is the in-
formation that has been counted madness, and treated as such.
But is it madness ? Am I not the living witness who has
been making every effort since the great and glorious intelli-
gence was given unto me this past thirteen years to declare it
to be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth—
a blessed truth that should at once enlist the heart with joy,
anddem and the greatest gratitude that God in His great mercy
should commit a work of such surpassing magnitude unto


mankind. Oh ! no, it is no madness on my part, but I will
show you where the madness and the blasphemy lie, and that
is in denying and rejecting the heaven-bom and God-sent
work ; yes, to deny and reject the Divine evidence and work
of God the Holy Ghost, that is madness—that is blasphemy
of the worst description. Well now, my Christian friends, to
bring this Divine and glorious work out of the mire of unbelief
that has been heaped upon it, something must be done on your
part as well as mine. lam in possession of Divine evidence
of the most convincing character to uphold the truth of my
affirmations, but there must also be a disposition on your part
to be convinced. You see plainly that I myself am only, so
to speak, an instrument, although an honoured one, in this
right of making known the mind of God to the world on this
all-important matter. I do not put forth any one statement
as my own private or particular opinion, but as the direct,
special, and express teaching and intention of God the Holy
Ghost according to the Scriptures of truth.
Now, in conclusion, there is one feature of this particular
work that I wish to point out more especially to those who
are leaders and teachers in the Christian Church, and that is
this—that every fresh effort I make to place before you this
important matter in its true and proper light, increases your
responsibility in rejecting it, Can you not see that in reject-
ing this great matter so persistently brought before you you
are ignoring the very existence of God Himself, and are
setting up your own opinion as an idol in His place ; you pray
for light and the extension of His kingdom, and yet refuse to
receive the means by which that end is to be accomplished—
because those means are contrary to your wishes or precon-
ceived ideas. I would ask you respectfully how is it possible
that my information can be anything else but truth ? Is not
our God the living God ? Can the blessed spirit of God be
divided against Himself ? Is He not the Author of every-
thing that is good and sacred—more especially of everything
relating to the past, present, and future work of Jesus Christ?
Who, I ask you in His great name, could, would, or should
dare unbidden to invade the inner circle of the Triune God of
Holiness ? Who but him whom God has given the right dare
enter the Holy of Holies and eat of the fruit of the tree


of knowledge? Can you not realise the fact that my
being in possession of the knowledge of this Divine work is
one of the most convincing proofs that I have been anointed
the person I represent I am, for unto none other could it
possibly be given, for is it not written—“ I will not give my
glory to another, neither my praise to graven images.” Oh,
my friends, let me entreat you to resist no longer against the
progress of this God-sent work, but gather together the
evidence and prepare your hearts to receive and help on the
most glorious work ever launched upon the world’s great stage
of action, which will prove itself none other than the Kingdom
of God spoken of by Daniel and all the prophets down to the
days of Jesus Christ Himself; such a Divine work, we may
rest assured, is calculated by the wise councils of heaven for
the purpose of advancing the glory of God, the kingdom of
Christ, and the best interests of humanity, from the Queen to
the meanest subject of the realm. Now let me conclude this
pamphlet with a solemn and urgent request that you will
scatter to the winds all vague uncertainties concerning the
manner of Christ’s Second Coming, and be willing to investi-
tigate the Divine evidence I am always able and willing to
give and produce, and forget not what suffering, humiliation,
and distress your unbelief in the Divine work has already been
the cause of to me ; and, lastly, I would remind you—l am
appealing to leaders in the Christian Church—that this
rejection, if continued, is a sin of such a character that not
even the precious blood of Christ can atone for and wash away
—for this reason, it is against Himself personally and God the
Holy Ghost.
P.S.—Anyone feeling desirous of corresponding with the
writer will kindly leave a note at booksellers ; and I beg leave
to mention that should this pamphlet meet with moderate
success it will give me great pleasure to publish the lectures I
have promised, which contain all the Scriptural information
concerning this great and interesting Divine work.
“ Behold the sure foundation-stone
Which God in Zion lays,
To build our heavenly hopes upon,
And His eternal praise.”
Frearsou and Brother, Printers, King William-street, Adelaide.


i V -
; ■ V
. 'I ■ -


. 1
.
, At
