





RIP TIDE


RIP TIDE
A Novel in Verse
by
William Rose Benét
New York,
Duffield & Green
1932


COPYRIGHT MCMXXXII BY DUPFIELD it GREEN
PRINTED IN TUB UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


To Lora Baxter


SHEILA




Sheila
I
SHE lay and listened for the exiled sound
Of far-off surf, incessant underdrum
Familiar to a shore-born childhood, heard
Rumoring through girlhood dream. With no desire
For aught but this, in space without a bound
She seemed to float, unconscious of the hum
And flutter as of wings of a baffled bird
Filling her room with firelight from the fire.
Pillow and counterpane of the cumbrous bed
Wherein she looked so frail, so white a flower,
Caught light from fading radiance of the west
Through one broad window where a pine bough swayed.
Languidly toward it she inclined her head
Whose bright consuming eyes seemed to devour
The waning hour. A glory on brow and breast
Her coppery hair across the pillow strayed.


‘My sea!” she thought. Tall tree-trunks of the grove
Lined the red sun with black and rigid bars,
Their purple shadows wavering down the snow.
Yet somewhere swelled the dunes, somewhere must be
That only corsive for the wounds of love,
That clean, cold restitution of the stars,
The seething foam, the roaring overflow
Of the crested and unconquerable sea!
Lulled by the thought, she drifted on the dream,
Nor knew the opening door, the logs bestirred
Deftly where the capacious fireplace loomed.
She scarcely felt the hand upon her brow
Or heard, in tones as unctuous as cream,
The district nurse’s voice; but now she heard
His quick step in the hall. “Tread of the doomed!”
She thought; and turned her head to listen, now.
Swiftly he entered, gone since early dawn.
She saw her husband Dermot’s burning eyes,
His hawklike face, his ever-restless hands,
His powerful height in awkward clothing cased.
She heard her name, her thin pale hands were drawn
Close to his breast. He knelt with no surmise
Of thought as bleak as seemed his old commands.
His eyes searched through her, and one arm embraced,
4
Rip Tide


“Sheila!” The now discreetly closing door
Left them alone. “Sheila!” She seemed to see
A forest path, a clearing, and a tall
Upspringing pine, with healing in its boughs.
That was before —oh, that was long before
The ravage to this lightning-riven tree.
That was brief Eden long before the Fall, —
Sparta, long ere the curse fell on the house.
Her still, small oval face, a cameo
Clear-featured in the ambush of her hair
That veiled its pallor, seemed almost to command
A flush of rose within that burnishing.
The fey delights he never was to know
Rose to her eyes, stood wild, as swift to scare
As barefoot dream. One coppery rivulet strand
Lay on his rough hand like a little wing.
So he, who lived by fire, famished by fire,
Changelessly unconsumed and burning ever,
His passion always razing what he reared,
His heart a hound hunting to kill his peace
Though ever tracking beauty with desire,
Gazed at the wasting prey of one endeavor
And felt her tugging heart that leapt and veered
Beneath his hand and quivered for release.
5
Sheila


“How has the day gone, Sheila? Tell me, dear.
I’ve been so anxious for you, all the day.
I hate to leave you, but of course you know
How the work drives, now winter felling’s on.”
Her white face smiled, “Oh, I was quiet here.
I really think I’m better, in a way.”
She thought, “The end to suffering is so slow,
And what may life intend, when I am gone?”
“Have you seen Barry?” she asked. “I just looked in.
He’s quite imperious for his supper now.
Annie was laughing. There’s a lad of two!”
Both smiled. “Oh can’t I see him?” “Not tonight.
Darling, you must get well; you’ve grown so thin.”
He placed a rough warm hand upon her brow.
“The doctor said you weren’t to overdo.
You can be certain that your son’s all right.”
Dermot at last was gone. She lay like death,
Starved for the voice of ocean in her ears.
Yet slowly she seemed drifting toward a deep . . .
Again the nurse’s voice, the draught she brought . . .
And then once more she lay with painful breath,
Spent beyond either phantom hopes or fears,
Dreaming a tide, drifting to infinite sleep,
Till one loved face rose from the bourne of thought.
6
Rip Tide


II
On Hawkflight Head the turfy cliff falls sheer,
The gulls mew near with clamorous plaintiveness.
A lock of hair blew fluttering in his eyes.
“Gordon!” That was to make him turn and see.
His questioning eyes were on her, blue and clear.
“I was just thinking; nothing at all, I guess.”
“Sheila, oh Sheila, isn’t this Paradise!
What’s that sweet funny song you sang to me?”
He looked and meant “Lord Level”, and he meant
There were just two of them in the world, just two.
“Sing it! You know I love your voice,” he said.
Then turned, shading his eyes against the sun
To watch far off one snowy sail that leant
Dancing the sunblaze through the abyss of blue.
Bronzed face and hand, straight poise, and upflung head
Blonde as a viking’s. Surely he was the one!
Grandmother’s song, “Lord Lovel”! That was so
“Gordonish” of him, like a countersign,
From summer’s omen, her preposterous joy,
This sudden droll companion grown so near.
She had sung one verse once, shyly, bending low
As though to tie a trailing garden vine.
7
Sheila


Now it drew flattery from this arrogant boy.
Nevertheless, she sang it, high and clear:
When will you be back, Lord Lovel? she said;
When will you be back? said she.
In a year or two or three at the most
Pll return to my Lady Nancee,
PH return to my Lady Nancee . . . !
So on through all the verses. All the while
He stood with shaded forehead, gazing to sea.
Clearly she sang, fingering the grass, astare
At the far horizon, till it blurred to mist
Suddenly, Eloquent tears had met his smile.
His arms were around her. When their lips were free
Half ruefully they drew apart, aware
Of cloud that had dimmed the sunlight while they kissed.
A week of childish romance. He was gone,
Vanished to college. Then Sheila’s mother died
Young in her forties. Hers the Celtic strain
Flickering like wildfire through her daughter’s blood.
The father, Frederick Trescott, living on
In the seaport town, turned recluse with his pride,
Felt slowly all his old ambitions wane,
Drifted, it seemed, through hells half understood.
8
Rip Tide


So she remembered, moving along her dream
As one who wanders through an empty home
Venturing each room to recognize from dearth
Familiar phantoms starting forth unsought.
Again her grandfather voiced his favorite theme;
Clippers from China, shearing the homebound foam;
Or jested of the year of her father’s birth
When the first telegraph tapped, “What hath God wrought.”
She saw him plain, gnarled follower of the sea,
Bruce Trescott, hale at seventy, hickory-grown,
Stumping his captain’s walk, such deeds to think on
You felt his gaze pierced far beyond the bay
Straight to old roadsteads where his sails should be.
She heard again his gruff old voice intone:
“They sang, ye know, ‘The gals link on to Lincoln
Because, they said, ‘their Mothers were for Clay!’ ”
Though now, it seemed, her father’s voice was there,
Telling the rarely told, of Chancellorsville,
Young wounds that caused his forfeiting the sea,
Though soon enough the wooden hulls were gone.
She saw his head with early-silvered hair
Bent toward his dusk law-office window-sill,
Scanning some haven where his heart would be
Far past night’s harbor lights just twinkling on . . .
9
Sheila


Flashlights of memory . . . then her heart was loud
With old rerisen emotion, half dismay.
First past her face that dark and hawklike head
Stooped to her hand, the tortured eyes so kind.
Stranger, then strangely husband, —Dermot Cloud.
Brief passionate wild wooing, then away
West to the Lakes where lumber mill-towns spread.
Gordon had long forgot. Her heart was blind.
She wondered now as she had wondered then,
Grasped by a will to which her will was water,
Why all young love had meant had not prevailed
Despite one careless boy who ceased to write.
Yet when the strangest man among all men
First met and faced his friend’s, her father’s daughter,
So fiercely that accipitrine will assailed
The trembling quarry was in his talons tight . . .
On which worn image of hawk and dove she woke,
Lay wanly smiling at a chilly moon.
Dermot was just a man, one kind of man,
A man who loved her, terribly loved her still.
Sometimes her pity ached for him, there broke
A sudden light, making his night as noon,
Showing it seemed some old original plan
Needing the work of that insatiate will.
10
Rip Tide


Another kind of woman? Threadbare tale
Of stale miscasting by oblivious fate!
Chance, all was chance, a chance for bale or bliss,
Risking relentless nature’s ancient force.
The weak shall fail, the stronger shall prevail,
Emotion moves in us that will not wait
But clasps the shadow of love for what love is,
Seeks the mirage and misconceives the source.
Nor was his appetite for possession new,
Old as the war of love in woman and man,
Old as the chafing of bonds, the bursting of bonds,
Or endlessly recriminating days
With life one long sour tedium to live through.
And perfect love , that grows as it began,
Continuous joy to which each nerve responds?
Youth’s foolish vanity, gauzed in rainbow haze!
No, there was something else. Deeply she knew.
Had it not happened? Shadows on a screen
They moved —even one’s nearest —in the light
That clothed one glorified presentment then.
How strange it was, how strange it should be true?
O how incredible the thing had been!
Embroiled in all this coil of wrong and right,
Entangled in these curious laws of men.
11
Sheila


11l
First leaving Sunbury, on her marriage day,
With Dermot ardent, gentle, kindly and proud,
Many misgivings fainter, —how her vow
Burned in her breast, appeared to make it light;
How silly indeed they had been, how silly and gay,
Two children running handfast under a cloud,
Paul and Virginia,—yet it assailed her now,
The sudden tenebrous terror of that night.
So long ago, such a jest to the world of men,
Oh well she knew it! But what an infant seemed
Her then-Self now, with its pretty airs and graces
And vastly ignorant innocence; yet if love,
True love had welded two, what of nightmare then?
This was something she knew forever, not something she dreamed,
Though now she was quite inured to the change some faces
Strangely assumed with the things they were thinking of.
But a fool she had been, and life is harsh to a fool.
Then the grief of her stormy Dermot spoke to her heart,
Her motherhood for him woke, it blossomed a space.
She even preened because she was thus possessed.
He was merely her little boy, so she played at school;
Then each essayed, for a while, a romantic part;
12
Rip Tide


Yet always the anguish followed on his embrace,
Ever he seemed to her ravening at her breast.
The body was nothing; she gave him her body in love, —
Well, if not in love, in pity, —ideas of his right,
Ideas of her loyalty, generous thoughts and kind, —
The body was nothing, she gave it to him for his ease;
But neither was this his end, for he clutched above
At fluttering wings from his ravage ever in flight,
Waged furious war on some fortress in her mind.
There were certain things—she could not give him these.
Things she could not explain. Not Gordon then;
Gordon was dim and afar, a face in a book,
A secret keepsake from summer childishness
Fit solely for sentimental reverie.
There were some things women could never explain to men,
She guessed it was that. And meanwhile Dermot took,
Sought and sought through her nature, reaping distress . . .
She had never dreamed of the Gordon that might be.
Though often she longed for Sunbury, she yearned
Exiled in inland hills near an inland town
Where Dermot’s timber contracts filled his mind,
No shipyard timber here but lumber a mort
For busy mills, —she longed for the foam that churned
13
Sheila


And fountained to spray at the cliff in the coign of the down;
For the oilskins and wharves and boats of the bay she pined,
And the bustle and deep-sea dazzle of Sunbury port.
Somehow, born near the sea, you partook of the sea,
Its weight of fate, its challenge to the affray.
Its elemental languor through moods of calm,
Its incessant whisper of peace, its limitless plain
Whereover the soul like the white winging gulls went free
Far out, far out, out over the waves and away.
Though all tall trees in the hills were dripping balm
Her only prayer was return to the sea again.
If you belonged to the hills, perhaps the hills
Imbued your spirit with their influence too,
Granite patience and star-familiar power;
Yet Dermot, born of the hills, seemed more akin
To storm. The crooked lightnings of clashing wills
Worked in the mirk of a mind that seldom knew
Calm, control, or the calculable hour.
From birth seemed set the snares that he blundered in.
It was true he was Celtic also, but more than the Celt
Bore the cross of another strain from his mother’s side;
Bloods badly mixed; a dominant will to hold
And bind, then a sudden impatience to tear and rend
14
Rip Tide


Even his own mind’s peace, or the thing he felt
Supremest happiness. Some warped demon of pride
Worked in a mind so far that was canny and bold
And farther, its own desolation, world without end.
In his work he stood well with men, but his work was marred
By fitful flares of temper, by brilliant aims
Rejected to others, just on a flash, at a word.
In his furious hours of labor, doomed to be thwart,
He drove his men, but himself he drove most hard,
Then the disaffection took him, the sullen flames
Smouldered again in his eyes. She almost heard
The rustle of burning creep through the beat of his heart.
Nor was he of those harassed through each waking hour
By a vision demeaning their task, who are plagued in the brain
To white-hot anger for all that their land might be
If order and equity routed the feudal foray,
If industrial chaos were ended, if lust for power
And seizure for private wealth of the public domain
Were branded theft, if man might walk upright and free
And a disinherited folk stand forth in the day.
No, he was part of his age and its shibboleths,
Ruled by his private ambitions. Only the blind
Warp of his nature worked his eternal defeat.
15
Sheila


He accepted the ways of his day and its rulers of men.
Faith in a better order was not of his faiths.
Yet ever questing he missed what he never could find.
In the height of the hills, or the glare of the roaring street,
Like a hound at fault he checked and quartered again.
He had thought that she,—but he lacked the patience for love.
Passion only, possession, jealousy deep
Of the moods of her mind, of something he never could prison
Or kill, as the animal kills when its passion is done.
Mate but not merged in him, this he was cognizant of.
What did she know that so irked him, awake or asleep?
Always it haunted him, walked like a ghost rearisen,
Always it whispered from moonrise, shadowed the sun.
This, with no means of a cure, she had long since found
Scored in the lines of his face, distinct in a thought
Quickly distrustful of hers, of a straying of eyes
Even, a fugitive smile. And now as she lay
Musing in moonlight, “Now,” she averred, “there is ground.
Fear of chimaeras, unrest, and suspicion have brought
This upon him, and to me a tissue of lies
Coiling a secret in all that I do or say!”
16
Rip Tide


IV
Eight years of torture, bringing no child to change
Two lives it was laying waste. Was the fault in her?
What ironic fate had prevailed past all control,
What forces deranged fruition, what wild warfare
Waged through the flesh by the spirit? And how strange
Not that God was afar, but that she, if barren she were,
Denied to herself with her soul what she asked with her soul,
That the innermost cells of her being repulsed her own prayer,
So she had agonized down the conventional days,
Days when proprieties bound all thought on the wheel,
An age when children by chance were begot in a cloud,
When the passion of love was shame in the dead of night,
When the young found knowledge in furtive, devious ways,
And nothing, of course, was uttered that was not “genteel,
And the fundamentals of life were disavowed,
Though the “visitations of God” were in all men’s sight.
So nothing at all could be said. But at times he would stand
Beyond the evening lamplight, close to the pane,
Staring the darkness through, his pride on the rack,
Curt to a tremulous question, cruelly curt.
Or, slouched in a chair with his book, she would see his hand
Suddenly tremble and clench. All comfort was vain.
17
Sheila


Now, could she call her amazing delinquency back,
Would she? And see him as then so savagely hurt?
No, that was pretext. The morning the letter came
Something fortuitous willed it should find her alone.
The writing was strange, she felt no presentiment at all,
Slitting the envelope, smoothing the page by her plate.
Then, at the opening words, swift search for the name,
‘Gordon” All other thought to the compass was blown.
A rampart suddenly crumbled, a long-built wall.
Deep in her heart began a tolling of fate.
Though here was a different Gordon, boy grown man.
His letter seemed wilfully stilted. She stared at naught,
Stunned to astonishment, scared by the exquisite joy
Mounting and mounting within her, to overrun
In catching breath. What folly! Yet she began
Rapid rereading, full of confusion of thought,
But flushed with deflected memories of the boy
As the moon in the shadow of earth still glows with the sun,
Chance and “a railroad job” had brought him near.
Now “after all these years” he had learned of her home.
Auld acquaintance—” he quoted. “That childishness even
Flutters my idiot heart; though he’ll never know,”
She thought. The town he mentioned she sought each year
18
Rip Tide


For seasonal shopping. He wondered if he might come
To “pay his regards.” But another plan for heaven
She formed on a sudden impulse, and answered him so.
“Midsummer madness,” she mused. It was Spring in fact,
With all the excuses of Spring for errands to town.
The journey was long, but evening would see her return.
Dermot consented. Her letter appointed the place.
Yet, strange to herself, she discovered a guileful tact
Concealing all mention of Gordon, beating down
All murmur of conscience, urged by some caution we learn
Or by dreams that years had labored in vain to efface.
So she was on the train. And above the wheels
Her heart was wild with rhythm, the yearly round
Of desolation in comfort, of dreary strain,
From clicking rails fled fluttering far behind.
Like wings in flight she felt, as the seabird feels
Soaring in sun through the blue without a bound.
“Innocent interlude; only to see him again,
To talk,” she thought, “and to put him out of my mind.”
Then a phrase of Dermot’s came, as to faults in trees,
Used when a certain Assuring spread like rays.
“Star-shake,” they called it. She was starrily shaken,
She smiled to herself; but the tree of her life would stand
19
Sheila


Hale and whole; her soul was in no disease.
Yet a fateful tremor ran through her mind at the phrase,
A portent moved, a resolve was almost taken
To return and renounce the meeting so madly planned.
Tall and alert, swiftly he strode to her,
Straight down the restaurant aisle from the open door.
Grasping her hand, “Do you know,” with a little bow,
“You forgot to say one word of what you would wear.
But, Sheila, you’re just the same. . . . No, not a demur;
You’ve not changed one single particle. What’s more,
If you’ll let me say it, you’re even lovelier now.”
He seated himself. He was actually there.
For an instant she could not speak; for he brought the sun
Just as of old; he dazzled with brightest noon.
Then (Imagine the curious man remembering!)
He tossed her a phrase of their youth. They laughed together,
Then spoke all at once.
“Here, something must be done,
Really about some food,” said Gordon soon.
He summoned the waiter.
Something—or anything!
She thought. Her mind was a rainbow, her heart a feather.
20
Rip Tide


Two hours of talk, recalling Hawkflight Cliff,
The daisy meadows, Sunbury in the sun,
Endover Lane’s wild roses; never a thing
They did not both remember. Faintly afar
Faded all other voices.
“And the skiff
We took, to fish for flounder, the leaky one
That nearly capsized—!”
“And the ring of grass, the ring
You were always to keep!”
They stood on an alien star.
Thus the first meeting —and last. She had told him so.
They must part on this. There was Dermot. He mustn’t dream—.
So they said the words. They wandered from street to street.
They said all the words again, . . . And now they must part. . . .
And at last he said, “It doesn’t come twice, you know,
To men; but a boy is a fool the fool that I seem—!”
Down the paths of a little park they had found a retreat.
Suddenly she was sobbing against his heart.
So that was the first, and the next time was the last.
Tea in his rooms, their caution awake and aware.
Rain on the pane with a late Spring storm in flight.
The drowsy light of the fire; the man of men
Holding her close in his arms. How the rain beat fast
21
Sheila


On the window, on her heart. When she loosed her hair
In its red-gold flood, at his plea, to his tranced delight,
They were mad with the ache of parting. It happened then . . .
V
She lay remembering, and beneath her room
Recognized once again thd muffled sound
Of a light, rapid, and continuous tread.
Each night she had heard that pacing of unrest,
Her weakness terming it the tread of doom,
Though knowing it only Dermot, prison-bound
By her late illness to his separate bed.
Ignorant of the secrets of her breast.
Still ignorant, since some pity of the gods
It seemed, had let no single rumor creep
From town to home. And ever since the hour
When anguished lovers wrested themselves apart,
Less than of old, indeed, had seemed at odds
Herself and Dermot, though the road was steep,
Stony, and blind; strangely she felt such power
And intimate glory move within her heart.
Recompense, yes, —guilt she could never feel,
Never. But now when on the midnight loomed
22
Rip Tide


Her sure foreboding of her end so near,
She mused on Barry, her child, the long-denied,
Born in due reckoned time; and wondered still
If that was why she murmured “tread of the doomed”
Of Dermot’s step. Why, what had he to fear
From the little boy who so restored his pride?
Searching the infant face, she could not find
One trace of Gordon, or indeed, of her.
Blonde with her own young blondeness, that was all.
Merry and strong he seemed; and yet —and yet —
Puzzling upon his birth, she threshed her mind . . .
And what might be his future, what occur
Beyond her knowledge? Was a curse to fall
On innocence such pure passion could beget?
Their passion, be it damned, had surely flared
From purest love; their bitter parting pain
Agony few could know; their sundering then,
Because she willed it, absolute. One word
He had sent her only, “Forever.” Now she bared
Her heart to the moon, and knew it without stain,
Saw Gordon still one man among all men,
And golden destiny all that had occurred. . . .
23
Sheila


And then, O at last her sea was in her ears,
The rising roar of her sea. She saw its acres
Flawed with whitecaps, far to the moon laid bare
In a silvery heaving plain; the turbulent tide
Spreading in foam. And rose in her bed with tears
Crying aloud to the wild magnificent breakers,
To the infinite deep; and, with running steps on the stair
And her name thrice-called, fell back on her pillow and died.
24
Rip Tide


GORDON




Gordon
I
TH E room was high and wide and full of light.
Broad windows glassed
The Yards below, eddying with steam blown white,
Gleaming with steel, where coal-black monsters passed:
High-shouldered locomotives, shunted cars
That rippled rumble down a dragon’s length
As slow hands waved and clinking couplings fell,
And voices called and sterterous power gulped strength
From seething fires; thick breathing; thunderous jars;
Upstanding towers ruling whistle and bell.
Inside the room a wide flat desk wire-trayed
Was spread with papers and a blue-print plan.
On one white wall, the portrait of a man,
The Line’s first President; on another one
An architect’s drawing, done


Of the new Terminus; a third displayed
The Cannonball, full flight, as she essayed
Her record run.
Hands clasped upon the desk, rapidly clear
Gordon dictated, halted, found his word . . .
Like a pecking bird
A girl’s quick hand transformed his speech to queer
Hieroglyphics, flipped the page, and bent
To her ruled book, adroitly intent.
Twilight drew near,
It shadowed all the smoke and glow below
The gleaming panes.
The blue gloom grew
Within the room. And suddenly a train’s
Wild wail approaching, or some other sound,
Pierced the man’s drumming thought. Words ceased.
He glanced around.
“That’s all then. That will do,
Miss Marvin. Why, it’s dusk! Turn on the light.
That’s all. Those letters needn’t go tonight.”
Across the room the girl
Snapped harsh light overhead.
“ ‘Night, Mr. Powell,” she said.
28
Rip Tide


Through the glass-panelled door her tapping tread
Receded as the door closed. In his chair,
Shoulder-bent, with wearied stare,
The man sat still. The great panes glimmered pearl
Shot with wild fires. Then, remembering
A half-forgotten thing,
Eyes sought his desk; a letter to one side
Was slit and crackled wide.
Most casual though affectionate recalling
Of Maine, of where it was he used to stay
On long-gone youthful holiday
With this same relative, till that last September;
A mere remote reminder. Then
“You must remember
The Trescotts here? I think you used to know
The daughter, Sheila, who married and went away.
The father died last May; and so,
As it turns out, was spared a bitter blow;
For now we have the news that Sheila, Mrs. Cloud,
Died suddenly in the West the other day.
She left a son, they say, a little boy —
The black ink blurred to gray.
The room seemed thunderously loud
With hammering of his heart. The heavens were falling.
29
Gordon


II
Even as first wild joy
From the heart was wrested,
Dream that still persisted
The Fates destroy;
Now, even as then
When, for long, Delight
Wandered through barren night,
Fate strikes again.
As then, when widening miles
Whirled us apart,
Rending heart from heart, —
When the swaying aisles
Of my train blurred
To one still place,
To the look on your face
With your final word;
And as then, for long,
When my spirit fought
Wild wars of thought,
Weighing right with wrong,
Wrong against right,
The protean-formed,
30
Rip Tide


While my passion stormed
Up the obdurate night;
Heart lead-encased, —
O difficult breath,
Taste as of death
In the writhing mouth!
Thought that paced
An iron cage, —
No drop to assuage
Dark, bitter drouth.
Such wine spilt
Of rebellious blood, —
The black mood
Heavy with guilt, —
But the heavier now! . . .
For his brain refused
The truth , as he mused
With tortured brow. . . .
Never to write, she had told him never to write,
He heard his mind keep saying,
And knew his heart a turmoil of grief and pity and fright
And desolate, agonized praying.
31
Gordon


Through these years he had fought alone, these few brief years,
Toiling early and late, —
Won at last to a certain peace, though shaken by whispering fears,
“There is no foiling of fate!”
And now, was there nothing to do, nothing whatever to do?
“Just what?” his reason said
Sardonic, deep in his brain, “And the pitiful dream gone too
That you cherished. She is dead.”
Yet the child? He remembered revealing words of hers
That beat and beat in his brain.
Was it possible that this child—? But when perilous question stirs,
Instinct would have it slain.
A vital suture tore in his heart it seemed
As he rose to his feet distraught,
Clamping cold palms to his brow (for the fool who had dreamed—!)
In new confusion of thought.
She had sent him only one word with a token to keep
Ages, it seemed, ago.
Now the agonizing truth that he sought lay buried too deep.
He was never to know.
32
Rip Tide


Silence the one way now; grim silence lay
On his breast for worst or best,
Lest any act of racked impulse only serve to betray
The eternal loveliest.
Silence weighed like an iron casque of doom;
A shroud of iron he wore.
Like the walking dead he moved at last through the lighted room;
Then, in darkness, opened the door,
“Well, Gordon, working late?” Of all men it was Blaine,
Department Head. The other, in shadow swaying,
Fumbling his overcoat, heard the words in his brain,
But what was old Blaine saying?
He must pull himself together. He managed a spectral smile.
“Man, I was looking for you,”
Said Blaine. “You’ve been working late for this long, long while.
Do you know what I’m going to do—?
Take you home for dinner tonight; so you needn’t say you’re engaged!
Gordon, you really look ill. .
Come now; for my car’s downstairs.” Then, as Gordon inwardly raged,
He heard himself murmur, “Why,—that’s very kind —I will,”
Regretting it instantly. But his heart was dead
Or numbed to the point of death.
From the office he followed the other with stiff and leaden tread
Drawing a harsh deep breath.
33
Gordon


11l
Lights of the streets; and the closed coupe was bowling
Smoothly amid their dazzle, sliding sleek through a mist
Of sleety rain; and Blaine was smoking and talking—
Something about a shipment of rails. They were rolling
Out on the boulevard now . . . The rain—the tryst
In the rain—in that other city . . . Oh if one knew
What was hidden behind the years!
Rasped horns were squawking
In a sudden jam of traffic. Then they drew
Clear of it, swung round corners; a velvet jar
As they entered a drive from the street.
The door clicked. Blaine was saying, “Here we are!
Come, Gordon, — I’ve something ’ll put you on your feet!”
Back in Blaine’s study, he took the proffered glass
As though in fingers of stone, —felt a hot shudder pass
Through his numbness, and knew he had drained it all at a draught
Blaine stood raising his own, and twinkling. Then he laughed,
“Put new life in you?” “Yes —,” said Gordon, “that’s very good.
No—no more!” The warmth of the room, the genial mood
Of his host, and the grip that the stimulant gave him now
Brightened his eyes a little, a little lightened his brow.
“Well, now for a wash,” said Blaine, “and we’ll join the ladies out there.
I didn’t tell you —my daughter Lillian’s here,
34
Rip Tide


Home from a visit!” And Gordon, trying to seem to care,
Sought for an answer. “Man, but you’re very near
Cracking,” said Blaine, “after the long hard strain
We’ve had the last few months. I’m going to recommend
A real vacation soon for you, my friend. . . .
Let’s join my wife and Lillian!”
Dinner then;
And Gordon ate in a daze and talked in a daze,
Aware of the girl beside him, and often again
Lost in a painful stupor. But she had ways,
It seemed, of drawing him forth, and soothing, and seeing
Somehow at first sight into the depths of his being . . .
In the drawing-room she sat and played to them all
Softly and skilfully, while Gordon above her
Leaned, quite unaware he was learning to love her
Even then—though the heavens had seemed to fall . . .
What does this music say,
Variably rippling away
Under my fugitive fingers ,
What is it lingers
Subtly to sway
My heart? Some mystery
Of pain I have never known,
Of a life too darkly alone
In its deeper wisdom than mine . . .
35
Gordon


A history
I must further understand . . .
Eyes I would keep, and a hand
On mine, in the deeps of sleep . . .
Who now only dimly divine
A need that speaks to a need
In me, — a strength to be freed
From some deep distress , . .
So the girl, scarce woman grown,
Shy and romantic, shielded
In unworldly gentleness,
Mused on an unexpected power wielded
Over her dreaming brain by enigmatic pain
In Gordon; while, through her eyes on his, she seemed
Moment by moment a like mysterious destiny dreamed . . .
IV
Days later, Blaine was suddenly beside
His desk.
“Well, Gordon, I’ve managed to arrange
Everything now—and you shall get your change.
And how about this, —just put that stubborn pride
Of yours in your pocket a little and listen to me!
I’m shipping my wife and Lillian off for a cruise
36
Rip Tide


On the Swift. Well, both of them very much wish you to be
Their escort —start right now —no time to lose;
First Florida, by train; the yacht’s down there;
Just what you need, blue water and tropic air
And a month to rebuild.”
“But really, sir, —indeed —!”
‘No, boy, —here’s your ticket. I know how you’ve worked. You’re freed
For a month from all this. You’re not allowed to say no.
Who’s the boss here, anyway?”
“All right—l’ll go —
Though I don’t know how to thank you!”
“Merely,” said Blaine,
‘My own self-interest—foresight.” His pleasant laugh
Rang out. “I’ll not have my right-hand man ruined from over-strain.
I’m going to need you badly. You’ve stood the gaff!”
, . . Weeks later, a night of moonlight . . . The heavy cloud
Lifted from Gordon’s spirit, or seemed to lift,
Afar in a Southern roadstead, dreamlike adrift
To firefly riding-lights . . .
His head was bowed
On Lillian’s glimmering hands. In that charmed hour of rest,
Anguish at last seemed lulled, as she breathed against his breast . . .
37
Gordon




BARRY




Barry
I
HEY, Barry Cloud! It’s Jack, Jack Ballantyne.”
The tall young man with roughly burnished hair
Looked up, leapt from the lounge. “Great Scott! Hello,
How are you, Jack?
“Judas, but this is fine!
Where have you kept yourself? It wasn’t fair.
There are all sorts of things I want to know . . .
Barry! How have you been, my beamish lad?
Why in the devil didn’t you ever write?
Lord, it’s three years. Come on into the bar;
Never mind Volstead; something can be had.
The occasion really calls for getting tight.
Here, surround that, and tell me how you are.
§
Stopping here at the Club?”
“A day or two.


I just got in an hour or so ago.
Last time we saw each other, Jack, —let’s see,
Was it Coblenz?”
“Wrong! I doubt you ever knew.
Here in New York, that night with Buck and Joe,
Long after Armistice, that ex-Service spree.”
“Of course! Well, Jack, how goes the real-estate?
You must own half Connecticut by this.”
“Nonsense! An office-slave. I wax rhetorical
On baths and masters’ bedrooms. But, Barry, wait;
You can’t evade me now; so just what is
Your subsequent history? Spill it to the oracle!”
“Oh well, let’s see. Of course I went back West;
Though now it’s all changed to me since Father died;
His affairs were most involved, for he’d sold the mill,
And somehow wasted all that he had to invest,
Before we entered the War, —put little aside.
It hardly seemed worth while probating the will.”
“Ah, golly, I’m sorry, Barry! I didn’t know
Of your father’s death.”
“Nor I foresee it, Jack,
When I left that way for college, and then for the War.
He was such a strange and sombre man; and so
42
Rip Tide


I was glad to go, though I loved him. But when I was back
Pretty damn well fed up with all we’d been fighting for
After all we’d seen over there — he looked so old
And haggard; he seemed so ill; he was living alone
In a dingy hotel. He’d never discussed his affairs
With me, and I was so young when the War took hold
And spilled us all out of Yale. I longed to atone
Somehow, for leaving him. Hell, there’s no good in prayers
Or regrets . . . I’m boring you!”
“Shoot! You’re not boring at all.”
“Well, the only thing I regret is, I never guessed
How lonely he was. He was always urging me on;
And so full of schemes, so busy. He went to the wall
Alone —and yet, those early years in the West,
He seemed just primed for success. Well, now he’s gone.”
“I’m awfully sorry, Barry. But still, old man,
You weren’t such a slouch of a son. You Did your Bit;
And everyone around you in college knew
What you might have had, the brilliant way you began.”
“No, Jack! It’s all so small when I think of it;
I should have been by his side, and seeing things through,
Not in college, at his expense. But you never know
Those things at the time. Although, there’s truth in this:
43
Barry


Through a letter among his papers I’ve come to the knowledge
That some relative of my mother’s, years ago,
(From the way it was worded, no connection of his)
Sent him a certain amount to see me through college.
The draft, of course, —or however the money came, —
Had been cashed long since; but the letter was there all right,
Just signed “For Sheila”—to save his pride, I suppose.
Awfully decent. Untraceable just the same.
One surviving aunt I asked couldn’t throw any light . . .
But, Jack, — the way I’ve been running on, —God knows—!”
“Don’t insult me, Barry. You know that I sympathize.
As for the money, some long-lost uncle of yours —”
“But Mother had no brothers —
“O, anyway, now
For all your quixotism, please realize
What you must have meant to your father. That endures . . .
Drink up; and tell me about your work . . . Here’s how!”
“Well, I’m with a firm who have opened a sales place here,
The Dexter car people. They’re new, but they’ll make a fuss
Before they’re through. I’m here with their New York show . . ,
No, two is my limit, Jack; and it ought to be beer.”
“Well, I’ll sell the houses and you can sell ’em a bus, —
We could work a fine little combine there, I know!
44
Rip Tide


But listen, Barry, — I’m going to give you a treat.
Around at my place I’m having a friend or two.
If you’re free about five, I’m throwing a so-called tea.
Look, here’s the address. There’s a girl you simply must meet, —
Meredith Powell, exactly the girl for you!”
“Hold hard!” laughed Barry; but added, “I think I’ll be free.”
II
Tossing his hat on the table near the door,
He grinned at the babble of voices. “A friend or two!”
More like a zoo, he thought, to judge by the sound.
A woman’s sudden shriek of laughter tore
The issuing haze of smoke. Jack’s view-halloo
Claimed him then. “Gome, Barry, I’ll pilot you ’round!”
Armed with a shaker of quite gargantuan size
Ballantyne wormed his way through the chattering crowd,
Proclaimed his guest with the shaker waved in its towel.
Then bent to a slim young girl who raised her eyes
Under a smart little hat. “This is Barry Cloud . . .
Barry, my boy,— the famous Meredith Powell!”
“Pretty,” he thought at once. “Her eyes are so blue.
She’s set them off, of course, with that blue in her dress.”
She smiled with “How do you do!” He smiled as he chaffed
45
Barry


“You’re the reason I came, you know. Jack told me. It’s true,”
“Quite up to the specifications then?” “Oh ,yes!”
So fervently it was uttered that both of them laughed.
She leaned reclined on a divan. “Here!” she said.
He seated himself beside her, was slowly aware
That his eyes were still engaged with her smiling eyes.
How charming it was, the way that she held her head!
He saw she was blonde by a straying glint of her hair.
“You know,” he remarked, “You’re really a big surprise.
Jack has excellent taste, of course, and he said you were grand;
But there’s more —” He halted then. There were girls in plenty
He’d met; but something here that he’d always known.
He couldn’t explain it, he couldn’t understand.
It wasn’t her pretty face —and she looked about twenty—
It wasn’t her poise. It was no one thing alone.
But, “Sure, we’ll make Meredith sing it!” cried Jack, and broke
This trance of Barry’s. “Come on now, Merry, come on!
Pierce will play for you. Gangway! The gal will sing.”
Shrugging she smiled, and rose. “Don’t go!” she spoke
Aside; then lithely across the room was gone.
The bulk of her audience gathered around in a ring.
46
Rip Tide


“Frankie and Johnnie!” they clamored; and “Frankie and Johnnie”
Meredith sang, contralto, mocking the dire
Drift, at first, of that ribald, fabulous song.
Startled, thought Barry, “Oh well, she’s certainly funny!”
Then she wrung from the lines real pathos, filled them with fire,
Wrought gunplay words to an epic legend of wrong . . .
She stopped. A flurry of handclapping started and spread.
“Another one, Merry!” they called, a few of them raising
Demand for a certain Blues. “No, now I’ll sing
An older ballad,” she mocked; then she quietly said
Just, “Lord Lovel.” And Barry bent forward, gazing,
Feeling, deep in his heart, an incredible thing;
Something that, drawn by words that he never had heard,
Mounted within him to joy reminding of tears,
Left him dismayed, with a desperate ache in his breast.
With the faintest of smiles she sang the romantic, absurd,
Simple and beautiful verses preserved through the years;
Bell-note and bird-note, she rang them and sang them to rest:
Lord Lovel he stood at his castle gate
A-combing his milk-white steed;
When along came Lady Nancy Bell ,
A-wishing her lover good speed, speed, speed,
A-wishing her lover good speed. . . .
47
Barry


They grew and they grew on the old church tower,
Till they couldn’t grow up any higher;
And there they tied in a true lovers’ knot.
For all true lovers to admire,
For all true lovers to admire!
This time she shook her head when they called for more,
Waving her thanks with the whiff of a cigarette;
Spoke to certain friends, and soon was back at his side.
“Well?” asked her eyebrows. “That’s something I’ve waited for
For years,” he ventured, “that last. I’ll never forget.”
“Really?” Her eyes were amused but opened wide.
“It’s a funny old thing of Papa’s. He sang it to me
As a little girl. It’s really a dear old thing.
But now, you talk of yourself and tell me a lot.”
“There’s something about you—” he said.
“Why then we agree;
I’ve been thinking the same about you —”
“But you went off to sing?”
“Of course!”
“Well, what?”
“Shall I really tell you or not?
“I will. And it’s silly. I seem to have known you before,”
“That’s precisely—!”
48
Rip Tide


“Well, what can it be? I can’t remember.
Nothing fantastic, I’m sure. But I often forget;
A memory like mine is really a terrible bore.
You weren’t, by chance, at the Greshams’, last December?”
“No, this is the very first time we have ever met.”
Then both of them changed the subject. She rattled along
Of the people around them, wondered about his “career,”
With quizzical eyes declared that the car of her choice
Should certainly be a Dexter. Still her song
Wove an enchantment of tone in his inner ear,
Till deeper yet, in his heart, he heard her voice
Singing forever, it seemed. He forgot his eyes
Fastened upon her face in a gaze devout
Till, “Gracious; it’s awfully late, I must get back.
I had no idea it was seven!” she cried with surprise.
“Oh, by the way, — this week-end, —can’t you come out?
We’re down at Rockhampton. Do please come, with Jack!”
11l
The beach was gay with the colour of beach-parasols,
Swimming suits, printed frocks. Small children scuttled
Like brown little land-crabs, youngsters bronzely-tanned
Ran shouting into the surf. By intervals
49
Barry


The breakers mounted, crashed into spray, and shuttled
The creaming foam up the sand to ebb from the sand.
Far out the ocean was indigo. The drifting
Smoke of a steamer lay on the far horizon
A ravelling shred. The lambent sun burned high.
Meredith turned toward Barry, slowly lifting
Her candid gaze from her sifting hands, his eyes on
The depth of her azure eyes. The summer sky
Shimmered its heat on the sea and diamonded
Myriad flickering waves, and warmed them through.
With smooth brown limbs they basked in the golden glow.
“Why did they call you Meredith?” Barry said
Idly. “My middle name.” “Well, it’s somehow you —.”
“They called me Lily, really! I hated it so!”
“No,” Barry considered. “Meredith seems just right,
Somehow—but Lily—too white .. . they smell of death .. .
Morbid—what? And you’re just as alive as can be,
Though fine—and funny!” he added, against the light
Shading his eyes to laugh at her; catching his breath
At her flashing smile . . . “My, but I love the sea,
“Don’t you? My mother’s people were Maine, you know.
She was born by the sea. I’ve heard my father say
50
Rip Tide


She always seemed to long for it.” He sighed
“I wish I’d known my mother. You see, she was so
Beautiful; almost, well, what the Scotch call ‘fey.’
But then I was only a little tyke when she died.
“Funny,” he murmured on, as he turned to the blue,
Sifting the sand through his hand, “One day I found
A sweet old photograph of her. I used to keep
That photograph under my pillow. No one knew.
I have it yet. I’ve always had it around . . .
Once I believed she came to me in my sleep
Looking so laughing and young! She was wearing a dress
Blue like the sea ... I never told anyone
Before . . . But I love the ocean; I’d like to live
Always down by the sea. That’s why, I guess,
When I saw you in blue, —and now —” He stared at the sun
On the breakers, with knitted brows. “But please forgive
Such sentimental maundering!” Meredith said,
Merely, glancing askance, “No, you’re rather sweet,
Barry. Thanks for telling me.” Then their crowd
Waved to them, climbing the beach. He turned his head.
This time his eyes and Meredith’s seemed to meet
With something shining that wanted no speaking aloud.
51
Barry


Back at the Powells’, lunch was high-spirited babel.
The golden morning, refreshing all with the sea,
Old friendship of most of the guests, the Saturday mood,
Incited a wave of nonsense around the table
Where near-sighted Mrs. Powell amusedly
Presided, inquired, directed the maids with food.
Barry sat on her right. The rest of the crowd
Were all so intimate; he knew only Jack
Among them. The girl on his right had turned to borrow
Someone’s lighter. “So sorry, Mr. Cloud,
That my husband’s away, but I feel quite sure he’ll be back
From this business trip, and down with us here, tomorrow.
“Gordon’s so busy,” Mrs. Powell ran on,
Scanning the table again with her hostess eye.
“This railroad conference—!” Vaguely she smiled, and rose.
The others followed; some strayed forth to the lawn
Through the large luxurious living-room close by
Across the hall. Barry was one of those.
He strolled toward Meredith. “That’s a wonderful way
To have your own short-cut here to the beach,” he began,
His gaze upon her. “So pleasant a short walk over.
It’s a beautiful place . . . But of course, your father. . . I say,
52
Rip Tide


I hadn’t realized he was the railroad man,
The famous Gordon Powell!”
“Oh, you’ll discover
He’s really much more than that; he’s a perfect dear,”
Meredith laughed. “Yes, it’s nice to be near the sea,
As you said. You can run for a dip in the afternoon
To a strip we keep private here that’s even more near —
I’ll show you tomorrow —you’re back so quickly for tea.
Sometimes I go there to read in my special dune,
But the others prefer the beach where the people are.”
Then a girl with mallet in hand demanded croquet.
Meredith joined her. Barry, hailed to the court,
Tried some tennis. A couple drove off in a car.
Several lounged on the porch. Toward the end of the day
The cocktail table proved a welcome resort.
Yet to Barry the light of the afternoon was shed
On long-drawn-out frustration. Whenever he found
A moment with Meredith, both were summoned apart,
Scarcely, indeed, he knew what he did or said
Drawn always toward her, always with others around,
While a mad bewildering torment wrenched at his heart.
53
Barry


He wondered, then, if she felt—. And Meredith wondered,
Joking along with the others, feeling quite dazed;
Plunged in their games, though often with absent replies;
What lunacy into her beating heart had blundered
Like a bothering moth at a flame. She knew how he gazed,
She saw where he moved, without ever lifting her "eyes.
IV
A wafer moon hung pale above the trees.
The awninged long veranda, shadowed deep,
Winked with a cigarette’s occasional spark.
Murmurs, a flurry of laughter . . . and the breeze
Moved in the sunken garden, flowers asleep
Faintly exhaled their scent across the dark.
Finally Meredith had been wiled away.
Now Barry watched her slender shoulders gleam,
Her lyric throat, her crisp and primrose hair.
“I have been thinking of you all today,”
At last he said, low-toned, “You make me dream,
You know, —you make me dream what isn’t fair ...”
Silence; and then as in a dream she turned
To search his face, queer brightness in her eyes
Though her mouth shaped a sweet mock-dolefulness.
54
Rip Tide


“I know,” he said again, “I haven’t learned
To hide some things. I know this isn’t wise.
I said that you surprised me, and I guess,”
(His laugh was rough and short,) “that it’s forever.
So if you’ll kindly tell me what it is—?”
He fiercely asked, rumpling his burnished hair
With upraised hands. “I thought that I should never —
And all of a sudden,—well, it’s got like this.
I’ve said —I say again—it isn’t fair, —
Not fair to you, I mean. But O good Lord,
Meredith! . . . Well, I guess I’d better go.
Perhaps old Jack ’ll drive me to a train.”
“Barry!” she said at that, as though a sword
Had pierced; and touched his hand. “No, Barry, no, —
What is the matter?”
“Oh, I sound insane,
I’m quite aware . . . But look at my control!”
He stretched his arm, clenched and unclenched his hand.
“It’s only,” he muttered, “the pain’s so strange, so new . .
You fill my mind. You’re in my very soul . . .
Meredith, I love you, —do you understand ?”
At last she said, very slowly, “I love you,
55
Barry


Barry!” Tears filled her eyes. Then, swiftly, “Fools!”
She cried, and turned away. They stood apart.
So still it fell, a distant sleighbell-sound
Of insects shrilled. “God, but what rotten rules!”
He groaned at last, above his hammering heart.
“What do you mean?” She stared, flashing around,
White-faced, large-eyed, poised like a shimmering lance.
“Why,” his face worked, “It’s obvious I mean
You’re you. I’m nothing. Well, perhaps, instead
I may be, someday. God, I’d like the chance!
But look at all this!” he waved. “And now I’ve been—!”
“I said I loved you, Barry,” she gently said.
And then, “As to saying ‘Fools,’ why, it’s so soon , —
That’s all I meant. I know I love you though.
And I don’t tell lies. I’ve never felt before
As I felt just then.”
“O, but Meredith, that moon, —
Darling, it isn’t farther from earth, you know,
Than you from me! O, I’m rotten to the core
To have let myself go like this, —when all I can offer—!”
She moved. She stood before him, her little chin
Slightly raised, her face in mockery masked.
“Opinion reserved; but Td rather you didn’t suffer . . .
56
Rip Tide


If you’re going to kiss me, though, do you ever begin?
You’re the very first man, you know, I have ever asked.”
Madness is not of the moon, but of earth. Of old
The earth begot moon-madness; the earth was new;
And in its Eden there were only two,
Which still shall be until the stars grow cold.
Madness, through all the blood, when love is told
Rages against what time or death may do.
And in their Eden there were only two,
Where every moment shone like minted gold . . .
Later, “Darling!” he said; “Darling!” he said.
“Barry,” she said then, blinking up at a star,
“I love you, Barry; do you love me still?”
“0 marry me, Meredith /” Quickly she nodded her head.
“But promise me, Barry, never to say you are
All those awful things that you say?”
“I’ll try. I will.
I’ll be worth your love!”
“Oh, Barry, my darling boy,
Will you listen to me, and stop that folly.
We’re what matters. Why, who do you think I am?
Some creature out of a novel? Let’s enjoy
Our love forever, and just be poor and jolly;
Do you think that anything else can matter a damn?”
57
Barry


She thrust herself away from him, gazing him over,
While despite himself he suddenly sobbed with laughter,
So lovely and raging she looked; then sobered like Fate.
“Ah,” sighed Meredith, “All I want is my lover!
I don’t care one iota what comes after!”
“And that’s just why,” Barry said, “I must pull my weight;
The first thing being that I must talk to your father.
He’ll probably kick me out or think me mad.
I’d hardly blame him!” Meredith smiled, and sighed,
“All right. I’ve thought you looked like Papa. I’d rather
You talked, at that. And when you two men have had
A bout with your prides, I’ll flourish my own small pride!
V
“Well, Gordon, —home at last!” “Well, well, my dear,
How have things gone?” They stood upon the drive
While Gaffney lifted luggage from the car.
“Oh, all of Meredith’s week-end friends are here,
Of course, —young people, very much alive
And full of nonsense, as young people are.
They’re at the beach, but soon they’ll all be back.”
“The Gould boy,— I suppose, —and Julie Slade?”
“Yes, and young Ballantyne,—a dozen all told . . .
58
Rip Tide


But tell me —?”
“Oh, a lot of railroad track
Changed hands last night; another merger made . . .
Lillian, you know, I must be getting old!
I’m really happy just sitting in the sun
Out here. I’m tired of business, I suppose.
I said to Jewett, —he sent you, by the way,
His best regards, — I was saying, ‘George, I’m done
So far as the old enthusiasm goes.
Do you think that old Cornelius, old James J.,
Ever felt all the zest go out of things
The way I do, sometimes, when it just seems
Enough to mind my family’s small affairs,
Give way to new ambitions with new wings
And let the younger men dream better dreams . . .
But when I talk to George like that, he swears,
The darned old mossback! Yet I looked around
At Wayne and Boudinot and Carswell there,
All men I’ve known for years, —all made our way
Together. Lillian, I declare, I found
Each just a dummy, suddenly, in his chair!
None of us had a single thing to say ,
59
Barry


That wasn’t parrot-talk. It seemed so strange!
Just always business —human contact nil.
(Thanks, Gaffney, I won’t need you now till seven
Tomorrow.) Well, I’ll get a wash, and change.”
“You are tired, Gordon . . . You’re not feeling ill
At all?” He smiled. “Dear creature! No, It’s heaven
Out here, though. I shall just admire the sky
A bit, and banish all this business too.
How’s Meredith?” “The usual happy heart.”
“Good. Good. And I suppose the cocktails fly.
Well, ‘the struck eagle’—Byron—thus must view
His very own feather ‘on the fatal dart,’
What? No, I’m joking, Lillian. But/liked
A ‘good time’ too, before my days were done.”
“Gordon, you’re so ridiculous! You’re not old,
You’re only tired!”
“Well, have those cocktails spiked,
And maybe, with the children, I’ll try one.
Perhaps it may retrieve the age of Gold
When we were empire-builders!” Then the gray
Tall man, with glints of gold still in his hair,
With humorous mouth, and eyes still bright and blue,
Stepped back beneath the lintel, making way
60
Rip Tide


For his wife’s entrance, —swiftly climbed the stair
And found one kind familiar room he knew,
VI
The long bright living-room vibrated chatter.
Cried Julie Slade, “You saw the girl in red, —
How she was vamping Jack —!” An eye-glassed youth
Declared, “Well, throw in Shaw too, for that matter,
I’ll back O’Neill—.”
“ —And then, my dear, she said —!”
“Do you think perhaps a trifle less Vermouth —?”
“ —Won under double wraps at Pimlico—
“Take it from uncle, there’s a lively stock!”
“You don't! I mean, she’s such a living motto."
“Oh yes, but wasn’t it a stupid show?
So serious ?”
“God, that gelding’s just a crock,—
Now Araby —!”
“ —the boy was simp-ly blotto!”
Meredith saw her father in the door.
“Papa!” ... A few he knew had turned. He waved
“Don’t let me interrupt! . . . Well, how d’you do,
Julie, my dear! Well, ‘Biff,’ —Why, there’s Phil Moore!
61
Barry


Isn’t this Sylvia Childs? I hope you’ve saved
A cocktail for me; I could use one too.”
Hemmed in by others, Barry turned about
Beyond the large piano, came aware
Of father and daughter moving arm in arm
Among her friends. At once his eyes made out
Straight height, fine head, the gray but glinting hair,
Across the room he recognized the charm
And magnetism of this courtly man
Who looked his quiet power. Yet he felt
No whit disturbed or daunted, —somehow proud,
As through his heart a singular tremor ran.
And then, with serious eyes that on him dwelt,
“Father,” said Meredith, “this is Barry Cloud,
A friend of Jack’s —and mine!” And Barry’s head
Went up, he gripped the firmly-given hand.
“How do you do, sir!” On his eyes the blue
Of the other’s rested. Vaguely, “Cloud?” he said.
“Cloud, did you say?” Then seemed to understand,
Frowned slightly, murmured gravely, “How-d’ye-do,”
But fixed him with a long and pondering gaze
Before he turned away. And Barry thought,
62
Rip Tide


“He’s guessed already that Meredith and I —”
Nor knew how, suddenly, the room was haze
Around the other,—what one glance had wrought
To rise like a thunderhead on a noonday sky.
:i. > : *
Like an automaton, Gordon Powell shook
The hands of others, mechanically spoke,
Fighting dim prescience with his whole command,
His mind still groping; mechanically took
A curving glass —drained it; and, as there broke
Bright bitter light, it quivered in his hand.
Yet there was nothing to a name, of course, —
Hardly so rare—. What had she named her boy?
She had written just one word, the word Forever
Answering his . . . From their deeply-buried source
Old writhing memories rose of anguished joy;
Then sudden barbed remorse. Why had he never
Sought further —found—done something? He had sent
Untraceable funds, at last,—and been dismayed
Lest it be proven a traitorous thing to do.
Yet his mysterious gift had long been spent
And Sheila’s secret still went unbetrayed.
But had the child been theirs? At heart he knew . . .
63
Barry


Yet how did he know at heart, and why did he feel
As he gazed just now in a tall young stranger’s face
A sense of communion, a bond he should recognize,
Oddly familiar gestures, traits that reveal
Our intimates to us at any time and place?
Well, the boy—he was sure of it now —had Sheila’s eyes,
But more than that—. And then words came to carry
Shocked certitude, for shyly Meredith said
Aside, in his ear, —and stunned him as though she knew,
“Papa, you liked him, didn’t you,—you liked Barry?
He’s such a dear. Did you notice that toss of his head ?
I guess I 1-like him because he reminds me of you!
But don’t look so cross!”
With all the force of his mind
And summoned control, her father smiled, “Indeed!
Why, daughter, I’m sure he appears an agreeable young man.”
He pinched her cheek. His fierce mind seemed to grind
On jangled nerves. “Suppose we all proceed
To lunch. I think that that’s the wisest plan.”
“Wisest?” asked Meredith.
“Wisest for appetite
Such as yours must be, if a parent may escort
A popular daughter!”
64
Rip Tide


Meredith, over her shoulder,
Signalled to Barry in secret, “It's all all right!"
Gordon, dissembling, managed lunch of a sort
With a laboring mind that seemed grown aeons older.
Meredith sat by his side. To her he said,
Under cover of talk, “And young Cloud comes from—where?”
But knew the answer before she made it plain.
“Barry? Let’s see,” she turned her pretty head.
To look at him, “The Lakes, somewhere out there.
His mother’s name was Trescott. She came from Maine.”
t
VII
Alone in his study, when the meal was done,
Gordon sat staring at his desk. Again
“Viewed his own feather on the fatal dart,”
Those words he had quoted, words he had joked upon
So lately with his wife, mocked in his brain, —
“And winged the shaft that quivered in his heart.”
Byron against the Scotch reviewers! God,
The words of satire, in the nick of time,
To scourge the mind with irony, to make
By accident a grim and chastening rod
65
Barry


Of a long-dead voluptuary’s rhyme! . , .
He should have torn the world down for her sake;
Snatched her away forever from her prison,
Raised somewhere in the world their paradise,
Worked for their love, fathered her children there . . .
Old self-denunciation, rearisen,
Made the hands shake tight-clamped upon his eyes
Where dusk seemed lit with balefires of despair.
Emotion stormed, as long since in his heart
Two crucial times it had assailed his breast,
And faintlier through the years, in hours alone . . .
And then, at length, he forced his hands apart,
Clenched them together, gripping. Here was the test.
If now he had found his son, he would atone.
And then within his mind awoke and stirred
A coiling intuition, a chill fear,
A surmise not a surmise—for he knew
The truth . . . Meredith’s voice it was he heard,
The tone in which she spoke into his ear,
Barry, of all the others? Was it true?
Could it be true? Lord, he was mad, or dreaming;
There was this sudden shock of seeing Barry
66
Rip Tide


And knowing at last. She could not be in love.
Only, his world was shaken into seeming.
This wasn’t life; the Furies didn’t harry
Save in Greek drama . . . What was he thinking of!
And then again, with every inference drawn,
How was it ever possible to prove
Barry his son? How wide such guesses fall!
If Meredith loved, some folly of love’s dawn
Fancied a likeness, and (Did Meredith love?)
His wife had noticed nothing, nothing at all.
He rose, and looked about him, crossed the floor,
Bent to the wall, twirled a small dial around;
Out of the wall-safe, with a chosen key,
Extracted something from one special drawer;
Turned, locked the door, and brought what he had found
Back to his chair, and placed it on his knee;
And suddenly the past in time stood still,
Rain scoured the pane, the fire’s upleaping light
Burnished the coppery torrent of her hair
Unloosed . . . immortal moments had their will,
Inexorable moments in their flight,
Swordlike sharp ecstasy and sobbed despair . . .
67
Barry


Then he was truly gazing on her face
Or, in this still, clear likeness, seemed to be.
How the old photograph held her lovely look!
The world receded for a little space . . .
He started at a sound, and hastily
Shut the old photograph inside a book
That lay upon the desk. Again that knock
Was definite at the door. One final gaze
When this intrusiveness should be dismissed!
He rose, and glancing at the small desk-clock
“Four-thirty, already?” thought his dazed amaze.
It seemed, indeed, that time had ceased to exist.
He crossed the floor again and turned the key.
“Yes?” he demanded crisply at the door,
Just opening it; and then he pushed it wide
Facing a tall pale Barry.
“Could I see
You, Mr. Powell, just alone here, for—
Well, I’ll explain.”
“Why, yes . . . Why . . . Come inside!”
68
Rip Tide


VIII
“Mr. Powell —” Barry faltered.
“Take that chair,”
Said Gordon, closing the door. He took his own.
“You wish to see me?” Questioning surprise
Lanced through his level look. “Suppose we share
A cigarette,” offering his case, “I’ve known,
I think, something about you,” and his eyes
Searched Barry’s. “Tell me more, before you say
Whatever’s on your mind. I’d like that, rather.”
“Thank you, sir,” Barry answered, catching breath.
“Though it must be someone else you’ve known. Today
Is the only time but perhaps you knew my father?”
He spoke of his work in the West, and of his death.
Gravely Gordon inclined his head, and said,
“No, I never met your father. I’m sorry to hear—
Then, “Tell me about yourself.” The words were drawn
With effort from his heart. He held his head
Erect, but in his eyes both pain and fear
Were veiled from Barry, as the boy ran on
Concerning childhood, college, and the War,
His present work . . . Gordon too clearly caught,
69
Barry


By this, the errand shining in his face.
Swiftly he interrupted then, before
The words he feared; and from his soul besought
A God discarded for some special grace
To ward the moment off, at least suspend
The dreamlike doom. His vibrant voice broke through,
“You spoke of Maine —your mother’s family.
One summer, in my youth, I made a friend
Up there, named Sheila Trescott. Yes, I knew,
Or must have known, your mother, in Sunbury.”
For better or for worse, the thing was done.
The sudden pleasure lightening Barry’s brow
Struck to the heart.
“Truly? Oh, did you, sir?
You knew my mother? Why, but she’s the one
Great thing in life to me —at least, till now.
I cherish every word I’ve heard of her.”
“As do not I?” thought Gordon, in his pain.
“She was very —lovdly,” were the words he said,
Deep-toned and musing, with his eyes away.
“You knew my mother!” Barry spoke again.
“Why then, perhaps,” he suddenly tossed his head,
“You’ll hear me out in what I’d like to say, —
70
Rip Tide


Or, rather, ask—At that his shoulders squared,
Forward he leaned, his elbows on his knees,
His strong hands clenched. “Well, Mr. Powell, it’s this
{The blow was falling .) Mr. Powell, I’ve dared
Love Meredith, and she —do hear me, please,—
Says she loves me. You must see how it is?”
The swift ingenuous words, vibrating so, —
Naive humility that could thus aver, —
Youth’s sudden direct attack, with hopes so free,
So confident in its candor!
“O, I know,”
Cried Barry, “I haven’t much to offer her
Except just everything I happen to be!
But that’s just now; I’m sure to make my way.
We’re absolutely sure. I know—l meant —
With everything she’s had, — I’m quite aware —!”
Suddenly wrenched with all he could not say
He left his chair, beside the desk he leant,
His restless hands fumbled the objects there,
His head bent down to hide his embarrassed mood.
Gordon sat tense. A wild desire to laugh
Stormed through his frame, and then a fierce chill shook
His shuddering heart. And Barry, as he stood,
7 1
Barry


Found himself gazing at a photograph
Flipped from between the pages of a book.
For one full moment it was just a blur.
Then his eyes focussed, clearly he saw it then.
“Why,—why, it’s Mother!” he breathed. “Why, that’s the one —!
How do you have this photograph of her?”
Blankly he stared at Gordon. “This was when—.”
He turned it round and over. There, upon
The back of it, in faint fine script, Forever . . .
“Why,” he said strangely, “I don't understand.
You said you knew my mother up in Maine
When she was just a girl . . . ?”
Though all endeavor
To speak seemed choked in Gordon, yet his hand
Rose as though charging the other to refrain
From any inference. He spoke at last,
His voice with almost now its usual ring,
“Put down that photograph, and look at me.
Sit down.” As though obeying from the past
Some strange and half-expected summoning
The younger man acceded.
72
Rip Tide


“There must be,”
Said Gordon, “Definite understanding here.
You have shown your heart to me; well, now I’ll show
My own. And we shall need some strength of will
To see us through . . . Your mother was most dear
To me, Barry, — though you could never know.
I loved your mother deeply, I love her still;
I—.” How in heaven’s name could he go on?
There sat his Judgment armed implacably,
Hazel eyes burning, either strong brown hand
Clenched on the chair. Yet such a bond seemed drawn
Tautly between, that Barry breathed, “I see,”
Almost in awe,
“No, you don’t understand,”
Gordon spoke harshly, driven to the wall
Within his mind. “But there, at last, ’s the truth.”
Barry frowned hard, then forced a harrowing smile.
“That picture’s the one I have of her —that’s all . . .
You were her romance ... I can see.” His youth
Asserted its omniscience. “All that while
She dreamed ... I guess it’s none of my affair . . .
My father loved her . . . But of course I know
Life, and how always there’s some thwarted thing.
She died so young . . . her spirit was so rare . . .
73
Barry


Oughtn’t it, maybe, to draw us closer, though?”
Thought Gordon, God to stop the ravening
Of all these words fanged with their ignorance!
“Why, probably,” cried Barry, “that’s some part
Of Meredith’s love and mine . . . Perhaps it’s fate!”
The other started, rose as though a lance
Transfixed him, gripped his chair, and all his heart
Shook for the youth before him. “Barry, wait!”
He said, his racked mind fighting for control,
“There are certain things—!”
“I know, sir; I suppose —?”
“You do not know. For you can never marry
Meredith, ever!”
Bewildered to the soul
The younger man stared at him, slowly rose.
“But, sir, —you have no reason —?” stammered Barry,
“Even though you think my circumstances now—.”
(A nervous gesture swept that fact aside.)
“But after all you’ve told me, sir—?” Despair
Seemed fogged about them. Sweat on Gordon’s brow
Was cold. A dark inevitable tide
Rose through the silence, filled the whispering air.
74
Rip Tide


“That is the very reason,” Gordon said
At last. “I did not tell you all.” His set
And working face was strange to look upon,
Filled now with keenest memory of the dead,
Stunned by the cruel issue to be met.
Harshly he breathed, “My daughter —and my son. . . . !”
Tall stood the two, like as they stood, the older
With face gone gray beneath its natural tan,
A carven adamant mask of pain, where through
The blue eyes burned with suffering. At his shoulder
With the same upflung head, the younger man
Stared in his eyes. . . .
Then, suddenly, he knew.
The lightning revelation seared his brain.
Backward he stepped . . . still backward . . . then he whirled,
Wrenched at the door, plunged through it . . .
His heart beat
Red in his mind with agonizing pain,
Through blackness roared the ruin of his world . . .
Gordon forever would hear those hurrying feet.
75
Barry


IX
The sunlight dazed him as he gained the lawn;
Wheeling, he sought the short-cut to the beach,
In flight from voices of the afternoon
Clamoring at games. Blindly he stumbled on.
Meredith! Meredith! Only, now, to reach
Her voice, —sink down beside her! . . .
On the dune,
Slipping away from friends preoccupied,
Long she had lain where sun and breeze could lull,
Waiting to bathe. At last she raised her head
Watching the surf and noting how the tide
Was strongly making.
“Oh, they’re just too dull
To talk so long! I’ll have my swim,” she said.
Soon to be married to Barry! Quick delight
Flooded her world with gold. She ran, she leapt
And dove with perfect timing through the green
And rising wall of a wave, — then, at its height,
She plunged another as it towered and swept
To topple in foam. One crooking arm flashed clean
76
Rip Tide


Again, again, and on the cradling swell
Beyond, lifting her cool and high to take
A glance ashore, she buoyed, she shook her head , . .
No, there he was, on the dune, — oh, all was well!
Wildly she waved an arm; then swirled to make
Speed to the beach. Vaguely, and with no dread
She felt the deep power of the undertow;
And flung her body against its aim to draw
Her far along the beach. She wished to ride
The waves straight to his side, —she loved him so!
A comber caught her high, a whirling flaw
Of water suddenly sucked her in a tide
Tugging her back and down; another wave
Smothered her rising. Fiercely churning through,
Again she rose, and knew that she was swept
Close to a reef of rocks. And then she gave
A clear wild cry, heard as a faint halloo
By Barry. But he saw. Swiftly he leapt,
Casting his clothes, in frenzied haste to clamber
From beach to rocks, slipping and falling to run
Their length to where they jutted, hazed in spray.
His true-timed javelin dive she would remember
77
Barry


As long as life . . . They rose together on one
Long wave. They faced each other in full day,
An instant, while the callous sun shone on.
Wild-eyed she saw him, heard the gasp he gave,
“Darling!” And then, for all their fighting strength,
The tide-twist took them. Close together drawn,
She was hurled on his body, they rose on a swelling wave,
Down-shocked to rock . . .
She opened her eyes at length
And moaned, and then, her every sense aware,
Writhed bruised, her elbows bleeding, from where she lay
Across his body; bent to him with a word
In torment, “Barry!” There was blood in his hair.
He lay so strangely twisted. . . . And the spray
Burst over them, and still he never stirred. . . .
“Barry, — oh , Barryl ”
Then came a shout from shore, —
Jack and some others, halted upon the dune.
Something was wrong, they saw. They were hurrying near. . . .
She could not hear, hand on his heart, while more
Spume shattered over them, “So soon, so soon, —”
She moaned, and shook his shoulders in deadly fear,
78
Rip Tide


Bending with arms around him, interposing
Her body’s shield against the drenching spray
That coursed to seething foam in buffeting past.
The bluish pallor of his eyelids’ closing
Seemed suddenly to bring darkness in broad day.
Chill were his lips. She held him till the last. . . .
X
Interminably the waves advanced their serried
Foam-crested turbulence in assault on the shore,
As over the dune a small dark group went slowly
Moving through nightmare-light, with two that they carried.
The cannonading combers increased their roar,
The outermost rocks of the reef were covered wholly.
The wandering waters with no thought or will
Forever weaving a dream in the heart of man
And woman, to slay that dream and bury the glory,
Exalt the heart and harry memory still
And then, all blind and mindless, swoop to kill,
Without intent and with no shadow of plan—
Warred in their foam round cliff and promontory.
But stunned and human hearts that labored late
Where one had ceased to beat, with one that cried
79
Barry


For death, and one (he thought) that death took never,
Heard in their ears, all night, like the drums of fate,
The far-off surf, the wind that would not abate,
The roar of the sea, the heavy roll of the tide,
And thought their ears would hold that sound forever.
80
Rip Tide


This First Edition of Rip Tide, by William Rose Benet,
consisting of 1200 copies, has been composed in mono-
type Baskerville, and printed on French Navarre paper,
by Richard W Ellis : The Georgian Press, Westport, Gt.
for Duffield & Green, Publishers, New York




