

Dear Sir, —
LAW SOCIETY.
fA Elizabeth Street,
7th December, 1874
fnif- 7^
You are requested to attend a meeting of the members of the Legal
Profession, to be held in the Jury Court, Supreme Court House, King Street, on Tuesday,
the 15th day of December instant, to consider the Report of the Committee appointed at
the meeting held on the 29th October last, and to take steps for the establishment of the
Society.
Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM DEANE,
Hon. Secretary.
Copies of the Report of the Committee and the accompanying documents are
subjoined.
LAW SOCIETY.
Report of a Committee appointed at a public meeting of the Attorneys of the Supreme Court of New South Wales,
held at the Supreme Court House, King Street, Sydney, on the 29th October , 1874.
Your Committee were appointed in pursuance of the following resolutions, adopted by the above meeting
1. That a Law Society be formed, with power to apply for an Act of Incorporation, and that such
Society shall have for its objects—the protection of professional interests ; the promotion of law
reform where practicable; the establishment of a hall and library for the use of members; the
assisting of the education of articled clerks, by the formation of law classes, or otherwise ; the
obtaining of the power to appoint examiners of articled clerks ; and such other powers and
functions as may be deemed necessary ; and that all Attorneys on the roll of the Supreme Court
shall be entitled to become members of such Society upon payment of an entrance fee and an
annual subscription to be hereafter determined.
2. That the following gentlemen be appointed a Committee to carry out the objects contemplated by
the meeting, with power to act therein in all matters as a majority may determine at the
meetings of the Committee, of which five shall constitute a quorum, with power to add to their
number, viz., Messrs. Edwin Daintrey, George Wigram Allen, William Russell, James Norton,
William George Pennington, Robert Palmer Abbott, Stephen Campbell Brown, Thomas Robertson,
William Deane, Richard Driver, Thomas Bately Rolin, Robert Burdett Smith, William Hillson
Pigott, and Alfred de Lissa.
The Committee beg to report that they have considered the subject of incorporation, which they consider
was the primary object, under a twofold aspect —
is t—With reference to the possibility of incorporation under the 54th section of the Companies’ Act
of 1874.
2nd—With reference to the obtaining of a special Act of Parliament for the incorporation of the
Society.
The Committee are unanimously of opinion that it will be undesirable to seek incorporation under the
Companies’ Act of 1874. The Act is clogged with restrictions as to the formation of limited companies or
associations not formed for individual profit; and there are, moreover, one or two objects sought to be obtained
by the Bill herewith submitted, which could not be obtainable by such a mode of incorporation.
The Committee are of opinion that a Bill should be submitted to the Legislature for incorporation of the
Law Society, and they submit a draft Bill of Incorporation, which they have carefully considered and prepared,
and which, they are of opinion, will embrace all the objects of incorporation sought for.
In the meantime, the Committee consider that a provisional agreement will be necessary to fix the status of
the Society before applying for an Act of Incorporation, and a form of such agreement they submit to the
members of the profession now present, and which they would respectfully recommend to be adopted prior to
applying to Parliament for an Act of Incorporation.
The Committee recommend that a Council be now appointed for the organization of the Society, and that
the Council so appointed shall have power to frame bye-laws to be submitted for approval to a general meeting.
The Council to hold office until such general meeting.
The Committee are informed that upon the institution of this Society the Law Institute will take steps to
dissolve itself.
THOMAS ROBERTSON,
Chairman.




LAW SOCIETY.
PROVISIONAL AGREEMENT.
Memorandum.-Whereas at a public meeting of the Attorneys of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, held at the Supreme
Court House, King Street, Sydney, on the 29th day of October last,
It was resolved,
First tt a Law Society be f„r m ed with
- —*- —■
EL?-S^
ssr.asw.ssM
carried agreed to adopt the same. nndersiimed Attorneys of the Supreme Court; for the purpose of the formation
„f vr?’ £ ssrrst s’,« sdfAta
upon the execution of these ,for the year .875-
As witness our hands this day of 74
A BILL
TO INCORPORATE THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
T T TtTVPFAS a Society has been formed, called the Law Society of New South Wales, consisting of Attorneys, Solicitors, and
constituted a body politic and coipoiate, by the name d J r otherwise appear and answer or be answered in all Courts
politic or corporate. _ f the Society it shall and may be lawful for them, Or such of them as shall be then
necessary, convenient, and piopei, foi | he , ' . f the Society is founded into full and complete effect.
not repugnant or contLy to an, law or statute now in force in
this colony examiners of articled clerks who are candidates for admission as
Attorne^of^he^uprem^Court^^nd S such other powers and as the Judges of the Supreme Court may from time to time
ee fit to confer upon the said Society. Snrietv to keen a correct alphabetical list of all Attorneys
shall hep run A fade evidence that all persons therein named were entitled to practise as Attorneys up to I . * •


sl&p
f I w
C-nit'i'j
1508
00010993
PC c&^h
