

WAR IN THE AIR.
AUSTRALIA’S PART
IN THE
EMPIRE SCHEME.
for Air
The V. FAIRBAIRN
m the House of Representatives, 10th May, 1940.
By Authority:
L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Pi inter, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)
2960.




EMPIRE AIR TRAINING AGREEMENT.
STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR AIR.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 10TH MAY, 1940.
“ Towards the end of September last year, the Prime Minister announced
that it was proposed that the Dominions of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand should co-operate with the United Kingdom in a scheme for training
pilots, observers and air gunners on a scale never before contemplated,” the
Minister for Air (the Hon. J. V. Fairbaim) said,
“ I was sent to Ottawa with Air Force and Finance Advisers to discuss
the proposal with representatives of the other three Governments.
COMMAND OF THE AIR.
Upon our arrival in Ottawa, Lord Riverdale, Leader of the United
Kingdom Mission, outlined the need for this great Air Training Scheme and
the lines upon which it should be organized. He explained that, in spite of
tremendous expansion of the Royal Air Force and the efficiency of its
personnel and aircraft, it was considered by the Allied leaders that if an end
was to be put to German aggression, it would be necessary to build up an
Air Force on a scale that would not only match the German aircraft
numerically, but which would have such a superiority as to give the Allies a
command of the air comparable to their command of the sea.
It had been calculated that British and French aircraft production, plus
the United States production, which would be available to the Allies, could
produce sufficient aircraft for this purpose. He went on to explain, however,
that owing to the definite limits imposed by the size of the British Isles and
the handicaps imposed by having to carry on offensive and defensive operations
in the air, it would not be possible to train, in the United Kingdom, sufficient
air crews to man such an aerial armada.
So it was suggested that the three Dominions, with their unlimited spaces,
ideal climatic conditions and freedom from the handicaps imposed by air
operations against a powerful enemy, should set up a vast training organization,
which would supply rather more than half of the air crews that would be
necessary.
ORIGINAL PROPOSAL.
The original proposal was that the Dominions, in approximate proportions
to their populations, should each set up elementary training establishments
to carry out the elementary training of their quotas and that the more advanced
intermediate and service training should be completed in a vast organization
to be set up in Canada.
It was at once agreed that each Dominion should undertake its share and
then the details of the necessary organization were discussed.
Australia’s share in this original proposal was to set up nine (9) elementary
training schools for pilots and a corresponding number of schools for observers
and air gunners who would complete their training in nine (9) schools and the
corresponding number of observers and air gunner schools to be set up in
Canada.


Mr. FAIRBAIRN’S COUNTER-PROPOSAL.
While the United Kingdom Mission was outlining the original proposal,
I noticed that the aircraft to be used for the advanced training in Canada were
all to be supplied from the United Kingdom with the exception of one
American type which we happened to be manufacturing in Australia. This
I noticed with some surprise as I had imagined the main reason for concentrating
the advanced training in Canada was that Dominion’s proximity to the aircraft
factories of the United States.
After considerable consideration and consultation with the Government.
I made a counter-proposal that, as the aircraft were all either to be sent from
the United Kingdom or could be produced here, Australia might undertake
seven-ninths of the advanced training in Australia itself.
This counter-proposal, which was finally agreed upon, was in several
directions, a considerable improvement on the original proposal.
The organization originally proposed might well have proved beyond
the capacity of Canada, whereas the alteration has reduced it to manageable
proportions, though it will still impose a tremendous strain upon our sister
Dominion.
DOLLAR EXCHANGE SAVING.
The alteration also will effect a great reduction in the dollar exchange
problem. Under the original scheme, it would have been necessary to find,
in the first three years, £51,000,000 worth of Canadian dollars, which would
have meant building up a considerable debt in dollars and almost certainly
most drastic reductions in our Imports from Canada, causing great loss to the
exporters of that Dominion and considerable hardship to Australian industries
and Individuals who require their goods.
Under the revised proposal it will only be necessary to find, in the first
three years, £11,000,000 worth of Canadian dollars. In other words, the
change has effected a saving of approximately £40,000,000 worth of dollar
exchange.
AUSTRALIAN AIR STRENGTH.
Another point which is of very considerable importance to us is that,
under the present scheme, we will have concentrated in Australia
over 1,200 service aircraft with a very great striking capacity, in
addition to our nineteen active service squadrons.
To illustrate the security value of this, I would like to point out that that
1,200 service aircraft is considerably more than double the seaborne aircraft of any
Navy in the world. So when one takes into consideration that only seaborne
aircraft can come against us and are at a very considerable disadvantage when
opposed to land based aircraft, it can be realized what a tremendous addition
to local security the aircraft to be used in this training scheme will give to the
Commonwealth.
Another not inconsiderable merit is that the revised scheme will cost
Australia more than £4,000,000 less than the scheme originally proposed.
Also over £30,000,000 which would have had to be spent abroad will be
spent and circulate within Australia, increasing our capacity to bear the financial
burden of our War effort.
Two questions will naturally arise. Firstly, why is training in Australia
so much cheaper than in Canada, and, secondly, if so much cheaper, why are
we not completing all our training within the Commonwealth.


The answers to the first question are that in Canada the great majority of
the landing grounds will have to be prepared at an estimated average cost of
about £50,000 each, whereas in Australia we have already more adequate landing
grounds than will be required. Also, owing to climatic conditions, hangars and
buildings have to be built on much more expensive lines in Canada. Hangars,
for instance, have to be centrally heated and have mechanically operated doors
that can open and close very rapidly so as to minimize the intake of intense cold
every time an aircraft is taken out or brought in. Another additional cost
will be the necessity for the continual rolling of the snow during the winter to
keep the landing areas consolidated.
I might add, by way of reassurance, that apart from the cold adding to the
cost for these reasons, winter flying conditions in Canada are very good.
MORE FITTERS NEEDED.
The reason why there is a definite limit to the amount of training we can
do in Australia, is an inadequate supply of fitters, which is going to be one of
our great problems, whereas Canada has the great advantage of being able to
draw on a vast reservoir of man-power across her border in the United States.
The proposal for sharing the costs between the four Dominions is as
follows ;
Each Dominion is to bear the cost of training its own quota of personnel,
except that the United Kingdom is to make a very substantial contribution
of aircraft and equipment to be used for training purposes ; the estimated
value of the aircraft and equipment to be supplied by the United
Kingdom is £77,000,006.
After the completion of training, the United Kingdom is to bear all the
cost of paying, equipping and maintaining the personnel and squadrons, even
to the extent of paying their pensions, though where the pay and pension rates
of a Dominion exceed that paid in the Royal Air Force, the particular Dominion
is to make up the deficiency.
The cost to the United Kingdom of maintaining the squadrons that will
be manned and reinforced by Dominions’ personnel, trained under the Scheme,
will be £300,000,000 sterling per year. The cost to the Commonwealth of
the air training scheme for the first three years is calculated to be £54,890,000.
AUSTRALIAN IDENTITY.
Although all personnel, on completion of their training, are to serve in
Royal Air Force squadrons, every effort is to be made to maintain their
Dominion identity. Australian personnel will remain members of the Royal
Australian Air Force during the whole of their service and will wear the
Australian uniform. They will also be grouped into squadrons, which will
bear the name of Australia. For instance, a squadron would be called No. 1001
Australian (Bomber) Squadron.
It is planned to send Australian regular officers on exchange with Royal
Air Force officers to get experience of active service flying prior to the arrival
of Australian trainees at the theatre of war, so that these officers may command
the flights and squadrons in which Australians are to serve. Exchanges will
also be arranged for more senior officers.
If later it is found possible to train in Australia more ground personnel
than are necessary for our home defence squadrons and the air training scheme,
ground personnel will be sent over also so that a certain number of
squadrons, at any rate, will be 100 per cent. Australian.


All squadrons in which Australians are grouped will be affiliated with
squadrons of the Royal Australian Air Force so that their records may be
added to the traditions of these squadrons.
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE.
On being enrolled, air crew trainees will be selected for training as pilots,
observers or air gunners and will undergo their training as airmen. On
completion of their training 50 per cent, of pilots and observers will receive
commissions and the remaining 50 per cent, will have the rank of Sergeant.
Air Gunners on completion of training will serve as Aircraftsmen or Leading
Aircraftsmen, according to how they pass out of the Course, except for
approximately 10 per cent, who will be granted Commissions.
I would like to correct any erroneous impression that the air gunner is
a comparatively unimportant member of an air crew. It is true that the air
gunner does not need quite such a high standard of education as a pilot or
observer, as he does not have to master the intricacies of navigation, but as
the war progresses, more and more importance is being placed on getting the
right type of fighting men to fill these positions. Very often the safe return
of a formation of bombers is due even more to the skill and courage of the air
gunners in fighting off the enemy than upon the skill of the pilots and observers.
DETAILS OF SERVICE.
Conditions of service are contained in pamphlets which are being circulated
throughout the Commonwealth.
The two immediately urgent problems which have to be overcome are with
regard to the need for young men with some mechanical experience to come
forward and be trained as fitters, and to persuade men who wish to serve as air
crew members to possess themselves in patience until such time as it is possible
to call them up for training.
POSITION URGENT.
The fitter position is particularly urgent as there are definitely
not sufficient trained fitters available in the Commonwealth to fill the
requirements of the air training scheme and if sufficient men of some
mechanical knowledge are not forthcoming rapidly to be trained it
will not be possible to carry through the programme which has been
set up.
I feel that possibly many suitable young men are holding back because they
do not feel that serving as 'ground personnel is a sufficiently combatant
occupation to justify giving up their civil employment.
To these it should be explained that no war service can be more
valuable than service as a fitter, in view of the fact that if the fitters
are not forthcoming, it will not be possible for the air crew personnel
to be trained.
OPPORTUNITY FOR YOUNG MEN.
I might mention the wonderful opportunity it is for young men to perform
valuable war service for their country and at the same time receive training
which will be invaluable for them in the post-war years. Already over 2,000
men are in training as fitters in engineering and technical schools at Canberra,
Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide and other schools are shortly to be opened
in other State capitals.


A splendid type of man is at present m training in the Schools, but 1 cannot
exaggerate the importance and urgency of obtaining many more of this type
promptly to fill these Schools to capacity.
With regard to air crews, the problem is rather the reverse to the fitter
problem but equally important. Here the problem is to pursuade men who
have the qualifications and the inclination to serve as air crews to possess
themselves in patience until such time as it is possible for them to be taken
in for training.
WAITING LIST.
If we could take all who wished to serve into training immediately, I have
no doubt that we could get the 30,000 who will be required during the first
three years of the scheme to come forward within a few weeks, but ov/ing to
the fact that there is already a waiting list of over 2,500, who have been selected,
and another waiting list of some thousands waiting selection, many are apt to
become impatient and disheartened by the delay and rush off to serve in some
other capacity.
If some thousands should do this the result will be disastrous as the 30,000
to undergo training within three years must approach the Commonwealth’s
capacity of young men who have both the qualifications and the inclination
to serve as air crew, and if some thousands of these are lost to the Air Force
there may well be difficulty later in getting a sufficient number of men of the
type required.
MORE MEN WANTED SOON.
I would point out that, although a waiting list of 2,500 seems a formidable
one at present, when only 380 are to commence training during May, the
intake will increase every two months as new schools are established, according
to programme, until the full capacity of the organization is developed, taking
in 1,148 every four weeks.
It will be realized how necessary a big waiting list will be later on to
provide for such colossal requirements.
I am not so much worried about those who have already been selected
and are on the waiting list, as waiting is never so bad when one knows that one
is definitely to be called up and knows the date. I am more worried about
those who are waiting to be interviewed and examined. Everything possible
is being done to expedite the Interviewing and medical examining of candidates
but it is a most complicated business, interviewing candidates, deciding on
their general suitability and their particular suitability to serve as pilots,
observers or air gunners and then on top of that the necessary medical, dental
and optical examination takes over an hour.
ORDEAL OF WAITING.
I am particularly sympathetic with those who have to undergo
this ordeal of waiting and uncertainty, well remembering my own
concern and impatience when I had to wait only a few weeks to be
called up for training in the Flying Corps during the last war.
Our recruiting officers are straining every nerve and working very long
hours, endeavouring to overcome the difficulties.
I would also appreciate very much anything that Members of Parliament
can do to explain the difficulties to prospective candidates and the importance
of patience on their part.


May I be permitted to enfuse a little of the spirit of the Empire Air Training
Scheme by quoting an extract from a remarkable speech made at the opening
of the Royal Canadian Air Force Recruiting Campaign by Air-Marshal Bishop,
V.C., the famous Canadian fighter pilot of the last war, who, by shooting
down between 80 and 90 German aircraft, proved himself one of the greatest
individual fighters in all history. At the end of a remarkably fine speech.
Bishop said :
A UNITED EMPIRE.
Germany lied and failed us so often that she only succeeded in deceiving herself.
As in 1914 she could not conceive that two things might happen—first, that England
would fight her, and second, that the British Empire was a united Empire, She did not
realize that when the Lion roars the Cubs will answer the call. The Cubs are there now
in their battle kit, waiting to fight any foe to freedom to play their part and give their lives,
if necessary, to the sacred cause of Empire. We come from a proud race. We are the
descendants of generations who have waged war through the centuries for our ideals of
liberty, and let no one think that we have forgotten the lessons this record has taught us.
Many months, perhaps many years —long and anxious times lie before us; but we face
the future with a spirit of serious resolve. This Empire has weathered many terrible
storms and by God’s grace it will weather this one too.
When Bishop spoke those words, he was not speaking only for Canada,
but for the whole Empire.”
By Authority : L. F. Joiixstox, Oonnnoiiwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
With the Compliments of
C. C. DAWSON,
Commonwealth Publicity Officer,
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
