

[From The American Ant iiroporog ist for September, 1897]


MESSAGE-STICKS USED BY THE ABORIGINES OF
AUSTRALIA
R. H. MATHEWS
Message-sticks or, as they are sometimes called, “ talking-
sticks ” or “black fellows’ letters,” have occasionally been referred
to by writers on the customs of the Australian aborigines, but
little information has yet been recorded on this
subject. From inquiries I have made personally and through
numerous correspondents in different parts of Australia, I am
forced to the conclusion that the value of “ stick-letters ” as a
means of conveying information from one tribe to another at a
distance has been considerably overrated and misunderstood-
To the student of ethnology, however, they are highly interest-
ingas showing an attempt by a primitive and uncultivated people
to develop some method of communicating their thoughts to per-
sons at another place by means of symbols. Speaking
the stick is given to the messenger to assist him in remembering
the heads of the message by connecting them with certain pic-
tures, marks, or notches cut upon it, which are explained to him
before he sets out on his journey. The stick also serves as his
credentials, being a confirmation or guarantee of the genuineness
of the message.
These message-sticks are pieces of wood of different sizes, vary-
ing in length from an inch and a half to eighteen inches or more.
They are in some cases flat pieces of wood, ornamented more or
less by carving, and were often painted a bright color ; in other
instances they are merely a rounded piece of wood or rod cut
from the branch of a tree or sapling; while a still more prim-
itive kind are made of a piece of bark. Instances have been ob-
served where marked pieces of bone were used in a similar man-
ner. They are marked in various ways, consisting of notches,
dots, strokes, curves, and also with triangular, quadrilateral, and
zigzag devices, in some of the more elaborately carved there
are rude representations of human beings, while in some tribes
they are not marked at all, but consist of a plain piece of wood.
“ Stick-letters ” summoning festive gatherings are sometimes


decorated with the down of birds, with or without other marks.
In some tribes the wood used for making the stick must be of
the same class 1 as the sender of the message, and the messenger
who carries it must also belong to that class. Many of the de-
vices on these sticks are apparently for ornamentation only, and
would depend upon the artistic skill of the maker. The marks
are made with a piece of sharp stone, bone, or broken shell.
Plate vii shows a number of message-sticks used by the natives
of the following rivers in New South Wales and Queensland :
Culgoa, Narran, Cudnappa, Bokhara, Cuttaburra, Birie, Munga-
lalah, Clark, and Basalt. (See “ description of plate vn ”at the
end of this article.)
“ Talking sticks ” appear to have been made according to some
conventional design known among the tribes using them. One
kind of stick is used for a corroboree where a large number of
people assemble; another is used to convey messages or remind-
ers between friends residing at some distance from each other;
a certain sort of stick would be used for festive gatherings; an-
other in cases of sickness or death, and so on. These sticks, differ-
ing perhaps but little in general appearance, would nevertheless
be recognized by the people inhabiting the tract of country in
which they were used, and would thus to a certain extent have a
more or less fixed significance, which would, however, be very
much restricted and of little use unless accompanied by a verbal
explanation by the bearer.
Message-sticks are used in summoning an assemblage for hos-
tile purposes, a meeting for corroboree, and in many cases of less
importance. The messenger who carries the stick and the mes-
sage is generally a young man, strong and active and a good trav-
eler, who is, therefore, well qualified to satisfactorily discharge
his duties. He is generally more or less known among, or is re-
lated to, the tribes he visits, and is to some extent acquainted
with their dialect. On his arrival at the men’s camp he hands
the message-stick to the person to whom he has been directed
to deliver it, giving the name of the sender and explaining the
meaning. The party who receives the “ stick-letter ” carries it
with him when he goes to the place to which he has been invited.
Sticks conveying friendly messages or greetings would be carried
i See my papers on “ The Kamilaroi Class System,” Proe. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.),
x, 18-34; “Australian Class Systems,” American Anthropologist, ix, 411-416.


by women or youths, as well as by the men. There being no
urgency for the speedy delivery of these friendly messages, they
are not generally sent direct, but may be a long time in reach-
ing their destination. A messenger sent to a tribe to report the
death of a relative or person with whom they were acquainted
would have his face painted with pipe-clay.
The bearer of a message is never molested by any of the tribes
through whose country he may have occasion to travel while en-
gaged on this duty, even although the people through whom he
may pass are not on friendly terms with his tribe. As far as I
can learn, this rule is of universal prevalence among native tribes
throughout the continent, and a breach of it would lead to re-
taliation.
Mr F. G. Jackson, in his work “The Great Frozen Land ” (1895)’
says: “All the primitive tribes of northern Europe used wood,
bone, and stone to write and cipher upon. Du Chaillu, in his
‘ Viking Age,’ tells how the Norsemen wrote upon staves of whale-
bone, and how they tied hair to their letters of communication —
just, strange to say, as the aboriginal Australians do today. I
have seen some Australian talking-sticks with hair tied on the
end of them, so that the recipient of the letter might the more
easily know who sent it to him. The Australians, like the Norse-
men, write also on bones as well as wood. A lady from whom
I got some of my talking-sticks showed me a bone—the fibula
of a kangaroo —with native characters on it.”
The practice of using marked pieces of wood to accompany
messages sent from one tribe to another may have been copied
from some of the invading races who came to Australia in the re-
mote past, and has been handed down in a rude form to the pres-
ent time. The custom has been observed among the aborigines
in different parts of Australia, but was much more highly devel-
oped in some districts than in others, and was, so far as I can
learn, altogether unknown among some tribes. The latter state-
ment should, however, be tested by further investigation.
Meetings for the performance of the initiation ceremonies are
summoned by a messenger carrying a bull-roarer, the several
articles of a man’s dress, some native weapons, and occasionally
a quartz crystal. A message-stick was also sometimes carried in
addition to these emblems. As I have given very complete de-
tails of how these important messages are delivered in my papers


describing the initiation ceremonies 1 of several native tribes, it
is unnecessary for me to refer to them further in this paper.
Although the Australian “ stick-letters ” were not of them-
selves sufficient to convey any intelligible meaning, there appears
to be some evidence that they were to a certain extent a rude
kind of picture-writing, which would perhaps have developed
into a more connected and useful form in course of time. It is
well known that gesture language was more or less extensively
recognized and understood among all Australian tribes. Gesture
language may be called “ idea-speaking,” and pictographs “ idea-
writing.” It has been said that written syllabaries and alphabets
have been developed from pictographs, and it is suggested that
in the picture-writing of different races the beginnings of our
modern manuscripts and printed books are to be found.
It is hoped that some of the residents of those districts in
which the custom still prevails will take advantage of their oppor-
tunities to accurately copy and fully describe as many as possible
of these message-sticks, in order that additional light may be
thrown upon a subject which is but little understood at present,
and also, if possible, to enable a comparison to be made between
Australian picture-writing and that of the peoples of other
countries.
As bearing upon the subject of native drawings possessing a
possible symbolical significance, I may refer the reader to several
papers communicated by me to different scientific journals on
the rock paintings and carvings 2 of the Australian blacks, and
also on some remarkable drawings on the ground and on trees 3
executed by the same people.
The territory within which the message-sticks herein described
were used is about 250 miles in length by a width of about 200
miles, and is distant about 600 miles from Sydney. It is situ-
ated partly in New South Wales and partly in Queensland, and
1 “ The Burbung of the Wiradthuri Tribes,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, xxv,
295-318; ibid., xxvi, 272-285. “ The Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Vic-
toria, ix, n. s., 137-173. “ The Bunan Ceremony of New South Wales,” American An-
thropologist, Washington, ix, 327-344. “ The Keeparra Ceremony of Initiation,” Journ.
Anthrop. Inst., London, xxvi, 320-338, plate xxxn. “ The Wandarral of the Richmond
and Clarence Tribes,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, X, n. s., art. iv. May, 1897.
2 “The Rock Paintings and Carvings of the Australian Aborigines,” Journ. Anthrop.
Inst., London, xxv, 145-163, plates xiv, xv, xvi.
3 “Australian Ground and Tree Drawings,” American Anthropologist, ix, 33-49, one
plate, figs. 1 to 36.


is watered by the Narran, Culgoa, Warrego, and other rivers. I
obtained the message-sticks and all the details respecting them
from Mr James E. Miller, a police trooper stationed at Goodooga
township. He has been traveling through that district in the
discharge of his official duties for some years past and is well
acquainted with the numerous aboriginal population, who still
preserve their ancient customs. The information was not gath-
ered by him all at once, but as opportunities offered during the
last two or three years. After I had this paper drafted I sent it
to Mr Miller and asked him to compare the descriptions of the
message-sticks by a further reference to the natives who gave him
the details. It w r as more than half a year before he had a chance
of seeing all the men whom he had previously got the particu-
lars from, and when he returned the draft to me no material
alterations were found necessary. Mr Miller displayed great
patience and industry in dealing with a difficult subject, and it
is hoped others will follow his example.
The use of message-sticks by the Australian aborigines as a
means of communication between different tribes has been re-
ferred to by different writers on the customs of these people, but
most of them are too fragmentary to be of any use to the scien-
tific investigator. Among the most important of these the fol-
lowing names may be mentioned: In 1878, Mr R. B. Smyth
published a wmrk, 1 in which he describes three message-sticks,
with illustrative drawings. Mr E. M. Curr, in 1886, gave draw-
ings and descriptions of two message-sticks used by some tribes
of which he treats. 2 In 1889, Mr A. W. Howitt described some
of these sticks which he had received from different districts, to
which he added a plate showing several figures. 3
Description of Plate VII.
The message-sticks illustrated in this plate have all been re-
produced by me from the originals, which are in my possession,
and are accurately drawn to scale. The locality from which
they have been obtained has been stated in each case, and their
purport, as given by the aborigines, has been recorded as fully
as practicable.
1 The Aborigines of Victoria, i, 354-355.
2 The Australian Race, i, 150.
3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, xvm, 314-332.


AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST
VOL. X, PL. VII
AUSTRALIAN MESSAGE-STICKS




Figures 1 and 2. —The message-stick here represented is made
of the wood of the cuttibundi tree, known to white men as qui-
nine or Peruvian bark. Its length is six inches and an eighth,
its breadth a little over three inches, and its thickness slightly
exceeding three-eighths of an inch.
This is a message from Nanee, Kumbo Kangaroo, a head-man
of the Culgoa tribe, to Belay, Kubbi Iguana, one of the head-men
of the Tinanburra tribe. Nanee handed the stick to a black fel-
low named Imball, Kubbi Iguana, at Goodooga, on the Bokhara
river, New South Wales, who conveyed it to Belay at Tinanburra,
on the Cuttaburra river, Queensland, the distance between the
two places being about 100 miles. When handing the stick to
Belay, Imball told him that Nanee and his tribe wished to meet
him (Belay) and his tribe on the Cudnappa river for the purpose
of holding a corroboree. Imball further explained to Belay the
devices on the stick as follows, which will be better understood
by referring to plate vn: Nanee (a) sent the message from the
Bokhara river (6), by the hand of Imball (c), via the Birie ( d ),
the Culgoa (e), and Cudnappa (/) rivers, to Bela}'- ( g ); that the
stick was dispatched at new moon ( h ), and Belay and his tribe
are expected to be at Cudnappa river (/) at full moon (i) ; ( j)
represents a corroboree ground, and Belay understands from it
that Nanee and his tribe are corroboreeing at the Bokhara river,
which is their taorai, and, further, that on the meeting of the
two tribes at full moon on the Cudnappa river a big corroboree
will be held.
The messenger, Imball, is shown standing beside Belay, which
conveys the meaning that he will remain with the latter until
he and his tribe are ready to start for the place of meeting, and
that he, the messenger, will accompany them thither. The route
taken by Imball in going from Goodooga to Tinanburra is shown
at ( lc ). From Belay’s knowledge of the distance from the Bok-
hara river to the place of meeting on the Cudnappa river, he
would know that the Culgoa tribe would require to start for the
Bokhara very soon after he received the message at Tinanburra.
Nanee and his tribe would have to travel about 70 miles and
Belay and his tribe about 30 miles to reach the place of meeting.
Figures 3 and 4. —This message-stick was sent from Goodooga,
on the Bokhara river, by a black fellow named Kubbi Iguana to
his friend Yarri, Murri Iguana, residing at Angledool, on the


Narran river, inviting the latter to bring his tribe to Goodooga
to a corroboree which was shortly to take place. The two places
mentioned are in New South Wales and are about 60 miles dis-
tant from each other.
The stick is six inches and one-eighth in length, one inch and
one-eighth broad at the widest part, and five-sixteenths of an
inch thick along the middle, tapering almost to an edge at the
sides and ends. The front side, figure 3, has a rude drawing of a
man, about four inches long, apparently decorated for the dance.
At each side of and below the human figure are a number of
crosses, 34 in all, and below these are some straight and curved
lines. There are ten notches, five on each side, nearly opposite
to each other. The native stated that the stripes on the human
figure mean that it is “ got up ”or painted for the corroboree. On
the other side of the stick, figure 4, there are two groups of crosses,
one containing four, the other six, or ten in all, similar to those
on the front side. The remainder of the carving on this side con-
sists of a number of devices of the yammunyamun pattern, made
up of straight lines and curves. The notches 1 and crosses on the
stick are merely added for ornament. The wood of which it is
made is nunumbeera.
Figures 5 and 6. —This stick was made by Belay and Kunga-
nooay, two brothers, of the Kubbi class and Iguana totem, both
of whom are chief men of the Tinanburra tribe, and was dis-
patched to Nanee, Kumbo Kangaroo, one of the head-men of
the Culgoa tribe, residing at Goodooga. The makers of the stick
gave it, together with a verbal message, to a black fellow whose
name I did not learn, who brought it from Tinanburra to Toulby,
a distance of about 60 miles, where he handed it over to Kubbi
Iguana, a man of the Culgoa tribe. Kubbi brought it to Tatalla,
on the Culgoa river, about ten miles from Toulby, where he met
“ George,” a half-caste, a Kubbi Padamelon, who is a “ tracker ”
attached to the Goodooga police station and who was then at
Tatalla on official duty. Kubbi handed the stick to George, who
i Having heard white men say that these notches indicate a certain numberof blacks.
I asked Mr J. E. Miller, the police officer at Goodooga, 'New South Wales, to make the
fullest inquiries he could from the various tribes in his district. He writes: “As re-
quested by you, I have made strict and careful inquiries in reference to the ‘ nicks’ on
the edges of the message-sticks, and as far as I can learn, they do not mean anything.
All the blacks in this district say the ‘ nicks ’ have no meaning, but are merely put on
the sticks to ornament them, or, to use their own words, ‘ to make them look pretty.’ ”


brought it to Goodooga and gave it to Nanee, the man to whom
it was sent, with the verbal message he had received from Kubbi.
The message was to the effect that Belay and Kunganooay re-
quested Nanee and his two brothers, Bindi and Bunjalah, to come
to Tinanburra for the purpose of joining them in a big corroboree,
which was shortly to be held there. Tinanburra is on the Cut-
taburra river, in Queensland, and Goodooga is on the Bokhara
river, in New South Wales, the distance between the two places
being about 100 miles.
The two heads alongside of each other in the middle of the
stick, figure 5, are the two brothers sending the message, and the
single head at each end of the stick are the two brothers of Nanee,
to whom the message was sent. 'There are 76 notches or nicks
altogether, 42 of them being on one edge; on the other edge there
are 18 notches, and then a smooth space of about an inch and
a quarter, after which there are 16 more notches. These notches
are added merely for ornamentation. The remaining marks on
the flat surface, and also all the marks.on the other side of the
stick, figure 6, consisting of V-shaped lines, triangles, and quad-
rilaterals of the yammunycimun 1 pattern are for ornamental pur-
poses only. Bunches of the white down of birds were fastened
on the ends of the stick, being tied to it by means of string at-
tached to the notched projections at each end. These decora-
tions are not shown in my drawing.
This stick is eight inches and one-tenth in length, an inch
and one-tenth across at the widest part, and a quarter of an inch
thick. It is thicker in the middle than at the edges.
Figure 7. —This is a message stick or token sent by a man of
the Clark River tribe to one of the blacks at the Basalt river,
Queensland. The messenger who brought it said it was a re-
minder to the Bluff Downs natives to bring plenty of handker-
chiefs and other fancy things when they next visited the first-
mentioned tribe. The length of the stick is five inches and
three-eighths and its diameter half an inch. It is simply a
round piece of wood, without any paint upon it, marked all over
in a somewhat similar manner to figure 12.
Figures 8 and 9. —This drawing represents both sides of a mes-
sage-stick made at Coomburrah by a native named Taballah,
1 This is a Kamilaroi and Wiradjuri word used to designate certain devices cut upon
the ground or upon trees. Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, xxv, 302; 323.


Murri Iguana, one of the head-men of the Cudnappa River tribe,
who handed it to a black fellow named Kunbitalah, Murri Iguana,
one of the Culgoa River tribe, who was at Coomburrah visiting
the blacks there. Kunbitalah conveyed the stick to Angledool,
and delivered it, with the oral message, to Enutbeakah, Kubbi
Iguana, one of the head-men of the Currawillinghi tribe. Coom-
burrah is about 80 miles from Angledool.
This stick is made of what the natives call nunumbeera wood
and is painted red. Its length is 8 inches and three-quarters, its
greatest breadth an inch and fifteen-sixteenths, and its thickness
three-eighths of an inch. The holes in the ends are for the pur-
pose of attaching feathers or hair, not shown in the drawing.
Tiie notches on its edges have no meaning, but are merely orna-
mental; (a) represents Taballah, and the figure immediately
alongside represents his wife. The two figures (ft) (ft) on the
other end of the stick represent two black fellows of the Cudnappa
tribe. On the other side of the stick, figure 9, the figure (c) rep-
resents Enutbeakah, and the other figures (d) on the same side
represent the blacks of the Currawillinghi tribe. On looking at
the stick, assisted by the verbal message, Enutbeakah understood
that Taballah was bringing his gin and two other blacks with
him, and by the figures on the other side of the stick Enutbeakah
saw that he was requested to bring the blacks of his tribe, the
Currawillinghi, with him.
Kunbitalah conveyed the stick from Coomburrah to Angle-
dool, but this was not absolutely necessary; he could have
handed it over to another black fellow at Goodooga or elsewhere
on the route, but if he had done so it would have been requisite
to have given him also the verbal message to be delivered with
it. Coomburrah is on the Mungalalah river, Queensland, por-
tion of the taurai of the Cudnappa tribe; Angledool, on the
Narran river, New South Wales, is portion of the taurai of the
Currawillinghi tribe.
Figures 10 and 11. —These drawings represent both sides of a
stick sent by Nanee (a), one of the head-men of the Culgoa tribe,
to Booinee, Murri Opossum (ft), one of the head-men of the Cut-
taburra tribe. It was dispatched from Goodooga, on the Bok-
hara river, to Brewarra, on the Cuttaburra river, both places be-
ing in New South Wales. Kubbi (c), one of the head-men of the
Culgoa tribe, carried it from Goodooga to Tatalla, on the Cul-
CVJ
co
CO
CVJ
