

*
>1
j
:
i
A
A
S
I
I
ll
KING WILLIAM STREET
J. L. HONYTHON & CO., “THE ADVERTISER ” OFFICE
' f




Hbdflifte
: co,, “the advertiser ” office




MY KIND FRIENDS
S. J. W. AND W. J. B.
I DEDICATE
THIS NARRATIVE OF A TOUR,
THE PLEASURE OF WHICH WAS GREAILY ENHANCED
BY THEIR COMPANIONSHIP.




Jk yiSIT TO JnDIA.
COLOMBO AND KANDY.
Colombo, 23rd January, 1891.
A.M not going to trouble my friends in
South Australia with a long account
of my voyage from Adelaide. Voyages
differ, no doubt, but accounts of them all
are characterised by such a uniformity of
dulness that I have long since learnt to
skip them, and I hope that most other
people do the same. Suffice it to say that
the passage was the calmest and the
vessel the most luxurious that I have ever
known, and had it not been for my
anxiety to see Ceylon I should have felt
quite sorry when the ship dropped
anchor on a Thursday morning in the
beautiful harbor of Colombo.
No one but an old traveller—a
rambler by nature, whom cruel cir-
cumstances alone keep stationary—
can realise the charm of feeling that
one is in the East once more. How
fascinating are the dear old familiar sights
—the same all round the world arid yet
each place having its own peculiarities.
The fleet of boats of every size and
shape, down to the perilous-looking


but perfectly safe outriggers that
seem just wide enough to contain half an
ordinary man, which surround the ship ;
the rush of quaintly dressed (or un-
dressed) natives on board all jabbering at
the same time about the cheapness of the
precious (?) stones they wish to sell, the
superiority of various hotels, or their own
qualifications as guides ; the wild stam-
pede of the passengers to get hold of the
latest files of newspapers, as though they
had been 10 years instead of 10 days
away from telegrams. How amusing it
all is to watch ! But the day begins to
get hot; it is high time to pack up our
traps, say good-bye to every one, and
make for the shore.
Having secured the services of the well-
known guide “ Charlie,” alias Charles 1.,
whose name will be familiar to many Aus-
tralians, I drove up to the Colombo
Club and was glad enough to find myself
in a cool hall, with a gentle sea
breeze blowing in and a punkah waving
above my head. The climate of Colombo
is charming for a visitor who has nothing
to do, and means to stay only a few days;
but I can well understand the residents
saying that the perpetual vapor bath in
which they live is far more trying than
even an occasional Sydney brickfielder.
It is genuine British pluck which leads
them to fight against the languor such a
climate must cause, by energetic games of
golf, cricket, and lawn tennis. Fortu-
nately the tourist is under no such neces-
sity, but may spend the cool hour before
sunset in a drive through the great
scattered city, and round by the lake and
the cinnamon gardens. And certainly a
most lovely and interesting drive mine
was ; the groves of waving cocoanuts and
shady breadfruits, the gorgeous blossoms
of the hybiscus, scarlet acacias, and
innumerable other tropical flowers,
mingled with the many colored leaves of


the crotons ; the cool white houses, with
deep verandahs and brown-tiled roofs
—(what a relief to the eye after the cor-
rugated iron of Australia !) —the crowds
of Cinhalese who, with their long
hair fastened in tortoiseshell combs
and their colored petticoats, look
far more like women than men ; the
closely-shaven Buddhist priests dressed
in yellow' togas, walking along in
stately dignity, each attended by his ser-
vant ; the unfamiliar fruits in the market-
place, all formed one confused picture
which seemed like a glimpse of fairyland.
What a strange, varied history there has
been to bring together this medley of
races and colors ! First came the Cin-
halese, who still form the mass o£ the
population and are about 1,000,000 in
number, nearly all of them followers of
Buddha, the aboriginal Yeddahs being so
completely crushed that they are now un-
important ; then arrived the Tamils, im-
migrants from India, in many respects a
superior race, now numbering about three-
quarters of a million, chiefly Sivaites. The
next wave w'as from Arabia, and the so-
called Moors may be distinguished at a
glance by their peculiar dress. To this
day they—and there are about 200,000 of
them —profess the faith of Islam. After
them came the European conquerors. Of
the once invincible Portuguese, what
traces are there left now ? A half-caste
population, numerically less than the
Arabs, still speaking a sort of Portu-
guese patois and belonging to the
Roman Catholic Church, but hardly
any other evidence of their century and a
half of rule. Nor does the Dutch period
seem less to be forgotten ; it is true that
there are many names of Dutch origin,
that all half-caste Europeans are popularly
called “Burghers,” and that a few Dutch
forts are to be seen on the coast ; but the
language is extinct, the forts are aban-


doned, and the Dutch Reformed Church,
which the Government attempted to force
on an unwilling people, has made no pro-
gress whatever. English missions by the
way (although of course the most perfect
toleration exists throughout the island
under British rule) have been far more
successful. Anglican, Wesleyan, and
Baptist missions have been planted in the
various centres of population.
One characteristic feature of Colombo
which I must not omit to mention
is the variety of its vehicles. I have
driven in one carriage that looked
like a meatsafe on wheels, I have
driven in a waggonette, I have driven
in a sort of cart drawn by a tiny bullock
about the size of a Shetland pony, but of
all the conveyances I have tried I give the
palm to a Japanese jinriksha,” a de-
lightful little two-wheeled chair, drawn by
a coolie. The motion is perfect, and the
pace capital.
I could have stayed happily for a month
at Colombo, but my time was short, and
on the Friday afternoon I started by train
for Kandy—once the capital of the native
kings, now the Mount Lofty of Ceylon,
the mountain retreat for the English resi-
dents of Colombo. It is possible to go
higher still, and find English frosts and
English flowers at Nuwara Eliya, but
Kandy is high enough to ensure cool
nights and delicious mornings. The four
hours’ journey was simply beautiful. We
passed through forests of cocoanuts and
other trees ; here and there seeing pic-
turesque native villages peeping out from
the shade, with troops of brown-skinned
children playing about the gardens. (What
a blessing to the people of Ceylon the
cocoanut tree must be ! I am told that
there are about fifty million of them in the
island ; they may be taken roughly as
growing 80 to the acre, each tree bringing
m a net return of about 2s. for each


year of its century of existence.) The
valleys are all carefully cleared and
planted with rice. I have often heard that
the paddy fields on the great Indian
plains are monotonous in the extreme,
and I have no doubt that it is true. But
here, where the valleys are narrow and
the terracing necessary for irrigation
makes them look like steps of brilliant
green, the rice crops seem to add a
beauty of their own to the landscape.
I was many times reminded of the
scenery on the west coast of the North
Island of New Zealand ; the color of the
young rice is not unlike that of the raupo;
the dense undergrowth of the jungle
curiously resembles the native bush ; and
even the cocoanut trees have their parallel
in the nikau palms and tree ferns.
Perhaps, indeed, it would be more correct
to say that I once more realised how
thoroughly tropical in appearance the
vegetation of New Zealand is. I was
surprised not to see any sugar growing on
the plains, which at first sight appear as
well suited to it as the low-lying districts
of Mauritius, but I am told that the
climate of Ceylon is too moist; the plants
flourish, but the juice is watery. We
passed by groves of bananas and planta-
tions of cacao and spices, and higher up
the mountain slopes reached the tea plan-
tations, which have now taken the place
of coffee as the great industry of the
colony, about forty million pounds being
annually exported. Unfortunately it is
not a pretty crop ; in outline not
unlike a vineyard, but the leaves
being of a dull sage-green color.
I had hoped to have seen some coffee
plantations, of the beauty of which I had
heard so often, but in this part of the
colony they are a thing of the past.
Truly the history of Ceylon coffee has
been a tragedy. Fifteen years ago people
regarded it much as South Australians


regarded Broken Hill—as a sort of in-
exhaustible mine provided for them by
nature. Banks were ready to advance as
much as £6O an acre on a good plantation.
Besides what the Europeans were doing,
the natives sold coffee grown by them-
selves to the amount of £500,000 a year.
There were rumors of a leaf disease having
appeared in some parts of the island, but
little attention was paid to them and
prosperity continued unabated. Sud-
denly, in 1878, the disease spread over
the island, and by 1880 every planter
was ruined. Only in some of the driest
parts of the east coast does the plant seem
strong enough to resist the attacks of the
pest ; where that is the case it is still the
most profitable crop which can be grown.
Had it not been for the timely introduc-
tion of the cinchona plant the ruin
would have been even more wide-
spread ; but with laudable energy
the moment the failure of the coffee
became an undeniable fact the planters
began to turn their attention to new indus-
tries, and although it may be doubted
whether any of them will ever bring in the
splendid profits that coffee used once to
do, yet it seems that the variety of the
crops now cultivated will place the pros-
perity of the colony on a firmer basis than
it ever was before, and doubtless expe-
rience will gradually enable the planters
to secure a greater return from plants
with which as yet they are scarcely
familiar. For instance, cinchona had
been grown for several years before the
best manner of stripping the bark had
been discovered.
It is not until the train has begun the
ascent of the hills that one realises the
intense beauty of the scenery. We were
in the midst of a wild, confused mass of
mountains scattered all round us, of every
form and shape, all standing out the more
clearly as the evening shadows lengthened.


The line winds round the cliffs with a
perfect triumph of engineering. The
short tropical day was drawing to a close
as we reached Kandy, but the labors of
sightseeing were not yet over. A charm-
ing moonlight drive along the lake brought
us to the famous Temple of the Sacred
Tooth of Buddha—one of the most vene-
rated spots of the religion which claims to
have the greatest number of adherents of
any in the world. The temple is crowded
with worshippers every morning and
evening. In my travels I have visited
churches, synagogues, and mosques
without number, but a Buddhist temple
was a new experience to me, and I must
confess that I was sorely disappointed. It
is rather a collection of small shrines than a
single temple ; the chapel containing the
sacred relics will not hold more than a
dozen worshippers at a time. Of course
we could not see the tooth itself, as it is
covered by a number of golden cases, and
is only shown to very great people—l
think I can mention some similar in-
stances nearer home ! —and in the dim
light of the cocoanut lamps it was impos-
sible to distinguish the rich jewels with
which the bell-shaped covering of the
tooth is encrusted from pieces of glass.
The paintings on the walls are curious—
representing the happiness of the Blessed
who have attained to Nirvana, and the
punishments of the lost ; and of course
there are many pictures of the calm, placid
face of Buddha. The whole atmosphere
was sweet with the flowers which the
worshippers present as offerings at the
shrine, but the noise of the ceaseless
banging and thumping of drums and tom-
toms was perfectly hideous. A solemn-
looking priest stood by as the crowds of
men, women, and children came forward
one after another to kneel for a few
moments in prayer before the relics, the
devout manner of all being most impres-


sive. By the rules of their religion the
priests are strictly prohibited from re-
ceiving money, but as there is always an
attendant at hand to receive it for them
the difference is more apparent than real.
Buddhism is surely one of the most in-
teresting studies in the world. It is older
than Christianity, the Fourth Council of
the Buddhists being about contempo-
rary with the meeting of the Apostles at
Jerusalem. It has become extinct in its
original home, as Zoroastrianism has in
Persia, and Judaism nearly has in Pales-
tine, and yet is professed by millions in
other countries. It teaches a lofty
morality, and yet denies the existence of
Ood and the human soul. Its most ardent
followers confess that as now practised it
has totally departed from its original
form ; in fact, the philosophical Buddhists
regard the ordinary wotship of the Cinha-
lese much as the strictest of the Puritans
would regard the ceremonial of the Roman
Catholic Church. As a factor for good in
the way of promoting education, know-
ledge of medicine, &c., it seems to have
almost lost its power, and the extraordi-
nary revival which is now going on is
rather owing to the zeal of Western con-
verts than any religious activity on the
part of native priests or people. Yet that
there is a revival cannot be denied.
Buddhist schools for both boys and girls
have been established in Kandy. I paid
a most interesting visit to these ; but,
though I wish to look at the matter as im-
partially as I can, and desire to express
my gratitude to the authorities who
courteously showed me all that was
to be seen, I could not but feel that
they are at best a feeble imitation of the
mission schools, whose w r ork they may
attempt to counteract, but will never
equal. The boys’ school, for instance,
cannot be compared with Trinity College,
the Church Missionary Society’s institu-


tion. Everything at the latter seemed to
tell of genuine energy and unselfish de-
votion. There are some 300 youths—
Burghers, Tamil, Cinhalese, and Moors—
receiving what we should call a first-class
grammar school education, some of them
taking their degrees at the University of
Calcutta, to which the college is affiliated.
And as the charge for boarders is about
£lO a year, and for day boys in some
cases only £2, it cannot be said that the
missionaries are seeking to make a for-
tune. The schools of the Baptists and
Wesleyans, which I also visited, seem of
a more elementary character, but are no
doubt very valuable in their way.
Close to the Buddhist temple is a bo
tree, sacred because grown from a slip
cut from the tree under which the Buddha
became “enlightened.” According to
popular belief, however, it will not be the
sacred tree much longer, as the new
Buddha, whose incarnation is expected to
take place ere long, will receive his en-
lightenment under an ironwood tree, and
accordingly they are being planted all over
Ceylon.
Strolling through the native town of
Kandy is perfectly delightful. It has all
the romance of Cairo or Damascus with-
out the dirt, the smells, or the army of
beggars. Truly Linnaeus was right when
he said that man lives in the tropics and
his proper food is the cocoanut ; he only
exists elsewhere and ekes out his
subsistence on grains and flesh. How in-
finitely happier must be the life of the
mass of the population here than it can
ever be in England. Clothing is almost
unnecessary ; sufferings from cold are un-
known ; there are no short gloomy winter
days, and cocoanut oil, which posts
almost nothing, supplies all the light that
is required at night. The various fruits
and leaves make curry —the ordinary food
of the poor—delicious. All around are


beautiful trees and flowers to look at.
But though a happy I do not think it can
be said that the Cinhalese are a merry
race. I miss the broad grin of the negroes
or the constant chaff of the Arab boys ;
all seem politely dignified, but not even
the children give me the idea of possess-
ing a keen sense of the ridiculous. Can
it be that the language has anything to
say to it ? Of course I know nothing of
such matters ; but who could tell a funny
story which contained such words as ‘ * Pac-
cayasannissitasila,” “ Ajivaparisuddha-
sila,” or “ Eratmiyadeniyahena ?” (I take
the words at random from a book which
lies open before me.) Would Mark
Twain have complained of the awful
German language if he had dipped into
Cinhalese ?
The excursions round Kandy areamongst
the greatest of its many charms. I trust
I shall not offend my friends in South
Australia when I say that never—not even
at Adelaide or Rio—have I seen anything
to compare with the Botanical Gardens of
Kandy. It is rather a vast park than a
garden, with dense groves of every variety
of tree and shrub. The roots of the
ndia-rubber twist about the ground like
gigantic snakes ; from the branches of the
banyans hang down the pillar-like roots ;
nutmegs, cinnamon, cloves, and all kinds
of spices grow in rich profusion. A
description of the palmtrees alone would
fill a volume ; I can at least give my
friends some idea of the magnificence of
the palmyra (or fan-palm) when I say that
I measured one frons and found it up-
wards of 26 ft. in length. Amongst the
grass on the lawn were growing masses of
sensitive plants, which they regard here
much as we do the stinkwort in Aus-
tralia. The guide pointed out to us with
natural pride a talipot palm, which is just
now one of the most famous sights of the
gardens. It stood up straight as a pillar


for about 70 ft., and above the crown of
leaves rose a pyramid of pale golden
blossoms for 15 or 20 ft. further. Like
the aloe they flower but once ; one can
well understand such a luxuriant growth
exhausting the plant, but the beauty of
the sight was never to be forgotten.
Nor are the drives round the hills,
looking into the deep valleys beneath
and across to ranges of distant mountains,
less delightful. To enjoy them to per-
fection one must start out soon after
sunrise, for before 9 o’clock the air has
become heated. The roads are excellent,
but the horses —well, they would not do
for Hill & Co.’s coaches.
The Governor of Ceylon usually resides
at Colombo, but he has an exquisite
Pavilion at Kandy, besides a mountain
retreat at Nuwara Eliya. The post is no
sinecure, as the administration of the
colony really rests with him personally.
There is a Legislative Council, it is true,
but it hardly corresponds with Australian
ideas of a Parliament, inasmuch as the
official members form a majority, and the
others are merely nominated, the repre-
sentative principle not having been intro-
duced. There has been some agitation in
favor of it, of course, but I should think
it would be even more difficult to work
here than in the Mauritius. Still,
arduous though the post may be, as I
walked through the lovely gardens of the
Pavilion, and afterwards enjoyed the
hospitality of his Excellency Sir Arthur
Havelock in the cool marble halls, I could
not help thinking that if I were Sir
William Robinson, and the choice of
Ceylon or West Australia had been offered
to me, I should not have made the choice
that he did.
On Sunday I attended the English
Church at Kandy, It is a large building,
well suited to the climate, but without
much architectural pretension. It seemed


quite like the old country to see once
more the Imperial troops attending church
parade; one forgot for a moment the
latitude and the surroundings. The con-
gregation was large, many planters
having come in from the country. A
young clergyman, who looked as though
he had been too long in the tropics and
sadly wanted a trip to Australia, gave us
an excellent sermon. The surpliced choir
was partly European and partly native ;
but the music cannot be described as a
success.
I felt quite melancholy at having to
leave the delightful little club at Kandy,
and made faithful promises (as one
always does ; but alas ! how often are
they fulfilled ?) to come back again next
year and stay for a good long time
so as to see the whole neighborhood.
But “no rest can be found for
the pilgrim of”—modern times. I
must leave plantations, ruins, temples, and
everything else unseen for the present.
Back I came to Colombo to await the
steamer for Calcutta ; the journey down
from Kandy being enlivened by torrents of
tropical rain, constant flashes of brilliant
lightning, and the ceaseless roll of
distant thunder. The time hero has,
however, been happily spent at the houses
of various old friends of my boyhood
from whom I parted long years ago,
and who, like myself, have wandered
far away from the old country. What
a charm such meetings add .to one’s
wanderings round the world ! Then there
are museums and gardens to be seen,
and English papers to be read, and—
must it be confessed—even a few days of
the climate of Ceylon make one realise
that an occasional rest in a long armchair
in a semi-somnolent condition is not after
all the least pleasant incident in the life
of a traveller.


MADRAS.
Bay of Bengal, 29th January, 1891.
fWO and a half days’ steaming over a
glassy sea brought us to Madras. (One
of my fellow travellers, who is a devoted
admirer of the “ Ancient mariner” here in-
terrupts me and says that “ slimy” is a more
poetic expression, but though I am open
to conviction on most points nothing can
persuade me that Coleridge is not a very
over-rated writer. lam bold enough to
say that I think his ideas are often far-
fetched, and his language sometimes
positively disagreeable ; and so pace my
learned friend, “glassy” shall remain,
poetic or not ; it certainly conveys a more
correct idea of what the sea looked like
ever since we left Colombo). Ten years
ago I should have considered the
Rohilla perfect ; but the luxuries of
the Austral have spoilt me for anything
smaller, and I have not yet got over my
regret at having to hurry away so speedily
from the mountains of Ceylon. However,
the time was spent pleasantly enough in
studying maps and histories of India and
reading the files of English papers which
had met us at Colombo.
The lions of Madras are not many ; but
as we had not time even to see all those
that there were, it was a consolation to
think that not much had been left un-
done. The neighborhood of Madras, as
one approaches it by sea, is too flat to be
imposing ; but it was interesting amongst
the few hills that formed the background


to trace the Little Mount, where, accord-
ing to a somewhat shadowy tradition,
Saint Thomas the Apostle was martyred.
Whether that be true or not, it was at
least the site of a Christian church long
before either the Portuguese or the
English landed on the shores of India.
To that hill, in the days of Marco Polo,
the Christians of the old native church of
Malabar (which all must admit to be one
of the most interesting bodies in the
world) made their pilgrimages; and it
has for centuries been an object of vene-
ration to Christians, Mohammedans, and
Hindoos alike.
Although the great breakwaters which
have recently been built to supply the
place of a natural harbor have already
been injured by a cyclone, enough of
them has been left to form a valuable
shelter; and (at least in the north-west
monsoon) the horrors of the landing, of
which I have heard so much, are a thing
of the past. Our ship was, of course,
speedily surrounded by great barges
rowed by naked figures who looked
more suited to the Styx than the
upper world, and by little surf-boats made
of beams tied together ; but, fortunately
for us, we were not left to the tender
mercies of screaming natives, for Mr.
Price, the Chief Secretary of the Madras
Presidency, whom we had previously
met in Australia, kindly came on board
to meet us and take us under his pro-
tection.
Madras is an entirely modern city ;
but then one of the strange things which
one has to realise on coming to India is
that although the India of history may
be of vast, even unknown, antiquity, the
India which we have come to see is a
newer country than Europe. The great
wonders of architecture, both Hindoo
and Mohammedan, are recent as com-
pared with the buildings of Greece or


Italy. With the sole exception of
that of the Jains (who are a com-
paratively small body) the oldest
religion now existing in India is
the Christian. No sovereign in India can
claim so long a line of royal ancestors as
Alfonso XIII. of Spain or our own Queen.
But the history of Madras, short though
it is, is not without interest. It may in
one sense be called the metropolis—the
mother city—of British-India. Bombay
dates from the time of Charles 11., Cal-
cutta is a few years younger ; but Charles
I. was still on the throne when Francis
Day founded Fort St. George, from the
native name for which “ Madras” is
derived. Since then, except during a
short period of French occupation, it has
been in the possession of the English, and
round it has grown up the native city,
which contains a population of about
430,000, of whom 320,000 are Hindoos,
55,000 Mohammedans, and 45,000 Chris-
tians. The great majority of this vast num-
ber belong not to the Aryan race, whom we
usually think of as forming the popula-
tion of India, but to the Dravidian, the
earlier race whom the conquering Aryans,
when they poured down from the
mountains of the north-west, drove before
them in their progress southward. Tamil
and Telugu —both of which belong to the
Dravidian family—are consequently the
languages most frequently spoken. But
the chief interest of course centres in the
fort itself ; and Mr. Price most kindly
showed us over every part of it. The
moats, drawbridges, and massive walls,
the bomb-proof roofs, and the antiquated
cannon, all tell of the period when it was
really a fortress in a strange country, and
at that time the old buildings, which are
now used as Government offices, were the
actual residence of the Governor of the
Presidency. In the cellars —in which
Clive once labored as a young writer—are


stored the archives of the once famous
company, the letters dating from as far
back *s 1674, yet all of them as clear
and legible as if they had been written
yesterday. The Church of Saint Mary,
within the fort, which is a sort of Sir
Christopher Wren building, not devoid of
beauty considering its date—l6Bo —is the
oldest English Church in India; its monu-
ments and tombstones, with their some-
what fulsome inscriptions, seem to carry
one back to the old country and the last
century. The fine statue of Lord Corn-
wallis, by Chantrey, which stands in the
square, and in the affected dress and stiff
attitude of the time of George 111., is
quite in keeping with the surroundings.
Even the grey uniform of the native
soldiers marching up and down on guard
looks thoroughly European,
It was like returning from the West to
the East to drive out from the fort across
the Cooum River, and into the lovely
park. The trees, flowers, and animals
all told of the tropics, whilst the endless
variety of the bright costumes and dark
faces of the mass of people that thronged
the streets completed the picture.
Leaving the glittering white walls of
Government House on our right, we
went on to see the senate-house of the
university—a magnificent building, cool
and airy.
Like its namesake at Cambridge,
it is used for all university functions.
The Madras University is only an ex-
amining body, but crowds of students
come up periodically from the affiliated
colleges all over the Presidency. Of
course here, as elsewhere, it is much
discussed whether in the long run
more good or harm is being done
by creating such a vast number
of graduates ; older Anglo-Indians shake
their heads and say that it is merely
arousing in the minds of the natives


aspirations which it will be impossible to
fulfil ; others again argue that the book
learning they are receiving will be of no
practical use to them in after life, when
they sink into the position of clerks or
copyists ; without further knowledge of
the subject I say nothing. Certainly, the
natives seem to value highly the Univer-
sity training which the Government have
provided for them.
Our next visit was to the old palace of
the Nawabs of the Karnatic—a handsome
Saracenic pile, in which the mixture of
red paint and white stone is very effec-
tive ; but it has little historical interest,
as it only dates from the beginning of this
century, at which time the so-called
Nawab was a mere pensioner of the British.
Unfortunately, we had not time to go
inside. An amusing drive through the
Mohammedan and the Hindoo quarters
(what quaint sights one does see at every
turn in these Oriental cities !) brought us
round to the Armenian street. We had
intended to see the Roman Catholic
Cathedral, but our driver had brought us
instead to the Church of the Assump-
tion, a large but uninteresting build-
ing ; however, next door to it we
found an Armenian Church nearly 180
years old, the tombs all having inscriptions
in the Armenian language, which is to
the uninitiated rather suggestive of the
pronghooks and hangers of one’s child-
hood than real writing. What marvel-
lous people these Armenians are ! Wiped
out of existence, politically speaking, cen-
turies ago, they still seem to possess all
the characteristics of an independent
nation, of a European rather than an
Asiatic type, and they carry their lan-
guage and their ritual with them where-
ever they go ; from Venice to the Kar-
natic. In the courtyard I met a charm-
ing old priest with whom I much wanted
to get into conversation, but my friends


cruelly interposed by asking me where I
wished my luggage sent to, as they were
just starting for Calcutta, and as I was
obliged to confess that the appointed hour
had very nearly arrived there was nothing
to be done but bid a hasty farewell and
return to the steamer after a delightful
morning on shore. As I steamed away
from the land I could not help being re-
minded of the view of the South Aus-
tralian coast near Largs Bay, and wishing
that in that happy latitude where there
are no cyclones to fear a great work might
be undertaken which might even rival the
splendid harbor of Madras.


CALCUTTA.
Benares, 3rd February, 1891.
CANNOT say that the first view
of Bengal, or even of the mighty
Ganges itself, is very impressive. It is by
the changes of the water from bright-blue
to green and then to a dull mud color that
one perceives the neighborhood of land ;
and then presently the low banks, covered
with palm trees and bushes, begin to
appear The tide in the river is really
too provoking ; it seems as if a particular
moment was required for each reach ; and
as we (like almost everybody else) suc-
ceeded in just missing it, what with going
slow, and stopping for the night, and one
thing or another, more than 30 hours
passed between the time when the pilot
came on board at the mouth of the river
and our landing at the wharf, although
the distance we travelled was only about
120 miles. Yet the hours spent in creep-
ing along were not without interest; they
gave me the opportunity for trying to
realise the gigantic size of this monarch of
rivers. It seems impossible all at once
to grasp the idea that this channel, which
looks so enormous, is but one—and not
the largest' —of the many mouths of the
Ganges; that those vast tracts of paddy
fields and plantations have been but
recently formed (comparatively speaking)
by the mud which has been washed down
from mountain ranges hundreds and
hundreds of miles away.


To convey some notion of what
the mighty river can do, I may say
that the delta of the Ganges (I use
the word for want of a better one,
though in fact it is not in the least
in the shape of a Greek letter delta) is
about 50,000 square miles in extent, and
that if 650 ships were to sail down every
day, each laden with 1,400 tons of earth,
they would not carry down as much in
the course of the year as the river is now
doing by itself. Truly the Ganges is to
Bengal what the Nile is to Egypt. I can
well understand the natives making it an
object of worship. Their whole life seems
bound up with it. They bathe in it ;
they drink from it ; it brings fertility
over their fields and washes away im-
purity from their cities; to its banks they
are brought out to die ; into its waves
their ashes are cast; and, last but not
least, if what I am told is correct,
it provides an income for half the
legal profession of the Presidency. As the
great floods rush down after the melting
of the snow on the mountains, whole
tracts of land are inundated, landmarks
obliterated, and the old beds are some-
times left high and dry, whilst new
channels are cut miles away; and thus
there arise questions of title sufficient to
occupy all the law courts in the country
until the next flood comes and brings
another crop with it! And certainly one
of the many things which the Australians
have to learn from the people of India is
the healthy love of litigation. Every
possible point is carried through every
court, civil and criminal, original and
appellant, till it has given innocent amuse-
ment to the whole town for a generation
at least. Not long ago one of these grand
disputes was finally settled and the success-
ful counsel was rash enough to go and con-
gratulate his client (a wealthy rajah) on
having gained on all points. “My dear


sir,” replied the rajah, “it is all very well
for you to put it in that way, but what
am I to do ? You English gentlemen
have your yachting, your shooting, and
your hunting to fill up your time with,
but I have none of such things, and this
lawsuit has descended to me from my
father, and has kept me busy ever since I
inherited the estate ; now my occupation
is gone unless you can manage to begin
another case for me.” How soon this
excellent desire was fulfilled I have not
been able to learn.
Just at present there is a cele-
brated suit being argued in the court
here which seems about as curious
(from an Australian point of view) as
a case well can be. Some young Jains
—who belong to a curious sect, half
Hindoo and half Buddhist, to which I
have alluded in a former letter —went
on a visit to England. Some time after
their return it was alleged that they had,
during their sojourn amongst the bar-
barians, partaken of a beefsteak, and had
consequently been excommunicated, or
turned out of their caste. Indignant at
the suggestion, they have commenced
criminal proceedings for libel ; and, in
order to prove the falsehood of the state-
ments, they have actually brought out
from London the servants who did the
cooking at the house at which they lodged.
They have now reached the twenty-third
day of the hearing, and the plaintiff’s case
has only just been closed. Such a
country must, indeed, be the happy hunt-
ing grounds of the profession.
The short winter afternoon —you must
recollect that we are now in latitude
22° N., and there is a noticeable difference
between the length of the days in summer
and winter —was already drawing in as we
came within sight of the City of Palaces.
The first view took me completely by sur-
prise. I was surrounded not by marble


palaces, glittering in the smokeless sun-
light of tropical splendor, but by huge
factories and tall chimneys ceaselessly
pouring forth volumes of soot into the
air. And as I looked, first at them and
then at the long rows of splendid four-
masted ships and the great steamers
moored along the bank, I rubbed my eyes
and began to wonder whether I had not
made a strange mistake and got back to
Liverpool instead. But no ; the glorious
afterglow of the sunset, reflected in the
still waters of the Hugli, and the dense
mass of white-robed figures on the bank,
all shrieking in an unknown tongue, re-
minded me that I was really in the
tropics. I found that we were not the
only distinguished visitors at Calcutta at
the time ; in fact, if the truth must be
told, so misguided is the Oriental mind
that I fear it was not we whom the crowd
had collected to see or in whose honor
the city was en fete. The Czarewitch and
Prince George of Greece, who had arrived
the evening before, had been spending
the afternoon at the Botanical Gardens,
and all Calcutta had turned out to stare
at them on their return.
There was a general flutter amongst the
passengers when the news came that every
hole and corner in the town was full,
and they would have to spend the night
on board, to the joy of the mosquitoes,
listening to the dulcet strains of the
donkey-engine. We could look down
on them all with scorn, and could
bear our brothers’ misfortunes with true
British heroism, as Mr. Justice Norris
had most kindly secured rooms for us at
the Bengal Club and made every possible
arrangement for our comfort. We
drove up just in time to dress, dine, and
drive off to a reception at Belvidere—the
splendid house of the Lieutenant-Go-
vernor of Bengal—to which we had been
invited.


I may here remark for the benefit of
my Australian friends that the duties of
an Indian Lieutenant-Governor are not,
as they might suppose, limited to the
times when the Viceroy is absent, but
are always arduous and important. The
Viceroy and his council deal only with
matters which affect India as a whole.
The Lieutenant-Governor, aided by a
council of his own, has to carry on all the
government of his gigantic province, and is
practically as independent as the Governor
of Madras and Bombay, or as the Lieu-
tenant-Governors of the North-West
Provinces and the Punjab ; in fact, his
position is more like that of a provincial
governor in Canada. Of course he is
socially over-shadowed at Calcutta by the
Viceroy, but the present lieutenant-
governor, Sir Charles Elliott, is looked up
to by all as a man of great ability and
experience, and the hospitalities which
he and Lady Elliott dispense are, from
an Australian point of view, magnificent.
Belvedere is an ideal house for
a large reception, a long hall or
corridor, which can be divided into
a suite of rooms by putting up
curtains, runs almost the entire length
of the house, with smaller rooms on each
side. This evening the curtains were all
removed, and the whole hall filled with a
crowd of natives and Europeans, many of
the Europeans being in bright uniforms,
and the native princes and maharajahs
decked out in gorgeous robes of all colors
of the rainbow, and blazing with
rubies, emeralds, and diamonds. Of
course there were but few ladies; it is
the rarest thing for native ladies to ap-
pear in public ; indeed, the only ones
who I saw were a few from Burmah ;
and many of the wives of the English
officials are far away in England. It
seemed all like a dream out of the
Arabian Nights—a glimpse of Oriental


splendor one never expected to see in
real life. And the occasion itself was per*
haps the most interesting part of the
spectacle ; to think thathere were gathered
together Hindoo maharajahs, Moham-
medan nawabs, Parsee merchants, and
Burmese nobles at the house of the British
Governor to do honor to the heir apparent
to the throne of Russia !
We had not been waiting long when
the princes appeared ; the Czarevitch was
conducted all through the hall by Sir
Charles Elliott, and shook hands and
chatted in a friendly and unaffected way
with each of the guests who was
presented to him. His Imperial High-
ness is certainly not of impos-
ing appearance ; he is small,
strangely so for a Romanoff—pale, and
does not look in the least clever; he
might pass anywhere in a crowd as a
young English gentleman. Prince
George of Greece positively towers
above him, and has a pleasant, intelli-
gent, but thoroughly German face ; he
looked as though he enjoyed life much
more than his Imperial cousin. Re-
freshments were served in an open
tent in the garden (from which you will
gather that even in winter Calcutta is not
exactly cold), and soon after the party
broke up. After a quarter of an hour’s
active search I found my carriage and
drove home.
By-the-bye, if you have noticed any-
thing peculiarly poetic about my style
I may account for it by saying that
the house, which is now the Bengal
Club, was once occupied by Lord
Macaulay. I am at this moment sitting
in the very room, and, perhaps, at the
very table where he wrote some of his
lays of ancient Rome.
On Wednesday morning, January 28, I
had a long and most delightful ramble
about the city. lam more and more sur-


prised at all I see. It is thoroughly
European ; in the great Maidan, or park,
I am often reminded of the Regent’s ParK
in London. Even the trees are new. The
fine houses which I see everywhere are
not built in the least in Oriental fashion,
but are of Greek architecture adapted to
the climate, and in some places the damp
has discolored the plaster, or caused it to
drop off, exposing the naked bricks
beneath, which gives the buildings a woe-
begone appearance. The native houses
are mostly airily constructed shanties, in
which the people pack together as closely
as they always do in Eastern cities. But
do not shudder at the idea of “over-
crowding there is no hardship about it
in this climate and to an Oriental race.
The men who live near the river sbem all
to begin the day by bathing ; those who
are too far off for that perform
their ablutions on the pavement with
little brass bowls for basins. As to
dressing, well, that is not a very im-
portant ceremony with them ; I cannot
yet get out of my head the idea that they
have all been awakened suddenly, and
have rushed out, some wearing the sheets,
others the bath towels, and the rest the
window curtains. Ordinary laborers—
for instance, the men who go about with
skins of water to water the streets —are
content with gigantic turbans and waist-
bands ; more fashionable gentlemen wrap
themselves in yards and yards of white
muslin, which they fold with all the
dignity of the drapery on a classical statue.
The white linen (for one sees but few
colored dresses) and the dark-brown limbs,
are not, it is true, as picturesque as the
blue robes and yellow skin of the Arabs
whom I have seen at Cairo or Damascus,
and yet what a relief it is to find no signs
of real poverty. I have not seen as many
beggars here in a week as I should at
Rome or Seville in an hour ; no hideous


deformities crowd round you the moment
you stop to look at a building, as they do
at Constantinople ; and you can enjoy
walking about without continually having
recourse to a smelling bottle.
It is never easy to realise the historical
associations with which a spot is con-
nected, but it seems harder than ever at
Calcutta. As I walk along the crowded
English streets I can hardly picture to
myself that not two centuries
have elapsed since this was a native
village celebrated only for its temple to
the dread goddess Kali, from which it
took its name —on whose altar it is said
that human sacrifices were offered less
than 30 years ago. Hardly easier is it to
think of it as a small factory belonging to
one of the many nations of Europe—
English, French, Portuguese, Dutch, and
Danish—who were struggling with one
another to obtain a footing for themselves
in this part of Hindustan. Of these the
Portuguese have long since been driven
out, the Dutch and Danes have sold their
possessions (which had ceased to be of any
value to them), and the French remain
the proud owners of a wretched little
village a few miles from the great English
city. I stood upon a little square in the
pavement —about 22 ft. by 14—close to the
magnificent post-office and just opposite
the gardens of Dalhousie square, and read
once more the terrible accounts of the
Black Hole of Calcutta, of which this
marks the site. It is well that it should
not be forgotten ; but a more elaborate
monument would be out of place.
In the afternoon there was a great
garden party at Government House
in honor of the princes. Here I had
another opportunity of meeting the
native magnates, whose appearance had
so impressed me the evening before;
but by daylight the charm was gone. I
could not help feeling that I must be


either at a fancy ball or Madame
Tussaud’s. The costumes, which looked
splendid by candlelight, decked with
jewels, seem strangely out of place when
worn by men walking about on a
lawn in the afternoon listening to an
English band playing. Perhaps the
most gorgeous was the son of the ex-King
of Oude (ex-royalty is not at all a baa
business either in the east or west, if it
means a comfortable annuity and no
anxieties !), who wore a sort of Imperial
crown, a green satin dressing-gown, and
crimson trousers. I had some interesting
conversation with various native gentle-
men to whom I was introduced, amongst
others being the priest, or teacher, of
the principal sect of the Brahama Sumaj,
the eclectic religion founded by the late
Baboo Keshab Chunder Sen, from which
so much was expected, but which I
hear has already split into several
sects and is not increasing. Did
any eclectic religion from the days of
Alexander Severus downward ever have
any real influence over men’s minds ?
Talking about phases of religious thought
reminds me of an account which I saw in
this morning’s paper which surprised me
not a little. A Mohammedan missionary
who has been laboring for some time in
England has come back to report what
he has done and to collect money for
building a mosque at Liverpool. He
says that his converts number upwards of
50, and that his success has caused much
alarm amongst the local clergy. The
whole thing seemed to read just like a
notice of an English missionary meeting,
with the names inverted.
However, this is digression. I return
to the reception at Government House.
The Viceroy seemed cordiality itself ; but
of course in so large a gathering a humble
stranger like myself could only expect a
word or two in passing. We strolled


about the grounds, talked to oar friends,
listened to the band, and drank tea
until the sound of the Russian “ National
Anthem” told us that the Czarevitch was
going, and it was time for others to follow
his example.
The following morning I was painfully
reminded (as I usually am on the second
day of my stay at a new place) that I had
been trying to do too much. The lazy life
on board ship is not the best preparation
in the world for rushing about sight-
seeing in jthe tropics, even in the middle
of what people here call winter; so I
spent the morning in quiet contem-
plation in the depths of an armchair,
and the afternoon in a delightful drive
through the suburbs. But pleasant
though the sunset hour is for driving,
it possesses the one drawback of being
too short; it is hot at 4 and dark at 6.
The right thing to do is to start early in
the morning and make a long excursion
before the air has become heated. So on
Friday I set out after a preliminary break-
fast, drove through the town, across the
floating bridge, and then by a quaint
native suburb down to the Botanical
Gardens. They are not nearly so beauti-
ful as the ones I had seen at Kandy.
The situation is not so charming, the
trees are mostly young (nearly all the old
ones having been destroyed by a hurri-
cane in 1867), and this is not the
best time of year to see the
flowers; but at any rate they
are very interesting, and show what
art and skill can do. They cover about
270 acres, and are maintained at a cost of
some £5,000 a year ; but then it must be
remembered that the rate of wages is not
exactly Australian. I was told that the
boys whom I saw sweeping the paths
receive about three farthings a day. There
is a regular village in the gardens for the
army of laborers employed. I was not


able to inspect the museum, as here (as
usual) the time was too short. Dr. King,
the curator, enquired kindly after Dr.
Schomburgk, with whom he had often
corresponded. The great sight of the
gardens is the old banyan tree ; I had
seen several of them in Ceylon, but
none nearly so gigantic as this. The
banyan is really a variety of the
fig tribe, and like many others
(notably the sycamore fig of the Bible)
has the peculiarity of possessing aerial
roots, which hang down from the branches
like long ropes. When they have once
found their way into the ground they be-
come in fact new trees, though still tied
on to the parent; and as the same process
goes on again and again, it is impossible
to say how old the tree is, or what size it
may ultimately attain to. The one we
saw already has 257 stems and is 860 ft.
in circumference. It is really rather a
grove than a single tree. However,
Colonel Meadows Taylor described one
near Bombay compared with which this is
a bush.
In the evening I went to a delightful
and interesting dinner party at Belvedere.
Most of the guests were Europeans, but
there were a few natives; Mohammedans,
of course, for no Hindoo but those of the
very lowest castes could eat with
Christians. Just at present there is
one subject which is engrossing the
attention of everyone in India.
You might as well expect to spend five
minutes in an Australian house without
hearing Broken Hill referred to as think
of passing an evening in India without
some one mentioniong the Age of Consent
Bill. A great deal has been written and
said about the evils of child-marriages in
India ; the lawful age at present is 9. A
Bill has now been introduced into the
Council to raise it to 12, and meetings are
being held all over the country to draw


up petitions, some for and some against
the measure. Among the guests at
Belvedere was Prince Mehomed Furrokh
Shah, a greatgrandson of Tippo Sultan,
to whom I was introduced. He is evi-
dently not only a wealthy but also an
intellectual and thoughtful man and
speaks English We soon found subjects
in common. Having (like most Indians)
had a great admiration for the late Lord
Mayo, he was much interested in hearing
that I had known him many years ago,
and enquired particularly after all his
family. Then, when he had elicited from
me that I had studied the Koran and
travelled in other lands of Islam, he
turned to the important subject of the
Bill, and explained to me the peculiar
difficulty of the position in which he was
placed.
“ The two fundamental truths of our
religion,” said he, “are the unity
of the Deity and the inspiration of
His prophet ; to alter one line of the
written revelation is for ever impossible.
Now, the Book says that marriage may
be celebrated when the girl is at the age
of 9, but the same authority lays down
that the marriage which may then take
place is only the binding ceremony ;
not until the wife has attained
to womanhood may she leave her
father’s roof and live as a wife with her
husband. Even these child-marriages are
rare, and amongst the upper classes
seldom take place except where the
parents are old and wish to see their sons
settled in life, or to secure protectors for
their daughters before they themselves
pass away. To prohibit this is not only
to forbid a custom which is good in itself
but is to contradict Revelation. On the
other hand, we freely admit that amongst
the Hindoos these child-marriages fre-
quently do take place without the whole-
some restrictions which our law imposes ;


that they are gross abuses, that they can
only be prevented by legislation, and that
according to the English system of Go-
vernment it is impossible in such a matter
to legislate for the Hindoos and to except
the Mussalmans. In such a complication
which side are the leaders of Mohamme-
dan thought to take ?” I could only reply
that I fully realised the difficulty; it
would not have been polite to have added
that it was but one of many which must
constantly recur so long as men will
attempt to measure their conduct in the
ever-varying circumstances of life by the
exact square and line of the text of a
volume instead of by the spirit which
inspired it. It was impossible not to be
reminded of the beautiful lines of Lord
Houghton (himself a genuine admirer of
all that is true and beautiful in Moham-
medanism) when he contrasts the two
religions—
So, as the world rolls on from change to change,
And realms of thought expand,
The letter stands without expanse or range,
Stiff as a dead man’s hand.
Whilst, as the life-blood fills the growing form,
The spirit Christ has shed
Flows through the ripening ages, fresh and
warm,
More felt than heard or read.
However, it seems probable that the Bill
will be passed ; and then it will be left to
the Muftis to settle the matter as far as
their own people are concerned, either by
a new interpretation of the passage in the
Koran, or by admitting that it is another
of the practices of Islam which is for-
bidden by the infidel rulers of the land.
The fact is that in a certain state of
society there is a great deal to be said in
favor of these child marriages, or rather
betrothals ; as every one who remembers
his Coke Littleton (and amongst these
I of course include all the law


students at the University of Adelaide)
will recollect at one time nine was the legal
age for marriages in England, and a
friend has pointed out to me that the
causes which led to the marriages of
children in both East and West were the
same. In a rude age, when wars are fre-
quent and life is uncertain, a man seeks to
provide for the safety of his infant
daughters by securing for them prospective
husbands, in the same way that a careful
parent in modern times insures his life,
makes a will, and appoints a guardian.
Now, in the era of peace which has been
gradually evolved in Europe, and has been
forced on in India by the firmness of
British rule, the reason has passed away.
I must confess that I had been so in-
terested in the prince’s conversation that
I had (not for the first time in my
life) omitted to notice that some music
was going on close to me, and it was only
seeing the guests rising that reminded
me that the evening had slipped away.
Saturday morning I was again up
early and started forth for a drive in
the cool pleasant air. We drove
along the river to watch the
crowds of bathers; and thence to the
Fort, which is a perfect town within a
town, and though perhaps not strong
enough to stand the shocks of modern
artillery, could afford a refuge for many
thousands in the event of any popular in-
surrection Everything tells of soldierly
neatness and British energy ; the men
were practising cricket as vigorously as
though they were at Aldershot—a good
example to the languid and effete
Bengalese. The garrison church is a fine
Gothic building, delightfully cool, and
well fitted up internally. lam told also
that the clubs, reading-rooms, &c., for
the soldiers are admirable. Certainly it
cannot be said now that Tommy Atkins is
wholly uncared for.


On our return from the Fort we drove
about the Maidan in order to examine
some of the many statues with which it is
ornamented. They are very fine as in-
dividual works of art, and add greatly to
the general effect. I wish there were
more of them in the Australian parks,
even apart from their primary object of
keeping alive the memory of the great
men in whose honor they are erected.
The chief excitement of the day was
the races, to which all the European
residents were going ; but as such gather-
ings have no charm for me, I preferred
to- spending my time in the Museum,
which the curator (Dr. Wood Mason)
had kindly promised to show me over.
It is a gigantic building, containing lafge
and ever-increasing collections, chiefly
zoological. But what interested me far the
most was the room devoted to Buddhist
carvings -some from Orissa, others from
the north-west of India. The charm con-
sists not so much in the size or quaintness
of the architecture (though that alone
would be impressive) as in the exquisite
bas-reliefs with which they are covered.
They are just the bas-reliefs of Italy or
Nuremburg over again, substituting
stories of Buddha for the Biblical narra-
tive and the legends of mediaeval
Christendom. There is the calm saint—his
head surrounded by nimbus, mythological
and allegorical figures, representations of
miracles, labors, temptations; all, whether
they form little wayside shrines or are
fragments from vast temples, being
totally free from the barbarisms of
modem Chinese-Buddhist ornamenta-
tion. In one sense, indeed, there
is a historical connection between these
and the works of art with which I am
more familiar, for the mediaeval carvers
of Europe learnt much from their classi-
cal predecessors in Italy, and they in
their turn from the master workers of


Athens; and so here it was Alexander
and his Greek followers who founded the
Bactrian kingdom, and the spirit which
they infused into art lasted on through
the Indo-Scythic period, to which most of
these belong. In this as in many other
ways it is Greece which forms the tie that
binds East and West together.
I may here remark that the casts which
can be taken from these bas-reliefs are
almost as beautiful and instructive as the
originals. I wish that some could be
secured for the Adelaide Museum.
In the cool of the afternoon I again
started out, this time to visit the Eden
Gardens, where all the beauty and fashion
of Calcutta assemble to listen to the band
play or to stroll about the grounds, which
are, the moment the sun has set, beauti-
fully lighted with the electric light. We
arrived before dusk in order to look at the
Burmese pagoda in the middle of the
gardens—a curious structure, rich in
elaborate carving, and bright with gold
and color —which is guarded by great
stone crocodiles and sphinxes, vigorously
if rudely carved. By the time that the
band began to play there were rows of
carriages drawn up—enough to remind
one of the Bois de Boulogne or the park
at Madrid. In this land of perpetual
summer one understands the charm of
lounging.
Quite apart from the religious side of
the question I am not ashamed to confess
that I thoroughly enjoy the quiet of an
English Sunday, and never more than
when I am on my travels. It is a real
rest to the mind to feel that for one day
there are no sights to be seen and no
journeys to be made. The man who has
not enough resources in himself to be
happy without rushing about for seven
days in the week must be either very
stupid or very badly educated.


Many of the churches at Calcutta have
service early in the morning on account
of the climate. At the cathedral, how-
ever, English customs are so closely fol-
lowed that there is a second service at
half-past 10. To this I went. The site
of the cathedral, just on the edge of the
park, is excellent, and the spire looks well
in the distance, but though large sums
were spent on it, it cannot be described as
architecturally other than a dismal failure,
lam told it is in the “Hindoo-Gothic”
style, and it certainly seems to have skil-
fully avoided all the beauty of either
variety of architecture. Internally it is
a large barn, surrounded by ornamentation
which in England we should describe as
“churchwardenish,” and surmounted by
an iron waggon roof. Yet it has certain
advantages. It is good for both seeing
and hearing, and cool. The organ is fine,
if somewhat too powerful, and the
choir evidently most carefully trained.
The congregation was somewhat
smaller than I had expected, but the
proportion of communicants very large.
The ritual was much the same as that in
St. Peter’s Cathedral at Adelaide. It
seemed stranger to me to hear the prayers
for “‘Victoria, our Empress-Queen,” but
then her Majesty’s Imperial title is so
universally used here that all the Crown
cases are entitled “Empress v. So and
So,” and I suppose I should get used to
it in a few weeks.


BENARES.
Lucknow, sth February, 1891.
T is at best a long and weary journey
£*•) from Calcutta to Benares, so it is well
to get over a good part of it by travelling
at night. The sleeping carriages are com-
fortable, if not so luxurious as those
between Adelaide and Melbourne, and
the refreshment rooms on the way are ex-
cellent and moderate in their charges.
The dead level of Lower Bengal is
monotonous in the extreme ; endless
fields, in the wet season planted with rice,
now green with corn; dal, which looks not
unlike Cape broom, and other kinds of
grain; patches of castor oil plants ;
groves of mangoes, guavas, and palms,
and here and there little clusters of tiled
or thatched cottages, which seem about
halfway between Maori pahs and English
villages. The night was decidedly cold,
but it became hot as the morning wore
on, and it was past noon before we
reached Benares.
Benares is one of the cities which I
have always from early childhood yearned
to see. Rome and Jerusalem I know well;
Mecca alas ! I can never see ; but a visit
to the sacred city of the Hindoo will
form a fitting conclusion to my wander-
ings amongst hallowed shrines. The very
history of the place seems beyond one’s
Sower of realisation. Not even Athens,
Lome, or Cadiz can boast such antiquity.
It is true that I have stood on the site of


many cities which may have been as
ancient. Memphis and the Lybio-berber
cities of North Africa date from periods
long anterior to any written records.
But Memphis is in ruins, and of the
Lybio-berbers nothing remains except
the strange weird cemeteries which are
scattered through the deserts and forests
of Algeria. Palmyra was built by
Solomon ; but the wretched hovels of
modern Tadmor can hardly be said even to
represent the gorgeous capital of Zenobia.
Jerusalem exists still, in a sense ; yet
the melancholy-looking Syrian town and
the collection of European convents is but
the ghost of its former greatness. The
only great living city I have visited which
can compare with Benares in point of
antiquity is Damascus, which like it seems
to have been endowed with the gift of
perpetual youth. In other points, also,
the two cities are strangely parallel. Each
has passed through three great phases of
religious life ; in each the ancient build-
ings have either fallen into ruins, or been
reconstructed so that the passing traveller
of to-day sees nothing but a modern city
teeming with life and industry. But
Benares seems the more unchanged of the
two. Twelve centuries ago a celebrated
Buddhist pilgrim from China, by name
Hiouen Thsang, described the city as near
the Ganges, a little more than three miles
long and about one mile broad. “Families,”
he wrote, “of great wealth whose
houses are filled with rare and precious
things are to be seen. The people are
gentle and polished, and esteem highly
those who are devoted to a studious life.
The greater portion of them believe in
the heretical doctrines of Hindooism, and
few have respect for the law of Buddha.
The climate is temperate, grain is in
abundance, the fruit trees are luxuriant,
and the earth is .covered with tufted vege-
tation. . . There are a hundred temples


of the Hindoo gods. ” Substitute Mahomet
for Buddha, and the description will
almost literally be true to-day. The popu-
lation now is about 180,000, of whom
130,000 are Hindoos, and the rest, with the
exception of a few Christians, are Moham-
medans.
But it is its modern sanctity, even
more than its past history, that is the
charm of Benares. To a hundred and
fifty millions of our fellow-subjects in
India it is the holiest spot on earth.
From every part of this vast country
pilgrims continually flock to worship
at its shrines and to bathe in the sacred
waters. It is even said that there are
more missionaries engaged in forwarding
the worship of its idols than in propaga
ting the doctrines of Christianity. Of
course I speak merely as a casual ob-
server, without having made any careful
study of the subject ; but so far as first
impressions go I must say that the Hindoo
religion strikes me as simply repulsive
without a single redeeming feature, except
perhaps its making bathing a religious
duty. It seems to contain just enough
that is satisfying to the aspirations of the
human soul to make the work of the
Christian teacher difficult; but it neither
possesses the pure Monotheism of the
creed of Islam, nor can it show the
works of charity and mercy which
were once the glory of Buddhism. Here,
I suppose, I can see it at its best,
and certainly the sight is not edifying.
In the Europeanized quarter, near our
hotel, even the native streets are wide and
well paved and lighted ; but once one
goes into the real Hindoo city, where the
streets are mere passages and the pro-
jecting upper stories of the houses seem
almost to touch each other overhead,
everything—pleasant and unpleasant—is
truly Oriental.
We drove first to see the famous


i( monkey temple,” sacred to the goddess
Durga. Everywhere along the roadside
were little temples, or rather shrines;
none, I believe, of any great anti-
quity, and very few possessing any
beauty. They are like shortened spires,
overloaded with barbaric ornamentation.
The army of half naked beggars who
rushed up directly our carriage stopped,
reminded one of a church door in Italy ;
many of them were pitiable objects of
deformity. We had to put on wreaths of
marigolds, to distribute backsheesh to
some forbidding looking priests, to feed
the sacred monkeys, and to try to admire
the temple and believe that the metal and
glass ornaments which decorated the
shrine itself were pure gold and rare
gems ; but I cannot say that I enjoyed the
visit.
I gladly drove on to the Ganges, which
is the real sight of Benares. The city
is built on one side of the river on
the top of a steep slope, or rather cliff,
which gives it an imposing appearance as
the cliff is crowned with a long line of
splendid palaces, from each of which long
broad flights of steps lead down to the
water’s edge. These massive buildings are
spoken of as the palaces of various Maha-
rajahs, but the description is somewhat
misleading, as they are really hospices
for the entertainment of the crowds of
pilgrims who come from the different
states of India. Here they are lodged
during their stay—which, however, is no
time of rest, as they have to visit the
innumerable temples in order, and to
bathe first in particular wells and then in
the sacred river itself. As everyone—
even the poorest—has to make an offering,
and the more wealthy rajahs are con-
stantly sending splendid donations, the
amount of money which is being poured
into the city must be simply enormous ;
and as railways are making pilgrimages


from distant parts of the country more
and more feasible it seems impossible to
say what it will come to unless
some unexpected reaction of feeling
takes place. But, imposing though the
general effect may be, it is utterly bar-
barous ; some of the buildings are in
ruins, others unfinished; between the
finest palaces are wretched shanties, and the
richly decorated spires of the little temples
have nothing of the elevating spirit of
Gothic art. Here and there a great
umbrella marks the spot where some
special ceremony takes place, and a few
little structures form the shelters in which
the faqirs, after spending the day in the
interesting and useful occupation of think-
ing about nothing, pass the night. The
great flights of steps are called ghats, a
name with which I had already become
familiar at Calcutta. It is indeed strange,
in the midst of all these evidences of
Hindoo worship, to see rising up the
two lovely and graceful minarets of
a Mohammedan mosque. From an
architectural point of view they add a
charm to the view ; and the history of the
mosque is interesting. It was built about
the beginning of the last century by
Aurangzeeb—the last great Emperor of
the Mogul Dynasty, who, instead of fol-
lowing the conciliatory policy of his pre-
decessors, made a determined effort to
force Mohammedanism on an unwilling
people. Thus he even seized and de-
stroyed a Hindoo temple which stood on
this site, and built a mosque to domineer
over the temples of the religion he hated.
We may denounce this as a piece of
Oriental tyranny ; but after all, 50 years
have not elapsed since the French confis-
cated the great mosques of Algiers
and Constantine to convert them into
cathedrals.
We hired a boat, and were rowed
up and down the river, so as to


have a full view of each palace
and to watch the ceaseless stream of
pilgrims passing to and fro. Troop after
troop arrived, some having come even
from distant Rajputan, carrying with
them their bedding and brass vessels for
cooking, each little party on its arrival
being met by a priest and conducted to
the hospice where they were to lodge,
just as I have seen the pilgrims at
Jerusalem from every country from
Kamskatca to Spain met by their own
clergy and conducted to the convents
belonging to their various nations.
Others, who had already spent some days
at the sacred city and worshipped at all
the shrines, were on their way down to
bathe in the river and wash away the
sins of a lifetime or the ceremonial im-
purity caused by their having unwarily
broken their caste. For some time we
paused to look at what is perhaps to an
Englishman the strangest sight of all—
the burning ghat. That extraordinary
institution of caste not only interferes at
every moment during the lifetime of a
Hindoo but even follows him after death.
It is a sacred duty for the eldest son to
see that the body of his father is duly
burned and the ashes cast into the Ganges.
The strict rules prescribe that the light
for the funeral pyre must be obtained
from a flame kept by the members of a
particular caste, the Domra, who, though
at other times despised, are regarded as
essential for the due performance of the
last rites over the dead. Formerly, as
probablyall are well aware, the widow used
to cast herself alive on to the pyre, but
that terrible ceremony has been pro-
hibited by the Government; the only
point, it is said, in which the tolerant
English have interfered with the laws and
customs of the Hindoos. Even that they
did in a curious indirect manner; they
said that the Hindoo law which ordered


the widow to commit suicide remained
law, no doubt, and might be obeyed, but
that the British law which had now been
introduced must be obeyed also, and ac-
cording to it everyone aiding and
abetting was guilty of felony, and
must be hanged. As the Brahmins
disliked such a prospect, the custom
of suttee rapidly fell into disfavor, and is
now long extinct, except (it is said) in a
few of the native states, where it is still
occasionally practised in secret. At
present when a body is to be burned it is
brought down to the river covered with a
sheet, on a light bier made of bamboos.
It is placed on a pile of wood ; more wood
is then heaped upon it, and the pyre is
set light to ; the ashes are afterwards cast
into the river. If a sufficient supply of
wood is used, and the body is completely
consumed, it seems to me quite as reve-
rent a way of disposing of the dead as
sepulture ; but those whose bodies I saw
being burnt were poor ; and, alas ! the
story everywhere is the same. Even
decency towards the departed depends on
money ; the sights I witnessed can only
be compared to of Dickens’s descrip-
tions of a pauper funeral in England 50
years ago. Day and night, the whole
year round, the sad processions can be
seen wending their way down the steps
that lead to the burning ghat. The
death-rate at Benares is always high ; but
then it must be recollected that wealthy
Hindoos who feel that their end is
approaching are brought to Benares so
that their spirits may pass away beside
the sacred river.
But enough of this painful subject. I
turned away from the ghat with relief to
look up once more at the splendid sight
of the palaces, now lit up with the
brilliant tints of the setting sun.
Match me this marvel save in Eastern clime,
A rose-red city half as old as Time.


The next afternoon we had a most
charming drive along a shady road be-
tween fields of green corn to a
place called Sarnath, about four miles
from the town. We had already be-
come so accustomed to the sight of the
little shrines about the villages and fields
(which are not unlike those one often sees
in Roman Catholic countries) that we
hardly noticed them. The object of our
expedition was something of far deeper
interest. At Sarnath an immense
round tower, 93 ft. in diameter
and 110 ft. in height, rises
above a mass of ruins all around. It
is impossible to say from a glance at the
building whether it is now falling to
pieces or was never finished; but con-
sidering its history I suppose that the
former view is more likely. Near this
spot some five and twenty centuries ago,
probably about the time when Jeremiah
was pouring forth his pathetic lamenta-
tions over fallen Jerusalem, and Con-
fucius was enunciating his dull morality
for the benefit of his Chinese followers,
Gautama, the Buddha, after his en-
lightenment under the 80-tree, first
began to preach his new doctrines—to
tell men that the bodily austerities of the
Brahmins were valueless, and that the
distinctions of caste were to be for ever
abolished. This tower marks the place.
These confused piles of ruins are all that
remain of a once magnificent monastery.
The era of Buddhism is past and gone as
far as India is concerned, and a more
corrupted form of Brahminism than any-
thing which Gautama saw is triumphant in
the city he came to convert, and in which
at one time his followers were to be
counted by tens of thousands. It is,
indeed, a spot to pause and meditate in.
Not far ofi" is another mound similar to
that on which the monastery stood. Here
also is a tower, which we ascended for


the sake of the view; but as it is
obviously modern, we did not stop to
examine it carefully. It is of Saracenic
architecture, and bears an inscription in
Urdu characters. We drove back to the
city about sunset.
The following morning we made
an early start, for we wished to
ascend the minaret of the mosque of
Aurangzeeb before the heat of the day
had set in. The walk through the
narrow, twisting, crowded streets was
tiring, and the climb up the steep stair-
case of the minaret still more so ; but
the glorious view more than repaid us.
Many of the larger houses on which we
looked down have flat roofs, which
form a pleasant contrast to the brown
tiles ; the river was silvery in the
light of morning, and already thronged
with crowds of pilgrims in quaint many-
colored robes on their way down to bathe ;
the bright green of the crops and the
dark foliage of the orchards stretched
far away on all sides until lost in mist
that still hung over the distant plain. It
was painful to have to descend into the
noise and smells and bustle of the streets,
to be jostled first by a crowd of newly-
arrived pilgrims, and next by a funeral
procession on its way to the river ; but
there was much to be done, and our time
was short. Benares has been from time
immemorial famous for its brasswork;
the beautifully-carved bowls and trays are
as celebrated as those from Cairo or
Damascus. We passed through the
bazaars where they were being made, and
admired the work greatly. I wonder that
more is not sent to Australia. Our next
visit was to Queen’s College, a fine
Gothic building erected by the Govern-
ment, and (like all educational institu-
tions in India) crowded with students.
There are two divisions, the English and
the Sanskrit. The former had not com-


menced work for the day when we were
there, but an examination for the Sanskrit
scholars, conducted by one English and
several native professors, was going on.
The principal told me that they have
about 500 students ; this certainly seems
extraordinary when we recollect that
Sanskrit, as a spoken language, has been
dead for many centuries. Fancy 500
young Australians being willing to spend
10 years in the study of Greek. It can-
not be said that a course at the college
opens a door to a very lucrative career ;
for the salary of a pundit is meagre, and
the profession overstocked. And yet
the energy of the people of Benares in
this direction is by no means limited to
what is shown by this college ; there are
in the city several private native schools
in which Sanskrit is studied. Truly if
Hiouen Thsang were to revisit the place
to-day he might still say “The people
esteem highly those who are devoted to a
studious life.”
We then went on to see the college of
the London Missionary Society, which, if
a less imposing building than the one we
had just left, is quite as interesting.
There are about 300 boys and young men
being educated here, their course of study
beginning with the alphabet and going on
until they take their degrees at the
Allahabad University. This noble insti-
tution is conducted by 30 native teachers,
under the superintendence of the Rev.
John Hewlett, an able and experienced
member of the London Missionary Society.
I was unfortunate in not seeing Mr.
Hewlett, but I have just been reading
with interest a paper he has published on
missionary work at Benares. I have a
great dislike to statistics, especially about
missions, as they are always more or less
misleading. But, taking statistics for
what they are worth, it cannot be said
that the various missions at Benares have


been successful. There are seven ad-
herents of the Baptist Mission, 195
of the Church Mission, 70 of the
London Mission, and 36 of the Wes-
leyan. (About the Roman Catholic
missions I have not been able to learn.)
These figures are certainly discouraging
when the number of agencies at work is
taken into consideration. Still it must
be remembered that the work here is of
exceptional difficulty; it is, in fact, be-
sieging the citadel with a mere handful
of soldiers ; and whatever the causes may
be—and Mr. Hewlett discusses them all
with a calmness and fairness enough even
to satisfy Mr, Huxley—l think I have
already seen enough of their work to say
that it is not from any want of energy or
devotion on the part of the missionaries
that greater success has not been ob-
tained.


LUCKNOW AND CAWNPORE.
Agra, 7th February, 1891.
the days of my early youth and un-
travelled innocence (I refer to the
time just before I left Adelaide) I fondly
imagined that India was a hot country,
and laid in a stock of white cotton suits.
Recollecting, however, that I might reach
England early in the spring I fortunately
put into my portmanteau a few warm
woollen garments, and brought with me a
winter greatcoat. I find that it is these
which in Northern India one always re-
quires at this time of year. The days
may be warm enough, but the nights
seem quite as chilly as they are in Aus-
tralia in July. The very sight of my
summer things makes my teeth chatter.
A railway journey of eight and a half
hours, that is to say according to the
Indian railway timetable, from 12.40
to 21.10; or, as we should express it in
Australia, from twenty minutes to 1 in
the day to ten minutes past 9 in the
evening, brought us to Lucknow. We
were still travelling along the great plain,
but the view was more pleasing, as the
farmhouses were comfortable homesteads,
which reminded us of England ; and the
crops looked richer if more backward.
It became bitterly cold before we
reached Lucknow, and after we had
driven up to Hill’s Hotel we were glad to


warm ourselves by a blazing fire before
turning in. This hotel life is not the
least amusing part of an Indian tour.
People all travel with their own servants,
who are quite content to sleep on mats in
verandahs and passages, regardless of
cold or damp. Well, each nation has its
own ideas of comfort. The day begins by
your servant coming into your room
bringing tea and toast There is a frightful
Hindoostani name for this comfortable
little meal, which my companions have
successfully mastered, but as I cannot get
nearer to it than Cheetah Kedjaree I
think it safer still to call it tea and toast,
lest the servant might think that I had
developed peculiar tastes during my so-
journ in the colonies. Even the warm
bath in the morning is taken luxuriously,
as every bedroom has its own bathroom,
and your servant comes and tells you
when your bath is filled.
Of course sight-seeing must begin
the moment one is dressed if the
long day’s work is to be got through
before sunset. It usually takes the
form of a pleasant drive in the fresh
morning air, with occasional halts at
points of special interest; then back to
the hotel again in time for an ample
breakfast—more like a French dejeuner
a la fourchette —at 10 o’clock ; after that
if it is pretty cool more sightseeing, but
if the heat will not allow of that with
comfort, rest and study of the current
literature of the period until tiffin ; then
another drive and more sightseeing as
long as daylight lasts; home again
for a late dinner, and an even-
ing spent in comparing notes as
to the events of the day. India is each
year more and more crowded with
tourists, and as we are now on the beaten
track we meet the same faces again and
again, and have the, opportunity of re-
newing pleasant acquaintances.


One mistake of course we have made—
everybody makes it—we have allowed
too little time for seeing all the places we
had determined to visit. We had not
realised either the long journeys between
city and city, or the immense number of
objects of interest at every place where
we stop. And now we cannot manage to
extend our time or find courage to
shorten our itinerary. The only thing to
do is to take a hurried glance at each
place in passing, and look forward to
another visit to this delightful country on
some future occasion.
From Benares to Lucknow ! What a
contrast of associations ! From religion
to war; from the remotest ages of
antiquity to the latter half of the 19th
century; from the east to the west.
The account of the Indian mutiny is an
old story now. I can faintly recollect
the time when Sir Colin Campbell and
his band of heroes returned from the
scene of their double triumphs—the
Crimea and India—more than 30
years ago. I have heard the story from
the lips of eye-witnesses ; I have read it
in histories ; and yet it is just one of those
things which one must be on the spot to
realise. Here for the first time I can
picture to myself what must have been
the life of these men and women day
after day—sixteen hundred souls—shut off
from the outer world, pent up in a few
narrow buildings through the terrific
heat of an Indian summer, yet protected
by no fortifications from the shots and
shells of a hostile army whose outposts
were but a few yards distant ; the ranks of
the besieged thinned every hour by death,
and still the weary days dragging on with-
out the arrival of the succor on which
the lives of the survivors must depend.
Then there was the danger lest the
enemy might at any moment suc-
ceed in springing a mine in their


midst, and the dreadful suspicion that
the mutiny might have spread over
Southern India, or that even if the re-
lieving force had actually started they
might have been intercepted on the way.
At least, they had one consoling thought
they knew that if relief was possible
relief was certain ; happily for them they
lived before the time when the fair fame of
England had been for ever tarnished by
the mismanagement and failure of another
“relief;” they did not suffer from the
galling anxiety lest, all the while that
they were upholding the British flag in
the face of a million foes, a party of Eng-
lish politicians might be calculating
whether in deference to an advanced
popular opinion it might not on the whole
be cheaper and better to leave them to
their fate.
It is almost enough to make one despair
of truth in history to find that around
the story of the defence of Lucknow —
although it occurred within the present
generation, in the era of newspapers and
dispatches—legends have already sprung
up, so that the guides who show travellers
over the scene are almost useless. For-
tunately for us, we were independent of
them, as we had the advantage not only
of studying carefully the elaborate plan
of the residency in the Museum at Luck-
now, but also of being conducted from
spot to spot by Colonel May, a gallant
soldier who had fought through both
sieges, and who now commands a native
regiment stationed in the district. It was
more impressive to me than words can
describe to listen to his calm unim-
passioned description, told not with the
vulgar bombast of a carpet knight, but in
the quiet unostentatious manner of one
who simply recounts how he has done
his duty. “This ruin marks the site of
the post-office. When I was on guard
here it was part of my work to go


each day to the main building to fetch the
rations for Mrs. Cavanagh, the wife of
the postmaster. Only a small part of the
way was under cover. Dangerous ? Why
of course it was, but we soon got used to
the feeling of being exposed to fire. On
that spot stood a small tower. A man
was stationed on the top day and night in
the hope of seeing the relief coming by the
Cawnpore-road. It was here that on the
25th of September I was the first to catch
sight of them. In this little cemetery we
buried the dead ; it was an exposed spot
certainly, but we always carried the
bodies out at night, under cover of the
darkness. You must remember that it
was cholera and smallpox as well as the
shots of the enemy which made the death-
rate so terrible.”
It was in April, 1857, that the master
mind of Henry Lawrence foresaw the
coming storm. The Residency (so called
from its having been erected as a dwelling-
house for the English Resident at the court
of the Nawab early in this century) was not
a fort, or even a very commanding posi-
tion ; but it was the best spot available.
It was situated on an elevation (which
hardly deserves the name of a hill) and
was surrounded by the bungalows and
gardens of various Europeans. Into it
Sir Henry Lawrence ordered ammunition
to be quietly brought ; he then made
arrangements that the whole should, if
necessary, be speedily surrounded by a
palisade of about a mile and a half in
circuit. Early in May the news arrived
of the massacre at Meerut, and Sir Henry
at once brought all the English ladies and
children who were in the city into the
Residency. By the 12th of June the
mutiny had spread so rapidly that Luck-
now was the only post in Oudh which had
not fallen into the hands of the enemy.
On the 30th of that month Sir Henry
(acting, it is said, against his own judg-


ment and that of some of his elder coun-
sellors, but yielding to the wish of the
younger officers) marched out with a
small force to give battle to a large
number 'of mutineers at a place called
Chinhut, about 8 miles from the city.
On reaching the spot they found the
enemy collected in so much larger
numbers than they had been led to ex-
pect that it was soon evident that the
only hope of safety lay in a retreat to the
Residency, 'they had taken with them
some of the Oudh Artillery and an 18-lb.
howitzer. In the haste of the retreat an
attempt was being made to limber this
up and take it with them ; but Sir Henry,
seeing that the enemy were rushing
towards them with the speed of an
avalanche, called to the men to spike the
«un and abandon it. Whilst they were
in the act of doing so they saw the native
artillery going over in a body to the
enemy, and their own guns being
pointed against them. Nor was
this all. When the retreating Eng-
lish had almost reached the city, they
found to their dismay that 1,000 horse-
men were drawn up on the slopes on
either side of the road. “Why they re-
mained passive and allowed us to pass
between them,” said Colonel May to me,
4 ‘ whether it was that they lacked some
one to give the orders, or were still un-
willing to attack their old comrades and
officers—God only knows. If they had
charged down upon us it would have been
impossible for a single one of us to have
escaped.” However, the little force was
allowed to reach the Residency in
safety and to take up a position of com-
parative security, some within the main
building itself, others in the bungalows
and offices, but all to some extent pro-
tected by the palisade which Sir Henry
Lawrence had erected. Thus began the
celebrated defence of Lucknow. For 87


days and nights, until the gallant
Generals Havelock and Outram could
arrive with succor, that little band,
gradually dwindling down from 1,700 to
less than a thousand, remained hemmed in
between these narrow barriers. We
traced on the slope of the hill, where the
dividing line between the opposing forces
must have been, and examined each of
the buildings which had served for garri-
son posts, hospitals, and refuges for
women and children. Close to the en-
trance were the ruins of what was once
the house of Dr. Fayrer. In a small
chamber here, which was partially pro-
tected from the shots of the enemy, the
gallant Sir Henry Lawrence breathed his
last. He had been wounded by the
bursting of a shell—probably from the
very howitzer which had been lost at
Chinhut—whilst sitting at a table in his
own room in the Residency, and to this
spot he was carried down to die. A small
slab with a simple inscription marks the
place where the soul of that noble-hearted
Christian and true leader of men passed
away. The very ground seems consecrated
by such an association.
Further on to the left we came to the
Martiniere Post, a native building so
called because it formed the shelter for
the boys from the Martiniere school. It
was guarded by a few soldiers and
civilians and by the boys themselves. As
they stood at their posts they could hear
plainly the voices of the enemy in a house
from which they were separated only by
a narrow lane, whence a galling fire was
continually being poured right through
the English lines up to the Residency
itself. Those lads must have had the
spirit of the ’prentice boys of Derry.
Beside the shattered walls of the main
building still rises the famous tower
where
Ever upon the topmost roof our banner or
England blew.


It is marked with bullets, which pene-
trated at every loophole ; but there day
after day throughout the siege the Union
Jack waved defiantly in the face of a
hundred thousand of the enemy.
The last spot we visited was the little
churchyard, now thick with graves. They
bear many inscriptions, but none more
touching in its simplicity than this :
Here lies Henry Lawrence, who tried to do
duty.
May the Lord have mercy on his soul.
Born 28th June, 1806. Died 4th July, 1857.
But it was not the arrival of Havelock
and Outran which brought the defence
of Lucknow to an end. The relieving
party were insufficient in number, and
were able to do little more than extend
the line of defence, and be in their
turn blockaded by the enemy. By
the wider lines, however, and the cooler
weather of autumn, the dangers and
privations of the second blockade were
considerably lessened. Yet the further
relief was unexpectedly delayed, and the
wearied defenders looked anxiously at
their decreasing supply of provisions, and
found themselves obliged to serve out
short rations even to the men on guard.
It was not until the night of the 17th of
November that Sir Colin Campbell, who
had come up with the reinforcements,
met Sir Henry Havelock in the grounds
of the Koorshid Mangal. Nothing re-
mained but to withdraw the garrison, and
this, although a work of no small diffi-
culty, was skilfully accomplished during
the night of the 22nd. They were suc-
cessfully conducted to the fortified garden
of the Alum Bagh, about 3 miles from
the city (unfortunately I was only able to
view the spot from a distance), where
Sir Henry Havelock, who died during
the retreat, now is buried. Here
a new camp was formed in a more


■secure position, and a strong guard,
under Sir James Outram, remained to
watch the movements of the enemy until,
on the return of Sir Colin Campbell in
the following March, the city was at-
tacked and captured. The fall of Luck-
now was practically the end of the Indian
mutiny. From a traveller’s point of view,
however, these later incidents are less
interesting, as it is not possible now to
trace the position of the entrenchments
and batteries, or to follow out the de-
tails of the siege.
We were obliged to crowd into one
busy day not only our visits to the Resi-
dency, but also as many of the other
sights of this interesting city as it was
possible to take a hurried glance at. The
many palaces of the Kings of Oudh have
a certain magnificence when not examined
too closely, chiefly on account of their
gigantic size ; but the style is usually de-
based, the material brick and plaster, the
details poor, and the ornamentation
execrable. They do not even possess
sufficient antiquity to demand atten-
tion on that account ; few of them date
even from the last century.
The edifice which on the whole inte-
rested me the most was the Great Imam-
bara—the House of the Prophet—an
immense pile, a single room of which
measures 163 ft. by 53 ft., and is now used
as a tomb for a vizier who died about a
century ago, not long after the comple-
tion of the building. The vast court-
yard with its surrounding cloisters must
present a striking appearance when it is
filled with a brightly-dressed crowd at the
fair which is held here during the Moham-
medan festival of the Mohurram. We
climbed one of the lofty minarets of the
mosque adjoining, and were well repaid
by the glorious view which it commands
over the city, the great gates, and the
far-stretching plain beyond.


Like most other Mohammedan cities
Lucknow possesses a Jumma Musjid, a
sort of cathedral mosque. But seeing
that it was in the same debased style as
the other buildings, and hearing that it
contained nothing of special interest, we
did not take the trouble to examine it
closely.
The only other expedition which time
would allow was a delightful stroll
through the bazaars to examine the
exquisite but expensive inlaid work,
the gold and silver lace, and the cotton
manufactures for which Lucknow
is famous Of course we did not omit to
glance at the money-changers’ stalls, with
coins of every value down to cowries,
each of which is worth about one nine-
hundredth part of a penny. What a
happy time the boys in the schools of
Lucknow must have when they are learn-
ing multiplication of money ! Of course
I had by this time become familiar with
the quaint sights which are common to
all Indian bazaars, but in this vast
country every city has its own charac-
teristics in costume, coloring, and archi-
tecture. My walk through the native
quarter of Lucknow, however, was too
hurried to enable me to write anything
definite ; it must be remembered that the
city contains more than 300,000 souls, in
fact about the same population as the
whole of South Australia. I returned to
the hotel in the evening thoroughly tired
out, but feeling that I had seen enough in
one day to supply me with food for
thought for many a month.
There was one other spot recalling the
history of the mutiny which we had de-
termined not to leave unvisited, although
the associations with which it is connected
are rather those of a terrible tragedy than
of a triumphant success. We started
early on a Friday morning, and in two
hours reached Cawnpore. It is now a


flourishing modern town, with mills and
manufactories in the midst of a richly
irrigated district, and is situated on the
great main road which stretches upwards
of 2,000 miles from Calcutta to Lahore,
but it will ever be known in history as the
scene of the frightful massacre in 1857.
It would probably now be generally ad-
mitted that the infamous Nana Sahib had a
grievance against the British Government,
a purely sentimental one, no doubt; but
then how great a part has sentiment
played in the history of the world ? He was
the adopted son of the last Peshwa of the
Marhattas, and Lord Dalhousie, whilst
confirming him in the possession of his
private estates, refused to recognise his
claims to the barren dignity to .which
according to Hindoo custom he would
have been entitled, and he consequently
became a sour, disappointed man. To all
appearance, he continued, however, to be on
terms of cordial friendship with General
Wheeler, who commanded the forces at
Cawnpore, and it was by his advice that
the general, when the mutiny first broke
out, selected a spot in the open plain
where a rude trench and breastwork could
be made to act as an encampment for the
Europeans in case of need. The lines
are now marked by a hedge, about 4 ft.
high—nearly the same height as the
original earthworks The little enclo-
sure contained two small bungalows
(of which now only the foundations
remain) and a well. All the artillery
which the English garrison possessed con-
sisted of 10 small pieces. On June 6 the
native troops deserted and marched out
along the Delhi-road, apparently with the
intention of joining their friends in that
city. General Wheeler immediately
ordered the Europeans at Cawnpore—
about 1,150 in all—to come within the
entrenchments. They hurried in, bring-
ing no food or changes of clothing, taking.


for granted that in a few hours they would
be able to return to their homes in peace.
A supply of provisions had, however, been
previously placed in one of the bungalows
which would with care last them for 30
days. No sooner were they all within the
enclosure than the perfidious Nana dis-
patched a messenger to summon the
native troops to return and attack the
camp. For 20 days and nights the shots
of the mutineers poured in like hail from
every side. The roofs of the bungalows
caught fire, and the only shelter the
women and children could find from the
scorching heat and the bullets of the
enemy was within the trench. Again
and again men and women were shot
•down in the attempt to reach the well
and slake their burning thirst. Small-
pox added to the horrors of the siege.
Even carrying the bodies of the dead to a
well just outside the encampment was a
work of terrible danger. For some time
the only food available was coarse flour—
cooking was impossible. On the evening
of the 26th a native woman appeared out-
side the camp bearing a white flag and a
dispatch from the Nana offering to pro-
vide the English with boats to take them
•down to Allahabad if they would sur-
render their arms and ammunition.
When the letter was read one English
woman exclaimed, “Never ! Let us die
here. Only yesterday I saw the
Nana at the head of the enemy’s
cavalry.” But General Wheeler de-
cided to accept the offer. It was
a fatal mistake. Better, far better,
would it have been for the men to have
killed their own wives and children and
then rushed upon the foe to die, as the
Rajput garrison of Chanderi had done in
the time of Babar. Yet there is much to
be said in defence of Wheeler’s decision.
The case was hopeless; their batteries
were nearly silenced ; ammunition and


provisions were well-nigh exhausted ;
there was no sign of relief. On the other
hand, if they surrendered there was at
least a chance of safety. The vilest
wretches in the world have sometimes
reverenced the sanctity of an oath.
Even the brutal Ferdinand of Aragon
spared the lives of Boabdil and his
family. It might possibly be to the
Nana’s own interest to allow them to
escape. The general’s officers were al-
lowed to inspect the arrangements
made for their departure, and pronounced
■them satisfactory.
That night the ill-fated band slept
in peace ; and the following morning
they were conducted in carts and
palanquins down a narrow ravine (we
traced their path exactly) to the 'river
side. On alighting the general saw, to
his horror, that the spot to which he had
been brought was not that where the
boats had been placed the evening before,
but a Hindoo temple, from which steps
led down to the river. In a moment the
dreadful truth flashed upon him—they
had been enticed into a trap to be offered
as a sacrifice to the goddess ! However,
there was still no positive proof of
treachery; boat after boat was loaded
quietly, and rowed some way down the
river, when suddenly a flag was hoisted
on the dome of the temple. It bore the
emblem of two black figures—the symbol
of unity between the Hindoo and the
Mohammedan. The instant it appeared
volley after volley was poured forth from
both banks upon the fugitives in the
boats and on the unhappy crowd who
were still waiting on the steps. Of those
in the boats four managed to swim down
the river and reach a place of safety ; the
rest were shot. A few from the steps
rushed away, only to be recaptured, the
men to be massacred and the women and
children taken, with those who had


already been made prisoners, to the
assembly rooms, two miles distant.
Some of these were then given to the
Nana’s officers. One of them it is said
slew herself after having heroically
played the part of a second Judith ; as to
the fate of the others there are dark
rumors, but nothing certain will be
known until the day of judgment. The
captives in the assembly rooms were kept
in close confinement until the 15th of
July, when the guns of Havelock’s vic-
torious army were heard in the distance.
Thereupon the Nana, fearing a rescue,
ordered a party of soldiers to shoot down
the prisoners. But they refused to take
part in a cold-blooded massacre, and
deliberately fired in the air. Then he
ordered a number of butchers from
the town to go in and hack them to-
pieces; and when Havelock’s army
arrived the next morning, all that was left
for them to do was to bury the mangled
bodies of those whose lives they had come
to save. The scene of those terrible
events is now a peaceful garden ; a marble
statue marks the well into which several
of the bodies were thrown ; the others
lie in a little cemetery beneath beds of
roses and violets. But inside those gates
no native of India is ever allowed to
pass.
We visited each spot in turn, lingering
long in the beautiful memorial church
which has been erected close to the site
of the encampment, and in which the
soldiers of the garrison now worship.
Yet, dreadful as the details of the
massacres are, it is but just that we should
look at them calmly and dispassionately.
Not even our British patriotism must lead
us to forget that if they were shocking to
our ideas they were by no means un-
paralleled in history. Tamerlane—the
Attila of India—boasted that 100,000
prisoners had been massacred in cold


blood when he captured Delhi; Nadir
Shah was only appeased when 30,000 had
fallen. Even in the West, the terrible
epoch of the Thirty Years’ War —which
seems to cast a lurid light as from the
infernal regions over the history of Ger-
many —contains records of slaughter
hardly less wholesale. The doctrine that
the women of a conquered city are not
the lawful prey of the victors was first
introduced by Grotius. It was unknown
to Charles V. Can even the massacre of
Cawnpore compare with driving 1,200
men, women, and children into a cave,
piling up the entrance with bushes,
and deliberately setting them on fire. Yet
that was done by the nation which claims
to be the most enlightened in Europe'and
justified by the general in command on
the ground of humanity as the shortest
way of bringing the war to an end !
We were conducted over the historic
fields of Cawnpore by Sergeant-Major
Lee, an eloquent and dramatic, if some-
what loquacious, narrator, who had served
gallantly under Havelock, both there and
at Lucknow, and had during his subse-
quent residence in the district been care-
fully collecting together such details as
the natives might be willing to disclose.
From him I learnt the incidents which I
have here put down, some of which I
cannot recollect having read before, but
his account of the retribution which fol-
lowed is too terrible to repeat.
We left Cawnpore the same evening;
the railway-station presented an extraor-
dinary spectacle, not only the building, but
all the compound being packed with a
dense mass of natives, both men and
women. The great ceremony of the
Ardhoyda Yoga, which occurs only at long
and irregular intervals (the time being
fixed by elaborate astronomical calcula-
tions, compared with which the “Table
to find Easter ” is as simple as the alpha-


bet) was to take place on the following
Sunday. It consists chiefly in bathing in
the Ganges and reciting certain mantras,
and natives from all parts of India were
hurrying down to perform the sacred
ablutions. Fifty years will elapse before
another Yoga can take place, and as some
astrologers have discovered that the
Ganges is already beginning to lose its
sanctity this occasion will probably be
the last. The importance of the ceremony
can be realised when I explain that, ac-
cording to the Hindu religion, bathing in
the holy river at the correct moment of
the festival will ensure for the bather not
only his own salvation, but that of all his
ancestors up to the thirtieth million
generation.


AGRA.
Delhi, February 16, 1891,
STAYED five days at Agra—much
i 0) too short a time, considering that it
is one of the most fascinating cities of the
East —and indeed not many in the West
can be compared with it. It was, I believe,
very ancient, as the ruins on the other
side of the river testify, and it played an
important part in the history of the
mutiny; but it is with the time of the
Moghul dynasty—a period of military
prowess and royal magnificence more
glorious than even those of Augustus or
Haroun-el-Raschid —that Agra is for ever
associated. A parallel has been drawn
between the Moghuls in India and the
Norman kings in England, and in some
respects it is strangely close. Both
entered as foreign invaders and became
native rulers. Babar was buried at
Kabul, as William I. was at Caen;
Humdyun and Akbar rest in the land of
their adoption, as the Plantagenet
sovereigns lie in Westminster Abbey.
The third monarch of the Moghul dynasty
allied himself to the subject race by
marrying a Hindoo lady; the third
Norman king was united to a Saxon
princess. From the blending of the old
native Pathan and the intruding Persian
styles sprang the glories of Moghul archi-
tecture ; we trace the influence of Saxon
and Norman in the Gothic cathedrals of
England.


The first Moghul who assumed the
proud title of Emperor of India was the
savage Tamerlane, But he came merely
to rob, massacre, and retire. It was his
descendant in the sixth generation, Babar,
who, by routing the forces of the house of
Lodi at Parupat in 1526, founded the new
dynasty, with its two capitals of Delhi and
Agra. A careful administrator, as well as
a great warrior, his name, in spite of all
his faults, is still cherished by the Mahom-
medans of India. His son, Humdyun,
nominally reigned from 1530 to 1556, but
during 16 years of that period he was a
wanderer in strange lands while usurping
sovereigns sat on the Imperial throne.
The next king, the great Akbar, the pride
and glory of the race, at once the Charle-
magne and the Charles V. of Northern
India, was almost an exact contemporary
of our own Elizabeth, his reign lasting
from 1556 to 1605. That was indeed the
golden age of the Mohammedan rule in
India. Enemy after enemy was routed
and the proudest of the Hindoo princes of
Rajputana sought to ally themselves by
marriages with the Mussulman conqueror.
Kandahar and Sindh became part of his
empire. Yet it is rather as a ruler than as
a warrior that Akbar will be remembered.
His elaborate assessments for revenue pur-
poses ; his legal reforms ; his thoughtful
provision for the equipment, payment,
and discipline of the army; his care in
the construction of canals and the plant-
ing of trees ‘ ‘ both for shade and blossom, ”
all stood unparalleled in the history of
India until they were imitated by our
own fellow-countrymen centuries later.
Even in forbidding suttee and the
marriage of children English legislators
have but followed in the steps of the
great Akbar. The only branch of the
public service which he reserved ex-
clusively for Mohammedans was the
judicial ; but even here his wise liberality


was apparent, as the Moslem judges were
directed in cases between Hindoos to
administer Hindoo law. Yet amongst
the many duties of his busy life this
marvellous man found time to take a
deep interest in all matters of religion.
He conversed freely with Christian
priests, Brahman pundits, and Mahom-
medan doctors of the law. If the legend
that he added a Portuguese lady to his
harem, which already contained several
Hindoo princesses, must be abandoned as
apocryphal, still there is no doubt that
he paid reverence to the images and
words of Christ. The orthodox party
amongst the Mussulmans were at times
shocked at his innovations, and indeed
there seems every reason to believe that
his dream was to found a religion as
eclectic as his palaces, which should com-
bine what he thought purest in Chris-
tianity, Hinduism, the philosophy of
Zoroaster, and the creed of Mahomet;
but his scheme, like all similar ones else-
where, died with its founder. Although
the buildings erected by his successors
are more beautiful than those which date
irom his reign, there is nothing more
interesting than visiting the palaces and
tracing the daily life of this monarch of
men.
The shadow which seems to hang over
all Mohammedan dynasties —family feuds
—fell heavily on the Imperial house in the
reign of the next monarch, Jahangir, the
contemporary of James I. of England.
His reign is little more than a series of
civil wars brought on by dissensions
within the palace. He was as tolerant of
all religions as his father had been, at
one time being regarded by the Jesuit
missionaries as a probable convert; but
his was the tolerance of the cynic, not of
the earnest seeker after truth. The
story of his successor, Shah Jahan, is a
tragedy in itself. His passion for mag-


nificence led him to grace Delhi and Agra
with the most exquisite specimens of
Indian architecture. But he never re-
covered the death of his wife, Mumtaz
Mahal, to whom he was devotedly at-
tached ; and, though surrounded by
every luxury which this world can offer,
he sank into a settled melancholy until
he was superseded in the government by
his turbulent son, Aurangzib, who after a
long civil war against his brothers suc-
ceeded in having himself proclaimed
Emperor in 1658. The new sovereign
waded to the throne through blood, but
that did not prevent him from posing as
a religious enthusiast. The palaces of
Akbar were carefully examined and
every representation of an animal was
displaced on the ground of idolatry ; in
much the same spirit as Cromwell had
carried on a somewhat similar crusade of
iconoclasm in the English cathedrals a
few years before. To the splendid court
of Aurangzib flocked envoys from Arabia,
Persia, and even Abyssinia ; at one time
nearly the whole of India was subject to
him ; his annual revenue amounted to 80
millions sterling. But the storm was
already rising in the south ; the warlike
Mahrattas and bold Rajputs waged con-
tinual war against the empire. Aurang-
zib was in a certain sense a great man,
but it was not with the greatness of
Akbar. He was an able if not always an
impartial administrator —a man of deep
religion, tinged with fanaticism, possess-
ing cunning if not originality and ingenuity
if not generalship.
The reigns of these six princes—Babar,
Humdyun, Akbar, Jahangir, Shah Jahan,
and Aurangzib—complete the period of
Moghul ascendency. After the death of
Aurangzib in 1707 the dynasty begins
rapidly to decline. Torn by _ internal
dissensions, ruined by the Persian invaders,
and the loss of province after province


as the native princes threw off their
allegiance, the power of the house of
Babar became the shadow of a shade, and
the English are really the immediate suc-
cessors, not of the Moghul Empire but of
the smaller kingdoms (chiefly Hindoo)
which arose from its ruins. This is a
fact which has an important bearing on
political questions even at the present
day, A puppet Emperor, however, held
his mock court at Delhi until 1857, when
the last bearer of the Imperial title was
formally deposed in consequence of the
part he had taken in the mutiny. He
died an exile in a remote corner of Pegu.
No one can view the marvellous works
of architecture at Agra without being
fascinated with their beauty ; but some
knowledge of the history of their founders
is necessary in order to appreciate them
thoroughly. Certainly these Moghul
emperors had every facility at hand for
rearing monuments to their greatness.
There must have been architects of genius
to form the general conceptions and highly
skilled workmen to carry out every detail
to perfection. Money was unlimited and
forced labor procurable. The mines
yielded costly gems. The rich red sand-
stone which came from the neighboring
hills seems equally beautiful whether
standing in massive blocks in the battle-
mentcd walls of the city, carved into little
pillars and brackets covered with the
richest ornamentation, or pierced into
delicate lattices which seem to hang like
curtains of lacework. The only thing
which would otherwise be wanting to give
an air of lightness to the whole structure
is supplied by the free use of pure spot-
less marble. After gazing on buildings
such as these I feel as though I could
never look again at the lath and plaster
of Granada.
The first place which the visitor to
Agra should examine is not the city itself


but the ruins of Fatephur Sikri, 23
miles away. These were once two
separate villages, but Akbar enclosed
them within a wall nearly seven miles in
length and changed them into a splendid
city. Here he fixed his capital, and for a
while all was a scene of gaiety and
activity ; but soon changing his plans he
returned to Agra, and, except for a scanty
population of a few thousand who still
inhabit the ruins, Fatephur Sikri is
almost as completely a city of the dead
as Gerash or Pompeii. Panthers have
roamed fearlessly through the halls of
the Great King. The smaller buildings are
now little more than an undistinguishable
mass of ruins ; but in the palace we seem
thrown back again to the time of Akbar.
Although the material is sandstone, the
style is minute rather than massive ; there
are no great halls like those in medueval
castles in England ; but then it must be
remembered that in this climate large
assemblies are held in the open air. We
stayed for the night in Akbar’s treasury—
a richly carved room of red sandstone,
still in perfect preservation (how charm-
ing a replica of it would be for a
library !) ; hard by was the Great Court
of Audience, where the Emperor sat to
administer justice to his subjects, who
flocked thither in thousands. Opposite
to us were his private apartments, the
flat roof being ornamented by one of the
light stone canopies which add such a
beauty to the whole palace ; beneath this
canopy on hot nights the Emperor was
wont to sleep. In one courtyard is the
stone on which the Hindoo astrologer used
to stand; in another the marble pavement
is marked out as a board for paschici—the
Indian chess —which the Emperor was
fond of playing with living pieces. Not
far off are the different palaces for the
ladies of the zenana. In some of these
the walls, the pillars, the brackets which


support the architraves, and even the
space underneath the projecting stone
eaves are covered, yet not overloaded,
with the richest ornamentation, both
floral and geometric, in the latest
Pathan style, which seems here to
blend so happily with the chaste Saracenic.
It will give some idea of the rich variety
of the architecture when I say that one
building—the Panj Mahal—consists of
five storeys, each smaller than the one
beneath it, and each supported by pillars;
the lowest story but one contains no less
than 57 pillars, the ornamentation of
every one of them being different. When
I thought of the tasteless piles which the
wealthy men of Australia have erected,
and on which they have lavished such
vast sums of money, I could not help
wondering that, living in a climate not
unlike that of Northern India, they had
not borrowed more from the gems of
Hindustani architecture. Of course the
houses of the attendants and the
stables for the horses and camels
are simpler in style, but yet they
are hardly less interesting. The gate-
way of the palace was once adorned
with elephants carved in stone —a favorite
emblem in Hindoo architecture ; but they
were effaced by the iconoclastic Aurangzib.
Even the baths were perfect gems, with
inlaid walls and painted domes. But the
building to which I found myself return-
ing most often was the Great Mosque. It
is said to be the noblest of all those which
Akbar constructed, and I can well believe
it. The design of most of the mosques in
India is the same, and in this bright
sunny climate it seems about as grand
and reverent a conception for a temple
of God as man has ever expressed in
stone. A great courtyard of marble, sur-
rounded by an arcaded wall, and contain-
ing the fountain for the ritual ablutions ;
on the north-west side of the court a vast


hall covered with a roof supported on
pillars and surmounted by three mag-
nificent domes. This hall contains
simply the mirhabs or niches, showing
the direction of the sacred city, and
the mimbar or pulpit, from which
the Friday sermon is preached. It
was on this plan, slightly altered on
account of the difference of climate and
certain exigencies of architecture, that
the great mosque of Cordova was originally
constructed ; but unhappily—as even so
ardent a Romanist as Charles Y. was
•obliged to confess —the idea was entirely
destroyed by the priests, who adapted it
for a form of worship for which it was
never intended. The congregation of the
mosque is usually collected in the covered
part; at times, however, the whole area
•of the courtyard is thronged. The floor
is divided into slabs of marble, each one
large enough for a man to kneel upon.
There is nothing to distract the eye, no
•unseemly division between rich and poor,
.no thought of how money may be made
by putting the most fashionable sittings
up to auction ; or how positions of advan-
tage may be secured from which to stare
at other people’s clothes ; it is simply a
house of prayer.
Familiar though it was from former
travels in Eastern lands I once more
paused to listen to the solemn cry of
the muezzin at the setting of the
sun—“Oh, men! time is passing;
eternity is coming; to prayer! to prayer!
•God is great and beside Him there is
none other !”■—and to watch the little
band of worshippers come forward, face
towards the west, kneel, and solemnly re-
cite their evening prayer. It may be that
■there is much of formalism which taints
this impressive ceremony; that it is
sometimes a useless repetition of words
produced by no thought and influencing
mo action ; in fact, I cannot deny that


Mahomet himself said, “Though a man
commit murder and adultery, yet if he
duly repeat the words, ‘ There is no
God but Allah,’ his salvation is secure
still at least it is a formalism which con-
tains the germ of a noble truth. For
each man thus to bend in adoration
before the Deity is a loftier idea than the
cold criticism of a hundred sermons.
There are, however, two things which,
though beautiful in themselves, tend to
break the symmetry of the mosque.
The first of these is the great gateway on
the south-west side of the courtyard. It
is really a triumphal arch, and the view of
it from the outside, where it is approached
by a long flight of steps, above which it
towers to a height of 130 ft,, is-simply
magnificent ; but its loftiness dwarfs the
mosque, which ought to be the principal
object to which all lines converge. I
admit that I am biassed in the matter, as
I always feel that the great gateways
which are a feature of Moghul build-
ings detract from the objects to which
they lead; but in this, which is the
largest of all, the fault must be confessed
by every visitor. The arch is richly
ornamented with inscriptions in the beau-
tiful Persian character. The one on
which Christian travellers will look with
the greatest interest runs as follows
“Jesus (whose name be praised!) said:
1 The world is a bridge ; pass over it, but
build no dwellinghouse on it; the man
who hopes for an hour may hope for an
eternity ; life is but an hour, spend it in
devotion; the rest is unseen.’” Of all
the “unrecorded sayings” of the Saviour
I have come across none more beautiful
and none which seems to bear within it
clearer evidence of authenticity.
The other object to which I referred
as breaking the symmetry of the Great
Mosque is the collection of tombs
on the north-east side of the court-


yard. It seems presumptuous to find 1
fault with structures which are in them-
selves so exquisite ; and they do infinitely
less harm than the barbarous monuments
which block and defile Westminster
Abbey ; still I think that the simple ex-
panse would have been more effective if
they had not been placed here. The most
beautiful of these tombs is of pure marble;
a chamber surmounted with a graceful
dome and surrounded by a cloister, every
arch of which is filled in with airy lattice
work of pearly whiteness. I measured
one roughly and found that it was about
5 ft. square—of course in a single piece of
marble.
One incident in my visit to Fatephur
Sikri I must not omit, although it
seems something like a descent from
the sublime to the ridiculous. Whilst
I was gazing in rapture on the
splendors of architecture a native came
up to me and said, “I dive for half
a rupee ; you come and see me.” And
certainly he earned his money and I was
well repaid. The top of the wall from
which he took his spring was fully 80 ft.
above the water’s line. Waving his legs
in the air during the descent so as to
balance himself, he brought them together
as he came close to the water, into which
he dropped feet foremost with a bang,
then quietly swam out and came up —as
cool as a cucumber in every sense—to
demand his backsheesh. I learnt after-
wards that he was by profession a police-
man, but was now taking a holiday and
employing it profitably in the lucrative
occupation of diving for ninepences.
On the road back to the city we still saw
traces of the influences of the great Akbar,
for the modern English road lies close to
the old one which he made, and it, like
all the main roads throughout his em-
pire, was marked at intervals by pillars,
which served the same purpose as our


milestones. Many of these are still
standing.
It was during his residence at Fatephur
Sikri that Akbar commenced a new palace
in the fort which he was constructing at
Agra ; but although much of his work is
still standing there it has been so altered
by later builders that it now seems to
suggest rather Ms successors than him-
self. So before entering it it is as well to
make another excursion outside the city
to see a building which, if not erected by
the great monarch, is inseparably con-
nected with his name—the tomb in which
he rests. It was built by his son and
successor, Jahangir. It is certainly a
noble pile, rising to a height of 74 ft. in
five storeys,the uppermost of these being of
pure marble ; and it is splendidly situated
in a large and beautiful garden, which
is entered through one of the colossal
gateways so characteristic of the style.
Everything is in keeping with the great-
ness of the man to whose honor the
monument has been reared ; yet as I
looked at it I felt that there was some-
thing about it which did not seem to
satisfy the eye. At first I could not dis-
cover what the fault was ; and as my
companions did not share my feeling I
could get no help from them. But after
walking round and round the building I
suddenly realised the whole thing ; there
are too many horizontal lines. In a
Gothic building relief is given by spires
and tracery ; the fluted pillars of a Greek
temple, and the great domes and minarets
of pure Saracenic art have somewhat the
same effect. But here, instead of one im-
posing dome there are dozens of little
kiosks, and they are insufficient for the
purpose ; there is certainly what I may
describe as a want of aspiration about
the monument.
As we drove back to Agra we passed by
a number of domes of all sizes scattered


about the fields. They mark the resting
places of great nobles of the Moghul
period, whose very names are now for-
gotten.
My heart beat high one sunny morning
as we started out on one of the expedi-
tions to which I had been looking forward
most keenly of all my Indian rambles —
to see the fort of Agra. Yet the realisa-
tion exceeded all that I had expected.
The name “fort” is rather unhappy, as
although the buildings are on a hill, and
being surrounded by a massive wall of
sandstone and protected by powerful
artillery, have served as a citadel during
times of siege, it is not the fortifications
which form the object of one’s visit
so much as the marvellous group of
palaces and mosques of every period from
the time of Akbar to that of Aurangzib,
which is contained within the enceinte.
What our fellow-countrymen have done
with this matchless cluster of buildings is
enough to make one blush for the name
of England. Close beside the choicest
gems of Moghul architecture rise edifices
as shabby and hideous as any that can be
found within the barracks of Chatham or
the camp at Aldershot. It is true that
each detail of the palaces they have left is
as perfect as ever; but it is like look-
ing at costly jewels miserably set in
brass and iron. We entered through
a portal far finer than that which
leads into the city of Toledo. The
first building we paused to examine
was the one that has been appropriately
named “The Pearl Mosque;” and,
indeed, it is a pearl amongst all the
buildings of the world. The charm does
not lie in size—for, including the court-
yard, it is only about 150 ft. square —but
in material and proportion. Entirely of
spotless marble, the three bulbous domes
stand out against the cloudless blue with
an airy lightness which makes it impos-


sible to realise that they are built of
massive stone ; the beautiful pillars
seem rather to have been placed
there in order to add the effect of
varied lights and shadows than to
support the graceful arches above.
The exquisite variety of outline in the
arches and domes makes ornamentation
of the surface unnecessary ; simplicity is
added to the other graces of the structure.
The whole sight seemed one of which the
eye could never weary. Yet we had to
hurry on—through the great hall of
audience, which would have been mag-
nificent if it had been left in plain sand-
stone, but unfortunately has been
“beautified” by being covered with
plaster and gilding ; through the red
Palace of Jahangir—of which all the con-
struction as well as the elaborate orna-
mentation is in the richest Hindoo style ;
through suite after suite of private apart-
ments built for the Emperor and the ladies
of his zenana; some being of white
marble inlaid like Florentine mosaic
with flowers composed of rare gems ;
the walls of others covered with in-
numerable little mirrors and delicate
paintings ; through baths approached by
marble palaoee and decorated with every jhaJJap**
beauty that outline and coloring could
supply ; courtyards once filled with water
in which the sultanas used to while away
their time in fishing for gold fish ; shady
gardens and latticed balconies, all forming
one confused dream of Oriental splendor
too varied to describe, but too exquisite
to forget.
We glanced in passing at the famous
gates of Somnath, which, as historians
relate, were carried off from Goojerac by
the invader Mahmud to Afghanistan in the
year 877, and brought back in triumph
from his tomb at Ghuznee by Lord
Ellenborough ; and should have been
deeply impressed had it not been for


the disturbing thought that they are
evidently not of Hindoo construction
and that there is no evidence that
Mahmud ever carried away the gates of
Somnath at all. But long did we pause
in the charming alcove where Shah Jahan
used to sit day after day in his widowed
solitude watching the glorious mausoleum
—the Taj Mahal, the Crown of Beauty—
which he was rearing to the memory of
his queen beside the river ; and once
more, in the choicely decorated suite of
rooms which were really his prison
during the last eight years of his melan-
choly life.
I have intentionally abstained from
giving a detailed record of our daily life
at Agra, because there was one building
to which we paid visit after visit, which
would be monotonous to recount, and yet
at the time each one seemed more delight-
ful than the last. That building was the
Taj. We saw it in the grey light of early
morning, in the full glare of the noonday
sun, and again in the red glow that illu-
minates the tropical sky just after the
sun has sunk beneath the horizon, and
every aspect seemed to draw out fresh
beauties. Poets have sung of it, artists
have painted it, designers have copied it
in alabaster, in ivory, in gold and jewels,
but no words can describe, no brush can
portray, and no model can reproduce the
magic charm of this triumph of art.
Language is at best a feeble channel to
convey ideas ; to grasp the conception of
the Taj it must be seen from every
side —from the great gateway at the en-
trance ; from the gardens as it stands out
between the avenues of cypresses and
casts its reflection in the glassy waters of
the little lake or is half hidden by the
delicate foliage of the tamarind trees ;
from the dark red mosque by the side,
which seems to add to the brilliancy of
the snowy marble ; from the graceful


minarets that stand like guards round the
mighty building; and last of all from the
flat marble roof whence the bulbous dome
springs. What jewels can equal its
lustrous brilliancy as it rises against the
clear, cloudless sky ?
Possibly the great writer who described
Cologne Cathedral as a mass of vulgar
geometry and who sneered at King’s
College Chapel as an inverted dinner
table might be able to find fault with the
scrupulous exactness of the whole struc-
ture ; and I admit that when it is
described on paper there is something
slavish in the manner in which the details
have been carried out. For instance,
on the side opposite to that on which
the mosque is placed there is a precisely
similar building. It is useless as a
mosque, as it faces in the wrong direction—
away from Mecca ; yet it is elaborately
finished so as to correspond in every
point with the reality on the other side.
And, if tradition be correct, the original
conception involved even more regularity,
for Shah Jahan had intended to erect
another Taj across the river as a mauso-
leum for himself and to unite the two by
a silver bridge, but the plan was cut
short by his deposition. All the same, I
defy Mr. Ruskin himself to stand before
the Taj with any feelings but those of
awe-struck admiration.
And yet, as I stand looking at this
triumph of Oriental skill, I find my
thoughts wandering away to another dome
in a distant land, and mentally contrasting
the two. The Taj was completed but a
few years before Sir Christopher Wren
commenced St. Paul’s Cathedral in Lon-
don. The dull, ponderous style of the
Western building can no more compare
with this fairy-like structure than the
smoke of a London sky can with the
clear blue of India. But what are the
associations ? The Taj tells only of des-


potism and death; the forced labor of
thousands of wretched slaves expended
in the building of a useless tomb to
gratify the whim of a monarch. St. Paul’s
was the voluntary offering of a free
people ; week by week thousands of men
and women flock to it to gain strength
and comfort for the battle of life. In the
Taj the sound of the voice dies slowly
away in the echoes of the dome ; the
words spoken in St. Paul’s find an echo
in the human heart, to be borne onward
through generations.
Still, as I turn away, I feel that I have
attained to the highest point of enjoy-
ment of which my mind is capable. I
have seen the Taj.


AGRA
(continued).
Delhi, February 17, 1891.
I do not wish my friends in Australia
to suppose that I did nothing whilst I
was at Agra but rave about ruins. Short
though my time at that fascinating city
was there were several of its other sights
which I managed to glance at in passing.
One evening we had a visit from Mr.
Palmer, the officer in charge of the great
irrigation works in the neighborhood.
He had come to see one of my com-
panions, whom he had known in Aus-
tralia, but being as hospitable as all
Anglo-Indians are he kindly included me
in an invitation to a drive the following
morning out to see the canal which is
under his care. I gladly accepted, for
the subject of Indian irrigation is a most
important one in itself, especially to a
traveller coming from Australia ; and
knowing that Mr. Palmer had a complete
knowledge, both theoretical and practical,
of every detail of the subject the chanc
of going with such a- guide was not to be
missed.
We started early in the chill misty air
of the morning for a drive of five or six
miles along a flat road with hardly a
turning. This you will say sounds dull
enough, but then you must remember
that this is India and that every yard
teems with interest of one sort or another.


First we saw a number of native police
being drilled. What splendid fellows
these Indians are when you see them
in their handsome, becoming uniforms !
Led by English officers they could conquer
the world, the dominions of the Czar not
excepted. Just outside the town the flat
outline is broken by a number of queer-
shaped hills, which had puzzled me each
time I had passed them. They could not
have been natural without violating every
rule in the elements of geology. They
were too large to have been thrown up
for military purposes. I had come to the
conclusion on the whole that they were
the remains of hanging gardens reared by
the great nobles of the Moghul age—
artificial hills on which, shaded by spread-
ing trees, the dark-eyed houris might
wander amongst the flowers and enjoy
the cool breezes of the evening; but, alas
for poetry and romance, my dream is
rudely broken. I am told that they are
the remains of disused brickkilns.
Our road is like all roads in India,
planted on each side with a fine row of
shady trees, perhaps the prettiest of all
being the graceful nim, which looks like
an English ash ; and it is also one of the
most useful. Its leaves are a preventa-
tive against ants, besides making excel-
lent poultices, and its shade is cool and
pleasant, I wonder that no one has in-
troduced it into Australia. Then there
are the wild banyans sending down their
aerial roots ; and numbers of acacias. Up
and down the stems sport the merry little
grey squirrels ; on the branches perch in-
numerable green parrots, crows, black
minas, anteaters with bright metallic-
looking plumage, king crows, and
whopoes. The king crow is not a crow,
as might be supposed, but an ambitious
little fellow who disdains to bully his in-
feriors or fight with his equals, but lords
it over the bigger birds and will not


leave even the crow in freedom, hence his
name. The whopoes flit about con-
spicuously, as though they were proud
of their bright-colored crests, as well they
may be. Their crests were made of real
gold once, but they lived in such danger
of being robbed that life was as great a
burden to them as it was to the poor
Duke of Brunswick, who used to sit day
and night watching his diamonds- So-
they begged King Solomon to take them
away, and when he did so he gave them
crowns of feathers instead as much like
gold as possible. By the watercourses
the brilliant blue kingfishers flitted about;
in the fields stood some majestic sairas,
looking like native companions with red
heads. It is cruel to shoot them," for
however long they may live they mate
but once ; to kill one of a pair means con-
demning the other to a life-long widow-
hood.
We met numbers of people as we drove
along. How much more amusing the
people are to watch here than they were
down at Calcutta! Of course in this
cold air they wear more clothing and it
is much more varied in colour. Some of
the women have—l beg your pardon,
Mrs. Grundy—bright red trousers, others
regular skirts. They have not exactly
rings on their fingers and bells on their
toes, but something very like —armlets,
bracelets, anklets, and toe-rings, besides
ornaments in their ears and noses. Their
jewellery is only made of glass, jink, or
some common metal it is true ; but it
looks bright and pretty. I enjoy watch-
ing these Indian women ; they move like
queens. There is more true grace about
a peasant girl here walking along bare-
foot carrying on her head a basket of
fuel than there is about a French lady
decked out in the newest fashions from
Paris. Presently we meet a little ekka r
a small two-wheeled cart drawn by bul-


locks, just roomy enough for two people
sitting comfortably ; but into it are
packed father, mother, and the whole
family down to the baby, going to town
for a day’s marketing. I think it must
be the effect of climate ; certainly people
here seem more vivacious than they do
in the tropics ; these boys look as if they
could really enjoy a joke or whistle a
lively tune. A friend who is with me
tells me that this difference between
North and South India is undeniable,
and is seen in every trait. A Punjabi
going along the road overtook a Bengali
who was (as Bengalis usually are) whining
out a melancholy funereal sort of melody.
The Punjabi stood it for some time, but
at last rushed up to the stranger and ex-
claimed, “ Hush, hush, my good friend.
Do you suppose that you are the only
man in the world who has lost both his
father and his mother that you should
fill all the air with your lamentations ?”
We stopped to look into one or two
houses on the way. None of our party
knew the owners, but in this friendly
country no one thinks anything of asking
whether he may look into anybody else’s
house. One of the prettiest we saw was
the villa of an Agra banker, which was so
complete that it even possessed a private
chaplain. In the middle of the principal
room stood the family altar. It consisted
of a large lingum stone for the disgusting
phallic worship, which has been incor-
porated into Hindooism (but which, by the
way, not even Christianity has wholly
abolished in Western Europe), surrounded
by marble images of the elephant-headed
Ganish, the bull of Siva, the Hindoo
Triad, and the dread goddess Kali. All
had been decorated with fresh flowers by
the Brahmin at the time of morning
prayer. It was base idolatry I know ;
yet at the time it struck me as not with-
out some noetic beauty.


Bat if I stop to tell everything that we
saw on the way I shall never reach
my journey’s end. I must whip up
my horses and hurry on. In describing
the irrigation works here, it is only fair
to remember that there was every facility
at hand for their construction. In the
first place there was plenty of water—a
matter as to which I have never felt quite
certain in the case of Australia. The
Jumna pours down from the Himalayas
in perennial richness, the mud which it
carries with it being in itself a manure.
Then the flat expanse is so enormous that
many hundreds of square miles can be
watered from one canal, and the fall is too
slight to require many locks. Besides
this there is the social state of the
country ; arrangements as to payments
can be easily settled, and frauds speedily
detected. The people have been ac-
customed to the idea of irrigation for
thousands of years. Hitherto it has
been from wells, which are as familiar to
the traveller through an Indian village as
they are to every reader of the
Bible. The well is invariably the
parade, the market-place, the gossiping
centre for the whole population. Bullocks
are perpetually at work drawing the
water, which is carried along in little
channels which seem, when one looks
down from a height, to divide the country
like an irregular chessboard. These wells
usually belong to the zemindars, who
receive payment for their use by an in-
creased rent. But all such primitive
arrangements are clumsiness itself com-
pared with the new system. This one
canal, for instance, starts at Delhi, and
goes for 100 miles almost straight, but
gradually getting smaller and smaller, as
it is tapped for the fields on each side.
At the end of the 100 miles it is divided
into three small channels, which soon
disappear. On the map, therefore, it looks


like an inverted river.
In this country the theory is that the
State is the owner of the land, next
to it come the zemindars, who were
originally officials but (their posts having
been made hereditary) have become some-
thing like landlords under the Crown.
They possess fixity of tenure, the rent
being assessed every 30 years ; of the
rent paid by the ryots or tenants the
zemindar retains one half, but for the
balance he is liable to the State. Of
course land becomes more valuable by the
construction of a canal in the neighbor-
hood ; in fact, near here it has risen from
about £3 10s. an acre to £7 ; but as an
assessment was made shortly before the
canal was completed, the Government
can reap no benefit until the 30 years
have expired. The zemindar, however,
if he wishes to raise the rent of the ryot
can go to a Local Court; and if in the
opinion of the magistrate the proposed in-
crease is reasonable the rent is raised ac-
cordingly. It seems therefore that the
unearned increment (if one must use that
abominable, hackneyed, and misleading ex-
pression) is not unfairly divided between
the landlord and the State.
It must not be supposed that the
use of the water is forced on the
cultivator against his will. Every ryot
(the farms about here, by the way, vary
from 5 to 50 acres, and in some cases
near the towns are even smaller) may
choose for himself whether he will irri-
gate or not. If he steals the water he is
liable to a fine of £5 or a fortnight’s im-
prisonment. Thefts are not uncommon,
as the wily Hindoo rather enjoys than
otherwise a quiet fortnight at the expense
of the Empress. If he decide to irrigate,
the Village Council (a popular institution
existing in India from remote antiquity)
settle the price to be paid. This very
much depends on the crop sown, as some


crops require more water than others ;
thus for sugar the cost of the water
amounts to 10s. per annum for each acre ;
for the three other classes of crops it is
much less. The fertility of a well-watered
field is simply marvellous. It is possible,
for instance, to grow sorghum during the
wet autumn, then wheat in the winter,
and after that has been reaped in
February some coarse kind of pea during
the dry season. This shows what an im-
portant part improvements in irrigation
have played in making India a great
wheat-producing land, and in this respect
a dangerous rival to Australia. It is one
of the many silent revolutions which have
taken place in this country during the
last few years.
Several of the wheat fields present
a strange and decidedly pretty appear-
ance on account of the lines of yellow
blossoming rape which are sown at
intervals through the corn. This
rape alone is often enough to pay the
rent, leaving all the wheat as profit.
Other fields again look perfectly varie-
gated, three different crops being sown at
the same time. For instance, grain, rape,
and pea ; or cotton, dahl, and some coarse
grain. This is a sort of agricultural
hedging, as come wet, come dry, some
crop or other is pretty sure to do well.
I was not surprised to find that each
year a larger number of ryots apply for the
water. The contrast between an irrigated
and an unirrigated crop forms an object
lesson which even the most conservative
of farmers—on whom lectures and books
would be thrown away can learn,
although it is but natural that when
people have been doing things in one way
for 3,000 years they should require a year
or two to change their habits. I will not
go into the question of how far a similar
system might be introduced with advan-
tage into Australia. lam not an agricul-


turist in theory or in practice, but
only a humble tourist. Abler men
have written fully on the subject ;
I have merely sought to give a
rough account of a happy morning’s ex-
cursion.
On leaving the canal we walked with
Mr. Palmer (whose genial sympathetic
nature leads him to have as many
friends amongst the Asiatics as amongst
the Europeans) through a native village
and paid several morning calls at the cot-
tages. They are cleaner inside than a
passer-by would suppose, and in many
cases show the happy side of Hindoo
family life. We stopped to watch the
potter making the moulds for the common
jewellery, the women grinding at the mill,
the men working in brass, and many
other sights with which one is so familiar
from pictures, until the sun grew hot and
we were glad to seek rest and refresh-
ment in Mr. Palmer’s hospitable bun-
galow.
Not far from the gigantic Mausoleum
of Akbar, at Sikandra, is the tomb—small
by comparison, but in reality a building
of very considerable size—of his so-called
Christian wife, Miriam. We had deter-
mined to see it, partly on account of its
historical and architectural interest;
partly because we had heard that it was now
used as a printing press for an orphanage,
which had been established close by. It
was late on Saturday afternoon when we
drove inside the gates of the orphanage,
and found a merry game of cricket going
on, the reverend principal joining in as
heartily as the youngest of the lads. We
were shown the tomb by one of the boys,
and fortunately just when our investiga-
tions were completed the cricket match
was over, and we were able to introduce
ourselves to the principal (Mr. Wright)
and hear from him full details about the
orphanage. It seems to me the most


Christlike work I have come across for
a long time. We first visited the boys'
home. There are about 150 boys in all,
the lowest of the low (yet not degraded by
anyfaultof theirown); nobody’s children,
outcast and despised, whom the holy men
among the Hindoos would not touch with
the tips of their fingers. Some are sent
here by Government (who consequently
subsidise the institution), others are
picked up by the missionaries, I have
before referred to the great variety of
races in India; here one realises the
effect of it. The heavy unintellectual
countenances of many of these dark-
skinned low-caste boys (who have really
more Dravidian than Aryan blood in
their veins) seem almost as
from the refined aquiline Brahmins as a
negro is from an Arab. And Mr.
Wright informed me that few of them
show any special intellectual capacity ; he
does not attempt to give them much
literary education, but to train them as
carpenters, artisans, and laborers. Cer-
tainly it cannot be said that they are
being brought up too luxuriously ; all
the work of the institution is
done by the orphans themselves; the
food of each boy costs about a penny a
day, yet they seemed strong and healthy,
those who had been some time in the
orphanage much more so than the newer
arrivals ; and, though few of them have
ever known what a home is. one cannot
help seeing that they look brighter and
happier than the average of the boys one
meets in the villages.
Close by is a little Christian village
which has sprung up under the care
of Mr. Wright, and is peopled chiefly
by men and women who have been
trained at the orphanage. This is not
only an admirable idea from a mis-
sionary point of view (since it prevents
them from lapsing into heathenism, as


they might if removed from Christian
influence), but it is almost a necessity,
for the artisans, not belonging to the
proper castes, could obtain no employ-
ment in ordinary towns. The neat ap-
pearance of the rough cottages, and the
evident signs of happy family life, all
showed that the good practical lessons
which had been taught at the orphanage
had not been without their effect.
Mr. Wright then took us to the female
department, where 150 orphan girls are
being trained to be useful Christian wives
and mothers. Only those who know the
hopeless ignorance and consequent incom-
petence of ordinary Hindoo women can
realise what a change this involves. The
girls are brought up in as plain a manner
as the boys. Luxuries such as beds are
of course unknown. They were just be-
ginning their evening meal in the court-
yard when we arrived. We paused and
listened to them singing grace in their
soft musical language. I unwarily be-
trayed my colonial ignorance by asking
one of the ladies in charge whether the
girls were being taught to be domestic
servants 1 She smiled quietly, and re-
minded me that there are no women ser-
vants (except ayahs) in India ; but added
that all the girls were married on leaving
school.
One incident connected with the insti-
tution I must not omit. Some years ago
a party of hunters were out in the neigh-
borhood of Sikandra looking for wolves.
Finding that some had taken shelter in a
cave, they lighted a fire to smoke them
out. As the animals escaped they saw
amongst them a strange-looking creature,
evidently not a wolf, although amongst
the wolves. Having pursued and cap-
tured it, they found to their horror that
it was a boy of about 10 years of age.
His face was scratched and torn by the
wolves, who had been his companions ; he


ran on all fours, spoke no language, and
retained bub the faintest evidences of
humanity ; yet he was not beyond the
reach of Christian care and sympathy.
He was taken to the orphanage, and there
he has been fed and clothed for 15 years,
and every effort made to awaken his
intellect, but it seems to be hopelessly
gone. Strange to say, not long after his
arrival, another boy was found amongst
the wolves in very similar circumstances ;
he also was taken to the orphanage, but
died soon after. I had often heard
stories of wolf-boys before, both in
Asia, and Africa, but had always re-
garded them as fabulous; about this,
however, there seems no doubt.
I wish that the people who write and
quote sneering remarks about the mis-
sionaries could see for themselves the
work of a little community like that at
Sikandra. Mr. and Mrs. Wright are
assisted only by four ladies and a few
native workers, and yet besides having
the entire charge of the orphanage and
village the ladies take it in turn to drive
about the country in ekkas and visit the
women in their zenanas and cottages,
whilst the native teachers address the
men in the villages. lam not prejudiced in
favour of the Church Missionary Society,
in fact I have more than once actively
opposed their policy in other parts of
the world ; yet when I thought of these
refined European ladies driving about in
a bullock cart along the rough native
roads in the sweltering heat of the plains
of India in summer time, I felt that—
whether they make converts or not, as to
which I have no information—the charges
of luxury and laziness which have been
recklessly brought against the mission-
aries were answered; and that I had
seen more real religion in the orphanage
at Sikandra than in the hundred temples
of Benares.


Agra has long been a centre of mis-
sionary effort. It was here that Henry
Martyn’s solitary convert from Moham-
medanism laboured as a Christian priest
and ever since then the work has been
carried on quietly but almost unin-
terruptedly. I started out early on
Sunday morning to attend the service at
the native church connected with the
Church Missionary Society. It is not a
success architecturally, as unfortunately
it is built in the Gothic style of 40 years
ago ; but it was most interesting to be
present at a Hindustani service, attended
by a fairly large and very devout native
congregation, in which men largely pre-
dominated. The chants and hymns were
joined in heartily by all ; barbarous
though the native music is, the lan-
guage seems well adapted for this more
cultured style. The prayers were said by
an English, and the lessons read and an
extempore sermon preached by a Bengali
clergyman. After the service the Rev.
Mr. Robatham kindly took me over St.
John’s College, where he is a professor.
It has been in existence for 40 years, and
is now affiliated to the University of Cal-
cutta, The large majority of the young
men who receive their education there—
at present there are nearly 500 at the
college—remain Hindoos, but of course,
the hope is that the Christian education
they have received may be of indirect
benefit to them.
It must always be borne in mind
that statistics of missionary work
are necessarily imperfect as a record of
what has been done. The relative im-
portance of each case depends on circum-
stances which cannot be explained in a
report. For instance, for a Brahmin to
turn Christian means a great deal; it
means that he gives up all that is
hallowed in family life, all that is
pleasant in society, all that is ad van-


tageous in business ; in a word, he gives
up caste. For a low-caste man to
turn Christian means a great deal also y
it means that he gets the chance of
education and employment, and of raising
himself in the social scale in a manner
which would be impossible for him if he
were to remain a Hindoo. Thus the
value of two conversions may be totally
different. Then again, the missionaries of
some religious bodies will baptise and
label as converts men who express their
readiness to be so classed after an hour’s
conversation ; the Anglican missionaries,
I am glad to say, are amongst those who
refuse to admit any until after careful en-
quiries and a long probationary period.
Paradoxical though it sounds,' I can
already see that it may often happen that
a missionary society is doing good work
just in proportion as its report appears
unsatisfactory.
Adjoining the college is a hostel for
Christian students at the college ; at
present it has about 60 occupants. I
was shown through this by a strik-
ingly handsome, intellectual - looking
young Brahmin, who has been there for
two terms, and is now preparing for his
matriculation at the University. The
arrangements at the hostel are somewhat
Spartan, according to the ideas of a Cam-
bridge man, but comfortable according to
those of a native. This, I regret to say,
was almost all I had time to see in the
way of mission work at Agra. On Thurs-
day we left with many regrets; and six
hours’ railway travelling, still over this
interminable plain, brought us to Delhi.


DELHI.
Ulwar, 18th February, 1891.
NEVER shall forget how over-
£*■) whelmed I felt, years ago, on first
visiting Rome, and realising that I was in
the Eternal City, whose varied history
stretches over twenty-five centuries, and
who has counted the greatest men of the
world amongst her subjects. The associa-
tions seem too vast for a single mind to
comprehend ; I was almost tempted to
give up thinking in depsair, and wander
about gazing vacantly into the shop-
windows, like a typical British tourist.
And now I have much the same feelings
with regard to Delhi; for what Rome has
been to Europe, Delhi has been to India.
In one sense, indeed, Delhi is the more
oppressive of the two ; for one cannot
quite forget the names of Romulus and
Remus, Caesar, or Michael Angelo ; but
the history of Delhi seems almost a blank
to me. I must sit down and try to recall
something of it before I start out on my
rambles.
We read of the neighbourhood of
what is now called Delhi in the com-
mencement of the oldest poem that
the literature of India contains the
Mahabarata, Here was the small tract
of land to which the five brothers of
that famous narrative laid their claim,
which resulted in a bitter civil war
and the first battle of Panipat. What-


ever doubt there may be as to the
date of the completion of the poem and
the truth of some of its details, Orientalists
generally agree that in its main outline it
is historical, and that the events recorded
took place here some time about the
fifteenth century B.C.—probably just
about the time when the children of Israel
were escaping from the land of Egypt.
The history of the Aryan period is a
wilderness too vast and tangled for an
ordinary traveller to venture to
penetrate. Battle follows battle,
and dynasty after dynasty arises,
flourishes, and passes away, leaving
hardly a trace behind. Here and there
we find a stray landmark —such as the
ruins of the city of the Sakas, which was
destroyed in the century before the
Christian era, or the famous Iron Pillar
(to which I shall refer again later), which
was set up on the site of the same town
400 years afterwards ; but they are few
and far between.
The real living interest commences
with the invasions of the Moham-
medans from beyond the mountains of
the North West. Theirs was no rapid
triumphal progress, like the march of
their co-religionists through the effete
provinces of the Roman Empire or the
distracted kingdom of Spain ; but a series
of long, tedious campaigns, during which
they were opposed at every point by
powerful Hindoo kingdoms which, though
crushed at length by the genius and
organisation of the Pathans and Moguls,
were destined centuries after to rise
up once more and re-establish them-
selves on the ruins. of the Mohammedan
Empire.
The first successful encroachment of
the Mohammedans into India was under
the Ghuznee dynasty in the year 1000 —
almost exactly contemporaneously with
the first great shock which the Arab


power in Spain received by the loss of
Toledo and Valencia. But although the
intrepid Mahmoud penetrated as far as
Somnath, his expeditions in the south
were but the raids of a knight errant;
the permanent Indian kingdom which he
founded did not extend beyond the
Punjab. There his successors reigned
securely as far as foreign enemies were con-
cerned ; but the turbulent nature of their
Afghan subjects was as great a thorn in the
side of the rulers then as it is to-day.
In 1186 Muhammed of Ghor not
only rebelled against and overthrew the
Ghuznee dynasty, but determined to
enlarge the borders of his kingdom.
If the legend be true here, as in
Yisigothic Spain, the petty dissen-
sions between local princes led to
the fatal policy of calling in the aid of the
foreigners. Be that as it may, it is at
least certain that after a severe campaign
Muhammed was victorious, and since
then Delhi has never known a native
ruler. Muhammed may be considered
as the founder of the Pathan Empire of
India. The native raj puts, after a
vigorous but unsuccessful defence of the
country, fled to the hills, and there
in the mountain fastnesses formed those
principalities which to this day maintain
their independence.
Muhammed was succeeded by his
viceroy, Kutab-ud-din, who had risen
from the condition of a slave, and
was the founder of the third or
Slave dynasty, and the introducer of
the first Pathan style of architecture.
Again I must refer to Spain for a
parallel. Just as the Arab builders at
Seville, working under the directions
of their Christian masters, produced the
Mudejar style, in which the rich
ornamentation of Granada seems blended
with the simplicity of the early Gothic,
so in the buildings of this period near


Delhi we find the most elaborate Hindoo
work introduced into buildings which are
essentially Arab in their general concep-
tion.
There were three dangers to which
the monarchs of the Slave dynasty were
specially exposed revolts by the Vice-
roys of provinces, revolts by the Hindoos,
and invasions by the Moghuls. Yet it
was a period of much splendor. Under
the greatest of the dynasty, Altamsh, the
empire of Delhi was formally recognised
as a separate Mohammedan kingdom by
the Khalif of Baghdad in 1229. The
forests to the south of the capital were
cut down, and the Rajput clansmen, de-
prived of their shelter, were driven back
to the mountains.
But the Slave dynasty fell through
its own weakness in 1290, and was
succeeded by Jalal-ud-din, the ruler
of Khilji, one of the ablest and most
diabolical of all the princes who have ever
sat on the throne of Delhi. He murdered
his uncle and his nephews, imprisoned his
sons, and betrayed his friends ; by his
orders 15,000 Moghuls who had settled at
Delhi were butchered in cold blood and
their families sold into slavery ; the
Hindoos were cruelly oppressed and their
temples ruthlessly destroyed ; but on the
other hand he extended the power of the
Empire of Delhi over Southern India.
But perhaps the most terrible period
which the unfortunate city has ever
known was the era of the house of
Tughlak, the fifth Mohammedan dynasty,
which lasted from 1320 to 1414. The
first of this race, Ghizas-ud-din, was pro-
claimed king in the palace of Siri (which
had been built by Jalal-ud-din) whilst a
rival Hindoo prince was actually ruling in
the city itself three miles off; he im-
mediately built a new capital close
to his palace and called it
Tughlakabad, He was murdered,


and succeeded by bis son, Muhammed,
a man who possessed all the villainy but
none of the talent of Jalal-ud-din.
Famine —brought on partly by his reck-
less misgovernment —decimated Delhi;
harmless villagers were hunted and
slaughtered like wild beasts to afford
sport for the Emperor ; the whole popu-
lation of the city of Kanauj were massa-
cred ; province after province broke into
open rebellion. The only ray of sunlight
through all this dark period of misery was
the reign of Firuz, son of Muhammed,
under whom a few canals and hospitals
were constructed, and some efforts were
made to alleviate the sufferings of the
wretched nation. Once again the city of
Delhi was moved, this time the new town
being named Firuzabad. Here we find a
new variety of architecture —the second
Pathan style ; discarding the elaboration
which the Hindoos had loved, it is
characterised by the sterner boldness of
the northern race.
It was during the last reign of this
dynasty that the hordes of Tamerlane
swept through Delhi. For five days
that terrible massacre raged until the
streets were blocked by the heaps of the
slain. The savages only desisted at last
in order to march on and enjoy the plea-
sures of fresh butchei’ies at Meerut.
With the fall of the house of Tughlak
in 1414 the Pathan empire practically
ends. Another dynasty —the Sayyids—
arose, it is true, to bear the Imperial
title ; but they were to their predecessors
what the contemptible little Empire of
Constantinople was to the old Empire of
the East; independent princes, both
Hindoo and Mussulman, established
themselves within a few miles of the
capital. They were in their turn suc-
ceeded by the Afghan house of Lodi, who
are of interest to the antiquarian only be-
cause it was under them that the third


and last variety of Pathan architecture
arose—the decorated order.
When we come to the eighth Moham-
medan dynasty—that of the Moghuls—
we seem treading once again on familiar
ground. They are the same monarchs as
those whose palaces and tombs we had
already seen at Agra. The present city
of Delhi dates only from the time of Shah
Jahan, who rebuilt it on a fresh site and
sought to name it Shahjahanabad, but his
efforts failed. It still is and will be for
ever known by the old name of Delhi. It
was here that the feeble successors of
Aurangzib held their court in decaying
splendor, until the last of the miserable
puppets was dragged from his hiding
place in 1857 to be deposed and exiled.^
It is necessary to go through this some-
what wearisome enumeration of the great
dynasties who have held sway here in
order to appreciate the interest of this
Eternal City or to understand the various
excursions which we made during our too
brief sojourn. The morning after our
arrival we started early for a delightful
drive through the historic ruins of the
old cities. Soon after leaving the
gates (the modern city is enclosed by
a splendid wall of red sandstone, like
that round the fort at Agra) we passed by
the Prastha, the field for which the Five
Brothers fought thirty-three centuries
ago, and came next to the ruins of Firuza-
bad, once a city of 150,000 inhabitants.
Now, in the confused mass of masonry, it
is almost impossible to trace the outlines
of the different buildings or to discern
anything of the beauties of the Second
Pathan order of architecture, in which it
was constructed; but high above the
ruined pile that was once the palace rises
a single pillar, which exceeds in interest
all the rest of the city of Firuz. It was in
the third century before the Christian era
—just about the time when Ptolemy of


Egypt was directing the translation of the
Old Testament into Greek —that Asoka,
King of Behar, became a convert to
Buddhism. What Constantine did
for Christianity Asoka did for the
faith of Gautama. No doubt many
of the anecdotes which have gathered
round his name are the poetic inventions
of a later age—just as we see the startling
difference between the Constantine of
history and the St. Constantine of the
legends ; but we know that he summoned
the third Buddhist Council at Patna in
the year 244 b.c., which was attended by
1,000 learned men. By that reforming
body the corruptions that had grown up
during the three centuries which had
elapsed since the days of Gautama were
swept aside. The Buddhism of Southern
Asia practically dates from the Council of
Asoka. Its canons were summed up in
14 edicts, which include such matters as
the prohibition of the slaughter of animals,
the appointment of missionaries, and the
inculcation of the doctrine that true happi-
ness is to be found in virtue. These edicts
of Asoka were engraved on rocks, in
caves, on pillars, so that they might be
known by all the faithful; no doubt they
were at one time to be seen on the great
Tope of Sarnath. Of the pillars but
11 now remain; they have been
treated by later Indian monarchs
in much the same way that the
Egyptian obelisks have by European
sovereigns—removed from their proper
positions and set up in palaces and cities
as mere meaningless ornaments. An
Egyptian obelisk disfigured with an iron
cross and stuck into a narrow street at
Rome does not look more ridiculously out
of place than one of these Buddhist
columns in the midst of a Mohammedan
palace. Yet the laborious care with
which Firuz rooted this pillar from its
place, floated it down the river, and re-


erected it here can only be compared with
that which was expended in transporting
Cleopatra’s needle to the Thames Embank-
ment.
Hardly had we left Firuzabad before
we found ourselves in the ruins of another
city of a very different period—the capital
of Humayun and of the usurping kings
who drove him into exile and for a time
occupied his throne. We glanced (only
too hurriedly) at the mosque, the chief
interest of which consists in its
being one of the finest extant ex-
amples of the Third Pathan style, and
having been the building in which
Humayun worshipped ; close by is the
great mausoleum of that emperor. Had
I seen this a fortnight ago, I should have
gone into raptures over its majestic
marble dome, which rises to a height of
70 ft. above the ground ; but after the
Taj no other building in the world can
satisfy. I look upon it now merely as
the precursor of that perfect structure ;
it is interesting to trace the first com-
mencement of the bulbous shape of the
dome, and to observe in how many points
the builders of the Taj took their ideas
from here ; and then from the roof of the
building to look across to the tomb of
Sufdar Jang in the distance, which was
built in the middle of the last century
and marks the final decay of the style—
for I refuse to reckon the still later mon-
strosities which I saw at Lucknow as be-
longing to any school of art at all. It
was in the tomb of Humayun that tha
titular emperor took shelter after the
failure of the mutiny ; in front of it his
two sons were shot by Captain Hodson.
Passing by exquisitely-carved marble
tombs and quaint old mosques without
end, and glancing at the tomb of the great
Firuz, we paused a moment near the
ruins of Siri, the splendid capital of
Jalal-ud-din, the Delhi which was sacked


•by the brutal Tamerlane. There is but
little to see there, its very ruins having
been carted away as materials for other
buildings. Sic transit gloria mundi.
At length we reached the great object
of our excursion—the Kutab Minar, a
pillar of marvellous beauty, commenced by
the monarch from whom it takes its name
and continued by Altamsh, but not com-
pleted until the time of Firuz. It rises
sheer from the ground to a height of
238 ft. It was built as a minaret, but of
course rather as a triumph of architec-
tural skill than for purposes of utility,
since even the most stentorian voice from
such an altitude would be almost in-
audible, It tapers gradually from base
to summit and is divided into five
storeys by balconies, each storey
being differently ornamented, the three
lower ones—the work of Kutab and
Altamsh —being richly fluted after the
manner of the First Pathan order ; the
fourth (which was added by Firuz) being,
as might be expected, severe in its sim-
plicity. With the exception of this in-
congruity and the absence of a final
cupola on the top (which has never been
completed) the ornamentation, proportion,
and situation all seem perfect. From the
summit the view over the boundless plain,
dotted here and there with the tombs of
princes and the ruins of cities—from
Tughlakilbad right round to the modern
Delhi—is magnificent.
Close to the Kutab rises the little iron
pillar to which I have before referred. It
bears an inscription which shows it to
have been erected by a rajah in the
fourth century of our era. I use the term
“ iron” for convenience ; but in reality it
must be of some very remarkable com-
pound of metals, as it has stood here for
1,500 years, and yet shows no sign of rust
or decay.
Immediately around are the ruins of what


must have been one of the most glorious
mosques in the world. Like its sister at
Cordova, it is constructed with pillars
seized from heathen temples, but the
pillars here are decorated with the ex-
quisite richness of Hindoo work, and the
lofty arches of the gateways are far more
noble than those in the Western building.
It is curious to notice that the Hindoo
builders employed (I think I have already
mentioned that this is in the First Pathan
style) were ignorant of the true construc-
tion of an arch. The apparent archways
are merely apertures cut into the shape
of Saracenic archways, but without any
real keystones. However, they had the
excuse of want of knowledge ; it was not
simply a case of depraved taste like'that
miserable sham the Albert Memorial, in
Kensington Gardens.
We wandered long through the beau-
tiful cloisters, examining the elaborate
carving of the pillars (some of which
have been sadly mutilated by later icono-
clasts) and looking at the tombs close
by : and with many regrets tore ourselves
away in the afternoon for our drive back
to Delhi. But the day was not yet done.
There was still time to visit the Jama
Musjid—the Great Mosque-—and see the
sunset from the summit of one of its
minarets. It is, indeed, a cathedral ; the
whole building, including the courtyard,
stands on an eminence in the middle of
the city, close to the busy crowded
marketplace, and yet raised above it. It
is, of course, on the same plan as the
other mosques I have seen and described ;
but even after examining them one cannot
but be struck by its majestic size and
noble proportions. Its date is almost
exactly the same as that of the Taj ; but
it differs greatly from it, especially in the
use of sandstone and black marble.
The next morning we paid a visit
to the fort, the remains of the once


matchless Palace of the Moghul Em-
perors ; more splendid, it is said, than
anything which Agra could show,
I have seen the damage which
Charles V. did to the Palace at
Granada and the theatre at Syracuse ; I
know only too well the ruthless vandalism
of the French military engineers at Tlem-
ijen and Constantine (which has earned
for them the soubriquet of “ Le mauvais
genie d’Afrique”); butbothsink into insig-
nificance beside the outrageous conduct
of our fellow-countrymen in the Fort of
Delhi. The greater part of the palace has
been absolutely destroyed to make room
for some hideous barracks. Still, I can
stand in the great marble reception-hall of
Shah Jahan, once thronged with a crowd
of nobles and ambassadors ; I can wander
through the exquisitely inlaid chambers
of the palace and fancy them peopled again
by the gay court of the Emperor ; I can
see in the hall of special audience the
spot where stood the world-famed Peacock
Throne, and trace on the walls the oft-
quoted inscription, “If there be a Para-
dise upon earth it is here, it is here, it
is here.” Quite true, architecturally ;
historically, hell would be a more correct
expression.
Must I confess that in the little marble
structure called the Pearl Mosque I was
somewhat disappointed 1 Good critics
pronounce it to be the loveliest thing in
India and I fully admit that it is a gem
of architecture ; but it was built by
Aurangzib ; and as I cannot help compar-
ing it with its namesake at Agra it seems
to me that the style is just a little too
late; it lacks the exquisite simplicity
which forms the chief grace of the earlier
building ; the domes are too ornate, the
minarets too florid.
From these halls, which have witnessed
scenes of the greatest splendour that man
has conceived, a few minutes’ drive takes


me to the little mosque of Roshun-ud-
dowlah, where the descendant of Akbar,
a prisoner in the train of the Persian in-
vader Nadir Shah, after being forced to
witness the cold-blooded massacre of
12,000 of his subjects in the streets of
Delhi, had to go down on his knees before
the conqueror and with tears in his eyes
pray him to spare the remnant of the
doomed city.
Two mornings later I started out once
more for a visit to another of the his-
torical sites of Delhi —the ridge from
which the gallant attack was made by
General Nicholson and a small British
force on the 14th of September, 1857,
when the Cashmere gate was stormed and
the vast city—which had, 50 years before,
been besieged in vain by Holkar with a
force of 20,000 soldiers and a hundred
pieces of artillery—recaptured from the
mutineers. A lofty Gothic monument
now stands on the spot where one of the
batteries was placed ; but the true
memorial is the shattered gateway and
the record which eye-witnesses have
narrated of the deeds of the heroes who
fell that day.
There are no Hindoo temples of any
interest at Delhi. It must be remem-
bered that Hindooism was a persecuted
religion when the present city was
built and has never since been dominant,
I went, however, to see the beautiful
little temple belonging to the Jains—that
strange religion, half way between Budd-
hism and Hindooism, which has lived on
quietly whilst all the other faiths of India
have grown up round it. The marble
carvings are very fine, but the building as
a whole is not so characteristic as I had
expected ; the architect has evidently
taken a mosque as his model and merely
adapted it by turning the part beneath
the domes into shrines, and filling it with
idols and images. Many of these seemed


mere reproductions of the statues of
Buddha which I had seen in Ceylon.
But Delhi, even apart from its history
and its temples, had a special interest to
me. It has long been a centre for mis-
sionary work, under the charge of the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel.
Many of my friends at Adelaide will re-
member the name of the Rev. Mr. Mait-
land, who is one of the missionaries who
labour there and who went to Australia
last winter for rest and change. In 1877
two special missions to India were inau-
gurated by graduates of the great English
universities. Oxford selected Calcutta as
its field ; the Cambridge brethren went to
Delhi. Amongst these was my old friend
Mr. Allnutt, whom I had not had the
pleasure of seeing since we were under-
graduates together long years ago. How
pleasant are these revivals of the friend-
ships of youth. He is a man of ability
and energy and is now a fellow of the
University of the Punjaub, being a ripe
Oriental scholar as well as a zealous
missionary. The brethren undertake
various forms of missionary work,
both evangelical and educational —
the special character of their mission
being that it is addressed, primarily
though not exclusively, to the educated
classes, all the brethren being men of
high culture and training. Mr. Lefroy,
the superior, chiefly confines himself to
the office of preaching. I heard him
preach in church on a Sunday evening,
and although he very rarely preaches or
delivers an address in English (his work
lying entirely among the natives), yet his
eloquence was so remarkable that it was
no surprise to me to learn afterwards
that he is considered the ablest bazar
preacher and debater in India. Not long
ago, when he had been addressing a
crowd, a Mohammedan moulwi, who
happened to be amongst them, asked him


to come and discuss the same points in
public in one of the largest mosques of
the city. He gladly accepted the invita-
tion and since then has been lecturing
and discussing every Wednesday
evening, sometimes in the court
of the mosque, sometimes in the
public gardens, his audience often
numbering upwards of a thousand. Mr.
Allnutt has the management of St.
Stephen’s College, in which young men
are trained so as to be able to take their
degrees at the University of the Punjaub
(there are ac present nearly 50 men at the
college), a school for 750 boys, and a
hostel and boardinghouse for students
and boys, besides editing a fortnightly
newspaper. Other brethren visit in the
towns and villages in the neighbourhood,
or take part in the training of teachers
for lower-caste schools, &c. They aim at
no sensational results ; in fact, one of the
most pleasing features, to my mind, of
their work is the calm common sense
with which it is conducted ; theirs is a
zeal according to knowledge. It may, I
think, be taken as an evidence of the
solidity of their work that the non-
Christian students of the college have,
unsolicited, subscribed liberally to the
building fund of the new college—a
work which is sorely needed, as every hole
and corner in the house they occupy at
present is overcrowded.
It seems strange to our ideas, but it is
nevertheless true, that it is necessary to
teach these Indian boys to play as well as
to study. An important part of the school
work of the missionaries is the organisa-
tion of cricket clubs and manly amuse-
ments.
The Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel have also a staff of ladies who are
actively engaged in zenana work, amongst
these being a lady from Adelaide—the


daughter of Mr. E. Cooke, Commissioner
of Audit.
I have had some experience of the
persistency of the Orientals in matters
of trading and bargaining in the
bazars of Tunis and Damascus; but
Greeks and Arabs are simply nowhere as
compared with the merchants of Delhi.
I used to have to barricade my bedroom
windows in the early morning for fear of
an invasion of rival dealers bearing
bundles of silks and embroidery ; if there
had been a chimney I verily believe they
would have come down it ; and when at
last I ventured to make a sally from my
citadel it was impossible to reach the
carriage at the door of the hotel without
running the gauntlet of a perfect army.
Even the carriage afforded no real se-
curity ; I usually drove down the street
with three shopkeepers on each step, all
jabbering at the same time and urging
me to tell the coachman to drive straight
to their stores. Others took carriages and
pursued me into the country in the hope
of victimising me whilst examining a
ruin or sitting down at a picnic ; when
I was at the Kutab it was only by climbing
to the very top of the pillar that I secured
a moment’s peace. The only way to take
a walk through the town in safety was to
go with my two travelling companions,
taking care to place myself between them ;
then when the attacks were made on the
right and left flanks the centre of the party
might be comparatively secure. When I
returned home in the evening I used to
find the floor of my room piled breast
high with shawls, silks, and rolls of
embroidery. To explain that I did not
want them and had no money to pay for
them if I did was utterly useless ; they
checkmated me by announcing themselves
ready to give unlimited credit or accept
cheques on any Australian banker. The
only thing to do was to tell them that


their goods were exactly the things that
my friends in the adjoining apartment
were looking for, and having thus got
them out of the room to bolt the door
behind them.
Still, in the face of such persecution
there are two defences. The first is the
love of opposition that marks the Anglo-
Saxon nature ; the second, the thought
that before a single purchase is made a
good solid hour must be wasted in bar-
gaining. There is a moment, however,
when even these cease to aid. That
moment is when one enters the shop of
Mr. Tellery, the greatest curio merchant
at Delhi. Jf he followed me about and
pressed me to buy I should steadily
refuse, but when he merely stands at the
door, bows politely, remarks that all the
things are marked in plain figures, and
that he is at hand should any information
be required, and I find myself surrounded
by exquisite carvings in wood, ivory, and
metal, by marble work from Jeypore,
alabaster from Agra, brass from Benares,
copper from Cashmere, and tiles from
Teheran, not to speak of Delhi em-
broidery and curiosities from every part
of India, human nature can resist no
longer. I left that shop a ruined man,
the only consolation being that all my
friends did the same.


ULWAR.
Jeypoke, February 21, 1891.
SO far I have given an account of my
wanderings through British India.
But, pleasant though they were, my tour
would not have been complete without a
visit to one of the native States. Fortu-
nately for me I had. received an invitation
to Ulwar, a State which lies in one of the
most interesting districts of the whole
country—the mountains of Rajputana,
the home of the legends, the chivalry, and
the romance of India. What the moun-
tains of Switzerland and Central Ger-
many were to the mediaeval empire; what
the fastnesses of Montenegro and the
Morea have been to the Turkish power;
this wild tract has been to the rulers of
Delhi, both Pathan and Moghul. In the
history of Rajputana we seem to be read-
ing the history of the Middle Ages in
Europe over again. Here as there we
find robber chiefs in the mountains
owning a nominal allegiance and
paying an occasional tribute to the
sovereigns of the great cities of the
plains, yet now and then sweeping down
to sack the capitals of the monarchs they
pretended to serve. We can trace the
rise of a regular feudal system, as the
emperors attempted to secure the loyalty
of the native princes by granting to them
lands to hold as fiefs of the empire. We


can watch the struggle between the great
feudatories and their under lords, who
were continually seeking to shake off the
power of their immediate masters and
hold their lands as tenants-in-chief of the
Crown ; and then, as the central authority
of the empire itself falls into decay,
we see one after another renouncing his
allegiance and claiming the dignity of an
independent sovereign. And here, as in
south-eastern Europe, it has been the
decay of the Mohammedan power which
has led to the resuscitation of smaller
principalities, which in the security of
their mountain homes had retained the
faith of their fathers, scorning alike all
attempts at bribery or persecution.
Of course the history of Ulwar is
closely interwoven with that of Delhi,
from which city the nearest point of the
present State is separated only by a dis-
tance of 35 miles. At every turn we are
reminded of the poetic legends of the
Marabharata. Virata, the hiding-place
of the five brothers during their time of
exile, is still shown in the mountains of
the west; to this day the peasants love
to point out the cave in which Bhima
dwelt, and the fountain which sprang
miraculously from the earth in obedience
to the call of Arjuna, that he might bathe
in sacred waters before arming himself
for the battle. It was by the aid of an
army of these hardy mountaineers (who
proudly call themselves the “ Children of
the Sun”) that the brothers were able to
win back their kingdom near Delhi.
Manu rightly describes the men of Virata
as “ heroes lit to take the lead in battle.”
Of the country during the Buddhist
period we know but little. One of the
many stones which were engraved with
the edicts of Asoka has been found near
the city of Ulwar, but when Hwen
Thsang, the Chinese pilgrim to whom I
have before referred, visited the home of


the Rajputs in the seventh century of our
era Brahminism was once more in the
ascendant.
The Rajputs—as ardent in their devo-
tion to Hindooism as in their love of war-
defended their country with heroic
patriotism against the invading armies of
the Mussulmans. In vain did Mahmoud
of Ghuznee seek to subdue the fortresses
of Ulwar. Again and again during the
long centuries of struggles between the
Rajputs and the Pathans did the garrisons
of the mountain towns choose death
rather than submission ; and throughout
that period, although the independence of
the Rajputs was at times in abeyance, it
can never be said to have been crushed.
Driven from Delhi they established them-
selves securely at Mewat, now the
northern district of the State of Ulwar,
and there, protected by the dense forests
which then covered that part of the
country, they kept the Imperial city in
such perpetual terror that the gates had to
be closed each afternoon after the hour of
prayer. It was not until the end of the 13th
century that their power was finally
broken, when the Emperor Balban cut
down the forests which had given them
shelter and put 100,000 to the sword.
Still their brethren in the mountains re-
mained undaunted ; and during the feeble
reigns of Bal ban’s successors they swept
down upon the plains once more, pene-
trating even as far as the city itself. But
the generalship of the great Babar suc-
ceeded where that of the Pathans had
failed ; the flower of the Rajput forces
were slain on the fatal field of Fatephur
Sikri. Even the bold Rajah of Ulwar had
to bow his neck to the yoke of the
foreigner and deliver up his capital to
a viceroy from the Emperor. But if it
be true that a nation has never really lost
its freedom whilst its spirit remains un-
tamed, not even then was this heroic race


conquered ; under the persecutions
which here, as elsewhere, have tar-
nished the glory of the conquests of
Islam, the nobles of Ulwar preferred
martyrdom to apostasy from the faith of
their fathers. They were only won over
by the more insidious policy of forming
matrimonial alliances between them and
the favorites of the Imperial house.
During the period of Moghul splendour
we find Ulwar at one time annexed to
the great fief of Jeypore, at another
governed by the Emperor himself. In
the anarchy that followed the decay of
the house of Akbar the country was
overrun by wild hordes of Jats—a strange
race of Scythian origin who had come
from the Bactrian mountains. But, so
far as any order was maintained in those
wild unsettled times, Ulwar was incor-
porated with the semi-independent
principality of Jeypore. In the middle
of the last century arose that remarkable
man, Pratap Singh, the founder of the
modern State of Ulwar. He was the Lord
of Macheri, a military fief of Jeypore ;
and, waxing bold, claimed to rank equally
with Chomee, the chief noble of J eypore.
Questions of precedence may form as
fertile a source of dispute in the moun-
tains of Rajputana as they did in the
ecclesiastical synods of England in the
time of King John, or as they have done
at a later date in secular gatherings in
another country which I could name
further south. In this case, however, a
compromise rational and worthy of
imitation—was at length arrived at; the
two nobles agreed never to appear at court
together ! All might have gone smoothly
had not a strange rumour reached the ears
of the sovereign of Jeypore to the effect
that an astrologer had predicted that
Pratap Singh would attain to the rank of
king. He immediately drove him into
exile. Pratap took refuge at the court of


the Maharajah of Bhurtpore. Having,
however, aided his former master in a
battle against the Jats, he was recalled,
restored to favour, reinstated in his fief of
Macheri, and rewarded with the title of
Rajah. Not content with this, however,
the ambitious Pratap sought to make him-
self independent of Jeypore. Ere long
an opportunity offered itself. A fitful
gleam of prosperity was just then light-
ing up the fallen fortunes of the house of
Akbar. The Imperial general had re-
conquered Agra, Ulwar, and some other
strongholds from the Jats, and placed
garrisons in them, but he was unable to
procure from the empty Treasury at
Delhi even the necessary funds for the
pay of the soldiers. As a last resource he
offered to grant Ulwar to anyone who
would provide for the arrears due to the
garrison, Pratap Singh at once came
forward with the necessary sum, took
possession of the fort, was raised to the
rank of Rao Rajah by the Emperor, and
allowed to hold Macheri as a fief direct
from the Crown. The local magnates
acknowledged him as their feudal lord ;
and during his long reign his territory
was continually being increased at the
expense sometimes of the country of the
Jats, sometimes of Jeypore.
The able and astute Pratap Singh had
“no son to raise his hope.” But, anxious
to make the best provision in hia power
for the succession to the throne which he
had created, not long before his death
(which occurred in 1791) he called to-
gether all the boys who were in any way
related to him and made them presents
of toys, allowing them to choose what-
ever they pleased. One of them —a lad
named Bakhtawar Singh selected a
shield and sword ; the old warrior at
once named him as his heir. The result,
however, was not happy ; the new ruler
was discreet enough to side with the then


-rising power of England, but as an ad-
ministrator he was a failure. At one
time he cruelly oppressed his Moham-
medan subjects; at another he offered
the Faqirs the choice of performing
miracles or having their noses cut off.
At length his eccentricities increased to
such an extent that it was evident that
his mind was deranged ; in 1815 he died,
a hopeless lunatic. A beautiful cenotaph
in the palace at Ulwar marks the spot
where his body was burnt and his widow
immolated herself on the funeral pyre.
The second ruler of Ulwar, like his pre-
decessor, left no male issue. He was
succeeded by his nephew and adopted
son, Banni Singh, a powerful though
cruel ruler, and an enthusiastic patron of
art and literature. Following the policy
of Bakhta war, he remained a firm friend
to the English, Almost the last act of
his life was to dispatch a force in aid of
the English garrison at Agra during the
mutiny.
For the only time in the history of
Ulwar a ruler was succeeded by his son.
Sheodan Singh was a boy of 12 at the time
of his father’s death. For some time the
government was administered partly from
Delhi, partly by English nominees ; but
this was found unsatisfactory, and a
regular council was appointed,
Sheodan Singh died childless without
having named a successor. Amongst the
many°clairaants the British Government
selected two and of these the Turqars (or
nobles) chose one. The subject of their
choice —his present Highness Lieutenant-
Colonel Sir Sawai Mangal Singh Bahadur,
G.C.S.l.—who was born in 1859, for-
mally took his seat on the cushion of
State in 1874, but then went to complete
his eduction at the Mayo College at
Ajmere. He attained his in
1877, and since then has devoted him-
self earnestly to the administration of the


government of his rich and interesting
country. And certainly his position is a
noble one. Of course matters connected
with foreign affairs are in the hands of
the British Government as suzerain ; but
as far as the internal management
of the country is concerned his
Highness is an absolute ruler. He
has power of life and death over
his subjects, and the appointment to
all offices; he fixes the taxes and pro-
vides for their collection. Should occa-
sion require, the British resident might
interfere, as British residents have un-
fortunately been obliged to do in some
other native States. Here, however,
under the wise and enlightened rule of his
Highness, assisted by a council of four (of
whom two are Hindoos and two Mohamme-
dans) the people are peaceful, prosperous,
and contented. The territory of Ulwar
consists of upwards of 3,000 square miles,
possessing a population of about 700,000,
of whom 531,100 are Hindoos and 151,727
Mohammedans. It thus, in area and
population, about equals the Grand Duchy
of Hesse. The capital is almost in the
centre of the State. It is a rich country,
containing (besides its agricultural wealth)
mines of iron and quarries of marble ;
copper, silver, and lead are also found in
the hills.
But Ulwar is not only a land of
warriors, it has also, like most Eastern
countries, produced men of thought
and literary ability. Amongst these
may be mentioned the great Bhar-
trihari. He lived at Siriska, in the
southern part of the State, many cen-
turies ago, probably about the time of the
Christian era. The story of his life is
touching. On one occasion when he was
absent from home the news was brought
to him that his wife had been unfaithful.
In order to test the truth of the report
he dipped his cloak in the blood of an


antelope and had it sent to her with a
story that he had been killed. All too
late he learnt the truth. When he
reached home he found that the tale had
been a base calumny, and the unhappy
woman, believing that her husband was
indeed dead, had committed suicide. He
then retired from the world and spent
the rest of his days in seclusion, devoting
himself to poetry and meditation.
Amongst many gems the following may
be taken as specimens of his style :
Knowledge is man’s highest beauty.
Knowledge is hidden treasure,
Chief of earthly blessings, bringing
Calm contentment, fame, and pleasure ;
Friends in foreign lands procuring,
Love of mighty princes earning;
Man is but a beast without it;
■Such a glorious god is learning.
The man of firm and constant soul
Who, naught possessing, naught desires;
Nor burns with passion’s raging fires
Finds happiness from pole to pole.
Probably most of my friends in Ade-
laide will recollect the visit which the
Maharajah of Ulwar paid to Australia,
and the scant courtesy with which
he was received on his first arrival
there. Fortunately before he left one
of our present party returned to South
Australia in time to secure for him there
and in the other colonies some considera-
tion more suitable to the rank of his High-
ness and to the debt of gratitude which
the British Government owes to the
rulers of Ulwar for the loyal services
they have rendered at more than one
critical moment during our rule in India.
Soon after we landed at Calcutta his
Highness, with truly Oriental hospitality,
sent an invitation which included our
whole party. At the time we were to
arrive the Maharajah was “in camp;’'
that is to say, he was travelling about in-
specting the outlying parts of the country;


but in order to be at home to receive us
he rode back 40 miles on a camel. Our
journey to Delhi, which took five hours,
was pleasant, for although some of the
country we passed through was desert it
was a relief to be away from the endless
plain and see hills once more. His High-
ness met us at the station and drove us to
the house of Dr. Faulkner, the medical
adviser to the residency, where rooms had
been prepared.
The city of Ulwar (which contains about
40,000 souls) is charmingly situated at
the foot of the hills ; on three sides it is
protected by massive walls, on the fourth
by the almost as perpendicular side of the
mountain and a strong fort which crowns
it. We drove through the suburbs—past
a beautiful country retreat of the Mahara-
jah’s, which stands in shady gardens and
groves of trees ; past the house and orna-
mental grounds of the residency; and
arrived at Dr. Faulkner’s, where we were
received by his pleasant and cultivated
wife.
The next morning we started early,
as his Highness had kindly arranged
to have a parade 6f the troops. The
Ulwar army consists of 1,000 cavalry
and an equal number of infantry ; they
are what are called “Imperial Service
Troops.” In 1888, when money was re-
quired for the defence of the north-west
frontier, splendid contributions were
voluntarily offered to the Imperial Govern-
ment by various native States, of which
Ulwar was one. The offer was declined ;
but the movement led to the formation of
a native army which can, in time of need,
be available for purposes of common
defence. The Maharajah’s soldiers are
all fine strong, athletic-looking fellows ;
in their gray karki uniforms they re-
minded me of the Mounted Infantry of
South Australia. Their drill and general
appearance is perfect. They marched


past, bearing two banners —the Queen’s
colours and the national flag of Ulwar—
the five stripes. According to the heraldic
symbolism of the old Empire of Delhi
four stripes represent a perfect man, a
man complete in every quarter. The
fifth stripe symbolises a noble (a Sawai),
who is one-fourth better than an ordinary
man. The title was formally granted to
the Prince of Jeypore, and the Jeypore
banner was adopted by the Rajah of
Ulwar when he had been elevated to the
rank of a great feudatory of the empire.
After the parade the Maharajah took
us to see his stables. He is pas-
sionately fond of horses and no
better judge of them could be found
even in Australia. In the cavalry stables
we saw 200 mares, many of them
being of the best breeds from England
and Arabia. He also showed us a bull
fight; not a brutal exhibition like those
of Spain, but more amusing. Two huge
buffaloes were led out into the yard and
placed opposite to one another. For a
moment each glared at his rival and then
rushed forward with a bound, the bang of
the two skulls when they came together
sounding like a report of artillery. How it
was that both their heads werenotsmashed
in I cannot conceive. Again and again,
they were drawn off by the attendants,
who kept them in perfect command by
ropes from their nostrils and legs, and
again and again did they return to the
charge. “Yet neither seemed seriously
hurt; as soon as they were getting tired
out they were led back to the stables. We
also witnessed a similar encounter between
two splendid rams, and then went to see
the elephants, cheetahs, lynxes, hawks,
and falcons. The Maharajah, like his
ancestors, is an ardent sportsman and has
shot more than 170 tigers with his own
hand.
Ulwar is a regular Indian city ; it is four-


square and divided into quarters by two
main streets, a fine archway marking
their point of intersection in the centre
of the town. A similar arrangement in
a certain city elsewhere will suggest itself
to my Adelaide readers, yet Ulwar
has not borrowed the idea from
Colonel Light; it is recommended
in the Shastras, a Hindoo work at least
2,000 years old. Can it be that Colonel
Light, who had served in India under
the Company, drew his inspiration from
what he had seen there, and that thus
the laying out of Adelaide was indirectly
a following of the commands of the
Shastras ? The water supply of the city
is admirable, the energetic Banni Singh
having constructed a large artificial lake
in the hills some miles away. The
houses along the two principal streets
are protected by a verandah of corrugated
iron, but I did not possess sufficient Aus-
tralian patriotism to go into raptures at
the familiar sight.
The palace is a magnificent building
of white marble ; the style is peculiar ;
it is, if I may sc express it, in the
Chirugaresque —the Rococo —of Hindu-
stani art. I could not find out the
date of its construction, but I feel
sure that it must be much later
than anything I had seen in other
Indian palaces. A curious effect is
given by the projecting dripstones over
the windows ; they are curved and
pointed like crescents with the convex
side upwards. These are technically
called chajjas, and are characteristic of
Rajputana art. Fergusson suggests that
this form of vault is in imitation of a
Bengal country boat. As he only throws
it out as a suggestion, not speaking de-
cidedly, my boldness may perhaps be par-
doned if I venture to offer another con-
jecture which has occurred to me as more
probable. This building seems to belong


to a stage of thought in which architects
do not borrow ideas from rude boats, but
from the elaborate works of their prede-
cessors. Some of the canopies I have
seen (for instance, at Fatephur Sikri) are
round, in the shape of a dome; others
are oblong, the roof having a regular
horizontal beam. Now combine the
two. In buildings later than those at
Fatephur Sikri, when the canopy is oblong
the beam is bent downwards at each end
so that it has the effect of a section of a
dome. Transfer this to a balcony in front
of a window and you have exactly what I
saw in the palace and in some other build-
ings at Ulwar.
I spent some time examining with great
pleasure the other details of this beautiful
and instructive building. The double cor-
nices which support the brackets and the
pendants from the eaves are features which
were new to me and which I should much
like to see reproduced elsewhere. At the
back of the palace is a splendid tank.
The view of it from the cenotaph of
Bakhta war, which stands just beside it,
is at all times striking, but especially
when lit up with the red glow of sunset —
on the right is the Marble Palace, high
up on the left towers the rocky hill
crowned with a fortress. The large dur-
dar hall and some of the reception
rooms are fine and in good taste, and the
historical portraits they contain interest-
ing ; but the time which I spent on them
was brief, as I was anxious to devote as
much as I had to spare to the armoury, the
jewellery, and above all, the library.
The collection of armour and weapons is
very complete, and seems to give one an
insight into the wars of former times
(just as the strange array of swords and
pikes at Prague carries us back to the
days of the Hussites); but I am some-
what at a loss to know what can cause
some of the swords I saw at Ulwar to be


of the enormous value at which the cus-
todian estimated them. The j ewels would
be enough well, even to satisfy the
dreams of one of Lord Beaconsfield s-
heroines. There are ropes of gigantic
pearls, clusters of rubies the size of
walnuts, diamonds and sapphires without
end. A cup as large as a wineglass is cut
out of a single emerald. I am told that
his Highness wears a necklace of pearls and
a diamond crescent in his turban (a crescent,
by the way, is not an exclusively Moham-
medan decoration, but often occurs in
Hindoo ornaments) on State occasions ;
but unless he resolves to hold a durbar
every day in the year and appears at
each with a different set of jewels on he
will never be able to make use of half
these treasures.
I need not say that —in spite of
my ignorance of Oriental languages
—I was greatly interested in seeing
the library, which is a monument
to the literary taste of Banni Singh.
There is a large collection of MSS., some
of them, with the quaint fancy of Eastern
copyists, being in volumes of which each
page is about the size of a man’s thumb-
nail. It is curious to observe that the
two treasures which are most highly
prized in this library, collected as it was
by a Hindoo prince, are both Moham-
medan ; an illuminated copy of the Koran,
which Banni Singh purchased for the ridi-
culously small price of 3,000 rupees, and a
still more beautiful MS., richly ornamented
with full-page illustrations, of the Rose
Garden of Sadi. I was somewhat sur-
prised to find these unorthodox repre-
sentations in a Mohammedan MS., but
was informed that the illuminator, though
nominally a Mussulman convert, was a
German adventurer. At the end of the
volume is a representation of himself
offering the book to Banni Singh.
Theßose Gardenis of course well known


in Europe through translations. It is
full of poetic ideas and religious thoughts.
There are poems on the unity of the
Deity, the virtues of contentment, mercy,
and charity; and (that favourite topic with
all Arab writers) the vanity and uncer-
tainty of all things human.
All night long a watcher sat weeping by a sick
man’s bed;
In the morning the sick man recovered ; but
the mourner, he was dead !
Sadi, who was a great traveller as well
as writer, was the last of the poets of the
Bagdad school. But the light which
then was fading in the East was beginning
to rise in splendour in Western lands.
Sadi was a contemporary of Ikmm&a#xi*,.
The jewels and library in the palace at
Ulwar are valued by Dr. Hendley at
£2,000,000 sterling ! I had seen many dis-
used buildings in India and ruins of for-
mer greatness, but this was the first time
that I had had the opportunity of visiting
the palace of an actually reigning Oriental
Prince. It seemed to take me back to
former times ; to throw a fresh light on
them, and make me realise more clearly
than ever what Fatephur Sikri and Agra
must have been in the days of their
magnificence.
A whole morning I spent in visiting
several of the public buildings of
Ulwar. Everything seemed to bear
witness to the wisdom and enlightenment
of the rule of the Maharajah, He has
introduced the telephone, and the latest
improvements connected with the manu-
facture of cotton. The hospital (which is
of course under the charge of Dr, Faulk-
ner) is a perfect model of neatness and
order. In the High School, which is
maintained by the Maharajah, 500 boys
are receiving an excellent grammar school
education, up to the standard of the
university matriculation, at a nominal


cost. The gaol, like many others in
India, is famous for the carpets, both
woollen and cotton, which are made there ;
the patterns of these are truly artistic,
the ornamentation from some of the best
buildings in India being carefully adapted.
After seeing these I went on to the
Presbyterian Mission. They have a
pretty little church in the town built at
the expense of the Maharajah, and several
schools for all classes, including even one
for the sweepers, the most despised caste
of all, who everywhere have to live out-
side the city gates. Yet although this
had only been opened for a few months
the progress which several of the boys had
made was remarkable.
In one of these schools I was
rather amused to hear that a remark-
ably well-fed and prosperous-looking
native teacher was a Faqir! The ex-
planation is that the Faqirs, like all
other professions in India, form a caste ;
this man’s father had been a Faqir and
at present his brother is going about
with mud on his face collecting alms, half
of which, according to customary law, he
is obliged to hand over to my friend !
My last expedition at Ulwar was to see
a holy man. He lives in a house by him-
self and is supported by the offerings of
the faithful. As far as I could see his
holiness chiefly consisted in the possession
of five fingers on his left hand and an
abominably bad temper; but perhaps I
was prejudiced.


JEYPORE.
Ahmedabad, February 23, 1891,
fEYPORE is one of the most important
of the native States of Rajputana.
It dates from the 12th century, when the
Raja conquered a hill fortress then held
by an independent tribe and converted
it into his capital. It was amongst the
last to submit to the rule of Delhi and
the first to reassert its independence.
In 1728 the Raja ventured to come down
from his mountain stronghold and found
the modern city. The local tradition
says that he did so because a holy man
warned him that it was not right that his
capital should remain more than 1,000
years in one place. The value of the
story may be tested by considering that
it is not yet 1,000 years since the former
capital—Amber —became part of Jeypore.
Although the new city can lay no
claim to antiquity, it is a place of
much interest. Here, as at Ulwar, the
directions of the Shastras were followed
in the lying out of the streets and
gardens ; and, as time has not yet worked
its changes, it is probably in some ways a
more exact representation of a really
ancient city than it would have been had
it been some centuries older. On the
other hand, it fortunately was completed
before the disturbing influence of Western


ideas had penetrated into Rajputana
hence it is thoroughly characteristic.
Every building is in the Hindoo-Saracenic
or Hindoostanee style of the period. The
space enclosed by the walls is an oblong
two miles in length by a mile and a
quarter in breadth ; it is divided into six
blocks by three main roads, of which one
runs down and two across the city ; there
are two squares at the intersection of the
main roads. The population is 124,000,
an additional 20,000 living in the
suburbs. It will be seen therefore that
although in plan it closely resembles
Adelaide it is larger, and of course every-
thing is on a much greater scale than it
is at Ulwar. It really seems quite a rare
thing in this part of the world for a prince
to be succeeded by his son. The late
Maharajah of Jeypore died in 1880,
leaving no male issue. His present High-
ness was only a distant cousin.
We drove into the city to see the
sights. The drive was curious and in-
teresting. The long trains of elephants
and camels drawing burdens, the bullocks
bearing great bundles of cotton to the
mills, the varied costumes of the different
tribes, the Maharajah’s bungalow, and the
barracks of the native troops, all made a
delightful picture of Indian life. We
passed one wedding procession on their
way to the temple, the bridegroom lead-
ing the bride by a string attached to her
veil—one of those traces which may be
seen in the marriage rites of every coun-
try, telling of the time when brides were
really captured. The friends of the bride
were following with sounds of what
Indians call music and rejoicing.
I have often heard of looking at things
through rose-colored spectacles, but at Jey-
pore that would be quite unnecessary. The
whole city is painted pink ! The effect,
in this clear bright air, is decidedly
pleasing ; and yet—although of course it


is not so—one cannot get out of one’s
head the idea that there is something
incongruous in these quaintly-shaped and
painted Oriental houses standing in broad
Australian-like streets. The palace looks
well in photographs, but in real life it is a
mass of vulgarity. The walls are plaster,
badly stencilled ; the style debased, and
the fittings up of the rooms not better
than those of Lucknow. The model
chosen seems to have been an inferior
Paris cafe.
A large part of the palace is taken up with
«n enormous zenana, his Highness being
very much married. We went to see the
horses and elephants ; but, although the
numbers are large, it struck me that in
such matters, as in everything connected
with military affairs, the Maharajah here
is behind his brother of Ulwar. We also
paid a visit to the School of Art, which is
interesting from an educational point of
view, as showing how much is now being
done by these native princes, aided by the
advice of the British residents, to revive
and develop the indigenous arts of India.
Free instruction is given in modelling,
drawing, carving, enamelling, and other
subjects; the sales of goods going some
way towards making the institution self-
supporting ; at present there are about
100 pupils. This school, like the splendid
Public Library and many other useful
works, owes its origin to the munificence
of the late Maharajah. Unfortunately I
had not time to inspect the other educa-
tional institutions, of which I had heard
much. I am told that in the college,
which is affiliated to the University of
Calcutta, there are 1,200 students.
The Museum is a noble structure and
reflects great credit on its architect,
Colonel Jacob. It shows how well suited
the Hindoo-Saracenic style is to such
a purpose (the Museum is in keeping
with the rest of the city), and how the


fantasticisms of its later developments
may be made pleasing by the use of white
marble. The collections which it contains
illustrative of the economic and industrial
arts are admirable and well arranged ; in
the way of antiquities there is but little.
The arches of the corridors are ornamented
with mottoes taken from old Indian
writers. What gems these long, tedious
works here and there contain ! They
seem like sparks from the one diamond
that man is always seeking.
Do naught to others which if done to thee
Would cause thee pain. This is the sum of
duty.
The body’s finest ornament consists
In knowledge of the truth.
Make the best use of thy prosperity,
And then of thy reverses when they happen,
For good and evil fortune come and go,
Revolving like a wheel in sure rotation.
The little-minded ask—“ Belongs this man
To our own family ?”
The noble-hearted regard the human race
As all akin.
The Museum is splendidly situated in
the midst of a lovely park, which also
contains a well-stocked zoological garden
(emus, kangaroos, and Australian birds
being amongst its treasures), a public
hospital, and a fine bronze statue of Lord
Mayo.
The afternoon was happily spent in an
excursion to the old capital, the moun-
tain fortress of Amber, We drove for
about five miles along an excellent road.
We passed by the residence of Rao
Singh, of Chomu, the present holder of
the title to which I referred in my last
letter. The independence of Ulwar being
now secure he has the honour and glory of
holding the undisputed position of premier
nobleman of Jeypore. In all directions as
we went along we saw kiosks, large and
small, which mark the spots where the
bodies of great men have been burnt. It


seemed to me that these Hindoos had
taken the idea for them from Moham-
medan tombs, they remind one so much
of the dome-shaped tombs near Agra.
Even here, in the very heart of Raj-
putana, there are evidences of the power
of the great Akbar—a large minar, or
milestone, marks the old Imperial road.
Elephants were in waiting to carry us
over the mountain pass down into the
valley in which Amber is situated. I
had not been on an elephant since the
days when I used to consider a visit to
the Zoological Gardens in the Regent’s
Park the height of human ambition.
Now, alas! I have ceased to see the
dignity of the position and find the jolt-
ing motion uncomfortable.
This is not the right time of year
for seeing the hills, as many of the
bushes are leafless and the ground is
dry and parched; but the view from
the summit of the pass is very fine. The
approaches to the hills are guarded by
forts and the city still further protected
by massive walls. Close to the city is a
little lake; the great palace rises above
on the side of the hill. Further down
amongst the houses rise the graceful
minarets of a mosque, showing the all-
penetrating influence of the Moghul
power. Conversions to Mohammedanism
were chiefly forcible; at present the
descendants of these converts seem to be
in much the same position as the “chil-
dren of the constrained,” the representa-
tives of Charles the Fifth’s “converts”
from Judaism in Majorca —looked down
on by both parties.
The palace is a glorious old pile, added
to during several reigns, but not in-
congruously. The long flights of steps
by which it is approached make it seem
the more imposing. The hall of audience
of red sandstone and marble reminded
me much of what I had seen at Agra and


Delhi; but of course it is in a more purely
Hindoo style. We visited the Chapel
Royal, in which a goat is sacrificed every
morning (tradition says that human
victims were offered in former times);
numbers of rooms inlaid with marble and
decorated with painting and with in-
numerable little mirrors, including the
splendid suites of apartments in which the
ladies of the zenana used to while away
their dull monotonous life, sometimes
working the punkahs over the images of
the gods, sometimes playing blind man’s
buff in the marble courts. How they
must have quarrelled for want of some-
thing else to think about! Why, life on
a lighthouse would be lively by com-
parison. All now is silent and deserted
within the palace, but of course the
town itself still remains the same as
It was growing dark just as we returned
to Jeypore, so we had the opportunity of
going to witness the evening prayer at the
great Temple of Siva, the shrine at
which the Maharajah himself worships. It
was a curious and somewhat barbaric cere-
mony. The temple is, like a mosque,
open at one side into a small court. In
this stands an enormous bronze bull;
the principal image faces the court,
but there are others at the sides.
Amongst these we were taken to
see the shrine of the Goddess of Small-
pox ; she, like the destroying Siva,
has innumerable votaries, whilst Brahma
the Creator is almost ignored. As Miss
Cobbe would put it, men worship power
rather than goodness. The temple was
lighted by little lamps in all directions,
which had a very pretty effect ; I think
they had been set up as votive offerings.
Before the great shrine four large bells
hang down from the roof; they are not
rung to call the people to prayer, as with
us, but to attract the attention of the


goddess. Each worshipper on entering
the temple rings one or two of the bells
and then commences his private devotions.
Some seemed to kneel, some to stand,
some to prostrate themselves; as far as I
could make out there was no rule. The
jangling of the bells, the conversation of
those who had finished their devotions,
and the noise of some unruly children
who were enjoying a game of hide-and-
seek round the legs of the bull were dis-
tracting ; but the worshippers, with true
Oriental calmness, took no more notice of
it all than a student at the University of
Adelaide does of the sound of the
lecturer’s voice.


AHMEDABAD.
Bombay, 27th February, 1891.
jjlff’ROM Jeypore we went to Ahmedabad,
the journey being a time of positive
misery. We started shortly before mid-
night and reached our destination at half-
past 6on the following afternoon. It was
a narrow-gauge line, very badly laid. I
must say I am astonished to find that they
have a variety of gauges in India; I should
have thought that with a strong centralised
Government such a mistake would have been
avoided, especially as the railways may
be required for military as well as mercan-
tile purposes.
At Ahmedabad we had taken rooms at
the railway-station, an excellent plan in
travelling in this country. They were
comfortable and convenient. We found
the cooking at the x’efreshment-room much
preferable to that at an ordinary hotel.
We had said farewell to the native states
and were in British India once more, this
time in Bombay, so who can say that
we have not visited every Presidency in
India ?
Ahmedabad was once the capital of the
kingdom of Gujarat, and is now a pros-
perous city with a population of 128,000
inhabitants. Unfortunately I can hardly
say that I have seen it, for the weary
railway journey made a long night’s rest
and a quiet morning necessary, and
it was nearly the middle of the day on


Tuesday when I drove out. We went to
see the mosque of Rani Sipari, a stone
building, the ornamental carving on every
pilaster, screen, and wall being marvellous
in its elaboration. Each piece is a study
in itself, and looks well in a picture ; but
the building is not large enough to be im-
posing as a whole, and the dull grey of
the stone seems poor after the red sand-
stone and white marble of northern
buildings. (I may here mention, how-
ever, that since I have been at Bombay I
have seen some instances of this peculiar
stone lattice work introduced into the
arches of Gothic cloisters ; it has a beau-
tiful effect, and is admirably suited to a
hot country ; another idea for Australia'.)
We drove out into the suburbs to see the
tomb and mosque of Shah Alum, which is
much larger and in the same elaborate
style. The ornamentation of Henry Yll.’s
chapel at Westminster Abbey (which, by
the way, was built just about the same
time), is simple compared with it.
We returned by a shady road which
skirts the beautiful artificial lake from
which Ahmedabad gets its water supply.
It must be a charming resort on hot
evenings.
I was particularly glad to have the
opportunity here of enquiring into a
subject as to which I have felt much
curiosity the practical working of
the Salvation Army in India. To judge
by their own accounts their successes
here are totally unparalleled in the annals
of Christian missions, the time of
Francis Xavier not excepted. To quote
from some not remarkably poetic lines
in one of their publications—
See India arise ;
To shake off the dust of past ages she tries ;
By hundreds her sons and her daughters see
turn.
Enlisting as soldiers, while scores of them
spurn


The world’s proffered prizes, position and pice,
And rival our English in self-sacrifice.
(Pice, I may explain, is a small Indian
coin.)
The Salvationists commenced opera-
tions in 1883, and by the end of 1888
claimed to have 170 European and 100
native officers and 1,100 adult soldiers.
Each year they issue 240,000 copies of
their newspapers ; nor do their efforts
show signs of flagging, since in their re-
port for 1890 they stated that their
advance during the previous year had
been more solid as well as more rapid
than in any previous twelvemonth.
Speaking of Gujarat, the same report
says :—“ This is one of our earliest
Indian battlefields. . . . We love
these simple country folks, and have
raised some devoted officers from among
our converts. The people in general are
as ready as ever to receive us, and always
offer us a hearty welcome to their houses.
It is a touching sight when we are on tour
among these corps to see not only our
sergeants and soldiers but numbers of the
unconverted heathen hurrying hither
and thither to arrange for our recep-
tion and make us comfortable, while
no one could fail to be astonished at the
entire familiarity of our European officers
with all their ways . . . We have
now 13 corps and 45 officers in Gujarat,
and publish a vernacular Avar cry (Jangi
Pokar) with a circulation of 1,000
monthly.” Noav if all this be true, 1 can
only say that there must be something
very wrong in the working of all other
missionary societies, from the Cambridge
Brethren downward, who toil away year
after year with hardly any visible result.
As we were driving through one of the
streets of Ahmedabad we were attracted
by a hideous noise, and saw a procession
formed partly of natives, partly of Euro-
peans in a fantastic imitation of native


costume. They were Salvationists coming
out of their “ barracks,” preceded by a
band. One of the Europeans amongst
them (whom I afterwards learnt was
a Mr. Greet) came up to us and
asked us very civilly if we would
like to see the building. We
accordingly went inside, and found it a
plain room with some seats at one end,
and a few texts on the walls. Learning
that we were interested in his work Mr.
Greet invited us to come and see their
offices in the next street. In these some
of their officers, male and female, live.
Certainly they lead the lives of ascetics,
with no furniture or luxuries, even the
necessary arrangements for the secretarial
department being as simple as possible.
Whatever their faults may be there is
every evidence of their being very much
in earnest. It is part of their rules that
the European workers must not only dress
but live as natives. There were no
schools worth seeing ; they have indeed a
small school for the children of officers
who are travelling about on duty, but
they do not attempt the educational side
of missionary work.
There was a “ holiness meeting” going
on at the office when we were there ; not,
as our host explained, a public gathering,
but one for workers merely. We were able
to look in through a lattice and found a
room filled with some 40 or 50 people,
nearly all adults, sitting and kneeling on
the door. All were fervently screaming
(I cannot call it singing) a native hymn
at the top of their voices, a concertina
and cornet joining in in a casual fashion
with no particular respect for time or
tune until they struck up the more
familiar airs of “Three blind mice ’ and
“ Marching through Georgia.” After a
time a European began to pray in the
native language, various members of the
congregation now and then bursting out


with ejaculations or brandishing their
hands about in the way I have
heard of in some of the strangest
American sects, but have only
seen amongst dancing dervishes.
(I find from some of their papers that
they regard the absence of such
manifestations from a religious meeting
as a proof of the absence of grace !)
My host pointed to the most excited of
all—a native man of middle age—and told
me that he had been a notorious burglar,
but was “saved” by the Salvationists,
and was now an officer in command of a
district. We continued talking for some
time, different officers who came in being
all equally courteous and ready to give
any information required. At length,
however, one of my companions came to
the question to which we had been lead-
ing up. “ Will you kindly tell me,” said
he, ‘ ‘ what course you adopt with reference
to other missionary workers ?” The Sal-
vationist drew himself up, paused, and at
length said stiffly “We neither help nor
hinder them ; we work on different lines.”
“ What,” pursued my friend (alluding to
a matter about which we had heard much)
“was the real history of your going to
Ranipur?” “That,” replied he, “is
a long story ; you had better read it
for yourself in this book ; but re-
member, we went there first by the invi-
tation of the missionaries themselves.”
He handed us popies of the pamphlet he
had referred to, and several other Salva-
tionist publications ; and we bade him
farewell.
So far, I have tried to give a plain
account of the Salvationist work as told
by themselves. I now proceed to speak
of what I have heard from other sources,
including the Presbyterian missionary
reports, Gujarat having long been a
centre of the work of the Irish Presby-
terians. I may say at once that I dis-


regard all stories about “ buying converts
with handfuls of rice,” Ax. In the first
place, I have heard the same stories told
so often (especially in Ireland) when there
was not a vestige of truth in them, that I
am tired of them ; besides, if missionaries
are distributing food in a time of want
(for which I cannot blame them) and
they are occasionally deceived as to the
persons they relieve, I am afraid they
only share that experience with every
one else who has tried to do any good in
the world. But even more than that, I
am not prepared to say that giving food
to the hungry as a means of attracting
men’s attention is much worse than giving
medicine to the sick or education to the
ignorant; it may be injudicious, But I
cannot see that it is necessarily immoral,
though it would be at once described as
“buying converts.” And after all, did
not the First of Missionaries (I use the
words reverently) confess that the crowd
followed Him for the sake of the bread
that He distributed ?
But the charges against the Salvation
Army are more serious than these. Will
it be believed that many of the “raw
heathen” whom they “save” are the
members of other Christian bodies whom
they persuade to leave their former
teachers ? This very Ranipur is a case in
point. A piece of land being offered for
sale by the Government it was bought by
some native Presbyterians at the sug-
gestion of their minister, and a village of
about 400 people, all Christians, built
upon it. Mr. “ Commissioner” Tucker,
the Salvationist leader, called on Mr,
Taylor, then the Minister at Ahmedabad,
and told him he would like to see
Ranipur. Mr. Taylor offered to accom-
pany him there, and asked him if he would
give an address to the people. He did
so ; and thereupon wrote home a glowing
account of the numbers “saved” at a


single meeting. Within a few months
100 out of the 400 Presbyterians had
turned Salvationists, and the two parties
were fighting in the village streets and in
the law courts. Although it seems to
me from the evidence that the Presby-
terians were more to blame of the two,
it resulted in some Salvationists being
put “In prison for Jesus,” as they
describe it in their reports and pictures.
But this was not all. They followed
the Presbyterian missionaries into
one after another of their stations,
making converts everywhere; amongst
the “Trophies from the Jungle,” recorded
at length in their books, is the case of a
female convert from Presbyterianism at
Borsad ! I do not wish to discuss the
question of whether it is better that
people should be Presbyterians or Sal-
vationists ; I am neither myself, and per-
sonally I think that if I were an Oriental
I should prefer even the drum and cornet
to the cold, bald ritual of Geneva ; and as
to matters of doctrine, I very much
doubt how far the refinements of theo-
logical terms translated into Eastern
languages, not always by the ablest
linguists, can be made intelligible to un-
educated natives. Probably most of my
readers have heard the story of the trans-
lation of the New Testament, which was
actually printed, containing the alarm-
ing text “Do no justice, lest jus-
tice should be done to thee.” All I
wish to point out is that the Salva-
tionists, in a country in which there
are 250,000,000 people professing no
form of Christianity, have set up a mission
with the deliberate intention of inter-
fering with the missionaries who are
already at work !
As to their work among the Hindoos,
how is that conducted ? How far do their
figures express realities ? Has their work
that substratum of common sense which


would lead us to suppose it is likely to be
permanent 1 Well, their plan is as
follows :—A new arrival from England,
who has merely picked up a few words of
the language, is sene about the country
with a native who was “saved” at the end
of the first meeting he attended. Crowds
follow the big drum, and are enrolled as
“saved.” (As they have abolished
baptism there is no test of that sort avail-
able.) At Borsad, for instance, the War
Cry reported 1,000 conversions from
heathenism. In two years there
was hardly one to be found. Last
year a sensational telegram was read
out in Exeter Hall about 1,000 converts
in a village in Baroda. Now the Salva-
tionists have been driven from' the
place and the people have returned to
Hindooism. Even the 100 converts at
Ranipur have deserted them and become
Presbyterians again (although they are
still counted amongst the 13 corps of
■Gujarat). At Bombay I am told that
the processions have ceased to excite even
curiosity. As I learnt afterwards, the con-
verted burglar who had been pointed out
to me with triumph at the meeting had
on several occasions—the last being with-
in a week previous to the time when I saw
him—been to the Presbyterian missionary
asking to be received into his church !
It would require more knowledge of the
subject than I possess to say definitely
whether the plan of wearing native dress
and living as the natives do is
a good one or not. Most people
whose opinion I asked seem to think
that the natives only laugh at it. At any
rate it is nothing new, as some Roman
Catholic societies have done the same for
centuries. The Salvationists, however,
do it indiscreetly ; I have heard of more
than one instance of the health of the
unfortunate girls they bring out from
England breaking down, and the hat


going round amongst the “raw heathen”
to send them home. On the whole, what
I have been able to see all tends to con-
vince me that however devoted and
earnest the Salvationists may be they are
doing more harm than good ; and at any
rate it is an illogical absurdity to class
them among missionary societies, for
either they or else all other missions (ex-
cept possibly one or two American
societies, which I have been told act in
much the same manner as the Salva-
tionists) are hopelessly in the wrong.


BOMBAY,
Indian Ocean, 3rd March, 1891.
#NOE again, though I have left India,
I “call for more pens, more paper,
and more ink.” I must report what I saw
and did at Bombay. We arrived there on
the morning of Wednesday, the 25th of
February, after a long night’s journey
from Ahmedabad. The whole city was
in a state of commotion at the time ; the
European part in consequence of the
races, with their attendant train of balls
and dinners; the native, in anticipa-
tion of the census which was to be
taken the next night. Reports had
been spread that the Governor,
fearing that the city was grow-
ing too large, had resolved to deport all
beyond 800,000; that the Queen had
made a bet with the Czar that Bombay
was larger than the capital of Russia, and
so both towns were to be counted at the
same moment; and on the whole it is very
doubtful whether any papers would have
been filled up at all had not some
people “ who really were behind the
scenes ” come down with the authentic
information that every man who could
prove that he was the happy father of
more than three children was to receive a
rupee a head from the benevolent Govern-
ment !
I have not yet heard the result of the
census. The numbers were estimated at
nearly a million ; certainly larger than
those of Vienna.


Bombay is a most interesting city,
historically, architecturally, and socially.
I have heard many amusing yarns about
sales of land in the early days of the
colonies ; but when I looked at this
Manchester of the East and recollected
that Charles 11. had sold the whole place
to the East India Company in return for
an annual payment of £lO, I began to
think that even the Australian stories
were outdone.
The public buildings of Bombay are
the finest I have ever seen ; I doubt
whether those of any other city in
the world can compare with them ; but
they are modern and European. Many
of them (including the University Library,
with its tower nearly 300-ft. high)
have been erected through the munifi-
cence of members of that strange com-
munity—the Parsis of Bombay. They,
like the Jews, are exiles from their own
country, yet have never been merged in
the general population of the land of
their adoption ; but they have accumu-
lated enormous wealth, and their liber-
ality is an example to all the world.
There are about 50,000 of them in
Bombay ; the curious Persian hats and
white garments of the men, and the
graceful costumes of the wealthy ladies,
forming a picturesque addition to the
ordinary Indian and European crowd.
All the men to whom I have spoken have
the manners of courtiers.
Then the large native city, though it can
hardly be said to be two centuries old,
is full of quaint and interesting sights ;
and for those who take an interest in
factories and tall chimneys, the great
cotton mills are a study in themselves.
Bombay has already driven the cheaper
varieties of English cotton goods out of
the Indian market ; the Manchester
merchants have accordingly put pressure
on the Government, and succeeded in


getting the duty removed from their
wares, but even that has been of no avail ;
now the cry is to force an Eight Hours
Bill on India in the hope of making pro-
duction more expensive : and all Bombay
is up in arms on the matter. The general
opinion seems to be that Eastern and
Western ideas of working are so different
that English rules as to hours and the
like do not apply here ; I have not gone
into the question deeply enough to ex-
press an opinion. But the alarm felt by
the Manchester people at the growth of
the rival city will be understood when I
say that 25 years ago not 8,000 hands
were employed in the cotton manufactur-
ing industry in the whole Presidency ;
to-day there are 60,000 in the city alone !
My first excursion was to the caves of
Elephanta. Bombay, I may mention, is
situated on a peninsula, which once was a
c<Election of small islands, but subsequently
became joined together artificially. Hence
most of the excursions are by water. The
caves of Elephanta have been so often
described that I will merely say that the
weird grandeur of this mighty cavern,
with the mountain above apparently sup-
ported by the heavy bulging pillars, and
the walls ornamented with colossal figures
of deities, impressed me even more
than I had anticipated. Although they
were constructed for the disgusting
worship of Siva and the lingum stones with
which the cult of that evil spirit is always
associated, they seem to tell of a time
when there was something grander about
Hindooism than there is now. The
sculptors who canned out these bold con-
ceptions had at least some greater ideas
than the designers of the monkey temple
at Benares. I cannot but think that the
whole thing must have been done to com-
memorate some great event, such as the
final overthrow of Buddhism or the
foundation of a new kingdom. Tho


carvings are in a dilapidated condition
now ; the sportive hand of Tommy
Atkins was rapidly destroying the few
things that the piety of the Portuguese
had forgotten to mutilate when the
British Government interfered and
took the unfortunate images under
their protection. There are several
caves on the island ; most of
them are tilled with earth and rubbish ;
it seems not improbable that if they were
cleared out they might be found to con-
tain carvings in better preservation than
those in the great chamber which is
usually the only one visited by tourists.
On the following morning we started
early for a drive to Malabar Hill.
Skirting the small but beautiful park
which lies between the city and the
western sea, we wound up the hill
amongst villas and gardens, bright
with the full blaze of tropical verdure.
Here, as at Colombo, the flame trees are
one sheet of brilliant scarlet. Unfortu-
nately the morning was too misty for us
to see the view over the town so perfectly ;
we could merely trace the dim outline
peering out here and there below us. On
the summit of the hill are the Parsi
Towers of Silence —the strangest, and for
some reasons the most painful sight
in Bombay. I am not sure that
there is in reality anything worse
in leaving the bodies of the dead to the
birds than to the worm ; and yet it seemed
horrible to watch the great vultures
perched near the buildings, some gorged
with their meal of yesterday, others
waiting eagerly for that of to-day. There
is a beautifully kept garden, and a little
temple in which the funeral service is
performed (the expense of the funeral
being in all cases met by a common fund
provided by the Parsi community).
When the service is over, the body is
taken and deposited inside the tower by


the attendants, the friends remaining
outside ; then the birds swoop down, and
when the attendants return a few days
afterwards nothing is left but a skeleton,
which is placed in a well in the centre of
the tower, there to be resolved again into
its elements by the action of the wind and
the rain. The system at least teaches one
great lesson—-the absolute equality of all
—pbor and rich, unknown and honoured —
in the presence of the one dread Monarch;
the hideous vulgarity of fashionable tombs
that disgrace Christian cemeteries—the
vain attempt to make the riches of the
departed go as near to following them as
possible—is avoided. And from a sani-
tary point of view it is as satisfactory as
cremation, though of course it is open to
the same objection—it destroys all pos-
sible evidences of poison.
We took a long drive down the other
side of the hill and along by the eastern
side of the peninsula. The work that
has been done in the way of reclaiming
land from the sea during the last 25 years
is enormous. I am told that many for-
tunes were made over it, and still more
were lost.
Bombay is indirectly associated with
the names of two former Governors of
South Australia ; for Sir William Jervois
came here many years ago and presented
an exhaustive report on the defences of
the harbour ; and Sir James Fergusson
was for five years Governor of the
Presidency.
The rest of my time at Bombay was
chiefly spent in driving about the city and
suburbs, enjoying the cool breezes of the
morning and evening and resting during
the heat of the day. I managed, how-
ever, to see a few of the principal build-
ings—of course beginning with the mag-
nificent senate hall and library of the
University. The word university reminds
me of a letter which I have just seen in


a native paper, signed “A Congress
Leader.” As I explained the great ques-
tion of the Age of Consent Bill in my
letter from Calcutta, I cannot resist in-
serting an extract from the letter here.
Speaking of the supporters of the Bill, he
says—“ They have not convened a single
meeting in Bengal in support of the Age
of Consent Bill; they have called to
gather in one to twenty meetings outside
Lower Bengal in support of the measure,
and their gatherings are perfectly wire-
pulling affairs, and at once taken ‘ peep-
ings.’ While on their prolific and fertile
action we cannot help mentioning a
fact that some of these busybodies are
out in Calcutta to secure as many signa-
tures as they can by nolens volens.”
[ do not quote this as throwing much
light on the vexed question, but as evi-
dencing the fact that amongst the many
good results of the system of higher edu-
cation in India is the variety of style
which is being added to the English lan-
guage.
One of the prettiest sights which I saw
at Bombay was the Crawford Market.
The name of Mr. Commissioner Craw-
ford has been before the public in connec-
tion with other matters ; but at any rate
here he did a noble work, valuable alike
for the health and comfort of the citizens
of Bombay, and entitling him to their
lasting gratitude. The market is a
gigantic structure, and in the mornings is
filled with every variety of fruits,
flowers, and vegetables ; the meat, poul-
try, fish, and other things being in ad-
joining buildings. Many of the tropical
fruits were strange to me ; but, fresh and
cooling though they were, I still prefer
those of temperate latitudes.
The Cathedral is a large building with
a handsome modern apse (built during the
“ reclamation boom”), a good organ, and
some interesting monuments ; but about


the architecture of the nave the less said
the better. When I state that it was
built at the commencement of the last
century the rest may be understood.
There is a large school attached to the
Cathedral for European boys whose
parents’ means will not enable them to
send them home. Many of them have
done well in the Civil Service and other
lines of life. I was greatly pleased with
everything I saw in the school except
one; the pasty, colourless faces of the lads
made me yearn to be able to take a few
of them away with me to cooler climes.
The charitable institutions of Bombay
are marvellous, the Parsis leading the
way in such good works, but other com-
munities following. The Hindoos have
even a hospital for dumb animals. I
regret to say I had no time to visit
any of them, except a Mohammedan
convalescent home, into which I found
my way by accident.
Here we bade farewell to our bearers. I
may remark, for the benefit of my friends
in Australia, that it is necessary for
everyone travelling in India to secure the
services of a “ bearer.” Even at the
large hotels you are expected to have
your own servant to wait on you at table;
the comfort of one’s tour very much
depends on the character of one’s bearer.
We had two bearers for our party, and
were most fortunate in each. One of
them, Thomas Henry (whose address is
17, Smith’s-lane, Calcutta), had travelled
through Europe and America in attendance
on invalid gentlemen ; he is just the man
for anyone not very strong to secure. The
other, Francis Simon, who may be found
at M. Feilmann’s, 44, Radabara-street,
Calcutta, had mistaken his profession in
life. Nature had intended him to be a
major-general. The commanding manner
in which he marshalled the whole party,
from the most distinguished tourist to the


coolie’s assistant, showed that he could
have directed a whole campaign in
Afghanistan if necessary. He packed the
luggage, secured rooms, arranged ex-
cursions, and did the bargaining. Only
once did I fall beneath his ire. I was
trying to buy some silks, and the trader,
assuring me with tears in his eyes that
his wife and seven children were starving,
said he would let me have the silks at
100 rupees—below cost price. I ottered
him 10 rupees, and before the evening
was over got them for that sum, Francis,
on hearing what I had done, reproved me
severely, and told me that if I had only
left the matter to him he would have got
them for two rupees, and my subsequent
experience of his powers showed that he
spoke pefectly correctly.
On Saturday, February 28, we left
Bombay by the Ganges, after as delightful
a month’s travelling as I have ever spent.
In concluding my letters I wish to state
once more that I have not attempted to
write a book on India. If I had been
foolish enough to entertain any ideas
of the sort before I started (which I was
not) the short time that I have spent
there would have been quite long enough
to show me the folly of trying to pose as
an authority on the subject of that
vast country without years of careful
study. Even in the few places I
have visited some objects of interest
have been seen imperfectly, many not at
all. All that I have sought to do is to
give a rough sketch of a hurried tour,
my letters being often written in the
evenings by the dim twilight of an hotel
lamp, when I came home tired after a
long day’s sightseeing, without the oppor-
tunity of consulting the necessary works
of reference. . ,
I am now bound for Brindisi. My
companions are prolonging their tour
through Egypt and Palestine. T. hey


press me to go with them, and delightful
it would be to revisit in pleasant company
the countries I knew so well long ago.
But still—
Oh to be in England,
Now that April’s there !
J. L. Bony thou & Go., Printers, Adelaide.






■ .
