

LETTEES
FROM OUR
TRAVELERS
SEPTEMBER, 1883-MAY, 1884.
[ALL RIGHTS RESERVED].
OXFORD:
Printed by J. OLIVER, 34, George Street.




FROM OUR
SEPTEMBER, 1883-MAY, 1884.
[ALL RIGHTS RESERVED].
OXFORD:
Printed by J. Oliver, 34, George Street.




LETTERS FROM OUR TRAVELLERS.
Roll well,
October Bth, 1883.
Dearest Mother,
We hope you all got safely back to shore, we
felt anxious, it seemed so rough, and was getting so
dark when you left the ship. We all felt very miserable
after you left, and went to our cabin almost directly.
I was awfully pleased to find a letter from Uncle Henry
awaiting me in the saloon. The first thing we did was
to “ toss ” for berths as we both wanted the top one; I
won, so of course took possession of it, at least tried to,
for the getting in was quite another matter; however
after several attempts, I landed safely consoling G.
by informing her that had she won, she could not
possibly have got into it. I frightened G. below many
a time, she being afraid I should, go through on to the
top of her. We slept very well that night; of course
the ship being in harbour, we were quite steady. We
were up very early the next morning, sleep being im-
possible after six, owing to the noise and bustle on
deck, in fact they had been taking in cargo all that
night.
After breakfast we went on deck and sat there till
we sailed, gazing longingly at Plymouth Hoe trying to
make you out; several times we thought we saw you.
Our captain came on deck about twelve o’clock and


immediately gave orders to “weigh anchor;” but we
were delayed a short time, for at the last moment the
doctor forbade one of our would-be passengers to go,
if he did not wish to die in a week’s time, so the poor
fellow was lowered into a small boat. It was very sad
to see him taken away, knowing his last chance of life
was gone. Nothing now remained to hinder us from
starting ; the captain’s stentorian voice was again
heard giving orders, the tug began to tow us slowly
out to sea, and in an hour’s time we were out of sight
of old England’s shores. The tug now left us, and
setting “ every stitch of canvas ” we were soon going
some nine or ten knots an hour, there being a strong
breeze; but this was not done without a good deal of
“ rolling ” which most of the passengers found disa-
greeable, not to say inconvenient, and soon some were
seen quietly retiring to their cabins. We were not long
to follow and we stayed in that cabin three whole days.
Oh the misery! The doctor came in once or twice to
console us, saying in a cheerful voice (he was a good
sailor), “We are in the Bay of Biscay now, it is very
rough, but we shall be out of it in two days.” Oh!
those two days, they were more like two years, what
we suffered is better imagined than written !
On the fourth day I struggled on deck (poor G. was
still very bad and could not move), finding a sheltered
corner I eat biscuits, for I still felt funny, you know,
but there is no cure like fresh air, and in a few hours I
was nearly all right again. In the afternoon, a sudden
squall split two sails right in two, it sounded like glass
smashing, and made the old ship roll and toss horribly.
In the evening we saw what they thought to be an
abandoned schooner ; we saw a steamer making for her,
but could not see if there was anyone on board or not.
G. got up the next day and was soon all right, after
being on deck for a time.


On our first Sunday on board, service was held in the
saloon, but few attended, sitting below being beyond
their capabilities at present. The passengers had nearly
all begun to recover from the effects of the first few
days at sea, and were beginning to struggle on deck
one by one. On our eighth day out, we had a small
dance in the evening, on deck. It was great fun, but
rather difficult, as the ship was rolling a good deal, but
perhaps this rather added to the fun. It was certainly
very amusing to see a couple of waltzers, perhaps the
best dancers on board, and the object of a crowd of ad-
miring eyes, suddenly precipitated into the lee scuppers
from whence they picked themselves up, and retired,
feeling very crestfallen, not to say a little bruised.
The next day O. and I inspected everything on deck ;
we had quite a farm, two cows, three ponies, two
hundred sheep, seventy pigs, and any amount of poultry;
poor things, they looked so miserable, especially the
ponies! they were three unbroken New Foresters and
were stowed away on the fo’castle, the sea and rain
often blowing in on them, I wonder they could stand it.
We passed Madeira on October 2nd, about 3.30 in the
afternoon, I had a letter ready in case a boat put out to
us, as it was thought they might do, but we passed too
quickly, there being a stiff breeze ; we were going be-
tween fourteen and fifteen knots. It was such a
pretty sight, we were close enough to see the vineyards
and cottages quite plainly, being a lovely sunny day,
the sea and sky a deep blue, the island must have
looked its best, I should think. But the fine weather
did not last long, the very next day we shipped some
heavy seas (owing to a strong sou’wester which had
sprung up during the night), and the old boat rolled as
badly as she did in the Bay, causing several passengers
to again seek their cabins and putting a stop to the
dancing in the evenings.


The bad weather lasted three days; having to sit a
good deal in the saloon we were able to survey our
fellow sufferers and form some acquaintances. There
are a funny lot of people on board, “ all sorts and con-
ditions of men,” from the high church curate to the
atheist, from the Oxford graduate with all his airs and
graces to the Brummagem jeweller with his display
of jewellery ; he wears a massive gold chain and I sup-
pose a watch, an immense gold ring and a large
diamond pin—there are the “three old maids of Lee”
travelling together, and the inevitable tourist is not left
behind ; he parades the deck with field glasses and a
stick (what the latter is for no one can make out, sticks
not being generally used on board ship) and carries an
atlas under his arm, in case, as he says, “ we should
come across any islands.” There is the lady-killer who
fancies no lady can resist his fascinating smile ; he has
red hair, pasty complexion, and greenish eyes, so I
should not think his fancies were often correct; two or
three tailors out of Regent Street in yachting costumes;
in fact all sorts, and, as I said before, it is rather
amusing watching them all.
We sleep awfully well now we have got used to the
noises, at first I used to complain that G. disturbed me
by snoring, but I eventually found out it was one of the
cows on deck. A bell goes every half-hour to tell the
time, it was very puzzling at first, as it rings up to eight
bells, then begins again, thus, eight at twelve, one at
half-past, two at one o’clock, and so on till four o’clock,
which is eight bells, half-past four being one bell again.
I have got used to them now, and don’t notice them.
The worst noise is when they “bout ship ” if it happens
to be in the night. “ Bout ship ” means changing the
ship’s course and a great deal of bustle, noise and
shouting; what they call the “ port main brace ”is just
over our cabin and the stamping is dreadful, and always


wakes us up, for it does not happen often enough for
one to get used to it. There is one man who will sing
out something which sounds like, 0, i, jo, lee, bow, go !
I don’t mind when they sing properly, it sounds awfully
jolly. There is always considerable excitement when
they furl the mainsail and the foresail, the two largest
sails. It requires all hands on deck, they all swarm up
the rigging like so many monkeys ; they are generally
timed to see how quickly they can do it, seventeen
minutes being the quickest so far ; it is done if the
captain expects rough weather. I have learnt the names
of most of the sails, and the following is a description of
the “Rollwell,” of the Swindle and Dons line, I got from
one of the officers. She was built at Aberdeen in 1866,
is a composite ship, being constructed of solid teak with
beams and framework of iron, with wrought iron masts,
and steel yards and top masts, 2130 registered, 3500 ton
burden. Her length is 300 ft., breadth 40 ft., and
extreme depth of hold 28 ft. The height of main mast
is 189 ft., from the keel, and of the main and fore yards
90 ft. She carries nearly two acres of canvas ; I believe
the mainsail cost £IOO. I don’t know if you will be in-
terested in this, but if you keep our letters, as I hope
you will, it may be useful some day to refer to.
Oct. 12 th. —We had an .awful fright yesterday about
nine o’clock, when I was just getting up, being later
than usual, I heard a sudden rush of feet over head, and
a cry of “ All hands on deck, the ship’s on fire ! ” ' You
may imagine my fright, I hurried into my clothes, not
wishing to be left behind if they had to take to the
boats, and rushed out to find the cargo in the main
hatch on fire. For about 40 minutes there was intense
excitement, of course, as is usually the case, the donkey
engine would not work, so a line was formed to pass
down buckets of water. One of the passengers got
dreadfully excited, and in his eagerness to extinguish


the fire, emptied a bucket of water on the captain’s
head, this increased the noise, for the captain, as Avas
his habit, “just mentioned the fact, you know,” to that
eager passenger; however, in spite of the noise and con-
fusion the fire was extinguished, but not so the captain;
all that day he remembered that eager passenger.
Without joking though, it was a very alarming accident,
if it had not been discovered immediately it began, we
should probably have been in the boats by now, for
close to where the fire broke out was a lot of Virginia
cork and a large quantity of spirits, which, if it had
once caught fire, nothing would have put out. We
heard afterwards that the carpenter had gone down
with a naked light, and a spark had dropped on some
straw. One lady was terribly frightened and rushed on
deck in her “ robe de mult” in fact there was quite a
panic for a few minutes. As soon as all danger was
over I went back and finished dressing, for I had rushed
out with my hair all down and minus my bodice, how-
ever, “all’s well that ends well,” and in the evening we
had all sufficiently recovered from our fright to have a
dance.
To-morrow, being Saturday, will be a half-holiday,
there is going to be a cricket match, the officers and
middies are going to play a picked eleven from the pas-
sengers. I think it will be rather fun to watch. I hope
it will be fine, we have had glorious weather the last
week, so hot we have all been wearing thin dresses and
an awning is put up every day to sit under, but I hope
it won’t be very much hotter, though they say it will
when we get into the tropics.
G. has become great friends with a Mrs. Morris, she
seems very nice, but I have hardly spoken to her yet.
Mr. Moses, the “tourist,” I mentioned before, amused
all immensely. I think he is a Jew, for he has a
nose and a mouth! Oh, such a mouth! when he


smiles it expands quite five inches, his legs too are
beautifully curved, and this hot weather does not
seem to agree with his nose. There is another in-
dividual, remarkable for his laugh, I never heard any-
one laugh like he does before, if anyone sets him going
he can’t stop, it makes everyone else laugh who hears
him, at least it used to, but we have all got used to it
now; the captain sent word to him not to make so much
noise, but he really can’t help it, so if anyone tries to
make him laugh he retires to his cabin. Some of the
“ladies” too are very extraordinary; there is a Mrs.
Robins, short, stout, and with short hair, who causes
amusement to some and annoyance to others; she has
a quiet lady-like companion with whom she quarrels
very much, and I believe she uses very bad language to
her, and on one occasion kicked her down the com-
panion stairs; she has her cabin in the ladies’ saloon,
we are very glad we are not that end of the ship. The
ladies’ saloon contains six cabins, the doctor occupies
one with his wife and two children, and three more
gentlemen have cabins there ; I believe they wish them-
selves elsewhere often enough, for the “ rows ” are
frequent, there is no place like on board ship for trying
the temper.
We have five or six invalids in a very critical con-
dition; two of them are in the last stage of consumption,
the doctor does not think they will ever see land again.
One gentleman seems to be getting worse, it is creeping
paralysis with him, he is all alone, though they say he has
a wife and three children ; he is quite young, it is awfully
sad to see him, he could walk when he first came on
board but now he has to be carried on deck, his steward
has to look after him, so he does not get much attention.
We get awfully badly fed now, we have pork and
mutton principally ; the sheep are kept in pens about
sixty in each, one can see them getting thinner every


day, so you can imagine what the mutton is like ;
eveything is killed and eaten the same day. A pig died
the other day, or was nearly dead, so they killed it, and
it was sent in for dinner ; luckily we were warned not
to take pork that night by Mr. Hollis who had seen it
killed, they did not know what was the matter with it,
but it certainly ought to have been thrown overboard.
They give us swedes as a vegetable, and potatoes in
their jackets always. As they are generally put on the
table before the meat is served, everyone grabs one
and keeps it till the meat comes, for they never send up
enough, and at first someone was always going without.
The rice is the very cheapest, full of husks, and worst
still, weevils ; the flour got wet when the fire took
place, so we have bread now made from mouldy flour,
it smells horrible and the taste is worse. The meat is
carved on the sideboard at our end, and more often than
not, fingers are used instead of a fork or spoon. We
see some very nasty things which would disgust you if
I told you, none of you would eat the food I am sure,
but we have to, or starve; the sea air gives us such ap-
petites we can’t help eating. I like the breakfast best,
we get Irish stew pretty often which is very good and
a dish called salmon-twice-laid, what it means none of
us can make out, but I think it is tinned salmon, they
mix it up with mashed potatoes, it is very good ; and I
like the jam, but if they would only wash the glass (it
is' always in an ordinary tumbler) before putting in a
fresh sort, it would be nicer, there is quite an accum-
ulation of jams at the bottom. The tea too, is made
from hay I should think by the taste, they make it in
two large urns, which I believe have never yet been
emptied of the tea leaves. We are very glad of our
own compressed tea and etna, but I don’t think the tea
will hold out much longer, we used a lot when we gave
a small tea-fight the day before yesterday in our cabin,


it just holds six comfortably. Tea-fights are all the go
now; we went to No. 16, last week, I believe our host is
a Regent Street tailor, but that does not matter here;
they gave us boiled eggs which they had brought with
them, they weren’t quite as fresh as they might have
been, but we thought them good.
We don’t like our captain any better, he has been
christened the “ Inflated Frog.” Fie is very short and
stout with a very red face, and thick curly grey hair, he
has no manners and never associates with the pas-
sengers, in fact treats them as so much cargo, which
some of the ladies particularly resent.
I have nearly forgotten to tell you of how we paid
our footing. I went on the fo’castle with one of the
curates (we have two on board), perfectly ignorant that
we had to pay what they call our “footing; ” we were
looking at some albatrosses flying near, when a sailor
quietly chalked a ring round us; — U A bottle of rum,
please, sir.” The curate did not like it, he refused to
give the rum on principle, so I told “ Mr. Willoughby,”
the head steward, to give them a bottle. I fancy the
curate was hard up. They also make anyone who goes
up the ma»st pay their footing, and if they refuse, a sailor
goes up and ties them to the mast till they pay, but no
one is ever foolish enough to refuse.
We passed a steamer yesterday, homeward bound, we
reported ourselves to her. We do not sight many ships;
saw a sailing boat the other day a long way off,- but
she soon disappeared. The captain says there is going
to be a change in the weather, the wind is getting up
and our port holes are ordered to be closed before
night ; it is dreadful with them shut, so stuffy, and the
only ventilation is from the saloon and that is as
bad as the cabins when the sky-lights are closed, which
is generally the case if the port holes have to be shut. I
hope we are not in for a gale, we have not had a real
B


one yet, though it was very rough in the Bay of Biscay.
I have just heard that they are going to furl the main-
sail at eight bells this evening, so the captain evidently
expects bad weather. They are just going to lay the
cloth for dinner, so I must put away my things, the
afternoon is the only time one can get the saloon quiet;
in an evening it is full, and very noisy with card players,
etc. Ar. has got a dreadful face-ache, lam going to
get the stewardess to make a poultice for him to night,
he has had it three days now. G. has a very bad cough
too, I gave her some sea-sick medicine in mistake for
cough-mixture last night, but it did not do her any harm
beyond burning her throat, it had chloric ether in it,
which made her go to sleep, I did not find it out till the
morning, when she was very indignant when I told her.
We have services on Sunday on deck now; it is far nicer
than in the saloon, the curates take it in turn, and their
wives conduct the choir, which is very poor considering
the musical talent on board, but hardly anyone will join,
I don’t know Avhy, I think because the curates’ wives
play badly and choose unsuitable hymns, and don’t like
to be interfered with. G. was asked to join but she
only went once to practise, as she did not like it.
Oct. Ylth. —The cricket match came off last Saturday
and was great fun; the balls were made of rope ends
sewn up in canvas, the wicket was an old box, and the
carpenter had made a bat; of course the officers won
they had their sea legs and were up to all sorts of
dodges, such as scooping the ball under spars. There is
a fine of 4d. for every ball sent overboard, but it counts
three runs, so they were often sent over on purpose, as
it was almost impossible to make any runs. We are
going to have a ladies’ eleven, I have been elected
captain, and we are to practise every day. On Saturday
we are going to play the gentlemen-; we are sure to get
beaten, for only six in my eleven know anything about


cricket, and we shall not have any practice unless
the weather improves, for since Sunday night it has
been very rough, and though it is much quieter to-
day, there is still too much sea on, to be able to stand
up at the wicket.
Monday was a dreadful day, the captain was right
about the weather, though a little out in his reckoning;
the gale came on Sunday night, instead of Friday,
though it blew hard the early part of Friday night.
The sea was splendid, the old boat rolled awfully,
and every now and again shipped a big sea, and
walking was impossible. We lashed our chairs to the
saloon sky-light railings, and five of us were sitting
quietly, when we suddenly shipped a big sea, which
broke our lashings, and washed us, chairs and all —to
the lee scuppers ; we all picked ourselves up amidst
much laughter, looking like drowned rats ; the worst of
getting wet is that the sea water makes your clothes so
sticky and nasty. It has [been very miserable since
Sunday, we have to sit in the saloon so much, it was
wet on deck, and raining hard for two days. I am
getting on with my knitting and like it very much,
Mrs. Morris helps me if I get in a muddle, but it is very
hard to pick up my stitches which I am always dropping
with the ship rolling so, and just as you get hold of the
stitch there comes a big lurch, making you drop
needles and all. I think we are going to have fine
weather again, the sea is getting calmer every minute,
and the wind has nearly dropped altogether. A shark
was caught yesterday, but it was quite a small one.
We have come to the end of our tea ; I got some ground
coffee, and a tin of condensed milk from the steward, also
a tin of biscuits. We are not going to have another tea
party just yet, but as everyone is getting short, we
thought we would lay in a store while we could.
Mrs. Morris is very nice, we have become great


friends with her, she is the only nice lady on board, at
least we think so. I don’t care for the doctor’s wife, or
the doctor, he is dreadfully hen-pecked. On fine days
he climbs up into one of the boats which are hung over
the deck house and sits there reading, she can’t get at
him there.
Oct. 26tk. —We are in the tropics now, and the heat
is intense. We crossed the line a few days ago. The
“tourist” by way of being funny, gave me a pair of
opera glasses to look at it, he had carefully tied a piece
of thread across the glass, and wanted to know if I
could see the line. Three of the new middies were
shaved, which I believe is an old custom. were all
dreadfully shocked last Wednesday by the sudden death
of Mrs. Brooks. I had never spoken to her, as she had
hardly been on deck, she seemed _ to be an invalid,
always being carried up. She died very suddenly
indeed, it has cast quite a gloom over the ship. She
was buried the next day at 5.30 a.m. We did not go to
the funeral, but a good many ladies did. I believe it
was a most impressive sight, and curious to see the
many coloured costumes, many being in flannels and
“blazers” of all shades, bare-footed sailors and ladies in
brilliant dressing-gowns, the clergyman in his surplice
making a striking contrast. A funeral at sea is a very
painful thing; we heard it all from our cabin, it took
place just overhead, we could hear the curate reading,
and the splash as the body fell into the water, our port-
hole being open. Poor Mr. Brooks is terribly cut up, I
feel so sorry for him, it must be such a terrible loss.
He has begged us to go on just the same with our en-
tertainments, but of course nothing has been done since
she died. It has been terribly hot the last week (I
think the intense heat was the cause of Mrs. Brooks’
death) with the exception of one day, which was kept
cool by the tropical showers. You should see the rain,


a bucket is full in no time, we all put our jugs out to
catch it, as soft water is a treat, for all we drink and use
is condensed. It is a good thing the showers don’t
last long, for I am sure we should have the saloon
flooded.
Being in the tropics now, of course we must expect
warn weather; we feel it dreadfully at night, there
being no ventilation in our cabins, as we are unlucky
enough to be on the weather side at present, we cannot
have our port-hole open. We managed to open it one
night by hammering at the head of the screw with the
heel of a boot; we were delighted, but our delight was
changed to disgust in the morning when we awoke and
found our portmanteau and boots floating about in five
inches of water, and many other things which were
lying on the spare berth (all the cabins have three) wet
through. We find the swing tray Barrett made very
useful, we keep all our breakables in it. We have been
becalmed for two days, I suppose we do move a little in
the course of the twenty-four hours, but it is so little, one
can hardly notice it. The heat is terribly trying to the
temper ; the “ rows ” have been frequent, especially in
the ladies’ saloon; we sit all day under the awning,
everyone grumbling at everybody else, with nothing to
do ;in fact we couldn’t do it if we had. There is
nothing cool to drink, the water is quite warm ; but the
evenings make up in a measure for the discomforts of
the day, mind you, not the night , but after sunset till we
turn in, is lovely. The sunsets are magnificent, lam
quite sure if you saw them on canvas you would say
“ how exaggerated,” but I don’t believe one could
exaggerate, or make the colours too bright for the sun-
sets we see just now, they are simply wonderful, and
quite beyond description. Directly the sun has disap-
peared it is quite dark, for there is no twilight, and
sometimes it is quite dark, for an hour before the moon


rises ; then it is exquisite, so still and calm, not a breath
of wind, no sound except the ripple of the water against
the old ship’s sides, and the occasional flapping of the
sails. To sit quietly and drink in the beauty of the
scene, seems to be the desire of most, and though the
decks have every available seat taken, there is often
absolute silence, all seeming to be impressed by the
exquisite loveliness of the scene. But I fear I am
growing sentimental, so will revert to more matter of
fact things.
The twenty-eighth day out is Dead Horse night, that
is the day the sailors receive their first wages, and they
have a ceremony of burying an horse. The money, £l6,
had been collected from the passengers the day before.
This money was divided amongst the crew. The enter-
tainment began at 8 p.m. with a procession round the
decks. The horse, which was very well made, after the
manner of sham circus-horses, was ridden by one of the
crew, another one leading him, as he seemed rather
fresh for his rider. Four policemen kept the course
clear as he was cantered up the starboard side of the
main deck, keeping time to the lusty notes of the
crew, as they sang the well-known ditty “ I say, old man,
your horse must die.” The jockey looked well in a
striped coat and hat, and, though he had a lively time
of it, kept his horse well in hand. After the preliminary
canter, St. Blaise, the horse, was put up to auction.
The bidding was spirited. The horse was knocked
down for £l6, the sum collected, you know. More
singing followed, then the horse and jockey were slung
up to the main yard, the rope was cut, and poor St.
Blaise was shot into the foaming deep; the jockey
escaped the fate of his steed and was seen clinging to
the yard amidst a “blaze” of blue light. The worst of
this sort of entertainments is that they are invariably
followed by a row in the fo’castle (the sailors’ quarter).


In fact, I believe, they are rarely allowed now on that
account. First one of the passengers, then another,
and they are generally those with more money than
brains, offered to stand the men drink, an offer, of
course accepted, for whoever heard a sailor refusing a
bottle of rum? The consequence is they become quarrel-
some, which results in a free fight, and as they all carry
knives, which in some cases they do not forget to use, it
is far from a pleasant thing for the officers on watch to
quell any disturbance there may be. In this case it
was not only the crew but the stewards, and even a
first-class passenger, who were mixed up in the row;
but he, I think, must have repented of his folly when
he found himself in irons in company with a sailor for
the night. This was the most disgraceful row that
occurred during the voyage, though we passengers did
not hear or see anything of it, but heard about it the
next day. One evening some little excitement was
caused by a ship which had been in sight nearly all day
signalling in distress, but our captain did not seem to
believe it, and so did not go to her. She kept
signalling that she was coming alongside, but she did
not or could not do so, and night coming on we lost
sight of her. Some on board were very indignant with
the captain for not going to her assistance, but I
suppose he knew best. Pirates were suggested by the
nervous portion of the passengers, which created some
little amusement, A small shark was caught by one
of the officers soon after passing Madeira ; getting it on
board was a great excitement. They are to be .seen
nearly every day swimming round the ship, also whales,
and birds of all sorts, such as cape pigeons, mutton
birds, molly-hawks, sooty-petrels, cape-hens, albatrosses,
whale-birds, Mother Carey’s chickens, etc., and follow
the ship all day. Archie caught an albatross the other
day by means of a long line with a hook attached,


baited with a piece of pork. It was hauled on deck
alive, its wings measured ten feet from tip to tip, and it
was not supposed to be a very large one. Ar. skinned
it, took the long bones out of its wings for pipe-stems
and the feet for tobacco pouches. He is keeping the
wings to take home. He fishes for them nearly every
day, off the poop, but has only caught that one. He
drowned one, the line broke whilst trying to pull it in
against a strong sea, and the poor bird floated away, to
all appearance, dead. Mother Carey’s chickens are
caught with a long piece of thread just thrown out over
the stern, and as they fly backwards and forwards, their
wings get entangled in it, and they are easily pulled
on board. They are very similar to a swallow.
Nov. sth. —We had such a terrible affair last night, a
girl of about nineteen, one of the first-class passengers,
jumped over-board from the poop. We had just gone to
our cabin, intending to turn in, being after ten, when I
heard a cry “ man overboard ! ” We all rushed on deck
to find it was this poor girl. Two life buoys had been
thrown to her, but it was too dark to see if she got hold
of them or not. Archie was on the poop at the time
and threw her one of the life buoys and though I
believe he did not actually see her climb over the
railing, he heard the splash and cry for help. The boat
was manned and in the water under five minutes, but
even by that time she must have been a mile astern,
as we were going some nine or ten knots at the time,
there being a stiff breeze ; and of course when the ship
was stopped she swung round, so the officer in command
of the boat did not know which way to go. The scene
which followed I shall never forget. One or two ladies
went into hysterics, one gentleman who had dined a
little too freely, vowed he would jump over-board too,
and had to be held back. The poor girl was the
adopted daughter of a lady and gentleman on board,


wlio W6i’6 going 1 to settle in Tasmania. It was dreadful
to see tliem sitting waiting for the return of the boat, in
fact everyone was anxiously watching. It returned
after an hour’s absence, unsuccessful. It went a second
time in a different direction, but everyone knew it would
be hopeless. At 12 p.m. all sails were again set, and we
went on as if nothing had happened. The poor girl was
known to be a first rate swimmer, if she had secured a
life buoy it would have been possible for her to live two
or three hours, if she escaped the sharks. The thought
that she may have been clinging to a buoy and watching
the ship’s lights recede was dreadful to think of, but I
suppose nothing more could have been done. Whether
it was accident or intentional will never be known. It
has naturally cast a gloom over the whole ship.
Nov. 2 Oth. —Before we had recovered from the shock
caused by Miss M.’s death, it was followed by two more,
one in less than a week, of two gentlemen from con-
sumption. The doctor had given them up some time.
In consequence, we have not been having any gaieties
lately. The other day a huge dead whale, thirty or
forty feet long, floated past. It had evidently been dead
some time, for as we passed to leeward of it we found it
dreadfully odoriferous. It was followed by a crowd of
birds ; they had gorged themselves to such an extent
that they could not rise off the water, and had a boat
been lowered, any amount of albatrosses could have been
killed with a stick. The water all round was covered
with oil, and smelt long after we had passed the whale,
which was some little time, as we were nearly becalmed
just then. The captain said he had never seen such a
sight before. The next day we passed a spar with what
looked like a corpse tied to it, probably from some
wreck. had three days’ bad weather last week ;
the sky-lights were battened down, and very few pas-
sengers ventured on deck. All sails were furled, except-


ing the two lower topsails, which is very little canvas for
a big ship like ours to carry. Very heavy seas kept break-
ing over the ship, drenching all who were on deck, and
nearly knocking them down. One huge sea broke over
the poop, ran along the bridge on to the top of the
music room, on to the deck, knocking down the doctor’s
little girl, who was standing there- (she ought to have
been below). She was washed backwards and forwards
on to the deck, and might have been badly hurt, had
not a sailor been near to pick her up. It was magnifi-
cent to see the big waves ; looking astern from the
fo’castle one could see them coming along, as the wind
was behind us, towering high above the ship, and
seeming to us as if they must swamp her. Yesterday
we were informed of the arrival of a new passenger.
The barber’s wife has presented her spouse with a
daughter. Funny, isn’t it? We got up the other
morning at four o’clock to see the Southern Cross, and
were very much disappointed with it; it is not half as
fine as our Great Bear. We were rewarded, however,
by seeing a glorious sunrise. I never saw anything
like it. On the west it seemed quite dark, as the last
cloud of night rolled away, with a star or two faintly
visible. In the east, a bright golden light gradually
appeared, growing brighter and brighter, till a flaming
ball of red rose slowly above the horizon. I looked
again to see what had become of night; a faint dark
line was all that I could see, and that disappeared as I
stood watching it. It was the most beautiful sight
I ever saw, and as I went back to bed I felt quite sorry
it was all over. You will think lam growing quite
sentimental; but really it was lovely. Our cabins at
night are sometimes lit up by large sheets of phos-
phorus floating by, making it almost light enough to
read, did it last long enough, but it has generally passed
in three or four minutes.


We have discovered a somnambulist amongst our
fellow passengers. Several things have disappeared
from various cabins lately, such as top-coats, umbrellas,
etc. Complaints were made to the captain, and
suspicions were directed to this man, who was sup-
posed to walk in his sleep. The captain threatened to
flog him if he continued his midnight strolls ; it was
strange that at this threat they ceased, and the coats
were left unmolested. We also have a young man suf-
fering from D.T.’s ; occasionally he is very noisy. The
other night he threatened to throw himself overboard,
and was chased through the saloon by two middies,
who had been ordered to see him safely in his cabin—
all this, after we had turned in. It is not very pleasant
for ladies, especially as we have to sleep with our doors
open, and only a curtain across the doorway, on account
of ventilation. One night a drunken man did fall in,
through the ship lurching as he passed our door ; but
he managed to pick himself up and stagger out. I was
very much alarmed. A gentleman, in the next cabin
but one to ours, had his thumb bitten by a rat during
the night; several complain that they have them in
their cabins. I am glad to say we have not seen or
heard one in ours. Sailors think they are a necessary
evil; the superstition is that a ship is not safe if the rats
leave her. They also will not kill a cat during a voy-
age. W r e are having cold weather just now, and have
substituted tip-and-run for cricket, on purpose to keep
warm.
December 11th. —The new baby was christened yester-
day, out of a soup tureen in the saloon. She was called
Amy Rollwell. We all went to the service, which was
conducted by the two curates. We have been having
some concerts lately in the music room ; but they have
not been very successful, so I do not think we shall
hare any more. Gerty and I play our everlasting


“ Qui Vive ” at every one ; I think other people too
have exhausted their stock of music. A grand bazaar
was held on deck the end of last week, for the benefit
of the Sailors’ Orphanage Society. Everybody con-
tributed as much as they could in the way of work, and
the things were all sold by auction, and realised the
respectable sum of £SO. It was opened by the captain
at 2 p.m. Some of the things fetched absurdly high
prices ; such as a carte-de-visite photograph, worth six-
pence, fetched ten shillings ; a cigarette case, made of
canvas, went for eight-and-six. There were a refresh-
ment stall, a roulette table, and Aunt Sally. The piano
was placed on deck, and dancing was kept up till a
late hour. The captain very magnanimously gave the
ladies each a glass of wine (Chablis !) at dinner. I for-
got to tell you that we have an amateur photographer
on board, as well as Archie, and his photographs were
those which sold so well at the bazaar, being chiefly
portraits of the passengers. They say he made £3O by
his photos. We expect to sight Portland (Australia)
on Sunday. Everyone is very much excited, and well
they may be ; for the sight of land, after eleven weeks
of nothing but the ever-restless sea, is well calculated
to excite anyone. We have had a very good passage
on the whole, though we were becalmed more than is
usual; and at one time we were only a hundred miles
from Buenos Ayres. The captain did this in order to
get the Trade winds, but we did not score much by it.
On account of this we sighted very few ships, and only
two within signalling distance.
December Doth, Sunday evening , 8 p.m. —They have not
been able to take sights for three days, owing to a fog ;
and on its lifting this morning, the captain found him-
self considerably nearer Portland (Australia) than he
expected. I believe we ought not to have sighted
Portland at all, but we did so at five o’clock this after-


noon. At six p.m. we could see the cliffs very plainly,
and at seven we could see the revolving light at Cape
Otway, the entrance to Melbourne Harbour. We ex-
pect to be in Melbourne Harbour to-morrow afternoon.
We have been very busy all the afternoon, packing.
We are going to turn in now, as we want to see the
pilot come on board in the morning, which they say
will be about five o’clock.
December 11th, Monday, 5 p.m. —We have just come
to anchor, and I hasten to finish this letter for Archie
to post, as he is going ashore this evening. We were
up soon after four this morning, and the pilot came on
board about 5.30. We were all anxious for his arrival,
as we had seen no one from the outer world for so long.
We thought him an Adonis, but, in matter of fact, he
was a very common ugly little man. At about eleven
o’clock we passed through the Heads, which is only a
quarter of a mile wide, and forms the entrance to a
splendid bay. Being thirty-nine miles from the pier,
and hardly any wind, it was four o’clock before we
came to anchor. I was much disappointed with what
I saw of the land ; it was very flat and sandy. A good
many have already gone ashore. A man came on board
with letters directly we arrived. I wish ours had been
addressed to the “ Rollwell ” instead of the post-office,
as we should have had them, now we shall not get
them till to-morrow. We are going to sleep on board
to-night; but Archie is going on shore at once to try
and get rooms. He is waiting to take this letter, so I
must end.
With our best love to all,
Yours ever,
MAUD.


Seacroft,
Beaconsfield Parade,
St. Kilda,
December 19 th, 1883.
Dear Mother,
We came in here this morning, it is a small
wooden house of one story facing the sea, and about three
miles from Melbourne. Archie was very fortunate in
getting these diggings, which he did on the 17th, the
evening we arrived, but we slept two nights on board, as
we could not get our luggage off till this morning.
Yesterday, when they weighed anchor to go alongside the
pier, they found we were stuck on the mud, so had to
wait for the tide, otherwise we should perhaps have got
away yesterday. We 'were sorry to leave the old ship,
and feel quite strange in a respectably sized bedroom
after our cabin. After passing our luggage through the
Customs, we hired a buggy to drive us to St. Kilda. It
was our first experience of one, and we were awfully
jolted coming along, the roads have such big ruts in them
and our springs were weak, I suppose. Yesterday morn-
ing we went into Melbourne. It is a much finer town than
I expected, and they have some very handsome buildings.
The shops are very good, and some of the things
reasonable, others very dear. We got a very nice zephyr
for a dress at sixpence; we have been obliged to get
ourselves each a new one. G. has grown so stout she
could not get into her print. She is looking uncommonly
well, and weighs 11 stone lib. having gained 211bs. I
have gained 8, and Archie 23. He is looking very well
now, and awfully tanned. But I was describing Melbourne
to you. There is quite a stream of water running down


each side of the street, with little wooden bridges over,
which keeps the roads nice and clean. After a thunder-
storm they get quite flooded ; I believe it is sometimes
necessar} r to take a cab to cross the streets, and on one
occasion a child was drowned. A pretty river called the
Yarra-Yarra runs through. The churches are numerous,
the best being the Scotch church, built of brown freestone,
and the celebrated white kakanui, in the early English
style, with a steeple 211 ft. high. Most of the other
buildings are of what they call blue-stone. The river is
wide enough to admit large steamers and vessels to come
right into the very heart of the town, but no further, as
navigation is stopped by a dyke of basaltic rock, known
as the Falls. There are plenty of ’busses, hansoms, cabs,
cars, waggonettes, etc.; it reminds one of London to see
so many hansoms. There are two railway stations, and
the principal streets are one mile in length, 99ft. wide,
and run at right angles to each other. They are in-
tersected by smaller streets which bear the names of the
larger ones with the prefix of “ little.” There are some
very nice botanical and zoological gardens, but we have
not been to them yet. Considering the town is only
forty-six years old, it is really wonderful, both in size and
structure.
December 2Qth. —Yesterday being Christmas Lay, we
went to dinner on the “ Rollwell,” and had a real Christ-
mas dinner, roast beef and plum pudding ; the only
difference being the delicious fruits strawberries,
cherries, etc., which of course are in season now, being the
middle of summer, and frightfully hot. You remember
the amateur photographer 1 mentioned in my last letter.
We heard on Christmas Day that he had swindled the
ship out of £7O, besides pocketing the £3O he got for
his photographs at the bazaar. The captain had made
up to this young man all the voyage (for he was sup-
posed to be rather a swell, connected with a leading firm


of ship owners, and very rich), as he was to get
his son into a good service, “so the folks say.” The
young man was allowed to have the best ot everything ;
the best wine was kept for him, and if we went to the
head-steward for anything, the answer was, “ Oh, it has
to be kept for Mr. So-and-so.” He frequently dined and
breakfasted with the captain in his cabin, and he was not
made to pay his wine bill weekly like all the others. On
our arrival in Melbourne, the purser remonstrated with
him, and said it was not usual for passengers to leave the
ship until they had paid their wine-bill, etc. ihe young
man said, u I am coming back ; I will leave my boxes.
The innocent purser thought it all right and let him go
ashore, but as night came on he did not come back, and
his boxes were opened and found to be The
young man has not been heard of yet, and I don t sup-
pose lie ever will. It serves the captain quite right, I
think. We go most days into Melbourne, as it is only
ten minutes by rail from here. One day we made an
excursion to a pretty village called Heidelbmg,
miles out of Melbourne, in a buggy. We drove a white
beast, with a long mane and tail. Two or three times it
nearly came down: we were glad to get home safe; I did
not think we should, one time. At Heidelburg we found
some locusts, the first we have seen; I brought them
back to St.. Kilda, pinned on to my hat. We also saw
and heard several laughing jackasses. The young ones
are grey, and the old have quite white breasts and dark
backs. We had a very wet day yesterday, which was
rather a treat, as it laid the dust and cooled the air. Tie
dust, by the by, is awful in Melbourne ; dust storms
blow up frequently, and if possible it is always best to
find shelter for a few minutes. The hot pavements, too,
make our feet quite sore. It was awfully funny when
we first came off the ship, we could hardly walk straight,
and felt inclined to stagger, and were always tripping


over the smallest obstacles. We paid a visit to the
zoological gardens yesterday ; they are not at all bad
gardens, but few animals. They have any amount of
kangaroos in a field, and we saw all the venomous snakes
and birds of Australia. We had an oyster lunch on our
way as we drove home ; they are very cheap and very
good. They have enormous sales here ; I saw advertised
at one sale 22,000 sheep, 4,000 lambs, and 500 cattle.
They have a comical way of putting poetry in the papers
after the announcement of a death, and all sorts of funny
remarks. The local papers are very funny to read. We
had such a trouble to get someone to take our washing
when we came here, it being Christmas time ; conse-
quently we are very short. I had to borrow one of Ar.’s
night-shirts, which fitted me rather “ too much.” All
new comers here are called “new chums;” we have heard
them say it as we have passed the roughs or larrikins, as
they are called here, in the streets. The country, what
we have seen of it, so far, is flat, bare, and dreary. lam
rather disappointed in everything. We leave to-morrow
for Sydney, and have been busy packing all the morning,
and saying good-bye to our friends.
December 31s£. —We left Melbourne at 4.50 on Thurs-
day. They charged us 29/- for excess of luggage ; 841bs.
only allowed each first-class passenger; quite absurd, and
we were very much disgusted, as our cash is getting very
low. We had a carriage to ourselves all the way : we
went three or four hundred miles through the bush, which
is very monotonous ; nothing to vary the scene except an
occasional log hut, and nothing but gum trees, tall, stiff-
looking fellows. At intervals we passed through miles
and miles of dead gum trees, stripped of their bark,
looking white and ghostly against the sky. We had a
most erratic engine ; it took in water about every two
hours, and oil or something every hour. At least, we
were always stopping for something, and once I saw the


driver jump off and get a drink at a shanty. We tra-
velled very slowly. At 11.15 p.m. we had to change trains
at a place called Albury, the terminus for the Victoria
trains. We had some dinner there, and very glad we
were to get something, not having had anything since
we left Melbourne. We secured *a compartment in a
New South Wales train, and settled ourselves the best
way we could for the night. I dozed till about four, when
Ar. woke me up to see the sun rise. It was very beauti-
ful, but I was much too sleepy to take it in. We reached
a place called Goulburn at 8.30, where we had breakfast.
The country is very flat and uninteresting ; everything is
so burnt up, we have seen nothing green all the way,
except a few willow trees growing by the side of a creek,
at a place called Barber’s Creek, where we stopped to
take in water from a high tank. A place called Wo-
donga was the prettiest place we stopped at. We saw
several bullock carts there, drawn by teams of twenties
and thirties. We passed several bush fires which were
raging fiercely. At 1.45 we reached Sydney, where John
and C. Danvers met us. We walked to the house where
John was staying, in which he had taken rooms for us.
We have a sitting-room looking right on to the harbour,
which is lovely, besides being very interesting, watching
all the ships loading and unloading. After we had had
dinner and got our luggage unpacked, we went with
John up a rather steep hill, called the Flagstaff hill.
The view was splendid ; we could see right into the
harbour ; it is the most beautiful one I have ever seen.
We turned in very early that night, as we were
thoroughly tired out. Ar. went to the Pacific office and
booked through to London ; took two deck cabins on
board the “ Australia” (which sails from here Jan. 31st),
and also on board the “ Zealandia,” which will leave
New Zealand about March 4th for America. We walked
through the botanical gardens on Saturday. They are


simply exquisite ; full of great palm trees and ferns of
all sorts. We saw lovely shrubs and oleanders in full
flower ; in fact, the oleander grows to perfection here.
There is one on the roadside opposite our house as large
as a large damson tree, and in full flower. The place is
alive with locusts ; they make a peculiar whirring noise.
We could hardly hear ourselves speak when we happened
to get under a tree full of them. There were lovely
parrots flying about, and the butterflies look like small
birds flying past ; there are some as large as one’s hand,
and of most brilliant colours. We also just walked
through the town, which is very pretty and picturesque.
The streets are narrow and irregular ; the shops are not
nearly so good as in Melbourne, and the inhabitants
seem much slower, plodding people, not like the go-
ahead Melbournites. A great many of them are Chinese.
I believe there are very few towns in Australia where
“John Chinaman” does not make himself known. We
have not made any excursions yet; to-day is so very hot,
we have not been out all the morning. I want this
letter to go by to-morrow’s mail, and I hear I must post
it before six, so must take it at once. Hoping all are
well at home, and with best love from us all,
Yours ever,
MAUD.


61, Lower Fort Street,
Sydney,
January 19th, 1884.
Dear Mother,
We received your letter yesterday, and were
awfully glad to get it. We were sorry to leave our home
on the sea, as I suppose Maud told you. We stayed two
extra nights, when she was berthed, and dined there on
Christmas day, as you know. We are simply frizzled up
here, the heat is dreadful. On Tuesday we had one of
those terrible hot winds, which is a great deal worse than
the sun, as you can’t get out of the way of it. Fans, of
course, are no good at all. We thought on the water
would be the coolest place, so went 14 miles up the
Parramatta river to Parramatta ; but it got hotter and
hotter, owing to the bush fires, which we found were
burning in places on both sides of the river. We were
on a little passenger steamer, so were obliged to go on.
It took us two hours, and there was nothing much to see
when we did get there. We were frightfully done up
when we got home. Archie had a bad headache and
attack of sickness ; we were afraid he had a touch of sun-
stroke, but it passed off. The last two days have been
much cooler, and we have had a little rain, which was
badly wanted, as the water supply in Sydney would only
have held out a week longer. In some places now they
are only allowed water three times a week. Sydney is
very full. Mr. Hollis, who is going with us to ’Frisco,
came here yesterday, and had to wait some hours before
he could get a room in any hotel. They told him half
England was in Sydney. He has been in Gibbs’ Land,
and has had splendid shooting; kangaroos, native bears


(which are very small), opossums, black swans, etc.
They had two natives to skin the opossums, and they do
it with their teeth. (This is for the Gov.’s benefit.) They
were called the King and Queen, and sat down on the
ground side by side ; the King with a cigar in the corner
of his mouth, and the Queen with a clay pipe. They hold
the skin of the ’possum in their teeth and the body in
their hands, and then ptill. The money for doing it was
given to the Queen, which the King did not at all ap-
prove of, so I believe they had a free fight. lam afraid
we shan’t see any kangaroos now, but we shall see some
pig-sticking in Kew Zealand, as I hope we shall go up
country and stay at some small place. We very much
want to see a buck-jumper, but have not done so yet ; I
suppose we should if we went up country. Horses here
are very cheap, and meat also ; something ought to be,
for everything else is dreadfully dear, a great deal worse
than Melbourne. I don’t think they know what tender
meat is like ; all we have had is like leather. They have
to cook it almost directly it is killed. The butchers must
lose a lot, as the shops seem to be full of bad meat when
we go past. There is really no scenery about here,
except just round the harbour ; nothing but the ever-
lasting gum tree. We found a tree covered with beautiful
beetles, shook it, and they came down by the dozen.
There are huge bushes of scented geranium growing
wild. We have got a fine collection of butterflies,
beetles, etc. The boys laugh at me, because I don’t like
to pick up those horrible hoppers with long legs, they
kick so, and are so strong. You put your hand down,
as you think, upon them, and are astonished when they
jump about four yards further off. It is an endless chase,
but I was determined I would catch one ; I managed it,
and when I got hold of it had to put a pin through it.
A cold shiver ran down my back all the time ; it was
horrid! I shan’t attempt to catch any more.... I should


not like to live out here, the colonials are most indepen-
dent and inclined to he cheeky. They all look, too, as if
they had been frizzled before a hot tire ; I don’t wonder
at it. Maud and I have been dreadfully bitten by the
mosquitoes, they swarm here. We have a hunt for them
every night, and for cockroaches, before turning into bed.
The cockroaches are large brown things. One night, just
before I got into bed, I saw one crawling on the sheet.
We gave chase, had a good run, and finally killed on the
pillow. The first thing I saw when I woke this morning
was a small hopper taking jumps up the sheet towards
me. I “ cotched ” him and pinned him to the table for
John’s collection, and when I went to take him up he
jumped through the window with a pin in him; wasn’t
it horrid'? It is steadily raining now; I expect it will
put out some of the hush fires. A shepherd was roasted
to death a few days ago, and thousands of sheep have
been burnt; the loss has been enormous. All the shrubs
here are lovely. I wish you could see the oleanders, they
are magnificent, though no one seems to think much of
them here. I have not kept a diary; we decided that
one book would not be enough for each of us, we have only
two, so we intended each to write in turn, one one day and
one another. I wrote a bit at first, and Maud has writ-
ten it all since. I quite intend to write a book when I
get home, only for the inspection of friends though ; and,
as I told Llewelyn, I suppose the correct thing would be
to dedicate it to him, if it ever gets done. Ar. brought
in a lot of peaches and nectarines this morning ; nectar-
ines are sixpence a dozen. They say it has been a very
bad fruit season, but one would not think so to see the
quantities going about; hand-carts everywhere piled up
with peaches, etc. Bananas and oranges are dear now,
as they are nearly over. We had some passion fruit one
day to try ; it tastes like black currants, only very nasty.
We shall all be very glad to get to America and have some


cold weather ; anything is better than this intense heat,
it knocks one up so. I should not like to live in the
Colonies under any circumstances, and some people tell
us they would not go home on any account. We have
not been to church yet ;itis so much too hot. We went to
the cemetery the other day, which is a disgrace to Sydney.
It is like a rough, hilly field, crammed full of grave-
stones. Passion flowers grew wild, straggling over
everything in a most neglected state. We went over the
‘‘Australia” yesterday afternoon ; she came in a day or
two ago. She is a very fine boat, but very narrow, un-
fortunately ; for the narrower she is the more she will
roll, and how ill I shall be! 1 feel almost ill when I
think of it. Our cabins are on deck ; they are smaller
than those below, but being on deck they are considerably
better, as one gets plenty of air and light. The crew
seem to be nearly all Chinese ; such horrid looking
creatures!
January 23rd. —I hope you will be able to read the
first part of my letter; Archie put a lot of vinegar into
the ink, as we had so little. I have better ink now, but
such a dreadful pen. We went to Botany Bay yesterday,
and took our lunch with us. It is a very desolate-
looking place. We were on the opposite side of the bay
to where Captain Cook first landed. We went as far as
we could in a tram car, and then walked the rest of the
way. We had our lunch close to the shore, among the
trees ; afterwards Ar. took a photo of us and the rem-
nants. We walked a good long way on the shore, and I
found some lovely shells. We watched some men hauling
in a net of fish, but they did not seem to catch many.
We could not get very near them, as the tide was out a
little way, and mud is substituted for sand there. We
went back to our luncheon place, and made a fire for tea.
After a long search for water we found some in a hole,
which, after draining through a clean handkerchief that


we took with us for the purpose, we were able to convert
into tea, which we drank out of tumblers and stirred with
sticks. They put us up lunch at our lodgings, so we had
no idea what we had till we came to unpack it. We had
only the billy-can to boil the water and make the tea in,
but being very thirsty we thought it excellent. To-
morrow we are going quite into the heart of the bush,
where there is not a soul for miles and miles. A friend
of Mr, Hollis’ has a log hut there, of which he has given
us the key ; so we intend to make a day of it. We have
seen a few snakes ; it is impossible to kill them, as they
are so quick. Mr. Hollis told us of a cow that was bitten
by one, close to the place he stayed at in Gibbs’ Land.
The animal fell down dead, and no one even took the
trouble to skin it, or bury it, or anything ; but let the
eagles and ants eat it. There are any amount of Chinese
in this place ; I suppose, owing to the fact that they will
work for half the wages an Englishman would ask, and
in consequence are more often employed. There is a fine
now imposed on every Chinaman who lands in Sydney.
I read of a very hard case in the paper the other day.
Three Chinamen were wrecked off the coast not very far
from Sydney; they managed to save themselves by
swimming ashore. On landing they were immediately
seized and ordered to pay the usual fine. Not being able
to do so, all their property having gone down in the ship,
they were sent to prison for a month. Poor John China-
man has a hard time of it. Larrikins often set upon him
and ill use him, for no other reason than that he is John
Chinaman. We made an excursion to a place called
Coogee Bay the other day. We went by the tram. They
have steam trams here; they are nothing more nor less
than trains through the streets. They have stations at
the street corners, and out of town have a regular rail-
way railed in. They whiz round the corners and go so
fast through the streets it is quite alarming, and I believe


they often, run over people, in spite of all the whistling.
We were delighted with Coogee ; I don’t think 1 ever
saw the sea such a pale green, or the sand so white
before. Ar. took some photos there ; and after having
tea at a sort of cafe we returned home in time for dinner.
Coogee Bay is one of the suburbs of Sydney.
January 2§th. —We had a lovely day for our excursion
to the hut in the wood I told you of in the beginning of
my letter. We started very early in the morning, in a
small steamer called the “ Fairylight,” to Manly Beach,
calling at Wooloomooloo on our way. We reached Manly
in about an hour’s time ; though it is situated in the
harbour, it is so large that it takes all that time to get
there. It used to he called Brighton, but as it was said
the natives were more manly there than elsewhere, it was
changed to Manly Beach. On arriving there we bought
some mutton chops, potatoes, bread, and wine. Arming
ourselves with these provisions, we started to find the
hut, which was some seven or eight miles distant. After
some little trouble we found it, situated in a lovely bit of
the bush, with a magnificent view over the trees of the
Heads and sea beyond. On opening the door we found
just one room, scantily furnished, with a table, three
stools, two mattresses on the ground, a few mugs, plates,
etc. We set to work to make a fire behind, to cook the
chops and get the dinner ready, as we were all starving.
Ar. and John started to look for water, the creek which
usually supplied it being dry. After a long search they
found some in a waterhole, which they carried back in a
can, but it was so dreadfully dirty that at first we were
afraid we should not be able to drink it; but after letting
the can stand a bit, and then pouring the water gently
through a handkerchief, and mixing it with a little of the
wine we had brought, we were able to quench our thirst.
Late in ihe afternoon we had tea, and set off on our walk
to Manly Beach, in order to catch the “ Fairylight” back


to Sydney, where we arrived in the evening quite tired
out. I shall have to close my letter now ; I have told
you all the news I can think of. With our best love
to all,
Your loving daughter,
GERTY.


61, Lower Fort Street,
Sydney,
January 30th.
Dear Gov.,
I intend beginning a letter to you to-night, late
as it is—9.3o p.m.; but it will not go till Thursday.
I expect I shall not have time to write again till we get
to New Zealand, as we have to be on board the
“Australia” by 12 o’clock to-morrow. I shall be very
glad to leave Sydney and get on the water again. The
heat has been so intense since we have been here. We
have made excursions to all the places near, worth
seeing. Wg have suffered dreadfully from mosquitoes
since we have been here ; they are so very sociable. I
have two huge lumps on my forehead from last night’s
visitation. It was the Anniversary day last Saturday,
of what I don’t quite know. They had a regatta in the
harbour, and it was a public holiday; so we did not go
out much, as it was very disagreeable walking about.
Ar. and G. went to church this morning ; they did not
like it much, the service was so very low. Sundays are
not kept much here; the shops and publics are opened
just the same as on week-days. We had a thunder-
storm yesterday; it was so nice after the rain, which
was very heavy indeed while it lasted. 1 hope it will
put out the bush fires, which have been raging ever
since we have been here. I think 1 told you in my last
letter what an enormous amount of damage they have
done ; thousands of roasted sheep lying about. One
man alone had 10,000 acres of grass burnt, and eight
miles of fencing destroyed. We have a small back
garden to this house, in which our landlord keeps a


couple of dingoes, the native dog, you know. They
are very pretty; one is pretty tame, but the other very
wild and savage. They whine dreadfully at night,
which was very disturbing, but we have got used to
them now. I go out most mornings with John to the
botanical gardens to catch butterflies. We have got
quite a nice collection ; some exquisite ones. I had
nearly forgotten to tell you how they kept New Year's
Eve on the ships below our window. We turned in
about 10 o’clock, but could not sleep for the noise, so
“ turned out ” again, and went on to the balcony of our
bedroom, to see what it was all about, and we found they
were keeping New Year’s Eve on the ships down below.
We stood watching them set off fireworks from the
different ships, and listening to their crews singing. A
little before 12 they began to ring the Old Year out and
the New Year in, with the different ships’ bells. Some
of them were very cracked, and the noise was anything
but melodious. A little after 12 I turned in again ; a
mosquito also turned in, and began singing the Old
Year out and the New Year in, unpleasantly close to my
head ; and though I made frantic efforts to impress
upon him that a new year was already in, it was of no
avail, and 1 was obliged to tuck my head under the
sheet, and listen to his song of one note, till Morpheus
came to my assistance, and I forgot all about mos-
quitoes, bells, and New Years. Some days it is really
too hot to go out, especially if a hot Avind is blowing.
No one who has not experienced these Avinds can
possibly form an idea Avhat they are like. If you open
the Avindow it gets into the room and makes it stifling.
The bush fires are still very bad ; a ship six miles from
land had her decks covered Avith bits of Avood and ashes
blown from the bush fires, which they could see blazing
all that way off. There is no bathing place in the
harbour on account of the sharks which SAvarm there ;


in fact, there is no bathing place anywhere, either on
the coast of Australia or New Zealand on that account,
unless there is a place enclosed, as was the case at
St. Kilda. We saw some aborigines the other day ;
they are most repulsive looking creatures: they are
very seldom seen now about the towns ; in fact, they
have been exterminated to such an extent that there
are very few left. t They smear themselves with a pig-
ment called “ wilga,” which is red, and mixed with
grease. The women wear their hair, which is quite
black and very coarse, cut short; the children when
very young are tattooed, principally on the chest and
shoulders. (I believe this custom is out of date now.)
They are a wandering people, seldom sleeping many
nights in the same place. They make huts to sleep,in,
about four feet high, like the section of a beehive. In
eastern Australia the bodies of the dead used to be
carried round and round the grave to puzzle the dead
so that he might not find his way back. They also
pretended to receive instructions from him before
covering up the grave. This was a custom some twenty
years ago ; now they are very much more civilized (at
least what remains of them, for they are fast dying out),
being employed as servants in various ways in the
different towns. I think Sydney harbour the most
beautiful one I have ever seen ; the entrance is very
narrow, being only three-quarters of a mile in width,
with shallow water each side, and only enough water
in the centre to allow two ships to pass at the same
time. The harbour is a mile and a half wide and seven
miles long, and has deep water to within a few feet of
the shore. I believe the shipping trade is enormous ;
nearly I,O(JU vessels entering the port annually. The
town is very picturesque, though the older parts are
narrow, dirty, and crowded. Some of the principal
streets are good, George Street and Pitt Street being


the two principal ones. The shops fair ; not so
good as at Melbourne. It is a thorough English town ;
the very names remind one of home —George Street,
Prince’s Street, King Street, Hyde Park, Surrey Hills.
Hyde Park, though it comes far short of its namesake m
London, is nevertheless a very pleasant spot lor a walk,
being nicely shaded by trees. There is a market held
twice a week. The country in the immediate neigh-
bourhood, and for many miles inland, is sandy, barren,
and dreary in the extreme. Hiey have a very line
museum, which is well worth seeing, with a splendid
collection of birds and animals. The shipping below
our windows interests us immensely, we watch it all
day. I suppose G. has told you ot our trip up the
Parramatta in a small steamer. I think it was the hot-
test day we have had this summer ; a fierce, hot wind
blowing, a burning sun, bush fires raging at intervals
on either side of the river, made the heat almost un-
bearable. The wind, as it blew against our faces, was
almost painful. Had we known what we should have
to go through, we should never have staited ; once
having done so, we were obliged to go on till we came
to a landing stage. Coming back, the wind had changed
and it was almost cool. In the night we had huni-
cane of dust and wind, but not a drop of rain. Things
are very bad out here ; stock are dying everywhere for
want of water and food. Bush fires are still raging all
over the country. I really can’t find anything more to
say. G. keeps saying she told you this, that, and the
other ; so I fancy she must have given you all the
news of what we have done and seen. I find this in c
has been let out with vinegar, and this pen is abomin-
able ; so I think, with two such grievances as these, it
is impossible to write more. With best love to all,
Yours ever,
MAUD.


Star Hotel,
Auckland,
February 17 th.
Dear Gov.,
I wrote you such a short letter last time from
Sydney, that I will write you another now. We had a
very enjoyable trip of five days on the “ Australia.”
The boat was everything that could be desired, and the
living was excellent ; and I was not at all ill, though
we had a fair sea on. I was able to strut about the
deck as though 1 had been at sea all my life. If there
is one thing in the world, you know, that will make a
fellow insufferably self-conceited, it is to have his or her
stomach behave well the first few days at sea ; especi-
ally when his or her fellow-passengers are more or less
prostrate. The crew and servants were all Chinese.
I like the latter very much, they are so clean and nice ;
and really one, the captain’s servant, who waited on us
as we sat at his table, had quite a nice face. G. fell
quite in love with him. His name was Yung Pyng.
The captain’s name was Guest ; he was an extremely
nice man, and said he was an Englishman, though he
used “ Why, cert’nly ” and u I guess ” every two
minutes. We went on board about 12 o’clock, John
with us, and all lunched together. A little before
3 p.m., the officer called out “ All ashore ! ” so we had
to say good-bye to John, who went back to the shore
and watched us till we were out of sight. As she was
a mail boat, she fired a salute, as she left the harbour.
The pilot left us at the Heads, and, being very foggy,
we soon lost sight of land. We liked our cabins very
much ; it was such a treat to be able to have the windows


open all day and all night if we liked. We slept with it
open the first night ; but J was rather startled, on waking
up suddenly in the morning, to see the yellow withered
face of a John Chinaman looking in, grinning. I
eventually found he was cleaning the cabins just out-
side, which they did every morning ; so 1 closed my
window the next night. The Chinese stewards wear
wide white or blue trousers, a loose blue blouse, with
wide open sleeves, showing remarkably clean white tight-
fitting ones inside, and a small black skull cap, worn on
the back of the head, and of course the inevitable pig-tail.
This voyage was very uneventful, only lasting such a
short time. There were very few passengers on board.
We arrived at Auckland on the fifth day from Sydney,
at four o’clock in the morning. We were awakened by
the guns firing, announcing our arrival to the authori-
ties. The harbour is a most dangerous one to enter at
all times, but especially so in a fog, there being so
many islands and sunken rocks. The captain told me
he disliked taking a ship into Auckland harbour in a
fog, and always tried to avoid doing so, if possible. We
came ashore immediately after breakfast, and came to
this hotel, which is the best in Auckland, though that is
not saying much. It is a poor town, though there are
some fine houses in the suburbs. Mount Eden, 500 feet,
an extinct volcano, is one of the chief features of the
place ; it is a three miles’ walk from the town. From
the top there is a lovely view over the town and har-
bour, and the river Waitemata. You can also see
nineteen extinct volcanoes from there. The Kauri pine
is one of the principal trees here. The principal ex-
ports are Kauri gum and timber. They make very
pretty ornaments from the gum. We left Auckland
three days after our arrival, in a little steamer called
the “ Glenelg,” for Tauranga, en route for the hot lakes.
Our party consisted of eight people ; we three, Mr.


Hollis, Mr. Simpson, and a Mr. Edingstone and his wife
(Americans). The proper steamer had been taken off
for repairs, and the one then running had only accom-
modation for sixteen passengers. We were over thirty
on board. It is a very dangerous coast, and we none
of us liked the idea of going out to sea in this small tub;
and had it not been very calm, I don’t think we should
have gone. The evening was lovely, and we sat on
deck talking till about 11.30, when we went below to
try and find our berths in the ladies’ cabin, a horrid
place with bunks all round, one above the other. It
was quite full when we entered, with the exception of
our two berths which had been reserved for G. and
myself; indeed, so full that three Maori women were
lying on the floor. This was our first acquaintance with
them ; I did not like the look of them at all. The
people were ill all round. We just lay down, and I
managed to sleep for an hour or two ; when I was
awakened by being nearly flung out. I found it was
blowing hard, quite a gale, and we were rolling very
much. People were all very ill, and I could hear cries
of u Steward ! ” issuing from the saloon, where the men
were sleeping on the table, chairs, and even on the
floor. I heard water coming in somewhere ; and as I
could not see a steward, I got up to investigate myself,
and found the port-hole open in the passage, and the
water coming in every time we rolled. I managed to
shut it, and turned in again, but sleep was impossible
for the noise, which continued till we steamed into
calmer water, close to Tauranga. On arriving at Tau-
ranga, about eight in the morning, we made our way to
the only hotel in the place, which is very small, and
ordered some breakfast. Here we saw a number of
natives; some in the most absurd dresses. One old
woman had a man’s top coat on, reaching to her knees;
another man had a kilt and a sort of pea-jacket. They


were all more or less tattooed, some nearly black, others
dark brown. After breakfast, the coach with four
horses came to the door, to drive us to Ohinemutu (hot
lakes). The coach was more like a covered wagonette
than anything. We climbed into our seats, and settled
ourselves for our 42 miles’ drive. We started well,
which we kept up for about three miles, when we came
to bad roads. We had a beautiful drive, though it very
nearly ended disastrously. Eighteen miles of it was
through the Oropi forest. The forest I shall never for-
get ; the shrubs, palms, and ferns, owing to the recent
rains, were the most brilliant green. They were most
beautiful. Huge trees towered overhead. I asked the
driver some of their names, but could not understand
what he said. The road was very steep ; we descended
one small precipice only to climb another ; and it was
mended with tree trunks just thrown across, over which
we bumped in the most delightful manner. Every now
and again, the wheels wmuld nearly disappear in a mud
hole. Most of us got out and walked through the
steepest part. Halfway through we stopped to lunch
and feed the horses, at a wooden whare, kept by a
Maori road-maker, named Nikora, and his wife. Lunch
consisted of chicken, ham, and bread. After stopping
there about an hour, we started again. Unfortunately,
the rain began again in real earnest; so we had to put
on cloaks and mackintoshes. It seemed to come down a
condensed stream between the high wooded ranges
that shut in the road. The horses, refreshed by their
feed and rest, started at a good pace ; we bumped and
splashed over tree roots and rocks, in a way calculated
to break any springs but those, and nearly throwing us
out of our seats. But this did not last long, as we came
to a very steep piece, with rocks going straight up on
one side and a sheer precipice on the other. The
gentlemen all got out to walk, and the horses began


slowly to drag us up to the top. About halfway up, I
noticed our driver was nearly asleep; I thought from
his looks he had been refreshing himself too freely at
Mrs. Nikora’s. 1 spoke to him, but he took no notice.
The horses were going as they liked, and the leaders
seemed dangerously near the precipice ; but just at this
critical point we got to the top, where the gentlemen
got in again, and we started to descend the other side.
All of a sudden the wheels slipped into a deep hole,
making the coach sway over towards the precipice.
We all thought we were going over, as we were so
very near. Archie, who was on the box, seized the
reins and pulled the leaders aside. This seemed to
make the coachman very angry ; he roused himself, and
taking the reins from Archie, whipped the horses up
into a gallop, and we tore down the hill at a furious
pace, bumping over rocks and roots of trees, rocking
from side to side in a most dangerous manner. It was
with difficulty we kept our seats ; in fact, Mr. Simpson
was thrown right up against the roof of the coach,
when we w r ent over a larger rock than usual. One of
the leaders stumbled badly, but luckily righted himself.
We were all dreadfully frightened, but sat in silence,
none daring to speak, for we could not have stopped,
had we wished. At the bottom of this steep piece was
a nasty curve, which led us over a bridge across a
ravine. Our hearts jumped into our mouths as we
neared it, and more than one of us thought we should
end our days there ; but we crossed it safely—how I do
not know—and in a few minutes we were quietly
toiling up another hill, and were able to breathe freely.
We none of us spoke much, and our fears were not
allayed, as the darkness was rapidly coming on, and the
coachman himself had hurried us into our seats at the
halfway house, expressing a wish to be out of the bush
before the darkness came on ; so we did not know what


unknown dangers we might still encounter. However,
we did get out of the bush safely, and arrived at our
destination without any further mishap; and on our
arrival we acquainted our host with the story of our
perilous drive. On telling him that the name of our
driver was Dickenson, he said he knew him, and that
Dickenson was in the habit of taking morphia ; and
added there would be an accident some day. We were
devoutly thankful that the accident had not taken place
that day.
It was too dark to see anything that night, so we went
to bed early. When we looked out of the window the
next morning, a wonderful sight met our eyes. The
whole place seemed to be bubbling up with hot water.
On each side of the road is a stream of hot water running
away into the plain. The Maori village is situated in
the very midst of boiling water. Streams of hot water
and springs bubbling up, here, there, and everywhere;
great clouds of vapour rising continually; strange hiss-
ings, bubblings, and gurglings can be heard perpetually.
Groups of dusky figures, standing or squatting, wherever
we turned our eyes, made us feel that we were really in
Maori land at last. The name of the hotel was Lake
House, so called from being situated on Lake Rotarura.
After breakfast we went out to look round. Treading our
way cautiously through a series of hot water holes, we
arrived at the Maori settlement, and made a close in-
spection of the natives and their whares (huts). Many of
the dresses of the women were gorgeous in the extreme.
They mostly wear European attire, which I think is a
great pity ; they look so much more imposing enveloped
in a blanket, bareheaded and barelegged. The whares are
built of reeds, large or small, according to the size of the
family to be accommodated ; dried rushes, strewn on the
ground one side, form their beds. They live principally on
pork or potatoes, and do all their cooking in the hot water


holes. The pork looked black and nasty, owing to the
unwholesome butchering, I expect. They do not bleed
pigs, pakeha (white man) fashion, but merely knock them
on the head or drown them. We watched from the
balcony on Lake House one morning a little mild killing
of this nature. Two Maori boys, after chasing a pig for
about twenty minntes, managed to catch him, and
dragged him by one hind leg to the side of a hot spring,
where he was hit on the head, and then thrust into the
water and suspended by one leg until quite dead. Then
he was chopped up with an axe, and was ready for eating.
I saw the joints afterwards lying outside one of the
whares. The morning after our arrival, we saw a terrible
fight between two women. They began nearly in front of
our house. The men had literally to strangle them off
each other, but this only stopped them for a time ; they
soon appeared in another part of the settlement, this time
armed, one with a club, .the other with a long stick.
However, they did not come to blows again, but railed at
each other for the best part of an hour. The noise they
made soon attracted crowds of natives, who squatted at a
safe distance to watch. A man, a near relative of one of
the combatants, tried to stop them ; but his spouse
quietly lifted him up and threw him on the ground. She
repeated this operation whenever he attempted to inter-
fere. Of course we did not understand what was being
said, not being acquainted wdth the Maori tongue ; but
we were told that one of the women was the wife of the
man with whom the other one had fallen in love, and
wanted him to elope with her—not very far, only to the
next whare. However, the wife did not see this, nor was
it a case of “ Barkis is willin’,’’ either ; for the poor fellow
had no wish to elope. How it ended I don’t know, for
we did not stop to see it out. At the bottom of the
garden is a small pond of boiling mud and water, and
built close by are some baths, where one can have a mud


bath at any hour in the day. It is a wonderful cure for
rheumatism, and there were a few rheumatic people at
Lake House who had come a great distance for the pur-
pose. I tried a mud bath, it was most peculiar; the
mud, when it was sufficiently cool for one to get in, had a
very soothing effect. They thinned it down with cold
water to about twice the thickness of pea soup. Close by
is what they call a “ rinser,” which was filled with cold
water ; the name suggests its use. At a place called the
Point, a mile distant, there were several other baths ; the
Priest’s Bath, which was supposed to heal anyone, and
Yenus’ Bath, which was supposed to make you beautiful.
We tried the former ; it was a large square bath, hidden
from view by palings. It was very strong of sulphur, and
turned us all the colour of lobsters, but I am glad to say
we did not remain so long. I went into the meeting-
house or temple at Ohinemutu. It is really worth seeing;
it is adorned both inside and out with all sorts of quaint
and grotesque carvings. The walls are panelled, and on
each alternate panel is a carved effigy of some immortal
ancestor. A good deal of painting in red and yellow is
to be seen on the beams of the ceiling. On one side I
noticed a peculiar looking boat, rowed by some black
fellows with long oars, towed by a whale, and guided by
a star. They were supposed by Maori tradition to have
come from Fiji, and to have been brought by the whale
to New Zealand, and where they landed the props of the
canoe took root, and two trees sprang up. They are the
only two of that kind in New,Zealand, so the Maories say,
but there are plenty to be found in the Fiji Islands. They
use this temple for several purposes. It serves as a
general sleeping apartment on a ffite day ; also for pala-
vers and taugis. A tangi is when they mourn when
anyone dies ; they all sit down on the ground, and howl
at the top of their voices, and keep it up the whole of one
day. The Maories always have a lot of dogs ; starved,


mangy looking animals, I read the other day an amusing
account of the Maories’ religion. It was the introduction
of pigs, not bibles and tracts, that put a stop to canni-
balism. It was no doubt the scarcity of animal food that
was the cause of it; if only bibles and tracts had been
introduced into New Zealand, roast missionary would still
he a favourite item in the Maori bill of fare. They have
numerous gods, or rather they had, which they used to
worship ; now they worship spirits. I saw two or three
discarded idols lying about Ohinemutu. Tiki, one of their
gods, created man, according to Maori tradition ; he
formed a man of red clay, mingled with his own blood,
and when he had mixed this man, he stuck him up
against a fence to dry. The drying process brought life
into this man. The first woman was created in the same
way, hut heated into existence by the rays of the sun.
The population grew so wicked, that it was found neces-
sary to drown all evil out of the world. When it was
under the water there came another Maori god on a
fishing expedition, with his two brothers, and one of the
brothers, who had a mighty strong hook, fished up some-
thing that it took all the fisher’s powers to land above
water. This was New Zealand. He secured it to the top
of a long pole, and thus gave the world another start.
They also believe in immortality ; their road to heaven
is through a cave and a cliff at the North Cape of the
North Island. Through this, departed spirits pass to the
realms beyond, using the roots of a tree, which grows
there, as a ladder ; but all great chiefs have to fly up to
the sky, and leave one eye there as an addition to the
stars, as they pass through the cave.
After two days’ rest we hired another coach, and drove
one afternoon to Wairoa, a distance of twelve miles, so as
to be ready to start to see the Terraces, and drive back
the following day. We had a very pretty drive through
the Tikitapu bush. The trees were magnificent; some of


the shrubs were bright with scarlet berries, and others
bore black ones. The scarlet are good to eat, and the
black ones are not; or the black are good to eat, and the
scarlet are not : I forget which it is, but I know that one
is rank poison. There is also a shrub with dark green
leaves, white underneath, which horses are fond of, but it
intoxicates them, and ends in death, unless remedies are
promptly administered. They say at night Tikitapu bush
is illuminated with glow worms. Archie and Mr. Hollis
walked back to Ohinemutu one night through it, and said
it was lovely. Just out of the bush we came upon Lake
Tikitapu, or Blue Lake, as it is generally called. It is a
small lake with intensely blue water ; a narrow range of
wooded hills divides it from another lake called Rotoka-
kahi, or Green Lake, and although so close together the
green lake is 70 feet lower than the blue. No Maories
will cross the blue lake, as they believe a spirit dwells in
it. Arriving at Wairoa, we drove to the Rotomahana
Hotel, a tumble-down looking building, but fairly com-
fortable. On the evening of our arrival, we made the
acquaintance of Sophia, the guide who was to take us to
the Terraces—a very intelligent half-caste, who spoke
English very well. Groups of Maories squatted in front
of the hotel, watching all our movements. They were a
wilder looking lot than at Ohinemutu. Early the next
morning we started for the Terraces ; we walked down a
beautiful gorge to Lake Tar aw era, where we were to em-
bark in a canoe. This lake is seven or eight miles long,
and five or six wide, and is surrounded by very grand
scenery. About a year ago, the water suddenly changed
colour, and became nauseous and unwholesome. It re-
mained so for some time, and then changed back again,
and is now quite drinkable. The canoe was rowed by
eight Maories. Sophia pointed out to us a part of the
lake, near the north-east coast, which she said Maori
boatmen always avoided, because of a superstition of a


magic tree, said to be growing under water. This tree is
called Matarehua, and when any great chief is about to
die, it thrusts its branches high above the surface, and
destroys any canoe that passes over it. Rounding a point
we stopped at a small native village, to buy kouras (cray-
fish) for dinner. At Tahunatorea, the head of the lake,
we left our boat, and landed and followed our guide
through scrub for about a mile. We reached the top of
a small hill, from which we had our first view of the
White Terrace. It was a curious and beautiful sight.
Descending again, we came to a small stream, where our
boatmen again met us, and paddled us across in the
canoe. On landing, we took off our shoes and stockings
and put on tennis shoes, which we had taken with us, to
prevent our feet getting cut, and pinned up our dresses,
as Sophia told us we should have to wade most of the
day. There were two Maori girls in our party, who called
themselves policemen. They were there to prevent any-
one damaging or taking the smallest bit of silica away.
These policemen were very amusing. Someone told them
I was going to steal a bit, so they immediately walked on
each side of me, one putting her arm through mine ; they
never thought of looking after any others of the party,
who took the opportunity of picking up some little bits.
When we reached the White Terrace, and saw its lovely
coral-tipped basins, filled with deep blue water, and when
we had climbed up step after step to the top, and looked
back, we were perfectly enchanted. It was like a huge
opal flashing in the sun. I will not undertake to describe
it, as it would be impossible to do it justice. On the top-
most ledge is a wonderful lake of boiling blue water,
about 100 feet long and 70 wide. The Terrace is over
100 feet in height, its lowest step has a curved sweep of
some 200 yards. The steps gradually decrease in size; so
that looking down from the top terrace, it has the appear-
ance of a large white open fan. It is the most beautiful


sight I have ever seen. Imagine a mass of petrified
snow, with the purest blue water possible trickling down,
first into one shell-shaped reservoir, then into another,
and you may possibly get an idea of its beauty. After
visiting the White Terrace, we followed Sophia through
some bush and scrub until we reached a large boiling
hole—l forget the name of it—about 40 feet long and 30
wide, from which water and steam spouted up every few
minutes, to the height of 30 or 40 feet. Near it was
another, not quite so large or violent, but throbbing
incessantly, like a steam engine. This is called the
“ Steamer.” All round are steam holes and boiling mud
pools, making it most dangerous walking, and Sophia
was most particular we should all follow exactly in her
footsteps. After this we returned to another part of the
lake, where we found that some of our natives had been
preparing dinner for us ; which consisted chiefly of cray-
fish and potatoes, boiled in one of the springs. I shall
never forget the appetite of one of our natives, a big chief.
We counted 38 potatoes he put into his mouth, whole,
one after the other; how many more he ate, and how
many crayfish, I don’t know, for we got tired of counting.
After lunch we left the lake, and again followed our
guide through a lot of scrub and bush to see more mud
holes and boiling springs. Everything bods in this
country, and but for the numerous safety valves, I be-
lieve the whole place would blow up. The next thing
we saw was a lake of deep green water, cold; a most
curious thing amongst so much hot water : but the
greatest wonder of all, I think, is what they call the
Devil’s Hole. The noise can be heard a very long way
otf, and when close to, you cannot hear yourself speak.
The steam (enough they say to turn 100 engines) comes
up without ceasing ; not at intervals, like most of the
others, but night and day without ever stopping. After
that we saw what they call the Porridge Pot, filled with


a kind of white chalk, boiling slowly like thick porridge,
and said to be good to eat. The chief with the appetite
plunged in a large stick, probably kept for the purpose,
and then handed it round for us to taste ; of course we
did, taking a little off with the tips of our fingers, and
found it tasted of nothing in particular, only very hot.
After all had taken a little, the chief licked the stick,
apparently with great relish, and plunged it into the mud
again, to be ready for the next comers. Having seen all
there was to beseen on that side of the lake, we all got
into a_ canoe, with two natives, who paddled us across to
the Pink Terrace. The lake is called Rotamahana, or
warm lake ; the water was quite hot. The canoe was
formed out of the trunk of a tree. We all had to get in
carefully, and sit on the bottom, which is lined with
rushes. When we were all in, we were only two inches
above water, so we had to sit awfully still for fear of
swamping. One native paddled in the bow, and another
steered, sitting in the stern. After a little anxiety as to
whether we should be upset, we arrived at the Pink Ter-
race, and got out carefully, one at a time. This terrace
was much smaller than the White, and though very
beautiful, is not to be compared with the other. It is
about 80 feet in height, and of a delicate pink shade. On
the top is a deep blue boiling lake, edged with a border
of pale yellow, sulphur out of the water, I suppose.
About half-way from the top is another blue lake, but of
quite cool water, and in this people often bathe. Sophia
here told us our wading was at an end, and we took otf
our wet shoes and stockings, to replace them with dry
ones. As we were doing this, the Maori chief with the
big appetite came and sat down beside me, and as soon
as I took my stockings off, he took them for his girl, as
he said ; he took my garter also, being much taken with
the clasp, but after some persuasion I got him to give it
me back. Leaving the Pink Terrace, we resumed our


seats in the canoe with due caution, and were slowly
paddled down Lake Rotamahana to the creek Kaiwaka.
The scenery was magnificent, as we could see both sides
of the lake. The great volcanic mountain, Te Tarata,
towered up on one side to an immense height; on the
other, mountains covered with scrub and brush, with
volumes of steam rising slowly out from some hidden
geyser. We disturbed any amount of coots, wild ducks,
etc., as we rowed down the Kaiwaka. I believe the lake
abounds with golden carp, which, after becoming accli-
matized, thrive well in their perpetual warm bath. We
floated quickly down the Kaiwaka, which is a very quick
flowing stream, and so called (“ canoe-destroying ”) be-
cause its rapids are sometimes fatal to canoes. When we
came to the place where we were paddled across in going,
we got out, and walked about half a mile to our larger
boat, which we had left in the Lake Tarawera. On our
homeward voyage, the natives sang us several weird love
songs, and a war song, which made our flesh creep,
especially when they imitated tearing flesh off human
bones. Ugh! On arriving again at Wairoa, we found
our coach waiting ready to convey us back to Ohinemutu,
where we arrived in time for dinner. In the evening a
Maori chief came into the Lake House, and danced a war
dance in the sitting-room for our benefit; but the poor
old gentleman was very asthmatical, and very stout, and
had to keep sitting down to get his breath. He was a
very fine specimen of a Maori, about 6 feet high, and
very broad. One afternoon we sailed across the lake
Rotorua (on the shores of which our house was situated),
to an island in the centre, about four miles off, called
Moikoa. We were over two hours getting there, as the
wind was dead against us. The island is very pretty ;
about half-a-dozen Maories living on it. The most curious
thing to see is a skeleton in a tree. A Maori was shot
some forty years ago, as he was taking refuge in a tree,


and now the wood has grown round the bones, and so
keeps them together. One afternoon, whilst we were at
Ohinemutu, a half-caste child was drowned in a hot
spring, and a chief’s daughter died the same day. A
tangi, or crying match, was held all day in the Maori
settlement. There was a palaver one morning ; I went
to it, and listened for some time, but could not under-
stand a word. I was much amused at the solemn way
in which each chief got up and spoke in turn. The Maori
children seem to bathe all day in the warm water, and
even the men sit for hours with their heads just above
water, smoking a pipe. We left Lake House on'Feb. 15th,
in a mail coach. It only held five besides the driver, so
our party just filled it. Ve drove thirty-one miles before
stopping, through lovely country. In one large forest we
stopped to get some ferns, Todea supei'ba etc., which
grow most luxuriantly, and the only place where they
grow in the North Island. At the side of a river we
stopped to lunch, and rest the horses for an hour ; the
lunch we had brought with us. We drove all the way to
Cambridge with the same team, passing Oxford on the
way—a small settlement of white people. We saw the
King country, where the King lives with 18,000 Maories,
as we passed within three miles of it. They are very
idle ; they own about twelve million acres, some of it
beautiful land, but they won’t cultivate it, or let anyone
else do so, and it is far from prudent to venture into their
country. When we got to Cambridge we had to put up
at a miserably dirty place, with nasty food ; but it did
not matter much, as we only had to stay one night.
Next morning we left in the mail coach for Hamilton
—a drive of sixteen miles, which I enjoyed very much, as
we had secured the box seat. The only little incident we
had was going up a steep hill, one of the leaders jibbed,
and we began to slip back ; the coach was very heavily
laden with passengers and luggage. The driver called


out to the men to get down, which they did, and put hig
stones behind the wheels. After a due amount of coaxing
the horses, we got to the top all right. At Hamilton we
caught the 10.30 train for Auckland. It was a very
shaky affair, and did not reach there till 5 p.m., a dis-
tance of 83 miles only. At one place, where we stopped
half-an-hour, there were a lot of natives selling baskets
made of reeds, containing from 20 to 24 peaches, for six-
pence a basket. We got into conversation with a squatter,
who was travelling the same way, and he told us what a
splendid country it was for farming. A friend of his
sowed 150 acres of swedes, and there was such a fine
crop that he fattened 600 head of cattle with them.
Mutton and beef is from 2d. to 4d. per pound ; steaks
(best cut), from sd. to 6d., at the butcher’s ; fresh butter,
sd. or 6d. We did not get such comfortable rooms this
time at this hotel, as we did when we arrived from
Australia. G. and I changed several times, before we
could get a bedroom we could sleep in: the first was so
frightfully dark and small and only one bed, about 3 feet
wide, in it; the second had partitions only half way up to
the ceiling, the next compartment being occupied by a
gentleman suffering from D.T.s. We had spent about
an hour in unpacking our heavy boxes, which we had not
taken to the hot lakes, when he came to his room, and
frightened us so, with his noise and threats to murder
everyone, that we hastily packed again, and went in
search of our landlady; who, after a good deal of persua-
sion, gave us her own room at the top of the house, which
was pretty comfortable. And now, I think I must send
this epistle, in order to catch the mail, which goes to-
morrow
Yours ever,
MAUD.


Star Hotel,
Auckland,
March 3rd.
Dear Amy,
I have not much to tell you in this letter, as I
told the Governor nearly all I had to tell, when I wrote
to him. We left here on the 21st for Waiwera, where
we have been staying a fortnight. It is a lovely bay,
not far from Auckland. We went in a steamer called
the “Rose Casey.” It took us about two hours to get
there. It only contains one house, a sort of hotel, and
a fisherman’s cottage. The hotel is a large wooden
building, shut in by densely-wooded hills, and a river
running into the sea on one side. The landing was a
very comical affair. There is no pier ; the steamer runs
in as near shore as possible, lowers a boat, into which
passengers get, which rows as near shore as possible.
It is met by a horse and cart, into which the passengers
and luggage are transferred. It is drawn by an old
white horse, named Major, who knew exactly what to
do, and when the word was given, brought them on to
the shore with a flourish. The hotel is built close to the
sea, and when the tide is up it is not more than fifty
yards from the gate. There were two swimming baths
of clear water, always kept warm by a natural hot
spring. We used to bathe three, and sometimes four
times a day, and generally about ten o’clock at night,
to finish up. There was a splendid garden, full of straw-
berries and peaches; the latter were lying on the ground,
actually rotting, they were so plentiful. There were
citrons, bananas, plums, quinces, etc., all growing there


as well. Not very far from the hotel lies a scattered heap
of human bones, ghastly relics of a feast that concluded
a fight fought close by. The battle, according to the
Maori tradition, was between two tribes ; what the fight
was about I don’t know, but one tribe killed the other,
and brought the bodies down to the beach to roast and
eat. When it was all over, and the bones picked, it
came out that the tribe they had eaten were distant
relations of their own, sort of second cousin, once re-
moved. On learning this fact they were all seized with
remorse (or indigestion), and had a tangi; then piled
the bones of their late relatives in a heap on the sands,
and left them. We found any amount of bones, but
they are very broken. The bush of Waiwera is most
lovely: we had several scrambles after ferns, which
grow most luxuriantly. There was one lovely gorge,
we used to climb very often ; a small stream flowed
down its rocky course in the centre, palms and ferns
overhanging on either side, hiding lovely little pools of
clear water. It was very steep, and here and there we
had to hold on to some large palms or huge supplejack
to prevent falling. Oysters abound on every rock and
boulder on the beach. When the tide was low, we used
to go and knock them off with a stone and eat them ;
they were very good, but rather salt. We were much
bothered here with sandflies and mosquitoes. G. w r ent
about with a huge mosquito bite on her cheek. The hotel
was quite full of tourists ; we used to play “ Muggins ”
nearly every evening. We had three or four dances in
a splendid room they had ; altogether we enjoyed that
fortnight immensely. We used to play tennis most
days, as they had a fair tennis court. Two old Maori
chiefs used to stroll in to see us play, and would insist
on calling out “ deuce ” at the wrong time. Every
other afternoon, about four o’clock, the “ Rose Casey ”
made her appearance, with a fresh batch of arrivals :


we were astonished to see several of our fellow passen-
gers on the “ Australia ” arrive. Most of the Maori
ladies ride ; it is killing to see them. We saw a chiefs
daughter at Ohinemutu with a blue habit, green veil,
and an old top hat; she got on and olf herself, and
amused us immensely by the way she held her skirt. I
had one ride at Waiwera on a white pony, but the
saddle was so fearfully uncomfortable that I sat on the
pony’s bare back most of the time, and did not attempt
another ride. We leave Auckland to-morrow for San
Francisco, on board the “ Zealandia.” I fancy we shall
meet a good many of our fellow passengers from the
“ Australia ” again ; I hear the ship is quite full. Ar.
took a good many photographs when we were up
country, but will not print them till he gets home. We
are all delighted with New Zealand ; everything grows
so luxuriantly, and there are such wonderful sights—
the hot lakes, etc. I must go and finish packing, as
our luggage has all to be on board at nine o’clock to-
morrow
Your affectionate sister,
MAUD.


R.M.S. “Zealandia,”
March 21st, 1884.
Dear Mother,
We left Auckland about five o’clock in the
afternoon of March 4th, and have had very fine weather
since we left. We have a very queer lot on board, and
the captain is a very extraordinary little man. We have
had entertainments of some sort nearly every night:
one night a concert, another a dance, another recita-
tions by an actress, who is going to America with her
husband. It has been awfully hot again, especially in
the tropics. The first night’s dinner on board ship is
always a curious meal. At our first dinner on board
the “ Zealandia,” we discovered our fellow passengers
were of all nations and sects : English, Americans,
French, Germans, Russians, Chinese, etc. If I attempted
to give you an account of each day’s journey, it would
very much resemble Mark Twain’s diary : “ Got up,
washed, went to bed.” Second day—“ Got up, washed,
went to bed,” and so on. So I will just tell you of
everything as it comes into my head. Our first place of
stopping was off Tutugela, a small island in the Pacific,
where we exchanged mails and shipped some fresh
vegetables. It was a most lovely night, and the de-
licious scent of tropical flowers was blown from the
shore. We noticed the temperature increased the
moment we stopped, and were not sorry when we were
under weigh again, about 11 p.m. We had two Thurs-
days in one week, on account of passing Longitude
180°; it was awfully funny. It was posted about the
ship on the first Thursday, that the next day would be


Thursday too. We had several very good concerts, as
we had some really good performers. G. officiated at
most, with success. We had also Christy Minstrels,
dances, and athletic sports ; but the feature of the voy-
age was a fancy dress ball, which was a great success,
considering the very short time we had for making
dresses (two days only). G. and I had great fun pre-
paring, especially Ar.’s costume, which was a Turk’s ;
breeches were made out of an old red shawl, and a
turban made out of two sheets, rolled together. He
also wore a blue jacket. He made a capital Turk,
being so dark. G. went as a romp, in a low cut dress,
with tucker, big pinafore, big hat, her hair down, and a
hoop and skipping-rope. I went as Madame la Pompa-
dour ; my hair powdered, patches, rouge, etc. There
was a very good clown, also a policeman ; in fact, all
sorts of characters. The saloon was very tastefully
decorated with Chinese lanterns and flags ; one half
being kept for a ball-room, and the other for a supper-
room. Supper was at twelve, at which there were very
amusing speeches. The captain’s especially, caused
amusement; for whilst returning thanks for his wife’s
health, which had been drunk, he misquoted from the
Bible, saying, “ It is written, We two shall be twain
meaning, “ We two shall be one.” Dancing was kept up
till after three, but G. and I left about one. We crossed
the Line on the 11th. It was observed in the old-
fashioned way, by Neptune coming on board with his
followers, mounted on a donkey, and singing, “ I say, old
man, your horse must die,” and then making a collection
amongst the passengers. On Sunday the 18th, we
arrived at Honolulu, a lovely spot, but being Sunday, all
the shops were closed, so we could not buy any curiosi-
ties. Some of the streets were overshadowed by beautiful
tropical trees and shrubs, bananas and cocoanuts. The
natives are called Kanakas, and are very dark in colour.


Leprosy, we heard, was very prevalent amongst the
blacks. We had only time to stay on shore a couple of
hours, so of course could not see very much. At six
o’clock we weighed anchor in the midst of a thunder-
storm, and with difficulty succeeded in passing through
the narrow channel between coral reefs which lie at the
entrance to the harbour. The principal event of each
day was the Calcutta sweep on the ship’s run. Each
person pays half-a-crown for the privilege of drawing a
number : these numbers were afterwards sold by auction,
some going for as much as five or ten pounds. Once the
auction realised £llß. When a number was bought, the
buyer paid half the price given for it to the drawer of
the number, the other half he put in the pool. On this
voyage the crew were all Chinese, the same as on the
“Australia.” We had a little excitement one afternoon,
as two children were missed ; but on the ship being
searched, after an hour’s time, they were found in the
bath room, the older one, aged seven, giving the younger
one, five years old, a bath. We expect to reach ’Frisco
to-morrow evening : it is very rough now, and blowing
quite a small gale. We shall be very glad when we laud;
it is getting rather monotonous, and I don’t like our
fellow passengers at all, barring about five.
Palace Hotel, ’ Frisco , March 2bth. —We arrived here
on Monday morning early. We sighted Yankee Land at
three o’clock on Sunday afternoon, and the pilot came on
board at 7.30. We passed through the Golden Gate
about eight; it did not appear very golden as it was
misty and raining. We came to anchor about nine
o’clock in the harbour, but did not come ashore till the
next day. Some of the passengers were very noisy all
night, being rather top-heavy. We got up soon after five
the next morning, and went alongside the wharf soon
after seven. We had a great bother to get our luggage
off the boat, and had to wait two hours before we could


get all our boxes passed by the Custom officers ; after
which we drove to this hotel, the largest in the world,
they say. It is seven stories high ; our room on the
fifth story only is numbered 844, but it is too large to be
comfortable. The niggers are very slow in waiting on
one. It is no good touching the electric bell, so we lean
a chair back against it now, which keeps it going till
they come. San Francisco, though only 50 years old,
has a population of over 30,000, composed of all nations
and creeds. A large portion of the city is given up to the
‘‘Heathen Chinee,” and is called China Town. We
walked through it yesterday, and were much amused by
the Chinese children. I believe it is not safe to go
through at night without guides and revolvers.
Thursday , March 21th. —We had a heavy earth-
quake shock yesterday. Ar. and Mr. Hollis were in our
room when it took place. They said the chairs began to
rock, the shutters flew open (they were closed to keep out
the sun), and the chandelier shook. All the people
rushed out into the passages and made for the lift. An
old negress who was in Ar’s room, next to ours, rushed
down, wringing her hands and shrieking. Archie had a
great fright ; but it passed over without serious damage.
Gr. and 1 were in a shop, and did not feel it quite so
much ; though what we did experience was quite enough
to make one feel uncomfortable, for fear we should have
another. It seems funny to be able to hear from you in a
fortnight: we found your letters on our arrival. We had
our photos taken in fancy dress to-day ; they promise to
be very good. Everything is very dear here. We
did a little shopping this morning. I had great
trouble to get an umbrella, as they hardly ever use
them here, rain being an almost unheard-of thing, so
they say ; but, as a matter of fact, it has rained every
day since we came till to-day, and I believe now I have
got the umbrella—for which I had to pay a good price,


five dollars—it is going to be fine. We also bought our-
selves one dress each, and new hats ; and though my
dress is a dirty-coloured brown, made with coat tails,
American fashion, lined with bright yellow, which keep
flapping round, first on one side and then on the other,
1 fancy myself “no end.” They have cable trams in
most of the principal streets ; if you don’t understand
the mechanism of them, I am sorry, for I don’t know
myself, but they seem to be all that can be desired. We'
went by one to Clift’ House, one of the sights of ’Frisco,
about six miles distant, to see the seals. There are three
large rocks opposite the house, on which these seals are
lying basking in the sun, and jumping in and out of the
water, barking like a pack of hounds. From the Cliff
House we could see the Golden Gate, of which so much
is thought. I believe the reason it is so called is because
the sun sets right in the centre of the opening, which,
to ships entering at that time, gives it the appearance of
a golden gate. There are any amount of jewellers’ shops
in the town, as of course Californian gold is constantly
coming in. They make things of quartz gold, just as
they find it. I had several ornaments given me ; one
was a brooch, different sorts of gold forming the three
principal tools used for getting it, and a small nugget in
the centre. In early days, the houses in ’Frisco, being
built of wood, suffered greatly from fire, which has made
the San Franciscans most perfect in the means of escape;
and one of the sights of the place is to see the fire
brigade practice, which they do daily at 12 o’clock a.m.
The moment the clock strikes, the man on watch touches
an electric bell, which pulls the bed-clothes off the men
in bed (they always have their uniforms quite ready by
their sides), drops the harness which is ready suspended
over each horse (they stand turned round in the
stalls), a little whip touches them up, the bar in
front of them drops, at which signal the horses so won-


derfully trained, rush to their various fire engines, while
the men come sliding down a patent slide from their
room above. The whole thing is done in four seconds.
Our guide, a Yankee, by the by, told us the men were so
accustomed to their drill, that on one occasion, when a
fire happened they were called out, one of the men
jumped out of bed, slid down the slide, jumped on the
engine, and found himself at the fire before he awoke.
They say it takes a long time to train the horses ; one, a
big bay, had been there eight years, and knew every bell
which rang, and various other things. The food here is
very good ; we have had great fun trying all the
American dishes. Squirrel pie is not at all bad. The
waiters are all niggers, and the way they rush about with
large trays full of plates and dishes, balanced on one
hand above their heads, is a good proof of their strength;
though now and then they cannon into another nigger,
they drop it, and of course there is a smash, whereupon
all the other niggers laugh so, they have to hold their
sides. The Yosemite Valley, I am sorry to say, we can-
not get to, as the road is not yet passable ; but I fancy
the scenery would be much the same as what we saw at
the Hot Lakes in New Zealand. We leave here to-
morrow for Salt Lake City ; I will write again from
there
MAUD.


Walker House,
Salt Lake City,
March 31st, 1884.
Dear Mother,
We left ’Frisco on Friday. When we got to
the railway depot, we had to cross the bay in a large
ferry boat, the fac-simile of those one sees in Mark
Twain’s book, “ Life on the Mississippi.” Some of our
fellow passengers went on as far as the station across the
ferry, to see us off. This was our first experience of
American cars. They are very long, with a passage down
the centre, and little sections on either side, with seats
for four, two and two facing, with a table between, which
you can let down or not, as you please. At night these
sections are made into two berths, one above the other,
with a curtain drawn across to secure privacy. There
were several of these cars on the train. Leaving San
Francisco, we travelled right across a beautiful valley
called Sacramento (California). After four hours’ jour-
ney, we reached the town of Sacramento. About an
hour before we reached Sacramento, we had to cross the
Straits of Carquinez, about a mile and a half ill width,
and through which three rivers run west. In front of the
town a long ferry slip has been built by the railway com-
pany, and another on the other side of the Straits at Port
Costa. These slips are piles of 18 inches in diameter,
and of an average length of 95 feet, braced and bolted in
the strongest manner possible. Between these slips or
passage, plies the Solano, the largest steam ferry boat in
the world, from Port Costa to Benicia. She is 424 feet
long, she has no keel, and is 116 feet wide. The engines


are capable of being worked up to 2,000 horse-power
each ; she has eight steel boilers, four iron fresh-water
tanks, each 20 feet long, and at each end has four rud-
ders which are worked by hydraulic steering gear. She
has four sets of rails, and will take twenty-four passenger
cars. Our train, being a very long one, was taken over
in two portions, and we all got out to watch what was
going on. Arriving at Benicia, our train was again
joined, and we went on. Of course, when the tide is out,
the landing stage has to be let down to the level of the
boat. It was done with a truly American dodge. About
eight o’clock we started again ; very soon after the black
guard came into our car to make up the beds and light the
lamps, as it was quite dark then. We none of us intended
to turn in so soon, but as all the beds were made up by
nine, which did away with the seats, we were bound to
turn in early, but we could not sleep much all night from
the rocking of the train. We travelled that night
through the Sierra Nevada mountains, but being dark we
could not see anything of the country. As early as half-
past five next morning, the guard came round to wake
us, saying we should stop in 30 minutes time at Reno for
breakfast; so we got up and dressed in a hurry, only to
find it was a dodge of the guard (a nigger, by the bye) to
get us up so that he might put away the beds ; but, as a
matter of fact, we were not due to arrive at Reno till
seven o’clock, so we had to sit waiting with nothing to
do. We could not even see out of the windows, as they
were covered with frost, the cold being intense ; and no
wonder, as we were some 5,000 feet above the sea level.
The hills were covered with snow, and the thermometer
10° below zero. The cars are heated with hot water, and
are deliciously warm, but one feels the cold all the more
when going out, which we presently did to have a look
at the far-famed Nevada mountains. At seven we reached
Reno, where we had half-an-hour for breakfast. At the


station were several Red Indians with their squaws, one
carrying a baby on her back, done up in a case like a
mummy. We spoke to them, but they were very shy,
edging away from us, as though they were afraid we
should do them some harm. After breakfast we started
again ; there was nothing much to see, so we played
whist to pass away the time. Unfortunately, we passed
most of the beautiful scenery in the night, and went
through 42 miles of snow sheds, one over 1,000 feet long,
which we never saw at all. At one place we stopped for
a few minutes and got out to look at the scenery, but were
quickly driven in again by the intense cold. So we passed
the whole of that day, talking, reading, and admiring the
scenery ; or looking at it, I should say, for there was not
much to admire, except the snow-covered mountains in
the distance, and they were not always to be seen, as the
snow storms frequently hid them. It was a most un-
interesting country ; all prairie or white plains, as I
believe they were called. The scrub, which was the only
vegetation to be seen, was quite grey, being nothing but
sage bushes, as I afterwards heard. We kept a look out
for buffaloes and big game, but only saw one solitary
Indian the whole time we were crossing the prairie. We
stopped about 20 minutes at a place to lunch—l forget
the name, but think it was Humboldt—and then we went
on again, through the same sort of scenery till 6.30, when
we stopped for an hour at Elko for dinner. There was a
group of Indians here, which, when we started, got on the
platform at the end of the cars, where I believe they are
allowed to travel free. They were there in the morning,
having been there all night; but I suppose they are used
to the cold. We played euchre and whist again in the
evening till about ten, and then went through the acro-
batic performance of “ turning in.” Next morning, we
got up early and put our things together, as we were due
to arrive at Ogden at 7.15, where we had to change for


Salt Lake City. When we got there we had breakfast,
and changed into the Denver and Rio Grande Railway,
and in an hour’s time we sighted the spires and domes of
Salt Lake City ; for the city of saints is a city of
churches. The lake itself is very pretty, and the snow-
clad mountains running alongside, with the sun just
rising above them, made it look lovely. The city is not
on the lake, as I expected, but some distance away. On
arriving there we came straight to this hotel, where we
tried to get something to eat, but were not very success-
ful ; frogs’ legs fried in butter, and a sort of Irish stew
without the stew, formed the two principal dishes. We
did better at our next meal, though the food here is
horrible. As soon as we had had breakfast we went out.
I was much disappointed in the town ; the streets are
well laid out, but in very bad condition, the houses are
very small. The people look much the same as other
people, only rather silly. The population, I believe, is
something like 25,000. The Mormon church, besides its
tabernacle, has a bishop located in every ward of the
city. There are mining and smelting works, iron foun-
dries, brass works, two flour mills, one woollen mill, nine
hotels, six breweries, two large marble works, and heaps
of other little manufactories. There are four daily news-
papers. Many of the shops have a huge eye on a brass
plate, with “ Holiness to the Lord ” above it, and “Zion’s
Co-operative Institution ” below. At shops with this
sign, Gentiles won’t enter, and the Mormon people are
forbidden to purchase goods from any shop that has not
this sign. We walked down Brigham Street, which,
from end to end, is filled with the residences of Brigham
Young’s widows. In the afternoon we went to the
Tabernacle, but were so horribly disgusted with all we
saw and heard, that we came out long before the service
was over. It is to be hoped that the Americans in the
United States will soon discover means to do away with


this abominable place. We have been all over the town
and seen everything, and we leave to-morrow early for
Denver, which will be two days and nights in the train
again. As it is getting late, 10.30 p.m., and my candle
is getting low, I think I had better stop. G. has got a
frightful cold and sore throat, and I have just been
dosing her with sweet nitre, which I hope will have good
effect. I keep awfully well myself, and so does Ar.,
which is a good thing, as we have to put up with very
had food and very little of it, just now. . . .
Yours ever,
MAUD.


Windsor Hotel,
Denver,
April 4th, 1884.
Dearest Mother,
I hasten to write and tell you all about the
railway accident, for fear you should have seen an ex-
aggerated account in the papers. lam thankful to say
we are none of us seriously hurt. Maud has a sprained
shoulder, and Ar. and I feel very stiff, and knocked and
bruised. Well, I will tell you. On Tuesday morning we
were stopped by the snow; it was level with the win-
dows, and two or three times we had to be dug out, so
were 13 hours late in getting to Salida. After stopping
there for breakfast, they put on a fresh engine driver, a
man noted for quick runs, to make up for lost time. We
were on the narrow gauge, and all night our car had
rocked so, that several times we thought it was going
over. Well, about four o’clock, an hoar after we had left
Salida, as we dashed round a sharp corner at 45 miles an
hour, our car, wdiich was the last one, turned right over
and went crash down on the rocks. Fortunately, the
coupling chain broke, and the train went on without us.
But for this, we should have been dragged, and, in all
probability, killed. On one side of the line is a steep
rocky bank and a river ; had we gone over that side, I
should not now be alive to write you this. It was an
awful sight. I was playing whist at the time, with Judge
Downwood and two other gentlemen, on the side we
went over. The gentleman opposite me went right
through the window, cutting his head terribly. My
window did not break; I can’t think how I escaped.


We were all thrown in a confused heap, one on the top
of the other. For a second, not a sound was heard,
not a scream. I thought I was going to be suffocated ;
there were about seven people on the top of me. I shall
never forget Ar.’s face, when he saw me under that
living heap of human beings. I heard him say to Maud,
“ Gr. is fearfully hurt,” so I managed to call out, “Not a
bit.” I did not lose my head for a moment. My dress
and hands were covered with blood ; I am glad to say it
was not my own. As soon as I got up, 1 looked round
and saw a dreadful sight ; everyone seemed more or less
cut and bleeding. One lady was lying in someone’s
arms in a faint, but I thought at the time, dead. A stout
old gentleman, who had travelled with us from New
Zealand, was lying in a corner ; someone half raised him
up, and I saw his ear was hanging right down, nearly
cut off, and his arm was broken, besides other injuries.
We were all rescued as soon as possible, by the passen-
gers out of the other part of the train, which had come
back to the scene of the catastrophe. They had to break
up the remaining part of the car to get out the stout
gentleman and another man, who had fainted. As soon
as we could, we all got into the train ; our fellow pas-
sengers were all very good in giving up their beds to us.
After some little delay, we proceeded slowly on our way,
the wounded being attended to as well as could be, under
the circumstances. One lady became delirious, and
fought tremendously ; at one time it took three to hold
her, but after a time she became quieter. About three or
four hours after the accident, a homoeopathic doctor came
on board at a small station, but he could not do much,
and at the next station he left, taking the stout old
gentleman with him, who was too badly hurt to go on.
How we got through the weary hours that followed I
can’t remember, for we did not reach Denver before
3 a.m. on Wednesday, nearly twelve hours after the


accident. At the station, doctors and carriages met us,
and we were all conveyed to this hotel, and provided with
comfortable rooms. The next morning it was rather
amusing to see our fellow passengers. First I met a
gentleman with his hand bandaged up, looking anxiously
at it ; then another, with his head tied up; a third might
be seen anxiously regarding the toe of his boot, w r hich
had been cut; a fourth was looking at the stains of blood
on his coat, and wondering if he could get a new suit
from the company, —all more or less sorrowful-looking.
Two of the company’s doctors went the rounds the next
morning, examining all those hurt. Archie and I were
Maud was in bed, as her shoulder was bad. The
doctors went in to see her and prescribe. She has just
told me that soon after the doctors had left, one of the
hotel boys bounced into her room with, “Are you one of
the victims? Here is some medicine for you.” They all
make great fun of it here, and a report they put in their
paper has made us all very angry. I copy you a piece
of it.
BATTERED TOURISTS.
Arrival of the English-Australian Party on the Tour Around the
World.
A Full Account of the Accident on the Denver and Rio Grande Road.
About 3 o’clock yesterday morning a sad looking party of travellers
was gathered at the Windsor. Some had their arms in slings, others
had their heads bandaged, and still others limped up to the desk, and
with a sorrowful homesick air placed their autographs upon the register
and were assigned their rooms.
WHO THEY AEB.
The bruised travellers were passengers on the Salt Lake train that
arrived in Denver, and were the advance party of the Australian tourists
that left Sydney, New South Wales, on February 28th, in the royal mail
steamship “ Zealandia,” and arrived at San Francisco on March 28rd.
The party that left Australia, numbered 125, although but thirty have
arrived in Denver thus far. The original party started from England for
a Tour Around the World, and is now on its way home. The journey
from the slope to Ogden was uneventful, but the snowstorms on the Rio
Grande Road interested the inhabitants of the Australian continent. The


storm delayed the train, and they left Salida several hours late on Tues-
day afternoon. An engineer had charge of the train that it is said had
never driven a passenger engine over that division of the road, and he
opened his throttle and let the engine out. The train was spinning along
at the rate of forty-eight miles an hour, the cars jumping up and down,
and thoroughly shaking the passengers. On one side of the track was a
gully, on the other the rocky side of a mountain. The train had been
running for some time on a straight piece of road, but suddenly coming
to a short curve, the last sleeper, a special car in which the tourists were
seated, was thrown from the track, turned completely over, and, striking
against the mountain side, was brought to a stand.
THE ACCIDENT.
Mr. J. E. Gardner, a member of the party, was seated in the smoking-
room of the forward sleeper, and seeing the car jump the track, jumped
up and pulled the bell rope. The train was brought to a stand, and the
passengers ran back to the scene of the accident. The porter of the car,
who was standing on the platform at the time of the accident, was found
rubbing his arm, having miraculously escaped with a few slight injuries.
The car was opened, and a number of passengers brought out, more or
less injured, as well as a number who had fainted. They were placed on
the train, and taken to Howards, the next station, when their wounds
were dressed.
THE JOUBNET CONTINUED.
As soon as the wounds were dressed the train left Howards, but at
Pueblo Mr. Sutton was so low that he had to be removed. The rest of
the party proceeded to this city and sent for Dr. Hawkins, who dressed
the wounds. A number of them are still confined to their rooms from
the effects of the accident. They all look sorrowful, although they are
all pleasant and agreeable ladies and gentlemen.
All were loud in praise of the great country, and delighted with Denver,
although they call the baby road hard names. Judge Downwood in-
formed the Tribune reporter yesterday that an action for heavy damages
would be brought against the Denver and Rio Grande Company. He
says the train should not be run at a higher rate than twenty-five miles
an hour round the short curves. Mr. Symes stated that he had timed
the train just previous to the accident and it had run a mile in one
minute and twenty seconds.
A good story is told on Judge Downwood, who is, by the way, on the
Supreme Bench of New South Wales. After the accident the Judge was
found unconscious. Restoratives were applied, and the Judge, slowly
opening his eyes, looked at his nurses and anxiously enquired, “ Where
is my hat-box?”
The list of the injured is as follows
Nearly all those hurt have been to the company’s
office to try and get damages. After a great deal of
bother, they consented to pay our hotel bills and re-


place what we had spoilt in the way of clothing. They
are trying to make up to us now, and sent us all tickets
for some minstrels last night, to which some of us went,
but they were great rubbish. This morning they sent
three open carriages, drawn by white horses with long
tails, to take us all for a drive round the town. We
drove at a snail’s pace, one behind the other, and were
awfully stared at, and no wonder, for we were all ban-
daged up somewhere or other. We did not like this
drive at all, for we knew they were making fun of us.
The doctor is a very nice man, and he drove me round
in a buggy one day. The Yankees are the most un-
civil, rude, uneducated savages, I ever came across ;
they think they are conferring a favour on you by
letting you stay in their hotels, or by selling you any-
thing at the shops, and the waiters in the hotel cheek
you at every corner, —in fact, as a French doctor tra-
velling with us says, they are not comme il faut. We
are just going to dinner, so no more from
Yours very shaky,
GERTY.


Windsor Hotel,
Denver,
April 6th.
Dear Gov.,
Thanks for yours ; we have all recovered from
the effects of the accident, and leave to-morrow for
Omaha. The company pay our hotel bill the whole
time we are here, and replace some trifles we have lost
in the way of gloves, etc. We have had delightful
weather up to to-day. It is now snowing heavily. This
is a very dry climate, a great resort for invalids ;
scarcely any rainfall, and the soil is very sandy. lam
told that 60 bushels of wheat to the acre is a common
occurrence, and this without any manure. Denver is a
large place, with a population between 30,000 and
40,000, built on a prairie at the foot of the Rocky
Mountains. The streets run parallel to one another.
The prairie extends 100 miles or more. It really is a
wonderful place, considering that it is only 25 years
since the first white man went there, and 10 years since
the Indians were really expelled. They have a very
fine cathedral; we went there on Sunday, the service
was really very good. The Rockies, which we can see
from our windows, are very rich in metals—gold, silver,
lead, copper, mercury in abundance; also amethysts,
topaz, and moss agates are very plentiful. I don’t like
America so far, or the Americans ; they have no man-
ners and are very disagreeable. I shall only get duck
shooting with Os. There is plenty of shooting to be
had here—bears, foxes, and deer in abundance ; plenty
of fur shops in the town, but as Os. has collected a


good many, I shall not bring any home. Glad to hear
you are all well at Bucklebury; hope Amy and Edie
will soon be among the number. We leave New York
earlier than the 3rd of May ; but it will depend upon
the time we arrive there, and whether we can get
berths. There are a good many of us here, passengers
by the u Zealandia,” but we shall leave them when we
get off at Omaha. We have met some very nice fellows.
There is a lot of bosh in that account of the accident
in the paper I sent you. Tobacco is very cheap, and
cigars are dear. I hope you will be able to read this
scrawl, and hope it won’t take up too much of your
valuable time. My love to everyone. Hoping soon to
see you all again,
Believe me,
Yours always,
A. ANDREW.


Richard House,
Sioux City,
April 9th.
Dearest Mother,
I have not been able to write to you lately,
my arm has been so stiff. Of course G. told you all
about the accident at the foot of the Rockies, so 1 will
not enlarge upon it, but I don’t think she told you any-
thing of the Rockies themselves, what magnificent
scenery it is, so I will begin at the beginning and try
and describe it to you. After we left Salt Lake City,
we travelled along the edge of the lake, which seems to
lie so cold and still. Out of the waters rise solitary
mountain islands, along the valley are plenty of farms
and in some of the fields stacks of hay, in others cattle
are feeding or green vegetables growing. It all seems
to be under cultivation and very prosperous. This is
Utah. After leaving the lake we went for some way
along the side of a river which seemed to be full of wild
fowl, when we suddenly entered a narrow gorge, called
the Black Canon. It was magnificent, huge rocks over-
hanging, as though they would fall on the top of us,
here and there a waterfall dashing down a dizzy height
falling into the river which runs below. At times it be-
came very narrow, and full of sharp curves. The line
runs along one side of the river, only about ten feet
above it, and seemed to be cut out of the rock. It
looked most dangerous. Of course we went rather
slowly, as the curves were almost at right angles. Here
and there the Canon widened to about a quarter of a
mile, which enabled us to see some of the wondrous
peaks above; the principal one is called Currecanti


Needle, and goes straight up two or three thousand
feet. It is not at all unlike Cleopatra’s Needle. Emer-
ging from the Black Canon the train goes through
what they call the Gate Canon, but it is not half as fine.
We stopped at 8.30 for supper at some place, but I
quite forget the name of it, and as it was quite dark
when we again entered the cars, there was nothing
more to be seen, and we played whist till we went to
bed. I never slept a wink all night owing to the rock-
ing of the car, which I thought every minute was going
over (it did, as you know), so it must have been a shaky
one then. We got up early the next morning and
found it was snowing hard, and had been doing so all
night, with a strong wind, making enormous drifts.
We had been gradually ascending all night, and when
we entered Marshall Pass, about nine in the morning,
we were some 8,000 feet above the sea, 4,000 above
Salt Lake City. Marshall Pass is a series of mountains
up which the train climbed by going zigzag. We had
three engines at one place which was frightfully steep,
and the curves were so sharp that you could see all the
engines from our carriage windows. Banks of snow lay
on either side, and fallen trees blown down by the
winds, making it look very desolate. It took us an
hour to get to the top, which is 10,760 feet above the
sea. Just at the top is a large snowshed, and while
they took oft' two of the engines we all got out. The
cold was intense ; icicles, three or four yards long, and
as thick as a man’s arm, were hanging from the roof.
Fortunately it had left off snowing, and looking back
the way we had come up, it was one of the grandest
sights imaginable Mountain after mountain towering
up above, each one seeming higher than the other, and
snow everywhere. The silence and loneliness were
almost oppressive, and it was a relief to enter the car,
with its genial warmth and companions.


About two miles further on, the snow became very-
deep, and on going round a curve it was higher
than the carriages on one side, so that the windows
scraped along the wall of snow. A few minutes more,
and we had run into a deep drift. Our engine driver
at first tried to get through it by butting ; he would
back the train for about twenty yards, and then, put-
ting on steam, would butt the snow. We didn’t like it
inside, and were glad when, after four or five attempts,
he gave it up, blew his whistle, when men came on the
scene, goodness knows from where, and began to dig
us out with pickaxes and spades. These men are
called “ Canaries,” and they live up there in huts, for
the purpose of keeping the line clear. We were two
hours before they released us; in the meantime, some
of the passengers, including G., had secured breakfast
in the car, but as the guard has a very limited supply,
I had to wait till we got to Salvia. The “ Canaries ”
having released us, we started again and reached
Salvia, two hours late, where we stopped for breakfast.
I was frightfully hungry here, and, jumping out, made
for the refreshment room, but found 1 could not get
anything fit to eat; they had pork chops, which were
quite black, and something which looked like buffalo
meat. I could not eat it, hungry as I was, and had to
content myself with a cup of very bad coffee and a
roll, for which I had to pay 75 cents, or three shillings,
but one must expect to pay in the Rockies, 10,000 feet
above the sea ; in fact, I was rather surprised to get
anything to eat at all. We started again about 12.30,
but had not gone very far before we were again stopped,
this time by a huge rock having fallen on the line.
Again the “ Canaries ” came to our assistance, and laid a
bit of new line for us, and in about half an hour’s time
we were going on again. We now began to descend,
and went much faster than I liked or thought safe, the


line winding about in the most marvellous manner,
sometimes looking down straight on to the line below,
and wondering how on earth we should get there ; but
we did, I don’t know how. We passed through some
magnificent scenery here, and the snow having cleared
off, and the sun come out, it was very lovely. At 3
o’clock we reached the bottom, and in a few minutes
had run into the station of Salida, a fairly large place.
Here we managed to get a very good lunch, and after
about half an hour’s delay, started again with our fresh
driver who eventually brought us all to such grief.
Gerty says she forgot to tell you that even after the
accident he was going fast again, and one of the pas-
sengers went and stood on the engine with a revolver,
threatening to shoot him if he tried that game on again.
I make a big jump now, to where we left Denver, late
in the evening of April 7th. Nothing occurred on this
journey till we reached the Pacific junction, where we
said good-bye to our fellow-passengers, and changed
into another train for Omaha. We were on
another line, and an awful line it was too, the river
Platte which runs alongside was much flooded, and in
places it had washed the bank right away, to within an
inch or two of the railway line. We went very slowly
for about an hour, it was a perilous journey ; at any
moment the line might have given and precipit-
ated us into the river, as it was we were terribly on one
side, and after our recent experience you may imagine
what a highly nervous state we were in the whole time.
However, we arrived at Omaha, which was not very
far, thank heaven, but unfortunately just too late to
catch our train for Sioux City. There was not another,
so we had to stay the night there at Paxton House, the
best hotel in the place. There were no porters to be
had at the station, so we had to carry our own luggage,
our heavy luggage we saw going to the luggage-room,


so we left it till the morning. We were all very tired
and put out at this delay, and were eating our supper
in silence at the Paxton House, when a hug - e rat, one
of the biggest I have ever seen, ran across the floor.
Ihe waiters, all niggers, began an excited chase, and
eventually killed it; they caused us no end of amuse-
ment with their antics. W e went to bed early that
night; I hardly slept at all, for my throat was so fright-
fully sore and my thirst so great that I could not resist
drinking the water in the jug, which I found in the
morning was quite yellow. We were called at five, our
tiam went at six, and when we went to the station we
could not get our luggage, but had to go on to Sioux
City without it. It was bitterly cold and sleet falling.
In about two hours’ time we arrived here; Os. met us at
the station looking very well, and just the same as ever.
He had taken rooms for ns at this place till to-morrow,
when we shall drive on to Le Mars. After some lunch
we went out, but there is not much to see ; we went
into a curiosity shop and bought some things, amongst
others, a squaw s dress. When we got back to the
hotel I felt very seedy and so cold, so Ar. got me some
whisky from over the way as they do not keep it here,
and, after some little delay, some hot water, the cook
having let the fire out, and I lay down on the sofa, and
got a little sleep, and, when I woke up, felt much
better, so I have been able to write this letter to you,
which I will finish at Kingsley.


Kingsley,
April 17th.
Dearest Mother,
We left Sioux City early in the morning, and
reached Le Mars in about two hours’ time. After lunch-
ing there Os. drove us in his two-horse buggy, which
seated four, to Kingsley—a distance of 24 miles. We
had a lovely drive right across the prairie, which we
saw on tire in one or two places. We saw a great num-
ber of golfers, pretty little animals something like
squirrels, which live in holes in the ground. They are
overwhelmed with curiosity, for if you run them into a
hole they nearly always come back and look out. It
was just springtime and the wild flowers were very
pretty. We reached Kingsley about 2.3 U. Maud went
straight to bed as she was very seedy ; we sent for the
doctor, and he said it was scarlet fever. We were much
alarmed at first, but he said she was going on very
well, and he hoped it would only prove a slight attack.
Ar. and Os. go out duck shooting nearly every day. Os.
has a quantity of skins to send home, 150 musk rats,
two beavers, a grizzly bear, a buffalo, some wolves, red
foxes and lynx. We have still got our ferns with us
which we got in the Oropi forest in New They
escaped the accident, though the bass they were in was
cut; we are going to put them in the box ot skins, I
hope they will survive it. I have been several times to
see Ossie’s house and farm, and saw a lot of dead snakes
there, which he had killed, and found one huge one
asleep in the long grass, which he promptly killed with
a spade. Maud was able to get up yesterday, and went


out for a walk this morning, so we have decided to go
on in a day or two. Os. has got an awfully nice grey
pony, which he has raced several times and been suc-
cessful. This is a very funny place, all wooden houses,
except the bank; but they are beginning to build some
stone ones now, and they have got a railway straight
from Chicago, and a good station, which has improved
the place immensely. Several people from different
settlements close round have come into Kingsley. They
put their houses on huge trucks and draw the whole
arrangements into Kingsley. No doubt in a few years’
time it will be quite a large place. There were prairie
fires all round us last night, we could see them from
the window. The boys shot a prairie chicken and a
golden plover, which Maud had to eat; she said they
were very good. I shall not write to you again till we
get to New York, as we shall not stay any time at any
place till then. We shall soon be home now. It seems
funny to be getting nearer every day; it will only take
ten days for letters to reach you from New York. I
think we shall go to-morrow if Maud is well enough to
travel. Os. has just driven her to see his house and
farm. We are getting dreadfully hard up for clothes,
but don’t intend to buy any till we get home, as every-
thing is so dreadfully dear in America, and we are
rather short of cash. I hope you will bring us some
nice dresses to Liverpool ; 1 suppose you will meet us
there. 1 really can’t think of anything more to tell you.
The boys are out shooting, and it is very dull here, I
shall be glad when we leave. I expect we shall leave
New York the beginning of May. Be sure you meet us
at Liverpool. Good-bye.
Y^ours,
GERTY.


Metropolitan Hotel,
Hew York,
May sth.
Dearest Mother,
I have been very seedy since I last wrote to
you, and so never finished my last letter, which I believe
Gerty enclosed in hers. We left Kingsley on April 18th,
and were very sorry to leave Ossie, it seemed so lonely
for him. We had to stay the night at a small place
called Carrol. We went to bed as soon as we got there ;
at least, after some supper, as I was quite done up.
After a very bad night, we were called at four in the
morning. We got up and found there was a heavy
thunderstorm going on. Our train left at five ; we could
not get anything to take us down to the station, so had
to walk. After a very uneventful journey we reached
Omaha about nine. Our train for Chicago did not start
till five o’clock, so Ar. took a room in the hotel near the
station for us. I lay down and had a good sleep, and
felt better after that, though very weak ; but after some
champagne managed to go on again. On leaving Omaha
we crossed the Missouri river bridge, which is half-a-mile
in length, and with the approaches over a mile. The
bridge is known as Post’s Patent. I did not like crossing
it at all, as it shook so, but we did so safely, and had a
good sight of the Missouri river into the bargain. We
arrived at Chicago on Saturday morning, April 19th,
when I went straight to bed. G. went out, and said
there was nothing to be seen; it was like all other big
towns. Ar. went to the stockyards and slaughterhouses,
where he saw a man shooting down bullocks as fast as


he could. I did not see anything of Chicago, being too
ill to go out. We left on Monday the 21st for Niagara,
which we reached at eight the next morning. We got
out on the Canadian side with two amusing old men
(Englishmen), who came all the way from Chicago with
us, and were most funny. We all got out at Niagara in
such a hurry that I forgot my umbrella, the one I bought
at ’Frisco. I had not used it once since then, and never saw
it again. We walked straight to the hotel near the Falls,
where we had some breakfast. At the first sight of the
Falls I was rather disappointed, but it seems to grow on
one, and before we left I was perfectly enchanted, and
began to realize what an enormous quantity of water
there was. For a mile above the Falls, breakers were
rolling in constantly like a sea, coming I suppose from
Lake Erie. We had a most glorious day to see it. The
sun was very bright, but the wind was rather strong, and
now and then blew the spray in such dense clouds that
one could hardly see the Falls. After breakfast we had
a carriage to drive round and see all we could. The first
place we drove to was a sort of museum and curiosity
shop, where we got out, and were shown up a long stair-
case to see the view, which we thought rather spoilt the
Falls, making them look so much smaller. At this place
we put on some oilskins, leggings, galoshes, and long-
coats with hoods, and the gentlemen with hoods tied
under their chins; we all looked very funny in our
yellow costumes. A guide took us to the Falls, where we
descended a long spiral staircase, which brought us
almost under them. There was a great deal of snow and
ice ; had it been summer time, we could have gone a
great deal further underneath the Falls, but as it was we
were able to look up, and in some way realize the enor-
mous height of the Falls. It was a very grand sight.
Of course we should have been wet through with the
spray, if we had not had oilskin dresses. There is


another fall on the American side, very pretty but not
nearly so large. After we had relieved ourselves of our
oilskins, we drove along a pretty road above the Falls,
and winding along by the River Niagara. We noticed huge
blocks of ice floating down towards the Falls. Our driver
pulled up at one place to show us a burning spring; a
very curious thing. After that we drove to the Rapids,
where Captain Webb lost his life, a quarter of a mile
below the Falls. They showed us where he was last seen,
and all the rest of it. Here we had our photos taken in
a group, with the Rapids for a background. Then we
drove back to the hotel for dinner. We left again by the
3.50 train, which was an hour late, for New York. Ar-
riving there I went straight to bed, as I was suffering
from a gathered ear. I stayed in bed for three days, and
in my room for a week, and enjoyed it immensely. G.
began with scarlatina on the 28th, but it was a very
slight attack, and she was only in bed three days. W T hen
I got a bit better, I went with Ar. to see Mrs. Langtry at
the Niblo’s Theatre; it was adjoining our hotel, and we
had simply to walk up a private passage. We went to
Brooklyn Bridge one morning; the finest suspension
bridge in the world. In the centre is a broad footway.
On either side the tram plies backwards and forwards,
up one and down the other ; and outside that, on both
sides, is a carriage way, broad enough for two carriages
to pass. It crosses the East river, which divides Brook-
lyn from New York ; the Hudson divides New York
from Jersey Town, on the other side. The streets all run
parallel, like most American towns. The houses are
built in blocks, with the exception of the Broadway,
which runs in a winding fashion right through the other
streets. They are all numbered, instead of having names.
Every other one is a sort of bye-street, through which
the elevated railway runs. Those running from east to
west are called streets, and those from north to south are


avenues. The elevated railway is about the height of the
second story of the houses, and is far nicer to travel on
than our wretched underground. The way they go round
the corners, which are very sharp, is at first very alarm-
ing, hut one soon gets used to it. We went one day to
the Central Park, to see the elite of New York disport
themselves in their buggies. We admired some of the
horses very much ; but those fast trotters, of which there
were a good many, were anything but pretty to look at.
We have had a great deal of rain since we have been
here, as a matter of course, having lost our umbrella.
Llewelyn arrived yesterday; we were awfully glad to see
him. I never saw such a cool lot as these niggers. The
waiter, when he brought me the menu to choose my
breakfast from, this morning before I was up, calmly sat
down on the sofa, and took up a paper to read whilst I
studied the menu. I had quite a little argument with
him the other morning, about who was going to win the
great walking match, which has been going on here for
the last three or four days. He began to look so mur-
derous ; and as there was a big knife on the tray, I
thought it prudent in the end to agree with him. Our
chambermaid, a very nice man, informed me that he
suffered from earache, and recommended me all sorts of
wonderful remedies for mine. When it got better, I was
stone deaf on one side, so that I could not hear the tick-
ing of the watch when the doctor held it against my ear,
and lam still so ;it makes it most unpleasant. lam
very much disappointed in what I have seen of New
York, I have always heard it was such a fine city; but
excepting Madison Square, Fifth Avenue, and all about
there, which is certainly very fine, there is nothing in it
to be compared to many parts of London. I have really
nothing much to tell you ; being such a sorry couple of
crocks, we have not been out or seen very much. Ar. has
just come in to say he has taken berths in the “ Bothnia,”


which sails on May 7th, the day after to-morrow. She is
an old boat, and takes the full ten days to make the
voyage ; so we shall see yon now in about a fortnight’s
time. Don’t forget to bring us some decent dresses to
Liverpool. We shall arrive there about the 16th, I
expect.
Yours ever,
MAUD.


EXTRACT FROM DIARY.
. Wednesday, May Ith.— Left New York in the “ Both-
nia. Had a little trouble to get our luggage down to
the wharf. Wet afternoon, everything looking very
miserable. This ship is a very old-fashioned affair ; the
cabins are all astern, and the smell of the engines rather
strong.
Sunday, May IRA-—Had very foggy and boisterous
weather since we left; fog horn going perpetually. We
feel the vibration very much in our cabins, especially
when the screw is out of water, which is more often than
not. Gr. and Ar. are very seasick; G-. obliged to keep
hex cabin, owing to a severe sore throat and swollen
glands. We had service this morning ; not many at-
tended.
Thursday, May Ibth. —Had a concert on board yester-
day, for the benefit of the Liverpool Seaman’s Orphanage.
Gb, who was much better, played Scotch airs. A collec-
tion was made, amounting to £22. Fog horn going' all
last night. We suddenly stopped, which woke me and
I was lather alarmed. Hope to sight land to-morrow
afternoon.
Fiiday, May 1 Qth. —Sighted land, the Kerry mountains
(lieland), about 11 a.m. Very foggy. Transferred our
passengers for Queenstown in a tender, at 8 in the
evening. Saw nothing of the place ; too foggy. Ar. and
Llewelyn missed their supper—the time being put on
three-quarters of an hour—at which they were rather
disgusted.
Saturday, May \lth. —Very cold and foggy. Can see
the Welsh hills in the distance. Entered the river
about 11, and came to anchor in the Mersey about 12,
when our rejoicing family came on board.


VOLCANIC ERUPTION IN NEW ZEALAND.
[Extracts from the Standard, July 29th, 1886.]
A volcanic eruption on a stupendous scale has suddenly broken out in
the North Island: the notable Pink and White Terraces, one of the
wonders of the world, have been swept away, and there has been serious
loss of life ; at least seven Europeans and 100 Natives have perished in
the disturbances.
Shortly after midnight on Thursday, June 10th, the inhabitants of
Wairoa, Eotarua, and other places in the district, were alarmed by a
constant succession of earthquakes. About half-past one a.m. a small
cloud was seen on the top of Mount Tarawera, and flashes of lightning
of great brilliancy were seen playing about its summit. The inhabitants
oppressed by dire forebodings turned out of their houses, and presently
an awful spectacle was witnessed.
The mountain appeared rent from top to bottom, and flames a thou-
sand feet high shot out of wnat appeared to be three craters opened up
simultaneously in its sides. This was followed by a shower of what the
eye-witnesses termed balls of fire, but probably rsd-hot cinders which
spread over the country for miles round. Then the affrighted inhabitants
took refuge in their houses, trembling at the thought of what might be
coming next. •
At Wairoa, where the brunt of the eruption was felt, there were only
a few Europeans living, and most of these took refuge in the local hotel
kept by Mr. McEae. Presently a hail of heavy stones, red-hot cinders,
mud and ashes, fell on the roof, which soon began to give way under the
strain. A Mr. Bainbridge was here killed: the rest fled through the
dense darkness to a Maori whare. The local missionary lost his life,
three of his children and a nephew were found buried beneath the ruins
of his house After attention had been given to the saving
of life, the most intense anxiety prevailed as to the fate of the Terraces ;
at first it was impossible to ascertain whether they existed or not. The
whole district was enveloped in steam and hot ashes, and treacherous
moya which covered the country and rendered it impossible to approach
them. So great was the interest felt on this subject throughout the
colony, that on the earliest opportunity desperate efforts were made to
get near the spot. At length, after infinite risk, the feat was accom-
plished. One party found it necessary to strip themselves to wade
through the mud. When at length they were able to peer over from a
height at the back of where the Terraces once stood, they found the
whole place occupied by one huge crater; and several small mud volcanoes
casting their hideous ejections high in the air. They watched one
volcano and counted four seconds till the mud fell, which it did with a
thundering noise. What was formerly a lake of warm water known as
Eotomahana, with luxuriant vegetation round its shores, is now a field
of geysers and mud volcanoes. The noise of the explosions was heard


at places, at least one hundred and fifty miles from the centre of the dis-
turbance. At Tauranga, on the sea coast about fifty miles from Tarawera,
the ground was covered to a depth of three inches or more with volcanic
dust. The air was darkened, so that the gas had to be lit at mid-day.
Altogether it is estimated that an area of at least two thousand square
miles of country are covered with volcanic dust to a depth of three or
four inches. Much of this was a rich grazing country, but cattle are now
roving about on it in a starving condition. The famous Tiki-Tapu forest
was entirely destroyed




