

CKjtrrtKj of itttlirrrtJ, Urmti
toitb Jit. Margaret |ttojiS£S.
FIFTH ANNUAL
COMMEMORATION
SERVICE
IN HONOUR OF
ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP,
R.N.
Patron :
H.R.H. THE DUKE OF KENT, K.G.
President :
ALDERMAN THE RT. HON.
THE VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD OF HYTHE, G.C.V.0., C.8.E., T.D.
MONDAY, 11th OCTOBER, 1937


©rber of Service
2.30—3 p.m Organ Music
Hymn
44 We Love the Place, O God.”
“ Lord, I have loved the habitation of Thy House and the place
where Thine honour dwelleth.”
W E love the place, O God,
Wherein Thine honour dwells,
The joy of Thine abode
All earthly joys excels.
It is the house of prayer
Wherein Thy servants meet.
And Thou, O Lord, art there,
Thy chosen flock to greet.
We love the word of life,
The word that tells of peace,
Of comfort in the strife,
And joys that never cease.
We love to sing below
For mercies freely given,
But O, we long to know
The triumph song of heaven.
Lord Jesus give us grace
On earth to love Thee more.
In heaven to see Thy face
And with Thy Saints adore.
Minister : I was glad when they said unto me we shall
return unto the house of the Lord.
Choir : Our feet shall stand in Thy gates, 0 Jerusalem.
Minister : The earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof.
Choir : The world and they that dwell therein.
O Lord, open Thou our lips.
And our mouth shall shew forth Thy praise
O God, make speed to save us.
0 Lord , make haste to help us.
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be,
World without end. Amen.
Praise ye the Lord.
The Lord’s Name be praised.


Psalm 67*
Deus Misereatur
G OD , be merciful unto us, and bless us : and shew us the light of
his countenance, and be merciful unto us :
That thy way may be known upon earth : thy saving health
among all nations.
Let the people praise thee, O God : yea, let all the people praise
thee.
O let the nations rejoice and be glad ; for thou shaft judge the
folk righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.
Let the people praise thee, O God : yea, let all the people praise
thee.
Then shall the earth bring forth her increase : and God, even
our own God, shall give us his blessing.
God shall bless us : and all the ends of the world shall fear him.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the Holy Ghost :
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world
without end. Amen.
The Lesson
Ecclesiasticus, Chapter XLIY
VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD OF HYTHE.
Psalm 100
Jubilate : Stanford.
Q BE joyful in the Lord, all ye lands : serve the Lord with glad
ness and come before his presence with a song.
Be ye sure that the Lord he is God : it is he that hath made
us and not we ourselves ; we are his people and the sheep of his
pasture.
O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his
courts with praise : be thankful unto him, and speak good of his
Name.
For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting ; and his
truth endureth from generation to generation. Amen.


Let us pray.
The Lord’s Prayer.
Prayer for the King,
and all in authority under him.
God, the fountain of all goodness, we humbly beseech
Thee to bless our Sovereign Lord, King George, and all high
and low in his Great Empire, the Ministers and Parliaments in all
his Dominions, that they may order all things in wisdom, righteous-
ness and peace, to the honour of Thy holy name and the good of
Thy Church and people ; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Prayer for Australia and the Homeland.
Q ALMIGHTY God, whose Divine Providence ordereth all things
and guides and rules the destinies of Nations and Peoples :
We thank Thee that out of much toil and heroic struggles our beloved
and honoured Australia has become a great and distinguished
Member of the British Empire and Commonwealth.
We honour Australia, always loyal and in times of danger ever
ready to give her full offering of Life, Strength, Means and Resources
to serve and help the Motherland in the day of trial. We pray that
every blessing spiritual and material, may by Thy Divine Grace,
follow her in the path of Honour, Loyalty, Peace, Fidelity and Manly
enterprise.
Bless O Lord and strengthen for their high duties the Ministers
and Governments of the Commonwealth of Australia and grant
that all therein may be united in the bond of brotherhood, in
prosperity and peace and in the Fellowship of the Faith.
Forgive, O Lord, the faults, neglects and errors of the past in
the course of our Empire development and grant us wisdom to fulfil
Thy laws of Eternal righteousness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
A Prayer for ourselves.
JJLESS, 0 Lord we beseech Thee our Country and Empire having
in mind more nearly at this time, our City of London and this
our Ward of Bread Street in their connection with Australia, the
home of our kindred. May the link between us be more and more
strengthened as the days go by with true loyal love and esteem.
May each help the other in fair and hard times, living for a great
ideal of Empire and commonweal, and hand on the best and noblest
traditions of our Race through Him, the example to all mankind,
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Australian Patriotic Song.
Advance Australia Fair.
AUSTRALIA’S sons, let us rejoice,
For we are young and free ;
We’ve golden soil, and wealth for toil
Our home is girt by sea.
Our land abounds in nature’s gifts
Of beauty rich and rare,
In history’s page let every stage
Advance, Australia fair.
REFRAIN.
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance, Australia fair.
Beneath our radiant Southern Cross
We’ll toil with hearts and hands.
To make our youthful Commonwealth
Renowned of all the lands ;
For loyal sons beyond the seas
We’ve boundless plains to share,
With courage let us all combine
To advance, Australia fair.
REFRAIN.
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance, Australia fair.


“ Now Praise We Great and Famous Men.”
jyOW praise we great and famous men,
The fathers named in story ;
And praise the Lord Who now as then
Reveals in man His glory.
Praise we the wise and brave and strong,
Who graced their generation ;
Who helped the right, and fought the wrong,
And made our folk a nation.
Praise we the great of heart and mind,
The singers sweetly gifted,
Whose music like a mighty wind
The souls of men uplifted.
So praise we great and famous men,
The fathers, named in story ;
And praise the Lord Who now as then
Reveals in man His glory.
William George Tarrant.
The Address
THE RIGHT REYD. BISHOP HORACE CROTTY, D.D
Vicar of St. Pancras , and late Lord Bishop of Bathurst,
New South Wales.


Hymn.
JpIGHT the good fight with all thy might,
Christ is thy Strength, and Christ thy Right;
Lay hold on life, and it shall be
Thy joy and crown eternally.
Run the straight race through God’s good grace,
Lift up thine eyes, and seek His Face ;
Life with its way before us lies.
Christ is the path, and Christ the prize.
Cast care aside, lean on thy Guide ;
His boundless mercy will provide ;
Trust, and thy trusting soul shall prove
Christ is its life, and Christ its love.
Faint not nor fear, His Arms are near.
He changeth not, and thou art dear ;
Only believe, and thou shall see
That Christ is all in all to thee. Amen.
National Anthem
The Blessing




Patron
H.R.H.
THE DUKE OF KENT,
K.G.
President
Col. & Alderman The Rt. Hon.
VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD
OF HVTHE,
G.C.V.0., C.8.E., LL.D.
Hbmiral Hrtbur IPbillip flDemonal.
(St. Mildred’s Church, Bread Street, E.C.4)
CORDWAINERS HALL,
Secretaries
Mr. F. W. MANDER, M.A.,
Ward & Vestry Clerk,
7, Cannon Street, E.C.4
THE OFFICIAL SECRETARY,
Australia House, Strand, W.C.2
Mr. R.E.H. BAILY, C.8.E.,
The Royal Empire Society,
Northumberland Avenue, W.C.2
7, CANNON STREET, LONDON, E.C.4
3rd November 1937,
Dear Sir,
Commemoration Service, October 11th 1937.
I enclose herewith a copy of the Order
of Service on this occasion and the account in the
’’City Press” which you may like to have.
If Bishop Grotty’s address-is printed
I will forward you some prints of this later"on.
Yours faithfully,
John A. Ferguson Esq. ,
O/o The Industrial Commission
of New South Wales,
Queen’s Square,
Sydney,
N.S. W.


A.D. 1937
JJUUiwit, IVnati
THE ADMIRAL PHILLIP COMMEMORATION COUNCIL
Monday, October nth, at 3.0 p-m.
The Rt. Hon. THE VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD of
Hythe, G.C.V.0., C.8.E., T.D., Alderman of the
Ward of Bread Street and President of the Council
and the Members of the Committee
cordially invite
to attend
The Fifth Annual Service in commemoration of
ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP
(born in the Bread Street Ward on the 11th October, 1738
Founder of Sydney and Australia, 178 B)
to maintain and strengthen the good and cordial relations of the
City of London and Australia.
Reception and Tea afterwards at Cordwainers ’ llall
by invitation of the Company.
R.S.V.P to F. W. Munder, M.A., The Clerk,
Cordwainers ’ Hall, 7, Cannon Street, E.CA.
