

THE WRITING OF COLONIAL HISTORY.”
JAMES BONWICK,
F.R.G.S., F.A.1., F.R.C.1., F.R.H.S.
EXTRACTS FROM
The Home News, 29TH March, 1895,
The British Australasian , 4TH April, 1895.




"THE WRITING OF COLONIAL HISTORY.”
12a 38—95 (b)




“THE WRITING OF COLONIAL HISTORY.”
JAMES BONWICK.
Extract from The Home News, 29TH March, 1895.
Mr. James Bonwick read a paper on the above subject at an
afternoon meeting in the Library of the Royal Colonial Institute
on Tuesday, March 26, Sir Frederick Young, K.0.M.G., being in
the chair. The following were amongst those present: —
Sir Saul Samuel, K.C.M.G., C. 8.; Rt. Hon. Hugh C. B.
Childers, F.R.S.; Gen. Sir Andrew Clarke, G.C.M.G., C. 8.; Sir
Henry Bulwer, G.C.M.G.; Mr. J. R. Mosse; Mr. C. Atchley; Mr.
S. Yardley, C.M.G.; Mr. G. Beetham; Mr. R. C. Hare; Prof. T. H.
Beare; Dr. C. Inglis; Mr. P. D. Prankerd; Rev. A. Caldecott;
M.A.; Mr. E. A. Petherick; Mr. E. J. Ohallinor; Mr. M. Macfie;
Mr. C. Sidey; Mr. W. S. Sebright Green; Mr. Edward Salmon;
Dr. A. M. Brown; Mr. J. S. O’Halloran (Secretary).
Mr. James Bonwick said : —lt is a common saying that history
largely needs to be rewritten. Ancient historians are too often
lacking in care and truth; yet the spirit of doubt may be indulged
to excess. Ancient annals of all lands are more or less descriptive
of the doings of their gods with man. Nature-worship is one
explanation of some narrations. The connection of astronomy —
not ordinary astrology—will be found a means of interpreting
others, since they may be but problems to illustrate zodiacal move-
ments, or the display of fancy with the constellations. Instead of


rejecting myths, we now seek opportunities of interpreting them.
Errors in history may arise from carelessness, the insertion of
margin into text, or from wilful erasure, addition, or pure inven-
tion, especially in controversial days. In modern times, with the
Press, we are occasionally accused of the subversion of simple
truthfulness for the good of our party or cause. Australian
history is not without its myths or exaggeration. As our partisan-
ship gave Richard 111 a hump and made Henry VIII nothing less
than a Blue Beard, so we have a monster or gentleman in Governor
Bligh; the tyrant’s or prisoner’s friend in Governor Macquarie ;
the bigot or saint in Chaplain Marsden; or the founder of
Victoria in Fawkner, not Batman. In writing Colonial history
we have some good models for our guidance in England. We
want not fine writing, with faulty research and party preju-
dice, as in Hume or Macaulay, but honest recorders like Sharon
Turner or the philosophical Lecky. To illustrate the prepara-
tion for the writing of Colonial history, may I be pardoned
a reference to my own modest productions, and the circum-
stances which gave them birth ? It was in 1841 that the
so-called Quaker Missionary, George Washington Walker, father
of the present Tasmanian archivist, took me to the studio of
Mr. Dutterreau in Hobart Town. There, upon the walls, I saw
portraits of the Island natives, and of George Robinson, the
Conciliator, besides hearing from the aged artist’s lips the fervid
description of the dark man’s sorrows. It was there and then
that I resolved to collect materials for the history of the “ Black
War of Van Diemen’s Land.” But thirty years elapsed before my
“ Last of the Tasmanians ” and “ Daily Life of the Tasmanians”
were published by Messrs. Sampson Low and Marston. Being a
teacher, my first book was “ Geography for Australian Youth,” in
1845, subsequently enlarged to the “ Geography of Australia and
New Zealand,” with a small shilling school-book on geography.
The “ Australian Reader ” was printed in Adelaide. A personal
acquaintance in Tasmania and Victoria, with many of the leaders
of the Colonisation movement around Port Phillip Bay, in 1835-6,
led to the publication of the “ Discovery and Settlement of Port
Phillip,” the “ Wild White Man and his Port Phillip Black
Friends,” “The Life of John Batman, Founder of the Colony,”
and the illustrated “ Port Phillip Settlement.” In 1852 came “ Notes


of a Gold Digger ” and the issue of “The Gold Digger’s Magazine.'”
Then followed the “Bushrangers of Van Diemen’s Land” and
“Western Victoria: an Educational Tour.” Later on were written
“ Curious Facts of Old Colonial Days/’ “ The Lost Tasmanian
Race/’ “ Western Australia/’ “Resources of Queensland,” “ Mike
Howe, the Bushranger/’ “ The Lily of Tasmania/’ “ French
Colonies/’ “The British Empire ami its Resources/’ “ Climate and
Health in Australasia,” “Romance of the Wool Trade,” “Early
Struggles of Australasian Trade and the Australasian Press,”
&c., besides articles on the Colonies in two encyclopedias.
Australian history has engaged the attention of a goodly array of
worthies, commencing with the founders of New South Wales—
Governors Phillip, Hunter, and Collins—and carried on by Went-
worth, Lang, West, Bennett, Westgarth, and others. Their
works are to be found in such noble Colonial libraries as those
of Mr. Henniker Heaton, M.P., Mr. S. W. Silver, Mr. E. A.
Petherick, and that of our own Institute, through the energy of
its officials. It is on this occasion I would make honourable
•
reference to one historian of Victoria—the persistent Australian
loyalist, and the now sincerely lamented Mr. de Labilliere. In
the pursuit of Colonial intelligence I have occasionally found my-
self in strange company. Once in 1852, benighted in the Black
Forest, then of very bad repute, I sought shelter in a rough
shanty, or sly-grog shop. Shown into a small curtained recess, I
saw the clothes upon the stretcher fairly soaked in blood. Besides,
the drunken diggers and teamsters gave small prospect of
peaceful repose. I retired, therefore, into the dark forest, and
sought a night’s rest at the foot of a gum-tree. Yet, in the
early morning, I found in one of the shanty occupants a man
who had gone through some of the most stirring scenes of
old Colonial days. In the back slums of Little Jlourke-street,
Melbourne, I got interesting tales from an ex-bushranger, then
turned into a preacher. As the names of some of my history-
contributors may be interesting to old Colonists, I will mention a
few; for convicts and clergymen, assigned servants and officials,
wild bushmen and newspaper editors, have helped me in the
investigations. Among ministers were the Rev. W. Jarrett,
founder of Congregationalism in New South Wales; the Rev. W.
Miller, in Tasmania ; the Rev. T. Q. Stow, in Adelaide ; the Rev. S.


Waterfield, in Melbourne. There was the founder of the Baptists,
Mr. Saunders, in Sydney; and Mr. Dowling, of Tasmania. I had
the story of Wesleyanism, beginning in Adelaide, from the Rev,
W. Longbottom and the brave and good Rev. Daniel Draper ;
and of Port Arthur from the Rev. Wm. Butters. The Rev. Dr.
Lang showed me in Sydney the scene of his early Presbyterian
career; and there also I gained stories from the Rev. W. B.
Clarke, of geological fame. In Parramatta I talked with the
widow of Chief Constable Oakes, who knew the first chaplain and
first Methodist, and also with the sister of John Batman. I knew
Father Therry, the first authorised priest of New South Wales ;
Father Geoghegan, the first priest in Melbourne ; the Rev. N.
Turner, the early missionary ; Rev. Dr. Braim, the historian, of
Sydney; George Washington Walker, founder of Australian
Friends* Meetings ; Rev. Wm. Ridley, missionary to the blacks,
as well as the Aborigines’ Protectors; Parker, of Victoria; and
Dr. Moorhouse, of Adelaide. Early exploration yarns came from
Bunce, the naturalist out with Leichhardt; from Hamilton Hume,
of Murray fame; from the worthy Hentys, of Portland; from
Mr. McMillan, of Gippsland; from Surveyor-General Gregory;
and from the gentle, but brave, Capt. Sturt; Mr. William Giles,
Mr. John Barton Hack, and Dr. Barry Cotter gave me primitive
Adelaide news. In Brisbane and Rockhampton men spoke to
me of early Moreton Bay life. The old New South Wales Corps
was represented to me in the person of Anthony Fenn Kemp. I
learned very much from Surveyor John Holder Wedge; Mr. Wm.
Robertson, of Hobart and Colac ; Mr. Sams, of Launceston; Mr.
James Simpson, first chosen magistrate by Port Phillip settlers ;
Dr. Thompson, of Geelong; Mr. Gardner, the first overlauder
from Sydney ; John Batman’s eldest daughter ; Foster Tyans,
J.P.; Mr. J. P. Fawkner ; Mr. Thomas Napier, of Essendon ;
Mr. Evans, Mr. Sutherland, and others of Port Phillip in 1835-
36. For years I lived near William Buckley, the Wild White
Man. Tales of 1803 and 1804 in Hobart Town were told me by
two ladies, by the servant to Chaplain Knopwood, by Governor
Collins’s servant, by Johnson, of Greenponds, &c. I knew Simon,
son of Jagga Jagga; Mrs. Hodgson, of Norfolk Island; Mr.
Strode, the first authorised printer of Melbourne ; and the ancient
Editors, Robert Lathorpe Murray, Gilbertson Dowling, Buzacott,
6
COLONIAL HISTORY.


and Melville. At Picton I met an old soldier who knew Sydney
in Bligh’s time, and in Melbourne, old Goslyn, then eighty-five,
who had a written record of very ancient date. Several out in
the Black War with Robinson and Batman, Dr. Milligan and Dr.
Jeannret, of Flinders Island, King Walton and his half-caste
wife, Lalla Eookh, and other Tasmanian natives were known to
me.
This tedious display of personal authorities may be excused
on account of the interest taken by Colonials in the individuals
thus brought forward. Pretty well acquainted with the worth,
as well as the shortcomings, of previous efforts in the direction of
Australian history, including my own labours therein, I had long
felt that what was wanted was a collection of records by each
of the Colonies—like as Canada has so nobly made, by the hand
of my friend, Mr. Brymner, the archivist. To this end I made
proposals to several Governments. For Queensland I transcribed
Colonial Office documents up to 1850. For Victoria I forwarded
some transcripts. For South Australia I prepared copies of letters
relative to its discoverer, Capt, Flinders. For Tasmania I acted
through Mr. James Backhouse Walker, and overlooked for him
the work of a transcriber. For New South Wales I sent at first
some transcripts through our veteran Agent-General, Sir Saul
Samuel. The Sydney Government subsequently acceded to my
request to furnish them with records of early days. When,
however, through the suggestion of Mr. Charles Potter, the
Government Printer, it was resolved to publish an “ Official
History of New South Wales,” I was engaged as archivist, with
a small staff of transcribers, whose able and intelligent services
I here most gratefully acknowledge. A History Board was
organised in Sydney, with the patriotic Principal Librarian, Mr.
Walker, for its chairman, though my communications continue to
be with Mr, Potter and the Keeper of Records, Mr. Bladen.
The polished pen of Mr. Barton was employed to produce the
first volume of history, and another volume came out under Mr.
Alexander Britton. A number of transmitted records have since
been printed. As new finds of early matter overran the published
history, I urged the authorities to be content, for some time at
least, with the collection of data. This has been accordingly
decided upon in Sydney. At some future period a Heaven-sent


historian may appear on the scene, and, gathering the threads
of the story transmitted to the Colony, weave them into a narra-
tive which will prove as romantic as, while far more reliable than,
the fairy tales of King Arthur. As one of our publications
treats, very incomjdetely, of the first voyage of Captain Cook, I
would venture, with much delicacy, a few observations upon
the legendary character of that interesting event. There is to
be seen at the Museum the fragment of Cook’s Voyage of
the Endeavour in his own handwriting, and the Record Office
possesses several genuine logs of the same voyage, in the hand-
writing of the first lieutenant, Mr. Hicks, and of other officers then
on board. Mr. G. M. Hudson, of Sunderland, has the complete
and only genuine narrative of that first voyage, which was pre-
sented by Cook himself to his friend and patron, Admiral Sir
Hugh Palliser, and which copy has remained in Mrs. Hudson’s
family to the time when I was privileged to inspect it for some
days at Sunderland.
Now, all these well-attested documents agree in one remark-
able particular—their non-acquaintance with the names of New
South Wales and Botany Bay. When possession was taken on
leaving the coast no name was given to the country. The bay
in question was only known in those old records as Stingray
Harbour or Stingray Bay, from the fish caught there. In a copy,
once supposed original, spaces were left for the subsequent
filling up of various names of places. Where Stingray had been
first entered, it was erased for the varied writing of Bottany
Harbour, Bqttonest. Bay, Botany Bay, &c. Unfortunately, no
care seems to have been taken to preserve the materials upon
which Dr. Hawkesworth compiled his well-written but largely
inventive story, published in Cook’s name. Even the so-called
diary of Mr. Banks is not in his handwriting. Thus far, we have
not got the real account of the Endeavour’s voyage, and it is due
to the navigator, and to the Colony of whose coasts he was, at
least, the rediscoverer, that more investigation of that subject be
undertaken, r I have forwarded to Sydney many details of the
life and correspondence of Sir Joseph Banks, of great value to
future Colonial students of Colonial history. Then there is the
correspondence between Banks and Consul Matra, who was with
Cook in the Endeavour, and whose letters to Lord Sydney, in


1785, upon the colonisation of Botany Bay by dispossessed
American Loyalists, directed the attention of Mr. Pitt to form a
penal settlement in New South Wales. Mr. Matra’s letters refer
to circumstances on board the Endeavour, and the midshipman,
through Banks, became our Consul in Morocco till death. The
archivist here requires to be furnished with permits at the Public
Records Office, Chancery-lane, for the examination of documents
transferred thither from the different Departments of the Public
Service. Unfortunately, this transfer has only been made of
late years. Had it been done earlier, there would not have been
the irregularity and deficiency that searchers have so much reason
to deplore. Some Departments seem to have taken more care of
their papers than others have done ; but it is most disappointing
to find great gaps, especially during the Napoleonic War, when
Great Britain was fighting for her very existence. The Ad-
miralty is better illustrated than the War Office. The Privy
Council volumes are in excellent order. The Home Office retains
many records. The Domestic Series of Home papers are very
useful. The Colonial Office records, the main subject of present
inquiry, are in a large number of fairly-bound volumes. Of these,
nearly thirty are taken up with the Commission of Inquiry during
1820, and upon which MSS. was founded the report of Mr. Bigge,
printed by order of the House of Commons. The Colonial Office
library, now under the care of the courteous Mr. Atchley, still keeps
possession of important entry-books. As at one time New South
Wales was dependent upon India for food supplies, an inquiry at
the India Office was necessary. The want of an index to the vast
collection of papers there is to be regretted. Though some good
service has been done, it would need the labour of a dozen like Mr.
Danvers, the active Superintendent of Records, to prepare a
suitable index. The Judge Advocate-General’s Office was very
disappointing, as Court-martials form good materials for history.
It is the custom there to destroy records after a certain number of
years. One of the officials kindly made for me a plunge into
neglected heaps, seeking the papers connected with the trial of
Col. Johnston for mutiny against Capt. Bligh, but returned unsuc-
cessful, though black as a chimney-sweep. One may still get well
blackened handling papers at the Record Office. While immensely
indebted to the wonderful stores at the British Museum, whose


officials are so attentive and helpful, the Australian searcher will
be somewhat disappointed in its collection of letters and the
incompleteness of newspaper-files. The Record Office has been,
and will be, the great repository for the students of Colonial
history. From Mr. H. Hall there I have received valuable sugges-
tions and much assistance in my investigations. The missionary
letters and other MS. records of the Church of England, Wesleyan,
and London Missions were of invaluable aid. lam also indebted
to the Westminster Catholic authorities for transcriptions of most
important letters preserved at the Brompton Oratory. Dublin,
Bristol, and Portsmouth assisted me greatly in old newspapers.
Private collections of papers, as those of Mr. Pownall, of Russell-
square, connected with Bass an d Waterhouse, were of signal
service. Lord Fitzmaurice kindly copied for me a letter from
Governor Phillip to Lord Lansdowne, and Lord Percy sent down
from Alnwick Castle to his London house important documents
for my transcriptions. Still the Colonial searcher is grieved to
find such lapses with public documents. Very little care was
taken of these when George 111 was King, and far less than in
Elizabeth’s reign. One is astonished to find the custom prevailing
of a Secretary of State, upon relinquishing office, being allowed
to carry off official documents as he pleased to his own library.
No wonder that subordinates were careless as to the fate of
papers. Many a cartload has been sent to sale-rooms as waste-
paper. Knowing ones raked among the heap to discover some-
thing for private disposal. Some years ago an official was vainly
searching for some necessary document. As a last resource, one
cried out, “ Look in the pigeon-house.” The birds had penetrated
to a lumber-room through broken windows. It was an isolated
remnant of the old Whitehall Palace. The door was broken open
by a smith, and amidst a deposit of papers on the floor, covered
with dust and pigeons’ dirt, the sought-for document was dis-
covered. Above thirty years ago, when in Sydney, I made
inquiry of the Colonial Secretary after any ancient official
records. As he was at a loss how to direct my search, an
attendant suggested that I might find what I wanted in the old
room. There lay on the floor, well covered by many a “ brick-
fielder,” a similarly neglected collection as that at Whitehall.
Rummaging in the tangled, dirty mass, I brought up a military


Order-book of most primitive Sydney times. Searching once
for Tasmanian archives in Hobart, I discovered, with much
concern, the total absence of long periods of official matter. It
was a popular tradition in my early Hobart Town days that
when Governor Collins suddenly expired in his chair, in 1810,
two armed marines were stationed outside at the room-door
while certain gentlemen were busily engaged in the destruc-
tion of documents —possibly for private reasons. There was,
many years ago, a similar destruction of records in Sydney; but
that order of Government proceeded from a desire of saving
pain to the descendants of unfortunate persons. It is, however,
to be feared that in the fiery consumption some very valuable
documents were lost to history.
London is, with all deficiencies, the best searching-ground
for comtemplating Colonial historians. The Record Office and
British Museum are treasure-houses to inquirers; and our own
Institute is taking wise measures to be a true home of reference
for chroniclers. I may add that the Secretary will be happy to
receive and preserve for historical reference any documents relative
to early Colonial days in various parts of the Empire that may be
in the possession of Colonists and others. But to every Australian
Colonist London will ever be the Mecca of his wandering, if only
for association with early history. Here he can show his children
the grave of Governor Hunter, at Hackney; the tombstone of
Governor King, at Tooting; the monument to Governor Bligh, at
Lambeth; the tablet tribute to the first chaplain, now at St.
Antholin’s Church, Cannon-street; the stone homage to the
memory of Lord Sydney, at Fulham Church; and the humbler
resting-place of Capt. Vancouver, in the churchyard of Petersham
village, near Richmond. The politician and reformer may do well
to gaze upon the monumental obelisk in Nunhead Cemetery,
erected in the honour of the so-called “ Scotch Martyrs ” to free-
dom, who were transported to New South Wales in 1794, To
conclude, I crave your indulgence for personal remarks, seemingly
needful to my subject, and demanded by my Colonial friends. The
mode of gathering facts, and the difficulties in the path of a
Colonial historian, appeared to require such a reference. More-
over, it was desired that I should tell the tale originating the
“ Official History ”of New South Wales. After all, Australia is


but making its history. The settlement thereof began in gloomy
trials; it struggled against difficulties never again to be encoun-
tered ; it emerged from deep shadows into brightsome sunshine;
and its future will, doubtless, be associated with the real progres-
sion of our race and the brotherhood of man.
12
COLONIAL HISTORY.


A VETERAN COLONIAL HISTORIAN.
Extract from The British Australasian , 4TH April, 1895.
The last afternoon meeting of tlie Royal Colonial Institute—
brief reference to which was made in our last —served to intro-
duce to the Fellows a veteran Australian colonist who is now
very seldom seen in public. Having passed the allotted span of
three score years and ten, he is living in practical retirement in
his charming suburban home in Surrey, but he is never idle. He
has been for some time past engaged on an important work for
the New South Wales Government on that Colony’s history, and
assuredly no one was better fitted for the task. Like that genial
Queensland squatter Sir Arthur Hodgson, Mr. Bonwick ascribes
his success in life largely to the fact that he married early, and
carved out a career for himself in Australia. At the age of
twenty-three he wedded Miss Esther Beddow, and in the follow-
ing year emigrated to the Colonies, arriving in Hobart at the
time that Sir John Franklin, who was afterwards lost in the
Arctic regions, was administering the Government. In less
than a fortnight, therefore, if all goes well, Mr. Bonwick will
celebrate his fifty-fifth wedding-day, and the old man, as may
well be imagined, is looking forward to the event with proud
satisfaction and delight. Pioneer colonists, —like the Right
Hon. Hugh C. E. Childers, who, strange to say, also married at
the age of twenty-three, and emigrated to Australia in 1850,
soon after the honeymoon was over; Sir Saul Samuel, the
veteran Agent-General for New South Wales, who was taken to
Sydney in 1832 at the early age of twelve; and Mr. E. A.
Petherick, who went to Australia with his parents in 1852, —
were naturally pleased to attend the meeting at the Royal
Colonial Institute on March 26, and take part in the discussion
on Mr. Bonwick’s paper on “ The Writing of Colonial History.”


There was little need for the author to apologise for the
modest reference to his own productions, and the circumstances
which gave them birth, for no paper on Colonial history could
possibly be complete without mention of the various works
produced from the facile pen of Mr. Bonwick during the last
half-century. What led him to become an historian ? He told
the story in a few words in the course of his most interesting
address. In the very year that he arrived at Hobart with his
young bride he was taken to the studio of Mr. Hutterreau.
There, upon the walls, he saw portraits of the Island natives,
and of George Robinson, the Conciliator, besides hearing from
the aged artist’s lips the fervid description of the dark man’s
sorrows. It was there and then that Mr. Bonwick resolved to
collect materials for the history of the “ Black War of Van
Diemen’s Land.” But thirty years elapsed before his “ Last of
the Tasmanians” and “ Daily Life of the Tasmanians” were
published. Being a teacher, his first book was “ Geography for
Australian Youth,” in 1845, subsequently enlarged to the
“ Geography of Australia and New Zealand,” with a small shilling
school-book on geography. The “ Australian Reader ” was
printed in Adelaide. A personal acquaintance in Tasmania and
Victoria with many of the leaders of the Colonisation movement
around Port Phillip Bay, in 1835-6, led to the publication of the
“ Discovery and Settlement of Port Phillip,” the “ Wild White
Man and his Port Phillip Black Friends,” “ The Life of John
Batman, Founder of the Colony,”and the illustrated “ Port
Phillip Settlement.” In 1852 came “ Notes of a Gold Digger”
and the issue of “ The Gold Digger’s Magazine.” Then followed
the “Bushrangers of Van Diemen’s Land” and “Western
Victoria :an Educational Tour.” Later on were written “ Curious
Facts of Old Colonial Days,” “The Lost Tasmanian Race,”
“ Western Australia,” “ Resources of Queensland,” “ Mike Howe,
the Bushranger,” “ The Lily of Tasmania,” “ French Colonies,”
“ The British Empire and its Resources,” “ Climate and Health
in Australasia,” “ Romance of the Wool Trade,” “ Early Struggles
of Australasian Trade and the Australasian Press,” &c., besides
articles on the Colonies in two encyclopaedias. Australian history
has engaged the attention of a goodly array of worthies,
commencing with the founders of New South Wales—Governors :


Phillip, Hunter, and Collins —and carried on by Wentworth,
Lang, West, Bennett, Westgarth, and others. Their works are
to be found in such noble Colonial libraries, as those of Mr.
Henniker Heaton, M.P., Mr. S. W. Silver, Mr. E. A. Petherick,
and that of the Royal Colonial Institute, through the energy of
its officials.
In the pursuit of Colonial intelligence Mr. Bonwick occasion-
ally found himself in strange company. Once in 1852, benighted
in the Black Forest, then of very bad repute, he sought shelter
in a rough shanty, or sly-grog shop. Shown into a small cur-
tained recess, he saw the clothes upon the stretcher fairly soaked
in blood. Besides, the drunken diggers and roystering teamsters
gave small prospect of peaceful repose. He retired, therefore,
into the dark forest, and sought a night’s rest at the foot of a
gum-tree. Yet, in the early morning, he found in one of the
shanty occupants a man who had gone through some of the most
stirring scenes of old Colonial days. In the back slums of Little
Bourke-street, Melbourne, he got interesting tales from an
ex-bushranger, then turned into a preacher.
Not satisfied with what had been done in Colonial history, Mr.
Bonwick tried to induce different Australian Governments to
follow the noble precedent of Canada, and establish Record
Offices in their capitals. Several partially responded, though
New South Wales resolved to have an “ Official History,” and
appointed him archivist to work up materials for it in this
country. Some volumes of history and records have already
appeared from the Sydney Government Printing Department,
though it has now been resolved to be content, for a while, with
the collection of transcripts and the printing of a selection of
such records.
In offering a few observations upon the legendary character
of Cook’s first voyage, Mr. Bonwick said that all the attested
documents he had seen agreed in one remarkable particular—
their non-acquaintance with the names of New South Wales and
Botany Bay. When possession was taken on leaving the coast
no name was given to the country. The bay in question was
only known in those old records as Stingray Harbour or Stingray
Bay, from the fish caught there. In a copy, once supposed
original, spaces were left for the subsequent filling up of various
15
COLONIAL HISTORY.


names of places. Where Stingray had been first entered, it was
erased for the varied writing of Bottany Harbour, Bottonest
Bay, Botany Bay, &c. Unfortunately, no care seems to have
been taken to preserve the materials upon which Dr. Hawkes-
worth compiled his well-written but largely inventive story,
published in Cook’s name. Even the so-called diary of Sir
Joseph Banks is not in his handwriting. Thus far, observed Mr.
Bonwick, we have not got the real account of the Endeavour’s
voyage, and it is due to the navigator, and to the Colony of whose
coasts he was, at least, the rediscoverer, that more investigation
of that subject be undertaken.
Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB9s
16
COLONIAL HISTORY.




