

What has the Church
of Scotland done for
our Colonies?
< leuaioue, pans.
Box \o
REV. ALEX. WILLIAMSON
CONVENER OF THE COLONIAL MISSION COMMITTEE
EDITOR OF ‘ MORNING RAYS *
AUTHOR OF ‘THE MISSIONARY HEROES OF THE PACIFIC,’ ETC.
WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS
EDINBURGH AND LONDON
And all Booksellers
Price 3d.




P l€loOb
WHAT HAS
THE CHHECH OF SCOTLAND DONE
FOR OUR COLONIES?
REV. ALEX. WILLIAMSON
CONVENER OF THE COLONIAL MISSION COMMITTEE
EDITOR OF 1 MORNING RAYS ’
AUTHOR OF * THE MISSIONARY HEROES OF THE PACIFIC,’ ETC.
WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS
EDINBURGH AND LONDON




CONTENTS.
EXTENT OP THE COLONIES, 6
THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN CANADA, ... 7
ILLUSTRATIONS OP THE PRESENT RELIGIOUS STATE, . 12
FOUNDATION OP THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN
AUSTRALIA, 15
FOUNDATION OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN NEW
ZEALAND, 24
RELIGIOUS LIFE IN SOME OP THE COLONIES, . . 28
WORK OP LOCAL CHURCHES, 29
FOUNDATION OP THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN
WEST INDIES, 30
PRESENT POSITION OP PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN
JAMAICA, 33
PRESENT POSITION OP PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN
GRENADA, 45
FOUNDATION OP PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN BUENOS
AYRES, 56


CHAPLAINS IN INDIA, 63
ADDRESSES IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY —
REV. JAMES FLEMING, 8.D., 64
REV, DR ANDREW GRAY, 68
SIR J. N. CUTHBERTSON, '1
MR W. J. MENZIES, W.S., 73
REV. DR MARSHALL LANG, 76


THE CHURCH AND OUR COLONIES.
WHEN the .Church of Scotland awoke to her re-
sponsibility in regard to Missions, she did not
forget her sons and daughters who had left the shores
of their native land for settlements in the different
parts of the Colonial territories of Great Britain. In
the beginning of the century some of her members
united in what was called the Glasgow Colonial Society,
and, through it, sent out ministers to Canada, to break
the bread of life among the emigrants who had found
homes in that great country, and attend to their spirit-
ual interests. That Society was amalgamated in 1836
with the Colonial Committee, which was instituted in
that year under the convenership of the late Rev. Dr
Macfarlane, Principal of the University of Glasgow —
whom the Church of Scotland will ever remember with
deepest gratitude for his long and unwearied exertions
on behalf of the religious welfare of Scottish colonists.
By reason of the exertions which the Church of Scot-


land made forty years ago, slie lias now the gratification
of seeing in Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, large
and influential Presbyterian Churches endeavouring to
the utmost of their ability to mould infant states in that
“righteousness which exalteth a nation.”
EXTENT OF THE COLONIES.
The union of Presbyterians in the Colonies has led to
important modifications in the work of the Church, and
yet there remain extensive fields which demand her atten-
tion. It must be borne in mind that the foreign dominions
of Great Britain include no less than 800 millions of
square miles, and the number of persons in these terri-
tories who claim this country as their fatherland is more
than half of its whole population. Exclusive of India,
there are more than 16 millions of people directly under
the sway of our sovereign in the Colonies. In Australia
the number of emigrants from our shores has, in little
more than thirty years, increased tenfold; Queensland
possesses an area twelve times as large as England and
Wales, and a population of 320,000, for which, four years
ago, there were only twenty-two Presbyterian ministers.
Canada is nearly as large as Europe; and two of its
provinces—Manitoba and British Columbia —have an
area of 464,505 square miles. The number of emigrants
to Canada three' years ago was 103,824, a large propor-
tion of whom went to the North-West Provinces.


THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN CANADA
owes its existence to the Church of Scotland. It would be
too long to relate all the efforts of the Glasgow Colonial
Society in the first instance, and then of the Assembly’s
Committee, to provide religious ordinances for emigrants;
the successful and long-continued endeavours of Principal
Macfarlane and his coadjutors to obtain a position for the
clergy and people of the Church of Scotland similar to
that occupied by the clergy and people of the Church of
England ; the voluminous correspondence with Secretaries
of State for the Colonies; the various journeys to London
and the interviews with the authorities; the methods
adopted for “facilitating the education of young men,
natives of America, intended for the work of the ministry; ”
the various sums voted for the relief of the clergy in
the Synods of Canada and Nova Scotia, for the building
of churches and school-houses, for the purchase of school-
books, and for the maintenance of missionaries and
teachers. Wherever Scottish families settled, the ordi-
nances of religion were established, and provision made
for the education of youth. Innumerable names of sta-
tions planted by these colonists could be given—many
of them bearing old familiar names of glens and hills
and rivers, towns and farm-steadings “at home ” —all
bearing evidence of the affection entertained by the exiles
for that dear land from which they had gone forth.
These are matters of “ ancient history.” But the fact
remains that the Church of Scotland laid the founda-
tions of the Presbyterian Church in Canada, one portion


of which has become a Union Church, and one still re-
mains apart —as the Church of Scotland in Canada. It
would be superfluous to dwell on the change which has
taken place in the relation of these two branches to the
mother Church. Suffice it to say that while she has never
thrown any obstacle in the way of congregations desirous
of joining the Union Church, she does not look with
disfavour on such as refuse to cast in their lot with
that large and prosperous body. The Church of Scot-
land still helps directly to maintain ordinances in one
or two congregations in British Columbia, and gives
small grants to the Colleges of Kingston and Winnipeg.
Last year were given to work in British Columbia
and the N.W. Provinces. An illustration may be given
of the circumstances of one of the congregations—that
of Nanaimo —where there is one church and one hall.
The church holds 288 —the hall 112. There are three
trustees, chosen by the congregation. There is a debt of
$lOOO on the church, and $l7OO on the manse. There
is one preaching-station at Wellington, three and a half
miles distant; it is a public school, seated for 40, and is
granted by the school trustees. Mr Millar has three ser-
vices on Sabbath—ll a.m., 3.30 p.m., and 7 p.m. The
attendance in the morning is 120; afternoon, 20; even-
ing, 180. He has one week-day service, attendance, 25.
There are 133 communicants on the roll, of whom 74 are
Scottish Presbyterians; 79 communicated on 4th No-
vember 1888. The Communion is dispensed half-yearly,
and the number of baptisms last year was 22 ; mar-
riages, 26.


The present church is new, and was opened only on
December 2, 1888, and has sittings for 300. The former
church was too small, being seated only for 92. The
congregation, therefore (numbering in the evening 180),
could not get accommodation. There are 4 elders, 6
managers, and 3 trustees; 2 Sabbath-schools —average
attendance, 80 and 20; Band of Hope—average, 60,
Number of teachers, 14.
The increase on the communion-roll for the year is 33.
Mr Millar has service in the prison every third Sunday,
and frequently holds visitations at the hospital.
The cost of the new church will be about $4OOO. To-
wards this the people have raised about $2900, and are
labouring to reduce the amount borrowed. In the mean-
time, however, the debt on the manse remains. The con-
gregation resolved to pay it up at intervals; but the com-
mittee under whom it was erected have either removed
from the church or are dead, and few of the people who
promised to pay remain in Nanaimo. Mr Millar says :
“In thinking of Nanaimo, one must ever remember
that it is only a mining town, and miners here have not
improved in morality by a trip across the Atlantic, or
across the American continent; and you must be pre-
pared for the same discouragement here that you would
have to face in such a district as Lanarkshire, Fifeshire,
or Ayrshire. In some respects our men are better than
they are in these counties, because they have travelled
a little, and because we have the better class of these
miners, whose ideal condition could not be realised in
the mining villages and towns of Scotland. On the


other hand, they are sometimes worse than they were at
home, because that ideal cannot be realised here, and
they become chronic malcontents; and also because here
they are cut off from all their restrictive ties and ele-
vating influences, and can sink very low without their
friends at home knowing anything about their fall.
When I remember these things, I feel extremely thank-
ful for what has been done amongst us, and am sure
our prospects for blessing are better than they ever
were.
“ On the other hand, when I remember that we have a
few, not miners, who ought to. take hold of the work on
behalf of these poorer people, but who are if possible
more callous and indifferent than they, I feel both sad
and annoyed. We have a number of merchants and
others who have had a fair religious training, and who
wish to be regarded as a kind of aristocracy in the dis-
trict, and not five per cent of these care anything for re-
ligion. Can the working classes of the lower orders be
expected to set them the example in holiness, and even
in morality, which it should be theirs to show and not
to copy 1 Or can the people, who feel they are looked
down upon by these, be expected to keep up that re-
ligious enthusiasm when such a wet blanket is perpet-
ually wrapped round them ? Here all things seem re-
versed, and it is the work of the poorer people to pray
for and strive after the salvation of ‘lapsed masses.’
“ From a minister’s point of view it is very discourag-
ing. The best of my labour has been given to the young
men of the district, for these, I felt, were exposed to the


greatest temptations. It takes considerable time and
tact to get them interested in anything but coal, and
now these are the first to be sent adrift. When things
open up again, and a new staff is taken on, there will be
the same thing to do over again.
“ Regarding the church itself, I was just becoming
hopeful of accomplishing something this summer. We
built a larger place of worship, had to open it while still
unfinished, and are about to complete it this month.
We have about $650 borrowed just now, and will require
about $250 more. But on the other side, we have a sale
of work in preparation, from which we expected $3OO or
$400; so that our liabilities this summer only look like
$5OO.
“ The attendance at the various services continues
highly gratifying. Our new building is never crowded,
but is often well filled; and what strikes most of the
strangers who happen to visit us is the very large pro-
portion of young men. I may remark that there are
scarcely any old men in the town. One Sunday evening
I ran my eye rapidly over our congregation, and counted
roughly about 50 women and 120 or 140 men; and that
is about the proportion, though not the exact size, of
each service.
“At home in Scotland you hear enough, perhaps more
than enough, about the hindrance that 1 drink ’ is to
gospel work; but you can hardly think how great a
hindrance it is in such a place as this. With about 3000
inhabitants, we have thirteen licensed houses, which arc
never closed day or night.”


ILLUSTRATIONS OP THE PRESENT RELIGIOUS STATE.
In order to illustrate the condition of affairs, it may be
mentioned that in 1887 upwards of 17,000 emigrants
arrived in Winnipeg —7000 more than in 1886, In 1887
no less than 500,000 acres in Manitoba were disposed of
to settlers and occupied. In regard to Manitoba, the
following facts are interesting :
“ The province of Manitoba alone is equal in size to
Ireland, England, Wales, and Scotland with its ‘ adjacent
isles ’ added; while the North-West Territories stretch
like an undulating sea of prairie hundreds of miles west
of the province of Manitoba, to the Rocky Mountains.
It is usual for emigration agents when lecturing or writ-
ing of this new country to refer to the North-West Ter-
ritories and Manitoba as if they were of almost equal
value, and offered similar advantages to the new settler.
They are one in extent, but in nothing more. Manitoba
is a new country. Seventeen years ago it was known
as a hunting preserve of the Hudson Bay Company,
and the home of the Red man. Indeed, except the
white settlers employed at the Hudson Bay Company’s
trading ports, there were then few white settlers outside
the Red River Settlement and Fort Garry, which are
now well known as Kildonan and the city of Winnipeg.
Kildonan is situated on the banks of the Red River,
about three miles from Winnipeg. Its first settlers were
the Highlanders of Sutherlandshire. They were guided
by a merciful and kind Providence to this (then) ‘ great
lone land.’ The father of the late Earl of Selkirk


did much to smooth their path across this far-away
continent, and to make their new home comfortable.
The Church of Scotland ordained a ‘ godly elder ’ named
Sutherland, that they might be supplied with the
ordinances of the Presbyterian Church. But with all
these privileges it was through great tribulation they
entered, and lived in, their new home. Yet all who
have seen the noble sons and daughters of those evicted
Highlanders who now inhabit Kildonan, and have known
the condition in which their fathers lived at home, will
agree that, for them, the eviction was a blessing. Kil-
donan has been the cradle of Presbyterianism for Manitoba
and the North-West. Until the first rebellion led by
Riel, which occurred about seventeen years ago, this
country remained unknown. But the rebellion advertised
it to the outside world. Since that time emigration to
Manitoba has steadily increased, until, according to the
census taken this year, there are 108,000 people in this
province; and during that time the Presbyterian Church
of Canada, which consists of all the Presbyterian bodies
in union, has endeavoured to send forth missionaries with
the new settlers.
“ The progress during that period has been very re-
markable. There are now in connection with the Presby-
terian Church in Manitoba and the North-West, self-sup-
porting charges, 10; augmented charges—that is, congre-
gations with settled pastors which receive aid from the
Augmentation of Stipends Fund— 20, implying 80
stations; mission fields, or charges without a settled
pastor, over 300; Presbyterian families, 7000; Presby-


terian communicants, 6000; ordained missionaries, 60;
student missionaries, 55 ; catechists or lay missionaries,
10. There are 87 churches, and over 20 manses. There
is also a handsome college building (almost free of debt)
with an efficient staff of 4 professors, 3 lecturers, and 2
tutors, in Winnipeg. Last year over 70 students at-
tended the various classes taught in it, and 19 of its
students are employed as missionaries in the mission
field during this summer, and 5 theological students
were licensed to preach the Gospel at the close of last
session. This college is of paramount importance to
the Church.
“New settlers cannot build houses suitable either as
places for public worship or as boarding-houses for mis-
sionaries. Therefore the success of the work and the ex-
treme nature of the climate require that churches and
manses be built. In pioneer districts the missionaries,
with their families, suffer great privations for lack of
suitable houses to live in. The preparation of the soil
for the divine seed had been arduous work; but the seed
sown in patience, and perhaps despondingly, had taken
root; and when showers of blessing came, the seed burst
forth and bore abundant fruit. Let us give God the praise
and glory ! But all this has not been accomplished with-
out great difficulty. The sparse population, the physical
difficulties of a new country, the atmosphere of grasping
worldliness in which young colonists live, the lack of
opportunity to attend public worship every Sabbath,
and the absence of other restraining influences, demand
that great hardships be endured, and large sacrifices be


made, in supplying the settlers with Gospel ordinances;
and these sacrifices are made by many of the new settlers,
and by friends of the Church in the eastern portions of
Canada, as willingly as they are made by the missionaries.
Apart from the work which the new settlers do for their
church, and the hardships which they endure in going
to and returning from it, they support ordinances most
generously. Many families give for the support of the
Gospel at the rate of £6 per annum per family.”
FOUNDATION OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN AUSTRALIA.
It was towards the close of last century that emigrants
began to arrive in Australia, and that a penal settlement
was established by the Government at “ Botany Bay.”
At Paramatta and Jackson’s Bay the population grad-
ually increased, the surrounding forests were cleared
away, and Sydney grew up into a large, populous, and
attractive city, with beautiful suburbs and a splendid
harbour. The first Presbyterian Church was erected
about 1835, and, as appears from a despatch by Sir
George Grey to Principal Macfarlane, the voluntary
efforts of the people were aided by a grant from the
public reveuue.
Then it is found, from the report of the Colonial
Committee in 1837, that to assist two ministers who had
gone previously to Hobart Town, Van Diemen’s Land,
the Rev. John Lillie, licensed by the Presbytery of Edin-
burgh, was sent out. Next, on the application of the


late Rev. Dr Lang, nine ministers were obtained for
Sydney. They were recognised by the Colonial Gov-
ernment, which placed them in the same position as
ministers of the Church of England, In 1839 troubles
arose in consequence of Dr Lang constituting himself
and his brethren a Synod of New South Wales, and
disclaiming all dependence on any Church or Church
court beyond seas. I have no desire to rake up the
ashes of a controversy now almost died out, but I may
mention that the dissensions were not allayed for a
considerable time.
In 1838 the Rev. James Forbes proceeded to Mel-
bourne, under the auspices, and at the charge, of the
Colonial Committee, and was the first Presbyterian min-
ister established in that part of the colony. It may not
be uninteresting to quote the following sentences from a
letter from Mr Forbes, dated 20th December 1838 :
“ Port Phillip is in the southern part of the territory
of New South Wales. Three years ago, its only inhab-
itants were the savages of the wild; now it has a pop-
ulation of several thousand white men. Melbourne, its
capital, was two and a half years ago mere forest, or bush
as we call it. Now it has between 300 and 400 houses,
and a population not short of 1000, every day increasing
by emigration from Van Diemen’s Land. I have been
here since the end of January 1838, and have, by the
kind guidance and aid of the Head of the Church, been
able to organise a congregation, and get above x,600
subscribed towards the erection of a church. Besides me
there are an Episcopal and Independent minister in the


place, and a subscription is also going on for a Methodist
chapel. There is, however, no Wesleyan minister here
at present.”
Mr Forbes then begs aid from the Colonial Committee
for Geelong, about sixty miles by land, or thirty-five by
water from Melbourne, where “are about 100 squatters,
each possessing a large establishment of flocks and herds,
with men varying from six or eight to forty, and
amounting in all to more than 1000 souls. The settlers
are principally Scots. We have an overland mail to
Sydney (distant about 600 miles) once a fortnight; but,
of course, I stand almost isolated from all. Mr Hamil-
ton, my nearest neighbour, is about 400 miles away.”
Mr Forbes occupied a humble wooden edifice, which
cost about and was the precursor of the present
Scots Church, He had been preceded by a pious lay-
man, Mr Reed, and by a retired chaplain from Bombay,
Mr Clow. The latter aided Mr Forbes at all times with
his advice and help. And these honoured men laid the
foundation of the present large and influential Presby-
terian Church of Victoria. Mr Forbes’s letters in the
‘Missionary Record of the Church of Scotland’ for 1838-
39 are most valuable, as containing an accurate account
of the condition of Melbourne and its neighbourhood
fifty years ago. The population of Victoria is now
estimated at 850,000, of whom the Presbyterians number
130,000, with 145 pastoral charges, 400 elders, 15,000
communicants, 264 Sabbath-schools, and 23,000 scholars.
The Church of Scotland continued to send out min-
isters, as frequently as possible, to the various parts of


Australia, and were in the habit of giving grants to aid
in the payment of their salaries and in the erection of
churches. When, so late as 1857, negotiations for union
were commenced, the Presbyteries of Sydney, Bathurst,
Maitland, and others declared their loyal attachment to
the Church of Scotland, In 1853 the Presbytery of
Melbourne obtained a dispensation of separation from
the Synod of New South Wales, and adopted as its
future designation the “Synod of Victoria” ; thus, writes
Mr Love, the minister of Geelong, “ sinking our nominal
connection with the Church of Scotland, which, after
some hesitation, was allowed by the Synod of N.S.
Wales.” The Free Presbyterian Synod of Victoria, and
the Synod of Victoria were eventually amalgamated under
the name of the “ Presbyterian Church of Victoria.”
Though in 1858 the proposed union was reported to
be virtually abandoned, it was known in 1859 to be
nearly consummated between the three great Presbyte-
rian bodies in Victoria, though not reported to the Home
Church,
In 1864 the Colonial Committee state “that the
union of the various Presbyterian bodies which has been
formed, or is in the course of formation, has put an
end to the correspondence of the Presbyterian ministers
there, whether jointly or severally, with the Church at
home;” and in 1865, the Committee “venture to ex-
press a hope that the union of Presbyterians, which
seems now to be inevitable, in the various Colonies, may
prove to be their strength; nay, satisfied that the United
Churches in Australia and New Zealand are sincerely


anxious to maintain the most friendly relation with our
Church, the Committee take leave to recommend that
the General Assembly should invite correspondence with
them, and applications for ministers from home, confident
that both kinds of intercourse would issue in mutual in-
vigoration, and the furtherance of the great cause which,
divided as Presbyterians unhappily are, is dear to them
all.” In the same year the Synod of Australia in con-
nection with the Church of Scotland, forwarded a letter
signed by Dr Fullerton, Moderator, and Mr M‘Gibbon,
Clerk, in which the assurance was conveyed of their
unabated attachment to the Established Church of Scot-
land, and their unimpaired confidence in her principles ;
“ at the same time declaring that their course of action
has all along been the result, not of diminished attach-
ment to the Church of their fathers, but of deep and
growing conviction that the union was essential to the
effectual development of those distinctive principles
which all Presbyterians hold in common.” The Com-
mittee, on the other hand, declared themselves persuaded
that “the motives by which our brethren in Australia
were actuated are entitled to our approbation, and in
bidding those newly constituted bodies ‘God-speed’
they confidently anticipate the sympathy of all Scot-
tish Presbyterians.”
“The Presbyterian Church of Queensland is a
Union Church, and comprises ministers of the Church
of Scotland, the Free and United Presbyterian Churches
of Scotland, and the Presbyterian Church of Ireland. It
is divided at present into five presbyteries—Brisbane,


Brisbane Presbytery, ....
■ is
Toowoomba,
• 5
Maryborough,
• 3
Rockhampton,
. 2
Townsville,
• 4
Total,
• 29
Toowoomba, Maryborough, Rockhampton, and Towns-
ville. In September 1887 the ministers of the Church
occupying settled charges were distributed as follows :
“ In addition to these there were at that date three or
four ministers supplying vacant charges; two ordained
evangelists under the superyision of the Home Mission
and Church Extension Committee; and five students in
divinity, and two ministers not officially attached.
“Roughly speaking, Queensland is about 1200 miles
long by about 800 miles broad, and has an area of nearly
480,000,000 acres. These figures are given that the
reader may have some idea of the extent of the colony
and of the distances of places from each other, for such
an idea is necessary to understand many of the state-
ments this paper will contain.
“ Of the twenty-nine settled ministers, ten are located
in the town of Brisbane, five in the other coast towns,
nine within 80 miles of the coast, and five beyond 80
but within 200 miles of the coast. Charges have been
formed outside that limit, but are at present all vacant.
Westward of 300 or 350 miles the Presbyterian Church
of Queensland has no place.
‘ It may be said, therefore, that practically the Presby-
terians who are scattered abroad through the far interior


of the colony are utterly neglected. Three reasons may
be assigned to account for this, ist, Brisbane is the
metropolis, the place of wealth, the centre of fashion, the
emporium of the pleasantest things the colony possesses.
And the other large coast towns present similar attrac-
tions. 2d, The Bush presents the fewest attractions and
demands the greatest sacrifices. 3d, The conditions of
ministerial work in the Bush are exceedingly hard, and
the associations of Bush life, generally speaking, anything
but tempting. And the worst of all these things perhaps is
that a minister in the Bush will never find sufficient time
for regular reading and systematic study. If a young min-
ister is thus placed, all must acknowledge the gravity of
such a circumstance, so far as his future is concerned.
‘‘'Some facts may be here stated which will help to
show how little likely the Presbyterian Church of Queens-
land is to make such progress as the circumstances of the
colony demand. Not one of the more wealthy churches
has ever yet tried to plant or help to maintain a church
in the interior. All the churches, rich and poor alike,
have to make an annual collection for Home Mission and
Church Extension purposes. But some of the churches,
in addition to this, might have made for themselves a
better name by adopting the course indicated. Ministers
in the Bush require to be everything that ministers in
the towns are. And it is scarcely to be expected that
a minister, who is only human after all, will rush to a
place where the difficulties are very great, the work
enormous, and the stipend offered so small as to be
barely sufficient to enable him to live.


“ Then, again, while a considerable number of men have
made large fortunes, by their connection with pastoral
or other pursuits in Queensland, yet, so far as I know,
not one of them has ever erected or endowed a church
in the district where their fortunes were made.
“ Further, though the Presbyterian Church of Queens-
land has an Augmentation of Stipend Fund, it is not in
a prosperous condition. Two ministers in the Presbytery
of Brisbane and one in the Presbytery of Toowoomba
received each out of it £l3, 6s. Bd., which more than
exhausted the whole sum contributed during 1886-87 1
and there were several other ministers whose stipends
required augmenting as much as theirs, if it could have
been done, all holding charges within what we may call
the settled district. There is very little hope that the local
Committee will ever be able to augment the stipends of
Bush ministers sufficiently, even if men were found with
courage enough to take up Bush charges.
“Still further, a circumstance which frequently mili-
tates very seriously against the income of churches in the
country is the fact that many of the proprietors have
their estates managed by overseers, while they them-
selves live in the towns, spend their money there, and
give their support to the church there with which they
connect themselves. So the Presbyterians who are
scattered abroad, are allowed to go on perishing for lack
of knowledge.
“An impression prevails among the members of the
Home Churches that in so rich a country as Queensland
the Church ought to be able to maintain itself. The


trutli is, that although large fortunes have been, and are
still being, made by individuals, the great body of the
people are just like the great body of the people in other
countries. Queensland is not a country in which people
can spring, as if by magic, into a position of opulence.
They have to think as earnestly, and work as hardly, and
be as diligent in business there, as anywhere else, in order
to live, let alone make a fortune. And in Scotland you
have your churches and manses and glebes in possession
already. In those places to which I am drawing at-
tention, the minister, besides having to attend to the
arrangements necessary for finding his own stipend, is
faced at the very outset with the necessity of raising
money for building a church and manse, and purchas-
ing a glebe.
“ The Sabbath-schools of the churches, where there are
churches, are doing good service. But the churches, as
I have shown, are confined to a comparatively narrow
strip of country along the eastern coast. Here and
there, too, throughout the great interior, a God-fearing
woman appears, who on Sabbaths gathers what children
she can find about her, and imparts to them a knowledge
of God’s Word. But there are few of them, and of
course, therefore, the vast majority of the children in the
Bush are receiving no religious education at all.”
To Western Australia aid was also given. It is
sparsely populated. The distance between the principal
towns is great —Albany is 340 miles from Perth. It is
believed that in five years Albany will be the largest town
in Western Australia. The difficulties surrounding the


ministers who labour there are very great, and these
deserve all encouragement and support. Mr Shearer has
done excellent work in this colony for a great many years,
and his services have been productive of great good.
FOUNDATION OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN NEW ZEALAND.
In regard to New Zealand, it may be mentioned that
it received its first Presbyterian minister from the Church
of Scotland in 1840, when about 2000 emigrants left this
country to settle, chiefly in the northern island. They
were accompanied by the Rev. Mr M'Farlane of the
Martyrs’ Church, Paisley. He proceeded first to Port
Hardy and thence to Port Nicholson, He began by
devoting himself to the organisation of different stations,
at which he officiated on alternate Sabbaths, but he final-
ly removed to Wellington, where, he says, “ nine-tenths
of the people reside”; “the only building which we have,
is occupied during the other half of the Sabbath by the
English clergyman.” The congregation soon took steps
towards “ providing a permanent place of worship, with
walls of clay and a roof of thatch.” During the winter
season the congregation was accommodated in the store
belonging to Mr Hunter. “At the first celebration of
the Communion twenty-two persons communicated.” On
Mr M'Farlane’s return to Scotland, his place was supplied
by Mr Kirton, minister of Roslin quoad sacra Chapel,
who laboured for many years in the island, and was rein-
forced by the Rev. James S. Muir, Rev, Mr Mac Nicol,


and others. The Rev. Mr Ogg, at present minister of
St Andrew’s Church, Wellington, was sent out about
1 873. Grants of money for various objects connected
with the church, were voted from time to time by the
Colonial Committee; and when the union with the other
Presbyterian bodies at length took place, the Assembly
expressed its satisfaction.
To the Home Mission enterprise of the Presbyterian
Church of Hew Zealand, the Church of Scotland has been
in the habit of giving a grant, to enable the work to
be carried on in districts that are in a state of spirit-
ual destitution, by reason of the inadequate number of
ministers. In some cases students have to be employed
to officiate at different, and widely separated, centres of
population. In recent years the grant was restricted to
the sum of ; but this year, on the earnest solicita-
tion of Mr Ogg, it has been increased to £lOO.
The Church cannot but regard with deepest sorrow
the condition of her sons striving to secure the bread
that perisheth, and utterly heedless of that which en-
dureth unto everlasting life ; and she would fain do
something to provide ordinances for them, and to stir up
those on whom the duty chiefly rests, to attend to their
eternal interests. In the present position of these
colonies, the danger is great of a population increasing,
of a state being formed, altogether regardless of the
“righteousness which exalteth a nation.” And at the
risk of objections from those in this country who do not
understand the true state of affairs, and regard any
aid given by them as superfluous, she ought, if in her


power, to help the Home Mission work of those churches
which, for whatever reason, cannot overtake the work
laid to their hands. As an illustration, the following
may be given from a letter by Kev. Mr Ogg:—
“It is that of the charge of Woodville, situated about
120 miles from Wellington. It may interest you to
know that the Church Extension Committee has recently
appointed to labour in that district a student, Mr Eobert
Stewart, the son of a respected elder in the parish of Mid
Yell, Shetland Islands. This district has three chief
centres, situated at the distance in one direction of six-
teen miles from Woodville, and in the opposite direction
of nine miles. Our agent is able to officiate only once a
fortnight in the different stations. This, you will per-
ceive, added to the necessity of visiting the various
families at their homes, entails a large amount of most
fatiguing labour. Also the settlers in such districts in
the colony, of whom there is a large number, are gen-
erally in poor circumstances, contending heroically with
the inevitable difficulties and privations of a new settle-
ment, and are thus unable to contribute largely to the
support of Gospel ordinances. The settlers in such loca-
tions, of which there are an immense number in New
Zealand, as in America, deserve not only Christian sym-
pathy but the largest possible assistance from the funds
at the disposal of your Committee. These are the people
who are making, by persevering labour and self-denial,
homes for themselves in the wilderness. It was in view
of the religious needs of such people and of their families
that the Colonial Scheme of the Church of Scotland was


instituted, and appeals are annually made by your Com-
mittee to the benevolence of the Scottish people to supply
funds for the purpose of sending the Gospel to their ex-
patriated countrymen.”
The patriotic interest which the Church of Scotland
displayed, the amount of pecuniary aid which she gave,
and the number of ministers whom she sent out to
attend to the religious wants of emigrants in the earlier
stages of the history of Australia and New Zealand, is
apt to be forgotten. When the shores of these distant
lands were but sparsely populated, the Church of Scot-
land provided ministers to break the bread of life among
the pioneer settlers who went forth from their native
land to push their fortunes; and it is to her fostering
care that there can be traced the existence and growth
of those large and influential Presbyterian Churches
which for the most part can now carry on their work
without her aid. The men who were active and zealous
in their oversight of the first emigrants, have passed away;
changes have come over the aspect of Australia and New
Zealand; a new form of relationship has sprung up
between the Churches there and at home, but the Church
of Scotland still regards the daughter Churches with
affection, rejoices with them in their development and
prosperity, and sympathises with them in the difficulties
which they have to encounter. These difficulties are not
light; they arise in part from a purely secular system of
education, by which the Bible and everything pertaining
to religion are banished from the schools, and the youth
are permitted to grow up without the advantage of that


“godly training” to which their forefathers were accus-
tomed in the parish schools of this country, and which,
to a certain extent, is still provided here under the new
educational system. They have, moreover, to contend
with the strong influences of materialism, which are
strengthened and intensified in the universal struggle for
wealth. Yet, amid all these difficulties, the Churches are
nobly putting forth their energies to bring the people to
a knowledge of the truth as in Jesus, and to imbue the
rising nations of Australia with that religion which is
the only permanent foundation of national power and
stability.
RELIGIOUS LIFE IN SOME OF THE COLONIES.
There is in connection with some of the colonies one
melancholy fact. It is—the accumulation of wealth in the
cities, which is not employed to the extent it ought to be
in providing churches and ministers for thinly populated
districts in the interior. Take, for example, the case of
Brisbane and of some other towns in Queensland. There
are individuals who make large fortunes on their estates
far inland, and take up their residence in the fashionable
centres of population, but who spend little or nothing on
building places of worship, or in otherwise providing for
the spiritual oversight of our countrymen employed on
their own properties or in their neighbourhood. This,
of course, is an evidence of lack of interest in religious
matters. Their conduct cannot but be lamented. But
the question forced on the Church at home is this : Is it


not a duty incumbent on us to make up for such negli-
gence ? People at home may say the Church would be
spending money where it is not required. In one sense
this is time; but because those who are wealthy will not
attend to the spiritual wants of the scattered families far
away from towns, are these to be permitted to grow up in
practical infidelity ? Is the language of the Church to
be, “Am I my brother’s keeper?” Will some condi-
tional assistance not be the means of arousing the care-
less to a sense of their responsibility ? There is no doubt
that there are districts in which no Sabbath is known,
in which there is no preaching of the Gospel, in which
religious ordinances are never dispensed, and where there
is a generation rising up, bearing the name of Britons,
who know absolutely nothing of that religion which has
made Britain great, and of that Word which is essential
to salvation.
WORK OF LOCAL CHURCHES.
It is necessary to bear in mind that the local churches
have a vast field in which to engage in.the work of preach-
ing the Gospel. They have attained such a position that
they do not require, as formerly, money grants from the
Committee, but some of them are not as yet able to
overtake the populations which are rapidly increasing.
In cities and towns —the centres of commercial enter-
prise—the local resources are quite sufficient to meet
the demand for churches and ministers; but there
are sparsely peopled and outlying districts in which,
without means of grace, the settlers are apt to lapse


into habits of indifference, and to become almost, if
not altogether, irreligious. It is as yet difficult for the
local churches to respond as readily as they wish to
demands made on them to attend to the necessities of
these places. There is, therefore, a call made on the
Church to do all in our power for the spiritual welfare of
those who have gone forth from our native land. To
send earnest and faithful preachers of the Word to the
Colonies is one part of our work; to aid colleges which
have been established in Canada and Queensland to train
a ministry, and to assist the Home Mission work carried
on in New Zealand; to contribute towards the mainten-
ance of ministers where it is impossible, at present, for
Scotch settlers without help to maintain them. It cannot
be denied that it is the duty of the National Church of
Scotland to carry on in the meantime these branches of
the work.
FOUNDATION OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN WEST INDIES.
In referring to the w T ork carried on at the stations in the
West Indies, it is necessary to recall the history of the
Mission. The Rev. Mr Radcliffe was appointed in 1848
to the charge of the Presbyterian congregation at King-
ston, Jamaica, which for a period of sixty-six years has
been in receipt of Government endowment. Though by
a late Act of the Legislature all ecclesiastical endowments
were withdrawn, the life-interests of incumbents were
preserved, and the Rev. Mr Radcliffe therefore still


receives a large part of his stipend from that source, the
remainder from funds invested by the congregation. He
has laboured for the long period of thirty-eight years
in Kingston, with great fidelity and acceptance. He
obtained from the Colonial Committee for many years
the sum of J~ioo annually for the services of an “assist-
ant-preacher ”; but for some time he has discharged all
his duties unaided. He is held in high respect in the
island, and deserves the grateful recognition of the Church
of Scotland for the work he has done. His congregation
recently testified their appreciation of his long and faith-
ful services by the presentation of an address and a sub-
stantial token of their gratitude.
It may be remembered that as far back as 1874 two
congregations of Maroons at Accompong and Mount
Trinity applied to the Rev. Mr Eadcliffe for a minister in
connection with the Church of Scotland, the communion of
which they decided to join. This application received the
favourable consideration of the Colonial Committee, who,
however, at the time were unable to provide a minister.
Next year, the Rev. John Kinnison went out from this
country. The inhabitants of Accompong are described
as “descendants of the old liberated slaves of the Span-
iards from whom the English took the island. On the
Spaniards giving it up, they freed their slaves before re-
tiring, who then retreated up into the mountains, where
they maintained their liberty; and the English were
glad to make a treaty with them, by which their indepen-
dence was secured, and they were settled in lands granted
them by the Crown.” The step which these people took


in “joining the Church was to many an anxious one, and
they were plied in all directions, especially the Maroons
of Accompong, with every argument to shake them, and
they had every promise held out that could induce them
to retract, even after they had committed themselves.
They are poor. The church land, of five acres or there-
abouts, was allocated for a church, but never made over
to the Church of England. The Maroons have taken it
back and given it us. The other congregation, at Re-
tirement, consists of black and coloured people, descen-
dants of the old slave population, who have settled in the
island. The distance between the two places, although
not more than three miles in a straight line, takes between
two and three hours to ride, unless one ventures on short
cuts, which are dangerous sometimes.” Mr Kinnison
was able to report in 1877, that the membership of the
two churches was increasing, and that a new church at
Accompong was being built. He further established a
new station at Medina, on the property of Mrs Strachan,
lately deceased, who took a great interest in the people
in her vicinity. She converted a range of cottages into
a neat temporary chapel, capable of holding about ninety
worshippers, and a school was also established through
the liberality of the same benevolent lady. Such pro-
gress was made, that in 1878 Mr Kinnison had five
stations under his charge.


PRESENT POSITION OF PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
IN JAMAICA.
Rev. Mr Stuart, who had been assistant to Rev. Mr
Radcliffe in Kingston, offered to aid the late Mr Kinnison
in his labours, and to take over certain stations—Giddy
Hall, Retirement, and Accompong—leaving to Mr Kinni-
son, who died in 1888, Medina and Hyde Park stations.
Mr Stuart says :
“Seven of our schools were examined in March. I
was physically unable to be present at two of the exam-
inations, and at the others I was not able to take that
active part which I have hitherto taken. In consequence
of this, two of our best schools which should have gained
marks have lost, and others have lost marks for the same
reason. Yet, on the whole, we have this year gained
eighteen marks on these seven schools —a result the more
creditable that, owing to sickness and increased work, I
have not been able to pay one-fourth of the attention to
my schools that I formerly paid. There are still three
schools to be examined for the year 1888789. These will
be examined within the next three months.
“For the year 1887-88 our nine schools earned 1
as Government grant for capitation and class : four were
first class, four second, and one third. In addition to
this, £2s was earned for pupil-teachers, and on
account of certificates held by three of the teachers —
making in all a sum of earned from Government
in aid of our schools. This year (1888-89) I estimate
that our ten schools will earn not less than ,£350 (class


and capitation grants), (on account of teacher’s cer-
tificates), and (on account of pupil-teachers), mak-
ing a total of or a gain of in one year, and
that, too, in a year when, from sickness and overwork, I
could not attend properly to their supervision. Now
that an active and willing man Rev. J. Maxwell
has been sent out to my help, we may anticipate
even better results in the future. In regard to edu-
cation, we are this year, I should think, if not alto-
gether first, yet pretty close on first, out of the eleven
or twelve Christian denominations engaged in such work
in this island. Considering the short time years)
that our Church has been in the field in the country
parts, we have done work to be proud of. Since I came
down to St Elizabeth ten years ago, the number of our
schools in that parish has risen from three efficient to
eight good schools. For this year our lowest school,
Glen-Stuart Infant, has gained forty-five marks and a
second class. The success of our schools has incited
other denominations to open several opposition schools,
which for a time have damaged some of our schools, but
sooner or later they will cease to affect our operations.
Four of our teachers have been educated in our own
schools. Two of these received from two to three years
training at Retirement, and passed certain Government
examinations annually. Two years ago I had to give
this work up, having too much other work to do in
managing six churches, nine schools, besides other work.
These four teachers do most satisfactory work in the
way of teaching and otherwise. We have at present six


Sunday-schools: two connected with Retirement, with
about 350 on the roll ; and one each at Giddy Hall,
Accompong, Thornton, and Medina, with, say, 360 on
the roll, making a little over 700 pupils in all, —not so
many as in former years. I send you a copy of lessons
for the three sections into which our Sunday-schools are
divided, also a programme for a portion of the year of
the routine of Sunday-school work at Retirement Sun-
day-school, which is of Mrs Stuart’s origination, and
which might be copied with advantage in many at least
of our country Sunday-schools at home. Every year, as
near as possible to Christmas and the New Year, we
have an examination of all the Sunday-schools in the
subjects studied during the year; and we give prizes for
proficiency of knowledge, for regular attendance, and for
individual singing of the Psalms, Hymns, &c., learnt
during the year. It is quite encouraging to see little
mites of girls from four to five years of age coming for-
ward to compete in singing with others four times their
age, and singing, too, with far less diffidence. This feat-
ure of the Sunday-school examination was introduced in
1887, and we intend keeping it up, as to many of the
adults it is the most interesting part of the examination
to listen to. We have in all over fifty classes and sixty
teachers in our six Sunday-schools.
“With regard to our churches, I have to say that the
four churches in St Elizabeth have advanced a little both
in numbers and in contributions. I have not been able
to send you yet a detailed statement, nor will be for
some months, owing to the debilitated state of my brain


and nerves. The two churches in Manchester have suf-
fered during the past year from causes outside my con-
trol, and I may say partly outside my knowledge. I
took charge of these two churches for the second time in
August last (Medina and Hyde Park). Medina is now
in a flourishing state. The number of communicants on
the roll is about 100, and at present there are 86 cate-
chumens in my class, which meets at least twice a month.
A large proportion of these are adults who have lately
been drawn out to attend church owing to the attempts
made to destroy the church during the time that another
was in charge. Next Communion, sth May, over 30 of
these will be received into communion with the Church.
Hyde Park is not in so flourishing a condition; it is far
from being even in the same condition as when I gave
it up in November 1887, after sixteen months’ work in
gathering together the scattered elements. Mr Kinnison
had originally the charge of these two churches. For a
long time before he went on leave of absence (August
1886) he was, from ill health, unable to attend to his
duties. Medina suffered therefrom, but Hyde Park more.
Medina has now every prospect of becoming a fine con-
gregation. Hyde Park is very badly situated on account
of roads for making a congregation. We must find soon a
better site. Want of means is the great obstacle that stands
in the way of our progress; if we had means here, or if you
could help us more, we could do an infinitely greater amount
of good for the advancement of the temporal and spiritual
interests of the people among whom we are labouring.
We have done much, but we are far from being satisfied.


“At Retirement and Giddy Hall progress has been
made during last year, both in number and contributions,
but not enough to give me perfect satisfaction. At the
former place 90, and at the latter 40, and at Thornton
25 persons have been attending a class for instruction
preparatory to being one day admitted to Communion or
church membership. At Accompong I had not time to
form a class; and at Hyde Park I have not as yet been
able to form a class. Formerly at Hyde Park I had a
class of 15, most of whom seem to have been admitted
into membership during last year.
“ With regard to buildings, &c., I have to say that we
completed and opened the schools at Glen-Stuart on July
2d. The Rev. Mr Radcliffe, of the Kirk, Kingston, and
Mrs Radcliffe, took a prominent part in the proceedings.
From 500 to 600 people, old and young, were present. A
little over was collected on the occasion, to help to
defray the costs of the building, which were not little.
The building is pretty, commodious, and substantial, the
best we have yet built. During the same year we
finished a teacher’s house in connection wjth Glen-Stuart,
and began to get out materials for one of the two teachers’
houses required at Retirement. At Retirement consider-
able progress has been made on the addition to the manse-
—a building 30 feet by 20 feet, of two storeys, thick stone
walls. This addition is required much on account of the
climate, which is very oppressive. The stone walls will
cause the place to be much cooler. This work we must
at present stop, as I have expended all I have, in the
work. At Giddy Hall we have done no building during


the past year, but we have placed during the last two
years about in the Government Savings Bank as a
nucleus of a fund for procuring a manse there. We are
just about buying an old house and 30 acres of land in
the neighbourhood, which we intend converting into a
manse and glebe. How the means are to be raised for
the completion of this work I know not. I would apply
for donations for the purpose through the ‘Mission
Record,’ were it not that so many appeals from places
nearer home, and therefore more likely to receive atten-
tion, are constantly found therein. Mr Maxwell has
taken up his residence at Giddy Hall in a house kindly
given by Mr Cooper, the proprietor, whom you met a few
months ago. At Thornton, during Mr Petgrave’s stay
there, a mission-house was begun, and much progress
made, when Mr Petgrave died after a few months’ service
there. I had to employ him as an evangelist, as I was
then physically unable to attend to my work. We all
felt his loss much. This work is about to be renewed.
A schoolroom is to be built at Devanha this year. At
Devanha we have only a hired room for school, yet the'
school earned forty marks the first year, and for the last
two years fifty-six marks, and first class. The teacher is
one of our own training. I expect to receive £6O from
the Government in aid of the building. The building
will be, when finished, worth about ;£ißo to jQ2OO . At
Medina this year (1889) the people have begun vigor-
ously to get out materials for a new teacher’s house,
which we hope to finish in the course of a few months.
“Mrs Strachan, of Medina, who died September 1885,


left about to in her will for the benefit of
the Church of Scotland. A considerable portion of this
amount was in land, which I have not yet been able to
sell. Mrs Strachan gave the site for, and helped to build,
Medina Church —a very excellent and artistic building
—but she neglected to give a title; and in her will,
although the Church of Scotland in Jamaica was made
not only a beneficiary but the ultimate beneficiary, there
was nothing in the will to give us a legal title. Mr
Kinnison was under the will a “ liferenter ”; after his
death it was to go to one of three, under certain condi-
tions. In March 1888, the second of these complied with
the conditions, and I, as trustee on the estate, gave up
possession. In October last the place was advertised; I
made an offer to buy, in order to secure the church, of
and above the highest bidder up to
J"6oo was offered for the property. I was offered the
property at that amount and closed with the offer. I
have to pay besides for furniture and utensils in the
place; in a few days the whole matter will be settled.
I will stay at Medina, which is 2240 feet above sea-level,
for a few months’ change, to prevent my return to Scot-
land for the change which I much need. I hope to be
able, within a short time, to sell off from Medina a
portion of the outlying land, which will bring in
to The place cost nearly double what I valued
it at, yet in time it will pay off all, and leave houses and
church and a good few acres of land free. The house
wants re-roofing. Many of the outbuildings must be
allowed to go to decay.


“ The total value of our buildings, leaving out land other
than sites, amounts to as follows : Retirement, jQ 800;
Giddy Hall, ; Accompong, only ; Thornton
(and Devanha), Medina, Hyde Park,
; Glen-Stuart, 1 jQ 6O (in connection with Retire-
ment) ; or in all about without lands attached.
“ The record above given will show you something for
our work during the few years we have been in this field.
The value of the property besides, which we hold, but
cannot realise owing to depression in trade, is about
more. This jQ 1000 if realised, as well as
invested in Government debentures, belongs to Mrs
Strachan’s estate, and must be left to accumulate for the
endowment in the future of Medina Church.”
It may be mentioned that Mr Stuart, with money he
has been able to save, has bought some land as the
nucleus of an endowment for the Church. In two or
three years, he says, the clear revenue will be not less
than or “I am very anxious to do what I
can for the Mission. I have now invested about
in this work, and I am therefore, as you know, a poor
man.” The object he has in view is, that the coffee
which he grows may be sold in this country for the
benefit of the Mission, in order to raise an endowment;
so that, when he feels himself compelled to retire from
the work which he so willingly undertook, and which
he has so indefatigably prosecuted, it may be to a large
extent independent of voluntary support.
Mr Davidson in Kingston, Jamaica, has succeeded not
1 Teacher’s house at Glen-Stuart, £6O ; schoolrooms, £2OO = £260.


only in maintaining but increasing the congregation in
St Andrew’s Church. His Bible-classes and Sabbath-
school have been a great success. He writes: —
“ I got most of the congregation visited at their homes
during 1888. The sick, and here there are ahvays a good
many, received a large share of my time and attention.
The Sunday-school I took in hand and got it thoroughly
rearranged, and some system introduced. I got a scheme
of lessons drawn up, and arranged to meet with the
Sunday-school teachers on the Saturday evenings and go
over the lessons with them. This I have been doing
steadily, with great profit and delight to the teachers,
and already with marked effects for good upon the
children. The Sunday-school has made great progress —
increased by a third. Then I have tried to interest them
in the Missions of our Church, Hitherto nothing of this
sort was done. I got each class —seventeen classes in all
—provided with a little box, round the sides of which
in large letters are printed the words, ‘Think, Pray,
Give.’ The children have been very enthusiastic, and
we hope to have something to send this year.
“ Then in December we had a children’s gathering in
the church, at which Mr Eadcliffe presided. The parents
and friends were present; the choir sang some anthems,
the children their hymns, and I got some gentlemen to
give addresses to the children, with the result that every
one was pleased. On the Sunday following I preached
in the afternoon a sermon to children, and it was with-
out any exaggeration one of the grandest sights ever wit-
nessed within the walls of the ‘big kirk,’ as they call our


church here. Over two hundred children were present,
and many grown-up people. Mr Eadcliffe was present,
and at the close expressed his pleasure and delight.
This year I have begun to give a little address of ten
minutes’ length to the children before the sermon, and
it has been as much appreciated, if not more so, by the
adult portion of the congregation as by the young people.
In a few years all this should tell for good in, and beyond,
the congregation. I started a Women’s Guild in October,
and we have some seventy names on the roll.
“We meet as a Guild once a month, when an address
is delivered, or a paper read,- by some of themselves. At
one meeting I got Eev. Leonard Tucker, M.A., some
time tutor in the Serampore College, Calcutta, to give an
address on the Women of India. We had over 100 ladies
present. It was a great success. At another meeting
Mrs Davidson read a paper on Some Aspects of Women’s
Work in the Church. Miss M'Pherson read a paper on
Zenana Work in India.
“At last meeting I gave an address on Consecration,
and at the subsequent meetings we are to have papers
from some of the ladies.
“Then our Dorcas and Zenana branches meet to do
work, as you will see by enclosed supplement.
“ The district visitors I meet with once a month, for
prayer and conference. On two occasions I gave
addresses. One on ‘How to make a Visit Profitable,’
another on ‘ How to Pay a Sick Visit.’ Of late I have
been delivering a course of lectures on the ‘Pilgrim’s
Progress ’on Sunday evenings. Our week-night service


has been going on regularly, and well attended. On two
occasions—and I purpose continuing the practice at judi-
cious intervals —I gave an account of one or other of the
Missions. My first was on the Colonial Mission of the
Church; unfortunately, that night rain threatened, and
the people here are very frightened for rain—in conse-
quence I had a poor audience. The second time I took
up the story of the Darjeeling Mission, and told them of
William Macfarlane, and his like - minded successors,
Sutherland and Turnbull.
“ Then at the week-night service the collection is
purely voluntary—no plates being sent round, only a box
placed at the door, and the sums will be devoted to the
Missions of the Church.
“On every hand there are evidences of blessing.
During my short stay here, some thirty have joined the
Church. The attendance on Sunday is increased, especi-
ally the evening service, which never used to be a largely
attended service.
“Next month we are having a congregational meeting,
in which we hope to get the people interested more in
themselves, and from that to other people.
“ I was mainly instrumental in getting a meeting of
the ministers of the city brought together, to confer as
to what could be done for the lapsed and lapsing people
of Kingston, for here, as at home, very many never
attend church.
“ I was anxious that some united movement should be
inaugurated.
“ All that resulted so far, was a sort of pastoral letter


signed by almost all the clergymen of the city. More
may yet come out of it.
“I have been taking an interest in the Young Men’s
Christian Association, and at present I am conducting a
class of young men at the rooms of the Association on
Friday evenings for the study of the Scriptures, A
series of monthly addresses to young men have been
arranged for, and I have been asked to give the second —
being the first of the city ministers asked.
“I have preached several times for others, and ad-
dressed some missionary gatherings, &c. I have been
elected to succeed the Rev. Dr Robb, of the U.R College
here, as secretary of the British and Foreign Bible Society
in Kingston. By-and-by I may have more opportunities
for doing good. We need much the reviving influences
of the Holy Spirit to put life and reality into all the pro-
fessions—for the people profess much.
“ We had recently a very interesting and encouraging
meeting in the church. I got the Church Committee
to arrange for a congregational meeting, when the treas-
urer gave an account of the financial state of the con-
gregation. The superintendent of the Sunday-school gave
an account of the work done, and the progress made,
since I came. I got some others to give addresses, and
also spoke myself on Christian work. Mr Radclifie pre-
sided with great good taste. It was a complete success,
the large church being very well filled. The Sunday-
school report announced 190 children on the roll, and it
has been added to since. The congregation I reported
on. In 1888 the communion-roll numbered 273, —that


was in January. Now, in January 1889, it numbers 318
(three have since died). Thus Mr Eadcliffe added 15
before I came, and I have had the joy of admitting 30
for the first time. An increase of 45 in one year is good
and hopeful. The week-night service begun in July
1888 has gone on steadily, with an attendance of about
100.
“At the week-night service we have a box placed at
the door to receive contributions for missionary purposes,
and already, in small sums, we have over £4 . One poor
man gave me 10s. The Sunday-school children have
begun to collect, and they too have done well, having,
at the present moment, over The ladies have begun
to do some work for others, and already we have a branch
of our Guild denominated the ‘ Zenana Mission Helpers,’
numbering some 20, who meet once a month to do work,
which in due course we shall transmit to Edinburgh for
India. I have been assured by various parties that there
is a revived interest in Christian work amongst the people,
which, let us hope, is the outcome of a revived life.”
IN GRENADA.
The Church of St Andrew’s, Grenada, had been closed
for fifteen years, when at the request of some of the
Scottish Presbyterians, the Colonial Committee sent out
the Eev. Mr Muir in 1884. During that period no ser-
vice had been held in the church except at intervals;
and as there was a danger that the Government would
take possession of the unoccupied building for a grammar-


school, a movement was set on foot in 1883 to open it as
a Presbyterian place of worship, and to obtain a minister
from Scotland. The Roman Catholics had indeed re-
ceived the use of it for a school in 1879. The Wesleyan
Methodists came forward and offered their services to
save the building for the Church of Scotland. These
were cordially accepted by the Presbyterians, and Mr
Muir was inducted on the 19th of September 1884.
Soon after his arrival he set himself to get the church
put into proper repair. The windows had been broken, the
pews nearly destroyed, and its condition was altogether
deplorable. The congregation aided him enthusiastically
in his efforts; and by the help of some friends at home,
he has been enabled to carry out his plans, and make the
building suitable and comfortable. The next scheme
which he took up was one relating to the Coolie popu-
lation of the island. His attention had been drawn to
their miserable state —ignorant, morally degraded, and
destitute of all the means of elevation and improvement.
He found that nothing was done for them either by
the Government or by any Church. He knew that in
Trinidad a Mission to the Coolies had been most suc-
cessful, and he was encouraged to open two schools, with
male teachers (natives of India), one of whom, thirty
years of age, had considerable experience ; and the other,
a lad of seventeen, had also been trained in Trinidad.
“The children,” he says, “are to be taught to read in
their parent tongue, and their education is to be given in
English. We believe this will be the means of bringing
a large number of Coolies under Christian teaching.”


He secured the services of the Rev, K. J. Grant and Rev.
Lai Behari, both from Trinidad, to inaugurate the work,
and to address public meetings, for the purpose of ex-
citing interest and eliciting help. The meetings pledged
themselves to support Mr Muir by their sympathy and
their pecuniary assistance, and in one place rooms for a
school, for Sabbath services, and teachers’ residence, were
kindly offered by certain employers of labour.
Grenada is about the size of Arran, and the number
of Coolies reaches little short of 3000. In Trinidad
there are 5 Presbyterian congregations, made up of
Indian immigrants ; and one church has “ a membership
in good standing of over 250 Indians; while the bap-
tised persons, adults and children, are about 550, the
majority being adults.” Mr Muir was naturally anxious
that the course pursued in Trinidad should, at least in
some measure, be followed in Grenada, where the Coolies
are “as ignorant of our holy faith as if they had been
born in India, and as destitute of education as if they
lived in a savage country.”
It is to be borne in mind that the minister is not
neglecting his congregation of Presbyterians in carrying
on this work; that these Coolies are resident in one
of our colonies; that the minister lives in the midst of
them; that no Scheme of our Church can properly
reach them; and that no other Church has hitherto
recognised their claims to be taught Christianity.
In St Andrew’s Church there are 236 sittings. It is
free of debt, and invested in trustees. There are two ser-
vices on Sunday, at n a.m. and 7 p.m. The attendance


is 5r at the first and 57 at the last. There is one week-
day service, with an attendance of 31, and out of 33
communicants, 25 communicated in October last. The
amount of church-door collections was 10s. Bd.
The Coolie Mission in Grenada.
In regard to the work among the Coolies, the late
Professor Stevenson, in 1862, wrote : “By the industry of
these benighted beings it is that the capital of our settlers
is turned to profitable account, and the general prosperity
of our colonies advanced; nor surely is it to be thought
of that the souls of the masters should be cared for, while
the toiling servants are left to darkness and the death-
shade. Moreover, these Coolies, as they are called, lie
completely beyond the range of our Foreign Mission, so
that unless the Colonial Committee shall interpose in
their behalf, our Church abandons them utterly. The
Committee are anxious to assist in the organisation and
support of Coolie schools wherever they are needed,
under the superintendence of our own ministers and mis-
sionaries.”
The Church cannot help rejoicing in the interest taken
in the spiritual welfare of the Coolies, and encourages the
prosecution of the work by every means in its power.
Mr Muir wrote : “ The Coolies come from British India
to supply the want of labour in the West Indies. They
are very poor, and leave their own land in the hope
of bettering their social position. Being heathens or
Mohammedans, they know nothing of the Christian
religion, and if they ever heard of Jesus it was only as


a prophet. As British subjects, we feel they belong to
us; but, alas! they are not subjects in the kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and know nothing of the true God. When
this was a sugar-producing island, they laboured on cane
plantations; but since these were abandoned, they work
on the cocoa plantations. The men receive is. 3d. and
the women is. per day. Boys and girls of school age
are employed, which is a great drawback to school work.
They toil from nine to ten hours daily, except on Satur-
days, when they do marketing or cultivate their own
gardens. Since the sugar estates were abandoned, the
Coolies are more scattered than formerly, because cocoa
cultivation does not require so many people on an estate.
This makes Mission work much more difficult than when
they were grouped together. In the old time, from 200
to 300 Coolies were sure to be had conveniently together;
now you cannot get more than twenty or thirty in one
estate. What we try, in order to reach as many as
possible, is to plant a school in the centre of the largest
number, with a native teacher ( i.e., an Indian), who goes
out to the estates, before or after school hours, to per-
suade the parents to send the children to school. The
catechist, as opportunity permits, holds services in their
houses, converses with the parents about the love of
Christ, teaching also the absurdity of worshipping false
gods. He is generally received kindly. One catechist
and two teachers amongst 2000 people, widely scattered
in small groups, are inadequate for the work. It is
proposed to have ten or twelve centres with a teacher in
each, and four or five catechists to assist in the schools


and visit the parents, inviting them to attend divine
service on Sabbath, held in the Mission schools.
or jQ 40 a-year would pay the catechist, and the teacher
can be supported on a-year.”
Rev. James Rae, who was assistant in a parish in
Argyleshire, was appointed to succeed Mr Muir, now of
St James’s Parish, Wakenham. He was ordained by the
Presbytery of Campbeltown.
Mr Rae has energetically thrown himself into the Coolie
branch of the work. It does not interfere with his atten-
tion to the interests of the congregation; “ and the out-
look,” say the managers,- “is hopeful, and we trust soon
to hear we have obtained the services of more catechists
to make the Mission a complete success.” —“The Mission
at Gouyave among the Coolies has been carried on, but
this branch of the work has also suffered from the lack
of regular services.”—“The Church at St George’s is an
exception. Members have rallied round it, and we have
to report favourably of the attendance and the state of
the funds.” “The Bible-class has proved a success.”
The report is signed by Mr Rae, and also by P. F.
Macleod, M.D., elder and chairman; Edward Begrie,
elder; B. S. E. Munro, elder. In one of his letters Mr
Rae says:—
“ We are doing what we can at present, yet the help
given by people is not adequate to the support even
of a single catechist. We are even now owing some
money to the catechist, whose salary has been reduced,
and who has therefore been obliged to sell his house.
He is on this account unable to go about among the


people as often as he used to do. This catechist,
Mr Geunarayan, does all he can. He teaches the
children during the day, and preaches on Sunday
to the adult Indians. When occasion permits he
visits his countrymen at their own houses, and all
his time is taken up with the work of the Mission.
This good man, when I spoke to him about the reduc-
tion of his salary, said that he was content to labour on
for Christ without thinking about salary, rejoicing in the
fact that he was permitted to spread the Gospel among
his countrymen. lam of opinion that he should be re-
leased altogether from his teaching work, and allowed all
his time for preaching and imparting religious instruction
to the Coolies, as he is well fitted in every way for the
task. His knowledge of Hindi, and the fact of his being
a high-caste Indian, give him great influence with the
Indians in the island. lam also of opinion that the
Coolie Mission in Grenada will never prove a complete
success until we can employ more agents. This we can-
not do without help, and this help I now see must come
from friends at home. The Rev. Mr Grant, Presbyterian
minister, Trinidad, whose church, which is a very large
one, is composed entirely of Indians, and who probably
knows more about the Coolies than any other clergyman
in these islands, assured me that the work would require
more money than the people here can reasonably be
expected to pay. He writes as follows: ‘ I feel deeply
anxious that your Indian work be sustained, and to
secure efficiency, it will be necessary to get a few friends
at home to come to your help.’ It is not enough, I think,


to carry on the work in the way it has been done. It
must be added to. On account of the scattered popula-
tion, we would require to have, at least for present pur-
poses, three more agents to get at the people. The
Indians themselves are anxious to help, but they are
very poor. The ordinary pay of a Coolie is about a
shilling a-day. I have no desire to underrate the work
of the other Churches in the island, but one cannot help
seeing that they have utterly neglected these poor Coolies.
No doubt they show their readiness to baptise or to ad-
minister the Communion to those desirous of baptism
and the Holy Communion, but independent Indian work
is left to the Presbyterians. With few exceptions the
Coolies are simply in heathen darkness. They cannot,
however, be expected to know much, for they have never
been afforded any instruction beyond that of our agent.
Had we the agents, however, —men of the same stamp as
our catechist at Samaritan, —I feel confident that, by
God’s blessing on their work, it would be possible to
Christianise all the Coolies in the island. It is very sad
to see an Indian arrayed in his priestly vestments, and
with his face painted, in honour of his heathen gods, sit-
ting close by the principal street of the town, —a monu-
ment of paganism and a blot upon the Christianity of the
island. In my humble opinion the work of conversion
among the Indians here is easier than among their coun-
trymen in India. Twenty-six or thirty pounds would be
enough to support a catechist. I notice that at the end
of the ‘Record’ there are usually subscription lists.
Would it be possible to set on foot a subscription on


behalf of the building fund of the Mission schoolhouse
to be erected at Samaritan for the Indians 1 The esti-
mated cost of a suitable building, of the plainest descrip-
tion, is The Indians, although so very poor, have
subscribed of that sum. We will give the order for
its construction, in the hope that we may ultimately
acquire the requisite sum. If we do not go on with this
building, I fear that the Indians will begin to think that
we too are neglecting them. My work at St George is
progressing favourably, and I generally have good con-
gregations, except when it is wet, as a shower of rain is
sufficient to prevent the people from coming out to church.
Mr Begrie, one of our elders, who wrote you about the
appointment of a minister to Grenada, has returned from
England. I have resumed holding services at Gouyave,
a town twelve miles from Grenada, where Mr Muir
wished to establish a Mission for Coolies, and where he
used to preach. I will be compelled to be away from St
George on Sunday once a month —in the evening only,
however, as I ride up after morning service in the church
here. I preached lately to the Indians at Samaritan.
The schoolroom was more than comfortably filled, and
those who could not get seats remained outside near the
doors. The catechist interpreted for me. The praise
was conducted in Hindi, and those present joined in it
very heartily.
“Had we money enough it would be most advis-
able to have another catechist stationed in the Florida
Valley, near the town of Gouyave. There are many
Coolies there, and I caused the catechist at Samari-


tan to come down once or twice lately on Sabbath to
preach to them. In spite of the opinion of several
planters, there is a wide field still among the Coolies,
but we can do nothing without native catechists, lam
very anxious about this work. At present the catechist,
for want of means, has no horse; and as my own horse
has been seriously injured and quite unfit for work, I
have been much crippled of late.
“This Mission to the Coolies is a great support to
Presbyterianism, and I am greatly concerned about its
future. Without monetary aid we cannot advance.
Our congregation cannot support another catechist. We
must get help from Scotland in the same way that
Canadian ministers, who labour among the Coolies in
Trinidad, get help from Canada.
“ The school attendance has increased considerably, and
the number present at divine service in the Indian Church
one Sunday lately was over eighty, including children.
“ I have secured the services of another teacher cate-
chist. He is from Trinidad, and has given great satis-
faction to the Indians, —the parents of the school children,
—and myself.
“lam very sorry we cannot give him a better salary
than he at present receives, for he is working very hard
and doing well.
“In a few weeks the school will be opened, and, I
trust, this will begin a more prosperous era in our Mission
work.
“We have now two catechists, each in receipt of
twelve dollars per month. One of the catechists con-


fines himself to the teaching work principally. The
other visits the Indians in their houses, and holds ser-
vices at the different estates. The two are meanwhile
living at Samaritan, where the school is stationed. By
the time this reaches you the new school will have been
finished. I visited the Mission this week to inspect
the school, and to baptise several Indians. Nine Indians
were baptised, and there are more who wish to be bap-
tised the next time I visit the Mission.
“Next week I am to marry three Indian couples, and
when I have married these, four other couples wish me
to do the same office for them. There were over sixty
children at school, but a few of them were rather young
to be admitted.
“We have, however, good daily attendances \ and
there is a marked improvement in the school work. I
am sorry to say, however, that I find it difficult to raise
sufficient money for the upkeep of the Mission. One of
the catechists expects a larger salary, and I must say
he deserves it. He has proved the life and soul of the
Mission, and is very anxious to extend the work by
getting a monitor to work in another district, at a salary
of thirty shillings or so a month.
“At least twenty-five children could be got together,
and a little Indian congregation could meet for worship
and instruction on Sunday.
“In this way we can reach the Indians. This cate-
chist desires to start a school in Gouyave, an important
village half-way between Samaritan and St George. He
is sure it would be very successful.


“ There is one thing I would like to refer to, and that
is the want of a Mission horse. Without a horse the
catechist can do little or no work. He has to go long
distances, as the people are scattered on the various
estates. Very often our catechist has had to walk ten
miles or more under a burning tropical sun, and to endure
a great amount of fatigue which could be avoided had
he a horse. He could preach at two or more stations on
the Sundays, and, in fact, do the work of two catechists.
“On account of the heat it is almost a physical im-
possibility to travel without a horse in this country, and
sheer necessity alone compelled our catechist to part
with his own horse. I am sure if the Sabbath-school
children at home knew a little about the Coolie children
here, and the hard w r ork which our catechists have to
perform, they would only be too glad to help them both.
“ How that I see our Mission is becoming a success I
am anxious to keep on, and if possible to increase, our
present staff. ”
FOUNDATION OF PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN
BUENOS AYRES.
It is interesting also to recall the history of the church
in Buenos Ayres, which was founded, and for some
time aided, by the Colonial Committee. It originated
in a school which dates from 1825, when an agricultural
community was founded by William and John P. Robert-
son, who took to the land purchased by them, about eight
leagues from Buenos Ayres, from fifty to sixty families,


drawn principally from the south and west of Scotland.
The spiritual oversight of this little community was first
undertaken by the Rev. William Brown, who afterwards
became Professor of Biblical Criticism in the University
of St Andrews; but Mr Gilbert Ramsay, a man of “ high
intellectual ability and great moral worth,” often con-
ducted service previous to Mr Brown’s arrival. When
the colony broke up, many of the people, along with
Mr Brown, settled in and near the city of Buenos Ayres.
A church was built, a congregation formed, and the
Scotch National Schools were organised in 1838. Mr
Rae, a graduate of Marischal College and University,
Aberdeen, became head-master in 1840 and when, in
1848, he removed to Monte Video, Mr Smith (the
present Rev. Dr Smith, to whom Mr Fleming refers in
the above notice), became his successor. Dr Smith has
laboured there for forty years, and has obtained a wide-
spread reputation for ability, zeal, and high Christian
character. Mr Brown and Mr Smith were both sent out
by the Church of Scotland, and the following statement
was made in iB6O :
“This is not a colony, but strictly a foreign land.
Still, some thirty years ago, a considerable emigration
of our countrymen, now scattered as sheep farmers over
an extensive inland district, gave to that scattered district
the character of a Scotch settlement. A Presbyterian
church, receiving the aid provided by the statute 6
Geo. IV. cap. 87, usually known as the Consular Act, now
exists in the town of Buenos Ayres, and is served by
Rev. Mr Smith. Another church at Quelmes, some con-


siderable distance inland, has been erected, and is served
by Rev. Mr Gebbie, with a salary, derived from the con-
gregation, of yearly. At the same time the for-
mation of a church at Chascomus is in progress.”
In 1862, it is reported that a church and a manse were
built at the latter place (Chascomus) by “ the efforts of
our countrymen and their descendants,” and a bond sub-
scribed for as stipend. The Rev, Mr Ferguson
was sent out, and the Committee gave for three
years towards his salary.
From 1863 liberal collections are acknowledged from
St Andrew’s Church, Buenos Ayres, towards the funds
of the Colonial Mission. Besides St Andrew’s, there is
another church at Chascomus, one at Quelmes, a third
at Barracas, a suburb of Buenos Ayres, and many other
stations scattered over the wide plains. In a late sup-
plement to the ‘ Life and Work Magazine ’ in connection
with St Andrew’s, it is said “ one station is as far off as
500 miles from the city, and we have five clergymen
engaged in the work, exclusively among our English-
speaking communities, and these ministers all belong to
the Church of Scotland.”
For a considerable period all these churches have been
entirely self-supporting. A mission has been carried on
for some years by the Rev. Lachlan MdSTeil at Entre Rios.
He writes:—
“ Since I wrote you last year I have had three journeys
to Entre Rios. On one of these journeys I travelled to
Corrientes, where some of our countrymen have settled
with their sheep and cattle. The price of land has in-


creased so much as to render removal necessary owing to
the high rents. In the early morning, before break of
day, I started (the ground was crisp with frost), accom-
panied by a guide and my nephew, who was, like myself,
a total stranger. Our road lay through a dense forest,
where a young Englishman was attacked two years ago
by two natives, who intended to rob and murder him.
But with the pluck characteristic of our people, he shot
one of the would-be assassins, and the other ran away.
After a journey of six hours we reached the house of one
of our people, where we had breakfast. Afterwards I
visited some of the families, baptised three children, and
returned at nine o’clock p.m., two hours after sunset,
having been ten hours in the saddle, having travelled
sixty-six miles. Next day I continued the journey to
Concordia, where, arriving on the Saturday, I held ser-
vice on Sunday, with an attendance of about two dozen.
Unless you have a map you can form no idea of the
extent of the territory. A large immigration is setting in
of late years —more than 100,000 per annum. It is a
fine country to live in, but for the extravagance of its
rulers in financial matters. Our currency has greatly
depreciated, the premium on gold not much below 50
per cent. I have made a collection for the Colonial
Mission; but the premium being so high I have been
waiting for a fall. I shall send it in June.
“At the beginning of the year we have a printed list
drawn up of the preaching-stations and the days when
service will be held. These are distributed among the
people. ... In summer, after preaching at St John’s, I


started on horseback, and rode fourteen miles in an
hour and a half, where a friend waited me with his
carriage to bring me to the church, where I held ser-
vice. This is hard work for a minister beyond fifty
years of age, with a bad road to traverse, not like the
roads in Scotland.
“ I visited Entre Rios thrice, and Corrientes once, this
year. This year, besides preaching, I had baptisms
and a marriage. In my last journey to Entre Rios I
solemnised four marriages in a colony close to where
our countrymen are situated; this colony is principally
composed of Swiss and Germans. I made a journey
southward, close to Bahia Blancas, where I had two
meetings—attendance 30 and 15 respectively. At times
we have to rough it. At night you sleep in a house
covered with galvanised iron, which is very cold; how-
ever, I take a good many wraps to keep me warm, without
divesting myself of my apparel. On the Monday morning
I started homewards, and was in the saddle before the
sun was gilding the peaks of a high mountain. After
nine leagues ride I held the other meeting. After
partaking of slight refreshment I remounted, and reached
the railway station an hour after sunset; the distance
ridden was close on 50 miles. By rail from the manse it
is about 400 miles. To give you an idea of the rapid
strides the country is making, the Southern Railway
carried last year above 1,000,000 passengers. The rail-
ways carried above 7,000,000 passengers, double the
population of the Republic. This year the emigration is
expected to reach 150,000.”


The following is a letter from Rev. Mr Ferguson, who
has laboured for many years at Chascomus :
“ I have laboured in this foreign land nearly twenty-
six years. I have been anxious to send yearly some recog-
nition of the Colonial Committee’s past kindness, but we
have always had some difficulty in meeting current ex-
penditure in the maintenance of the pastorate, and more
so latterly, as several families, owing to the rise in the
rent of land for sheep, have been obliged to migrate
farther out; and though I have followed many of these
up with the ministration of the Word, I have not been
able to overtake all in the work.
“The premium on gold is now very high, nearly 50
per cent, and it has not been easy to make up the stipend
in gold as guaranteed, but nearly every year I made a
reduction; and I also, with help of friends, organised
amateur concerts, and by this means realised considerable
aid towards the payment of expenses connected with the
church.
“Through the goodness and providence of God I am
thankful to say I have been able for my work, not having
missed any appointment of duty. In 1880 my people
presented me with a gold watch and purse of sovereigns
to help me in having a furlough home with my two
daughters. My poor wife died in 1869, and I have had
uphill work ever since that irreparable loss.
“ In former years I have had to ride sixty-nine miles
or twenty leagues a-day under a burning sun, and have
escaped many dangers in travelling on horseback, and by
diligence. A few months before the massacre at Tandil


I slept in a farmhouse, where a young Scotchman and
his wife, named Smith, from Lanarkshire, not long in the
country, and a Mr Lawson, were ruthlessly murdered.
“Now there is more facility in travelling by rail. On
Sunday I have to preach at Tandil, about 200 miles
distant.
“ I have two services when at home, i.e., twice a month ;
mid-day at church, three miles from Chascomus; and
afternoon in a schoolroom which I built in the town.
Every alternate Sunday I go to some other distant dis-
trict to preach, and have always been kindly welcomed
by good attendances when weather was favourable.
“Our Communion was dispensed last Sunday, and my
old friend Dr Smith assisted. There were 59 communi-
cants —about 90 people present. I have Sunday-school,
at church and wherever I hold services; and through the
kindness of Mr Thomas Drysdale and Mr W. B. Barbour,
M.P. for Paisley, have a great many S.S. magazines to
distribute, which are eagerly looked for. I also distribute
the ‘ Monthly Visitor.’
“I do not feel so equal to the work of visiting on
horseback as I used to in former years, and perhaps
some arrangement might be made for getting an assistant.
There is ample field for another labourer in this vineyard
as the people are now so widely scattered. Meanwhile I
do what I can, and am still ready to spend and be spent
in our Master’s service.
“ Our church cost I helped as much as pos-
sible in getting subscriptions.
“Of the eight gentlemen who signed my guarantee


for stipend, only two survive, one of whom has left
this district, so that I depend on the generosity of
ray people.”
The Church of Scotland gives support to chaplains in
India —at Meerut, Mhow, and Rawalpindi. This has
been done for many years, because there was a large field
for the work of her ministers among Scotch people, for
whom, otherwise, no religious ordinances would have
been provided.
There are about 300,000 Europeans and Eurasians
in India, and it is right that their spiritual interests
should be attended to. They did not come within the
scope of Missions to the heathen or of army chaplaincies,
and ministers must be provided for them. In each of
the above-named stations the time of the chaplains is
fully employed among the military and civilians; the
congregations and Sunday-schools are large and flourish-
ing. In Cyprus the Church has a chaplain who
attends to all Presbyterians. He recently received
the hearty thanks of the Wesleyan Church for his
attention to those of their number who sojourned for
a time in the island. In Ceylon —where an Act of Dis-
establishment has been passed —there are five ministers
connected with the Church of Scotland, but one of them
only receives aid from home. In Fiji a minister for
the colonists was sent out some years ago, and though,
on account of the depression of trade, the Presbyterian
Church of Fiji was unable to fulfil the promises it
had made, and he had to leave, yet aid is still given


on a smaller scale; and it is gratifying to know that
the congregation has to a great extent recovered its
prosperity, and is now in a better condition than it was
some time ago. In Mauritius the Church also helps to
maintain ordinances among Presbyterians. It will thus
be seen from all that has been said, that, in every part of
the world wherever an opportunity has presented itself,
the Church of Scotland has not been slow in seeking
to advance the cause of religion among our countrymen,
and to send heralds of the Cross to preach the glad
tidings of great joy.
In the General Assembly of 1889 the following
speeches were delivered in reference to the Colonial
Committee: —
Rev. James Fleming, 8.D., Buenos Ayres, then ad-
dressed the General Assembly. He said that although
the Church he represented was one of the smallest
Presbyterian bodies in the world, still it was not by any
means the youngest. As he heard Mr Williamson speak
of the Church in Australia celebrating its jubilee this
year, he remembered the fact that their Church dated
considerably further back. It was founded by the
Scottish colony in the year 1826. That colony broke
up very speedily, but they managed to keep a clergyman
in the country; and the success of the Scottish Church in
the Argentine Republic had been, he might say, entirely
due to the two admirable men who had preceded him
in the ministry there. The first minister, the Rev. Dr


Brown, who would be known personally to some there,
and his name to many more, was afterwards the Professor
of Biblical Criticism at the University of St Andrews,
which of itself was enough to speak his character and
qualifications. After him came Dr Smith, who was
still alive, and, if he might use the expression, seemed
more able for work than when he (Mr Fleming) went to
the country ten years ago. Every Sunday that it was
possible to go about, and have service throughout the
country, the Doctor was always there; and this was for
him a labour of love, for which he received no remunera-
tion whatever. Their church in Buenos Ayres had had
a somewhat checkered existence, owing to the state of
the country for some years ; but for a considerable time
now it had had good prospects. But as he left that
prospect was threatened with one more serious change,
whether for the better or for the worse remained to be
seen. The church was situated in a very central posi-
tion, and so central, that the municipality of the city are
running a new street which would go through their
church. This would compel them to build a new church,
and they hoped to be able to build a much larger and
better building, with a school, —for they had a day-school
as well as a Sunday-school in connection with the
church. They had asked a very large sum for the church
and buildings, and they had every reason to believe
they would get very nearly the amount. It seemed a
large sum. With that they would be able to do a
good deal, but money did not go so far in these coun-
tries as it did here. The other congregations in the


Argentine Republic were, be might say, only three.
Theoretically it would be very easy to say how they
came to be founded, but practically it was a little
difficult to say. People began to go out of town and
among sheep-ranches and farms, and one minister was
sent. After that the people began to go further out,
and another church was founded, and it was ministered
to by the Rev. Mr Ferguson. But that distinction had
ceased to be a local one, for the people had gone far
away, and the ministers were compelled to follow their
flocks rather than abide in a particular parish. If they
could imagine a Spanish congregation scattered over
Scotland, they would have some idea of the labours of a
clergyman in the Argentine Republic. As to religion in
that part of the world, he did not know that it differed
very much from what they had around them iffi Scotland.
They had some difficulties to meet that the members of
Assembly had not. They had got, of course, a Spanish-
speaking element, and with that many views and some
ideas, especially on the matter of Sunday-keeping, that
were certainly objectionable to them. On the other
hand, he must honestly confess that there were certain
advantages there. There was scarcely any drunkenness
among their congregation; and he was proud to say that
in the ten years he had been associated with the church
in Buenos Ayres, with a communion-roll of 300, he had
not been called on to deal with one case of illegitimacy.
He felt he must not trespass longer on the time of
the Assembly. They believed their country there
was to be one of the great countries of the future.


They had a large immigration, and among those who
came were many Scotsmen, For his part,—and he was
sure he might say so for his colleagues,—they would be
very pleased to do anything for those who came among
them, and he would appeal to those who knew people
coming, to be good enough to commend them to the
ministers ; for settling in a large city of 400,000 people,
it was impossible for them to know when Scotsmen
came among them, and so they were unable to do any-
thing to help them when they first came. There was
really a great future before them. The Argentines were
not at all an irreligious people, nor a priest-ridden
people; they had the greatest liberty of conscience any
one could wish for, and their Church had always received
from the Argentine authorities every courtesy any one
could expect. There was a work going on among the
people of the Argentine Republic, mainly taken up by
the Methodist Church in Buenos Ayres, of bringing
home the Gospel directly to the Spanish-speaking people.
For his own part, he had not taken up this work, for he
had more than he could undertake with their own people.
Their Church built at its own cost a mission-church for
a poor locality. That church cost £2OOO, and they
gave nearly a-year to the minister who was in
charge of it. That would show that there was not that
stinginess which was alluded to in some other Churches
in the little Church they had in Buenos Ayres; and if
they were not able to send home large sums of money,
the General Assembly must not on that account think
they had ceased to have an interest in the Church of


Scotland, for they had their own people round about
them, and these, it would be admitted, had the first
claim upon them. But they would like to keep up the
interest they had in the home Church, and the connec-
tion with the Colonial Committee was one of the ways
to do it. They had kept up their collection for many
years, and he had no doubt it would be continued for
many years to come. He thought he had said enough
on the subject. He could only say the one thing they
seemed to want was a little more personal intercourse.
They, 6000 miles off, felt more lonely than could be
imagined. That would be very hard to get over, but
probably they would some day have a deputation to the
Argentine Republic. He was afraid it would not be
soon; but the sympathy which the General Assembly
could give them he was sure would be gladly received.
The Rev. Dr Andrew Gray, of Dalkeith, said:—
“ During the progress of the next quarter of a century
the question of the relations that are to subsist between
this country and her colonies and dependencies will, in
all human likelihood, come up for solution and deter-
mination on a more or less permanent basis. The ques-
tion is, will there be an Imperial Federation, or anything
approaching thereto, meaning, if not formal unity, co-
operative power in time of stress and need, between
Great Britain and Ireland on the one hand, and our
colonies and dependencies; or will these grow up, one
after the other, according to their fitness or desire, a
series of separate and independent commonwealths 1


There are, no doubt, a few of our public men who say
that we would do better without our colonies. But the
Earl of Rosebery, a representative man on one side, has
been strenuously advocating a policy of federation; and
the Chancellor of the Exchequer only the other day
asserted that the colonies were vital to the expansion
of England. The great majority of our public men, and
the vast majority of our countrymen, seem to desire a
continuance in some form of co-operation of that empire
on which the sun never sets. We are among the fore-
most nations of the world; we have at this moment the
strongest and the richest positions; we inhabit nearly
one-sixth part of the land of the whole globe; we rule
the seas; and certainly we as a Church should do nothing
whereby the tie between us at home and our fellow-sub-
jects abroad should be slackened. Our trade, commerce,
and worldly prosperity depend largely upon union. Our
national position and safety may depend upon it. What-
ever else may be, certainly imperial unity is imperial
safety. This country and her colonies united and indi-
visible are invincible. There is more meant by that than
safety to ourselves. It means the peace and progress of
the civilised world, the extinction of barbarism and the
diffusion of the Gospel of the grace of God in all the
dark places of the earth. Now there are many binding
elements in communities and nations —speaking one lan-
guage, being under one rule, having the same worldly
interests. We have all these factors contributing to
intimate union here. But the closest human fellowship
is common worship before the throne of God; and if it


be the old home-country worship, whether according to
the ritual of the Church of England, or according to the
simpler ritual of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland,
that is reproduced by the colonists in the distant parts
of the earth, the nearest approach to the perfection of
this fellowship is realised. To bring about this is the
Church’s duty and the Church’s privilege.
“ Then the Colonial Scheme ought to be supported for
reasons directly religious. Brother toucheth brother. We
have a leverage power placed within our hands. The
colonies are open to us. We are on friendly soil. The
colonists speak our language; they are our kinsmen;
they have gone forth from our homes ; they share with
us in the benefits of our government; they will listen to
the Gospel message. There is no fear of martyrs’ graves
for our missionaries. The colonies need our help, too.
Emigrants may carry many good things away with them,
—a sturdy constitution, incapability of knowing defeat,
memories of school and home and church, the printed
Bible, and the ever-present blessing of the Spirit of God ;
but going, as so many of them do, to the more untrodden
parts, they carry with them none of the privileges of the
Church at home. They need help from us in this matter,
at all events for some few years to begin with. For who
constitute the bulk of our emigrants 1 Those disap-
pointed in the battle of life here —whose first thought is
to get a living, not to build up a church, the ardent and
undisciplined, who have found the social relations of the
home life too tight—these in large numbers go to the
colonies. Digging, to begin with, in a more or less


reluctant earth for bare livelihood, they cannot by any
possibility bear within themselves the elements for re-
producing the Church of Christ. We must care for them
at the start, stimulating their memories of the Lord’s
Day and God’s Word, of a Christian place of worship and
parental training, and preventing the tidal wave of con-
stant emigration bearing the front of indifference, of irre-
ligion, and of nothing nobler than mere courageous and
enduring earthliness of Saxon character.
“ And have not the colonies many claims upon us ?
Are we not in debt to them 1 Most of us are bound by
close and tender ties to one or more of them. All of us
have benefited by what they have done. They have pro-
vided labour and a living to our surplus and impoverished
population. They have drained away riotous valour.
They have removed a source of national danger, and
lightened our national burdens. They pour in affluence
upon us the necessaries of life, and enrich us with many
of its luxuries. They have shown themselves ready to
rally round the flag of the fatherland. Surely the appeal
comes home to us with strength not to leave the emigrant
to say in distant lands, ‘ My kinsmen have failed me, and
my familiar friends have forgotten me.’ ”
Sir J. N. Cuthbertson said, that in regard to India and
Cyprus and the West Indies, they were likely to have
claims from them he dared say for many years to come.
He found in the report, which, he trusted, would be read
by every member of the Assembly, most interesting state-
ments in regard to the work in these places. He had


been attracted to two stations where he happened to
know the minister. One of them was a friend of his
own, who spent a long time in the Argentine Republic—
that was Mr Ferguson. Then Mr Rae’s letters from
Grenada were hopeful, and full of energy and activity.
He had taken up a mission to the coolies. He spoke as
if there were no one else to look after the large number
of coolies who had been imported into that island for the
sugar plantations. He could not conceive of a finer field
for a young man of energy and activity than those coolies,
after he had attended to his Scotch or English-speaking
people. He was rather interested on receiving a letter
from Mr Rae a few weeks ago, requesting that the work
he was engaged in should be brought before Sabbath-
school children. He (Sir John) did not know if he would
have an opportunity of bringing the matter before Sabbath-
schools, but he could scarcely conceive a finer field for a
portion of their contributions to be given to. They were
sometimes told that their countrymen abroad were making
rich and ought to look after themselves and their depend-
ants. Unfortunately, as had been explained, sometimes
the willing hand did not go with the willing heart.
Sometimes Jthere was not the same desire to spread the
Gospel; and many of them, he had no hesitation in saying,
were perfectly unable to do anything towards the spread
of ordinances in this far-away place. And let the
Assembly remember this, that these different Presbyterian
Churches in Australia, New Zealand, the Argentine Re-
public, or in the United States of America, looked to the
Church of Scotland as the mother of the Presbyterian


Churches. They did not want her contributions in the
Churches among the wealthy communities in Australia or
in New Zealand, but they looked to her and expected
that she would sympathise with them, and share their
anxieties, whether by sending and receiving deputations,
as had been so splendidly done —that she would remember
they were her children. He agreed with what had been
said, that the labours of this Committee was not likely to
fall oft. Emigration to different parts of the country was
a natural thing for a large part of the people of this
country. How had it been in the past 1 How had these
countries been replenished ? It had been by their younger
sons going there. This did not apply to one class more
than to others. The younger sons of all classes had gone
abroad; and has it to be said that they were to be obliged
to remain at home in this country, so much over-populated ?
He looked forward to a continued overflow of emigrants
from this country to all parts of the world, and he main-
tained that, as the mother Presbyterian Church, it was the
duty of the Church of Scotland to have her eye and her
heart open to the appeals of those sons and daughters
who went to all ends of the earth.
Mr W. J. Menzies, W.S., said; The importance of
this scheme had been lately brought before him in a
very striking manner. Three weeks ago he was in a
country formerly one of the colonies of Great Britain,
at a time when the celebration was taking place of the
centennial of the inauguration of its first chief magis-
trate. When one considered that the United States had


now a population of sixty millions —that it was little
more than a century since it was one of our colonies, —
and when one thought of the remainder of Great Britain’s
colonial empire—the various colonies in Australia, Vic-
toria, New South Wales, Queensland, South-West
Australia, and New Zealand, as well as the British
territory in America, which was larger than that of the
United States, the thought naturally arose—if one colony
had in the last one hundred years grown to be a republic
with sixty millions, what, at the much greater speed at
which matters progressed now, would our colonies become
in the course of the next fifty years ?' In the streets of
New York he had seen paraded one day fifty thousand
soldiers, men fully equipped, with a fine military bear-
ing ; and these, he was told, were a sample of upwards
of two millions of militia in the United States, a
force which cost the State nothing, and was amply suf-
ficient to quell any internal tumult, or resist any foreign
attack. The next day there was a procession of the arts
and industries, most elaborate and costly in its nature,
and which took seven hours to pass a given point. And
here they had an illustration not only of the might of
the people, but also of the vast progress they were
making in all the industrial arts, and of the competition
which we must expect to come from them.
But the Church of Scotland had a stronger interest in
the United States than the mere fact of their having been
originally a colony of Great Britain. He had been told
by good authority that the constitution of the United
States was taken by its framers from the constitution of


the Church of Scotland, and that government by presby-
tery was the model which the framers of that constitution
took in framing it. The constitution of the United
States had been initiated in every republican government
which had been formed. It was based upon this axiom, —
the will of the people—that is law; and while having the
freest of all possible governments, there was no despotic
government in Europe which was so absolutely powerful
in redressing wrongs and putting down tumults as the
will of a people resolved to live peaceably, and to uphold
their mutual rights. The principle of the Church of
Scotland was the same. It was founded upon the will
of her people, and the will of her people was law. Here,
then, they had something to be proud of —that the
struggles of their ancestors during two centuries, which
the establishment of presbytery, should have
given to the world an ideal form of constitution which
had been accepted as the best suited to the civil govern-
ment in so large and influential a portion of the world’s
population.
In returning through Canada from British Columbia to
Manitoba, one could not help observing that where strag-
gling hamlets were commencing along the line of railway,
however small the settlement, there was always a church.
This showed very emphatically that those who went from
home to make room for us who remain, carried with them
a desire for religious ordinances, and appreciated any
help they might receive. Looking to the part which
this Church had taken in the civilisation of the world,
and to the part which their colonies might, before long,


take, it seemed to him to be a great privilege, as well as
a duty, that they should endeavour to supply ordinances
to their struggling fellow-countrymen who had gone
forth from them, so as to fit them in every respect to
be worthy citizens of the great countries to which they
would one day belong.
Rev. Dr Marshall Lang said: The General Assembly
had heard a good deal about Australia, and he hoped
it would indulge him by allowing him to say a little
more on that subject. Last year, it might be known
to some, he was one of those persons who had been
called globe-trotters, and he spent a considerable por-
tion of 1887-88 in the delightful lands that were be-
neath the Southern Cross; and he thought it was due
to those whose kindness he could never forget, and in
whose welfare he would always feel the deepest inter-
est, to say a few words. The Presbyterian Church in
Victoria was about to hold its jubilee. The history of
that Church, they had been reminded, began in 1838. It
was very interesting to him to meet only last week, and
to spend a considerable portion of two days, with the son
of that Mr Forbes who was the pioneer of Presbyterian-
ism in that part of the colony which was then called Port
Phillip. They were grand men those pioneers of British
civilisation —the men who worked their way up from Van
Diemen’s Land through bush and jungle to Gipps Land,
and on and on to the plains; and of that noble band, Forbes
and Clow and Hamilton were the most worthy members.
It was in 1838, as Mr Forbes mentioned, that two and


a half years before that date Melbourne was only “ forest
and brush land.” The city of Melbourne was one of the
wonders of the world —a magnificent city now, with double
the population of this historical city. The Scots Church
stood in a street —and a noble street it was —where,
within the memory of men still comparatively young,
bullocks floundered in swamp and morass. One saw there
the plate of the humble wooden edifice that was erected
through the efforts of Mr Forbes —the first Scots Church ;
and on the site of that humble wooden shed there stood
to-day a magnificent church —the Scots Church of Mel-
bourne —in which it was his privilege for four months to
officiate. The Presbyterian Church was a most important
factor in the religious life of Australia, and especially in
that portion of it which was known as Victoria. So far
as the Australian Handbook went, there were 195 min-
isters and 220 chapels in Victoria. The Presbyterian
Church, so far as the number of adherents was concerned,
stood fourth —the Methodists being first, Roman Catholics
second, the Church of England third, and the Presby-
terian Church fourth. But there were two things that
were very noteworthy. The one was that the Church
which was fourth so far as mere adherents was con-
cerned, was second when they came to estimate the aver-
age attendance of the Churches throughout Victoria; and
the other circumstance was, that it comprised more than
any Church of the intelligent artisans or tradesmen of
the cities, and a large proportion of the farmers, those
who hold the wealth of the country, and a very large
proportion indeed of the squatters, who formed the aris-


tocracy of Australia —especially in Victoria—which has
largely settled from Scotland. There was great wealth
in this Church. As an instance of that wealth and
liberality, he might mention that two collections were
lately made in one church within a fortnight of each
other, and on each occasion the amount exceeded
When he was in Melbourne, it was only beginning to
recover from the great commotion that had been caused
by the two Scots Church cases. Now he was not refer-
ring to these except as an illustration of the keenness of
the intellectual and ecclesiastical interest in Victoria. In
this country that commotion would never have attained
to the proportion it attained in Victoria. They had here
a steadiness of view, a respect for the past, and a defer-
ence to tradition, which were not conspicuously present
on the other side of the world. They were a much more
excitable and nervous people than we were. And he
referred to the Scots Church only with the view of say-
ing that it was all right now —that what nearly shattered
Presbyterianism in Victoria was again proving one of its
sources of strength. The Scots Church, under the min-
istry of Mr Marshall, lately of Inveresk—who had proved
the right man in the right place—was, as the Scots
Church used to be, crowded every Sunday by an attached
and enthusiastic people. The Church’s safety in its
darkest days—at least one of its most important ele-
ments —was the love that was in the hearts of its people
to the old Church of Scotland. They clung to the old
Church—they determined that their minister should be
the minister of the old Church. And if he might


instance any one more than another as illustrative of
that love, and one of the features of the squatter, he
would refer to the brother of one of their honoured
elders there—the late Mr Baillie, brother of Sir William
Baillie, Well, this jubilee year the Assembly of the
Victorian Church proposed to raise as a thank-
offering, and this was to be devoted to the aid of their
Sustentation and their Home Mission Funds. When he
was in Victoria, it seemed as if that sum was not likely
to be reached; but they had not only reached that
amount, but had exceeded it. It was a Church of great
vitality and liberality and cordiality.
He would like to say a word for New South Wales.
It was his regret that he could not go to New Zealand.
But he did go to New South Wales on the invitation of
the General Assembly, and a most cordial reception they
gave him. He referred in glowing terms to Sydney, and
the kindness he received there, and to various experiences
in the life of Australian ministers. He concluded a long
and eloquent speech by saying: In remembrance of de-
lightful companionship, in name of this General Assembly,
he breathed back to the Churches in Australia the words
—“ Peace be within your walls, and prosperity within
your palaces.”


PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.


. ■
V V . ! , T “■
■ ■ ■ •- ■.
•• A . Y 4 - *.(•/
' ■
> ' . N ,v:
• -- ' 1 ' : •
.
■
•■•■ , ■ ,
f 1 A ...
' . ' ■ '■ v ■
■
.


BY THE REV. ALEX. WILLIAMSON.
PLAIN WORDS AND SIMPLE FACTS ABOUT THE
CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
Price 4d.
WHAT HAS THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND DONE
FOR SCOTLAND?
A QUESTION FOR THE PEOPLE.
Price 2d.
THE MISSIONARY HEROES OF THE PACIFIC.
Price 3s.
