

m
Stye Parliament of tlje (Eummomuealtij of Auatralia.
EXTRACTS
FROM THE
RECORDS OF THE PARLIAMENT.
Resolutions and Speeches
RELATING TO
THE DEATH OF
The Honorable Sir LITTLETON ERNEST GROOM,
K.C.M.G., K.C., M.P.




Parliament of tljr (Commomnealth of Australia
CANBERRA.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
EXTRACT
mu THS
VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS, No. 131.
DATED TUESDAY, 10TH NOVEMBER, 1936.
2. Death of Member (The Honorable Sir Littleton E. Groom, K.C.M.G.,
K.C.). —Mr. Lyons (Prime Minister) moved, by leave, That this House
expresses its profound regret at the death of the Honorable Sir Littleton
Ernest Groom, S.C.M.G., K.C., Member for Darling Downs, and a former
Commonwealth Minister of State and Speaker of the House of Representa-
tives, places on record its appreciation of his outstanding public services to
Australia, and tenders to his widow and daughter its deep sympathy in their
bereavement.
And Mr. Curtin (Leader of the Opposition) having seconded the motion, and
other honorable Members having addressed the House in support thereof,
and all Members present having risen, in silence—
Question —passed.
Resolved—That Mr. Speaker be requested to transmit to Lady Groom the fore-
going Resolution, together with a copy of the speeches delivered thereon.
GEORGE BELL,
Speaker.
E. W. PARSES,
Clerk of the House of Representatives.


.3b> hO
/ & A' A vJ :8UOH
. '0/JT.yA
a., : Most
•
- -
< , <! ' - j8^*.
• ••*;. ,; ii 'iornmo/
;‘l ». 8 ‘ •
;o;J
ifiv>M. ■>’ "ti isdto
■ ■ •. ' . .s..r '• Jii baa .
.1)9- - lit; ~l ' a"'
■ £
■!, i 3a0210
;;/ T .. •
«8?. \o ‘ ■ t ) '■V-' 1 '


HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
Tuesday, 10 th November, 1936.
DEATH OF THE HONORABLE SIR LITTLETON ERNEST GROOM,
K.C.M.G., K.C., M.P.
Hr. LYON’S (Wilmot —Prime Minis-
ter). —by leave —When honorable mem-
bers of this House on the 15th October
last recorded their regret at the death of
the honorable member for Kennedy (Mr
Riordan) they little thought that within
so short a period as has since elapsed
they would be called upon to perform a
similar sad duty in the case of another
fellow member. We are met this after-
noon to express our very deep regret at
the death of Sir Littleton Groom, the
honorable member for Darling Downs.
Sir Littleton Ernest Groom, K.C.M.G.,
E.C., M.A., LL.M., was elected to the
House of Representatives for Darling
Downs, Queensland, on the 14th Septem-
ber, 1901, vice the Honorable W. H.
Groom deceased, and was re-elected at
the general elections in 1903, 1906, 1910,
1913, 1914, 1917, 1919, 1922, 1925 and
1928 (unopposed).
The deceased gentleman was a member
of the Royal Commission on the Bonuses
for Manufactures Bill, 1903, the Select
Committee on Electoral Act administra-
tion, 1904, and the Royal Commission on
the Navigation Bill, 1904-6. He was
Minister for Home Affairs from July
1905, to October, 1906; Attorney-
General from October, 1906, to Novem-
ber, 1908; Minister for External Affairs
from June, 1909, to April, 1910; Minia-
ter for Trade and Customs from June,
1913, to September, 1914; Honorary Min-
ister from February to November, 1917;
Vice-President of the Executive Coun-
cil from November, 1917, to March,
1918; Minister for Works and Railways
from March, 1918, to December, 1921;
Acting Attorney-General from April,'
1918, to August, 1919, and Attorney-
General from December, 1921, to Decem-
ber, 1925—when he resigned the port-
folio. He was also Minister for Trade
and Customs, and Minister for Health
from the 26th May to the 13th June,
1924. He was Senior Delegate for the
Commonwealth at the League of Nations
in 1924, and Chairman of the First Com-
mittee of the Fifth Assembly. The
honour of being made a Knight Comman-
der of Saint Michael and Saint George
was conferred on him in January, 1924.
He was Speaker of the House of Repre-
sentatives from the 13th January, 1926,
to the expiration of the eleventh Parlia-
ment, but was defeated at the general
elections of 1929, securing re-election at
the general elections of 1931 and 1934.
He was Chairman of the Bankruptcy
Legislation Committee, 1932-1936.
The death of Sir Littleton Groom, Mr.
Speaker, removes from among us still
another of that already small band of
pioneers, who played a part in the estab-
lishment of the Commonwealth and,
some of them, an important pari
in the Parliament created by the
federation. His life was an eminently
3


•
*
■
.
'
■
■
-axsptoVi oJ .0 - . - m&0


unselfish one; unselfish, because he
assuredly would have advanced to
a very high estate in private life
had he devoted his exceptional talents and
ability to his own service rather than to
the service of his fellow citizens of this
Commonwealth. In latter years he took
perhaps a less considerable part than dis-
tinguished his earlier activities in the
hurly-burly of politics. He had come
to occupy somewhat the position of an
Elder Statesman whose advice was valu-
able because it was based on such a long
and varied experience. But even in
those latter times he was always ready
to make valuable contributions to
debates on important questions in
this House. One of the most
poignant features of his passing
is related to his most recent activities.
As the outline of his record indicates,
he was keenly interested in bankruptcy
legislation; and in going through his
papers, Lady Groom found that he
had carefully prepared, the whole of the
matter that he needed to enable him to
participate actively in the discussion
of projected legislation on the subject
—a clear indication of his continued
assiduity and interest in the work of this
House to the very close of his career.
In earlier times he took a very active
part in the politics of this country. His
ministerial record extended over a period
of twenty years, and terminated in 1925.
As I have shown, he held numerous port-
folios ; and in discharging the duties
associated with them he gave evidence
of very great ability. His fine legal
brain has left its imprint upon the
statutes of this country. He was never
a servile follower of governments or par-
ties, never merely a political party-hack.
He brought a deep conscientiousness to
bear upon the various matters that had
tc be dealt with by himself and the Par-
liament generally. I am perfectly sure
that he made no statement in this House
without having prepared it well. His
work was characterized by a broad
national outlook; he definitely and deter-
minedly avoided anything in the nature
of parochialism.
The vision of a great Australian
nation he kept prominently in mind
throughout the whole of his political
career—this he shared with the founders
of this Great Australian Commonwealth
—yet to the consideration of individual
propositions he could bring to bear
a spirit of detachment and imparti-
ality. He preferred always the longer
to the shorter view.
In his private life he was deeply
and practically religious, and it can
assuredly be said of him that he
was a Christian gentleman. Although he
was a devoted and loyal son of his own
church, yet at the same time in his rela-
tions with and in his general attitude
towards the members of other faiths, he
was tolerant, generous and charitable. I
have not the slightest doubt that he
entertained no unkind thoughts of his
political opponents. Even when, on one
occasion, in the heat of political con-
troversy, he severed an old political
allegiance, he never stooped to
personal vituperation or bitterness.
In the domestic sphere, his life
was so happily circumstanced that he
set a shining example to all. The happi-
ness and love that permeated his family
circle will make harder to bear the sepa-
ration caused, by his death. Our
deepest sympathy will go out to Lady
Groom and her daughter in the great
sorrow that has come upon them, and
that sympathy will also be felt by the
whole of the Australian people.
4


-
.
O' 'jij
,
■


Sir Littleton Groom loved Aus-
tralia, and helped in a materia]
degree to shape its destiny. He
loved this national capital, Can-
berra, and both the Commonwealth and
its capital have derived great benefit
from the services which he rendered to
them. His remains will rest in the
national capital in the churchyard of
St. John’s which itself was very near
to his heart. Had he been given the
choice, I am sure that he would not have
chosen otherwise. Australia has lost a
fine Australian. I move—
This this House expresses its profound
regret at the death of the Honorable Sir
Littleton Ernest Groom, K.C.M.G., K.C.,
member for Darling Downs, and a former
Commonwealth Minister of State and Speaker
of the House of Representatives, places on
record its appreciation of his outstanding pub
lie services to Australia, and tenders to hi»
widow and daughter its deep sympathy in
their bereavement.
Mr. CURTIN (Premantle). With
feelings akin to emotion, and deeply
regretting the passing of a very great,
a very distinguished and a very gracious
Australian, I second the motion that has
been moved by the right honorable the
Prime Minister (Mr. Lyons).
Sir Littleton Groom belongs to the his-
tory of this federation and this Parlia-
ment. His father before him was a mem-
ber of it, and father and son shared
the unique distinction of having been
members of the first Commonwealth
Parliament. Sir Littleton Groom
became the member for Darling Downs
as the result of the regretted death of his
father, and he undoubtedly inherited that
deep sense of the importance of public
service which marked the career of his
parent who, as far back as 1862, entered
the Parliament of Queensland and con-
tinued to be a member of it until the
foundation of this Commonwealth. It
is a curious and yet not altogether extra-
ordinary fact that the father and the son
should each have lived to preside over a
parliament, the father having been a
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of
Queensland, and the son, Sir Littleton
Groom, a Speaker of this House. Sir
Littleton Groom’s father had the honour
of moving the motion for the adoption of
the Address-in-Peply on the first occasion
that such a motion was moved in
the Commonwealth Parliament. I
have no doubt that, with such
an example before him, Sir Littleton
Groom strove —how successfully we know
—to comport himself in a way which
would maintain the great family tradition,
and, at the same time, in his own work,
enable him also to play a great and con-
spicuous part in the service of his coun-
try.
The Opposition desire to associate
themselves in all earnestness with the ex-
pressions of regret which the Prime Min-
ister has voiced. Ho honorable member
on this side of the House has other than
the most human sense of kinship with
Lady Groom in this time of her sorrow.
We never heard Sir Littleton Groom
utter a bitter word in controversy in sup-
port of his own case, or in opposition to
anything my colleagues or I might have
said from time to time. On those privi-
leged occasions when we were admitted to
his private conversation I never heard,
and I do not think that any honorable
member ever heard, Sir Littleton Groom
say an unkind word about a fellow mem-
ber. He was, indeed, a gentle man, full
of kindly consideration, animated by a
sense of virtue, a believer in the good be-
cause it was good, and an upholder of
those institutions and principles which he
felt were indispensable to the welfare of
5


■


Australia. Personally, I regret that a
man who belonged so much to the histori-
cal side of federation should have passed
from us, hut we can be proud, indeed,
that Australia is capable of contribut-
ing to this Parliament men of such high
qualities, and with such a noble concep-
tion of public duty. We express to Lady
Groom and to her daughter our deepest
sympathy in the irreparable loss they
have sustained, and we hope that, in days
to come, there will he some comfort for
them in the knowledge that they have
been part of the life of a great son of a
great country.
Mr. HUGHES (North Sydney—Minis
ter for Repatriation and Minister for
Health). —I support the motion, and
desire to associate myself with the Prime
Minister (Mr. Lyons) and the Leader of
the Opposition (Mr. Curtin) in express
ing deep regret at the death of Sir Little-
ton Groom, and in extending to his sor
rowing widow and family most sincere
and heartfelt sympathy in their sad
bereavement.
Death has been of late very busy
amongst us; these last few weeks it has
laid its icy fingers on two of our mem-
bers, both of whom were respected and
held in high regard by us all. Death is
no respecter of persons, nor, indeed, of
parties; and they who were in life
divided by social and political differences,
lie now united in death.
Sir Littleton Groom, whose death we
mourn to-day, was my friend. I knew
him well, and I speak of him here as 1
knew him in public and private life. He
was an upright and honorable man, “ a
very perfect gentle knight ”, a man with-
out guile, who never stooped to intrigue,
nor attempted to deceive; and he was the
very soul of honour and of truth. A
devout Christian, for him religion was
something more than a creed; it
was a way of life, and with firm
unfaltering tread he walked the narrow
way, guided in all that he did in
public or private by those eternal truths
to which Christianity owes its abound-
ing vitality, and through which it
makes its universal appeal. Upon these
he patterned his life, devoting it to public
service and the welfare of his fellow men.
He went about doing good. And this he
did; not in fits and starts, as do men who
seek to make atonement by occasional
good deeds, for many ill-deeds done; but
as steadily as the beat of his own
generous heart, for the desire to do good
to others was woven into the fabric of
bis daily life. His last thoughts were for
others. On the day before he died, when
1 sat at his bedside, he talked very little
about himself, although he had been, and
still was, suffering greatly, but spoke at
length about the widow of a former mem-
ber of this House, who was in sad need of
help.
He was indeed a man upon whose tomb
should he inscribed “ Here lies one who
loved his fellow men ”, for of all his fine
qualities this one stands out, and most
fitly epitomizes his character.
He never spoke ill of others; in all the
years I knew him I never heard him,
either in public speech or private conver-
sation, say an unkind word of anybody.
His manner, friendly and open, invited
men to seek his advice and aid, and none
who came to him went empty away. His
temper was equable, his disposition mild.
1 never saw him angry. Amidst the most
exciting scenes in this chamber he pre-
served an unruffled calm. Claiming full
freedom of speech for himself, he con-
ceded the same right to those who differed
from him. In debate he was courteous
and conciliatory; he sought to persuade,
to convert by argument. He never
6


'■
.
; , J -*i: ' V■' :
■


descended to personalities, nor sought to
put an opponent to confusion by ridicule,
or overwhelm him hy vituperation.
He made no enemies, for his speech and
manner disarmed enmity. In public and
private his life was exemplary; but he
was no Pharisee, smugly exulting in
his own righteousness and condemn-
ing men’s morals or conduct. He was
a very human, kind and tolerant
man. In politics he was forbearing and
tolerant, always ready to listen to the
views of other men, and on minor points
anxious to find a via media, but I have
never known a man who stood more stead-
fast on great principles. Upon these he
dared at all times to risk all. Throughout
his career he showed a quiet but steady
courage that nothing could shake, and
this was proved when he chose a course
that he knew gravely imperilled both his
tenure of the highest office this Parlia-
ment can bestow on any of its members
and his seat in this chamber.
Sir Littleton Groom first came into
Parliament upon the death of his father,
who, after a distinguished career in the
State Legislature of Queensland, had been
chosen as one of the original members
of this chamber. In the very earliest
days of his parliamentary life we were
thrown closely together, and as time
passed, acquaintance ripened into a
friendship which the years strengthened.
Although for many years we were in
different parties, we found ourselves in
the early days of federation sitting side
by side in the divisions on those great
measures that laid deeply and well the
foundations on which the superstructure
of Commonwealth legislation rests to-day.
Sir Littleton Groom was a democrat,
and from his adherence to the principles
of democracy he never wavered, even
when his party turned from them. The
first Labour Government in this country
owed its accession to office to the support
of a hand of Liberal democrats amongst
whom he, whose death we mourn to-day,
was one of the most stalwart, and the most
steadfast.
In these days there is much talk of
parties of the right, and parties of the
left. Our dear dead friend and colleague
belonged to neither, but walked with even
tread in the middle of the road. But
always he stood boldly for the rights and
privileges of the great masses of the
people. In all the years we have sat
together in this Parliament I have never
known him to cast a vote for reaction, or
against true democratic principles. Many
times when, at the insistent summons of
the division hell, I stood hy the door of
the chamber uncertain how parties had
aligned themselves, I have looked along
the crowded benches, and, seeing my
friend, have seated myself beside him,
assured that where he was, I might fitly
be.
He had had a distinguished academic
career. He was a deep student, a sound
lawyer, and an acknowledged authority
on constitutional law. He was a man of
fine intellect, clear vision, ripe judg-
ment, a capable administrator, and
was possessed of unwearying industry.
For 35 years he filled a leading
place in the political life of the
Commonwealth. He held many high
and responsible positions, and discharged
the duties of all with distinction.
For many years it was my privilege to
be associated with him in the government
of the Commonwealth. During the
greatest crisis in its history he was my
colleague, one of my most trusted and
valued advisers. A more loyal colleague,
or more helpful adviser, no man ever had.
7


.
I;"-:- ' . • ■


He was a great parliamentarian; no silent in death. That figure, so familiar,
man had a more profound knowledge of
the rules of debate than he, and he
brought to the discussion of every
measure before this chamber, the fruits
of wide reading and careful study. He
was in the direct line of descent from
those distinguished men to whom had
been entrusted the affairs of the Common-
wealth during its early years. He had
been the follower of Barton, the colleague
of Heakin and Forrest, and a fellow-
member of Reid, Kingston, Lyne, Turner,
Braddon, and many others of whose very
names the great majority of honorable
members have never heard. He had
inherited the great traditions which they
had so steadfastly upheld, and had
acquired from them, and in the same
school, that mastery of the art of
dialectics that lent to his lightest con-
tributions to debate, distinction and dig-
nity. To one who, like myself, had
known, and for long years had been —
although not of their party—a fellow-
member of these great men, Sir Littleton’s
speeches made a deep appeal, and con-
jured up visions of a vanished past with
which he was indeed the last remaining
link. When he took part in discussions
on matters of major importance, his dig-
nified bearing, his measured periods, his
orderly marshalling of facts, his argu-
ments logical and convincing awoke in
me vivid memories dulled by the fleeting
years. And sometimes as I listened to
his voice, time seemed to turn back, and
the shadowy figures of those long since
gone from amongst us again sat in their
accustomed places.
But the crystal has been shattered, the
wizard has laid down his wand, the last
of the old Liberals, the follower of Bar-
ton, of Deakin, and the rest, has gone.
That voice that bridged the years is
quiet, unassuming, full of human kind-
ness, upon whom our eyes have rested so
long, has joined the shades. My friend,
the friend of all of us, has gone, and we
shall see him no more!
He has gone, leaving us sad and sor-
rowful, and his widow desolate and for-
lorn, mourning her irreparable loss.
Mr. EORDE (Capricornia).—l deeply
deplore the passing of Sir Littleton
Groom. He was a good living man with
true Christian ideals and was a fine
example to the manhood of Australia. He
was a great student and a tireless worker.
He had a wide knowledge of constitu-
tion law and parliamentary practice, and
an extensive acquaintance with the world’s
best literature. A man of culture and
learning, he appreciated to the fullest
degree the works of our Australian poets
and prose writers. It could be truly said
that his name was a household word
throughout Australia, but particularly
throughout Queensland. He belonged to
a family widely renowned for its great
public service to the Australian com-
munity over a period of 75 years. For
three-quarters of a century the
people of Darling Downs have had the
unique privilege of voting for a member
of the Groom family in State and
Federal politics. There are not many
instances in Australian history of poli-
tical service being hereditary, but the
Groom family provides one such. The
late Mr. William Henry Groom, the
father of Sir Littleton Groom, was
elected first mayor of Toowoomba in
1860, and he became the member for
Toowoomba in the first Parliament of
Queensland in 1863 and represented the
constituency without a break until he was
elected to the first House of Representa-
tives in 1901. He died a few months
8


;;i ‘ 1 -i: -> ■ '■
•
.
•
.
.
'
■
oox w&i


afterwards and was succeeded by bis
illustrious son, then Mr. Littleton Groom.
The father represented the Toowoomba
electorate for 40 years in the State Par-
liament and the son represented the Too-
woomba district in the Commonwealth
Parliament for 35 years. That is a
record of which any family might reason-
ably feel proud.
The work of Sir Littleton Groom
was not limited to politics, for he
took a leading part in the synods
of the Anglican Church and in many
educational and progressive movements
in his own city and throughout Aus-
tralia. He was broad and tolerant in
his outlook, dignified and courteous in
his manner, and wide and charitable in
his human sympathies. To him the
honour of parliament was in the nature
of a personal possession. The Common-
wealth Parliament can ill afford to lose
men with such vast experience, great
learning and high ideals as those of Sir
Littleton Groom. On many occasions
he indicated to us how views could be
stated forcibly but without giving per-
sonal offence to any one. The very high
standing which he enjoyed in the public
life of Australia will be a source of
inspiration to every generation and an
indication to us of what a public man
•hould be. Although he has gone from
among us, his memory will be cherished
by all who knew him. Let us hope that
rising generations of Australians will be
greatly improved in mind and body by
endeavouring to emulate the great public
service which he gave to his country. Ho
greater tribute could be paid to the
honour, integrity and fairness of any
statesman or politician.
Speaking as a representative of Queens-
land, I wish to say that it was always a
pleasure to work with Sir Littleton
Groom in matters that transcended the
realm of party politics. In political
campaigns I always found him to be
fair and honorable to his opponents. I
deeply sympathize with his widow and
daughter for they have lost a devoted hus-
band and father. Lady Groom had shared
with her husband the triumphs of his
political life and was always a great con-
solation to him in any temporary defeat.
It will, I hope, be some consolation to her
now to realize that her sorrow is shared
by thousands of people throughout Aus-
tralia who appreciated her husband as
a great Australian who had given many
years of unselfish public service to this
country during his distinguished and
honorable public career.
Dr. EARLE PAGE (Cowper—Minis-
ter for Commerce). —I associate my
colleagues of the Country party and
myself with the resolution of
sympathy moved by the Prime Minister
(Mr. Lyons) on the passing of a great,
lovable and gentle Australian. I was
privileged to know Sir Littleton Groom
as a colleague in this chamber, and was
associated with him in the same Cabinet.
1 also had the honour to sit under him
while he was the presiding officer of this
House. In all these capacities I found
him to be unfailingly wise, courteous,
kind and considerate. It is probable
that he occupied more political offices
and held more portfolios than anj
other member of the Federal Parliament.
He acted always according to his con-
science, and was of such a disposition as
never wittingly to do harm to any one.
He had an immense store of political
knowledge and experience, upon which ha
was always ready to draw for the benefit
of his less experienced fellow members.
By reason of the fact that he had been
associated with the Commonwealth
9


■
- •


Parliament in what might he called the
formative period of its legislative work,
he was always able to outline motives
that lay behind various legislative enact-
ments of earlier days. In fact, he was
probably better equipped to do this than
any other honorable member. He was
privileged to bear a family name which
carried long traditions of public service.
It must be unique in the political historj
of Australia for members of the same
family to have represented the same
constituency for about three-quarters of
a century. He was fortunate in that he
had a helpmeet who, by her grace,
dignity and courtesy, endeared herself to
all who knew her, and this made Sir
Littleton’s own political path easier.
It is appropriate that he should be
buried in the national capital, very
near to the national Parliament
House, for he did a great deal to assist
in the development of the capital.
Almost his last speech in this chamber
indicated his intense desire that the
capital should grow and develop to its
proper destiny.
Mr. FRAHCIS (Moreton). —It is with
deep stress of spirit that I rise to support
the motion moved by the Prime Minister
(Mr. Lyons). The late Sir Littleton
Groom was a very sincere friend of mine,
and in the early years of my member-
ship of this Parliament he was an in-
valuable colleague to me. The electorate
which I have the honour to represent
adjoins the electorate of Darling Downs,
and on many occasions I had the
privilege of campaigning with him in
his own electorate and also in mine, and
was able to see how very truly his con-
stituents loved him. As has been said
already, the name of Groom is a house-
hold word throughout Queensland, and
in the electorate of Darling Downs all
sections of the people loved and admired
Sir Littleton Groom. He lived a life
of great public service from his very
earliest days. As soon as he was able
to do so, be took an active part in public
affairs, and ever since has been associated
with public life, at first in Queensland
and subsequently in the Commonwealth,
particularly as a member of this Parlia-
ment. It may be said of him that he
gave his whole life to the service of the
nation, and I am sure that the nation is
definitely better for it. He was a great
Australian, and stood definitely for every
effort to increase the prestige of the
national Parliament and to develop a
true spirit in relation to the national
capital. When I paid my first visit to the
national capital in 1923, I was accom-
panied by Sir Littleton Groom. I was
amazed, then, at his enthusiasm for the
capital and at the immense wealth of
his information about it, and I know that
even since that time his love for Canberra
deepened. As the right honorable mem-
ber for Cowper (Dr. Earle Page) said a
moment ago, the purpose of almost the
last speech Sir Littleton Groom delivered
in this chamber was to urge the develop-
ment and expansion of the national
capital according to the plan originally
made. Sir Littleton Groom was a man
of great culture, marked ability, sound
judgment and true courage and deter-
mination. He was also a man of remark-
able industry. Invariably he was cour-
teous and kindly in his disposition, which
made him such a valuable friend. He
was a fine Christian gentleman who was
respected and admired by every section
of the community. His memory
will always he associated with the
development of the federation and
the establishment of the national capital,
as the name of his father will always be
10


■
,
-
■


associated with the development of
Queensland. I convey my very sincere
sympathy to Lady Groom and her
daughter in their very sad bereavement.
Mr. HUTCHINSON (Indi).—The
vacant seat beside me is witness of a
presence that will never again grace our
councils —of a voice that will never again
be heard in this chamber. Sir Littleton
Groom will be sorely missed from this
House. He always endeavoured to place
our debates upon a high plane and to
maintain a truly deliberative atmo-
sphere. He had a very high regard
for this democratic institution, for
its traditions and procedure, and having
such a high regard, devolved upon him-
self the task of ever raising its prestige.
It can be said, I think with every truth,
that if every honorable member in this
chamber shaped his conduct along the
lines of the late honorable member, this
Parliament would stand very much
higher in the regard of the public thau
it does to-day. His long association with
Parliament, the many high offices he held,
and his great learning, made his contri-
butions to our debates of great interest
and value to all parties. As a man, his
many attributes were apparent. He was
first of all a kindly man —I never heard
him speak harshly of any of his fellov
men —his whole attitude was one of
friendliness and of desire to help, while
never pressing advice. To sit next
to him in this chamber, as I have done
during the life of this Parliament, was an
education. He had a high public spirit,
and was pleased to do, as indeed he did
do, everything that lay in his power t<>
advance the best interests of the people
of this nation, and in that service he laid
down his life. It is fitting that his
remains should lie in this—the capital
city of Australia. One of the founders
of Canberra, he always took a
most lively interest in Canberra’s
affairs, and was most spirited in
defending this city against adverse
criticism. The future of Canberra will,
in many ways, be a memorial to the men
who fashioned it. Let us, who follow
after, make that memorial a worthy one
I know that nothing that I can say can
alleviate the grief of his wife and rela-
tives. I can only hope that the memory
of one who lived uprightly and honestly,
who spent his life in the cause of the
nation and of his fellows, on whom many
honours were deservedly bestowed, and
whose name will go down for ever in the
history of this country, and the sym-
pathy of his many friends will atone in
some small measure for their irreparable
loss.
Mr. MENZIES (Kooyong —Attorney-
General). —I do not desire to stale by
repetition any of the tributes so eloquently
paid this afternoon to the memory of the
late Sir Littleton Groom; but I do feel
that I should specifically associate myself
with what has been said about one of
my most distinguished predecessors in the
office of Attorney-General. Reference
has been made to the attributes of the
late Sir Littleton Groom, his legal
scholarship, his wide knowledge of the
Constitution, his ripe experience, and his
generosity of mind; and I likewise can
speak of them, because, as a newcomer
to this Parliament and as one of his suc-
cessors in the Attorney-Generalship, I was
the beneficiary of all those attributes.
Nobody could have behaved with greater
kindness and greater consideration; no-
body could have displayed greater readi-
ness to place at the disposal, not only of
myself, but also of the whole Parliament,
the great resources that he had of charac-
ter, knowledge and experience. He struck
11


■
,


one who came recently into this Parlia-
ment as an old-fashioned man; even his
speech had about it something of the old-
fashioned flavour of an earlier parliamen-
tary time, and yet accompanying that
rare, elusive quality, was a most modern
interest in every problem with which
this Parliament had to deal. All his
actions, as we have been reminded, were
directed by a singularly lofty character
and a well-informed mind, and by the
highest principles. He was, as the
Prime Minister (Mr. Lyons) has pointed
out, in the best sense of the sometimes
overworked expression, a Christian
gentleman, living in the closest com-
munion with his charming and gracious
wife. No words, I believe, can better
sum up his service to Australia than the
words of Edmund Burke that he
“ brought the dispositions that are lovely
in private life into the service and con-
duct of the commonwealth ”,
Question resolved in the affirmative,
honorable members standing in their
places.
Motion (by Mr. Lyons) agreed to —
That Mr. Speaker be requested to transmit
to Lady Groom the foregoing resolution,
together with a copy of the speeches delivered
thereon.
12


. ■


®ljr Parliament of the (Enmmmuuealth of Australia
CANBERRA.
THE SENATE.
EXTRACT
TBOH THK
JOURNALS OF THE SENATE, No. 81.
DATED TUESDAY, 10TH NOVEMBER, 1936.
5. Death of the Honorable Sir Littleton Groom. —The Minister for External
Affairs (Senator Sir George Pearce), by leave, informed the Senate of the
death of Sir Littleton Groom, Member of the House of Representatives for
the Division of Darling Downs—and moved—
That this Senate expresses its profound regret at the death of the
Honorable Sir Littleton Groom, K.C.M.G., K.C., Member for Darling
Downs, and a former Commonwealth Minister of State and Speaker of the
House of Representatives, places on record its appreciation of his outstanding
public services to Australia, and tenders to his widow and daughter its deep
sympathy in their bereavement.
And the motion having been seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Senator
Collings) and supported by the Leader of the Country Party (Senator
Hardy)—
And all Senators present having risen, in silence—
Question —passed unanimously.
BURFORD SAMPSON,
Deputy-President.
GEO. H. MONAHAN,
Clerh of the Senate.


.
-


SENATE.
Tuesday, 10 th November, 1936.
DEATH OF THE HONORABLE SIR LITTLETON ERNEST GROOM,
K.C.M.G., K.C., M.P
Senator Sir GEORGE PEARCE (West-
ern Australia —Minister for External
Affairs).— by leave —It is with pro-
found regret that I inform honor-
able senators of the death of
Sir Littleton Groom in Canberra, on
Friday last, the 6th November. Born
in Toowoomba 69 years ago, he
received his early education in that town.
Passing on to the University of Mel-
bourne, he crowned his brilliant scholas-
tic career by attaining the degrees of
Master of Arts and Master of Laws,
Later he was admitted to the Bar.
His association with this Parliament
began in 1901 when, on the death of his
revered father, the late W. H. Groom,
he was elected as member for Darling
Downs. He represented that constitu-
ency, with one intermission, for a period
of 33 years. During much of that
time, he was a Minister of State;
his service as a Commonwealth Minister
was somewhat striking for the diversity
of the portfolios he held at one time or
another. He was, in turn, Minister for
Home Affairs, Attorney-General, Minis-
ter for External Affairs, Minister for
Trade and Customs, Honorary Minister,
Vice-President of the Executive Council,
Minister for Works and Railways, and
Minister for Health. He was Attorney-
General and Minister for Trade and Cus-
toms on two separate occasions. In
1924, he was the senior delegate from the
Commonwealth to the Assembly
of the League of Nations, and
was chairman of the First Commit-
tee of the Fifth Assembly. Earlier in
that year, he was honoured by His
Majesty by being appointed as a Knight
Commander of the Most Distinguished
Order of Saint Michael and Saint
George. In 1926, he was chosen as
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
He retained that position until the
general elections in September, 1929.
During his occupancy of the Speaker-
ship, he worthily upheld the traditions of
that high office. As chairman of the
Bankruptcy Legislation Committee from
1932 to 1936, he gave of his best in the
praiseworthy task of endeavouring to im-
prove an important branch of the statute
law.
I have so far referred to his record
of public service as a member of this
Parliament and a member of successive
Cabinets. In other ways also, his record
of service is equally notable. His abid-
ing interest in, and appreciation of,
spiritual things is shown by his life-long
devotion to the ideals and practices of the
church of which he was such a faithful
member. His services to literature and
cultural movements in general will be
acknowledged by those whose privilege
and pleasure it was to be more intimately
associated with him in his moments of
leisure. He was a man splendidly


■
%■ Tl .0 >1


equipped by nature, endowed with a fine
intellect, actuated by the highest ideals
of service, and unsparing in his efforts
for the betterment of his country. A
great figure has passed from Australian
public life, and many will mourn hie
passing. Thoughts of his widow and
daughter come into our minds at this
time. We grieve with them and offer our
sympathy to console them in some
measure in their great sorrow. I move—
That this Senate expresses its profound
regret at the death of the Honorable Sir
Littleton Groom, K.C.M.G., K.C., Member for
Darling Downs, and a former Commonwealth
Minister of State and Speaker of the House
of Representatives, places on record its
appreciation of his outstanding public services
to Australia, and tenders to his widow and
daughter its deep sympathy in their bereave-
ment.
Senator COLUNGS (Queensland), —In
seconding this motion I feel that I am
honouring myself and my colleagues of
the Opposition when I join with the
right honorable the Leader of the
Senate (Senator Pearce) in paying a
last tribute of respect to the memory
of one who has been so suddenly removed
from our midst. I knew the late Sir
Littleton Groom from the time he entered
the public life of my own State. I also
knew his father, and can testify to the
splendid service of father and son
to Queensland and Australia generally.
If it can be said of any man
that he was a cultured gentleman, and
that he had a well-balanced nature,
that he earned the profound respect of
every one with whom he came in con-
tact, that can be truly said of Sir Little-
ton Groom. A man of wide education, a
lover of literature and of all that is best
and most beautiful in life, he was incap-
able of coarseness of either thought or
expression. As a speaker he was much
sought after. I heard him speak
on numerous occasions on widely
different subjects and always with
advantage to myself. He ennobled
and dignified the simple and the abstruse
alike. He will be long remembered by
all who love Canberra for his wonderful
work in connexion with this splendid
national capital. Before a spade was
turned, or a brick laid in the building
of this city, he visualized the Canberra
that now is, and what it will yet be. He
saw it as Australia’s contribution to our
national consciousness. He loved its
beauty and dignity as few others have
done, and in this connexion, as in others,
he has left us a legacy worth cherish-
ing. All our hearts go out in deepest
sympathy to Lady Groom, whose loss is
tragic and irreparable.
Senator HAUDY (Hew South Wales).
—lt is one of the sad duties of the leader
of a political party to express, on behalf
of members of his party, sorrow at the
passing of great men who have served
the Commonwealth, and always on such
occasions it is extremely difficult by
means of the spoken word to pay adequate
tribute to their memory. The Leader
of the Senate (Senator Pearce) and the
Leader of the Opposition (Senator
Gollings) expressed the thought of all
honorable senators when they said that
Sir Littleton Groom was a great Aus-
tralian, a man who followed the dictates
of his conscience, regardless of conse-
quences. Sir Littleton Groom had an
independence of thought which it was
most refreshing to find in a public man,
and his passing is a national loss. I
associate myself with the expressions of
sympathy with the widow and daughter
of the late honorable gentleman.
Question resolved in the affirmative,
honorable senators standing in their
places.
15


