

The Fundamentals
of Modernism in
Typography


THE FUNDAMENTALS
OF MODERNISM IN
TYPOGRAPHY




The Fundamentals
of Modernism in
Typography
DOUGLAS C. McMURTRIE
CHICAGO
EYNCOURT PRESS
1930


Two hundred and fifty copies
reprinted from Printers’ Ink
Monthly for January, 1930.


The Fundamentals
of Modernism in
Typography
One of the symptoms of our changing times is the new
typography. The innovations of the new manner are
startling even abhorrent to conservative eyes. Pro-
tests are made against the adoption in this country of
the new typographic style: it is foreign; it is ugly; it is
revolutionary; it overthrows centuries of progress in the
development of a sound typography.
Nevertheless the new style is here. It is not something
that can be dismissed as a passing fad with a condes-
cending wave of the hand, nor can it be abolished with
bitter criticism. When we recall the condescension or
the hostility of our parents and grandparents toward
the railroad and the automobile, we may decide that it
is the part of wisdom, or at least of good sense, to deal
with the new typography sanely, as a legitimate out-
growth of the times in which we live, and see what can
be done with it for the use and benefit of our own
generation.
For, after all, printing does not exist as an end in
itself. If it does not serve some need of man, it is noth-


ing. Printing always has reflected quite accurately the
spirit of its period, conforming itself to the needs of its
time. It is fairly safe to say that it always will. It would
be amazing, indeed, if in our own times, so wholly
different from even a quarter century ago, it did not
develop a typographical expression peculiar to itself.
Right now the problem is to understand this new
typography and to discover, if we can, its underlying
principles. In our approach to this problem we may
clear the ground by removing a few misapprehensions
and misconceptions which seem to have confused many
of the critics of the new style.
In the first place, the influence of the new typography
is felt most strongly in that branch of printing which
is related most closely to the activities of daily life. This
means, of course, advertising and all that we call “dis-
play” —all that printing which is addressed, so to speak,
to men in motion, whether at work or at play. The influ-
ence is felt much less in book and periodical printing,
in all that is addressed to thought and contemplation,
or to men at rest. Even in Germany, where the new style
in display is most extensively cultivated, book composi-
tion, except for a title page or a heading here and there,
is still relatively conservative. This, I believe, is deeply
significant. The life of action, in which our generation
differs most from its predecessors, is reflected in a new
typography. The life of thought, in which we are still
united with our past, finds printed expression in a form
which yields more slowly to innovation.
In the second place, it is necessary to bear in mind


that the new spirit now abroad in the world finds dif-
ferent expressions among different nationalities. The
German consciousness of it is expressed, of course, in a
German manner. It so happens that most of the speci-
mens which are shown us of the new typography come
from Europe, and principally from Germany, but it is
a mistake to assume that to be “modern” typographic-
ally we must also become German. There is more to
typographic modernism than rectangular blocks of sans-
serif types and the liberal use of heavy rules. The es-
sence of the new typography lies deeper than the man-
nerisms of its German or Russian interpretations.
Furthermore, modernism is not achieved by imita-
tion, nor can a sound style be formed by self - willed
efforts to be “different.” Much of the condemnation of
the new typography is directed against unintelligent
imitations made with no discernment of the construct-
ive principles in the models that were copied, or against
the weird results of efforts to be “creative.” Such shafts
do not hit the substance of modernism.
Finally, we should remember that the ways of the
pioneer and discoverer are always marked with the
monuments of failure. The achievements of typographic
modernism are to be studied and judged by its successes,
and not by the evidences of its experimental efforts. For-
tunately, the modern style is still largely experimental.
There is still opportunity for the typographer who has
the will and the intelligence to contribute to the forrtia-
tion of a style that will best express the spirit of his own
time and people.


If we bear in mind, then, that a thoroughly modern
typography does not necessarily have to be in the Ger-
man manner; that the weird and bizarre is not ipso
facto modern because its creator says it is; that the ty-
pographer cannot lift himself into a command of the
modern style by pulling at his own bootstraps, no mat-
ter what typographical contortions result from his ef-
forts; if, in other words, we free ourselves from the
misconceptions which have been the cause of most of
the uproar against the modern typography, we may be
able to discover some principles in the new style which
will reward our study.
It is obvious, of course, that the new typography does
not recognize the authority of tradition. This declara-
tion of independence brings about a desirable emanci-
pation. Tradition, instead of a master, becomes a rather
helpful fellow worker. It is only to be expected that
some hailed the deposing of tradition as an invitation
to lawlessness, and typographical anarchists have made
the most of their opportunity, but the propaganda of
these anarchists has had little effect on the world of
printing, and for a quite obvious reason: the propagan-
dists overlooked the fact that the primary purpose of
printing is to be read, and no one but the anarchists
themselves —and a few students of interesting abnor-
malities —would take the trouble to puzzle out what
the lawless printing was all about.
Except for this “lunatic fringe,” which Roosevelt once
warned us to expect with every new movement, the
deposing of tradition as the sole guide to typographic


righteousness was followed by the setting up of a new
government, but with conferred insteady of arbitrary
power. The law now is that “form follows function.”
This is the law which now controls the modern move-
ment in the applied arts. The function to be served, and
not some tradition of manufacture or construction, is to
be the only valid determinant of the form, whether it
be of a skyscraper or of a teapot.
Form follows function. The application of this law to
typography means simply that the inherent purpose of
printing alone determines the form it shall take. In
every case in which this law has been observed, no mat-
ter how unusual the construction, we are compelled to
recognize an effective piece of printing. On the other
hand, most of the inept failures of aspirants to printing
in the modern style may be laid to disregarding this law
—to disregarding the essential function of type.
Now the primary function of type is to be read —to
convey in printed words a message to the comprehen-
sion of readers. If it is an advertising message that is to
be conveyed, it is especially necessary to set it forth in
type in such a manner that it may be read with the
greatest possible ease. Fitting form to function, we see
that clarity of form is the first essential of modern ty-
pography. Any form which does not first of all express
the function of legibility is not in the true spirit of
modern typography, no matter how striking or “mod-
ernistic” it may be otherwise. On this requirement of
the utmost in legibility, all the authorities on the new
typography are agreed.


Thus the use of extravagant and exaggerated and
overemphasized type forms is not essential to modern-
ism in typography. This principle of clarity disposes of
the pretensions of much current printing which resorts
to extraordinary types with the boast of being “modern.”
If a word or two in such types serves the purpose of
attracting attention, then their use is legitimate, for they
are functional. Otherwise, their use is contrary to the
spirit of modernism, for they are difficult to read.
Nor does modernism restrict us, as some seem to be-
lieve, to the use of sans-serif types exclusively for all
purposes. It is true that there is an active and determined
cult of the sans-serif in Germany. This may be regarded,
perhaps, as an expression of the post-war psychology of
that nation. Typographically, Germany seems to have
gone on a diet of “iron rations” in its thoroughgoing
efforts toward the utmost in efficiency. Needless to say,
the expression of the modern spirit does not demand
that we, too, adopt this mental attitude. The new sans-
serif types have much to commend them, and it is well
that we are learning to make good use of them, but we
can use other means to legibility and still be modern.
Next we observe, as a corollary of the proposition that
form follows function, that the modern manner permits
no preconceived notions as to layout. The modernist
does not first design an “attractive” layout, or adopt one
previously used for another composition, and then force
his type to fit this pattern. The arrangement must be
held fluid, elastic, until the most effective disposition of
the type masses has disclosed itself. The copy and its


purpose is completely in command, and the arrange-
ment is governed accordingly, without reference to any
other authority.
A quite definite requirement of the new typography
is that it shall be dynamic rather than static —in other
words, that it shall be expressive of motion rather than
of rest. This is in order that it shall be truly representa-
tive of its period and of the life about us. Perhaps the
most typical characteristic of present-day living is the
quick tempo at which it moves. The tempo of our ty-
pography should be in keeping. The balanced compo-
sitions suitable for the leisurely contemplation of an
earlier generation must give place to arrangements in
which the feeling of movement is pronounced, for we
of the present age must, so to speak, read as we run.
The typographic modernist, therefore, contends that
the symmetrical, or balanced, layout is an outworn form.
Because it is balanced, it is motionless, static. Motion
begins with a loss of balance. Hence the characteristic
form of the new typography is asymmetric. Its main
axis is purposely out of center, and its type masses are
disposed to the left and right of this axis, or of subordi-
nate axes. The center of gravity of the composition is,
so to speak, that of a man running. If the runner’s move-
ment is halted, he falls. If the type movement leads the
eye to a point of rest instead of instantly carrying it
onward until its intended course is run, the whole com-
position collapses.
To establish this “asymmetric balance” and to attain
a rhythm of purposeful movement —which is something


quite different from aimless movements of mere rest-
lessness—is one of the most difficult tasks facing the
modern typographer. Many who have aspired to com-
position in the new manner have learned from experi-
ence that it is not something to be worked out by rote
or by the mechanical copying of approved specimens.
Such efforts to create typography that moves have re-
sulted only in typography that staggers or flounders or
whirls or only jiggles, if indeed it has any motion at all.
It is necessary to bear in mind, for one thing, that
typographic devices which impede movement are al-
ways to be avoided. Hence it is contradictory to set up
the motion of asymmetry and then put on the brakes by
the use of a border. Instead of a border as a means of
holding his type masses together, the modern typogra-
pher depends upon his well-defined vertical axis. When
type masses are intelligently placed with respect to the
axis, they form an integral composition rather than an
agglomeration of unrelated elements.
This method of emphasizing by an axis the vertical
dimension of the composition, so as to make it contrast
effectively with the horizontal direction of the type
lines, is a device peculiar to the new typography. The
vertical axis is not to be expressed with anything so obvi-
ous as a rule—which would impede motion. It is much
more effectively suggested by the ending of one type
mass and the beginning of another.
The emphasis which the new typography lays on the
asymmetric layout, with its necessary relations between
the vertical and horizontal dimensions, also imposes an-


other problem upon the typographer. He must deal with
white space as a component factor in his composition.
This requirement is quite different from the treatment
of white space in composition in the old or traditional
manner, in which the white was used more or less as a
background against which the printed matter stood, or
was interspersed to give the type “room to breathe.”
In the new typography, white space is a structural fac-
tor, to be disposed with reference to the axis with as
much care as the black masses, so as to get the full
effectiveness of the axial structure.
To state this problem in another way, the new typog-
raphy regards the composition as lying in a plane with
two dimensions, width and length, and no part of the
area of that plane may be overlooked. It will be noted
at once, in good specimens of modern work, that the
white areas are conspicuous and bear a significant rela-
tion to the printed masses. The outlines of the whites
as well as their total surface are controlled. Sometimes
this control is effected by increasing the black area. The
use of black rectangles, squares, triangles, and heavy
black rules, which is characteristic of the work of some
of the German typographers, is not to be ascribed to an
unreasoning fancy for these forms. They are used rather
in a serious attempt to attain a proper proportion of
black to white in given areas. The proper disposition
of white space in the asymmetric layout is by no means
a simple matter. There is plenty of opportunity here
for study.
The prescription that all elements of a type composi-


tion shall be functional—that is, shall have definite pur-
poses — serves to exclude ornamentation in the usual
sense from typography in the modern manner. Nothing
that attracts attention to itself is permitted. Ornament
introduced for its own sake or to make the layout
“pretty” serves no purpose functional to the purpose of
the whole composition. Ornament is legitimate only if
it is organic to the copy in that it promotes comprehen-
sion of the message. Even here it is allowed only if of
extremely simple character, so that its presence will not
excite interest in itself.
With ornament is also excluded all rules with orna-
mental feeling in their design, such as the Bodoni rule
and the thick-thin or Scotch rule, as well as rules with
any suggestion of scrolls, curves or other conventional-
ized patterns. The rule, in fact, is never used in modern
composition except as a structural element. The rule is
used to set up motion in the composition and to control
its direction, or to break up and control areas, the boun-
daries of these areas being regarded as functional. As a
matter of fact, the possibilities latent in this simple typo-
graphic device, once it is released from service as orna-
mentation mainly, are by no means fully known and
understood. Here again, there is opportunity for further
experiment.
The ban against ornament extends to types of orna-
mental character, even though otherwise legible. Type
does not exist to be “attractive,” according to the mod-
ernists, or to be “spirited,” or to vaunt any other man-
nerisms; it exists simply and solely to be read. The


tendency among the more advanced modernists is in
the direction of types as elementary as possible in form
and design. Hence the abolition of the serifs those
traces of the medieval pen in letter forms in many of
the “modern” type faces. Extremists even demand a still
further simplification, to an irreducible minimum of
form that will still remain recognizable as the letters of
our alphabet. The theory underlying these tendencies
is that type should in no way attract attention to itself
and correspondingly detract from attention to the mes-
sage it conveys.
There is need for caution here, I believe, lest the lure
of simplification be followed too far. To require that our
types be modest and self-effacing does not necessarily
mean that they be utterly expressionless. The demands
of the extremists are like a demand that every spoken
address be uttered in an uninflected monotone, in order
that attention may be riveted on the words themselves,
unaffected by any contribution from the speaker’s per-
sonality. It is not essential to modernism that our printed
words be thus cold and austere.
Furthermore, the type forms which attract least atten-
tion to themselves are those with which, from long
association, we are most familiar. By their very strange-
ness to our unaccustomed eyes, the highly simplified
type forms now tend to draw some attention to them-
selves, particularly if there is any considerable quantity
of the text. They therefore need to be used with some
forethought and with full understanding of the kind of
text matter to which they are appropriate.


On the other hand, we still have types that are highly
legible, graceful and full of character, yet wholly mod-
est and self-effacing, entirely appropriate even in thor-
oughly modern composition. Other types are still to be
designed, perhaps for book as well as for advertising
uses, which shall be full of modern feeling for simpli-
city and frank directness, yet not so geometrical as to
be expressionless.
The exclusion of ornament from modern composition
does not mean the exclusion of illustration. Quite the
contrary, for illustration is peculiarly suitable as rein-
forcement to the work of type in “telling the story.”
The modernist requires, however, that the illustration
be functional—not merely ornamental—and that it be
conceived in the spirit of the type structure with which
it is to be used. It may be functional in establishing an
axis on which the composition is built, in imparting
the feeling of motion, in relieving the type of some of
the burden of description, or in various other ways. It
must be designed to co-operate with its type ally. In
modern composition, the typographer and the illustra-
tor must work together, each with an understanding
of the other’s technique, and both with the purpose of
the whole composition clearly in mind.
With the foregoing principles, which have been bare-
ly outlined, modern typography requires us to depend
on ourselves alone for the working out of our typo-
graphic problems, without looking to the solutions or
practices of another age, and seeking authority for our
decisions solely in the message given us to interpret. We


are to do our creative work in the spirit of the present
time, making full use of its technical facilities, putting as
well as we may its spirit into the messages we transmit
to readers through the medium of type.
We are not to suppose that the new typography of
“movement” dictates one and only one correct solution
for a given typographic problem and thus sets limita-
tions on originality in creation. It has been the com-
plaint of some critics of the modern style that the speci-
mens “all look alike” and that there is no individuality
in them. This rather hasty judgment reflects little credit
on the discernment of those who make it. There is, of
course, a generic similarity in all modern typography,
but this similarity goes no deeper than the fact that all
modern work is distinctly different from all work in the
traditional manner. The fact is that with the same copy,
the same types, and the same fundamental principles of
construction, twenty different typographers will produce
twenty widely varying finished jobs, each with its own
individualty clearly stamped upon it. In fact, one typog-
rapher can produce several satisfactory, yet different,
solutions to one problem.
One danger of the modern style is that it may appear
self-conscious and labored. Greater familiarity with it
will bring greater ease. At its best, modern typography
should present a natural and spontaneous expression.
