

MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN




PREFACE.
7 'HE manuscript which occupies the following
pages was originally intended as a rough
draft, to be revised at leisure; but this has been
found impossible from the state of health of the
writer. It is most necessary at the outset to fore-
warn those dear friends for whose emertainmenl
the following narrative has been undertaken, that,
through partial blindness and the most distressing
symptoms about the head —in many portions, to the
detriment of the little “i,” dots have either been
altogether omitted or ruthlessly scattered; and
“ crossings,’’ intended for the “t,” have so missed
their mark as to inflict grievous wounds on un-
guarded neighbours, who might have expected
more friendly treatment. The perusal must, there-
fore, be accepted as a labour and an exercise of
patience.
Note. —It is requested that the manuscript
may not pass out of the hands of those for whom
it has been, prepared prior to my decease.
S. O.




MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN
AORN 7th June, 1801, at Fulham-on-
j. Thames, about four miles distant from
the West end of London. So eminently
WC
v ' blessed in my parentage, that if pa-
rental influence alone could have accomplished it,
I could scarcely have been otherwise than godly
from my youth up ; but I had to be purged of the
wickedness of my nature, and sealed by the Holy
Ghost, before God could regard me with compla-
cency or my fellow-men with respeft.
About 1806-7, sent to an excellent preparatory
school, conduced by three maiden ladies—any-


thing but “ three blind mice”—named Batsford,
supported by a batchelor gentleman named
Cleesby —lame, and of apopleftic build, but highly
qualified as a writing master and arithmetician.
I well remember the square brick building, with its
school-room and play-ground, just outside the
churchyard and opposite the Vicarage. My pro-
gress at this school was satisfactory, and the mis-
chievous element only developed so far as to in-
volve an occasional seat in the hall after school
hours instead of being allowed to go straight home.
In due course, the writing master managed to cop-
perplate his sentiments on the still impressible
affeftions of Miss Ann, and henceforth the firm was
represented by Mr. and Mrs. Cleesby and the two
Misses Batsford, whose maiden state might safely
be regarded as already stereotyped.
I do not know why, but so it happened, that I
was then placed at a second ladies’ school, at which
my attendance was suddenly cut short by the up-
setting of a form full of young ladies. Thence I


was transferred to a school of considerable note at
Putney, on the Surrey side of the Thames, under
the head mastership of a Mr., afterwards Dr., ,
the severity of whose discipline would have ren-
dered the upsetting of any sort of “ forms” a most
hazardous enterprise. Here I attained a maximum
of “ marks,” only they were not by any means of a
sort to conduce to personal comfort, or to indicate
prospective literary eminence. Here, too, I served
an apprenticeship as a “ fag.” The elder boy to
whose special service I was assigned was named
Glass. For the exemplification of the moral cha-
racteristics, and the measure of the requirements of
my master, it may suffice to mention that on a
cold winter night, when my youthful blood, aided
by blankets and rug, was gradually and softly pro-
curing for me a heaven of physical comfort, and
the darkness of night, as I delusively thought, was
protecting me from hostile interference, the voice
of my fair-complexioned, curly-headed tyrant sum-
moned me from the warmth of my nest to an out-
B 2
3
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


side place over his body, with nothing but .my
scant calico between my skin and “zero.”
In the year 1814, when I was thirteen years
of age, I had a desire for the sea service, and my
family being on terras of intimacy withFAdmiral
Gambler—known as the “ Psalm-singing Admiral”
—I was appointed to an 18-gun brig, commanded
by a Captain Pasco, cruising on the coast of Ire-
land. My elder brother Henry (afterwards a cler-
gyman in the Church of England, and now living
in the neighbourhood of London, in his 77th year)
went, in charge of me to Portsmouth, where I was
placed on board the guard or receiving ship, pre-
paratory to my being forwarded to the brig to
which I had been appointed. When the oppor-
tunity offered, I was sent across the Irish Channel
to the Cove of Cork, where, again, I was placed
on board a guard or receiving ship, amidst tag,
rag, and bobtail, so hustled and plundered, that I
had to go on shore to friends to whose care I had
been commended; and having been thus repeatedly


thwarted in my efforts to reach my appointed
second home—the brig, I began to turn back my
thoughts to the blessed home of my infancy and
early boyhood, and having communicated with my
father, who had no desire that I should follow the
sea service, the Port Admiral at Cork was in-
strufled to send me home. Of my passage across
the Channel I will only record the mistake, as it
proved, of giving my young friend, the Captain’s
son, a shilling, which procured for myself a rebuke
and for the poor lad a severe chastisement —alto-
gether, a very bad shilling’s worth. If I mistake not,
I lent certain moneys to honourable gentlemen on
board, but were I to record the recovery of the
same, there could be no doubt as to mistake.
Finally, under this head, I experienced such a
visitation of sea sickness, as, avoiding the horrible
details, so completely turned me inside out, that I
could be said to represent nothing more lively or
profitable than an empty barrel.
After passing a few weeks pleasantly among
5
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


friends in the neighbourhood of Cork, I was for-
warded by the Port Admiral to Plymouth, on my
way home. At this port I was accompanied on
shore by a naval officer, who proposed to treat me
to the theatre and supper. Accordingly, when the
play was over, he ordered supper at an adjoining
hotel, the piece\ de resistance being cold goose,
which, alas! w y as only to be paid for by the cold
shoulder, for no sooner had we finished than my
“big brother” beckoned me outside, and giving the
word of command, “ Bolt!” went off at full speed,
leaving no other course open to me but to follow
the disreputable lead, as, having been invited to a
“ treat,” I was quite unprepared for the conse-
quences of standing my ground. Such were not'_a
few of the naval officers of that time, although it
is needless to urge that there has always been a
fair proportion of those who have been, and are, an
honour to the service.
On the way to London, the coach put up at
an hotel at Exeter, conduced by the parents of the


celebrated Miss Foote. These people took such a
fancy to me that they entertained me at their own
table, and made no charge, all of which -was as
convenient in the interests of my finances as plea-
sant to my feelings. Then, fancy me sitting oppo-
site the famed aftress, face to face, in the coach all
the way to London, giving me credit for an ad-
vanced appreciation of the attraflions of the sex;
and say whether, always barring the scandal of the
goose, my homeward course must not have been
more pleasurable than my experiences in the guard
ships, and my physical disturbance in the Irish
Channel.
Arrived at home, I soon learned that the family
were all away on a visit, I think, to friends in
Cornwall. I was not slow at apprehending my
lordship of the domain, as the only, though
diminutive, member of the family. To my mind,
occupation and membership were the prominent
features of the case. It is of the very nature of
smallness to be overlooked, especially when the


consideration of it is inconvenient. When night
came, therefore, a powerful sense of drowsiness in-
clined me for jbed, and, wholly innocent of ap-
proaching disaster, I slept as a healthy youth will
who exchanges a hammock for and
sackcloth for clean sheets. Alas! that in the nur-
sery of my infancy —for it was there,J amidst the
exuberance of boyish rejoicing in the fancied se-
curity of a home that had hitherto been a castle to
its inmates, a Philistine was speedily to be upon
me, and discomfiture and humiliation were to over-
whelm me! But so it was to be. On the morning
after my arrival, even before 1 was fully aroused from
my slumbers, the authoritative voice of a clerical
Tartar whom my father, thinking no evil, had re-
quested to see me to school when I returned home,
demanded that with all speed I should prepare to
accompany him ; and as there was no help for it, I
obeyed, resolving, however, there should be, at
least, a small diversion on the road. Accordingly,
when about half-way to the school I bolted, not
8
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


this time following the lead, but rather with hot
haste pursued by the parish constable, ignomini-
ously collared, and handed over to the magistrate,
a fine old fellow, Mr. Roy, then almost in his
dotage, but ably supported by his two sons, the
Rev. William and Robert Roy, College-educated
men, and highly competent teachers. Before pro-
ceeding further in my narrative, I will take my
final leave of the Rev. Chief Constable, Mr. Colter,
and just say that he was of the type more likely to
crush a boy’s spirits than to win his aifeftions.
From the ready appearance and prompt aftion of
the constable —so exceptional an incident all over
the world —it would seem as though the rev. gen-
tleman had placarded my expended arrival, for Ful-
ham was in arms on my appearance, and only had
peace when I was in safe custody.
Of my experience at Roy’s School my record
will be short. Of the nominal head, I may men-
tion that he wore a brown wig, seldom removed
the whole of the shaving soap from his face, and
c
9
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


objefted to the word “ thing” in our short essays,
in the supposed examination of which he occupied
a portion of the school hours, being unwilling, as
a man of spirit, to “give in.” Of the sons, I
will only add to the testimony already recorded
that they had a habit of what, in school language,
is styled “cobbing,” which means bringing the
knuckle sharply.down on the pupil’s skull; and as
this praftice naturally enough resulted in “ bob-
bing” on the part of the boys, the whole proceed-
ing must be declared out of accord with the gravity
of chiefly classical studies with which the parties
were engaged, to say nothing of the danger of this
mode or punishment, excepting only in the case of
boys protected by very thick skulls.:
At this school (Roy’s, Fulham), I well re-
member two sturdy lads, some three or four years
older than myself, named Ross—l think John and
James —whom I have ever fancied I recognised in
the subsequent famous Arctic explorers. Should
memoirs of these great men appear at some future


day, the accuracy or otherwise of my surmise may
be tested.
Depending on my recolleftion, there seems to
have been some little mystery about my removal
from Roy’s School, which may possibly have ad-
mitted of solution by the fad of my having been
employed by an elder boy in conveying small
billet-doux to one of my sisters. [However morti-
fying to that gentleman, it should be told that the
correspondence was quite one-sided.] Whatever
the cause, I was sent beyond walking distance, to
Cheam School, Surrey, under the head mastership
of the most loveable, while at the same time one
of the most efficient, of my teachers. Cheam
School was the last I attended in England. My
career extended over a period of about eighteen
months, ending Christmas, 1816. I gained some
prizes : one for English Composition, the mention
of which may possibly elicit from the reader the
remark, “ What a sad falling-off there must have
been!” My success was probably attributable
c 2


mainly to the religious sentiments enunciated,
gathered, sinner as I was, from the life and teach-
ing of that honoured father, before whose abilities
I must ever shrink into nothingness. The point I
have mentioned would have great weight with my
revered master. I was great at cricket, football,
and all other athletic sports. I have already al-
luded to the goodness of my dear master. Punish-
ment, like unto that of the God he revered, was his
“ strange work.” I do not remember to have met
with any account of similar treatment on the part
of other teachers. If he intended to administer
corporal punishment—that is, if nothing short of
this would meet the requirements of the case —he
would say, “Boy, meet me in my study,” at a
certain time named. His plan was manifestly
based on principle : he would not aft on the im-
pulse of the moment while under the influence of
full anger. The effeft on the culprit, though
intended, doubtless, to be salutary, was very trying
—it involved mentally a rod in pickle during the
entire interval between serving the notice and the


moment appointed for taking the rod out of pickle,
and using it for the purpose for which it had been
pickled. [ N.B . —The terms “ rod in pickle ” must
be accepted figuratively, as the instrument used was
a cane.] My visits to the study on this errand
were not more than sufficient for a thorough under-
standing of the process.
As already stated, I took my departure from
Cheam at Christmas, 1816, my father having de-
termined to send me to a school at Bremen, in
Germany, with the view to preparing me for com-
mercial employment. Before starting for Bremen,
however, I will just present a few notes on an
Oddity, a Parish Beadle, my Nurse, an Adventure,
and Two'Half-crowns.
My Oddity is one Bottomly, the master of
what was in those days styled the Parish Charity
School. This person used to complain to my father
that the boys did not mind him more than the fifth
wheel of a coach, which, of course, implied either
very lax discipline on his part, or utterly uncon


trollable wildness on the part of the boys. I appre-
hend he would attribute failure to the latter cause ;
for, again, if his intelligence were at all called in
question, he would say “ Sir, I have an under-
standing.” My hard-worked father, who dearly
loved a little fun, would relate these things with
great glee, rubbing his hands together the while.
The Beadle was a fine old fellow, one of an
interesting group of people in humble life who
assembled in our parlour on Sabbath winter even-
ings for religious service, the service in the church
being held in the afternoon in the winter time.
He used to work in our garden during the week
time, and although I am sorry to say I plagued
him sadly, and oft took unfair advantage of him
when in a stooping position, planting, he never,
under utmost provocation, allowed himself a stronger
expletive than “Dash my buttons!” This much
was necessary as a safety valve, and under extreme
pressure.
Nurse Eddowes was a kind-hearted, faithful


creature, much attached to the family. Nurse was
subjeft to “ spizzums.” I fear that this ailment, if
not induced by my wildness, may, to a certain ex-
tent, have been aggravated thereby. On one occa-
sion, when the elder members of the family were
out, Nurse had strift charge to look after Master
Stephen : no joke ! Accordingly, she watched me
with cat-like keenness, and seeing me about to
make a start, got hold of me by my jacket behind;
but this only resulted in my sliding her in grand
style along the oilcloth in the hall, and then out
like a shot. Notwithstanding all this, had Nurse
and the Beadle been called on to sit in judgment
upon me, they were such good-natured souls that I
need not have feared their verdidt.
My Adventure was as follows. Walking at
midwinter in the neighbourhood of an open space
called Parson’s Green, where there was a pond
thickly coated with ice, I observed the tools of
some workmen who were employed in collefting
ice for the pastrycooks of London, who had for the


moment retired to a short distance for refreshment.
My hands being idle, either the Evil One or the
evil within me, suggested the trial of my skill with
one of the picks. The first stroke convifted me of
mischief ; the point of the pick was damaged, and
instantly apprehending damage to my person at
the hands of the injured person, I started off
towards home, about one mile distant. Not a
moment too soon, for the avenger was at my heels:
and then ensued a race worth witnessing by chance
lookers on, between a light weight, with light
boots, fleeing for his life or skin, and an over-
weighted giant, straining for revenge. “Go it,
little one!” “Go it, clodhopper!” The light
weight wins, and shooting through the familiar
doorway,finds safety in his home—City of Refuge!
As for the Half-crowns, were it not for their
extreme scarcity in my financial experiences of
those days —my range rarely extending beyond
coppers —this part of my story might well be dis-
pensed with; but having promised, I will perform.


One of the young gentlemen whom, amongst
others, my father was preparing for college, offered
to place one of the silver coins indicated in a sum-
mer-house at a considerable distance from the
house, which I was to retain if, after midnight or
nightfall, I had the courage to obtain possession of
it. I say nothing about my courage, but I assert
that I pocketed the coin. As an instance of the
great license which these young gentlemen allowed
themselves, without enquiring whether or not I
allowed it, in their intercourse with me, I may
mention that, my name being Stephen, they per-
sisted from first to last in styling me “ Bob!” Cop-
pers, however, covered all. My second half-crown
was earned very easily at my Uncle Smith’s, in the
City, a visitor offering the prize as before if I could
say where was when the candle was put
out. Avoiding the diversion intended in the adverb
underlined, I answered, “ In the dark,” and again
won.
Before starting for Germany, I may mention
D


an amusing incident which occurred in this neigh-
bourhood, carrying me back in thoughts to my
nursery days. The late Mr. Hone, so well-known
in this City, in the course of conversation professed
acquaintance, not only with my native place, but
with my father, and amongst other remarks en-
quired if I knew Kite, the tailor, of Fulham.
“Know Kite, the tailor?”'! replied. “Verily.
Why he was the very man who made the only suit
of clothes of my whole life-time worth mentioning
—a sky blue jacket, white waistcoat and trousers,
which, after I had been tubbed according to rule
on Saturday night, were placed on a chair beside
me, and caused my infant spirit to long more than
ever for the Sabbath morn.” Mr. Hone then, with
ludicrous exactness, described gait and manner,
elbows to sides, and toes severely turned outwards.
When residing in Patrick-street, I made acquaint-
ance with a daughter-in-law of this same Kite,
whose remains I afterwards attended to the grave,
the funeral conducted by the late Rev. F. Miller.


In the winter of 1816-17, when in my six-
teenth year, I embarked at Yarmouth for Cux-
haven, en route for Bremen, then one of the three
free cities of Germany. Before landing at Cux-
haven, the wind having, to my detriment and in
the interest of hatters, blown my only hat into the
sea, my first objeft was to refit thus far, which was
easily accomplished, as I was necessitated to buy,
and there was no lack of readiness on the part of
my hatter to sell. There being no temptation to
delay at the port of debarkation, I took my place
in the diligence—perversely so called; and as
surely as the driver had a whip for his horses, had
I a scourge for him in the simple but persistent
question, the German of which, unhappily for him,
I had already mastered —“ How far to the next
town ?” With this question I plied him to the full
extent of my daring and of his endurance. Arrived
at my destination, I soon got introduced to my
master and his lady, Mr. and Mrs. Dryer; and I
am not at all certain that he took t’ne trouble to go
in search of me, and in the absence of certain in-
D 2


formation on this point, judging from my experience
on further acquaintance, the probability is that he
left me to look after myself.
I omitted to mention in the proper place that
on the passage from Yarmouth to Cuxhaven I had
as my only fellow-passenger a German Count,
between whom and myself there was at least one
point of agreement —a prompt and very decided
rejection of red herring as an article of diet, which
manifested itself on the occasion of the first morn-
ing meal, by the Count, with great disgust, thrusting
a specimen of this strong-scented and highly-fla-
voured dish toward my quarter, and my forwarding
it with speed and vigour elsewhere. However vul-
gar and unjustifiable the prejudice of the British
mind in those days, Counts and dis-counts were
all but convertible.
To return, however, to Herr Dryer. I regret
that my recollections do not permit me to report
favourably: he possessed neither manliness nor self-
control, and paid but small attention to personal


cleanliness. From the first he appeared to mani-
fest uneasiness on two points—my ability to deleft
his shortcomings in his English teaching, his
attempts at speaking, more particularly, being lu-
dicrously Germanised; and further, as in his pre-
sence I gave ample evidence of considerable strength
and agility by the lifting of heavy weights, leaping
with the pole, &c., what would be the probable re-
sult of hostile encounter in the event of serious dis-
agreement. In regard to the first, there was no
cause for alarm. If he went the length of breaking
the King’s (Geo III.) English on the wheel, it
was to me not only no personal offence, but rather
a source of amusement. As to the second, an
occasion presented itself of settling at once and for
ever, if not the question of our relative physical
strength, that which equally well answered the
purpose, the risk of personal assault by the master
on his pupil. The matter was brought to an issue
thus: —One morning, when, instead of being at
the breakfast table, I was still lingering at the


washstand, tumbler in hand, Herr Dryer, with all
the appearance of considerate attention, presented
himself, bearing with him a cup of coffee. Com-
pletely off my guard as to the atrocity about to be
committed, I offered to him a full and ingenuous
front, on which he, without saying a word, dashed
the coffee in my face, leaving the embrowning
liquid to saturate the entire front of my shirt and
person. Ading on the impulse of the moment,
still providing against injury to the person of my
assailant, I made the doorpost my mark, and just
as Herr Dryer, sneaking off without explanation or
apology, was passing through the doorway, I hurled
the tumbler with such accuracy and effed that the
scattered fragments must have tingled his ears.
Strange as it may appear, in so far as my memory
serves me, no remark was made on either side ; it
was all adion —very telling adion; nor was there
any after allusion to this remarkable “passage of
arms.” Henceforward there appeared to be a dis-
tind understanding that as forcible interference
with my person was, at the best, a perilous adven


ture, it was safest to be quiet. Coffee was prac-
tically admitted to be neither intended nor fitted
for external application, and was ever after ad-
ministered only after the orthodox fashion. There
were two of my praftices which subjefted me,
though without just cause, to a certain measure of
ridicule —my English pronunciation of Latin ac-
cording to my English teaching; and rising in the
stirrups in trotting a horse, the Germans sticking
close to the saddle, and praftice enabling them to
do this without “ loss of leather.”
During my stay at Bremen, I proposed to my-
self to ride about the surrounding country for a few
days for amusement, as one might do through any
part of Great Britain; but I had to learn by un-
pleasant experience the difference' between a coun-
try open to all throughout who know how to behave
themselves, and one with endless sub-divisions,
each having (at that date) its own peculiar laws
and regulations, bearing all the signs of being
specially designed to harass the foreigner. I


accordingly hired a horse and started, reaching
Oldenburgh, about thirty miles from Bremen, on
the first evening. On alighting at what appeared
to be the principal inn in the place, having handed
over my horse to the ostler, I walked into the
common room, when I was accosted by an officer
of police, and politely asked for my passport. Had
he demanded “ Your money or your life,” I could
scarcely have been more taken aback. I told the
simple truth —that I was placed at school at Bre-
men, was just riding about for amusement, intend-
ing to return to my residence in the course of a
few days, all of which would have been verified had
the authorities communicated with Herr Dryer, as
I requested; but being an Englishman I was sup-
posed to have money, and must be fleeced. Ac-
cordingly, I was placed under arrest, taken before
the magistrates day after day, until having declared
myself bankrupt, I was allowed to return to my
place of residence.
One other instance of the cupidity and sham
authority of petty German officials. When riding


within a few miles from my residence, the weather
being very hot, I left the road for the purpose of
finding water for my horse, quite unconscious of
the fad that I was being watched. On returning
again to the road, about half-a-dozen coarse-look-
ing men, one calling himself the Mayor of the
village, all armed with spade or pick, sprang
from a ditch, seized the bridle of my horse,
and on the ground of my having incurred a
penalty, threatened me with violence if I refused
to pay a certain sum named, I think about half-a-
sovereign; and fortunately, escape being impossi-
ble, I managed to satisfy their demand, as I should
otherwise have been detained, roughly handled,
and placed in their lock-up until I was able to
communicate with my master.
As, however, acquaintance with the German
language was the main objeft of my visit to Bre-
men, it is high time to give some account of my
progress in this respeft. Bremen is, or was,
divided into Old and New Town, separated by the
E


River Weser, crossed by a bridge. • My residence,
advantageously in regard to the speedy acquisition
of the language, was situated in the Old Town,
chiefly occupied by private residences, and little
resorted to by my countrymen, and it thus hap-
pened that I made no acquaintance with English
speaking people for about three months, by which
time I could, for all purposes of personal inter-
course, use the German with the same fluency as
my native tongue. This was of much consequence
to me, for about this time a gentleman named
Ramsbottom presented himself with a letter of in-
troduftion to me, which led me into English
society. Had this happened on my first arrival, it
would have resulted with me as with the generality
of my countrymen —the preference of my native
tongue, and the absence of the disposition for close
application to the study 'of the German would, to a
great extent, have frustrated the purpose of my
residence abroad.
As it will be surmised, my attainments were
by no means limited to the language. I was well


Germanised in regard to the use of pipe and cigar;
and while I think of it, the use of tobacco, indi-
reftly betrayed me after my return to England,
most unintentionally, as will be seen, into an aft
which, destined as I was at a later period to visit
Botany Bay at the King’s expense on His Majesty’s
service, might, and probably would, but for the
opportunity of placing the innocence of my inten-
tions beyond all question, have procured for me
the sort of conveyance called “ transportation” to
that destination at an earlier date, and under sadly
different guardianship. The fads were, that being
in a tobacconist’s shop in St.. Martin’s Lane, for
the purchase, probably, of tobacco, I had been
examining some Scotch snuff-boxes of noted and
very beautiful manufadure, without any intention
to buy, when placing what I had purchased in my
pocket, I accidentally added one of the snuff-boxes.
Happily, before I had gone many steps from the
shop, putting my hand in my pocket and feeling
something hard, I discovered my mistake, and
wheeling sharp round, returned at full speed, and
£ 2
27
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


placed the article on the counter. But what if 'the
shopman had observed my aft, followed me, and
handed me over to a constable, as he would have
been justified in doing! No explanation or apology
could have served, for any gentleman swindler
could have beaten me at that. I ever have, and
ever shall, thank God for that deliverance.
While residing with Herr Dryer, there was a
fellow-boarder, Wilhelm Schroder, a very pleasant
companion, with whom I passed much of our
leisure time, especially at chess, at which we both
attained considerable skill, and occupied ourselves
night by night in winter to a late hour. As in the
case of our master, so in this pupil I regret to re-
port unfavourably as to due appreciation of soap
and water or clean linen.
There was one sore disappointment which I
experienced during my residence in Germany. A
German acquaintance having proposed a pedestrian
tour through Switzerland, I obtained the consent
of my father, subjeft, however, to the approval of
28
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


one Herr Tidemen, a merchant, who, to my dis-
may, declined all responsibility, probably on the
ground of his want of confidence in the proposed
companionship as a sufficient guarantee for profit-
able results.
I should have related in its proper place that
on my way from Cuxhaven to Bremen I made
some stay at Hamburg, with very kind friends,
merchants, named Van der Truisser, to whom I
had introductions. At a later period I renewed my
intimacy with these friends, whose private residence
was at Altona, in the immediate neighbourhood of
Hamburg. I made the journey on this occasion
on foot: I cannot get at the distance just now.
My friends had a pleasant summer retreat a few
miles distant from Altona, to which they resorted
occasionally for refreshment and recreation, taking
me with them. By way of extended variety, for I
think my narrative has throughout been rather
strongly marked by that quality, I will relate an
incident of one of the visits to the retreat. As
29
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


usual, on the look out for adventure, I descried a
monster turkey cock puffing, strutting, and by his
arrogance challenging every live thing around him.
It fell in with my humour to accept the challenge,
and tying a knot in my handkerchief I approached
the giant of his race. Like unto a certain Goliath
of old, he despised alike my person and my weapon;
when, however, he came within reach, I brought
the knot to bear with such precision, vigour, and
persistency on his cranium as staggered his turkey-
ship, so that what with a sore head on his side and
a tired arm on mine, there came an opening for a
cessation of hostilities, without dishonour to either,
and doubtless acceptable to both.
In the autumn of-1818, with two other young
gentlemen, I embarked in a small Scotch craft for
England. It was not until we had weighed anchor
that we discovered there was no such thing as a
sleeping berth for any but the two who styled
themselves master and mate, but who, in fad,
committed the navigation almost entirely to some


competent English mariners who were “ working
their way,” no doubt by agreement, instead of pay-
ment. Had not the owners of the two sleeping
berths passed nearly the whole of the time occupied
by the passage in either sleeping or trying to sleep,
the amount of animal life in the bedding would of
itself have excluded from beneficial occupation any
but the Hardened ruffians who seemed to have made
a compaft with vermin. I did make one attempt,
but the result was to suggest the “ softest plank ”
in preference for the future. Landing at Falmouth,
after beefsteak and bottled porter I got on the box
of a coach just starting for London; but the absence
of all approach to refreshing sleep for ten days
while on passage, added to the comforting effeft of
the ample meal, had produced such overpowering
drowsiness as rendered any attempt to retain my
seat beside the coachman so dangerous, that, at his
request, I stowed myself away among the luggage,
and was for awhile oblivious alike of sorrow and of
joy—a condition which is, alas! too often the only
refuge of the stricken of this world.
31
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


The all but desperate state of my health, and
a regard to the patience of those who may still re-
tain sufficient interest in me, warns me to condense
what remains to be written.
In the autumn of the year 1819, when accom-
panying my father to Huntingdon, where he had to
attend a public meeting of the Bible Sdtiety, I
made the acquaintance of one who was to be
instrumental in procuring for me a start in life.
On leaving Huntingdon, en route for home, in post
chaise, my father ordered the post-boy to call at
the residence of Lady Olivia Sparrow, to whom he
was known as a public man. My father had no
other objeft in this visit than to pay his respefts to
a lady of high station who was interested in the
institution for the advancement of whose cause my
honoured father was satisfied to spend and be spent.
There was no intention on the part of my father to
remain, even for an hour; but although there was
at the time a royal party at the house, consisting of
the Duke of Gloucester, Lord Gosford, Mr. Wil-
32
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


berforce, Sir Willoughby Gordon (Quartermaster-
General), and others, it may be, specially invited
to meet the Duke, Lady Olivia was pleased to re-
gard my father as no unworthy guest on even such
an occasion, and insisted on his forming one of the
party, though this could not have happened in
accordance with etiquette without the sanction of
the Duke. What concerned me more particularly
in all this was, that it led to the Quartermaster-
General, Sir Willoughby Gordon, making my
father an offer to appoint me to a clerkship in his
office, and further, that for the moment, in regard
to physical enjoyment, I, together with the juvenile
portion of the party, for whom separate entertain-
ment was provided, was “ in clover,” having no
special interest in royalty, and having no recog-
nised duty towards it but to take off my hat in its
presence, and to cultivate a spirit of loyalty towards
it on all occasions and in every company.
I took my place in the Quartermaster-Gene-
ral’s office, at the Horse Guards, towards the close
p
33
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


of 1819 as a junior clerk. In the year 1820,
through my official position, I obtained a card of
admission to the coronation of George IV. But
for the help of a former pupil of my father, Mr.
Henry Porcher, merchant, who, by virtue of his
membership of the Yeomanry Cavalry, was entitled
to present himself in the uniform of that corps (no
one could obtain admission to Westminster Abbey,
where the ceremony of coronation was performed,
dressed otherwise than in some recognised uniform
or Court dress), and this Mr. Porcher happening to
be possessed of a Court dress, which he was kind
enough to make available for my service—l should
not have been present at the coronation otherwise,
for it would have taken several pounds to qualify
myself in regard to dress, &c. Fancy the broken-
down old man of 1873, quite satisfied with an ordi-
nary tweed coat, having, some fifty-three years ago,
figured at a coronation ceremony, in single-breasted
claret-coloured coat with steel buttons, embroidered
silk waistcoat reaching down to his hips, knee-
breeches, white silk stockings, buckled shoes, steel
34
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


scabbard swordat side, opera hat under arm, conveyed
to Westminster Abbey in his friend’s sedan chair;
and believe this same old man as he tells you of the
comfort he experienced when, after sitting for
twelve mortal hours (from four a.m. to four p.m.),
subject to a pressure which a love of sight-seeing
alone could render tolerable, and encased in gar-
ments forbidding all freedom of limb, he resumed
his customary garb and recovered elbow room.
I remained at the Horse Guards for about six
years, towards the latter part of which period my
health began to fail, and finally completely broke
down, so that toward the close of 1826 I was com-
pelled to retire from office. For about two years I
was unemployed, seeking the restoration of my
health, and during the interval I married Rachel
Fletcher, of Liverpool, making no mistake as to the
objedt of my affedtions, but very seriously forgetful
of ways and means, for which I have paid the usual
penalty. I take to myself the entire blame of this
imprudence, as she who became my wife would
F 2
35
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


have been quite willing to wait until proper provi-
sion was made for the expense consequent on such
an engagement. However, being in for it, I sought
employment, and as there was no hope at that time
of my enjoying in the atmosphere of London such
a state of health as would enable me to attend to
business, and the climate of Australia being favour-
ably reported on, I accepted an appointment in the
Commissariat of New South Wales, and embarking
at Gravesend with wife and infant, 10th November,
we reached Sydney and disembarked on 9th of
May, 1829, just six calendar months on board.
'As my residence in New South Wales em-
braced a period of a quarter of a century, within
two months, it would be impossible to give any-
thing like full details. During the first five years
my baggage was almost constantly on the road.
Leaving Sydney, Christmas, 1829, I visited in suc-
cession Liverpool, Emu Plains, and Bathurst. At
the last-named place, my attention was direfted to
sheep farming as, under good management, a safe


and highly profitable investment, and as I had no
hope of providing for my family out of any possible
savings from my Commissariat emoluments, I pur-
chased one hundred ewes, which I set eyes on once
for all, and then bid good-by to for ever. These I
placed under the care of a gentleman who had re-
tired from the Commissariat, and who was about to
occupy himself in cultivating this sort of property.
He might have done well for me and for himself,
but, like many others, he turned drunkard, and the
property went to ruin. I further put myself into
communication with a person of large property, with
whom I was intimate, whose name I will not men-
tion just because of his dishonourable treatment of
me. I proposed to purchase of him three hundred
ewes, at his own price; he took the highest market
price, and in return gave me sheep which proved to
be diseased. These were placed in charge of a
person of highly respeftable family, who also be-
came a drunkard. I had to pay for the bad lot by
instalments at my convenience, paying 10 per cent,
for the accommodation. The first remittance of


£2 5 not being acknowledged, I learned on enquiry
that it had never reached its intended destination,
the up-country postmaster being strongly suspended
of having broken open the letter and taken possession
of the contents. Thus an enterprise which might,
but for the dishonesty and drunkenness of those on
whom I had to depend, have placed me even in
affluence, as was the case with many, resulted in a
signal failure. I was privileged to meet my engage-
ments in full with those from whom I had pur-
chased, but I was completely foiled in my endeavour
to provide for my family.
From Bathurst I proceeded to what was then
the penal settlement of Moreton Bay, where I was
stationed from January, 1834, to July, 1839. To-
ward the close of the latter period I lost my dear
wife, and was left in widowhood with two sons and
two daughters, our first-born having been committed
to the deep on our journey from England.
Before coming to a close, I must return to
Parramatta, date 1831-2, and with profoundest


reverence and overflowing thankfulness record the
crowning mercy of my life —the regeneration of the
Holy Ghost: the impartation of a new heart and a
right spirit: the passing away, once and forever, of
old things, and the making all things new. The
preparation consisted of the early training of
“ Parents in the skies,” to which God’s Ploly Spirit
put the seal. There was nothing remarkable at the
time in regard to human instrumentality: Christ
laid hold of me, and I returned His grasp, which,
by God’s grace, amidst the most grievous short-
comings, and the most humiliating departures
from righteousness, I have hitherto maintained,
hoping and believing that by His grace and in His
strength I shall be found faithful even unto death.
On the return of my family to Sydney (Ofto-
ber, 1839), I took my place in the Pay Office,
where I was employed from the year 1841 to the
close of 1853, as Receiver and Paymaster. In the
meanwhile, I had been introduced to Rebecca
Crook, a daughter of that devoted and dauntless


missionary, the Rev. Pascoe Crook, in whom I
found a valuable partner, and my motherless
children by my first wife a faithful and devoted
stepmother. ,
In March, 1854, after a residence of nearly a
quarter of a century, I embarked with my family
for Hobart Town, where we landed 31st March.
In Hobart Town my Commissariat career
closed on the 10th Oftober, 1859, after having
been at the head of my department three and a
half years; the Home authorities having accorded
to me the honorary rank of Deputy Commissary-
General, as an expression (as recorded in their
correspondence) of their satisfaction with the
manner in which my duty had been discharged.
Of my Hobart Town career the record is with
those whose intimacy it has been my privilege to
engage; in their judgment of me, let them extend
to me a large-hearted charity. Of my two wives,
be it recorded of each and both, that they were
characterised in the highest degree by the qualities


essential to the formation of “helps-meet” for
man. If there has been aught amiss between me
and either of them, let that be placed to my
account. Of my fellow-men, let me record with
warmest gratitude that none can have sustained
less injury at their hands; none can have been
more deeply indebted; none have been placed
under larger obligations to their kindly interests
and their generous help in my every time of need,
especially in Sydney and Hobart Town—ever, be
it remembered, as instruments in the hands of Him
who is the first great cause of every blessing.
G
41
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


ADDED AFTERWARDS.
Liverpool, N.S. Wales,
About 20 miles from Sydney,
. .
Liverpool, my Commissariat experience
ma y be said to have commenced in
earnest - was charged with the cus-
l*'
- tody of stores, and had to settle with
contraftors for the supply of gangs of convifts em-
ployed on the roads under the superintendence of
surveyors. My clerk, a native of the Isle of
France, a clever fellow —too clever, indeed, having
regard ever to his own interests—was a convift, as
were the whole of the men under my orders, ex-
cepting, it may be, the storekeeper, who was pro-
bably either an expiree (one who had served his
sentence) or a retired soldier. Thus I found my-
self, without training for or experience of the dan-
gers and difficulties of the situation, charged with
highly responsible duties, beset by professed rogues


and thieves, resulting, as might reasonably have
been expected, in serious embarrassments to
myself and terrible disaster to the rogues.
Having made discovery of certain discre-
pancies in the accounts, which in the first
instance I attributed rather to clerical error than
dishonesty, I intimated to my clerk my intention
day by day to occupy myself in tracing these dis-
crepancies to their source; and in proportion to my
earnestness and persistence did he manifest ever
increasing uneasiness, at last disappearing from the
scene. Assured now that what I supposed to have
arisen through clerical error was, in fad, attri-
butable to fraud, and having little confidence in
the ordinary constabulary in such an emergency, I
procured at the hands of the local magistracy the
swearing in as a constable of probably as great a
rogue as the runaway clerk—one of the convifts
under my orders; and promising to recommend
him for a “ ticket of leave” —a great boon in those
days —if he succeeded in capturing the absconder,
I started him without delay. My convid special
G 2


constable understood the work cut out for him, and
the speediest and most effectual mode of accom-
plishing it. He proceeded direCt to Sydney, pre-
sented himself at an inn called the “ Rose,” and
asked for Maas (the clerk), and paying no atten-
tion to the reply that he was not there, walked
straight through the house into a back parlour and
collared his man. On the matter being investi-
gated, it turned out that my clerk and the Super-
intendent of Convicts’ clerk had been employed
during the nights in the Superintendent’s office, for
a longtime past, in forging documents in imitation
of the genuine ones, with all the signatures of the
various parties authorised to sign such documents,
the difference between the genuine and the forged
signatures being, in many instances, most difficult
of detection; and of these forged documents it was
my painful experience to pay away money to the
amount of about £6OO. There was scarcely a
doubt of the complicity of the Superintendent of
Convicts, as it would have been impossible for the
forgeries to b eeffeCted by candle-light in his office


without his knowledge. There was as little doubt
of the complicity of others : none, however, but the
two clerks were brought to trial; both were con-
victed of felony, and, to the deep disgrace of the
British law of those days, whatever the guilt of the
culprit, hanged on an open space of ground in the
locality where the offence had been committed.
The affair was in due course reported to the Home
authorities, who took a liberal view of the matter
in so far as I was concerned, only exhorting me to
greater caution in future.
Should what has already been narrated be
deemed insufficient evidence of the perilousness of
my position in regard to my clerical connexion,
what follows will probably suffice to remove any
doubt on that point. It having become known
that there was a vacancy in my office, a person,
the blandness of whose manners assuredly sup-
plied no clue, as will hereafter appear, to his real
character, presented himself as a candidate for the
vacant office. The name of this person was Knatch


bull, a step-brother of Sir Edward Knatchbull —
and verily, Sir Edward had good reason to con-
gratulate himself on the step that was between
them. The applicant for the clerkship had, in the
earlier part of his career, been in the Royal Navy,
and had even attained the rank of Captain, but was
dismissed the service, as reported, for tyranny. At
a later period he arrived in New South Wales as a
convift ; and what his course of life was to the bad
end will appear from his own words, addressed to
me when I, during his last moments, visited him
in the condemned cells in Sydney, where he lay
under sentence of death for murder: —“There is
not a point in my history which is not black with
crime.” The present Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Mr. Lowe, at that time practising as a barrister in
Sydney, was counsel for the defence, and was
sharply rebuked by the presiding Judge for the
plea set up —monomania. Knatchbull, when
called on by the Judge to say why judgment
should not be passed on him, paid so little regard
to the arguments of his counsel that he at once


took up high ground, and asked the Court whether
it was within the bounds of possibility that one who
had formerly been a Captain in the Royal Navy
could be guilty of the meanness of murdering a
poor woman who kept a small shop for the support
of herself and family, for the sake of the paltry
sum that might be in the till. Still this was pre-
cisely what he had done, as was proved on the com-
pletest evidence. He had been watched, unknown
to himself, was found in the shop with the toma-
hawk with which he had committed the murder,
the murdered woman being also found on the pre-
mises. A few individuals, Dr. Ross and myself
being of the number, engaged to pass the last hour
of Knatchbull’s life with him in his cell: the in-
tention was to hold a religious service suitable to
the occasion. No sooner had we assembled than
Knatchbull himself led off, and delivered a most
comprehensive prayer, in which he fully confessed
his guilt, commended the orphans to God’s care,
and himself to God’s mercy through the Re-
deemer.


I was stationed at Liverpool from Christmas,
1829, to April, 1831. The only event remaining
to be recorded is the birth of our dear daughter
Charlotte, our second born and eldest daughter,
6th January, 1831, married to Dr. Bannatine, an
officer of the medical staff of New South Wales,
December, 1851 —at present, arid for several years
past, a widow with two sons and three daughters.
Parramatta, from April, 1831, to July, 1832.
—I have elsewhere referred to what I have em-
phatically acknowledged as the crowning mercy of
my life—my conversion to God, by the enlighten-
ing, regenerating power of the Holy Ghost; and I
well remember the blessed settled peace and fear-
lessness of every kind of danger which I was
privileged in a very marked manner to enjoy,
especially for several years after this event, and
which I have been enabled, amidst deplorable
backslidings and shortcomings, by the help of
God’s grace, to maintain to the present hour. At
Parramatta I made the acquaintance of the Rev.
Samuel Marsden, who was the officiating clergy-
4 8
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


man of the place, and so well known as among
the first, if not the first, missionary to New Zea-
land. He was known to and appreciated by my
father, and I remember the faft of his portrait
placed in my father’s study. He amused me on
one occasion by relating what had happened to
him at the house at which I was then living. He
was making a call on a clergyman, a very irritable
person, arid not being able to leave his horse so
as to knock at the door, he threw small stones
against the door to attraft attention, when out
rushed the irate master of the house, pistol in
hand! It is well not to mention this gentleman’s
name, but I remember that he had to be removed
from Moreton Bay, when a penal settlement, on
account of the commotion he created there. He
was one of the sort who would, no doubt, have
keenly contended for Apostolic succession in the
Church; still, pistols are not apostolic. During
the whole of my residence at Parramatta I was the
tenant of a very excellent old gentleman, formerly
a missionary, a Mr. Eyre. As the premises were
H
49
MEMOIR OF STEPHEN OWEN.


unpleasantly exposed to neighbours, it was agreed
between us that a dividing fence should be erefled,
the cost of which was to be shared between us
equally. Having been, as I suspended, backed up
to it by his wife, he took me by surprise one morning
after the work had been completed by expressing
in very angry tones his displeasure at a fancied loss
of a few inches of his ground through the ereftion
of the fence, quoting Scripture as to the- “ removal
of ancient landmarks,” &c. Personally, I had no
responsibility in the matter, and his earnestness and
the extremity of his gravity only added zest to my
amusement. We were none the worse friends for
this little matter. Referring to the fence, it may
be worth noting, as showing the different results of
opposite dispositions and consequent course of
aft ion, what occurred between the fence and my-
self in our occasional communication while he
was at work on the premises. He said, “ I
suppose, Sir, you have heard of Sam Terry?”
(once a convift, eventually a very wealthy
man). I replied, “Of course.” “Well,” he said,


“ you know that he is a very rich man, and you see
that I, though a very old man, am obliged to work
hard for my living and by way of explanation he
added, “ When we worked together as convifts —
(probably as ticket of leave-holders) —we were at
times paid in rum instead of money : I drank my
rum, but Sam sold his, and got a high price for it,
saved, and became wealthy.”
In 1831 I was ordered to Emu Plains, in the
district of Penrith, where the late Sir John Jamieson
had large property, residing at his place called
“ Regentville.” I remember that while at Emu
Plains the then Governor, Sir Richard Bourke,
visited the district, and took up his residence at Sir
John Jamieson’s. I received a message from His
Excellency to the effeft that he desired my pre-
sence : I accordingly resorted to “ Regentville.” It
happened, however, that His Excellency was away
when I arrived, and, in faft, never made his appear-
ance during my stay; so one of his suite proposed
a game of billiards. It was fortunate.: that I won,
h 2


for it was the only sort of business that resulted
from my visit, and, moreover, the only occasion of
my playing billiards since leaving England.
As I am now engaged in supplying some de-
tails of my journeyings in New South Wales, it
appears a suitable opportunity for mentioning the
Commissariat Transport, that is, the means of con-
veyance of baggage or goods. These, although
the roads they had to traverse were of the most
difficult and even dangerous sort, were admirable,
the drays being well adapted to the rough ground
over which they had to pass, and the horses, being
either imported from England or bred from such,
were, for the most part, admirable samples of Eng-
lish stock. This was no small advantage to those
who, like myself, were required frequently to trans-
port all their earthly possessions from one post to
another. It is with much pleasure that I note also
the faft that -while the property had to be committed
to the care of prisoners, often left entirely to the


exercise of their own will or dispositions, there
being no overseer placed over them on these occa-
sions, by a particular mode of treatment (too much
neglefted by some others in similar circumstances,
to their own almost certain damage), my goods
■were on every occasion delivered at the destination
in excellent order, and without an article missing.
My plan was to deal with them as my servants for
the time, without any reference whatever to their
condition of bondage to the Crown, and to aft on
the assumption that however hard-featured, however
hardened in sin by habit and praftice, there must
be a soft place at some depth, and I think I gene-
rally managed to reach it. I dealt with them as
those who, though they might be skin-hardened to
the lash, would still be found accessible to the
influences of kindly sympathy, and such attention
to their physical wants and comforts as the nature
of their employment on my account suggested. I
supplied them with tea, sugar, and tobacco for the


road, with the promise of a small pecuniary reward
on the safe delivery of my property. Whatever they
may have been to others, they were faithful to me.
After a residence of about six months at Emu
Plains, Christmas, 1832, I was ordered to
Bathurst, the roads between the two places
—a distance, I think, of forty miles—being
terrible in those days, some parts of the
way being formed on rock, shelving towards a
precipice. On arrival at Bathurst, I found that
there was no better accommodation for my family
(wife and Charlotte) than a thatched hut with two
apartments, each about 12ft. x 10ft., and a small
kitchen, in which our two prisoner servants had to
sleep. All our trunks had to be placed in the Com-
missariat Store, and only that which was required
for daily use in our hut. Happily, we became fast
friends with the clergyman (Rev. C. Keane) and
his amiable wife, where we were constant visitors.
We remained at Bathurst from January to Novem-
ber, 1833.


I now return to the period of our residence at
the penal settlement of Moreton Bay, January,
1834, to July, 1839. At the date of our arrival,
there were about 600 prisoners of the worst class,
but such was the admirable management of the
Commandant (Captain Climie, of the 17th Regi-
ment), that while the strictest discipline was main-
tained, all tyranny on the part of the overseers was
forbidden; the men were simply put on their good
behaviour, and dealt with accordingly. About 1837
w r e were visited by the Friends Backhouse and
Walker, who, besides availing themselves of the
opportunity of adding to their stores of information
in botany and natural history, also deeply interested
themselves in the moral w'ell-being of all on the
settlement.
While at Moreton Bay there occurred a very
distressing case of shipwreck, that of the Stirling
Castle , to the northward of the settlement, at a
point of the coast called Wide Bay. Those of the
ship’s company, including the master (Captain


Frazer) and his wife, who were enabled to cffeft a
landing were attacked by the natives, and all who
were captured, of whom were the Captain and his
wife, were reduced to a condition of bondage, and
employed as hewers of wood and carriers of water.
The Captain was speared to death in sight of his
wife. On some of the wrecked men reaching
Brisbane, and reporting that the Captain and his
wife and some others were alive when they made
their escape, an expedition was immediately formed,
accompanied by a prisoner who had formerly ab-
sconded from the settlement and lived for many
years with the natives; and this man, after reaching
the neighbourhood where Mrs. Frazer was being
detained, managed by stratagem to get possession
of her, and conveyed her in safety to the settle-
ment, and it was our privilege to receive this
starved and half-demented woman under our roof,
where, with all necessary comforts, she sufficiently
recovered to proceed to Sydney. Before her de-
parture from Brisbane, money was subscribed
among us for her benefit, and she was shortly


recommehded to the charitable consideration of
the authorities and public of Sydney, and alto-
gether a considerable sum was raised for her bene-
fit. Whether or not the money she was put in
possession of was regarded as compensating for
the total absence of personal attraftions, it is at all
events a faft that the Widow Frazer was wooed
and won a second time by the master of a vessel
bound for London, where, not forgetting the charm
of her widowhood as a stimulus to the charitable,
she presented a letter to my mother, in which I
had strongly recommended her case —as a widow,
of course ; and my letter having been certified as
genuine by my relatives, I was astonished at the
results. A great stir was made amongst the friends
of my family, the Widow Frazer’s case was brought
under the notice of the Lord Mayor of London, the
case was pamphleteered, the British Commissary
at Brisbane was favoured with honourable mention,
and altogether there was such a “ kick-up” as, in
the simplicity of my aftion on behalf of the poor
woman, I had never dreamed of. Before the bulk


of the money collefted in England was disposed of,
it was ascertained that the once widow had re-mar-
ried, and that she had children by her first husband;
the money was, therefore, very properly invested for
the benefit of the children. In all this lam not at
all disposed to blame the poor woman, as lam
not sure that she was chargeable with wilful de-
ception ; and I am sure, from the account taken
from her own trembling lips, that during her de-
tention by the natives of Wide Bay, and from her
broken down condition on her arrival at our house,
that her sufferings must have been terrible.
There followed in succession to Capt. Climie,
as Commandant of the penal settlement, Captain
(afterwards Major) Fyday, who, on his retirement,
became Police Magistrate at Geelong ; then Major
(at present, if living, a General Officer) Cotton, a
brother of the Major Cotton formerly a resident of
this town.
I have already mentioned elsewhere my sud-
den recall to Sydney in July, r 839, and my return
about Oflober of the same year to remove my


family, when I found, to my great grief that death
had in the meanwhile taken my dear wife. I was
then left a widower with four children, of whom
Charlotte (now Mrs. Bannatine) was only nine
years old.
The remainder of my time in New South
Wales, from the close of 1839 t 0 March, 1854,
was passed in Sydney, where I was connected as a
working member of committee with almost all of
the religious and benevolent societies, taking
especial interest in the Benevolent Society, and
more latterly the Female Refuge Society, of which
I was Treasurer, having helped to the full extent
of my ability and influence with the then Colonial
Secretary, Judges, and others of high standing, Sir
Alfred Stephen having become President prior to
my removal to Hobart Town. I also held the
office of Deacon and Treasurer of the Pitt-street
Church, under the pastoral care of the Rev. Dr.
Ross, for the last twelve years of my residence in
Sydney.


I arrived in Hobart Town on the last day of
March, 1854, Sir William Denison being the
Governor. I closed my Commissariat career of
thirty-one years as head of my department on the
last day of Oftober, 1859. The record of what
remains up to the present hour, in so far as it has
any interest for my friends, their own recolleftion
of me may supply.
In conclusion, I feel that I need scarcely point
out to those dear friends for whose especial enter-
tainment the whole of the rough notes of the salient
points of my life’s experience have been written,
how utterly unfitted so impeded and disjointed a
production must be for any other purpose than
their personal gratification, if, indeed, I may pre-
sume that I have even succeeded thus far.
S. O.
February 2, 1873.
Printed at the “ Launceston Examiner ” Office*
