





STATEMENT
FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES
ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE
ORIGIN AND HISTORY
OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH,
AND OF THE
EARLIER EFFORTS ON BEHALF OF ACADEMICAL EDUCATION
NEW SOUTH WALES;
INCLUDING AN
ACCOUNT
OF THE
MONSTROUS PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
SYNOD OF AUSTRALIA
1842.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AT THE EMPIRE GENERAL STEAM PRINTING OFFICE, HUNTER STREET.
1857.




TO THE PRESBYTERIANS OE NEW SOUTH
WALES.
Fellow Colonists and Fellow Christians—You will
doubtless have observed that a prosecution was recently
instituted in the Supremo Court of this colony, at the
instance of the Synod of Australia, to dispossess me of
the property of the Scots Church and the College Build-
ings adjoining it, on the ground that that property be-
longed to the Synod, and that I had been deposed by
that body from the office of the Holy Ministry in the
year 1842. As the case involved two questions, a civil
and an ecclesiastical one, and as I could not willingly
allow any purely ecclesiastical question to
ha submitted for decision to a civil Court,
I instructed my counsel at the commencement
of the suit to apply to the Court for a commission to
examine certain eminent ministers of the Church of
Scotland in the cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow as to
whether the course pursued towards me by the Synod
of Australia, on the occasion referred to, was accordant
either with ecclesiastical law or with common justice,
which I utterly deny that it was; and the commission
having been granted accordingly, I am enabled, for the
first time these fourteen years, to assume the aggres-
sive, and to place the Synod, or rather the men who
disgraced that body at the period in question, on their
defence.
It is with this view that I have drawn up, for the
information of members of our communion generally,
but particularly for that of the ministers and others to
whom the matter at issue will now be referred at home,
the following “ strange eventful history,” which, I am
sure, will be found quite unparalleled in the annals of
the Presbyterian Church, and which I publish here on
the spot that those whom it concerns may have it in
their power to disprove the facts and circumstances I
have detailed, or to draw up a counter-statement, if they
can.
It will be observed that I have said nothing, in the
following statement, to the prejudice of any of the
ministers who have come out from the mother-country,
either for the Synod of Australia or for the Free Church,
since the year 1842; and if these ministers are at all
wise in their generation, they will be particularly careful
not to identify themselves in any way with the men to
whom that statement exclusively refers. These men
are now upon their trial, and I shall be greatly mistaken
if they are not visited ere long with a sentence of the
sternest reprobation from the proper quarter for their
heartless, suicidal and disgraceful proceedings of 1841
and 1842.
There is a wonderful difference in the circumstances
and prospects of the colony now, as compared with what
they were fourteen or fifteen years ago. A new order of
things has arisen in the interval, and it surely becomes
those who have the best interests of their adopted country
at heart to endeavour by all means to turn to a proper
account this change in its circumstances and prospects.
Now there is no way in which this could be done more
effectually, as far as our particular communion is con-
cerned, than by a union of the different sections of the
Presbyterian Church on broad and comprehensive prin-
ciplesj on the one hand, and the establishment of a Soots
or Presbyterian College in connection with the Univer-
sity of Sydney, through the united efforts of the Presby-
terians of the colony, on tlie other. But there can be no
union on such,principles till the question I have raised on
the proceedings 0f1842 is settled definitively; and it would
be folly and madness to contribute one farthing for the
establishment of a Presbyterian College till such a union
is effected. -
I remain, Fellow Colonists and Fellow Christians,
Your sincere friend and well-wisher,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
Sydney, 22nd November, 1856.
Statement of Facts an© Circumstances Illustrative
of the Origin and History of the Presbyterian
Church, and of the earlier efforts on behalf
of Academical Education in New South Wales.
In the year 1825 there was established, under a Royal
Charter, a magnificent Institution, designated The
Church and School Corporation of New South Wales,
which was endowed with a seventh of all the available
land in the territory, together with a princely revenue
from the public treasury, till that land could be made
available; the design of the Institution being to invest
the Colonial Episcopal Church with the entire control
of religion and education throughout the colony. Not-
withstanding this magnificent provision, however, there
was no public school in the colony in which a boy could
be taught either the rudiments of the Latin language, or
the elements of mathematics, down to the close of the
year 1830. In these circumstances, after one or two
abortive attempts to establish an Institution in Sydney,
for the education of youth in the higher branches of
useful knowledge, I resolved to proceed to England,
which I did accordingly in the month of August of that
year, to obtain the requisite means for the establishment
of an Academical Institution or College for the educa-
tion of youth in the town of Sydney. On my arrival in
London, I consulted the late Joseph Hume, Esq., M.P.,
and the late Rev. Edward Irving, with both of whom I
had been previously acquainted, on the subject ; and
they both advised me to apply for aid at Downing-street
(which I had not thought of doing previously) as the
Government of England was then administered by a
professedly liberal party, the Whigs. Lord Viscount
Goderich, who was then Principal Secretary of State for
the Colonies, was pleased to receive my application very
cordially, and to direct that .£3500 should be advanced,
as a loan without interest for five years, for the estab-
lishment of an Educational Institution in Sydney, on
condition of a similar amount being contributed by the
promoters of the undertaking; the buildings contem


plated to be erected on the ground belonging to the the Educational Institution was totally distinct from that
Scots Church, and myself to be personally responsible to of the church, 2nd, That a permanent alienation of a
Government for carrying out the undertaking. At the
same time Lord Goderich intimated to me, in the pre-
sence of Lord Howick, now Earl Grey, that all the Go-
vernment intended by this covenant was that the funds
should be honestly 'expended for the object proposed.
This arrangement was made —for it is of importance to
attend to the date —on the 13th January, 1831.
I returned to the colony in that year, bringing out
with me a whole ship-load of Scotch mechanics, under
engagement to erect the requisite buildings, and to re-
pay the cost of their passage out by weekly instalments
from their wages.
In the meantime, it was determined by the late Sir
John Jamison and the trustees of the Scots Church
respectively, to open up the street now called Jamison-
street, through their respective allotments in the town of
Sydney, partly for the improvement of both properties,
hut chiefly to enable Sir John to sell his ground in that
locality in building allotments. Sir John’s allotments
were accordingly s fid on the 29th September, 1831, and
in order to obtain an additional extent of ground for the
Educational Institution then about to be commenced, I
purchased a portion of Sir John’s ground at the sale; it
being intended at the time to apply for an Act of Council
to enable the trustees of the Scots Church to transfer
the vacant portion of their allotment, situated between
Jamison-street and Church-hill or Charlotte-place, to the
trustees of the Academical Institution, who were a dis-
tinct body from the first. It was also intended, at the
same time, to transfer to these trustees, for the purposes
of the Educational Institution, the ground I had pur-
chased from Sir John Jamison ; and with a view to this
transference, which could not be effected till the said
trustees should be incorporated and an Act of Council
passed for the purpose, no conveyance was made to me,
and no part of the purchase-money was paid till ten
years thereafter, when the completion of the purchase
had become absolutely necessary to save the property
from lapsing to Sir John.
The Academical institution, which was designated The
Australian College, was accordingly commenced under a
totally distinct management from that of the Scots Church,
towards the close of the year 1831; and public support to
a considerable extent was pledged in its favour. It was
intended at this period, to erect four plain houses, to
cost not more than £750 each, for the residence of the
four masters or professors, in the line of Jamison-street,
and a separate building for a series of class-rooms
in the line of Church-hill or Charlotte-place ; and a
foundation for the latter building was accordingly
excavated (as may still be seen) at a cost of nearly
£l5O. But before a stone of the buildings in Jamison-
street was laid, it was determined, by the trustees of the
Scots Church, that as the new street crossed both of
the adjoining properties diagonally, leaving a small
triangular portion of each, on the south side of the
street, that could not otherwise be turned to account,
the triangular portion of the allotment of the church
should be exchanged for the triangular portion of the
ground I had purchased from Sir John, so as to square
the lines of both properties, and to leave a suitable and
compact allotment for the erection of a manse or dwelling
for the pastor of the church. There are documents in
the Colonial Secretary’s office—a letter from myself, as
one of the trustees of the church, acting with the
written authority of the others, of date 22nd November,
1831, and another from the late Captain Perry, Deputy
Surveyor-General, of date February, 1832—proving all
these statements ; viz. Ist. That the management of
portion of the church property for educational purposes
was agreed on by all concerned, and 3rd. That an
exchange of the two triangular portions of ground above
mentioned was stipulated and effected.* Captain Perry’s
letter actually contains a measurement of the lines of
the respective properties pursuant to this arrangement,
and therefore leaves no doubt on the subject.
It has often been observed, however, that Educational
Institutions in the colonies are peculiarly subject to
calamitous reverses. The Australian College experienced
this evil fortune in an eminent degree. In the first
place, a whole series of ferocious attacks were made upon
myself, on the most frivolous pretences imaginable, in
connection with the Institution, by the colonial press of
the period, which was then for the most part in very
exceptionable hands. This served materially to alienate
the public mind from the Institution and to deprive it of
public sympathy and support. In the second place
every imaginable difficulty was conjured up in the
Nominee Legislature of the period, to neutralize and
defeat the object of my arrangement with Lord Goderich.
I had given great offence to the late B shop Broughton,
who was then only an Archdeacon, but an influential
member of the Legislature, in a letter I had written to
the Secretary of State while in England, pointing out the
impolicy and injustice of the Church and School Corpo-
ration system, under which a seventh of the whole available
lands of the country was allotted for the exclusive
support of the Episcopal clergy ; and ways and means,
of the most unfair description, were had re-
course to, to damage my character with the public en the
one hand, and to defeat the arrangement I had made
with the Government at home on the other. In the
third place, the architect whom I had brought out from
Scotland with the Scotch mechanics to erect the College-
buildings, although a man of ability in his profession,
was like many others of his class strangely out in his
calculations ; insomuch, that instead of a plain building
to accommodate the four masters, or professors, which
might have been erected at the time for £3OOO, (the
stipulated amount,) the plan which was adopted on his
recommendation, required for its completion an expen-
diture of not less than .£lO,OOO. + This, combined with
the other unfavourable circumstances I have mentioned,
proved a very serious and almost insurmountable
obstacle in our way. In short, under hostile influences
of various kinds, the public support which had been
pledged to the Institution was, in not a few instances,
withheld; the erection of the series of class-rooms was not
proceeded with, and it was arranged thata temporary class-
room should be provided in each of the four buildings in
process of erection. At length the supplies from without
ceased, and the Committee of Management recommended
that the mechanics should be discharged forthwith, and
the undertaking abandoned as impracticable. To this,
however, I could not assent, as I was determined on the
one hand to fulfil my engagement with the Home Govern-
ment, while the mechanics who were then at work on
* In pursuance of the arrangement thus made for the squaring
of the lines of the two properties, and the exchange of the two
triangular portions of ground above mentioned, it was further
stipulated that the trustees of the Academical Institution should
erect a half-gable on the boundary line thus agreed to, for the
convenience of the trustees of the Scots Church, with a view to
the future erection of a manse for the minister on the adjoining
allotment reserved for the church. The half-gable was erected
accordingly, as part of the buildingl now occupy, and serves as
a complete proof of all the facte 1 have stated above.
+ The range of buildings alluded to in Jamison-street could not
he erected now, as I have been repeatedly assured by practical
men, for less than £20,000.


the Cnilege-buildings bad been brought out under a
specific engagement for a specific period on the other.
In these circumstances I was obliged to dispose of my
own personal property, which was then very consider-
able, to carry on the undertaking ; the following items
of property having been successively sacrificed in the
protracted struggle.
1. My late father’s grant of 2000 acres of land from
the Crown at Bong Bong and Sutton Forest; for which
I received £l5OO. I am not aware what the value of
such land would be in that locality now. At all events,
it would be at least four times that amount.
2. Twelve hundred acres I then possessed on the
Illawarra Lake. It was a splendid property, and is now
worth from £2O, to £3O an acre. It brought me only £2
an acre, or £2400.
3. My late father’s Town allotment of about one acre
of ground in the city of Sydney, fronting Kent, Bathurst,
and Sussex Streets, with a two-story verandah house on
it.
4. The buildings now known as Petty’s Hotel, Church-
hill, with frontages to four streets. This was my
dwelling-house at the time; Clarence-street being then
opened up, without any compensation to me, through
my garden.
These items of property would at this moment be
worth at least £50,000. They would probably bring a
much larger amount.
In the meantime, the Institution had been progressing
as an educational establishment. Of the first three
college-bred men whom I had brought out to conduct it,
one had died during the first three years of its existence;
a second had been called to undertake the pastoral
charge of a Presbyterian church at Launceston, Yan
Diemen’s Land, to which he acceded; and a third left the
Institution at the expiration of his engagement for three
years. I went home to England again, however, in the
year 1833, as also in 1836, and brought out other three
all college-bred men and masters of arts —and the
following was the condition of the Institution in the year
1838, when examined by his Honor, Sir William Burton,
now Chief Justice of Madras, as extracted from his own
report in his book ;
To the activity and perseverance of the Rev. Dr. Lang, the
senior Chaplain of the Presbyterian Church, is to be ascribed,
not only the establishment of that Church in New South Wales,
and afterwards, its increase in the accession of numerous clergy-
men of the same communion ; but also the introduction into the
colonv of many useful and excellent men as instructors of youth,
and especially the establishment of the Australian College, which
is to be regarded, as it was intended, not only as a seminary for
general education, in which youth of all denominations might
receive instruction, but particularly as a college for the propaga-
tion of the principles of the Presbyterian Church in New south
Wales, and in the Pacific Ocean. .
The number of students in the College during the year 1838,
was 116 : of this number, 32 attended these Latin classes,—the
first learning the Grammar ; the second, Macgowan s ‘ Latin
Beading,” Part II ; and Valpy's Delectus ; the third were, at the
commencement of 1839, reading Livy, and acquiring the elements
Natural Philosophy classes, lectures, illustrated by expe-
riments are delivered, and subjects prescribed on which the
students write by way of exercise; of these essays (some of which
extended to some 60 closely written pages), several hundreds
were given in during the year, and several were read with much
gratification by the writer of these observations, as shewing, in
many instances, acuteness of observation and reflection .particu-
larly interesting and useful, as indications of the natural bent ot
the mind of the pupil ; each being at liberty, out of a number of
subjects proposed, to write upon that which he chose. ,
In the Mathematical class, Euclid s Elements, and Blands
Geometrical Problems were used as text books. In the course
of the year, about 46 attended the classes for Natural Ihilo-
sophy and Mathematics. ,
About 70 attended the classes for History and Geography. Hie
books used were the common School History of Greece and
Rome (with questions), and Steward's Geography.
Nearly the whole number of pupils attended the classes tor
writing and accounts. Engaged in giving this instruction, there
were in the year 1838, and af the commencement of 1839, the Rev.
Thofnas Altken, A.M., the Rev. David Mackenzie, A.M., and the
Rev. Robert Wylde, A.M.—gentlemen possessing every qualifica-
tion to give instruction in higher branches, but whose time, from
the comparatively low estimate at which the standard of a liberal
education has at present been holden by colonial parents, is con-
sumed in a course of elementary instruction.
In the Australian College there may be found about thirty or
forty students who would prosecute studies superior to those of
a common education; but this number is obviously ton small to
provide funds, without other assistance than fees received from the.
pupils, for the maintenance of teachers devoting their time to the
higher branches.
Having visited the Australian College at the commencement of
the years 1838 and 1839, the writer of these observations was
highly impressed in favour of the course of instruction pursued
in it, so far as it had proceeded; questions were proposed on all
the subjects of instruction, and answered with a quickness which
proved both the knowledge and care of the teachers, and the
aptness of the scholars. Quickness and sprightliness were in-
deed the general characteristics of the latter; but some evinced
also a depth of reflection evidently proceeding from solid
genius.
To the same effect, James Macarthur, Esq., M.L.A.,
whose testimony as a political adversary of mine these
many years past is only the more valuable, observes in
reference to the Institution in the year 1836. “ This
College was founded chiefly by means of the personal
exertion of Dr, Lang, to whom the greatest credit is due
for his indefatigable labours on behalf of religious and
educational institutions in South Wales.” New
South Wales: Its present state and future pros-
pects, die.
In short, the Institution was then in a very flourish-
ing condition. It had not fewer than a hundred and
sixteen pupils and students in its different classes, and
forty of these were boarders, the s ns of some of the first
families in the colony. It had also wrought a great
reform in the cost of education, tuition for the highest
pupils, under three different masters, being only £l2
per annum in the Institution ; whereas it had previously
been £2O under a single master in private schools in
Sydney. The rates generally are much higher now.
In the year 1839,1 had to leave the colony for Eng-
land once more, and did not return to it till the month
of March, 1841; having in the mean time paid a visit to
the United States, and published a volume on my return
to London, entitled Religion and Education in America;
In which I shewed how Christianity could stand erect in
the world without the support of the State, as I then
foresaw that that system would eventually be introduced
and become universal in Australia.
During my absence, however, a great and fatal change
had taken place in the Institution. The sheep and
cattle, and land mania—a sort of epidemic which breaks
out in New South Wales periodically—having broken
out in the year 1839, all the three masters or professors
were seized with it simultaneously, and the Institution
was thenceforth made a sort of appendage to certain
sheep and cattle stations on the Namoi, which was then
the extreme north, and on the Murray, which was then
the extreme south of the colony (not to speak of an
estate in New Zealand which one of the gentlemen had
acquired; ; the bullock-drays carrying down wool and
carrying up supplies, appearing regularly at the doors of
the class rooms, and the business of horsebreaking, on
account of certain of the fraternity, having actually
superseded the training up of youth on the premises of
the Institution! Under this process, the Institution
gradually declined ; the boarders were withdrawn in the
first instance, loud complaints being made at the time
of the domestic management of the Institution, which
had been entrusted in great measure by the reverend
stockholders to ticket-of-leave servants, and the daily
pupils were successively removed, till only the merest


shadow of the Institution remained; there being only I upon the buildings which I was willing and ready to
about thirty remaining when I returned from Europe.* acknowledge. Till that time I had not only never
T : ti-ia "Ravr fl.wt Wvlde. A M., received a farthing either as principal or interest for all
In these circumstances, the Eev. Robert Wylde, A.M.,
the classical, and the Eev. David Mackenzie, A.M., the
mathematical master, who, it seems, were in partnership
in their extensive sheep and cattle speculations on the
Namoi and Murray Eivers, alleged that the decline and
fall of the Institution was owing entirely to their col-
league, the Eev, Thomas Aitken, A.M., who had charge
of the commercial department, and urged that the first
step of reform was to be taken in the removal of Mr.
Aitken from the Institution —a measure which they
alleged must be effected at all hazards. I accordingly
made an amicable arrangement with Mr. Aitken to leave
the Institution, on receiving a bonus of £2OO, which 1
paid him out of my own pocket. But things got rather
worse than better after Mr. Aitken’s removal; the num-
ber of pupils gradually diminished; there was no vigour
or life left in the educational arrangements of the Insti-
tution, and the domestic management, which was
entirely in the hands of the two remaining gentlemen,
was discreditably bad. Things went on in this way till
some time in the year 1842, when the revival of the In-
stitution under its then management being utterly hope-
less, 1 had to submit to the further infliction of
having to pay Messrs. Wylde and Mackenzie £lOO each,
to leave it altogether, after they had virtually ruined it
and nearly ruined me. For if these gentlemen had only
stuck to their proper duties, and gone on as they were
doing when Sir William Burton examined and reported
upon the Institution in 1838, they would not only have
raised it to the highest character and standing as an
educational establishment, but realized a handsome in-
dependency for themselves. Whether they ultimately
realized anything of the kind as stockholders, I am not
aware. I only know that in the subsequent period of
general depression, when other people in that line
throughout the colony were, to use their own phraseo-
logy, hard enough up, they were no exception to the
general rule.
In the meantime Sir John Jamison was, naturally
enough, insisting upon the payment of the ground I had
purchased for the Institution, at his sale, on the 29th
September, 1831,nearly ten years before; threatening that,
if such payment were not made within a certain period, he
would seize the two lower buildings, which were both
erected entirely on that ground, and give the one of
them to one of his two sons-in-law, and the other to the
other. In this emergency, as the arrangement contem-
plated in the first instance, the creation of a separate
trusteeship for the Institution under an Act of Council,
was now utterly hopeless, I paid Sir J®hn the full amount
of principal and interest then due—viz,, £475, and the
conveyance was accordingly made to me for uses ; im-
plying that there were other parties who had claims
* There is something to he said in excuse for these men after
all. It is evident from Sir William Burton’s account that in 1838
and 1839 there were from thirty to forty of the colonial youths
attending the Australian College who “ would have prosecuted
studies superior to those of a common educationand that the
gentlemen in charge at the time were both able and willing to
have imparted such education. Had the Government, therefore,
only given them salaries of £250 each, and had they thus acquired
the superior status in society which that very moderate endow-
ment would have ensured them, in connection with an academical
institution, they would never have taken to stockkeeping. But
it was the hopelessness of their situation, as instructors of youth,
that drove these men into the strange course they pursued, and
thus transformed them at length into regular bushmen. In short,
bad government, in one or other of its numberless developments,
is the curse of humanity. It is worthy of observation, however,
that there is not a larger number of students at our well-endowed
University even yet, than the number whom Sir W. Burton found
disposed to prosecute higher studies in the Australian College in
1838.
the advances I had made for the institution during the
previous ten years, although I had sacrificed all my own
personal property in the process, but I had not even
security of any kind for anything I had advanced. I
then raised money, through the Loan Company, on the
buildings erected on the ground purchased from Sir
John, to complete the four buildings, which up till that
time had been in a very unfinished state, and to erect a
lecture-room or hall on the opposite side of the street.
It appeared at this period extremely desirable that,
although the Australian College had not proved success-
ful as a general educational establishment from the
causes I have mentioned, it might still be revived as an
institution for the training up of candidates for the mini-
stry in the Colonial Presbyterian Church. But as an en-
dowment for the masters or professors was indispensa-
bly necessary for this purpose, I applied in the first
instance to the Local Legislature, soliciting that a mode-
rate endowment might be granted from the public
treasury for three or four duly qualified, and University-
bred men, to afford such education in the Australian
College as is given in the undergraduate course in the
language and philosophy classes of the universities of
Scotland. But instead of granting this very moderate
request, a Select Committee of the nominee Legislative
Council of the period was appointed, at the instance of
the honorable E. D. Thomson, Esq., Colonial Secretary,
which, alleging that the Institution had proved a failure,
and that I had overreached the Government in regard to
the security tendered for the original advance of £3500,
advised his Excellency Sir George Gipps to direct the
law officers of the Crown to foreclose the mortgage,
which was attempted accordingly.
It could scarcely be alleged with any degree of pro-
priety that the Institution had failed as a general educa-
tional establishment, when upwards of 500 of the youth
of the colony had, during the previous ten years, re-
ceived a good education —such as is described above by
Sir William Burton—in its classes; and if it had latterly
fallen into temporary abeyance, that was my misfortune,
and not my fault. But as to the charge preferred by
Mr. Thomson and his committee, that I had over-
reached and cheated the Government in the matter of
the security—a charge which was echoed and re-echoed
exultingly in the council chamber of the period—it was
utterly false and unfounded. The facts upon which
this charge was based are as follows:—When it was
deemed necessary by the local authorities to have a
mortgage of the ground and buildings executed by the
trustees of the Scots Church, in favour of the local
government, in the year 1832, previous to the advance
of the £3500 ordered by Lord Goderich, I drew up with
my own hand a draft of a bill to authorise such a mort-
gage, including in it, in express terms, both the
ground belonging to the Scots Church, and
the ground purchased from Sir John Jamison;
and the Bill was actually printed from that draft and read
a first time in the Legislative Council, and I happen still
to possess several copies of it, printed by order of the
Council, with the signature of Mr. Thomson’s own father-
in-law, Sir Richard Bourke. In the face of such a docu-
ment, which was surely completely out of my hands, as
a Bill read a first time'by the Legislative Council, there
cannot, therefore, be the slightest pretext for charging
me with having overreached or cheated the Government
in the matter of the security. But when the Bill was
referred to the Attorney-General of the period, the late
John Kinchela, Esq., afterwards one of the judges, pre-


yious to its being read a second time, that functionary students who had completed the undergraduate course in
sir nek out the entire narasranh of the printed Bill, as the Scotch Universities, on condition of their passing
struck out the entire paragraph of the printed Bill, as
copied from my draft, which offered security on the
ground purchased from Sir John, alleging, as he told me
himself at the time, that the Government were bound
by Lord Goderich’s instructions, to take security only on
the ground belonging to the Scots Church; the Trus-
tees of the church, as he added, having no power either
present or prospective over any other ground. It was,
therefore, entirely owing to the law officers of the
Crown, that the Government mortgage which was after-
wards executed by the trustees, of whom I am now the
only acting one myself, was confined to the ground be-
longing to the Scots Church and the buildings thereon;
and the charge of fraudulent dealing, which was urged
against me so offensively by Mr. Thomson and his Select
Committee, was therefore, I repeat it, grossly false and
utterly unfounded.
The Government prosecution, which was thus insti-
tuted at the instance of Messrs. Thomson and Co., and
which took the form of a Chancery Suit, lasted four
years ; entailing upon me a large amount of unnecessary
and annoying literary labour, in counterworking the
manoeuvres of the Crown lawyers, who had expended
all their strength upon the case, and a pecuniary expen-
diture besides of not less than £4OO ; while it effectually
prevented any efforts during its continuance for the
revival of the Institution. It issued at length, however,
I think in January, 1845, in a signal failure; the Govern-
ment being defeated in their own Court, and the mort-
gage declared to be of no value. For in the last stage of
the suit, when the Crown lawyers were about to carry
their point, I suggested that the elders of the Scots
Church, as the representatives of the congregation for
whose benefit the grant had been originally issued,
should file a cross bill, protesting against the right of
the trustees to mortgage their property to the Govern-
ment, for any purpose, and they did so accordingly and
proved successful. I had resisted the prosecution, con-
.trary to the advice of all my friends, Ist. Because the
charge on which it was based was utterly false and un-
founded, as I have shewn it to have been; 2nd. Because
the Institution had not proved a failure, although it was
in temporary abeyance at the time, from no fault of
mine; and 3rd, Because it was never the intention of
Lord Goderich that the Government advance should be
repaid, if it was only honestly expended, as I knew it
had been to my own cost.*
In the month of October, 1841, immediately after the
Government prosecution above mentioned had been
commenced, the Synod of Australia, of which I was then
a member, consented at my particular instance, although
with evident and extreme reluctance, that students, to
be educated thenceforth at the Australian College,
should be admitted as candidates for the ministry in the
Colonial Presbyterian Church, on the same footing as
* Judge Therry, then Attorney-General, and Sir William
a'Beckett then Solicitor-General, were both engaged as Crown
lawyers on this suit, and the latter functionary, then a puisne
judge gave the decision in the case. It was doubtless evident
enough to Sir William a'Beckett, that the Cross Bill had been
filed at my instance, although apparently against myself, as one
of the trustees ; and Sir W., in addition to the mortification of
acknowledging a defeat for the Crown in such circumstances,
evidently considered my conduct in the matter reprehensible
and dishonourable, and was supposed to have taken up a
strong prejudice against me accordingly. But when it is taken
into account that the action was based on false and groundless
charges, on the part of the prosecution, as I have shewn it
to have been, and that I was not acting for myself individually,
hut merely protecting the interests of education from unjustifi-
able aggression on the part of the Government, I believe it will
be allowed on all hands that my conduct in tue matter was strictly
honourable and highly proper.
the requisite examinations in the languages and
philosophy. Immediately after this arrangement had
been effected, I proceeded to Port Phillip and Van
Diemen’s Land, to stir up the Presbyterians in both
colonies to cooperate with those of New South Wales in
raising a temporary endowment for the support of the
requisite number of professors in that Institution, to
train up candidates for the Christian ministry in the
Presbyterian Church, for all the Australian colonies. I
was absent on this tour only five weeks, having returned
to Sydney before the sixth Sabbath. During that period
I had visited Melbourne, Hobart Town and Launceston ;
assisting at the dispensation of the Lord’s Supper both
al Melbourne and Hobart Town, and holding public
meetings and forming societies in all the three localities
for the promotion of the important object I have men-
tioned. And so successful had I been in this mission, that
in all the three localities combined, a sum total of
£4OO a year was guaranteed for this purpose for four
years certain ; one gentleman, a member of the Legis-
lative Council of Van Diemen’s Land, pledging himself
to contribute £35 a year for that period. But so full of
envy and malice were ray quondam brethren of the
Synod of Australia on the one hand, and so utterly
insane and suicidal was their policy on the other, that,
without taking the slightest notice in any way whatever
of this greatest service that had ever been rendered to
the Presbyterian Church in Australia —a service, more-
over, which had been rendered without costing them-
selves individually one farthing of expense—they im-
mediately got up a formal charge against me for having
left my congregation without due authority, and treated
me as if I had been a culprit guilty of some serious
crime.
The law of the Presbyterian Church is, that a minister
may be absent from his church or parish for any period
less than six weeks, without being amenable to
ecclesiastical authority, provided his pulpit is accept-
ably supplied in the meantime, and suitable
provision made for the discharge of his clerical
duty otherwise. Now, I had returned to my post on the
occasion in question within the prescribed period of six
weeks; I had had the express concurrence both of my
elders and of the committeee of management of the
Scots Church before I had embarked ; the mission on
which I had gone was one of death and life to our Insti-
tution, especially under the persecution we were experi-
encing from the Government at the time, as well as of
paramount importance to the general interests of our
communion; and my pulpit was supplied thvee times
every Sabbath during ray absence. The late Rev. Mr,
McKean, a highly popular minister, from the Orkney
Islands, who was then so far on his way to Tahiti, where
he was afterwards accidentally shot by the French
during a skirmish with the natives, officiated with great
acceptance on two of these Sabbaths; and the Re\.
Matthew Adam, a regularly ordained Presbyterian Min-
ister, then Seamen’s Chaplain in Sydney, officiated on
one or two others. But the beauty.of the thing was that
two of the brethren who sat in judgment upon me on
the occasion, the Eev. W. Pnrves and the Rev George
Mac Fie, had themselves been absent from their respec-
tive stations, one for six and the other for nine or ten
weeks together—not doing anything for the church in
any conceivable way, hut simply looking after their own
sheep and cattle in distant parts of the colony witnout
either providing any supply or incurring any censure.
This frivolous charge, which was dealt with with all
the hypocritical and mock solemnity of the Spanish In-


quisition when sitting in judgment upon a heretic who remarkably illustrative of the peculiarity of the posi-
has been found guilty on his own confession of reading tion of a minister of religion in the colonies, has just
the Word of God, was followed up very shortly there-
after, by others equnlly frivolous, equally contemptible.
Now although I could by this time stand a great deal
both of ingratitude and of malevolence from men who
owed everything themselves to me, as had been the case
almost without exception with my quondam brethren—
although I could stand all the personal ill-treatment
which I experienced at the hands of these men—l could
not withstand the conviction which was forced upon my
mind by these transactions that it was utterly hopeless
to carry out the great objects of a Christian Church in
these colonies in connection with such men—men who
could sacrifice the best and dearest interests of their
own communion for the gratification of their envy and
malevolence. And conceiving that the root of the evil
was the unhallowed connection of Church and State in
this colony, under which the pecuniary support of the
Government is held forth equally to truth and error,
and men who would otherwise be good for nothing
as ministers of religion are encouraged to say Put
me into one of the priests' offices that I may eat a
piece of bread, I resolved that I would at once leave the
whole fraternity for good ; and accordingly, on the 6th
of February, 1842, fifteen months before the famous dis-
ruption in Scotland, I publicly renounced all connection
with the State and the Presbyterian State Church of New
South Wales, thereby relinquishing a salary of £3OO a
year, which I had till then received regularly from the
Public Treasury, with the promise of its being increased
to £5OO.
But in renouncing all further connection with the
Synod of Australia in the circumstances I have stated,
I had no desire to renounce my connection with the
Church of Scotland, as one of its licentiates and
ordained ministers. I had no quarrel with that Church
at the time. I had broken none of its laws. I had ob-
jected to none of its standards. My position was pre-
cisely the same as that of the Rev. D. K. Drummond,
a regularly ordained clergyman of the Church of Eng-
land, in the city of Edinburgh, who, having joined the
Scottish Episcopal Church, but having afterwards
found that, in consequence of its thoroughly Puseyite
and Romish character, he could no longer remain in
its communion with- any degree of personal freedom or
comfort, renounced all further connection with it, and
continued to discharge his clerical duty, in his own
church and to his own congregation as before, as a
clergyman of the Church of England officiating in Scot-
land. Nay, when the famous disruption took place in
Scotland, in 1843, I declined joining the Free Church,
because my own withdrawal from the Synod of Australia
had taken place fifteen months before that body had
come into existence, and had taken place on grounds
peculiar to the Ecclesiastico-political constitution of this
colony, and altogether unconnected with the great
ecclesiastical questions of Scotland. I foresaw, indeed,
from the first that all State support would eventually be
withdrawn from all religious denominations in these
colonies, and that the position I had thus taken up of
antagonism to the latitudinarian and infidel system of
our colonial Government, which supports Popery and
Protestantism, Jews and Christians, Unitarianism and
Trinitarian ism, without discrimination, would have been
materially compromised by joining the Free Church,
which, in the neighbouring colony of Victoria at least,
has, in the face of all its professions, not scrupled to
accept endowments from the State, in common with
Papists, Jews, and Unitarians.
But another case, precisely similar to my own and
occurred in the city of Melbourne, in connection with a
different section of the Presbyterian Church altogether.
There is a Synod of the United Presbyterian Church in
the colony of Victoria, and at the invitation of that
Synod, certain ministers were sent out to form congre-
gations under it by the parent church in Scotland.
One of these ministers, however, the Rev, Alexander
David Kinninmont, recently of Leith, conceiving that
certain proceedings of the local Synod, in which he was
personally concerned, were unwarrantable, oppressive
and tyrannical, withdrew from its jurisdiction alto-
gether, and has since, in conjunction with another
minister who had taken the same view of the case,
formed a distinct Presbytery in connection with
the United Presbyterian Church in Scotland. It
is quite possible therefore, that constituted
as colonial churches generally were, till a comparatively
recent period, of notoriously incompetent and inferior
men in a large majority of instances—simply from the
extreme rarity of a proper missionary spirit at home—
men of unquestionable piety, talent and zeal, and
strongly and devotedly attached to their Mother Church,
may nevertheless have felt themselves constrained, by a
principle of honour and duty, to renounce all connection
with the Branch Church which at once bore and dis-
graced her name in the colonies. And such a state of
things is peculiarly incidental to the Presbyterian
Church, especially when connected with the State ; for
while Episcopalian and Romish Churches can be easily
managed, even with very inferior materials, as they
have each a sort of clerical Major-General for their head
with absolute authority to do as he pleases ; the aposto-
lic and republican constitution of the Presbyterian
Church cannot be worked at all, and is perpetually liable
to become utterly intolerable, unless its office-bearers
are characterised by a comparatively high degree of
Christian virtue. Corruptio optimorumfitpessima ; “it is
always the best thing*, as for instance the human body,
that are the most intolerable in a state of corruption.”
The conduct of my quondam brethren on the occa-
sion to which I have referred, although apparently un-
accountable at first sight, is nevertheless susceptible of
the easiest explanation. It arose from two different
classes of motives. On the one hand, I was the object,
in certain quarters, of that feeling of envy and malevo-
lence, which is unfortunately characteristic of that por-
tion of the clergy, of all communions, which occupies
the lower levels of the clerical scale. Through my long
standing in the colony, my sacrifices, and exertions, I
had acquired a prominent position in the country, to
which none of these “ l§an cattle” could ever attain ; and
it seemed to have become, in their own estimation at
least, the chief end of their being to endeavour to raise
themselves up a few inches by pulling me down. The
welfare and prosperity of the church of which they were
all the while unworthy members, nay, of which, like as
many Judases, they were betraying the cause, were no-
thing in comparison with this special object of their en-
deavours. But as I have already hinted, some-
thing of the same kind has occurred in every
age of the Christian Church and under every form
of Christianity. For example, it was doubtless
under precisely the sanje sort of treatment
on the part of his brethren, that the zealous Apostle
Paul, after establishing a whole series of churches and
settling a whole company of ministers in Asia Minor,
nevertheless found himself constrained to write to his son
Timothy in such language as the following: This thou
knowest that all they which are of Asia be turned away


from me, of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes. It was cordial approval of my procedure, renouncing all further
doubtless from manifestations of the same unworthy connection with the State and the State Church, and un-
feelings on the part of the clergy in the Eomish church
that the Spanish proverb derives its origin :
Rome tames her fools: ’tis true; but then
She ne'er forgives her learned men.
And Lord John Eussell assures us that precisely the
same feelings characterised the lower orders of the
English clergy of his time, towards one of the greatest
ornaments of the episcopal bench, the celebrated Bishop
Burnet.*
But there was another class of feelings that required
to be gratified in this extraordinary procedure towards
myself. By the publication of my work, entitled Reli-
gion and Education in America, I had committed the
then unpardonable sin, of declaring publicly through
the press that Christianity could stand erect in the world
without State support, and that it would be greatly pre-
ferable for the interests of religion in all these Austra-
lian colonies, if all connection between Church and State
were discontinued. In short, Iliad been fifteen or twenty
years before the age in this particular, as I have been on
various other ocasions; and I had to pay for it accord-
ingly, as every person has to do in one form or another
who advances and maintains unpalatable truths. The
Church of Scotland was then engaged in that war of ex-
termination with the Voluntaries, which was waged prin-
cipally through the late Eev. Dr. Chalmers’s grand
ecclesiastical manoeuvre of Church extension, and which
led, through the breaking of the main shaft in the poli-
tical machinery, to the famous disruption of 1843. For
that event, splendid and magnificent as it was as a mani-
festation of heroic principle, was nevertheless, in some
measure, at least, a judicial infliction from Divine
Providence for the grasping selfishness and the fierce
intolerance of former years. Now, in 1840, when my
book was published, this war was at its height, and any
Churchman, whether at home or abroad, who had given
utterance, as I had done, to liberal opinions as to the
propriety or possibility of supporting the Christian
Ministry, without the intervention of the State, was to
be hunted down and got rid of by all means. In short,
I was thenceforth the Achan in the camp, and stoning
was too good for me ; or to change the metaphor, like the
string held by the sturdy boy in the fable, I was the
only obstacle in the way of that sublime flight which the
Colonial Presbyterian Church would otherwise make,
like its prototype the kite, in the colonial firmament.
So I cut the string, when it was least expected; and the
consequence was, the Presbyterian State Church, like
the kite in the fable, fell at once to the ground, in virtue
of its own specific gravity; and it never rose above the
low level of pitiful incapacity and-profound contempt to
which it then sunk for ten years thereafter—if it has
done so even yet.
On renouncing my connection with the Synod of
Australia, I delivered an address to my congregation,
which was published at the time in th - ' Sydney papers,
and of which I shall forward a copy to the proper
quarter, as it was made the ground of one of the frivo-
lous charges brought against me. It will be found
in the Appendix. My intention, in the first instance,
was to have left the colony for good and gone to New
Zealand; but my congregation insisted on my remain-
ing with them, and at a public meeting held on the 22nd
February, 1842, they unanimously expressed their
* If I am not greatly mistaken also, the late Rev. Dr. M'Crie, of
Edinburgh, was excommunicated for some alleged breach of
ecclesiastical order by that section of the Presbyterian Church
to which he belonged.
dertaking to provide for my future support as they have
done till this day, notwithstanding my frequent and
protracted absence for the last ten years, on the Volun-
tary system. [See Appendix.]
In the month of October, 1842, the Synod of Australia
held its annual meeting, and I was summoned to appear
before it on the charge of following divisive courses. I
attended the meeting, along with a number of my
friends, not in obedience to the summons, but simply to
ascertain what charge or charges they had to prefer
against me.
The following is the account of the proceedings on
the occasion, published in the Colonial Observer of the
12th October, 1842 :
Dr. Lang attended the meeting on Saturday .together with a num-
ber of his private friends and Members of his congregation; and,
on being asked by the moderator whether he would ap pear at the
bar of the Synod to be tried on the charges preferred against
him in the libel or indictment with which he had been served,
he replied to the following effect: —
Moderator, as I appear before you this day in very peculiar
circumstances,! am naturally desirous that the nature and object
of that appearance should not be misunderstood, and that a con-
struction should not be put upon it, which I have no intention
it should bear. I appear before you, therefore, in compliance
with your own invitation or citation, or whatever you may please
to call it, to explain or to defend any parts of my conduct that
may have been called in question By the Synod up to a certain
date.
I appear before you this day, prepared to answer whatever
charges may have been preferred against me, up to the date I
have referred to, or any other charges whatsoever, that any mem-
ber of this Synod may bring against me, as a minister of the
Gospel, from my first arrival in the colony more than nineteen
years ago. And I appear before you also, because it has been
publicly given out, as well as privately and industriously insinu-
ated by individuals here present wnora I shall not mention more
particularly, that I left the Synod because I was under charges
at the time which I was either unable or afraid to meet.
Sow I am here to give the lie to such unfounded and
unmanly insinuations, to shew that I am neither unwilling
nor afraid to meet my accusers face to face, and to prove incon-
testibly to all concerned that, up to the time referred to, the
Synod neither has nor ever had anything against me.
You are well aware, therefore, that on the 6th of February last
I delivered a solemn address to my congregation, which was
afterwards published on the 9th of February, renouncing all
further connection with this Synod as a church connected with
the State ; of which I forwarded a regular notification at the next
meeting of the Presbytery of Sydney. (Stop, said the moderator,
supposing, doubtless, that Dr. L. was going to enter upon a
Justification of the measure in question.) Moderator, said Dr.
L., resuming, you quite mistake me ; I had no intention to enter
into the grounds of this measure, or in any way to discuss it. I
referred to it merely as a note of time —marking, as it did, an im-
portant era in my ministerial career in this colony. Now, as I
understand that there are charges against me, founded on circum-
stances and events antecedent to this period, as well as others
originating after it, before I can answer your question, as to
whether I will place myself at your bar to answer the charges
contained in the libel, I ask you, moderator, whether the Synod
will hear and dispose of all charges of an origin antecedent to
that period first ? You will observe, Moderator, that I am not
at present disputing your right to institute whatever inquiries
you may think proper into my conduct subsequent to that period.
That is not the question now. But as an accused party I have a
right to demand that whatever charges there may be against me
—they shall be taken up and determined successively in the
order of time, and not disposed of in the lump. Am I therefore
to understand, Moderator, that the Synod are willing to enter
upon the consideration of whatever charges they may have
against me, founded on circumstances and events prior to the
6th of February last ? If they are, I will instantly place myself
at your bar, to defend my conduct from such charges, of whatever
kind they may he.
Dr. Lang then sat down, and the Moderator having asked the
opinion of the Synod in reference to his question, various re-
marks were made, pro and con, by various members. Dr.
M‘Garvie, in particular, observed that Dr. Lang’s question was a
fair and reasonable question, and demanded a direct answer,
which he thought the Synod ought to give. The Rev. Messrs.
Atchison, of Wollongong, and Adam, of Windsor, expressed them-
selves to the same effect. The Rev. Messrs. Tait, Fullerton, and
M'lntyre, however, insisted that the Synod should give no such
answer, but proceed with the libel forthwith.
Dr. L., however, having urged that he could not allow the libel


to be read in his hearing till he got a direct answer to his
question, and that if an attempt were made to read it notwith
standing, he would instantly leave the a member ob-
served that the Synod might answer Dr. L. s question, and
thereby satisfy him on the point .from courtesy. Dr. L. replied
that it was not an act of courtesy or favour of any kind he asked
from the Synod, but an act of unquestionable justice. There was
no maxim in British law more firmly established than this, that
a party accused should have the time and place of his offence
specified, and that each specific charge against him should be
tried separately; adding, that as he was a straight-forward man,
and was always ready to give a straight-forward and direct answer
to any question put to him, when it was in his power to do so, he
would immediately give such, an answer to the Moderator s
question when he got a direct and categorical answer to his own.
A member then observed, that as Dr. Lang must have read and
seriously considered the libel, he must be well aware whether
the charges it preferred originated before or after the period he
referred to: to which Dr. L. replied that he had never either
read the libel or heard it read, and knew nothing of its contents.
He only knew that there were charges against him originating in
events prior to the 6th of February, as well as others of a later
origin, and all he asked was that the former of these charges
should be heard and determined first.
In the course of the remarks that were next offered by various
parties, it was distinctly admitted by the Moderator and another
member of Synod, that the libel did contain references to Dr.
Lang's procedure before the 6th of February, by way of aggrava
tion or enforcement of the charges therein preferred, and ongi-
Dating in eveuts of a later date ; but Messrs. Tait and Fullerton
both argued, that, as the specific charges in the libel were Of a
later date than the 6th of February, Dr. Lang's demand was vir-
tually met; adding that there were other charges of a previous
origin but it had been agreed that these should not be brought
forward. The Moderator being then urged to press Dr. L. for an
immediate decision, in answer to his original question as to
whether he would appear at the bar of the Synod to answer the
charges contained in the libel, Dr. L. replied to the following
effect:—
Moderator, I have not yet got a direct answer to my question,
and I cannot he satisfied with the singular explanations now
given me in reply to it. You have yourself distinctly admitted,
and so also has another member of the Court, that the libel con-
tains references to my conduct prior to the 6th of February, by
way of aggravation ; and it has also been admitted since that
there were other charges against me, originating in events prior
to that date, which, it seems, are nowin abeyance, and not to be
brought forward at present. Will the Synod say distinctly—yes
or no—that these charges were fallen from because they were
either frivolous or unfounded, and that it has nothing against me
prior to the 6th of February last? For I will allow no Court on
earth before which I may ever stand as a party accused to travel
over my past history as a minister of the Gospel, and to pick out
whatever it may think proper to work up into charges against me
without specifying time and place, and, binding up these charges
in one volume, to launch it, with its accumulated weight, at my
head.
Mr. Tait then stood up—pale, trembling, and writhing with
emotion —and observed that this discussion could not be suffered
to go on any longer. There were only two places in which the
Synod could recognize any party as standing—in the court or at
the bar—and he insisted that Dr. L. should be considered as not
having appeared to answer, and the libel be read forthwith. The
Moderator having then asked Dr. L. finally whether he would
appear at the bar, and answer to the charges contained in the
libel, Dr. L. spoke as follows
Moderator, since you have refused to answer my question, as
to whether you have any charges against me prior to the 6th of
February last, and whether, if you have, you will enter on these
charges first, I am compelled to put the only construction on
that refusal which it can possibly bear, —viz., that you have
nothing against me prior to that period, but that you have not
the honesty to confess it, because you wish the public to believe
that you have. Like the Apostle Paul, therefore, who, when
denied Justice by a company of Jewish priests, appealed to
Ctesar, I appeal to the people.
This announcement was received with such loud and
hearty demonstrations of approval by the people present, that
Dr. L. was obliged to assist the Moderator in restoring silence ;
the Synod in the meantime being silent and lack-a-daisical
enough. When silence was restored, Dr. L. concluded as
follows: —
Now, Moderator, I am ready to give you a direct answer to your
question, although you have refused such an answer to mine.
In reference, therefore, to all charges preferred against me in
your Court, founded on circumstances and events occurring
either on or after the 6th of February last, when I publicly re-
nounced all connection with the State and with this Synod as a
State Church in this colony, I have only to say that I decline
your jurisdiction.
Dr. L. then took hie hat and walked off, and so did all the stran-
gers who were present bat two or three ; leaving the Synod to
perpetrate their deed of darkness by themselves.
The charges against Dr. Lang, the consideration of which was
proceeded with on Saturday and Monday, were ranged under the
three following heads :
1. Calumny—inasmuch as in his published address to his con-
gregation on the 6th of February last, renouncing all connection
with the State and the State Churches of this colony, he had
characterised the ministers of the Synod generally, although not
without particular exceptions, as being inefficient, worldly-
minded hirelings, and their Church Courts as being for the most
part little better than synagogues of Satan.
2. Schism—in separating himself from the Synod, as well by the
said address as by the proceedings of a pubhc meeting of his
congregation held in the Scots Church, on the 22nd of February
thereafter.
3. Contumacy—in refusing to allow the Rev. W. In tyre to
enter his church or pulpit to notify his suspension to the said
congregation.
At the meeting of yesterday, the Rev. Mr. Hetherington, of
Patrick’s Plains, reported the result of a conversation he had just
had with Dr. Lang, along with the Rev. Mr. Adam of Windsor,
relative to the decision which it was understood the Synod was
about to arrive at; from which it appeared that Dr. L. s return
to the Synod on any terms, was utterly hopeless.
The members being then called to express their sentiments,
Dr M'Garvie strongly urged the propriety of adopting a concili-
atory course, as being best calculated to promote the interests
of the Synod; observing that the evidence adduced was insuffi-
cient to establish the charges, and that even though it had been
sufficient the charges themselves were of such a nature as by no
means to warrant a sentence of such extreme severity as was
contemplated. He remarked, also, that although conciliatory
measures should not have the effect of re-umting Dr. L. with the
Synod they would at least tend to neutralize the vigorous efforts
he was making and the great influence he was exerting in van-
ous directions, and so prevent tlie growth and extension of the
schism that had been produced.
After a few remarks on the peculiar circumstances in which
Dr. L.’s resignation had originated, but which had been studi-
ously kept out of view in the whole course of their enquiry,
although strongly calculated to bring about the very result they
had witnessed, the Rev. Mr. Atchison, of Wollongong, moved that
Dr. Lang’s resignation, presented to the Presbytery of Sydney
on the Ist of March last, be received; observing that any other
proceeding on the part of the Synod was altogether uncalled
for.
The Rev. M. Adam, of Windsor, seconded this motion; urging
that the measure proposed by Mr. Atchison, in the case of Dr.
Lang had already been adopted in that of the Rev. John Gregor,
whose offence in renouncing all the distinguishing principles of
the Presbyterian Church, and entering the Church of England,
was infinitely worse than any implied in the charges brought
against Dr. L.
The Rev. W. M'lntyre having then expressed his opinion that
there was no analogy between the two cases, and that Dr. L. s
washy far the worst, Dr. M‘Gar vie observed that there was
certainly no analogy between them ; but in his estimation the
case of Mr. Gregor was infinitely worse in point of criminality,
than that of Dr. Lang. Mr. G. had been a personal friend of his
own and he had regretted his having been placed in circum-
stances that had deprived the Presbyterian Church of his
services; but he could not shut his eyes to the fact that while Dr.
Lang had at once tendered his resignation to the Synod, through
the Sydney Presbytery, on the Ist of March last, Mr. Gregor had,
without any previous intimation of his intention to the Synod,
opened and completed his negociation for entering the Episco-
palian Church.*
The Rev. Mr. Ross, of Patterson, then moved, and the Rev.
George M'Fie seconded, an amendment recommending depo-
sition, which the Court having declared unintelligible, was
withdrawn.
Mr. Hetherington then moved, and Mr. M'lntyre seconded
another amendment, to the effect that the charges against Dr.
L., contained in the libel, having been found proven, the Court
should proceed to deposition.
On a division there appeared for the motion, Messrs. Atchison,
Adam, and Dr. M'Garvie, ministers; and Mr. Blair, of Sydney,
elder.
* The reference to Mr. Gregor’s case originated in Dr. L.
having incidentally asked Messrs. Adam and Hetherington when
leaving his house, yesterday morning, “ What they had done with
Gregor;” to which Mr. A. replied that “ they had merely pro-
nounced him no longer a Presbyterian minister in connection
with the Synod." “ Then,” observed Dr. L., all the malignity
and opprobrium are reserved for me. I take it kindly.


For the amendment, Messrs. Hetherington, MTntyre, Tait,
Fullerton, Ross, M‘Fie and Purves, ministers ; and Dr. Hill, of
Parramatta, elder.
The Rev. H. Gilchrist, of Camphelltown, declined voting; but
the Moderator (Rev. W. Hamilton, ofGoulburn) volunteered an
expression of his own concurrence in the vote of the majority.
The sentence—which had been all pre-arranged and pre-deter-
mined long before by the pitiful little clique of conspirators who
have for some time past ruled the Synod—was accordingly pro-
nounced in due form by the Moderator, after prayer lor the
divine blessing by Mr. M‘Fie.+
Deposition is the last sentence ofthelawin the Presby-
terian Church, and is uniformly reserved, both in
Scotland and the North of Ireland, for the gravest
offences ; a deposed minister being supposed to desig-
nate some unworthy bolder of the sacred office, who
after a solemn trial, has been degraded by his brethren
for gross and habitual drunkenness, foradultery, for theft,
or for flagrant heresy. Now, the main object of these
charitable men was to give me all this benefit of clergy ■—
to degrade me in the estimation of the colonial public,
by inducing ignorant people and all who were unac
quainted with the facts to believe that I had been guilty
of some atrocious crime. That the whole affair, as far
as I was its object, was a case of malice prepense of the
foulest character, is evident and indisputable from the
very different course pursued by the very same parties
towards two other ministers of their body who had
actually been guilty, one very shortly before and the
other after, of the highest ecclesiastical offence.
It had been found necessary, in the year 1841, in order
to restore peace and harmony to the Colonial Presbyte-
rian Church, that the Rev. James Allan, of Parramatta,
and the Rev. John Gregor, of Maitland, together with
other two ministers who had been occupying these sta-
tions respectively at the same time, should be loosed
from their congregations at Parramatta and Maitland,
and proceed to other stations within the colony. The
other two ministers complied with the injunction of the
Synod and left these localities accordingly. But Messrs.
Allan and Gregor, instead of complying with that in-
junction, publicly renounced their ordination vows, and
declared, in the presence of the congregation of St,
James’s Church in Sydney, that they were moved by the
Holy Ghost to be re-ordained by a Puseyite Bishop to
whom they accordingly vowed implicit obedience. The
loss of these men was doubtless a real gain at
the time to the Presbyterian Church ; but
although they had been guilty of the highest eccle-
siastical offence against the body they had deserted, no
notice whatever was taken of the case by the Synod of
Australia, all the vengeance of the body being reserved
for me. _ ~
To complete my disgrace, the Rev. James Fullerton,
clerk of the Svnod, informed the colonial public,
through the Sydney Herald, that marriages and
baptisms celebrated by me would thenceforth be invalid,
and that I was no longer entitled to the courteous
designation of reverend.
It is well known, however, that in this age of general
enlightenment, ecclesiastical sentences are utterly
+ It was one of the canons of the African Church, in the days
of the celebrated Christian father and martyr, Cyprian,—and the
African Church of that period was as nearly as possible identical
in its constitution with the Church of Scotland—that no bishop
or minister could be deposed from his office without the unani-
mous concurrence of at least twelve other bishops ; but here are
seven engaged in the good work in the face ot an opposing
minority of four ministers ! The population ot Roman Atrica at
the time, according to Gibbon, was seven million, of whom about
one-half were Christians. A disruption, however, took place on
a point of discipline and 400 bishops or ministers about one-
half of the whole number—were at once cut off by the orthodox
party, as they are now termed. These bishops could be nothing
else than Presbyterian bishops or parish ministers.
devoid of all moral force, unless supported by public
opinion. The proceeding of the Synod of Australia in
my affair excited, even among their own professed
adherents, universal disgust and indignation. Even Bishop
Broughton, to whom, as the embodiment of a nefarious
system of State policy, I had been strongly opposed for
a series of years, expressed his astonishment and horror
at the tidings, and so also did the more intelligent
Roman Catholics of our community. But a still
stronger testimony, of an unmistakeable character, was
given" 3 in my favour from an unexpected quarter.
Towards the close of the year 1842, the colony of New
South Wales obtained a Parliamentary Constitution, estab-
lishing a semi-representative legislature, to which the
district of Port Phillip, which was then merely a part of
the great colony of New South Wales, was to return six
members. Sydney, the place of meeting for the Legis-
lature, was so far distant from that district, that the
inhabitants felt it necessary to select certain of their
members from amongst the more prominent residents
of Sydney; and many of their number being from Scot-
land, I was pitched on as one of the candidates to be
proposed. Previous to the invitation I received on the
occasion, the idea of my ever becoming a legislator
had never entered into my mind; but as I was so
situated at the time that I had no Ecclesiastical Court to
appeal to against the iniquitous sentence of the Synod
of Australia, I could not help regarding that invitation
as a providential occurrence, which unexpectedly
afforded me the means of appealing direct to the people;
for the whole proceedings oif the Synod of Australia in
my affair were then fresh in the recollection of the
numerous and highly intelligent Scotch electors of Port
Phillip. So far as I was aware at the time, there had
been no instance of a minister of religion being elected
a member ®f a Legislature in the whole history of
British colonisation; but the celebrated Dr. Wither-
spoon, an eminent minister of the Church of Scotland,
who had been settled for some time in America as Presi-
dent of Princeton College New Jersey, when the troubles
in that country broke out, had been elected one of the
members of the first American Congress, and
was one of the signers of the famous Decla-
ration of Independence; and the well known
and able divine, Dr. Timothy Dwight, of Yale College,
also in that country, had been repeatedly elected a
member of the Legislature of his native State of Massa-
chusetts. In these circumstances I accepted the invi-
tation, and became a candidate for the representation of
Port Phillip ; and although the Synod of Australia,
which could not but foresee the extremely damaging
effect which my election would have upon themselves
and their recent proceeding, did everything in their
power and said all manner of evil against me to prevent
it, I was elected notwithstanding—havinghad a majority
of eight votes above the opposing candidate, the late Sir
Thomas Mitchell.
I continued to represent Port Phillip in the Legisla-
tive Council of New South Wales for four years, till I went
to England, in the year 1846. Shortly after my return to
the colony, in 1850, there was a vacancy in the repre-
sentation of Sydney, and I had the honour to be returned
as one of the two members for the city by a majority of
25 votes over the Government candidate. At the General
Election, in 1851, under an amended Constitution, I was
again elected for the city of Sydney, and placed at the
head of the poll, as the first of its three members, by a
large majority of votes. And on ray return to the
colony, after another voyage to Europe, in 1851, I was
elected for the county of Stanley, in the Moreton Bay
district, in the far north, more than a thousand miles


from the locality I had first represented. I have no
intention to say anything as to my career as a legislator.
I may be permitted, however, without subjecting myself
to the charge of egotism, to express my belief that I
have been honoured to leave “footprints on the sands
of time ” in Australia, that will never be effaced.
Neither is it my intention to say anything about the
services rendered to the cause of religion in these
colonies by the Synod of New South Wales, the eccle-
siastical body that was instituted at my instance, in the
year 1850 ; for I had stood alone for the previous eight
years. Reduced although the ministers of that body are
at this moment, through death, disease, arad desertion,
to not more than seven, we have yet a record of moral
and religious influence to appeal to, which is animating
in the highest degree, and cannot but put our adver-
saries to the blush. The United Presbyterian Church,
in Victoria, which already numbers, at least, a dozen of
ministers, owes its existence entirely to a humble effort
of my own in sending home one of my elders in the
year 1844, to invite one or two ministers of that body to
co-operate with us in the great work of evangelizing
Australia. One of the two he sent out settled in Mel-
bourne, and this is the result. I had established a
German mission to the Aborigines of Moreton Bay, in
the year 1838 ; and in the year 1850 I brought out with
me, along with other candidates for the ministry from
the mother-country, one, now the Rev. Matthias Goethe,
from the continent of Europe. Mr. Goethe, a man of
apostolic, zeal and splendid acquirements, and three of
the brethren from Moreton Bay—all ordained and sent
forth by the Synod of New South Wales —now constitute
the only evangelical ministry for a population of twenty
thousand Germans in the province of Victoria.
But the real object of the Synod of Australia in acting
so differently towards me from the manner in which
they acted towards Messrs. Allan and Gregor, was the
hope they entertained of getting immediate possession,
not only of the Scots Church and the valuable allot-
ments belonging to it, but also of the pile of buildings
which I had erected, chiefly through the sacrifice of my
own property, for the establishment of the Australian
College, and which they innocently imagined was part
of the property of the church. Apparently ignorant
that the days of Pope Hildebrand were past, and sup-
posing that the thunders of so contemptible a Vatican
as that of the Synod of Australia, in 1842, would shake
the universe, they proceeded to declare the Scots Church
vacant, and demanded to be put in possession of the pro-
perty—a declaration and demand which, of course, my
congregation treated with the contempt they deserved.
For the Scots Church being under a peculiar trustee-
ship, which had come into existence long before the
Synod of Australia was formed, it was a matter of much
greater difficulty to deal with that property than with
other Presbyterian Church property of recent origin.
Being, therefore, repulsed on their first attempt, and
finding that there were serious obstacles in the way
which they had not anticipated, fourteen years were
suffered to elapse, during which no step what-
ever was taken in the case; but having in
the meantime obtained, by some surreptitious
means, and in direct violation of the first
principles of the ecclesiastical law of Scotland, an
alleged confirmation of their iniquitous sentence of
deposition from the Presbytery of Irvine, by which I had
been both licensed and ordained, a suit in equity was
recently instituted against me, at the instance of the
Synod of Australia, for the possession of the property
of the Scots Church and the Australian College; in the
progress of which the Rev. Dr. Fullerton, of Sydney, who
has all along been the ecclesiastical nightman of the
Synod, doing all its dirty and disgraceful work, of which
I have already exhibited a fair specimen, actually swore
through three foolscap pages of a voluntary affidavit in
reference to the facts and occurrences detailed in the out-
set of this paper—facts and occurrences which had taken
place 25 years before, with which, moreover, he was totally
unacquainted, and which were directly at variance with
his impudent and reckless, although sworn allegations.
The decision of the Judge was, so far as it could go,
entirely in my favour; declaring, in accordance with the
preceding statement, that the Scots Church had nothing
to do with the College Buildings, and that the property
of the church was, in no way, under the control of the
Synod of Australia. Desirous, however, that my cha-
racter as a minister of religion should not be damaged
in the estimation of the public by the outrageous pro-
ceedings of that Synod, and the prima facie case they
would establish against me, I had instructed ray counsel,
at the commencement of the suit, to apply to the Court
for a commission to examine several of the most eminent
ministers of the Church of Scotland, as to whether the
proceedings of the Synod of Australia, in my affair in
the year 1842, were accordant with law and justice,
according to the principles and practice of the Church of
Scotland. And that commission being granted at once,
the object of this Statement, which I now publish for the
information of all concerned, is to place the whole facts
of the case before those able and honorable men, to
whose judgment it will shortly be submitted.
I have already hinted that the Synod of Australia
exhibited, for at least ten years from the period at which
I was constrained to renounce all connection with the
body, the most pitiful incapacity for the management of
a Christian church, and the want of everything like
common sense, as well as Christian zeal. Let the fol-
lowing particulars prove whether I have not been in the
right.
1. During that decennial period, in which the colonial
population had doubled itself, although the Episcopalian
and Romish Churches of the colony both doubled the
number of their respective ministers and priests, there
was no addition made to the numbers of the Presbyterian
State Church.
2. Nothing was done by the body, during that long
period, for the interests of education. In the year 1837,
on my return to the colony, after a voyage to England, I
brought out not fewer than 12 ministers, and 15 school-
masters, and made arrangements for others to follow;
in several instances in both cases, entirely at my own
cost. But the Synod did nothing in addition. They
traded exclusively on my ecclesiastical capital, and
merely worked, in the most languid manner, the
machinery I had previously set up t© their hand.
3. I have shown how they destroyed the fair prospect
of the establishment of a college for the education of can-
didates for the ministry in the Presbyterian Church in
the year 1841, —for it is the easiest thing in the world,
and requires no other quality than mere malice to des-
troy—but have they ever done anything earthly for that
noble object, have they ever sacrificed a silver sixpence
for it, to the present day ? I answer, No !
4. The majority of the Synod were rabid Free Church-
men and disruptionists, up to the year 1843, when they
found, to their utter astonishment and sorrow, that the
men in Scotland were in earnest. The tidings of the
actual disruption reached Sydney a few days before their
annual meeting in October of that year; but, although
they were upwards of a whole week in session, they never
mentioned it! Oh! no—they never mentioned it. Like


Zaeharias the priest, at the vision of the angel in the
temple, the unwelcome tidings struck them dumb, and
they were speechless on the subject for twelve months.
5. It was necessary, however, under the cutting ridi-
cule of the colonial public, to say something about it in
the year 1844; and a series of half-way resolutions, offer-
ing the right hand of fellowship to the Free Church and
the left hand to the State Church, that they might have
all the credit of being identified with the one and all the
pecuniary profit of belonging to the other, was passed by
a majority of thirteen to three, and transmitted to the
moderators of both Assemblies in Edinburgh.* I had
predicted that these resolutions would be received by
both Assemblies with ridicule and contempt; and it
turned out exactly as I had anticipated. The celebrated
Dr. Merle D’Aubigne, of Geneva, was present in the
Free Church Assembly when the resolutions were an-
nounced, and he tells us they were received with loud
“ guffaws” of what Homer, I suppose, would call “ inex-
tinguishable laughter.” The General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland treated them somewhat differently,
by appointing a committee to take them into consider-
ation, and by declaring afterwards, on the recommenda-
tion of that committee, that the whole thirteen who ad-
hered to the resolutions were no longer ministers of the
Church of Scotland.!- It is gratifying, however, to think
that there were so many Cranmers in the lot. It is,
doubtless, easy for such men, and it costs them nothing
earthly, to recant in such circumstances ; so they re-
canted accordingly, and were soon safe back again in
“ the old Held.”
6. There were a few, however—four altogether—the
Eev W. Hamilton, of Goulburn, author of the Half-way
Eesolutions; the Eev. John Tait, of Parramatta; the
Eev.W, Mclntyre, of Maitland; and the Eev. Colin Stewart,
of Bowenfells, who thought better of it, and made up
their minds to “ disrupt,” in the year 1846. But, as they
had taken three years to do so, it was not wonderful
that the people had, in the meantime, grown very cool
about it. How, then, did they act in such an emergency ?
Why, like those men who are wiser in their generation
than the children of light: for, as a person who occupies
the first or second floor of a large house, and awakes
during the night to find the house on fire, and no other
means of escape left him than by leaping over the win-
• The following is a specimen of these world-famed Eesolu-
tions ;
“ They considered the Free Church and the Establishment
to he both portions of the Catholic Church of Christ, and that
communion could be held with both. If any member thought
right to divest himself, by a private act of demission, of a right to
hold the presentation to a parish in Scotland, the Synod would
not subject him to any disqualification as a colonial minister and
a member of their Court.”
+ The following was the deliverance of the General Assembly
on the subject:—
At the evening sitting—“ Dr. Eobertson gave in the report of
the Committee appointed in the forenoon, to consider the reso-
lutions passed by the Synod of Australia. The committee recom-
mended that those ministers who adhered to the resolutions
should no longer be regarded as ministers of the Church of Scot-
land, and that copies of the minute be transmitted to the Mode-
rator and Clerk of the Australian Synod, and to the Secretary for
the Colonies.” Agreed to.
The thirteen who were thus ignominiously turned out of the
Church of Scotland, for which they had nevertheless professed
such heroic sentiments, were as follows: —Those with an asterisk
prefixed to their names had never in reality belonged to that
Church, being legally unqualified to hold any appointment in
connection with it.
* Rev. C Atchison, Wollongong; *H. Gilchrist, Campbell-
town, since deceased; W. Hamilton, Goulburn; *C. Eipper,
JBraidwood; J. Hetherington, Patrick’s Plains, now of Mel-
bourne; T. Mowbray, now at Moreton Bay, and ab agendo-, *M.
Adam, Windsor; *Dr. Fullerton, Sydney; W. McTntyre, Mait-
land; J. Forbes, Melbourne, since deceased; * E. Blain, Hinton;
J. Tait, Parramatta, now in Geelong ; C. Stewart, Bowenfells.
dow, earnestly desires a feather - bed, or
even a dunghill, to break his fall, so these
intending disruptionists, before taking the grand leap, duly
apprised the Legislature of their intention by a formal
petition, and earnestly solicited the boon of a political
feather-bed or dunghill to break their fall, in the shape
of a special endowment for themselves as intending
Free Churchmen. But the local Government having
very properly refused them this boon, they were obliged
to disrupt without the endowment; and the result was
that the Eev. W. Hamilton, finding that his people
■would not support him as a Free Churchman, had to go
to Port Phillip and open a boarding-school. Mr. Colin
Stewart had to do the same at Bowenfells. Mr. Tait,
after languishing for a time at Parramatta, and making
repeated but ineffectual attempts to get to Sydney, to which
Mr. Mclntyre, who it was said wished to be there
himself, was strongly opposed, made “ a moonlight
flitting” at length from New South Wales, in defiance
of the very Synod which he had helped to form, and is
now settled as a Free Churchman at Geelong, in
Victoria. Mr. Mclntyre remained at his pest, as a
minister, at Maitland, and was thus the solitary excep-
tion to prove the general rule ; although, having funds
from another quarter independently of his congregation,
he can scarcely be considered as an exception. Such
then is the hole of the pit out of which the Free Church
Synod of Eastern Australia was originally dug. In the
want of common sense, as well as in the utter lack of
high principle that characterised its origin, it certainly
bears a strong family resemblance to the Synod of
Australia. In these remarks, however, I
speak exclusively of the men who were
concerned in the outrageous proceedings of the latter
Synod in 1842. I have no desire to say anything
condemnatory of the men who have come out from
Scotland for either of these Synods within the last few
years.
I impute the proceedings in question in the
year 1842 entirely to an unprincipled combina-
tion, and conspiracy—such as is not altogether
unparalleled in the Presbyterian Church—on the part
of the Eev. John Tait, of Parramatta, the Eev.
James (now Dr.) Fullerton, of Sydney, and the Eev.
William Mclntyre, of Maitland. These men were all of
diminutive stature, but of overweening vanity and self-
conceit ; and so long as they were sworn brothers, which
was only for a short season, while they were banded to-
gether against myself, they were commonly known in
the colony as the three Tooley- street Tailors. They had
all come out at my special instance and through my
personal exertions, in the year 1837 ; Mr. Mclntyre,
however, being the only one of the three who had been
selected by myself. They were all previously in very
humble and obscure situations at home. Mr. Tait was
a town missionary in the town of Greenock, but with no
prospect of a settlement in Scotland. Mr. Fullerton
was settled at a place called Benburb, under the Synod
of Ulster, in the north of Ireland, where all that his con-
gregation could give him, in addition to .£7O a-year of
Regium Donum, was the starvation allowance of
£'27 4s. 5d., and Mr. Mclntyre was teaching a second
rate school in Tradeston, one of the suburbs of Glasgow.
My own voyage, both home and out on that occasion, as
well as all my travelling and other expenses in England,
were defrayed from my own private resources ; but I
got £l5O for each of these ministers, as well as for eight
or ten others, from the public funds to defray the cost
of their passage out.* In short, they all owed everything
* During my absence from the colony on this occasion, my pul
pit was supplied by two licentiates of the Presbyterian Church ,


to me ; but t ara not in the least astonished that they
should, notwithstanding, have all turned against me.
This is human nature, and in perfect accordance
with its usual developments. Our blessed Saviour
cured ten lepers, but there was only one who returned
to give him thanks. Now Ido think I have experienced
a return of gratitude from one out of every ten of the
numerous ministers and schoolmasters, and others,
whom I have been instrumental in bringing out, from
obscurity and penury at home, to prominence and com-
fort and comparative independence in these colonies.
lam sure I cannot boast of a higher proportion; but,
with such an example to modify one’s expectations, why
should I look for it ?
Mr. Tait was a mere shallow-brained pretender, who
made up for his want of real ability by his pomposity
and affectation. His undisguised and unprovoked hos-
tility to myself was constantly exhibiting itself in in-
stances which I can still recollect, but which I should
scorn to repeat; and his envy and malignity were
equally evident and offensive. In short, Mr. Tait had
all the natural qualifications for a Dominican in-
quisitor.
The Rev. James (now Dr.) Fullerton is, in point of
literary and ministerial qualities, a miserable Hibernian
driveller, with neither ability nor respectability. How
then, it may be asked, could he have got an
Academical degree from a Scottish University ? Why, it
happened as follows : —He wrote a sort of begging letter
to the Rev. Dr. Brown, of Aghadowey, in the north of
Ireland, a well-meaning, good-natured man, oh whom he
had some claims; telling him that, as he was then Clerk
of the Synod of Australia, it would tend greatly to the
honour and glory of that body, as well as to his own,
if he could get him anything of the kind
through his clerical friends in Scotland. The
Church of Scotland was then at open war
with the Scotch Voluntaries, and any countenance it
received from any quarter out of Scotland, especially
from the recipients of the Regium Donum in Ireland,
was peculiarly acceptable. Dr. Brown took advantage
of this feeling, when in the course of a missionary tour
in Scotland, he had to visit Aberdeen ; soliciting and
obtaining from the University of that city a degree for
the Clerk of the Synod of Australia 1 The whole affair
was something like that species of swindling designated
obtaining goods on false pretences. The late Rev. Mr.
Murray, ;of the North Church of Aberdeen, related the
whole circumstance to me, as he had had it from Dr,
Brown himself, in his own house. I shall only add for
the benefit of those it concerns, that it is discreditable
in the extreme to any University, and absolutely ruinous
to the interests of learning, to prostitute its titles in any
such way.
The Rev. William Mclntyre undoubtedly possesses
abilities of a particular kind, although somewhat
muddy-headed, flat, and insipid. Dogmatical, and fond
of power to an inordinate degree, he was nevertheless
apt to become the dupe of far inferior men (as was
doubtless the case in the coalition he joined against
myselfl who either flattered his vanity or wrought upon
but as they were not ordained ministers, the baptisms and
marriages, which would otherwise have been solemnized in the
Scots Church, were solemnized for the most part by the late
Rev. Dr. McGarvie. By the colonial regulations a minister absent
on leave receives half salary during his absence ; and on this
occasion, a portion, I think about ono half, of this half salary
due to me was claimed by Dr. McGarvie and paid by the Govern-
ment, on the ground that he had had additional baptisms and
marriages to solemnize in consequence of my absence in Eng-
land ! As an Instance of despicable covetousness, I think this
is quite unparalleled in the history of the Presbyterian Church.
Dr. McGarvie died in 1833, worth, it is said, .£13,000.
his fears. Believing him as I did from the first sincerely
pious and devoted, I had the highest esteem for him ;
and although we differed widely in opinion on some
subjects, especially on the relations of Church and
State, I am quite sure we never exchanged one angry
word. So strongly was I prepossessed in his favour
from the first, that I recollect walking one dark night,
when I had arrived in Glasgow by the railway from
London or Liverpool, about two miles through the
rain and sleet to induce him to come out to this colony.
He lived more than two years under my roof in Sydney,
during my own absence in England and America, and
was tended by my family for the whole of that period, as if
he had been my brother. It was, therefore, with a sink-
ing of spirits, with a feeling of painful misgiving which
I cannot describe, that I found Mr. McTntyre banded
against me along with two such contemptible men as
Messrs. Tait and Fullerton. The Roman Catholics have
a blasphemous book, written by some Spanish or Italian
monk, entitled “ The Conformities of St. Francis.” I
have reason to be thankful to Mr, McTntyre for enabling
me to realize something of the Conformities also. It is
to him I stand indebted for being enabled to appropriate
the following verses of the 85th Psalm, which I shall take
the liberty to quote from ray own metrical version of the
Psalms of David, written at sea—
’Twas not my bitter foe whose tongue
Reproachfully maligned my name,
And violently wrought me wrong,
Else had I borne or shunned the shame.
But thou, my bosom friend, ’twas thou,
With whom my soul had converse sweet,
Oft as we paid the solemn vow,
In God’s house where his people meet.
I believe it was my Book on America—my indirect plea
for the freedom of Religion in these noble colonies—
that turned the head of this narrowminded, this un-
worthy Celt.
But, although Messrs. Tait, Fullerton, and MTntyre
were unquestionably the three conspirators in the famous
case of alleged deposition in 1842,1 must acknowledge
that they were zealously followed up by all the others
concerned. It may not be out of place, therefore, to
add a few particulars as to some of these other Scots
Worthies.
The Rev. W. Purvis, then of Port Macquarie, now of
Maitland, had arrived in the colony as a licentiate of the
Church of Scotland during my absence in England and
America in the years 1839 and 1840. Being quite a man
of the world, Mr. Purvis was for some time undecided as
to whether he would take to preaching or squatting; but
having at length resolved upon the latter, he obtained
an interest in a squatting station in the South
country, and lived as a regular squatter for
a twelvemonth or more; appearing, when he came to
Sydney, in a squatter’s dress and armed with the usual
appendage of a stockwhip. Finding, I suppose, how-
ever, that squatting would not answer, he took to
preaching, and was ordained at length for Port Mac-
quarie; and it was after his settlement in that locality
that he was absent from his charge, as I have already
observed, nine or ten weeks together, looking after his
stock and station in the South country, and leaving
his devoted people to shift for themselves.
After I had renounced all connection with the Synod,
charges deeply affecting the moral character of Mr.
Purvis were tranmitted to me, in the first instance, both
by a magistrate of the territory in the district, and by a
respectable Scotch inhabitant of the place; and the
thing becoming notorious, the late Rev. Df.
M'Garvie, who had been quite an adept at white-


washing for a long time previous, and Dr. Fullerton, <
having been appointed a committee to investigate ■
the case, they declared there was nothing in it, and Mr.
Purvis was cleared. Of the public money allotted to the
different State Churches of the colony, there is a certain
amount intended for church-building ; and a church
being in process of erection at Ipswich, in the Moreton
Bay district, it was confidently expected by those con-
cerned that the sum of five hundred pounds would be
forthcaming from that fund towards the erection of the
church. But when the parties who had made them-
selves responsible for the money applied for the five
hundred pounds, it was found that it had been appro-
priated by Mr. Purvis, by what authority I know not, to
defray the expenses of his late voyage to England; and
the parties aggrieved are now threatening to sell the
church for the debt. All my expenses, on my seven
voyages to and from England, were always defrayed from
my own resources. . ,
The Rev. George McFie, who implored the divine
blessing on my deposition, was one of the twelve minis-
ters I brought out from Scotland, on the recommenda-
tion of the General Assembly’s Committee, in the year
1837 having previously been minister of some Pres-
byterian chapel in the Moorlands of the county of Cum-
berland in England ; and the manse and valuable glebe
he occupies at Pitt Town on the Hawkesbury were pur-
chased for the church by myself from funds I had col-
lected for the purpose in Scotland in the year 1825. On
bis arrival in the colony, Mr. McFie was sent to Penrith,
where there was then a favourable prospect for the
settlement of an acceptable minister. The late Sir John
Jamison, who resided in the neighbourhood, having been
of Presbyterian descent in the North of Ireland, was
disposed at the time to patronize a Presbyterian minis-
ter in that locality; but he complained to me very
bitterly of the sort of man they had sent—
so uncouth both in manners and appearance
and with a voice that seemed to come from the
interior of a porter-hogshead. Of course, there was no
settlement for Mr. McFie at Penrith, and it was a con
siderable time before he got one in his present sphere /
hut his wife having had some money, which he had
repeatedly declared he had come out to invest in sheep
and cattle, with the prospect of going home with a
fortune in a few years, he attended one of the late
Mr Samuel Lyons’ sales of stock, in Sydney, within
three months after his arrival in the colony, and pur-
chased a lot of sheep or cattle to commence business
with as a grazier. The remark I made on the occasion,
of which I believe Mr. McFie had a perfect recollection
in 1842, was that “ as he found he could not get a cure
of soles’he was determined, at all events, to have a cure
of cluits** 1 *
Of the Rev. Irving Hetherington, now of Melbourne,
the mover of the amendment, which was carried, in
1842 I may have something to say hereafter. For the
present, as he is no longer a member of the Synod of
Australia, I shall let him alone.
The Rev Mr. Ross, of Goulburn, was one of the Gaelic
Ministers who was sent out, along with about 4000
Scotch Highlanders, then in great destitution, to whom
Lord Glenelg, with the concurrence of the Privy Council,
was induced to give a free passage out to Australia at
the expense of our land fund, in the years 1837, 1838,
1889 and 1840. It was at my suggestion, exclusively,
that the Highlanders were sent out on that occasion;
and it was also on my recommendation, through Sir
George Grey, that the ministers were sent along with
The synonime for the hoofa of sheep and cattle in the Scot-
tish dialect.
them. It would have been strange, therefore, if in such
circumstances, Mr. Ross had not resembled the nine
lepers who were cleansed and forgot all about it, rather
than the one who returned to give God thanks.
Of the Rev. W. Hamilton, the Moderator on the
occasion in question, 1 shall leave the Halfway
Resolutions to proclaim his utter incapacity for
anything connected with the government of a Christian
Cl Now!*l have no hesitation in expressing my belief and
conviction that when this plain truthful statement, which
carries its own evidence on the face of it, shall be read,
together with the documents that will accompany it, by
those eminent ministers of the Church of Scotland, to
whom it will shortly be submitted, they will declare
unanimously, and at once, that the proceedings of the
Synod of Australia towards me in the year 1842, were
not only utterly unwarranted, but absolutely monstrous
and disgraceful —contrary alike to Scottish ecclesiastical
law, and to British justice. And I am confident also
that they will insist upon that Synod, as the first step
in the process of needful reformation, as well as under
pain of incurring'the high displeasure of the mother-
church, forthwith to repeal its own scandalous and dis-
graceful decision of 1842 in regard to myself, and to erase
every syllable respecting it from its records. When
that is done—but not till then—it will be time to talk
about a union of the different sections of the
Presbyterian Church, and the establishment of a
Presbyterian College in this colony. Such a union
must not be the work of a few clerical drivellers; it
must be such as will commend itself to the great body
of the Presbyterian people throughout this land. A
Presbyterian College is neither to be looked for nor
received from the effete fribblers of 1841 and 1842,
whose infatuated and suicidal conduct destroyed the
noble prospect there really was for the establishment ot
such a College for all these colonies after my return
from Van Diemen’s Land and Port Phillip,
fifteen years ago. Let a comprehensive union
on fair and honorable terms, he the sine qua
g non in this matter; and let not one sixpence be sub-
cribed for a College by any intelligent Presbyterian who
has a particle cither of public spirit or of self-respect,
till it is effected.
Through my exertions in the Legislative Council in
1854, the establishment of a Presbyterian College was
left equally open to all Presbyterians throughout the
colony. The three Synods are, therefore, all on pre-
cisely the same footing in this matter, and it cannot,
therefore, be permitted to become a monopoly in the
hands either of one or of two. And let it be remembered
that the only splendid donation that has hitherto been
made for this object, was made from the body with
which lam identified. My late brother-in-law, Mr. .
H. Baillie, who belonged to the Synod of New South
Wales, and was a member of my congregation till his
death, left the whole of his property, subject to the life
rent of his widow, for the endowment of two professor-
ships in a Presbyterian College, to be established in
Sydney; and it was chiefly to prevent that noble endow-
ment from falling into exceptionable hands, as it might
otherwise have done, that I laboured, and laboured suc-
cessfully to get the future Presbyterian College kept
open for all in 1854. Let the Synod of Australia and the
i Svnod of Eastern Australia—the State Church and the
Free Church—shew something equally munificent from
' each of their respective quarters, towards this noble
t object. I can only hope they may.
When a union of the Presbyterian Church on a broad
and firm basis is effected, and a Presbyterian College


established, it will be absolutely necessary to have a
preparatory academy for the training up of candidates
for the ministry from all parts of the colony, previous
to their entrance into the College and University; and
for this purpose the £3500 advanced from the public
treasury for the establishment of the Australian College
twenty-five years ago, may all still be available. About
£2OOO additional was contributed by the public ; but
that whole amount and very considerably more was
expended in the progress of the Institution (indepen-
dently of the buildings) in passage-money from England,
in salaries, in house-rent, in books, and philosophical
apparatus. The only parties connected with the Insti-
tution who contributed more than £5O each, were
Mr. George Bowman and Mr. William Bowman
M.P., the former of whom paid £4OO, and the latter
£2OO. When the property—consisting of the two upper
houses in the range of buildings in Jamison-
street comes to be sold, in order to
a final settlement of the questions involved in it, I pro-
pose that £3OO of these amounts should he repaid from
the proceeds, to the former of these gentlemen, and
£lOO to the latter, to be devoted to the Presbyterian
College, or otherwise as they please; and that the
£3500 representing the original amount advanced by
Government, which I shall hold sacred for the purposes
of education, should be expended in the establishment
of such a preparatory academy as I have indicated, to be
situated on the vacant allotment of the Scots Church;
deducting from that amount the estimated value of the
hall or lecture-room already erected, which must form
a part of the educational establishment, and which was
erected, I may say, exclusively at my expense.* I shall
then, I conceive, have honourably discharged my duty
to the Government and the public in this matter; for
while a considerably larger amount will still be available
for the cause of education than any person can have a
right to expect under all the circumstances I have
detailed, I shall only recover a mere fragment of my own
property from the wreck.
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D. and A.M.,
Minister of the Scots Church, Sydney;
Honorary Member of the African Insti-
tute of France, of the American Oriental
Society, and of the Literary Institute of
Olinda in the Brazils.
Sydney, 24th November, 1856
* The Australian College, after a partial revival in 1850 and
1851, ceased altogether to exist as an educational institution on
the Ist of April, lffs4 ; the prospects that were then opened up
for the establishment of a Presbyterian College in connection
with the University of Sydney, rendering the farther existence
of that Institution on its former footing unnecessary. I brought
in a Bill into the Legislative Council of that year, with a view to
the final settlement of the questions of property alluded to above ;
but in consequence of the illnatured opposition of the Synod oi
Australia, it had to be withdrawn for a time. While this Bill was
in suspense, the hall or lecture-room was occupied (gratuitously
on my part) by the Philharmonic Society, for their practisings
and rehearsals; but when the Bill was withdrawn, the Society
offered to rent the hall, which they did accordingly from the Ist
of January, 1855. This will explain Mr. Justice Therry’s allusions
to fiddling in the hall. I can shew that the building was erected
as I have stated above, and as I had never received one farthing
of interest for the money I had sunk in it from the year 1841,1
had no misgivings as to the course I had pursued.


APPENDIX.
At the particular request of parties desirous of trans-
mitting to Scotland copies of this document, which has
formed the basis of the late extraordinary proceedings of
the Synod of Australia, in the case of Dr. Lang, we are
induced to re-publish it in our present number, from the
Observer of February 9. It is as follows:
ADDRESS.
Christian Friends and Brethren —l deem it ex-
pedient and necessary to apprise you, thus early and in
this public manner, of a circumstance of no small
importance to myself individually, in whatever manner
it may be regarded by some of you, which you might
otherwise come to be apprised of in a more objectionable
way.
You are aware therefore that a new dissension has
most unexpectedly arisen in the Colonial Presbyterian
Church, and has already assumed so serious an aspect as,
in my opinion, to render indispensably necessary a step
of which I had not the most distant idea within the last
few weeks.
That the Presbyterian form of Church government is
not only apostolic but divine—that it is the form insti-
tuted by the Lord Jesus, and uniformly carried out by
hi? apostles—l am now more strongly convinced than
ever from my own long experience and observation both
at home and abroad. It must be evident, however, that
the peculiar character of that system of Church govern-
ment, which places ail the office bearers of the Church
on precisely the same level as to power or authority,
renders it indispensably necessary that there should be
mutual confidence on the part of these office bearers,
mutual esteem and mutual respect. The mere master
of slaves may either hold these slaves in unmurmuring
subjection, or reduce them, when in a state of disturb-
ance, to external quiet by the mere exercise of authority
—and if a minister of religion, invested with arbitrary
power over his brethren, he may create a moral desolation,
and call it peace; he may produce the stillness and stag-
nation of spiritual death, and call it tranquillity. But
we have not so learned Christ; we have not so sacrificed
the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. We
have been divinely taught to call no man master, seeing
one is our Master, even Christ; and all we, his professed
disciples, are brethren.
But the office-bearers in any Church in which this
truly apostolic and divinely instituted system of Church
government prevails, must be brethren in reality, and
not merely by profession—in order to render that system
either tolerable on the one hand, or practicable on the
other. They must be animated by one spirit—they
D R - LANG’S ADDRESS.
(From the Colonial Observer of 1842. J
must be pursuing one object—and that spirit must be
the spirit of Christ, and that object the glory of God,
and the salvation' of men. In short, the Presbyterian
system of Church government is fitted only for a Church
of Christ, and not for a mere synagogue of Satan—a
mere society of worldlings or hirelings. When adminis-
tered by men of the latter description, men who show
by their actions that they are destitute of the spirit of
Christ, the Presbyterian system of Church government
degenerates into an instrument of the grossest tyranny,
alike intolerable and contemptible.
Now it appears to me that the Presbyterian Church
in this colony has fallen in great measure into this
unhappy condition. On my return to the colony about
eleven months ago, I immediately, and in a spirit of
entire confidence in my brethren, signed the bond of
union, and entered the new Synod which had then been
but recently constituted, without the slightest hesitation;
taking such other steps as were requisite for placing this
Church and congregation under its superintendence and
authority. I did my utmost also immediately there-
after to give effect to an act of Synod which had then
just been passed, although without my previous con-
currence, (for I had not returned to the colony at the
time,) in the removal of the four former ministers from
Maitland and Parramatta; and I even went personally
and repeatedly to the latter of these localities to induce
the congregation to submit to the Synod, and to elect as
their future minister their present pastor (Mr. Tait). At
the meeting of Synod in October last, I am conscious also
of having exerted myself in every possible way to
promote the peace and prosperity, the honour and
advancement of our beloved Zion, (and, as some of you,
my Christian brethren, will bear witness,) with by no
means indifferent success. The Synod having on that
occasion agreed to recognise a course of Academical
education for the training up of young men for the
ministry in the Institution with which I have been so
long connected, I took occasion, with the express
concurrence of a majority of the elders, as well as of a
meeting of the committee of management of this Church
and congregation, to visit the neighbouring colonies of
Port Phillip and Yan Dieman’s Land, to endeavour to
interest their Presbyterian inhabitants in the accomplish-
ment of an object of such vital importance to us all, both
as Christians and as Presbyterians. You are well aware
of the cordial and even flattering reception I experienced
on that occasion, and of the hearty concurrence given by
our friends and brethren in both of these flourishing
colonies, towards the accomplishment of our common
object.
It grieves me to the heart, however —not so much for


myself individually, (for in this respect I confess I am
quite indifferent,) as for the miserable prospect it
affords for our beloved Church in this land—it grieves
me to state that all these efforts, so honestly intended,
and carried out with so much personal inconvenience,
personal sacrifice, and self-denial, have been received by
a comparatively large number of my brethren, not only
with the utmost coldness and indifference, but with a
spirit of rancorous hostility towards myself individually,
which I firmly believe could have emanated only from
the Father of Evil. At the recent meetings of the
Presbytery of Sydney and Commission of Synod, held
during the past month, a series of the most uncalled
for, unprovoked, unchristian, and suicidal attacks were
made, not only upon myself individually but upon every
object or Institution with which I was either connected
or identified ; insomuch that our Church Courts,
instead of exhibiting, as they ought to do, friendly and
Christian assemblies of brethren, met fpr the building up
of our Zion, and the general advancement of the cause
of God in the land, degenerated into a mere arena for the
exercise and display of pitiful and personal malignity.
In these circumstances I confess, Christian friends
and brethren, and I do so, I assure you, with the most
unfeigned sorrow, I have lost all confidence in a com-
paratively large number of my brethren; and it is
impossible, therefore, that I can regard them hereafter
with that esteem and respect which are indispensably
necessary for the welfare and advancement of a
Church of Christ. It is quite possible, indeed, that
these feelings may be reciprocal; and if so, who is
there to judge between us ? This, however, is obvious
and unquestionable, that a house divided agaircst itself
cannot stand. But if lam the Achan in the camp, as is
doubtless alleged by certain of my brethren, I am not
only willing but determined to leave it—to leave them
in quiet and undisturbed possession, forthwith and for
ever. In short, despairing of the cause of God in this
colony—at least through the instrumentality of the
Presbyterian Church as at present constituted—! have
resolved, after mature deliberation, to resign the
pastoral charge of this Church and congregation, and to
seek some other field of Christian exertion, where my
services will be better appreciated, and my honest self-
denying efforts for the building up of our Zion be
met with the friendly and cordial co-operation of Christian
men.
I have come to this resolution, I confess, with the
less hesitation, after attentively considering the manner
in which the Christian ministry is supported in these
colonies, compared with the recent manifestations to
which I have already referred; for after nearly nineteen
years’ experience and observation in this country, I am
irresistibly led to the conclusion that all the sordid
worldlymindedness, the lamentable inefficiency, the
clerical delinquency, and the strife and contention that have
hitherto characterised and disgraced the Presbyterian
Church in this territory are distinctly and exclusively
traceable to its connection with the State ; for if such a con-
nection had not subsisted, and (if Christian ministers in
this colony had been dependent solely on the good
providence of God and the Christian affections of their
people, these enormous evils would either never have
existed, or, if they had, would speedily have disap-
peared.
In regard to the abstract question of a connection
between Church and State, I have already subscribed
our National Standard, the Westminster Confession of
Faith, and I am quite willing to do so again. I do not
regard such a connection as either sinful or unlawful.
But it is evident, the question assumes a totally different
form and character in this country from what it does
either in the abstract or in Scotland. The question here
is simply this, “ are we by receiving State support, on
the principle and condition that that support shall he
extended to all religions and superstitions alike, to
countenance, by our practice and example, the
monstrous heresy that all religions are alike, and
therefore all equally deserving of support from the
State ?” We may doubtless profess to think otherwise,
whatever our practice may be in this respect; but so
long as we continue to receive State support from a
Government that proclaims and acts upon this principle,
we are unquestionably doing our utmost to maintain
and propagate the damnable delusion. Conceiving,
therefore, that the radical and fundamental principle of
all the Religious Establishments of this colony is *a
thoroughly anti-Christian and infidel principle, of which
the uniform tendency and result in this land has
hitherto been irreligion and infidelity, I cannot be a
party to the maintenance of such a system of infidelity
and delusion, or, in other words, I cannot continue to eat
the Queen’s bread as a minister of religion in this colony,
any longer.
I am the more confirmed in this resolution in
contemplating the present moral and religious aspect
of the colony. You are all aware that for several years
past, through the gross and highly culpable mismanage-
ment of our Colonial Government in the matter of
Immigration, Popery has been coming in like a flood
upon this devoted land. And where, think you, is the
spirit of the Lord to lift up a standard against this
mortal enemy of all pure and undefiled religion ? Is it
in the Protestant Episcopal Church ? Alas ! brethren,
the matin and vesper be Us which we now hear daily in
one at least of the Episcopal Churches of this Colonial
Capital, proclaim to us in sufficiently intelligible
language the probable and speedy advent of something
like a Protestant mass and an incorporating union with
the Church of Rome. Is it in the Presbyterian Church
as at present constituted ? Yes, brethren, if the spirit
of the Lord is a spirit of the grossest worldly-mindedness
and inefficiency, a spirit of envy and detraction, a spirit
of strife and malevolence.it is there. To speak in sober
and sorrowful earnest, the Presbyterian Church, as at
present constituted, is utterly inefficient as the bulwark
of Protestantism in thfs land ; and I verily believe that
this curse of inefficiency will rest upon her till she puts
away from her the accursed thing —till she throws back
to the Government with indignant scorn their Babylonish
garment of an infidel establishment of religion, and
their wedge of gold.
It is not my intention, however, in resolving to
pursue this course myself, to hamper or distract ray
brethren by forming a separate communion in this
land. Neither is it my intention to seek for a
settlement in some other land of equal or still greater
advancement in civilization and refinement, where I
have reason to believe I should not be left to seek it in
vain, I have no wish to enter upon the labours of others
either at home or abroad, or to occupy ground in the
great field of the world that has either been trodden or
cultivated before. With the blessing of God I intend
to devote the remainder of my life towards the building
up of our beloved Zion, without either soliciting or re-
ceiving support from the State, in the neighbouring colony
of New Zealand ; for it appears to me that so important a
field ought not to be occupied by a mere stripling in the
I have certain pecuniary claims on this Church for
advances in time past which I am sure the trustees and
congregation will not be unwilling to consider, espe-


cially as I have no prospect of a salary for years to
come where I am going. I have only to request that
in choosing a pastor for this Church you will not con-
fine yourselves to the limited choice which the colony
at present affords. The emoluments connected with
this charge, will—now especially that all difficulties have
been overcome—ensure you a pastor of respectable
standing from the mother-country. The Government
salary of the minister of this Church has been ordered
some time since by the Secretary of State to be aug-
mented from 10300 to T‘soo per annum ; and although
the Governor has as yet, for reasons best known to
hi mself, withheld from me this augmentation, alleging
as his justification that the Church was in a distracted
state, it will be granted as a matter of course to my
successor; who, I hope and trust, will come to you in the
fulness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, and approve
himself a workman that needeth not to be ashamed.
MEETING OF THE SCOTS CHURCH.
{From the Colonial Observer, October, 1843.)
A meeting of the congregation of the Scots Church,
called by intimation from the pulpit on the previous
Sabbath, for the purpose of taking into consideration
the recent proceedings of the Synod of Australia, was
held in the Church on Wednesday evening last. A
numerous and respectable assemblage of the members
and seatholders and other friends of the cause had
collected before the hour of meeting, and the warmest
interest in the object was exhibited.
On the motion of Mr. Hugh Brodie, seconded by Mr.
Beattie, of Erskine-street, Francis Gaunson, Esq., was
unanimously called to the chair.
Before commencing the .business of the evening, the
Chairman called on the Rev. Dr. Lang, who opened the
meeting with an impressive and appropriate prayer,
after which the Chairman shortly addressed the meeting
as follows:—
Ladies and Gentlemen —The present meeting has
been called in consequence of certain acts of the Synod
of Australia, with which you are well acquainted. As a
Presbyterian Congregation, we are in the enjoyment of
inestimable privileges, particularly under the able,
zealous, and truly apostolic spiritual guidance of the Rev.
Dr. Lang, our much esteemed and justly deserving
pastor. Surely we cannot better testify our approbation
of his worth, than by rallying round his spiritual
standard, in these trying times of persecution from
within; with both heart and hand, cheerfully, and
unanimously, uniting in co-operation with him, for the
cause of God, and true religion, in this, the land of our
adoption. A series of resolutions to this effect, which
have been drawn up by the Committee of Management,
will be submitted in due order for your consideration, to
which your particular attention is requested. Any gen-
tleman addressing the meeting will be pleased to con-
fine his remarks, as closely as possible, to the case under
consideration; and as this is exclusively a meeting of
our own body, those who are opposed to the Voluntary
System cannot be permitted a hearing on the present
occasion.
Thomas Cadell, Esq., then rose to move the first resolu-
tion. After what had fallen from their worthy Chairman,
he conceived it was not necessary to offer any observa-
tions on the resolution it had fallen to his lot to move.
It expressed his own sentiments, and he was sure they
were the sentiments of this meeting, and of the great
body of the Presbyterians throughout the colony. He
would therefore simply read the resolution with which
he had been entrusted, confident in its meeting with a
cordial reception. The resolution was as follows: —
That this meeting regard the recent proceedings of the Synod
of Australia, in pretending to depose the Rev. Dr. Lang from the
office of the holy ministry, after he had solemnly renounced all
connection with the said Synod, as well as all the pecuniary
emoluments to which that connection entitled him ; especially,
when, by their own publicly extorted confession, they had
nothing against him of a date prior to that renunciation; as an
impotent and contemptible expression of personal feeling on the
part of a few individuals, who, by their own infatuated procedure,
have forfeited all title to the confidence and respect of the Pres-
byterians of the colony.
W. Coghill, Esq., of Berrima, would cordially second
that resolution. It coincided with his own sentiments,
and he believed with those of the larger portion of the
Presbyterian community.
Dr. Campbell also spoke in support of the resolution,
which on being put to the meeting was unanimously
carried.
Mr. Andrew Melville then moved the second resolu-
tion —
That, while this meeting regard the recent proceedings of the
Synod in the light above stated, they -view them also as affording
a strong stimulus to vigorous and united exertion for the sup-
port and extension of the Presbyterian Church in this colony
unconnected with the State ; it being the decided opinion of
this meeting that the voluntary system affords the only prospect
of extending the knowledge and practice of scriptural Christi-
anity in this land.
He was perfectly satisfied that the reading of the reso-
lution was quite enough to ensure it their cordial sup-
port, and that anything he could say by way of recom-
mending it was unnecessary. He left it, therefore, in
their hands, confident in the hope it would meet with
their unanimous approval. He would allude, however,
very shortly to the circumstances in which we, as a
Christian Church and congregation, are at present
placed. Although we are as it were isolated and alone,
yet our position is by no means new or singular. It is
gratifying and encouraging to reflect that we occupy as
a Christian Church and congregation the very same
position with that of the one half, if not the majority of
our fellow-countrymen in our native land; and it is not
by any means unlikely that the majority of that Church
with which we were lately outwardly connected will at
no very distant period be in the same position too—at
least he hoped so. We are told by some that we are not
now in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland, but if we are not in connection with the Es-
tablished Church of Scotland, we are in connection with
the non-establisbed Church of Scotland, and it ought
not to be a matter of any great consequence to us to
what Church we belong outwardly, provided we belong
to the Church of Christ. We ought to examine for our-
selves, and try to get connected with that Church, the
constitution and discipline of which is nearest in accord-
ance with the Word of God, It appeared to him, that
the members of a Christian Church maintaining the
ordinances of religion within its own pale, and con-
tributing to its support, according to their several abili-
ties, is more scriptural than the system of an establish-
ment. “If we sow to you spiritual things,” says the
Apostle, “is it a great matter if we reap your carnal
things ;” and again, those who preach the gospel must
live by the Gospel. But we have a higher authority still ;
we have the mind of our Lord himself on the subject.
When he commissioned his disciples to go and preach
the gospel of the kingdom, he instructed them to take
neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in their purses; for
the workman is worthy of his meat —leaving us, in his
opinion, distinctly to infer that the ministers of the


gospel are to depend on the good providence of God for
their support in all ages. If Christianity is left to its
own native energy there is little danger of it so working
its way into the affections of the people, that so far from
their regarding the support of their ministers and the
maintenance of the ordinances of religion generally as a
burden, they will, on the contrary, regard it as a privi-
lege and a blessing. We are a congregation in the
enjoyment of no ordinary privileges, and he was happy
to know that there were a goodly number amongst us
who appreciate these privileges and value them as they
ought. But he had no doubt they were all well aware
of the strenuous and powerful efforts that are at present
put forth to wrest these privileges from us ; the foulest
and most unfounded reports are afloat at this moment
regarding this church and congregation. The men who
can be guilty of such vile calumny cannot be said to be
possessed of a single spark of Christian feeling, and it is
not worth our while taking further notice of them, than
as a Christian people, we may see it to be our duty to
plead with Almighty God that these infatuated men may
he brought to a better mind; at the same time while
cherishing this Christian spirit, let us not forget, if any
aggression is attempted on our religious privileges, to
rally around the standard that is raised for their defence.
These privileges have been transmitted by our fore-
fathers to us pure and unimpaired; let us imitate their
example by standing up boldly and fearlessly at all times
in their defence, that we in like manner may transmit
them pure and unimpaired to our posterity. Let us
live in the unity of the Spirit and in the bond of peace;
and notwithstanding all the opposition with which we
may be called on to contend, God, even our God will
bless us, and the Church of our Fathers—that church
the foundation of which was laid in blood—pointed at,
as it is in this land, with the Anger of scorn and con-
tempt, and that too by those who were brought up in
her own bosom, (shame be to them!) will come forth
like gold seven times purified, and appear “ clear as the
sun, fair as the moon, and terrible as an army with
banners.”
Nichol Stenhouse, Esq., solicitor, seconded the
motion, which was also carried unanimously.
Mr. Walker then moved, and Mr. Stirling seconded,
the third resolution :
That these resolutions be embodied in a declaration for
general signature by the Presbyterian inhabitants of Sydney
and its vicinity, and that copies thereof, with the signatures
attached, be transmitted by the Chairman to his Excellency the
Governor, and to the Moderators of the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland and of the Presbytery of Irvine.
Mr. Baillie* rose to support the resolution which had
just been moved and seconded. He would only offer
a very few remarks on the subject. The present
meeting had expressed in the foregoing resolutions,
their opinion of the recent transactions of the Synod of
Australia in the deposition of Dr, Lang. In that
opinion he entirely concurred. Their act could be
regarded in no other light than as an “ impotent and
contemptible expression of personal feeling” on the part
of a few individuals, who have forfeited all claim to the
confidence and respect of the Presbyterian community.
That that expression was totally powerless and unin-
fluential, might be judged of from the fact that this,
their great achievement, was witnessed only by himself
and five or six other individuals. The fact was, the men
who had thus signalised themselves, had no hold what-
•The late John Hunter Baillie, Esq., Secretary of the Bank
of New South Wales, who has been already referred to as having
left all his property, subject to the life rent of his widow, for the
endowment of two Professorships in a Presbyterian College in
Sydney.
ever on the affections and sympathies of the Presbyte-
rian body, much less of the public at large. He did not
regard the course now proposed, therefore, as necessary
to vindicate the standing of this Church in the eyes of
the public here, where the whole of the circumstances
connected with the late proceedings, and the real causes
in which they originated, were too well known to require
such vindication. But it was the duty of this Church,
in its present position, to adopt every available means
of setting itself right in the eyes of our fellow-Christians
wherever there is any likelihood of our position being
misrepresented. We are told that the Synod of Austra-
lia have instructed their Moderator to intimate their
notable sentence to the Moderators of the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, and of the Presby-
tery of Irvine ; and as the act of a duly constituted body,
however little weight it may carry with it here, it may
perhaps have some influence in the quarters specified.
He conceived, therefore, that to neutralize that influence
they could not adopt a better course than the one now
recommended. The voice of the people had in ail ages
been the voice of God, and it is so still. Let us then
obviate the false impression which the late decision may
produce in some quarters in Scotland, by setting in
opposition to that decision the voice ©f a united people,
and even there that decision would be harmless. The
Synod has resolved to send its manifesto to the authori-
ties of the Church of Scotland—by all means let it not
go alone. But it seems, Mr. Chairman, he continued,
we have the same influence to counteract in another
quarter. We are told that on the day subsequent to the
deposition of Dr. Lang, the Synod instructed the Moder-
ator to intimate their decision to his Excellency the
Governor ! Now, really, Sir, on the first announcement
of this determination on the part of the Synod, it struck
me as the most thoroughly despicable act I had ever
heard or read of—an act whose only apparent motive
was inveterate malice, and for which no possible justifi-
cation could be conceived. What, I ask, has Dr. Lang
to do with the Governor, or the Governor with Dr. Lang ?
We ask nothing from the Government—and the favour
or disfavour of the Governor we alike disregard. But
did the State-sycophants actually imagine that they
would curry favour with Sir George by their proceedings ?
Because, forsooth, Dr. Lang might be no favourite with
the Governor, did they think that they would ingratiate
themselves with that exalted personage, by throwing a
stone at Dr. Lang’s head ; and were they anxious that
of their doing so he should not pass in ignerance ? It is
conceivable only of such men that they should have
acted under the influence of motives like these. But,
sir, I apprehend there is something more in the pro-
posed intimation than what first meets the eye: and
something too which calls for our prompt and decided
interference. The Moderator of Synod, after the depo-
sition had been duly pronounced, stated in Court, that
the effect of their sentence would be to confer ecclesias-
tical status on the half dozen of individuals who sepa-
rated from this Church at the period the present move-
ment was determined on ; whose number it seems is
now increased by the accession of some fourteen or
fifteen more, the sweepings of other congregations. Now,
what do you suppose, Mr. Chairman, is meant by this same
ecclesiastical status ? Why, sir, it means this, that this
precious little knot of malcontents are now, in the esti-
mation of the Synod, the congregation of the Scots
Church, Jamison-street ! However ridiculous this may
sound, it is, nevertheless, the fact. Now here comes the
plot, and an infamous plot it is. The Eev. Mr, Noodle,
a member of the Synod, we shall say, is duly installed
as minister over the aforesaid congregation. The next
pay-day for the corps at the Colonial Treasury comes


round in due course, and forth steps Mr. Noodle among
the rest to present his schedule, with a certificate duly
signed by the Moderator, that he, the said Mr. Noodle,
is the successor of Dr. Lang as minister of the Scots
Church, Jamison-street, and entitled to the £3OO a-year
heretofore paid from the Colonial Treasury to the
minister of that church. Now, sir, are we prepared to
tolerate this public robbery, fer it is nothing else which
such a transaction would imply ? And I am well aware
that such a transaction is secretly contemplated. And
besides, if acceded to, it would involve on the part of the
Colonial Government a declaration that as a church, we,
Mr. Chairman, have no existence. And is this large and
influential congregation—more numerous and possess-
ing greater power and moral influence than all the other
Presbyterian churches in the colony put together to
submit to such an insult from a government from whom
we ask no support nor assistance ? Certainly not! The
Synod may intimate as they choose that we are ecclesi-
astically defunct, but let us take the means at our dis-
posal of making our existence known and felt at the seat
of power, and of opposing such a monstrous perversion
of the public money. Let our decision follow theirs to
the government; and I feel assured that Sir George,
whose peculiar aversion to draw the purse strings of the
Colonial Treasury on unnecessary occasions is prover-
bial, will pay far more deference to ours than theirs,
backed as it is by the recommendation that we not only
make no demand ourselves on the public funds, but
oppose such demands when made by others under false
pretences.*
The resolution was then put and carried.
Mr. Gaunson having left the chair, which was tempo-
rarily occupied by Mr. Smith, Mr. Stenbouse proposed,
and Mr. Melville seconded, a vote of thanks to Mr. Gaun-
ton for his able conduct in the chair, which was carried
by acclamation.
The Eev. Dr, Lang pronounced the apostolic henedic-
sion, and thus closed the proceedings of the most ani-
mated and interesting religious meeting we ever wit-
nessed in this colony.
* There is no doubt this attempt was made by the Synod ; but
it signally failed. Instead of handing over Dr. Langs re-
linquished salary to the Synod’s nominee. Sir George Gipps told
Dr. Lang that he should he very glad if every minister in the
colony would do the same as he had done —it would save the
Government a great deal of trouble and annoyance.






