

HIDDEN SPRINGS
OR,
PERILS OF THE FUTURE AND HOW
TO MEET THEM.
ADDRESS
DELIVERED BY
HIS GRACE THE LATE ARCHBISHOP VAUGHAN, O.S.B.
ON THE OCCASION OF OPENING THE GULD HALL, SYDNEY,
OCTOBER 9TH, 1876 .
FINN BROTHERS & CO., BOOKSELLERS AND PUBLISHERS,
586 GEORGE STREET.
1891.




HIDDEN SPRINGS
OR,
PERILS OF THE FUTURE AND HOW
TO MEET THEM.
. ADDBBSS
DELIVERED BY
HIS GRACE THE LATE ARCHBISHOP VAUGHAN, 0.5.8.
On the occasion of opening the Guild Hall, Sydney,
October 9th, 1876.
FINN BROTHERS & CO., BOOKSELLERS AND PUBLISHERS,
586 George Street.
V _____
1891.


SYDNEY:
II T DUNN AND CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
queen’s chambers, queen’s place,
1891


HIDDEN SPRINGS,
OR
PERILS OF THE FUTURE AND HOW TO MEET THEM.
[Address delivered on occasion of opening the Guild Hall,
Sydney, October 9th, 1876.]
His Grace said that he appeared before that large audience which
now met his eye, at the request of the Warden and Council of the
Holy Catholic Guild, who had done him the honor of asking him to
open the spacious hall (of which he laid the foundation-stone twelve
months ago), by giving a Lecture on any subject that he thought
fit to select. He accepted the offer in the spirit in which it had
been made, and felt pleasure in identifying himself with those solid
and Catholic principles on which he believed the Guild was
founded. Besides, he deemed it a duty, when a fair opportunity
was afforded him of telling wholesome truths and of giving sound
advice to people in whom he felt an interest, not to let that fair
oppportunity slip by, either through sloth on his part, or through
fear of the criticism of opponents. Indeed, himself he did not care
to hold principle which would not stand the rough usages of the
openest warfare, or which would collapse and fall to pieces when
they were most required to stand their ground : and as for sloth,
which in this climate has many votaries, he hoped, so long as he
had health of body and brain, to keep that enemy at bay, and to
spend himself and to be spent in the service of Christianity and in
the interests of the people.
Such being the case, the next question was, “ What is the
Lecture to be about?” 'He had already confided to them this much,
that it was concerned with “ Hidden Springs,” though, at the same
time, he candidly confessed that those two mysterious words con-
veyed scant information to the mind. But for that very reason he
insisted that they illustrated all the better the subject upon which


he was about to speak. The large assemblage that he saw before
him was most assuredly drawn together by some one attraction
common to them all. Each man and woman present had been acted
on by some force or influence, or Hidden Spring, secret from the
eye, and beyond the reach of the hand. Guided by its influence
they left their homes, converged upon that building, entered that
Hall, and were now prepared to listen to a discourse regarding the
subject-matter of which they possessed but the vaguest information.
Now, the whole universe (said the speaker) is moved by Hidden
Springs or unseen influences. From the sleepless universal oper-
ation of gravitation to that movement in the heliotrope which turns
it to the sun : from the mysterious laws which regulate the milky
way to those which govern the fern-fronds, ice-stars, and saline
crystals of our planet; from the highest star on the forehead of
night to the lowest gem in the bosom of ocean—-everything is
hidden from us, except outward operations and sensible phenomena.
Du Bois Reymond, who said he scanned the whole heavens with a
telescope and found no God ; and Lawrence, who remarked that on
opening the brain with a scalpel he found no soul—simply declare
in their own language a fact, patent to any thinking man, namely
that the world of matter and the world of spirit have more in them
than the lense or the knife can discover; and that science, when the
microscooe, the telescope, and the test-tube have done their utmost,
has, after all their scrutiny, to declare that were they to probe
“ Deeper than did ever plummet sound,”
they would be as far from the initial forces, the Hidden Springs, of
the Universe as they were when they began.
And as that which builds and weaves and quickens all matter
is invisible, impalpable ; so it is with the master-forces which sway
that great world of man which makes up the human family. The
actions of mankind, from that day on which a solitary pair trod the
green slopes of Eden to the present day, with its countless nation-
alities and many-sided civilizations, are catalogued and compared in
what are called the annals of the world ; but underneath these
actions, as the root is underneath the flower, as the works are con-
cealed within the clock, energize those hidden forces which are at
once their origins and their explanations. Not that the complicated
movements on the world’s wide stage are always or ever set in motion
by simple operations. The influences are generally manifold and
divergent, thwarting and crossing each other, being jarred and
dislocated by antagonist impulses, which turn the direct motion
into curves, zig-zags and diagonals, creating such eccentric velocities
as at times absolutely to defy the calculation of man. Still, there
is o-enerally to be found in every age some steady master-pressure
uro-ing in one direction, and that so powerfully, that the vortices
and eddies, the counter-streams and cross-currents, are carried along


with it; and in spite of opposition and confusion, and appearances
to the contrary for a time, it fixes the destiny of an era, and gives
its direction to generations of mankind.
Such are those master-springs which, whilst they maintain
society in its present status, are not without their influence on the
individual heart. It was evident that such centres as these must
be intimately bound up with moral and religious principle; for no
other powers possess that permanent force and that piercing char-
acter necessary for moulding nationalities, for creating civilizations,
and for developing, or stunting, the spiritual elements in man.
What he proposed then to do that evening was to uncover and
display three great Hidden Springs of this description; the first,
governing and directing that old world which is passed and gone;
the second, wholly different from the first in its position, its setting,
and its workmanship, which still maintains the present equilibrium ;
and the third, which, though not yet possessed of its full power of
leverage, and standing in the background, threatens to come forward
and reverse the present courses of the world. Of the past he would
say but little : for the past is gone ; and where the tree falls there
let it lie ; but the now, said the speaker, the now is in your hand,
and is of enormous interest, not so much on account of its present
attitude, as because of its impress on the future, and the part it of
necessity is bound to play in the mouldings of the coming race.
And each man and woman, and each child it may be said, however
poor or illiterate, however humble or solitary, exerts a certain
influence, good or evil, on the future : we are all our brothers 5
keepers, and forces that impinge upon an unborn generation.
Hence, no life is utterly useless or forlorn, no power ever wholly
thrown away. And as all those present had their part to act, high
or low, in the great drama of life, ever ending with a tragedy ; as
he knew as well as they knew; that they could not shirk the deep
responsibility even now at this moment weighing on their shoulders;
such being the case, he thought it would be a useful and an instruc-
tive thing to lay bare the Hidden Springs that moved the world, to
point out their nature, display their effects, and indicate the
attitude those who love God, and what is best in man, should assume
in their regard. Indeed, no thinker animated by a genuine love of
his kind, no man identifying himself with the people amongst whom
his lot is cast, and seeking their highest happiness and ready to use
such ability as he had to serve them, according to his humble view,
could have suggested a subject more pregnant with momentous
issues, more central to the heart, or more likely to suggest guidance
for the future—a future in which their deepest interests might
easily be jeopardised, in which much light, courage, and direction
might suddenly be required.
He did not propose to treat the subject as a theologian, so
much as a philosopher; not so much even as a churchman, as a


citizen of no mean City; as one possessed of an unfeigned affection
for and interest in his fellow-colonists, especially those who found
their homes in that bright spot in which it was his happiness to
dwell; and those still more especially, who were supporting him
and surrounding him that night. Every one there present could
not be expected to agree with each detail of his argument; that
was inevitable ; but he entertained little doubt that in the main,
in the general current of his disquisition, reading men, and
especially thinking men, —men who meditated much though they
talked little—would follow him with approval ; and feel compelled,
through the influence of facts and forces, to fall in, though they
might have wished it otherwise, with his general conclusions.
I.
Casting on one side then all secondary and minor sources or
springs of action the three master forces of the past, the present,
and the future can be summed up in three words, Paganism, Super-
naturalism, and Materialism. Now these terms are as yet, so far as
we are concerned, mere words, which may signify anything or
nothing. Let us draw some definite meaning from them by the
help of a common measure ; so that, thus, whilst we bring out their
true significance, we may, at the same time, by throwing them into
contrast gain a firmer hold of their external shell, so as all the
more searchingly to probe their hidden kernel. And, first, these
three words are used to connote and call before the mind three great
religious or moral positions in which vast masses of mankind are
found, and that for so considerable a season as, for the time, to be
held as permanent. The origins or Hidden Springs of these three
especial conditions of humanity are then what we are in search of,
and desire to analyze. We will probe beneath the surface, and
expose the secret root; and point out the source of those move-
ments which threaten the future, or which have already been acted
out on the stage of life before all eyes, and are recorded in the
history of the world.
Let us now take our common measure, and guage these
influences and contrast them.
Religion apears to be made up mainly of three elements ; first,
the idea of God ; secondly, the idea of man, and his relation to his
God, this relation comprising a system teaching what to believe and
what to do, that is, dogma, including mysteries, and ethics, or a
scheme of morals ; and, thirdly, a form of worship, or a cultus. If
by comparison we discover the relations in which Paganism, Super-
naturalism, and Materialism stand to these three elements which
make up religion and morality, we shall have a chance of getting
at their centre cell, or inmost core, or Hidden Spring : and through
a threefold comparison of them, by throwing them in contrast or in
harmony, as the case may be, we shall gain some knowledge of their
fundamental differences, and appraise them at their intrinsic value.


It is evident that a society or nation will be greatly moulded
according to its practical idea of religion and morality ; and will
take its tone and temper from what it is taught to admire, reverence
and adore, as well from the view it entertains of its own imperfection
and dependency. As a man’s God is, so will man be : as he knows
himself as he really is, so will he stand a chance of perfecting his
nature, and fulfilling his destiny : as a nation adores, so will it be
developed : and according to its truthful vision of itself, will it fall
or rise in the scale of moral power.
If a people’s god be like to Typhon, the people will be gloomy;
if it resembles Moloch, it will be cruel; if the Paphian Yenus, the
people will melt away into softness and effeminacy. And if they
do not understand their own deficiencies, their wound in nature,
they will assuredly, sooner or later, make shipwreck, and founder
with all sails set, or die of a disease which they were either too
proud to acknowledge, or too gross-minded to discover.
Let us rapidly throw our tape across this Paganism, not so
much as an object of present interest, but because we shall thus be
the better able to understand the character and position of those
other two Hidden Springs with which we are principally concerned.
First as to its divinities : “ The gods of the Pagans,” says De
Quincey, “ were wicked natures ; but they were natures to be feared
and to be propitiated; they were fierce, they were moody, and (as
regards man who had no wings) they were powerful. Once accredited
as facts, the pagan gods could not be regarded as other than terrific
facts; and thus it was that in terror, blind terror, as against power
in the hands of divine wickedness, arose the ancient religions of
Paganism. Because the gods were wicked, man was religious,
because Olympus was cruel, earth trembled, because the divine
beings were the most lawless of Thugs, the human being became the
most abject of sycophants.”
Again : “ The gods in some systems of religion, have been such
and so monstrous by excess of wickedness, as to insure, if annually
one hour of periodical eclipse should have left them at the mercy of
man, a general rush from their own worshippers for strangling them
as mad dogs. Hypocrisy, the cringing of sycophants, end the credu-
lities of fear, united to conceal this misotheism ; but we may be sure
that it was widely diffused through the sincerities of the human
heart. An intense desire for kicking Jupiter, or for hanging him,
if found convenient, must have lurked in the honorable Roman
heart, before the sincerity of human nature could have extorted from
the Roman stage a public declaration, that their supreme gods were
capable of enormities which a poor, unpretending human creature
would have disdained.”*
Such were the gods worshipped by millions upon millions in the
past; monsters of cruelty, brutality, vindictiveness, lewd, overgrown
* Works, vol. x., p. 251-2


men, lolling on Olympus, their wickedness intensifying as you
ascend the mountain of debauchery, the twelve Paladins of the
Pantheon being vile, concrete demons—whose very smiles would
make the stoutest hearts shrink, and the boldest spirit quail. Below
man in intellectual gifts and spiritual endowments, intoxicated with
the quintessence of depravity, mortal, subject to disease and decay,
pain and annihilation, they were more like the hideous dreams of
maniacs, than deities worshipped by reasonable creatures in a living,
thinking world. Thus were the heavens of Paganism peopled ; such
were the divinities, such the gods of the Greeks, who so intensely
loved the beautiful; such the gods of the Romans, who so reverence
that law and order which their gods trampled on with such
unmitigated ruffianism.
Such being the Pagan God, what was the Pagan man ?
Man, in the estimation of the Pagan world, was, in many
respects, looked on as a superior kind of animal, whose one object
in life was to secure the intensest gratifications of body and brain
at the least amount of cost or suffering to himself; and in the fulfil-
ment of this double lust, his final end was placed. He had no sense
of guilt or sin or repentance or supernatural love, just as some men
have no ear for music, or no faculty for colour. His instincts of
heart, head and sense, were his rudder; passion, his sail. He lived
through his span as merrily as he could, he made the most of it, and
then lay down to die. He cultivated every instinct to the highest,
that it might yield him the largest cup of pleasure; and he drank
off his draught of pain, as an inevitable necessity, and held grief to
be an arrow discharged into him through the vindictiveness of the
gods. His mental eye did not knowhow to lift its lid above the
horizon of the earth : or, if it did, no effort was made to pierce
beyond. Thus he lived, in some ways a splendid animal, in others a
brute ;• for his noblest impulses and most divine, received no
stimulus or culture, and remained in embryo to the end. In little
else did he differ from the flower springing at his feet, or the bird
shooting across his path—except in wickedness—for if truth has to
be told, his fierce and lawless passions, and his demon pride, were
stimulated rather than assuaged by the kind of brutalities he
worshipped, for they debased and crushed his original nobleness to
an extent almost incredible. The picture of human life painted by
Paganism with its
‘ Bursts of great heart, and slips in sensual mire.’
is simply appalling; and surpasses in the sense or horror it creates
—on account of its reality—the worst circles opened out by Dante
in his exhibition of hell. Below we see men, brutalised by every
form of depravity—though here and there receiving a lacquer from
intellectual culture—and above them, close over their heads, families
of hideous gods, deeper died in vindictiveness than they, stronger in
physical force, monsters, winged-animalisms, capable of manoeuvring


around them in the air and worrying them, of striking them, and
then wheeling out of reach of retaliation. Fully to realise these
murderous natures which made up the Pagan Pantheon, you need
but open Dollinger’s ‘ Gentile and Jew,’ or peruse the celebrated
Chapter on the subject by St. Paul.
Now, in what relation did those men stand to the gods? Was
it a relation of love and reverence ? Just the reverse. Their relation
sprang from secret hatred and craven terror. The malignity of
Jove is proverbial. The sufferings of Prometheus were caused by
his having befriended man : whilst Herodotus himself assures us of
the secret detestation which the nations through which he travelled
entertained for their divinities. Common prudence itself would
recoil from placing trust in the club of demons who disported them-
selves in eternal outrage on Olympus ; and whose spitefulness sealed
up every avenue to confidence, and whose cruelty excluded every
approach to love. Man hated the gods, because they were brutal
and cruel; he feared them because they were stronger and better
equipped for committing outrage than himself.
Such being the relations, what positive teaching is found
amongst the Pagans ? First, as to creed or a code of dogma:
Paganism had absolutely no creed, no dogma; it had no sacred
book : nothing resembling a Pentateuch or Gospel, or even a
Koran. The gods had no moral relation whatsoever to man, who
hated them and feared them. “They were,” says De Quincey,
“ mere odious facts, like scorpions or rattlesnakes, having no moral
aspect whatever, public nuisances; bearing no relation to man but
“ mere odious facts, like scorpions or rattlesnakes, having no moral
aspect whatever, public nuisances; bearing no relation to man but
that of capricious tyrants.” Had the Pagans then no code of
ethics? None. Their mythologies and legendary tales amused the
multitude, but they had no moral or dogmatic bearing. The only
code of ethics which the Pagans practiced was that which was
distorted by brutal instincts, and corrupted by contamination with
the gods. “ Religion in the eye of a Pagan, had no more relation to
morals than to shipbuilding or trigonometry.” There was just one
things the Pagans had, though they lacked a code of action and a
scheme of Faith —they possessed a worship or cultus. The gods, as
they were stronger than men, and at the same time cruel and capri-
cious, had to be propitiated. So they were soothed and softened by
means of death and carnage. Banquets were offered them to mitigate
their ferocity, and to assuage their demoniacal craving after blood.
Let another voice tell what these gods gained by these Pagan sacri-
fices or dinner parties. “ What they gained was this, the luxury of
inhaling the groans, the fleeting breath, the palpitations, the agonies
of the dying victim. This was the dark interest which the wretches
of Olympus had in human invitations to dinner; and it is too certain
upon comparing facts and dates, that, when left to their own choice,


the gods had a preference for men as their victims. All things
concur to show, that precisely as you ascend above civilization,
which continually increases the limitations upon the gods of
Olympus, precisely as you go back to that gloomy state in which
their true propensities had power to reveal themselves, was man the
genuine victim for them, and the dying anguish of man the best
‘ nidor ’ that ascended from earthly banquets to their nostrils ; their
stern eyes smiled darkly upon the throbbings of tortured flesh, as in
Moloch’s ears dwelt like music the sound of infants wailing.”
It requires a violent mental effort, such as minds engrossed by
active pursuits are scarcely capable of, to realise the condition of the
pagan world; and to grasp the whole bearing of such a
‘ Total eclipse
Without all hope of day.’
And it is difficult to conceive that these pictures are not made up of
the skimmings of a deceased fancy, or the fumes of a poisoned brain,
difficult to take in the astounding fact that millions on millions of
our fellow-creatures were born, lived—we cannot say ‘ flourished ’ —
and died, in the midst of this pandemonium, and weighed down with
this living night-mare. Yet so it was; and that too for centuries,
and in the fairest portion of God’s creation, and in the midst of
exercises of mind and imagination the most perfect of their kind.
What now is the Hidden Spring of this vast corruption 1 It
consists in that centre of fierce lust in the animal man, which,
when the counter-checks are taken off, gains mastery over the
reason, stains the imagination, and corrupts the heart. The very
existence of the Supreme Maker, the pure Creator, is ignored, and
His idea expunged from the mind : the whole Supernatural King-
dom melts into thin air : heaven is shut out with a vault of brass,
and a hill on earth, peopled with animalisms, takes its place for
men to worship. The human race becomes drugged, body and mind,
with the poison of brutality, and begins to assume a form and con-
dition resembling chronic madness more than anything else. Man
reverses the whole divine order of facts within him and without
him, which is the same thing as upsetting the world into another
chaos ; brute instinct tyrannises over reason; the beast enslaves and
rough-rides the man ; and the world becomes simply a receptacle
for beast of prey. Had not man proved this on a large scale when
passion had its sway over him : were there not amongst us records
of to what abysses he is able to sink, how low the lamp of purity
can flicker, and how dark the night can spread, we could not have
believed it. It seems that man cannot only fall into the abyss, but
can absolutely forget his destiny :
‘ For awful truth it is that man
Forgets the heaven from which he fell. ’


So far for Paganism, and that dark curtain thrown by its Hidden
Spring across the world.
11.
Now it was the Supernatural that crushed that spring, and
sweeping the hill clear of the unclean families of gods, destroyed
the walls of brass, opened out the heavens, and gave a totally new
direction to the current of human life.
Taking the Supernatural in its length and breadth, such as it
has exhibited itself at large on the broad stage of the world for well
nigh two thousand years, and viewing it in its integrity, we can
compare it with the Paganism as fruit compared with fruit. He
used the expression the “ Supernatural,” and not Christianity,
because the former word possessed a wider significance than the
latter, and included societies of men, who, though they reject the
Christian system as unproven, still believed in a Supreme Being,
the Ruler and Rewarder of mankind. Whilst the Pagan’s eye
does not range beyond the natural world, and whilst his reason
acknowledges no forces which are not identified with earth—the
Supernaturalist takes in a loftier range, a wider vision, detects
in the movements and sequence of events in the heaven above him,
and in the mirror of his consciousness within him, the evidences of
a Power which is not nature, but above it; which is not one of
nature’s manifestations or phenomena, but which is the Hidden
Spring of manifold developements and multitudinous life. The
Supernaturalist is contrasted with the Pagan by this radical
difference: that whilst the latter in reality starts from his own
baser self as a centre, the former quits self, and places the centre of
the universe and the measurement of its courses, and the main
instrument of his own perfection, out of nature out of self, and fixes
it in the Supreme Governor of all. Thus it is, possible, that man
bears about with him a sense of banishment; and though more
happy than ever Pagan was or could be, still feels as if there were
something wanting; as if he were, after all, away from his Father’s
House; —that very thought producing a sweet sadness, which has
nothing about it of the bitterness of grief. Is not this minor key
referred to by the Poet when he sings—
“We look before and after
And grieve for what is not,
E’en our sincerest laughter
With some pain is fraught.
Our sweetest songs are those which tell of saddest thought. ”
How stands the Supernatural respecting the idea of God, of
man, and their relations 1 As contrasted with Paganism it is as if
in an instant the darkest night was suddenly changed into the


brightest day ; as if the most loathsome and painful hell were by a
flash transformed into an expanding joyous heaven : it is like an
intellect, maddened by apparitions of terrific wickedness such as to
overset its balance, instantly relieved, and restored to peace and
rest: finally like awaking from the thraldom of an overpowering
night-mare, which stops the heart, and leaves its victim fully awake,
gasping for breath, and half undone by the very relief afforded in
the consciousness that that which seemed so real and so terrible, was,
after all, but the effect of a momentary hallucination —so radically
opposed are the consequences respectively produced by the Hidden
Spring of Paganism, and that which broke it up and took its place.
First, observe the contrast in the Supernaturalist’s conception
of Almighty God. Take it, as drawn out by one of the deepest and
perhaps the most cautious thinkers of our time—
“l speak then,” says he, “of the God of the Theist and of the
Christian : a God who is numerically One, who is Personal; the
Author, Sustainer, and Finisher of all things, the Life of Law and
Order, the moral Governor : one who is Supreme and Sole ; like
Himself, unlike all things besides Himself, which all are but His
creatures; distinct from, independent of them all; One who is self-
existing, absolutely infinite, who has ever been and ever will be, to
whom nothing is past or future; who is all perfection, and the
fulness and archetype of every possible excellence, the Truth Itself,
Wisdom, Love, Justice, Holiness; One who is All-powerful, All-
knowing, Omnipotent, Incomprehensible.”*
Here then is a Being supreme in every characteristic, excluding
all taint of imperfection, not of the world, but still ruling it as
its Maker and its Guide : All-powerful and All-seeing ; and the
Essential Love, as He is the Essential Justice, Holiness and Truth :
Incomprehensible on account of His very Greatness; still, revealing
Himself to man, speaking with him, not being very far from any
one of us, on account of His surpassing Love; a being possessing
in its fullest flower every conceivable attribute of Goodness and
of Beauty; and yet exquisitely harmonious in the midst of the
coruscating variety of His Riches as they externally reveal them-
selves to man.
Next, what is the Supernaturalist’s idea of man himself 1 He
regards man as a being created by the Supreme God, and as placed
in a condition of discipline on earth. His centre is out of the
circle of self, and within the triangle of the Trinity. To this
centre, unless blocks are put in the way, he should and does
spontaneously tend—the sparks of his soul flying upwards. The aim
of his life is ever to be approaching nearer in likeness to his Maker,
to whom in character of Reward, eventually, if he has performed
* Newman’s Grammar of Assent , p. 98.


his mission, he will pass, and there find the fulfilment of every
desire, and that peace unspeakable which is the highest form of
rest. The years of this life are to him really valuable only so far
forth as they fashion him for his future, and secure his permanent
happy destiny. The joys and delights which make up the goal,
which direct the aim* of the Pagan, to him are of comparatively
small account;
“ He looks on all the joys of time
With undesiring eyes.”
For his imagination is possessed with the idea of the exquisite
happiness of an endless Reward, which though hidden behind the
draperies of the future, he still feels to be fairly within the grasp of
his supernaturalized ambition. With all this he is sensible of the
struggles of the baser nature within him, and of the thraldom and
irksomeness of the passions. He is conscious of an internal disloca-
tion, of two laws combating within the arena of his being ‘ the man
and the beast continually at variance, occasionally at rampant war;
he is sensible of a disharmony which he cannot conquer j he feels
himself out of tune, and partially unstrung ; robbed of the robust
health of his original constitution; weakened in will, darkened in
intellect ; and swayed by gusts and sudden violences of passion,
which seem at times stronger than himself; and, which, indeed, he
knows he cannot, of his own power alone, subjugate or effectually
control. Hence he is as it were forced to look out from the con-
tentions and insurrections within himself ; and wearied for want of
rest, his higher nature yearns upwards, and stretches out imploring
hands for help : and ‘as the eyes of the servants are on the hands
of their masters , and the eyes of the hand-maid are on the hands of
her mistress, so are his eyes unto the Lord his God until He have
mercy on him.’ For he knows, whilst he is praying, that
‘ Life meanwhile
Is in the loom, where busy passion plies
The shuttle to and fro. ’
Thus man feels himself helpless, so long as left to his own resources,
indeed, it may be said, doomed, if not assisted by a higher power, to
corruption and ruin. Still he despairs not. He possesses an over-
mastering conviction that He who made him what he is, and holds
him in His Hand, will not treat him ill; and that as the perfection
of his being and the fulfilment of his aspirations are alone to be
found in God, he will one day really be brought in contact with
them, and drink out of that Cup which an Unseen Hand all his life
had been holding near his lips.


The relation between God and man is now easily drawn out.
As the pagan god and man are antagonistic at every point to the
God and man of the Supernaturalist, so it is with their relations.
In what temper could the helpless, help-seeking man of the Super-
natural look up to the Eternal of Infinite Holiness, Beauty and
Charity, save in that of humility, reverence, and worship ? God
would be to him as the sun to the flower, as the dew to the latter-
math, as the sap to growing trees. He would be to him a spring of
external warmth and light, and of internal life and peacefulness.
Man would regard his Supreme Creator as the Way to walk as the
Truth to guide; and as the Life by which work is done and light
absorbed. He would regard Him as a mighty and affectionate
Patron, whose favour would more than super-abundantly make up
for, indeed wholly transcend, the loss of all else besides. He would
know by experience that the Personal Love of such a Being was of
itself heart-filling and soul-satisfying ; that
‘ That perfect vision of His face,
Which we, for want of words, call heaven,’
was sufficient without anything more, to content for an eternity the
deepest cravings of mortality. He would, in one word, feel satisfied
that to be really loved by God, was, even in this world, to be
replenished with all that man could want; and that to know His
will and to do it, was the end of life, and the summum bonum of
the creature.
Has this God of the Supernatural bestowed on man a system of
belief and a code of moral action, and a form of worship proper to
Himself ?
To reply to this we must grasp the Supernatural in its whole
extension, and in the full significance of its power. It can be
looked upon as a vast wide-embracing force, which has exerted a
greater sway over the destinies of man than any other that has ever
shook the world. Place one point of the compass on Catholicism
as a centre, and then stretch out the other point till it fall upon
Theism pure and simple, describe the circle, and within that circum-
ference, the whole domain of the Supernatural is contained. In
proportion as you quit the centre and move towards the circum-
ference, you leave the impregnable Stronghold of immoveable dogma
and unchangeable morality behind, and gradually find yourself in a
comparatively bleak and barren region, till at last you come upon
the sandy level of naked Theism without its safeguards and
guarantees. Whatever man may believe as to its objective truth-
fulness, no student of history, no serious thinker, can entertain a
moment’s doubt that the Catholic Church has been from the days
of Christ till now, and promises indefinitely to continue, the very
Heart of the Supernatural, and the main Stronghold of the unbend-
ing, the stubborn dogmas of religion,


What, then, is this Catholicity which forms the centre-heart of
the Supernatural ? for where the heart-centre is, there the main
essence, and the distinctive characteristic will be found.
To sketch it rapidly : It began with the assuming human
nature by that God whose principal attributes have already briefly
been discussed. The Incarnation is by far the greatest potent that
has ever taken place in a universe filled with marvels, and created
by Almighty Power. The Infant of Bethlehem, the Boy of
Nazareth, the Man of Tabor, the Sufferer of Calvary, the Jesus
from the Tomb ; that one Voice, that single Hand which changed
water into wine, turned the broad swift current of the world. The
virtue from that solitary Man—for He was a God—lent a new
pulse to the human heart, a stronger spring to human energies, a
brighter light to human eyes ; and displayed a vision of Glory,
future and inexpressible, before the astonished sense ; thus lifting
humanity, as one man, on to a higher level, and directing its noblest
strivings towards an imperishable goal. As the brown silent forests
in northern latitudes on the first warm day of spring stand clothed
suddenly in green and are alive with song—that which was just
now still and rigid, throbbing with multitudinous life—so suddenly
almost did the Pagan World give way, when the sun and sap of a
new creation warmed his soul, and rose in the heart of man. The
Son of Justice alone possessed those penetrating rays which could
overcome man’s blindness, and bend his stubborness of will. He
alone could create the sap of a new form of life, and cause it to
course in the channels of humanity, and supernaturalize it at every
extremity. He it was who knew how to touch the springs of many
hearts at once, and in many places, and to impart a subtle virtue to,
and to set an Hidden Spring of Divinity in each member of the
human family : so that, to recur to the figure just made use of, each
tree of the wild forest would be charged with an electricity, which
nature, with all her varied capabilities, had not the power to bestow.
God came down, was made Man, became in the likeness of the Good
Samaritan, to lift man up, to rest the drooping head upon His
Bosom, to pour oil and wine into the failing strength, to breathe
into the sinking frame a new Divine invigorating breath of Life.
He came for each man and for all: but for each, as if for him alone ;
for the unit, and for the family made of units, for society composed
of families, for Kingdoms, Empires and Republics composed of the
various societies and nationalities which make up the population of
the world. He came to join man to God, and to lift up humanity
by means of the Supernatural to an end and destiny beyond the
passing hour. He came to infuse new arterial blood into the con-
duits of life, and to thrill the creature with a new sense, with a new
revelation, of his weaknesses, its capabilities, and its destiny ; and
so far to make him a partaker of Divinity as to render him conscious
of his fellowship with a better and an abiding City, whilst he held


himself to be in pilgrimage, and under discipline on earth. Such is
a portion of the mercies offered to man through the Supernatural.
It was scarcely necessary for him, the speaker, to draw out
from History the results and operations of the Christian scheme
which forms the burning-point of the Supernatural. The History
of the Church, of her dogmas, her moral discipline, and her worship,
is simply the history of the post-pagan world for eighteen hundied
years. The heart of the Supernatural, in the duration of its
energies, in the power with which it has urged the stream of supei-
natural life into each extremity of the world, and its firm, steady
beat, and healthfulness, can be compared to nothing analagous in
the history of Churches or of States. Strike this great fact from
History, and you throw History into chaos, if you do not actually
annihilate it for over fourteen hundred years. Ignore its influence
on humanity, and you render philosophy a dream ; as well might
you ignore yourself. Deal with it, whether you will or no, you
must; hate it, decry it, blacken it : this you may do if you will,
but in doing so you blacken and decry the human family itself,
whatever you do, you must admit its claims, or at least its powei as
a hard fact which cannot be got over. _
Its foundations may be said to have been laid with Christ
preaching on the IVlount. The mountain of the Beatitudes was
His Olympus, and He was the only God of it. A peaceful region,
and a Divinity so truthful and so pure—in fiercest contrast with
the hideous divinities of Paganism. Here Christ laid down the
principles which were to regenerate and reconstruct the world. He
chose His Twelve. He went, and sent His Spirit in His stead, The
Twelve were replenished with It, and Peter represented the Voice
which was heard no more. That small society, multiplied from the
one centre of infallible teaching, was guarded by the protections of
the spirit of truthfulness. Thus there was bestowed upon the world
an unmoving Cathedra of certainty as to belief and action , there
was an ever replenished store-house of Supernatural Grace to enable
man to do what he saw to be right. What began on the Hill was
carried to the Catacombs; it next rose to the Basilicas, and spread-
ing itself with rapidity abroad, penetrated into and pervaded the
civil society of the world It ascended from the streets up the
steps of the imperial throne, into the Assembly of the Homan
Senate ; it entered the solemn tribunals, and fixed the Divine seeds
of a Supernatural destiny in the hearts of Emperors and Senators,
and the exponents of the imperial laws of Rome. Thus opening
their minds as
‘ Wax to receive, and marble to retain ’
the principles and Hidden Springs of a newer life, they fulfilled
their destiny in cultivating the soil made suddenly so rich by the
generous hand of a saving Providence.


Of the old civilization which passed away it was not necessary
to treat at any length. He, the speaker, would content himself by
pointing towards one great representative of the Supernatural who
forms a conspicuous land-mark amongst the wreckage of a broken
world. St. Gregory the Great, sitting on the Throne of Peter, the
representative of Christ, and the impersonation of Christian
Authority and Faith, stands out as in a picture, amidst the decay
of the older culture, as a type of the Supernatural principle in its
relation not merely to religion, but to the civil order of the world.
If the Christian Commonwealths of this hour would look upon their
origin, let them cast their eyes upon Pope St. Gregory governing
with Patriarchal rule the three and twenty patrimonies of the
Church; or if they prefer it, upon Pope St. Leo 111., solemnly
crowning the civil power in the person of Charlemagne on Christ-
mas Day at the Tomb of the Apostles.
And thus for seven hundred years, whilst men were one by one
elevated by Sacramental Grace, secured in stability by a teaching
uttered with a consciousness of protected Truth, and guided by a
steady onward hand to Heaven, Kings and Princes of the world,
States and Commonwealths looked upon the Church, the Heart of
the Supernatural, as occupying an analogous position in their regard.
They held that the Law of the Ten Commandments which bound the
individual conscience, bound also the consciences of Empires and
States, of Kings and civil Rulers ; and that the moral action of the
State should play in harmony with the high protected teachings of
the Supernatural. In a word, not only individual men, but Kings
and Legislators, Statesmen and Warriors, were Catholic, and were
possessed by that principle of obedience to rightly constituted
Authority which is the surest guarantee of the stability of the
Throne and the liberty of the subject.
Then the wrench came of the sixteenth century. Should he say
it ? Pride and sensuality even at times within the sanctuary : sloth,
wealth and worldliness amongst a portion of the clergy; occasional
corruptions and even scandals amongst religious orders ; ignorance
and that fierce bigotry which follows it as a shadow, as well as the
wealth daily spread out before their eyes, offered to those who had
been checked by the spiritual power for their vices, and who hated
discipline, a pretext for confusing the evil deeds of a handful of men
with the guiding principles of the Supernatural which those men
trampled under foot, and for bringing about that great land-slip,
which, when once effected, became the cause of endless and multi-
plying revolutions in the religious world. The first large land-slip
bore within it the principle of its own separation from the Heart of
the Supernatural; and as every master-principle is the fruitful parent
of a thousand phenomena, no sooner had that spiritual territory
slipped from the rock, and fallen to a lower level, than it also
became the parent of other slips, till what was once one solid


ground, became broken up into a thousand fragments. For each
new form of the Supernatural, as it parted with that which was
logically its pi rent, left behind it some positive doctrines, some
moral axioms, some time-honored disciplines, till, at last, nothing
remain but naked Deism, which speedily travels to those coniines
where the terra firma of the Supernatural meets an altogether
different element—the wide quagmire of level Materialism, or the
bitter ocean of heaving unbelief. Such is the logical, ana indeed
inevitable progression in the working of an initial principle, which
begins by showing an insignificant crack in an outer buttress, and
ends in the radical destruction of that into which its wedge has
been inserted.
And here it is important to observe what a superficial mind
might not perceive the full bearings of, namely, that the fact of in-
dividual Catholics having abandoned the practice of religion and
the principles of the Supernatural, is, in reality, no justification,
indeed does not hold out the slenderest cloak of an excuse for the
repudiation of those principles themselves, or for violently jerking
religion, as by a sudden twist, from the only logical basis on which
it can stand with any hope of remaining firm. To offer as a suffi-
cient reason for trampling on the Law the paltry, not to say
criminal excuse, that a certain number of persons have not observed
the Law ; to introduce anarchy because certain members of society
have not been kept in order, has an unmistakable touch about it
either of lunacy or cunning : and suggests the suspicion that those
who thus philosophize must have some selfish end of their own to
serve. And when this is done in matters of religious principle ;
when the only stable principle, that is to say, Authority, is rejected,
and the principle of confusion is made to take its place , then it is
merely a question of time and circumstance how soon destruction is
to follow. For when once a system of morality and faith, which
restrains passion, curbs pride, humbles man, directs his life within
and his actions without, is shoved from the square block and level
foundation of authoritative. Truth taught with unerring security,
on to the slippery incline of the individual judgment which changes
with the weather, one inevitable consequence follows; the ball will
not rest till it rests at the very bottom. As a rule, whatever of
positive teaching these rolling fragments of Christianity may have
retained is the result of their previous oneness with the Heart of
the Supernatural, that City on the mountain top, with
“ Her godlike head crown’d with spiritual fire,
And touching other worlds. ”
The landslips, even the biggest of them, have, after all, simply
fallen from the outer edge ; the Rock remains all the more con-
spicuous from its very isolation, and the adamantine bases on which
its towers are reared are now partially unveiled before the eye,


And if what Mr. Gladstone says be true, viz., that “ The Christian
thought, the Christian tradition, the Christian society are the great,
the imperial thought, tradition, and society of this earth,’’ this earth
owes that circumstance to the Catholic Church. If it be true, as
another able writer says, that “ The great principles of Christian
morality are now so interwoven with our habit of thinking, that we
appeal to them no longer as Scriptural Authorities, but as the
natural suggestions of a sound judgment,” if such be the case, we
owe it to the fact of human society having been steeped in the
Baptism of the Supernatural for over eighteen hundred years. Deny
it as men may, let them be ever so ashamed of their spiritual lineage,
the philosopher is not deceived. He traces to their source, however
distant, the shallow waters, and discovers the causes of the stagnant
pools; and he finds the initial springs of all of them in that fountain
of living waters which wells up towards everlasting life in the City
of the Saints. Though they may have lost their vital qualities,
though they may have grown brackish or corrupt, still, he traces
what remains of good in them to their true origin; and knows,
though now they may have lost their savour, that they once were
limpid portions of the Living Spring. Many fragmentary creeds
retain some lineaments of past greatness, some vestiges more or less
of the Divine Original; and though marred and mutilated, though
but chips and torsos , he gazes on them with affectionate regret; with
affection, in proportion as they still retain some token of their
origin ; with regret, on account of seeing so much beauty tarnished ;
such graceful symmetry destroyed. The Catholic thinker must
needs feel sympathy for every thing within the circle of the Super-
natural—sympathy in proportion as he draws his eyes from the
circumference to that centre where in perfect loveliness the “ Mystic
Queen ” of the Supernatural holds her court.
And after eighteen centuries of battle has the Great Mother of
men lost the force of her arm, the flash of her eye, and her high
proverbial courage 1 Does she not still prosecute her sleepless
work, her paramount mission of saving souls ? does she not still
“go about doing good,” and sanctify with her gentle presence
households and families of men; and, though fallen on an evil era,
still influence with her elevating, purifying spirit, Kingdoms and
Empires, and the whole civil order of mankind 1 Her bitterest
enemies are loudest in proclaiming that she still exerts her power,
and not in vain ; that she is no antique, or bee in amber; but an
aggressive Life in contact with the forces of the modern world ; and
roused up all the more to energy, just on account of the violence of
opposition. “ From a dormant, as was thought defeated super-
stition,” says Mark Pattison, “Catholicism has become an aggressive
and menacing force. It is backed by millions of hereditary believers.
It is armed in Spain, mutinous in Italy, rapidly re-advancing to
the re-conquest of France, and takes the whole force of Protestant


Germany to keep it under.” Mr. Gladstone himself assures the
world that “ for working purposes ” the Catholic Church has the
advantage over all other forms of religion, and that in this respect
they have suffered loss by leaving her. She is possessor, he says, “of
by far the most elastic, the most closely knit, and the most highly
centralized organization,” when compared with the denominations,
which are of more recent date. This Heart of the Supernatural, of
which the Vicar of Christ is the Supreme Commander, he says, is
“ organized like an army in which each order is in strict subjection
to every other order that is above it. A thousand Bishops are its
generals; some two hundred thousand clergy are its subordinate
officers ; the laity are its proletarians. The auxiliary forces of this
great establishment are the monastic orders. And they differ from
the auxiliaries of other armies in that they have a yet stricter dis-
cipline, and a more complete dependence on the head, than the
ordinary soldier. . . To the chain of an unbroken continuity,”
he continues, “to the majesty of an immense mass, to the energy
of a closely serried organization,” the Catholic Church, this Heart
of the Supernatural, “ adds another and a more legitimate source of
strength. It undeniably contains within itself a large portion of
the individual life of Christendom. The faith, the hope, the charity,
which it was the office of the Gospel to engender, flourish within this
precinct in the heart of millions upon millions. . . Many beautiful
and many noble characters grow up within it. Moreover, the babes
and sucklings of the Gospel, the poor, the weak, the uninstructed,
the simple souls who in tranquil spheres give their soul and heart to
God, and whose shaded faith is not scorched by the burning
questions of human thought and life, these persons are probably in
the Roman Catholic Church by no means worse than they would be
under any other Christian system. They swell the mass of the main
body; obey the word of command when it reaches them; and they
help to supply the resources by which a vast machinery is kept in
motion.”
So, according to the testimony of our able adversary, this vast
machine, this most elastic, closely-knit and highly centralized Heart
of the Supernatural, which we call the Catholic Church, is beyond
comparison, in its tough strength, in its dynamic power, in its
colossal size, in its adaption to the gigantic work placed for it to do,
superior to every other. As she has been for ages, so is she still in
this nineteenth century, the mainspring of the Supernatural, the
chief antagonist, the Leader, against which the foul monsters of the
future will have to throw themselves, if they would overrun, and
ravage this fair world which God has given us, and darken the
heavens with their poisonous breath.
The secret force of this Hidden Spring is identical in kind with
that which energises in the centre-soul of the individual man. For
the Church lives and acts from a Divine and Supernatural impulse,


from which proceed those restraining principles which maintain the
world m order; and those renovating stimulants which lift society
up to, and fix it on the basis of Supernatural facts. It consists in
her possessing a complete revelation of supernatural Truth, and an
ever-abiding and intelligible Voice in its interpretation and appli-
cation, both on the plain of intellectual vision, and that of practical
action; it consists in her being the fountain-head from which
proceed seven distinct channels of supernatural light and energy, by
means of which man’s reason is comforted by the gift of Faith" ’and
J 8 spirit emboldened to Love and Hope; it consists in each order
of the social hierarchy receiving its own proper gift and grace for
the right fulfilment of its avocations ; so that all mankind may, in
the steady light, m the permanent glow of the Supernatural, be
urged from within and attached from without,
“ lo scorn delights, and live laborious days’
in working out its higher destiny. It consists in the fact of that
b-reat Mother knowing her own mind thoroughly; and in times
of peril, and of mental conflict especially, boldly and emphatically,
without respect of persons or powers, declaring it, and anathe-
matizing the wrong ; and in her possessing a Supernatural instinct
to place Truth and Goodness before expediency and success;
and m her almost Divine penetration in seeing an enemy through
any mask, and of picking out and rejecting such principles,
however plausible, which, seeming to be doing the reverse, really
tell against her. She bides her time, and does her work and
offers her antidotes to the poisons of the age; and knows, as no
other can, how to gird herself up for the contest, and launch
herself out on the foe. Her secret force consists in her stern
authoritative insistence that those, it matters not who they be,
who disobey the Law, whether as written on the heart or given ill
the Gospels, will, of a surety, if they die impenitent and in° mortal
sm P erish everlastingly; and that those, on the contrary who
make it the great object of their life to fulfil the will of their
Cieator, and die in a state of grace, will be rewarded for ever
with exquisite delights. It, moreover, consists in her impressing on
man an idea of his real character and condition, so that he knows
himself as he really is; and has an abiding consciousness of his own
personal debility, and bears ever about with him a sense of sin and
a consequent temper of dependence and humility; he comes to
realise, through her teaching, the idea of guilt and of repentance ;
ai ?. , e g lns to practise, not merely those more masculine virtues
which are summed up in the four cardinal characteristics of a noble
and well balanced mind, but those other virtues also, especially con-
nected with the Gospel Revelation, and emphatically shown forth in
e 1 e o t e Incarnate : such as humility, patience, sweetness,
gentleness, self-repression, forgetfulness of self and thoughtfulness


of others ; all which virtues, when exhibited in their fairest bloom,
represent to the world, men and women of the highest type, and of
the most exquisite symmetry of soul. These flowers of the Super-
natural spring up in a carnal world from the Hidden Spring of a
Supernatural root, and redeem human life from utter desolation.
Such men and women as these sweeten earth’s bitterness ; and,
whilst casting a halo of softening light into the saddest recesses of
humanity, and saving the fallen from despair by their angelic love
and gentleness, dwell here, not as the Pagans did, not as casting
their lot with earth, but as men making use of it as a many-sided
instrument for their own perfection—as a many-runged laddei
which they daily have to climb towards
“ That God, which ever lives and loves ;
One God, one law, one element,
And one far-off divine event
To which the whole creation moves.”
Thus earth ceases to be a place of damp fog and disappoint-
ment ; its darkest enigmas are sufficiently solved to open the door
of hope; the sombre future is pierced into by a slant of light;
death, with his horrid scythe, is discovered to be
“ but a mediator
Between the lower and the higher life.”
The inequalities of the earthly course, the unequal distribution of
wealth, health, and talent, are explained in the promises of the
future; and the creature, by thus identifying himself with the
Supernatural, not only perfects his moral character as a man, but
renders earth itself more habitable by making man more happy ;
whilst the higher forms of virtue receive a stimulus which no other
system of philosophy or religion can supply.
Such being the action of the Heart of the Supernatural : In
what relation does it stand to those larger and larger circles round
it, which describe a wider and wider sweep, till Deism pure and
simple is confined within the widest? In what relation does it
stand to Anglicanism, Presbyterianism, Wesleyanism, Congrega-
tionalism, &c., and to the various forms of Theistical belief ? It
stands in two distinct relations to all these. First, there is placed
an impassable logical gulf between it and them. For, whilst the
Heart of the Supernatural, the entire Catholic system, hangs from
the one hook of Divinely-given and unerringly-interrupted Reve-
lation ; those various systems represented by the outer circles, hang
from so many different hooks as there are men’s heads to fix them
in ; are, in point of fact, the creation of the private judgment of
each individual man. Thus the logical gulf which yawns between
the Catholic Church and the Denominations, is as wide as the
difference between the mind of God and the mind of man.


But though it is an admitted and patent fact that this gulf
does exist between the Church and the Denominations; still a
certain sympathy is created where there is identity of belief, though,
in the one case, belief is made to rest on premises which do not
warrant it. A man may, and many men do, hold true conclusions
upon false premises ; so man’s heart is often better than his head ;
but the fact of an illation being false, does not by any means imply
that in se the conclusion is untrue, or cause the lover of Truth to
love the Truth the less. Thus the Catholic philosopher, whose
heart beats with the blood of the Supernatural, sympathises with
the Denominations in proportion as they have retained and teach a
greater number of Catholic verities : whilst his sympathy gradually
loses its edge in proportion as those Truths decrease in clearness and
in number, and belief dwindles down towards the outer ring, which
includes the simple assertion of the existence of a God.
On the other hand, the Denominations, if they study their own
interest, and deeply prize the doctrines which they still retain, will
so far forth as the Church teaches and defends the cardinal princi-
ples of the Supernatural, look up to her as the great Heart
of Christianity, as a sustainer, more potent than all of them
together, of the fundamentals of their own religion ; and as an
organized army which it becomes their dearest interest to encourage
and assist against a common foe. In a word, though fundamentally
different in the logical basis of their systems, though this difference
is radical, and will remain so, between the Church and the Denom-
inations : and though the Denominations will, from the very nature
of that basis, never agree in detail amongst themselves: and
though, so long as a common enemy does not start up to make
Christians suspend hostilities and look to their mutual preser-
vation, there is little prospect of a laying down of arms ; still,
did such an enemy present himself; did his attack threaten to
be formidable and sweeping ; did he approach the circle of the
Supernatural with set purpose of blotting out the idea of God, of
Providence, of Sin, of Grace, of Redemption : did he propose thus
to put out man’s eyes, to stop his heart, to poison or rather quench
the springs of hope; and did he appear powerful enough to bring
all this about—in such a case, would not all within the Supernatural
Circle stop their hands, and turn their eyes in one direction ? and,
conscious of their mutual peril, and of how, especially in such
warfare as this, union is strength, would they not, each circle inde-
pendently, encouraged by the strength of the Central Heart, turn
upon, push back, and slay if possible the monster, the enemy of our
common race 1 All, surely, in any measure interested in or identi-
fied with the Supernatural, would for the time at least, drop mutual
hostilities, and combine, each from its independent point of view,
against the destroyer of the Hidden Spring of present and future
happiness.


11l
But is there such an enemy as this 1 Does the future portend
any such great antagonisms as have already been fought out
between Paganism and Christianity ? Could a line be thrown round
the army of the future with as much precision as the Super-
natural has been circumscribed 1 He (the speaker) did firmly believe
in the existence, the presence, and the power of such an enemy ; he
felt deeply impressed by the perils looming in the distance ; by the
reckless aims of the approaching devastator who, even at this hour,
had gathered his strength together and had become a menacing
danger. So much so that he felt it to be a duty, and of paramount
importance, for the army of the Supernatural to leave alone com-
paratively minor and domestic differences, and to advance in solid
column against an enemy threatening the existence of them all. He
looked upon the coming whirlwind as promising to be more destruc-
tive and uprooting than anything that had occurred in pagan times ;
or that has threatened the stability of the Supernatural since the
Incarnation. Lust in the heart leaves a blot, which may be
purified : but pride in the citadel of the intellect leaves a stain, which
percolates to the passions; and, thus, mind and body become con-
taminated, and man succumbs to a double wound in the two
fountains of his energies. He comes to resemble those insects
worried by children, unconscious of the torment they inflict, and
which crawl about with legs broken and wings burnt, wrecks of
what they originally were. Having deprived his victim of all hope
of the future, having put out his eyes as well as cut off his wings,
the monster proceeds to throw up infection into the very air
he breathes, and to sow corruption along the line of path he will
have to walk.
How the Hidden Spring of all this threatening misery is called
“ Materialism.” This is the power which is marshalling its forces,
and has been for these two hundred years preparing to make a
general advance against the Supernatural. There are many forms
of it; but they can be analyzed into one, and traced to a single
principle. Put one point of the compass on man’s brain, stretch
the other out as far as his heart, describe the circle, and within that
circumfereuce is contained the sum total of the religion and
philosophy of the future. The Hidden Spring of it consists in this,
that the centre of authority is drawn out of Heaven, is filched from
God, where the Supernatural has fixed it, and is placed in man, or
in humanity. Man is made the measure of all things, and humanity,
his god ; within that circumference, every law and every growth
must exclusively find its explanation :
‘ A fatal circle
Upon whose magic skirts a thousand devils
In crystal form sit tempting innocence,
And beckon early virtue from its centre. ’


Thus pride in the hands of depravity will carry the world to a lower
hell, if it be not mastered, than that which contains the animalisms
and atrocities created by that brutal energy which formed the
Hidden Spring of Paganism.
Let us analyze this system of the future. First, as to the idea
of God. And to abviate mistake, he (the speaker) would recite to
them the very words of the most “ advanced ” thinker of the present
day, though he did candidly confess to reciting them with horror :
“What is the use of adoring that phantom of Divinity?”
exclaims this pioneer of the future, “ and what does He want of us
by means of that gang of inspired people who persecute us every-
where with their Sermons?”* With regard to God,” he continues,
“ I know Him not. God is nothing but pure mysticism. If
you desire me to listen to you, begin by suppressing that word
in your discourses ; for from the experience of three thousand
years, I have been convinced that every one that talks to me
of God, wishes to rob me of my liberty or my purse. How much do
I owe you ? Behold my religion and my God.”f Again : “ This I
say, the first duty of an intelligent and free man is to tear immedi-
ately the idea of God from his mind and conscience* . . . God is
nothing else but stupidity and fear, hypocrisy and deceit, tyranny
and misery. As long as humanity bends before an Altar, the slave
of kings and priests, it will be reprobated ; as long as a single man
receives in God’s name an oath from another man, society will be
founded on perjury, and peace and love will be exiled from the
earth. Beware, Jehovah ! for henceforth, cured of the fear of God,
and having attained true wisdom, I am ready to swear, with my
hand raised towards heaven, that you are only the murderer of my
reason, and the spectre of my conscience ! ”
Thus it is evident that Materialism tramples on every form of
Divinity so far acknowledged amongst men; and will only consent
to recognise a modern god, made up of the aggregate of creatures
humanity—without wings to fly with, or even an Olympus to sit
on ; a divinity which the individual has ‘ to aspire to improve,’ and
into which that same individual will, it is said, be incorporated,
after having born his part in its development. If such be the true
philosophy we must unweave the words of the Poet when he sings
“ Man is not God, but hath God’s end to serve,
A master to obey, a course to take,
Somewhat to cast off, somewhat to become,
How could man have progression otherwise ? ”
Having expunged the Supernatural in all its circles as with a
blow, it becomes clear that, according to this system, man can aspire
no higher than the Pagan, and does not aspire so high. He can
* Systeme des Contradictions—Chap. iii.
t Ibid—Chap. vii.


stand in no relation to that of which he denies the very existence.
Man himself thus necessarily becomes the centre of being; from
him, exclusively, law and truth, all greatness and all beauty flow }
he grows out of clay like the weed, and falls back into clay, like the
weed, again; and virtue, goodness, faith, love, are but the colouiing,
brilliant or sombre, as the case may be, upon its petals, during the
few short hours of its prime. As there is no immortal God, so there
is no immortal soul. As there is no Judge to come, so there is no
future punishment or reward. The filling-in of the grave ends all.
The all-sufficiency of this life, and of man for himself, become funda-
mental principles of action. The idea of sin. of repentance, of
dependency on another, are blotted out; and the creature becomes
his own god, that god, after all, being nothing higher than an
idealized aggregate of degraded men produced by the human brain.
As to positive teaching, as to a system of belief, the religion
of the future, in rejecting God, by that very stroke, separates the
mind of man from every element of Faith ; from every vestige
of Revealed Morality : so, each individual is left free to follow the
dictates of his own lust; and eternal, changeless Truth, both
dogmatic and ethical, is turned into the camelion of “ that which
man troweth.”
The movements that take place in the plane of morality and
faith must, as a necessary consequence, be communicated to the
political and social plane; for politics and diplomacy, after all, are
but the Moral Law applied to society at large, to Empires and
Nations. That man who will not acknowledge God as his Chief and
Master, will never bend to the authority or dictation of a fellow-
man. But let M. Proudhon, the foremost leader of “ modern
thought,” speak in his own language :
“ All men,” he says, “ are equal and free. Society is, then, as
well by its nature as by the functions of its destiny, antinomical,
which means ungovernable. The sphere of activity of each citizen
being the result, on the one hand, of the natural division of labour,
and on the other, of the election he makes of a profession, and the
social functions being constituted in such a manner as to produce an
harmonic effect, order becomes the result of the free action of all;
whence I draw the absolute negation of government; every one who
puts his hand on me to govern me, is a tyrant and usurper, and I
proclaim him my enemy.”* Again: “Only society, that is the
collective being, can follow its inclination and abandon itself to its
free will without fear of absolute and immediate error. This
superior reason which is in it, and which slowly escapes from it
through the manifestations of the multitude, and the reflections of
individuals, always puts it right in the end. The philosopher is
incapable of discovering truth by intuition ; and if he attempts to
* Confessions of a Revolutionist.


direct society, he runs a great risk of establishing his own ideas
inefficient and unsufficient ever, in place of the eternal laws of order,
and thus hurrying society to the abyss. The philosopher requires
something to direct him. What else can that something be but the
law of progress, and that logic which resides in humanity as in its
centre ?”*
Now such Materialism as this is not opposed to Supernaturalism
as Protestantism is opposed to Catholicity ; but it is root and flower,
the opposite pole, the direct contradiction, point for point, of the
whole circle of the Supernatural. It launches a straight denial at
each form of religious belief, at every modification of Supernatural
Religion with equal vehemence, from Catholicity with its ample
dogma, to the most scantily clothed Deism ; and accompanies that
denial with louder and still louder expressions of scorn and derision,
as the modification departs further and further from the Catholic
centre. There is no Locus standi from which it can be even reasoned
with, or on which terms can be discussed for an accommodation; it
is the uncompromising, and radical enemy of God, whom it denies ;
of the Throne, which it upsets ; of the Altar, which it destroys ;
that is, of the whole sweep of the Supernatural in all its circles and
centres : and, therefore, of Christian Government, and the acknow-
ledged usages of the society of the present day. Tt would with one
push shove all these into space, or bear them away in block and
bury them, and established on the cleared area in the “howling
wilderness,” the Church of the Revolution and the tyranny of the
Sect.
It may be thought by some that Materialism in reality offers a
terror merely to the professed alarmist, and that, in point of fact,
there is no real occasion for those within the circle of the Super-
natural to combine in self-defence against it, as a common enemy.
Those who carefully heave the lead, and scrutinize the current and
spirit of the age, those who interrogate the Zeit-geist , and study the
signs of the times, are not so sanguine in their judgment. The
longer they watch the growth of public opinion, the stronger becomes
their conviction that the menace of the future is sufficiently alarm-
ing to create a deep-set and terrible anxiety. And they do not
hesitate to declare that, unless something be done, and done speedily,
too, the Supernatural, though in possession, and strong in the
prestige of so many centuries, and so deeply rooted in the affections
of the people and the habit of their mind, will, unless she show
herself more resolute and more masculine in the contest than she
has done, lose ground, and at length be relegated to sacristies and
vestries ; and, finally, be reduced to such a ghost as Paganism is
amongst us at present.
* Ibid.


Speaking of the future prospects of this fierce school of univer-
sal innovation, as an able publicist says : “ Positivism,” so he calls
the phase he speaks of, “ claims the future as its own. Progress is
a chief part of its ostensible programme. It offers itself as the
embodiment of all that is known which can be beneficial to society.
The science of social phenomena, with the preliminary studies of
biology and physics, are its substance. So far from being con-
servative, it is in the highest degree innovating and revolutionary,
for it would organize society on knowledge, instead of on usage and
tradition as at present. If ideas continue to progress as they have
done for the last two hundred years, the future is assured to the
positive spirit. The only condition of things which could keep
knowledge and Positivism, which is identified with knowledge from
supremacy in Europe, is force. Sheer brute force might be organ-
ized to suppress knowledge in the conservative service of some one
of the different interests of modern society, such as that of
Catholicism, or the Communistic proletariat.”*
And do not the greater Christian Denominations exhibit daily
evident tokens of that enervating spirit which is produced by
breathing the foul air of such “ modern thought ” and modern “ pro-
gress ”as this ? Before the landslip absolutely melts into the sea,
does it not steadily soften at the base in the water, and gradually
dissolve, and then losing its clear outline, slip out of sight altogether?
Is not such an effect even now discernable in the original landslip
which in course of years, split up into three hundred fragments as
the consequence of its fall ? The keen eye of Mr. Greg has already
noticed this. He discovers a “ disposition in the most large-minded
Protestant Divines to modify, ignore, eliminate, or cover with a
mystical and nebulous halo (as Coleridge did) some of the least
creditable feature of their creed.”f “ How many sections of Chris-
tians,” says Mr. Harrison, “ are really seeking to vapourize or
sublimate their religion, on the plea of more humane and compre-
hensive ends, but perhaps rather to escape from the bonds
of the definite and systematic ? The troubled air resounds with
Pan-Christianites, Pantisolatries Eirenica, the fraternization of
Churches, and the amalgamation of sects. One sect is exalting
Theism, by getting rid of the Gospel; whilst another school implores
us to save the religion of Jesus by giving up our belief in God.
Churchmen and Dissenters would exchange pulpits as freely as
migratory curates; and some burn with zeal to uproot the wall of
demarcation, whether in formularies or grave yards.”|
Thus, whilst these large tract of the Supernatural are showing
signs of decomposition, of falling in and falling out, collapsing, and
then melting altogether, and this for want of that which in the
nature of the case they cannot have, viz., a firm under-pin of Logic;
* Mark Pattisoii.
+ Rocks Ahead, page 1'29.
J Aspects of Positivism.


the Catholic Church rising sheer from the granite square of Divine
authoritative teaching, hardens and strengthens, rather than softens
and enfeebles, under the influence of the new sun in the new
firmament.
“ One Church,” says the same thinker, “shows a marked
contrast with this tendency to evaporate. Amidst the eagerness
of the rest to escape outside their own skins, and to find a new
pou stO' in pure ether, Rome has been distinctly, systematically
hardening her own system. She is making her formulae far more
definite, and has applied them with a startling courage to all the
problems of the world. In all three parts of religion—in doctrine,
worship, and government, especially in the last, she at least has
been showing no cowardice of her opinions— no desire to apologize
hei self into a metaphor. Therein, doubtless, in her own light she
is right. That profound staff, which from the Vatican directs the
Catholic army, a staff to which that of Von Moltke is a petty and
clumsy machine, has long been at work to refit every part of the
Catholic organism, and to make more unmistakable the mechanism
of its discipline. The growing success of this tremendous project,
the insignificance of the Old Catholic bubble, and of all attempts at
rebellion, have shown how truly the scheme was in the air and alive
to the spirit of the situation. The sagacity of Papal Rome, com-
parable to nothing in history but to the sagacity of Imperial Rome,
saw, no doubt, that in the great and final battle with Revolution,
. . .. a Religion like a State, or an army, must tighten and not
loosen its cohesion ; it must give its whole intellectual and practical
mechanism more unhesitating authority. . . . The re-assertion
of Ultramontanism, in which Prince Bismark, afflicted like so many
Roman Emperors with the delirium tremens of power, sees a
spectre threatening his life, is really as old as our own generation ;
it began when the Catholic staff realized the crisis to be met, and’
resolved on the desperate issue— S. Petrus contra mundurn. Suicidal
it may be—but Rome, at any rate, will not die nephelo-cephalus,
nor swear that she never meant anything by Christianity.”
Two things, then, are crucially indicative of a coming struggle
the softening of the land-slip, and the hardening of the City on the
Rock.
The gradual melting away of positive belief, and the rejection
wholly or in part of a coherent scheme of doctrine, and an organized
code of practice, is one of the portentous signs of a dark and dis-
tressing future. In France, Spain, Italy, Belgium and Germany, it
is the same. In every class the Apostles of Materialism are to be
found. The acute and active politician, the man of science, the
litterateur, and the polemist by profession, as well as a swarm of
intellectual adventurers, who have everything to gain, every change
being a change for the better for them, are, day by day, doing the


work of the white ant, and loosening the rivets and nuts which
keep together the great framework of society below themselves.
But, dismissing other nationalities, look at our own England,
with which we are so inseparably bound up, whose influence moral
and religious is brought to bear upon us like a tide, and with every
tide. Humanly speaking, what she becomes, that we shall be : we
are in great measure her reflection, or her shadow, he would not say,
her mimic. This question then is brought home to us with a special
significance, viz.: What is the mental attitude of her leading
thinkers, and of those who form the bone and sinew of the people,
whose mental labourers those thinkers are 1
Let Mr. Greg, a gentleman of wide personal experience,
and a keen observer of English intellectual life, reply. He says,
emphatically;—
“ I believe that the strongest mental power, the finest thought,
the highest intelligence amongst us, is yearly diverging more and
more from Christianity, is discarding all faith in it, assuming
towards it not so much a hostile, as an isolated, neutral, almost
supercilious, attitude —an attitude which may perhaps best be des-
cribed as one of silent renunciation and disapproval—of looking, and
“ passing by on the other side.” The preponderant intellect in every
line—statesmanlike, legal, scholarly, scientific, literary, industrial—
is no longer believing, is, as a rule, distinctly unbelieving
Is such general decomposition of thought as this possible
amongst the leaders, without passing to the masses below them ?
Let Mr. Greg again reply : “ A very large proportion,” he says,
“ probably the majority, of the operative classes in towns are total
unbelievers ; and these are not the reckless and disreputable, but,
on the contrary, consist of the best of the skilled workmen, the
most instructed and thoughtful, as well as the steadiest. The hard-
headed, industrious, reading engineers and foremen, members of
mechanics’ institutes, the natural leaders of the artisans, are sceptics,
intellectually, not morally; they disbelieve because they have
enquired, argued, and observed, and have been unable to obtain
from their Methodist fellow-workmen, or even from ministers of
the Gospels, satisfying answers to their doubts. Amongst the manu-
facturing artisans, and the highest description of citizen labourers,
it may be stated, with even more confidence than of the ranks above
them in the social scale, that the intellect of that body is already
divorced from the prevalent creeds of the country.”
And in proportion as the less learned class and the less critical
are fed with infidelity by those who should provide for them another
kind of nourishment, in proportion as the masses are taught and
encouraged to reject and scorn the Supernatural, they turn round
* Rocks Ahead, p. 128-9.


and scorn and reject those who, having repudiated all authority
above themselves, would still tenaciously maintain their own authority
over those below themselves.
“ Everywhere,” says an able English pen, “ there are signs
that the respect for great national Institutions, for central as dis-
tinguished from local ideas, is diminishing. Everywhere, the self-
sufficiency of popular opinion is increasing. .
Everywhere the difficulty of organizing opinion is growing,—the
residuum , aided by the ballot, realizing more and more clearly
that there is no true responsibility for political opinion at all, and
that an arbitrary inclination to accord support is at least no worse,
if no better excuse for determining a secret vote, than a reason for
thinking that that support will result in public benefit. All the
signs of the times go to show that the people believe less and less
that they have anything to learn from their political leaders, and
indeed hold that those leaders are much rather their own instru-
ments than their sagacious and respected advisers.
Look at it which way you will, it seems to promise for England
a period of mean and capricious politics, in which the least scrupu-
lous men will come to the top, and the most scrupulous and most
eminent will be cowed and silenced—in which either the House of
Commons will lose control of the wild whims of the people, or the
wild whims of the people will gain control of the House of Commons;
and which of the alternatives is the worst, it is hard to say.”*
Such then are the elements amongst which the future will have
to do its work, elements which already offer indications of the
virulence of that poison, the power of that Hidden Spring, which, as
yet, has not fairly found a leverage, or exhibited one tithe of its
genuine elasticity.
Now, what is the Hidden Spring of the possible success of that
unseen attraction which, massively and silently, almost with the
sleeplessness and certainty of gravitation, is drawing the world’s
mind out of its old moorings, where there is comparative peace and
rest, into that
“dark
Illimitable ocean, where eldest Night
And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal anarchy.”
The Hidden Spring of Materialism is centred in, and derives
its main energy from the Sect, the Church of the Revolution, the
International Secret Society, which is weaving its network around
the world. He (the speaker) used the generic term “ the Sect,” as
this Materialism is made up of an hundred independent, yet at the
same time, sympathetic centres; all, whatever their mutual relations,
* Spectator, April 23, 1875.


aiming steadily at one mark. Just as the Catholic Church forms
the centre-heart of the Supernatural, so does the Sect form the
centre-heart of Materialism. Were it destroyed, were that impal-
pable, wide-extending network raked away, were the Church of the
Revolution abolished, and the secret Craft committed to the winds,
the Supernatural would soon regain her own; and, in fact, turn the
tide of human energy once more in the direction of order in Society,
truth in Religion, and morality in diplomacy and Politics. But this
is easier said than done. The Sect always possesses a strong hold
upon society; it is skilfully manipulated; and persistently, nay
doggedly, toils, without discouragement, at carrying out its vast
ambititions. Infidelity amongst leaders of thought and public
thinkers, Atheism amongst skilled labourers and artisans, and
frightful immorality from one end of the gamut to the other, compose
the muddy waters in which this conspiracy can ply its trade with
best advantage to itself. Let us point out a few of its salient
characteristics, that it may be seen with what manner of an
antagonist the Supernatural will have to deal.
“ Friendship,” we are told by its Ritual, “is the sacred bond
which unites together all the Brethren of our Craft; for, how-
ever much scattered they may be over the face of the earth, they
all compose one only body, because one is their origin and one their
aim ; one the mystery with which they are initiated; one the
path by which they are led; one the guage and measure applied to
each and all of them ; and one the spirit by which they are
animated.”*
At the present moment this Craft is said .to number seventeen
millions of men banded together for secret ends by secret oaths
throughout the world. And out of these there are a chosen few
who represent a Hidden Spring within the vast machine. The object
proposed to themselves by those who compose this Central Cell of
operation is as world-embracing as that aimed at by the Catholic
Church. The intent of these sectaries is to do in the future what
the Church has done in the past, to possess, break up, re-organize,
and renew the world.
The object of the sect, say a leader of it, “is not to lay down
certain principles which must be respected within the narrow
enclosure of its assemblies ; the whole of Society is its aim. The
Lodges are Schools where men must be formed to certain conviction,
so that they may be able to struggle with vigour in ‘ the profane ’
world, and especially in the political arena, f The Altar, the
Throne, Civil Society as at present constituted, are, under the
action of its breath, to melt down into an International Com-
munism, when the (impossible) equality of all men shall be achieved,
* Erkert, Die Trage der Staatl, Amerk., p. 12, Leipsig, 1852.
t M. Neut, Tom 1., p. 67.


when the Almighty Gocl, and, consequently, dogma and Christian
morality shall be expunged; and when, out of the most unmitigated
Materialism, the future perfection of humanity, like the Phoenix
from its ashes, shall arise. Nor is all this in these days very care-
fully concealed. Such is the public teaching indeed of a foremost
master. He says boldly, that the Brotherhood is in duty bound to
place itself not only above different religions, but “ above all belief
in any God whatever.”* “We are our own Priests, our own Gods,”
exclaims another, “and this unlimited, complete, universal liberty is
a right.”! This secret Craft, which, during the last two hundred
years has been accumulating energy and widely extending, is
organized with great cunning, and so adapted to the conditions of
Society and the changing positions of human thought, that only
those who have been “schooled,” tested, and found worthy, are
gradually and cautiously admitted to a full knowledge of its secret
aims. This many-sided machine is made up of from thirty to ninety
Hidden Springs, or circles one within the other, which represent the
various grades of initiation. Those who are permitted to occupy
the outer circle are so far practised with, are so far the tools or
instruments of the prime-movers, that without being aware of it,
they simply act the part of ornamental dummies, or show-figures;
and are paraded before the world, that the world may feel re-assured,
that—a blind oath of secrecy notwithstanding—little harm could
attach to a Craft, however secret, so long as Dukes and Lords, and
men of large estate, and of high character were members of it. How
could that Society be subversive of the Throne, which is patronized
by Royalty itself ? How can that be destructive of rule and social
order to which so many Statesmen of eminence give their names? How
can that be the instrument of a communistic levelling which counts
amongst its members, men, whose whole status is intimately bound
up with ancient lineage, and hereditary estate? So speaks the
vulgar word of “ the profane ” as it looks on, and admires the
gorgeous pageants and the painted masks. And so plausible and
telling is this argument, that it would become cogent enough to be
conclusive, were it not patent, from documentary evidence, first, that
those who masquerade for us along the outer circle are kept in
ignorance concerning the hidden aims of the ruling few; and
secondly, that those aims are absolutely and radically subversive of
those institutions on which the actors on the outer circle depend for
their very life. They are dancing on a volcano which they are
hiding from the world, and do not know it: —
“ In gallant trim the gilded vessel goes ;
Youth on the prow and Pleasure at the helm ;
Regardless of the sweeping whirlwind’s sway,
That, hushed in grim repose, expects his evening prey.”
M. Neut, Tom. 11., p. 233.
t Const. Mafonnique, Art. I.


To meet in large assemblies, to display a strange and gorgeous
dress, to enact a number of mysterious rites, to practise occasional
acts of general philanthrophy, and enjoy good fare, and drink to
“ Loyalty and Charity,” not only appear to be harmless amusements
in themselves, but will be regarded with favour by society at large
as tokens of union and good-fellowship, and, therefore, also, of
stability and order. Such is the superficial view of the busy world,
and of the uninitiated on the outer circle who have not been suffi-
ciently schooled in the principles of their own destruction to be
trusted with more responsible offices than those which speak of
convivial gatherings and general benevolence. So smiles the outer
mask as it displays itself to the profane in all the paraphernalia of
authority, and all the luxurious pride of class. But were you to
remove it and strip the figures of their stage effects, were you to
penetrate from the outer to the inner mind, something else besides
conviviality, grips, and grotesque costumes would be discovered.
The Sect, let us do it the justice to say so, is no mere shallow plaything
used simply for turning grave and thoughtful men back into boys.
The smiling cheek, and the sunny eye, and the frank address, which
front the outside world, here are no longer needed. They make
way for something more profound and radical than surface polish
and graceful manners. To the secret movers the ripple on the
surface is simply something ludicrous, when proposed as an end in
life: for they are ever directed towards an achievement which
implies an altitude of audacity and ambition scarcely measurable by
ordinary rule—an ambition which for ever sleeplessly, and with
exhaustless patience, pushes towards its goal. And just as those
who are set to play the outside game are kept ignorant of the secrets
of the Sect, so “ the profane ” world is deprived of all knowledge of
them whatever, by solemn oaths on the part of each member of the
craft.
The impalpable wall which protects the Sect from the scrutiny,
not to say the vengeance, of the general public is made up of the fol-
lowing fearful oath, or oaths to the same effect: —
“ I swear in the name of the Supreme Architect of all worlds,
never to reveal the secrets, the signs, the grips, the password, the
doctrines, or the customs of the Sect; and to preserve with respect
to them an eternal silence. I promise and swear to God never to
betray any of them, either by writing, by word, or gesture; never
to cause them to be written, lithographed, or printed ; never to
make public anything of that which has now been confided to me,
or of that which shall be confided to me in future. I pledge myself
to this, and submit myself to the following penalties if I fail in
keeping my word : They may burn my lips with a red hot iron, they
may cut off my hand, they may pluck out my tongue, they may cut
my throat, they may hang up my dead body in a lodge till the
admission of a new brother, as a scourge for my faithlessness, and


as a terrible warning to others. Then they may burn it, and cast
its ashes to the winds, to the end that there may not remain a single
trace of the memory of my treason. So help me God, and His Holy
Gospel. Amen.”
Such is the abominable, and he would not hesitate to call it,
criminal oath, which we are assured is administered to those who are
to be initiated into the secret Brotherhood. The victim enters on
his career by loading his soul with the fearful burden and respon-
sibility of an oath, binding him before God to a secrecy, the bearings
of which he could not possibly define. Designs of the most heinous
wickedness might be unfolded to him whilst thus his mouth is locked.
And he calls the King of Justice to witness that he will not bring
the criminal to the bar, or move his tongue to expose, for the sake
of genera] society, to which he owes it, the infernal machine which
may be preparing for its destruction.
Well may those who stand on the outer edge, and who may be
gentlemen of unsullied honour, be kept in ignorance, though they
may have been entrapped in the cage with its iron bars of a secret
oath to God. Well may they be allowed to rest until time, and the
schooling of “ modern thought,” and the pressure of “ advanced
ideas,” have prepared them for another, and then another revelation.
Well may the number of circles have been multiplied from three to
over ninety, each inner one with another veil removed, and another
abyss revealed, according as the victim’s mind has been seasoned to
bear the shock.
But let M. Louis Blanc, who speaks with an authority given to
few, explain in his own authoritative language the disciplina arcani
of the Craft:—
“As the three grades,” he says, (Apprentice, Companion and
Master) “ included a great number of men who were entirely opposed
by their station and principles to all social subversion, the innovators
multiplied the degrees of the mystic ladder which each had to climb ;
they created fresh Lodges reserved for edrant souls. They instituted
the higher grades of ‘ Elect,’ ‘ Knight of the Sun,’ of ‘ Strict Obser-
vance,’ and of ‘ Kadosch,’ (or regenerated man) —dark sanctuaries,
the doors of which were never opened to the adept, till"after a long
series of trials calculated to prove his progress in revolutionary
education, to try the constancy of his faith and test the strength and
metal of his character.”* It pleased certain Sovereigns, Frederick
the Great amongst the rest, to join the Craft. Why not? The
existence of the higher grades being carefully concealed from then],
they only know about it what could be revealed to them without
danger. They have no need to trouble their heads about it; kept
down as they were in the lower grades, where they only saw an
opportunity of amusement, joyous banquets, principles taken up and
* History of Ten Years.


laid down at the threshold of the Lodges, formulas that had no
reference to ordinary life; in a word, only a comedy of equality.
But in these matters comedy borders closely on tragedy, and princes
and nobles are brought to sanction with their names, and blindly to
serve with their influence, the latent enterprises directed against
themselves.
At times, however, the sappers and miners belonging to the
Sect, in their anxiety to draw men of influence into the inner circle,
forget the ordinary caution, and produce a recoil which becomes
very inconvenient. Frederick, Prince of Orange, is a case in point.
He was raised to a high position amongst the Brotherhood in 1816.
He was thought sufficiently advanced to be admitted to some small
portion of the hidden mysteries and aims. But, for once, the miners
had mistaken their man. The Prince, horror-stricken at what he
saw and heard, resigned his dignities, and boldly published his
reasons for doing so to the world. “lam a Christian, and will ever
remain one,” he exclaims : and goes on to show how the Birth, Life,
and Death of our Divine Redeemer is treated as a legend, and made
a mere parable and plaything of: and how the very Ritual of the
Craft is condemnatory of the Divine character, as well as of the
Divine teaching of Christ, and of His holy Law. Thus, not only
those who have been leaders and directors of the Craft teach us that
“ behind thick curtains of secrecy ” there are prime movers ever
sleeplessly at work, and that that work is one of radical revolution;
but the great ones of the world also, corroborate their testimony to
such an extent that, if they be permitted to get near and see too
clearly into the Hidden Spring, they withdraw with horror as men
who have stepped, thinking it to be a flower, upon a rattle-snake.
Let us penetrate now into an inner, though perhaps not an
inmost, circle. Let us see how a “ Knight Kadosch ”is made, who
steps above the mere administrative order, and represents, according
to a high authority, the “ essential compliment ” of this institution.
The victim, for that is the best and truest name for him, has to
pass through four different apartments, and his profession and
initiation are completed in the last.
The first room is hung with black, and is lit by a single tri-
angular lamp hung from the ceiling, It is in communication with
a cellar, a kind of cabinet of reflection, where are found mingled
together the symbols of death, sorrow, and destruction.
The second apartment is draped in white. Two altars stand in
the centre. On one is an urn full of spirits of wine, which fill the
room with its glaring light ; and on the other altar burns fire in a
brazier, and incense by its side.
The third is lined with blue hangings. The ceiling is adorned
with stars, and three yellow wax candles lend to it a sombre and
melancholy light.


In the fourth and last room is held the Supreme Council of the
Elders, the Great Knights-Kadosch. It is hung round with red
drapery, and lit by twelve yellow candles.
When he has passed through the three rooms, with the usual
ceremonial, the candidate is ushered into the fourth; and here he is
made acquainted with the nature of the new obligations and
engagements which he contracts. Then he is made to go up and
down a mysterious ladder, and the emblem of his grade is placed in
his hand. This emblem has its hidden meaning :It consists of a
cross with a three-headed serpent. This emblem represents the evil
which is said to have been introduced into the world by the three
higher classes of society. On the head of one serpent a Royal
Crown is fixed, which is representative of Kings, Emperors, and
Civil Rulers ; on the second, a Tiara and St. Peter’s keys, which is
representatives of the Supernatural, and especially of the Yicar of
Christ on earth, and his authority to bind and loose; and the third
wears a Sword, emblematic of military authority or executive
power. It now becomes the duty of the candidate to use his in-
fluence to destroy those three so-called enemies of freedom and
“modern thought.” As a pledge that he will not shirk his newly-
imposed obligation of subverting religion and society, the candidate
takes a dagger in his hand, and sharply cuts the three heads of the
Serpent; and then the Crown, Tiara, and Sword fall to the
ground.*
Thus are men gradually conducted into the inner gloom. Thus
are they gradually seasoned and exercised, so as to be fit to bear,
without blinking, the rays of darkness proceeding from the lampblack
sun of the Society. “Darkness, mystery, and an awful oath to
pronounce,” says M. Louis Blanc, “ a secret to learn from each trial
courageously borne, a secret to keep under pain of execration and
death, peculiar signs whereby the brothers recognise one another at
the uttermost end of the earth, ceremonies referring to a murder,
and seeming to hatch and foster ideas of vengeance—what more fit
to form conspirators 1”
Standing then within the inner circle of Kadosch, let us apply
the measure which we have already used upon Paganism and the
Supernatural to this hidden Empire within an Empire, this ethereal
Society within Society, to this almost spiritual entity, which, with
its invisible sappers and miners fixing their blasts in the keystone of
the world, like the dry rot in timber, leaves everything apparently
untouched in its condition, whilst it is all the while turning its
strength to dust and powder, and preparing for a great catastrophy
unexpected in proportion as it is near.
First, the idea of God. As the cardinal principle of the Sect
is “ absolute toleration,” the Dogma of Divinity cannot be enter-
* Explanation of the Grade, by F, Ragan,


tained. For, to insist on a Divine Personality, or even on a General
Providence, would be, and is emphatically declared to be “intoler-
antly sectarian,” and a direct uprooting of “ liberty of conscience
and freedom of opinion.” “I affirm,” exclaims a leader amongst the
Brotherhood, “ I affirm that the name of God is a word void of
sense.” “We must not only place ourselves,” exclaims a second,
“ above different religions, but above all belief in any God whatever!”
“It is only fools,” cries out a third, “that speak and dream still of
a God !” And, as if to crown the highest pinnacle of blasphemy and
lunacy, a fourth, raving amongst his fellows, exclaims to them, “We
will be our own priests, and our own Gods! ”
Now, what is the teaching with regard to man? The Sect
boldly and consciously inverts the Divine order of facts; or
rather, God being blotted out, the Supernatural circle being swept
clean away into space, the only material out of which a God can
be made, is man. Hence, “ humanity ”is set up, and deified and
worshipped. “ Our temples,” exclaims one of these ‘ modern
thinkers,’ “ our temples consecrated to the worship of humanity can
as yet be open only to a few. We should indeed expose ourselves to
a charge of idolatry were we to attempt to personify the moral idea
of humanity in the way in which the Divinity is usually personi-
fied. . . . On this account, therefore, it is advisable not to
reveal the cultus of humanity to the eyes of the uninitiated,
until at length the time shall come when from east to west, from
north to south, this lofty conception of humanity shall find a place
in every breast.” Again: “We must live as Gods,” exclaims
another Apostle of the future. “ The spirit which animates us,” he
continues, “is an eternal spirit; it knows no division of time or
individual existence. A sacred unity pervades and governs the
wide firmament of heaven ; it is our one calling, our one duty, our
one God ! Yes, we are God ! We ourselves are God !
Looking upon our spiritual nature, we men may be said to form
part of the great whole, the great being of God. The myths, the
legends, the beliefs of benighted nations will all one day disappear
before the consciousness that man himself is God.” *
Let Statesmen look one moment at the logical consequence of
this wild teaching, which goes by the name of “ Modern Thought,”
and the outcome of which goes by the name of “ Civilization and
Modern Progress.”
God being destroyed, if Society exist at all, it must be governed
without a God. Here there is no longer any use talking about a
separation between Church and State ; for if there is no God, there
can be no Church to separate from. God, and therefore the Super-
natural, will be regarded by such authorities as remain, both as
usurpers and impostors, which, for this twofold reason, ought to be
* Secret Warfare, p. 229,


dethroned, and crushed out of existence without delay. The State
thus becomes not merely separated from, but absolutely hostile to
God and Christ, to all positive revelation by Book or otherwise ; in
a word, to the whole circle of the Supernatural. But since man’s
nature, however depraved and drugged, clamours for a Cod of some
kind, true or false, man himself is set on the pedestal to be his own
divinity; and that there should be no jealousy, that all without
exception might have in this divine nature some sort of participa-
tion, humanity is deified ; and being represented to the mind most
forcibly by the State, the State becomes God, and hence, the
Supreme Ruler—or rather demoniacal tyrant over the liberty of the
subject, and the freedom of his conscience. Thus, despots weave
the web in which the flies are caught : and the sapper and miner
put down their tools, abandon their secret haunts, and fix them-
selves on, and suck the blood of the victims on which their eyes
have been glaring from the first. Thus good and evil, right and
wrong, the eternal principles of Justice, Truth, Holiness, Love—
which have no meaning when cut off from God, their Origin—
become simply reakings and vapourings which can neither reward
nor punish, praise nor blame, which possess no authority whatever,
for they are but the fumings and exhalation of that bit of phos-
phorous of which, it is said, man’s brain is made. Does not the
figure and outline presented to us by “ modern thought ” recall that
Paganism which the Supernatural confronted and chased into the
darkness ?
Thus God being obliterated, and man being turned into God,
what is the characteristic of the Sect’s teaching? That of direct
and fierce polemic against the Supernatural. Before erecting its
fabric of socialism and communism combined, Materialism must cut
away the Heart of the Supernatural, and the ingrained traditions of
the human mind. The Sect fixes savagely on one dogma as its own.
whilst gnashing its teeth at all dogmas, it is this, viz., that absolute
liberty and unlimited freedom to do, say or think anything he likes,
is the natural, inalienable right of every man. Hence this other
doctrine, taught with noisy violence, viz., that the Sect is above all
dogma, that it is anterior and superior to all Religion; that it is to
give a new pulse to the world, and that it, with its wonderful
organisation, may, and indeed will, eventually replace the Christian
Church. Being thus, as it were, kept out of its birth-right by the
Supernatural, the Sect is ever launching its poison-tipped arrows at
the Heart of it, and exerts all its ingenuity to blacken its character,
and lower its prestige in the estimation of the world. Thus, it des-
cribes the Supernatural as “ a bastard religion,” and its Ministers,
as a set of men who have “ undertaken to enslave all progress, stifle
light, and destroy all liberty, in order to reign quietly over a bruta-
lized population of ignorant slaves.” The Sect, exclaims one of its
chief orators, should “ carry the scapel into the very sanctuary of


that blind faith which we have sucked from our mother’s breast.
No; the revealed God does not exist!” “We must raise
Altar against Altar,” says another of these Apostles, “teaching against
teaching We must fight; but fight with a certainty of
victory.” “Our final object and aim,” shouts another, “is that of
Voltaire in the French Revolution, —the total annihilation for ever
of Catholicity, and all ideas of Christianity.”
Such a design as this is absolutely being attempted at this
hour by some of the more advanced confraternities. Looking round
themselves from the centre of self, they can see neither hope before
nor light behind them. They preach the eternal “unknown”
before birth, which is simply to be followed by the “ eternal
nothingness ” after it. So completely have they extinguished the
deeper instincts of humanity which confess that
“ Even from the tomb the voice of nature cries,
Even in our ashes live their wonted fires ! ”
To show how intensely they believe in their Materialistic creed,
they enter into secret compacts one with the other to annihilate, so far
as their influence is concerned, Religion, and all reference whatso-
ever to the Supernatural. They solemnly pledge one the other
never to have a child baptized, never to celebrate a religious
marriage, never to permit a clergyman to visit their homes in times
of sickness, never to open their doors to him in times of death,
never to suffer the remains to be brought within reach of his
ministrations.
Thus the tenth Article of the Statutes says : “ Lest the free-
thinker should be prevented at the moment of death by foreign
influence from fulfilling his obligations towards the Committee, he
will remit to three of the brothers (to facilitate their mission in
such case) a mandate, of which there shall be at least three official
copies, giving full authority to their brothers to protest loudly, if
for any reason whatever his formal will and resolution should be
disregarded to be buried without any kind of religious rite.”* “He
died without the assistance of any minister of religion—” “ He
departed faithful to his principles, and was buried without a priest”
—such are considered by their friends the highest form of panegyric
that can be pronounced over the remains of the departed and in the
ears of those they love. “ Only fools,” exclaims Zelle, who is an
interpreter of this frame of mind, “ only fools, ignorant and weak
in undet standing, dream still of God, and the immortality of the
soul! ” f Indeed, the Sect in its formal apology for its principles
boldly declares that it “ teaches men how to be virtuous without
* Le Monde Mafonnique, Tom. ix.
fLe Monde Maiponnique, Tom. iv., p. 654,


the stimulus of hope or fear, independently alike of heaven or
hell.” The sectary, it says, “ looks to no future reward ; he has
received his recompense in the present and therewith he is con-
tent.”* Thus it follows, as a necessary consequence, to use the
expressions of another craftsman, that “ as matters now stand the
presence of the Bible on our altars is an empty form. From what-
ever point of view we regard the Bible, we do not hesitate to
declare openly, that in our reunions it is out of place once and for
ever ; since the doctrines of humanity now occupy the most promi-
nent position, and are as the best method of ameliorating
the condition of mankind.”f “Superstition” (that is Christianity
and the Mosaic Law) says another high authority, “ has hitherto
been the mainstay of tyranny and deception by means of which
princes and priests have drawn mankind into their net. Fear of a
future life, of an eternity of punishment, has been a motive power-
ful enough to hold weak minds, bowed down with the load of
prejudices sucked in with their mother’s milk, and to enervate the
holiest spirits, rendering them incapable of any great action. This
is the evil of Christianity, that it enslaves minds to such a point that
they are willing to endure any present suffering with the consoling
hope of a life to come. On this account it becomes indispensable to
undermine the pillar which bears up such a structure of superstition.
But as the number of those who yet fondly cling to the pious fictions
of their childhood is very large, and the roots of political and civil
institutions strike deep in the national soul, it is necessary to go
cautiously to work. Here philosophy may take a useful hint from
nature. As man is chiefly worked on through his passions, these
must be excited, and Christianity must be made ridiculous ere the
dominion of faith can be overthrown in the heart. Belief in Revel-
ation is a malady to which weak and pious minds are very subject;
it is an infectious epidemic, employed ever since the world began to
effect the destruction of human liberty ; it is alike incompatible with
sound reason and true freedom ; it is the parent of fanaticism and
superstition.” I Thus the great Kadosch, as Burnel says, is the soul
of the Sect, and the final object of its plots is “ the re-introduction
of absolute liberty and equality through the destruction of all
Royalty, and the abrogation of all Religious worship.
But it is only where it can be done with comparative impunity
that the Sect dares to creep up into the open daylight. Its Universal
method is that of the mole, silent burrowing and secret operations,
whilst it patiently educates and trains the mind to receive step by
step a fuller and fuller view of the entire Materialistic Creed ; whilst
it administers a fearful oath, under the most awful sanctions, to stop
* The Attitude, &c., by E. Eckert, Leipsig, 1852,
t See Almanack of the Sect, 1872,
£ Waarschuwing, vol. xi,


all mouths, if it cannot stop all consciences. Drop by drop the
water falls, and the drop at length wears the stone away. And
drop by drop the poison is set upon the brain and spreads, and
society at length becomes familiarized with, and treats with
playfulness, almost with levity, views of life which some time
before would have sent a thrill of horror through its nerves.
Thus, within the visible Society of man, there energizes another
invisible one, mixed with it, and yet apart from it, following it as
a shadow, and as the air encompassing it round about, and with
the steady pressure of gravitation drawing it to itself, and
infusing into it together with the Zeit-geist, or subtle spirit of the
age, its own more corrosive and deadly poison. Thus it is that
those moral explosions are produced which have from time to time
suddenly burst upon Society. “It is from the death of your
Lodges,” exclaims De Lamartine, speaking to the Sect, “ that the
ideas have emanated, first in the dark, then in the twilight, and now
in the full light of day, which have laid the foundations of the
revolutions of 1789, 1830, and 1848 !” And he might have added,
“ Which have been for years preparing the World for that reign of
Materialism which now stands so threatening in the future.”
Already has this secret net-work spread itself over the world,
and interwoven itself with the very meshes of Society. “ The
Sect,” says Emile Grisar, “ possesses by its affiliations enormous
resources.” He represents it as “ a robust bodyj a colossus with a
thousand heads, with an hundred thousand arms ; the great instru-
ment of all social reforms, the laboratory of all new ideas, and the
precursor of that democratic spirit which is advancing with giant
strides. The number of our holy militia,” he exclaims, “ extends
day by day ; our arms are multiplied, and very soon we shall be
able to clasp the whole country in our embrace.”
So much for its strength ; now as to its subtilty. “ The
greatest and wisest men,” says one of the Brotherhood, “ have
bestowed on our Society a constitution which gives lasting proof of
their sagacity. Shrouded in threefold night, we move among our
adversaries, and unseen by them acquaint ourselves of their weak
points, thus acquiring a mastery over their mind and heart. We
use their passions as wires, whereby without their being aware of
the fact, we set them in motion, compelling them to work in union
with us, whilst they ignorantly imagine themselves to be gratifying
their own wishes. It would be unwise to engage in open warfare;
the spread of freedom of thought and independence of action is the
surest means of undermining the gigantic monument erected by
ambition. Under the very shadow of authority our members work
the mighty tool committed to them.” The Sect, “great and terri-
ble, dogs your steps, spies out your proceedings, reads the thought of
* Neut. Tom. i., p. 290,


your inmost soul, watches you when you imagine yourself enveloped
in impenetrable darkness. Its hidden and irresistible influence
shatters your plans, its powerful arm rests the dagger from your
grasp. With your help, brethren,” he continues, “we will strike
the chains which still bind the peoples of the earth.” *
Such are the character, methods, and aims of that elastic
organization, of that laboratory of the Revolution, forming the
centre-cell of the Materialistic cancer, which, from a hidden secret
centre, pushes its horrid fangs and tentacles about the world. Its
aim now stands out clear before us : it is nothing less than the utter
destruction of the Supernatural in every shape and form ; and of Civil
Society as at present constituted upon the broad framework of
Christian revelation. It aims at Deicide, for it would annihilate
Cod; it aims at Suicide, and that of the most criminal kind, for it
would annihilate man’s immortality. It contracts the whole vision
of the soul to earth. That eye which used to seem to see
‘ ‘ The great world’s altar stairs
Slope thro’ darkness up to God.”
now pierces through the obscurity in vain. Man, from being in
freedom, finds himself in a cage, and in vain beats against its
massive bars of matter. Materialism clips the wings of hope,
opens the heart to hunger, and leaves it to despair, and plucks out
the eye of faith. Humanity being enthroned in the place of God,
like a brutal tyrant, quenches at once the torch of Liberty and
erases the word “ Freedom,” as an intelligible expression, from the
vocabulary of Nations. Earth rocks back to Chaos, and the spirit
is veiled in universal night,
“Not pierceable by power of any star.”
Both Church and State have shown themselves alive to the
possibilities of the future. Over and over has the State put its foot
upon the Sect as being a dangerous and revolutionary element of
disorder and destruction. Over and over again has the Church
exposed its character, and warned the world against it by her strong
anathemas. The States-General of Holland prescribed it in 1735,
and King Louis XVI., of France, in 1737. The great Council of
Berne did likewise in 1748, and it was totally suppressed in Bavaria
in 1848. At Milan and in Venice it was dealt roughly with by the
Civil Power in 1814 ; whilst at Modena, in Spain, Portugal,
Prussia, and in the Russian Empire, it has been looked upon by
those entrusted with authority as one of the great and growing
perils of the age. Still, it has been, and it must be confessed is,
gaining ground : and it would be difficult to find a Ruler with
* See Weiner Journal fur Freimauer Mss, for the Brethren, 2nd year,
Ffo, J., p. 66.


sufficient boldness or personal courage at the present day, to bring
his authority to bear for its destruction. Experience, and “ what
pays,” implies a principle much used by diplomatists and states-
men, and they find it convenient to disregard, and at times to
connive at, and occasionally to encourage, combinations and forces
the strength and vindictiveness of which they cannot measure; and
the overt actions of which have not as yet forced themselves into
any ugly prominence. The world is principally ruled by waiting,
and by meeting contingencies as they present themselves, rather
than by forecasting and preparing elaborate methods of aggression
or defence against some possible enemy whose movements are still
buried in the dark.
There is one power, however, whose especial vocation, whose
very profession in life it is, to publish the Truth, cost what it may,
to the world. The Catholic Church, the Heart of the Supernatural,
has, from the first, though the mouths of her Sovereign Pontiffs,
sent forth her light and warning—warning given with no un-
certain voice—with regard to this Arch-enemy of the Supernatural.
She, if no other, sees with eyes illuminated by her continual contact
with what is beautiful and true, the deformity, the falsehood, the
massive evil of that system which is doing all it can to bring her
down, and introduce a reign of universal darkness. Pope Clement
XII., so far back as the eighteenth century, denounced the Sect as
“ the open enemy of the Catholic Church.” In the present century
it has already been condemned by four Sovereign Pontiffs. Pius
VII., Leo XII., Gregory XVI., and Pope Pius IX., have, severally,
warned the world, and then openly and in its hearing, and for its
benefit and guidance, anathematized and cursed this destructive
principle of Chaos and of Death. Bishop Ketteler, sums up the
true attitude of the Church when he says : “ There is then, on the
one hand the Catholic Church, and on the other the Sect. Here the
work of God, the work of Christ, and all those who believe in Him ;
there the work of men, who deny God and his Christ, or at any rate
abandon Him. A Catholic who joins the Sect deserts the temple of
f.he living God to work at the temple of an idol.”
And such being the case what conclusion do we come to to-
night ? Is it to abandon Christ crucified, and adore instead one of
two such malefactors as Paganism and Materialism ? Are we to
choose what is more brutal than Barabbas, in preference to the
Saviour who redeemed us, and prefer a murderer of all high and
holy things, a destroyer of God and man, to that glorious Revela-
tion which, having been given in the Conscience, is perfected in the
Gospel, and leads us straight through life to death, and from death
to life again ? There can be but one unanimous reply. To whom
shall we go 1 Christ alone—and He has shown it in the contests 0£
eighteen hundred years—has the words of eternal life. Christ shal
reign. Christ shall rule, But how ? Not by our remaining listleSg


and supine, but by our rousing ourselves, and pushing back the
advancing darkness, by meeting the foe with determined boldness,
and confronting him at every point: and finally, by subjugating
him through the sheer force of that Goodness, Beauty, and Truth
which he altogether lacks. Let us, let the people rouse themselves;
let none slink back; let the whole circle of the Supernatural, that
great army which still looks up to the Supreme King of Kings, as
its commander, under His flaming banner, led by His eye, directed
by His intelligence, and armed with a courage that comes from the
Heart of the Eternal —advance against the Colossus with its thou-
sand heads and hundred thousand arms which, looming in the
distance, threatens to take captive and enslave the future generation
of mankind.
“ All in a moment through the gloom were seen,
Ten thousand banners rise into the air,
With Orient colours waving. With them rose
A forest huge of spears ; and thronging helms
Appear’d, and serried shields, in thick array,
Of depth immeasurable.”
True, the enemy is many and is powerful, still we need feel no
craven fear, though it is right to feel anxiety. There is One, but
only One, who is stronger than man, and can take him, with all his
fierce passions, captive, can lay his banners low, aud cause his shield
to fall, and his spear to drop useless by his side. Though
“ The million with fierce song and maniac dance
Did rage around.”
He, who converted the haughty Roman, and softened the heart of
the fierce barbarian, He, who has already shown, on an imperial scale,
how He can subjugate pride and passion to Himself, would not
shorten His arm, and leave us to be overcome, and then to perish.
Society has it in its own hands whether it will be saved or not. He will
not be wanting to it, if it is not wanting to itself. How, then, shall
the enemy be encountered 1 First, what is the Hidden Spring of his
success, of the future force of Materialism, taking it in its widest
signification ? and secondly, what is its main weapon of offence ? and
finally, what shall Society, and we, who belong to the very Heart of
the Supernatural, do to meet its coming most effectually ? If we can
only discover the true answers to these questions, and do what they
impose upon us, and that with all our might, then these words will
not have been spoken in vain.


IV.
The Hidden Spring of Materialism is Pride of Reason, which,
before man was made,
“ With ambitious aim
Against the throne and monarchy of God,
Raised impious war in Heaven, and battle proud,
With vain attempt.”
The Hidden Spring of all things and the measure of them is filched
from God, the sole Origin of every created form and the archetype
of their perfection, and is fixed in the logical faculty of man. This
Hidden Spring finds it most congenial environment and exercises
its fullest expansion in the unapproachable recesses of the Sect;
and, being made Supreme Arbiter and Absolute Dictator in the
Universe, its fiats become law, and its decision final. The whole
Supernatural, tested by its arbitrary canons, melts into space, and
the only residuum of existences is comprised in a repetition of mole-
cules and cells, such as are detected or imagined by the scientific
intellect, assisted by such appliances as modern ingenuity provides.
Whilst Paganism, through the massive power of the passions,
poisoned man’s imagination, and humbled him to the dust, making
him bow down before the counterparts of his own passions to
worship them ; Materialism, deliberately and in cold blood, proceeds
to take the Almighty God off His Throne : and, through the force
of human reason acting on arbitrary principles, raises up “humanity ”
to fill the vacant place. Having been enamoured with an empty
idealization of himself, man declares that he himself is God, and
that the other Gods or Saviours of humanity, all other essences
of progress and perfectibility, are but so many figments of pious
minds, or scare-crows set up by priests and princes to keep the
world off its rightful heritage of universal liberty and unlimited
equality. Man’s unassisted reason and the products of it are to rule
and direct the destinies of the race. His career is measured from
end to end, from the Womb to the Tomb, by bis earthly conscious-
ness. As for him there was no past before he was born, so there
will be no future after he is dead. This span comprising his whole
career, man must make all he can out of it \ strain from it the
greatest quantity of pleasure for himself and others ; and spend his
days in developing such capabilities as may increase the happiness
of those who will take his place after he has fallen back into that
general humanity, that broad shadow, out of which he came. Man
comes back to Paganism simply with an exchange of Gods, and
with a deeper development of human pride. That Great Centre-
Heart of the Supernatural which “came eighteen hundred years
ago into the world, which is an earnest and harbinger of solution of
moral problems ; which has banished from the earth, or frightened


into the darkness, many of the foulest monsters that laid waste
humanity; which has restored woman to her place in the natural
order ; which has set up the law of right against the rule of force;
which has proclaimed, and in many great particulars, enforced, the
canon of mutual love; which has opened from within the sources of
strength for poverty and weakness, and put a bit in the mouth and
a bridle on the neck of pride,”—the great Centre-Heart of the Super-
natural which has done all this, is therefore simply scoffed at and
trampled on ; its leaders being declaimed against as tyrants and
usurpers; and its doctrines compared to so many metaphysical
cobwebs spun in a dark and superstitious age for the entanglement
and capture of man’s reason. With an arrogance not without its
thread of Satanic pride in ’it, Materialism undertakes, by the action
of its Hidden Spring, to clear this way, and provide for us, not only
something better, but something which will meet and satisfy, as has
never been done before, the cravings of humanity, and the wants of
the human soul. Such is Materialism’s aim, such its steady purpose,
and such its Hidden Spring.
Now what plan does it propose to itself in its campaign against
the Supernatural? How does Materialism propose to effect this
ambitious purpose ? By driving the Supernatural and its principles
out of all minds, and by replacing it with its own theories and philo-
sophies of progression; by destroying its Hidden Spring and
replacing it by another. How does it aim at effecting this ? Its
plan will come out more clearly by watching the action of its Heart.
What is the action of the Sect ? What are its instruments and
methods? Its great struggle and patent aim is to educate the
intellect of humanity and to take possession of its reason. The
field of its operations is as wide as the human family itself. It adopts
every instrument (it matters not how humble), to promote its ends,
which promises in any way to act as a lever on the mind. Its
ambition soars to the highest class and the foremost intellects, and
embraces all ages and conditions, from the philosopher to the artizan,
from the statesman and civil ruler to the roughs in a country town.
The pen and the tongue are its two main engines. And it strives
with sleepless energy to enlist in its service those who can work
them with most powerful effect; thus by degrees, by bringing an
equal universal pressure to bear upon the great brain of humanity,
to mould it according to its will. It aims then at the Universal
Education of all classes according to one distinct philosophy ; and,
by means of its network spread abroad with its invisible centres and
attractions, it seems to be gradually influencing the human con-
sciousness towards its own methods, and its impossible ambitions.
These tactics show themselves most unmistakably in the burn-
ing question of the Education of the rising generation. The large
world of men can be practised on without creating much suspicion ;
but if Materialism is to get possession of the world’s youth, it


knows that it must tight for that possession, and hence, whether
it will or no, exhibit the cloven foot. Here, again, it comes in
direct clash with the Supernatural, and especially with its Centre-
Head, the Catholic Church. On this plain, openly, the battle must
be, and is being, fought. It is such a battle-ground as opens out to
the lookers on the battalions and squadrons of the opposing hosts:
those who before were wavering, who hardly knew to which banner
they belonged, now have to choose sides once for all; to determine
by which of the two Hidden Springs they will be influenced; and
in which direction, so far as they are concerned, the future courses
of the world shall run. See for a moment the tactics of the Sect.
“The teaching of Catholicism,” it says, “is the greatest
obstacle to the development of a child’s faculties. The intervention
of a priest in education deprives the child of all moral, logical, and
rational teaching.” * Again : “ Faith in God takes away the
dignity of man, troubles his reason, and may lead to the abandon-
ment of morality.” Once more : “ The principle of a Supernatual
authority, that is to say, faith in God, takes away the dignity of
man, and is even likely to lead him to the abandonment of all
morality. . . . The respect we owe especially to the mind of
a child forbids us to inculcate doctrines which might trouble his
reason.” f The Sect, exclaims one of its Apostles, speaking in
reference to his own practice, “ ought to be and is only a school
of morality independent of all religious dogmas I have
myself,” he continues, “ brought up children, but I have never
lied to them. Each time that they have asked me, £ What was
meant by God ? ’ I have answered, ‘ I know nothing about it.’ It
is thus I have acted with men.” J Such are the logical conse-
quences of the Materialistic principle, and of the action of its
Hidden Spring operating from within the environment of the Sect.
Such being the principle, how can it be brought to bear with
the most eFect ? By means of an organized activity which shall
propose as its exclusive object the furtherance of such an aim. The
influence of an organization like this has been appraised at true
value by the Sect. Active, resolute, intelligent, daring, it has put
to shame those whom it opposes by the energy, resource, and deter-
mination of its efforts after the realization of its dreams. It has all
the spring and elasticity of a great ambition, and all the boldness
and self-confidence of a newly-made idea. The enthusiasm of an
Apostolate which looks to change the world into a Paradise of its
own, seems to animate this energetic body; and the general supine-
ness or numbness which it has already produced in the public mind,
together with the want of dash in its antagonists, seems to it at
* Journal de Bruxelles, Nov. 28, 1864.
t Le Monde-Mafonnique, Aug. 167, p. 196-7.
i Ibid.


least, to hold out prospects of future victory. Boldly, like some
reckless buccaneer, it has run up the black flag in the presence of
the whole fleet of the Supernatural, and whether we will it or will
it not, the engagement must be fought. Thus the “ Education
League ” established in Belgium, with the distinct object of driving
the Supernatural out of Education and introducing Materialism into
it, spread like a fire through Europe and beyond it when once its
general aim became known amongst the Sect. The League in one
nation shakes hands, fraternizes with, and encourages the League in
another. From Belgium this organization spread to France, where
it was taken up with enthusiasm by those who had been schooled in
the principles of the “ Knight-Kadosch ” ; and from France it has
been extending itself to other portions of the world. Its watch-word
or war-cry is “ Universal, Secular, Free, and Compulsory Education
for all classes of Society.” It receives its inspiration from, and is
directed by the Sect, which lets slip no opportunity to forward its
interests, and to identify itself with its operations, bearing ever
steadily in view its one ultimate object, the universal destruction of
the Supernatural, and the universal reign of Materialism in its
place. Filled with this spirit of mutual help, the convention of the
Sect in France, in 1870, declared to the world, in its leading organ,
that it would ( .Associate itself with the efforts made in other
countries to compel the establishment of Free, Compulsorv, and
Secular Education.”*
In proportion as Society has appeared ripe for the introduction
of this machinery for the universal diffusion of Materialism and the
blotting out of God and Christ, it has been pushed boldly upon
the people: but where the Hidden Spring of the Supernatural has
been too strong, the Sectaries have displayed the wisdom of. bidiim
their time, and have refrained from horrifying the public conscience,
whilst gradually undermining it. The Sect is ever content to wait:
as. it is never sleeping. It is satisfied with inserting quietly, and
with tenderest gentleness the thin end of the wedge j and is pre-
pared if necessary to let it bide there for years, without giving it a
single blow. Countries might at this hour be pointed out where, in
their gradations—as in the manufactory of firearms
different people are, some nearer some further off their final finish,
their complete education in the Materialistic mode of life. And
with all and each of these the Sect and its hundred thousand arms
are steadily at work, pushing all on in their various degrees towards
the consummation of their so-called perfectibility. The ultimate
effect produced by the Hidden Spring of Materialism is, necessarily,
and of its essence, Voltairian and Anarchical. Where it can do so
without fear of shocking prejudice, the Sect boldly steps forward,
and, with a smile, fraternizes and shakes hands with, nay, indeed,
* Le Monde Maconnique, Apr., 1867.


embraces, first, that Infidel Voltaire, and then, Rousseau, that
father of Revolution. Its principal organ —established to teach the
world that it is the source of religion and government, and the
Supernatural the parent of tyranny and superstition—thus addresses
its subscribers :
“We are happy to announce,” it says, “ that the subscriptions
for the Educational League and the Statue of Brother Voltaire
meet with the warmest sympathy in all our Lodges. It would be
impossible to have two subscriptions more in harmony with each
other : Voltaire, that is to say, the destruction of all prejudice and
superstition, and the Education League, that is to say, the building
up of a new Society, based on science and instruction alone.”
Here then stands out in all its nakedness the ultimate aim of
Materialism and of the Sect. They would substitute for the present
educational machinery of the world, one radically subversive in its
aim. They would have all education, from the highest to the lowest
culture, embracing women as well as men, turned into an instru-
ment to carry out one end. They would starve the Supernatural
out of the mind of man ; and expunge the very notion of a Law-
giver, Judge, or Rewarder, of the immortality of the soul, sin,
penance, supernatural love, Christ, Heaven, Hell, from education.
They would crib and cabin man in the narrow prison-house of this
little earth; and contract his career, limit his hopes and fears to
the clay out of which he is said to grow. Thus, man would begin
to feel life to be a living death, and pass his time waiting as
resignedly as he could for annihilation. Existence would be shorn
of all its charms, and death, which had been robbed of half its fears,
would return with all its terrors. Thus, to be born would become a
greater calamity than to die; and the highest impulses of man so
many arrows tipped with poison to penetrate his heart. All the
deep tenderness of the affections would be bathed in a sea of bitter-
ness ; and the very yearnings of the spirit, all its up-strivings, would
simply render man a type or pattern of collapse; an energy ever
striving and ever failing, and unlike anything else in nature, the
only being falling short of all its promise. Thus does the Hidden
Spring of Materialism reduce man to that “ slime ” out of which
God took him, before He breathed in his face the breath of life.
“ Remember man that thou art Dust, and nothing but Dust,” cries
the High Priest of the new Religion without God or Christ, “ and
unto Dust thou slialt return, never to. rise from Dust again!” Such
is the outcome of “ modern thought,” such the fruit of “ advanced
ideas,” such the ultimate analysis of that scheme of “ progress ”
and “ modern civilisation ” which the Heart of the Supernatural,
the Catholic Church, has anathematized with all the thunders of the
Vatican.
It may serve a controversial purpose to confuse men’s minds,
and to make out that the Church condemns legitimate progress,


true civilization, and modern ideas—though they be sound; but
thoughtful men are not to be thus deceived; what she condemns,
and will ever battle against, and that with all her intellectual
might, is not the good but the evil, not the light but the darkness,
which loves to mix up and identify itself with the true interests of
humanity. It is evil of all kinds that she is ever combating and
endeavouring to destroy. Her eye sees the line of demarcation;
her hand knows where and when to strike ; and being protected in
her mission, she swoops down, as with a two-edged sword, upon the
loathsome monster of Materialism, however skilfully disguised in
the draperies of an angel. Is it not to the interest, the essential
interest of the whole circle of the Supernatural that Supernaturalism
should be victorious ? Should not each Denomination, in its place,
do its share in the battle, and bring out such artillery as it is
possessed of to keep in check the advancing, common enemy of God
and man ?
What shall we, what shall Society do to meet most effectually
the coming danger ?
The way to meet it most effectually is, first, to realize the
momentous interests that are at stake—the eternal interests of
millions of immortal souls: and, secondly, to adopt means for
pushing back the advancing tido, such as will be adequate to the
task imposed upon them. To limit the contest to the narrow circle
of the school question would be to show but a slight appreciation of
the universal nature of the danger, and the übiquitous presence of
the enemy. The battle, if it is to be won by the Supernatural
against Materialism, will have to be fought out, not merely in the
Church and in the Schools, but on the broad platform of the world.
The great secular world of men—men who in one way or other
belong to one or other of the circles of which the Supernatural is
composed—must be roused to a sense of their duty, their responsi-
bility, and their danger. The Statesman, the Politician, the
Magistrate, the Lawyer, the Physician, the Soldier, men in the
Civil Service of their Country, all these, have they not friends or
families, those whom they love dearer than themselves ? The
journalist, the literary, the scientific man, men of the leisured read-
ing class, —are they not living in thousands in the world, with their
private circles and their social interests? Is this great army to
remain idle, and to allow those who depend on them for life, peace,
and happiness, to find themselves presently surrounded by a world
of new ideas, where God, and Christ, and all those thoughts of the
future which bring heaven into a household, are looked upon as so
many old wives’ tales ? How is it that they are not prepared to
exert themselves in defending the best interests of their hearths and
homes ? How is it that they do not see the cloud of locusts swarm-
ing in the distance, and threatening to devour every living and
green thing—everything that has any spiritual life or beauty in it ?


Will their homes, their own hearts, be happier or brighter when
“ Humanity ” takes the place of God, and heartless logic, which
has to borrow all its principles, is set up in the place of Christ
and the Supernatural 1 Will they weep the less when those who
are falling into decay, assure them that death will separate them
for ever, and that there is no place of future bliss, where friends
meet again, and where sorrows and mourning cease 1 Cannot
men see their own advantage? Men of the world who are so
shrewd in other things, are they blinded here, where the sight of
their eyes is most required ? As the State is founded on the Family,
so the lever which moves the one w r ill move the other. If the man
of the world sees, first, that it is to his own personal advantage, and
then to the interest of his family to preserve the Supernatural, he
will carry the conviction with him wherever he goes ; it will become
a motive power in his life; and whatever his intellect touches, to
which it can be referred, will be influenced by it. The Journalist
will, instead of writing flippant articles against religion, use his
best intellect to defend Supernatural truth as the noblest and highest
influence in a difficult and sinful day; The Publicist will become
serious and logical when matters of the other world have to be
treated of; for he will feel that it is his paramount duty to add all
he can to the strength and influence of the Supernatural. The Civil
Ruler and the Statesman will use their high position and their many
opportunities, for establishing the regulating and ruling principles
of a Christian Government wherever they have a chance; and for
repressing and ostracising those antagonistic influences which deprive
order of its highest sanctions, and sow the seed of anarchy and con-
fusion. They will be moulded by the double pressure of domestic
interest on the one hand, and of public benefit on the other : being
persuaded that they cannot serve man, or the society in which he
lives, more effectually, than by doing their very uttermost to con-
solidate by tongue and pen, by example and influence, the governing
principles of the Supernatural. Then that which is found worthy of
so much attention amongst Statesmen and the distributors of power
and patronage, will speedily become a matter of interest also with
philosophers, publicists, and thinkers. Men of science would engage
their attention with the problems of Christianity, and learned works
would issue from the press defending the fundamentals of Religion,
and castigating with inexorable logic and overpowering analysis
those plausible writers who, otherwise would first have tickled the
public ear, and then have impressed the public intellect.
If thus those great forces which go in the aggregate to form the
thinking or public opinion of the world, were to rouse themselves to
secure their true interest, we should speedily be conscious of an
influence pervading society like an atmosphere, forming the tone of
thought, and moulding the public mind according to Christian prim
piples and Christian models, The revolutionary ideas and theories


of the Sect would fall upon barren or uncongenial ground, and would
be unable to take root. The public ear would be turned to a
different harmony; and Materialism would be looked upon in its
true colour, as the infatuation of a heated brain acted upon by a
proud, ungodly spirit. When once the world’s mind is fairly made up
upon a point, everything else follows. If the perils of the future are
to be met successfully, much of the world’s thinking must be undone.
Truth, when it has once got hold of the intellect of humanity is
with difficulty driven out; but, fortunately, not so with error. Error,
of its nature, is transient. Therefore, though the symptoms of
Materialism were strongly developed, it would still be possible to
apply an antidote. But to be effectual it should be administered by
the Leaders of thought and action ; and by those in whose power it
is, on account of their position, to mould the opinions of the Society
in which they live. Single men, ere now, have turned the whole
current of thought in their own direction, and may be said to have
given an impetus which continued energizing long after they were
dead. What one man has done, many men may do, who combine to
do it; and if the Sect, through organization, personal energy, and
individual talent, is strong enough to move to their foundations 5 by
means of rampant error, the very corner-stones of the Supernatural:
surely, a combination of Christian gentlemen, were they only in
earnest, could, by means of tongue and pen, of public and private
influence, urge back the growing tendency towards Materialism, and
give a new and forward push to those principles which claim the
Supernatural as their own. Men deeply in earnest, and personally
possessed by a vivid Faith, by Love and Purity, would ever over-
match in any intellectual or moral contest, the advocates of
Materialism in their canvass for the suffrages of the world.
Were such a turn given to the public opinion of the age, there
would be little difficulty in perfecting the work begun.
Statesmen would then perceive that Religion, that is the
Supernatural, is a far better instrument for the preservation of peace
and order, than all the police, volunteers, and artillery in the world.
They would look upon a religious training for youth as the best
method of turning out honest, orderly, and useful citizens. Hence
it would follow, that the State, driving such evident advantage from
the great circle of the Supernatural, would support, according to a
given scale, every school in which the Supernatural should be taught.
It would encourage the Church and the Denominations to do all in
their power to ground the rising generation very profoundly in those
truths of the Supernatural circle which they respectively hold. Each
Denomination having its own school, and each Denomination re-
ceiving an equal and justly-divided assistance in its work : —two
things would inevitably follow ; first that that great body of truth
pontained within the circles of the Supernatural, and which tends so


much to mould men’s minds to purity, honesty and courage, would
be, more than ever before, brought into immediate contact with the
intelligence of the rising generation; and thus would arise a more
profoundly Supernatural people; and, secondly, that soreness and
bitterness, which is the inevitable result of trying to make one shoe
fit every kind of foot—of trying to force your own favourite system
>of education upon people who do not want it, as well as on those
who do, would be wholly done away with ; and each circle of the
Supernatural would jealously maintain that body of Christian and
Godly doctrine which had been preserved to it amidst the rough
conflict of human interest and opinion.
That the Church and all those systems which profess to impart
religious truth would do their utmost to preserve the treasures of
Revelation, and to wedge them deep in the minds of their respective
peoples, stands to reason : for to do this is their very raison d’etre.
Still all could exert a larger share of energy, and do more than in
the past to strengthen and consolidate those guiding beliefs, which
are founded in the very constitution of human nature. The exist-
ence of God, His Attributes, His character as Judge and Rewarder ;
the Immortality of the Soul; Heaven, Hell, the Incarnation, Sin,
Grace, and Providence, —there are innumerable Truths, besides
those written in the Book and witnessed to by Tradition, which
serve as a sort of specific against the radical change that Materialism
would bring about; and that lead of themselves, if not to higher,
at least to more subtle truths, with which they are immediately
connected.
If in this way the great lay world were to perceive the perils
of the future, and were to mould into shape a more believing public
opinion; if this public opinion were brought to bear on Parliaments
and Legislatures; if Parliaments and Legislatures, seeing the power
of the Supernatural as a peace-preserver and citizen-maker, were to
give fair play to the Supernatural in every School, and to assist
each circle according to some equitable scheme ; if added to these
influences, those whose profession it is to be Apostles and Evange-
lists of the Supernatural, stirred themselves up to do their duty:—
if such a combination of forces and renewed energies were brought
to bear upon society at large, then there would be a fair chance of
beating back Materialism, of breaking its Hidden Spring which
aims at the destruction of society; and of society itself tending day
b y day, more and more, towards the completion of its knowledge,
towards such an appreciation of the beauty, symmetry, and harmony
which exist between all parts of Supernatural Religion, as to induce
it slowly, yet by degrees, to exchange the fragment for the whole ;
and, in place of being satisfied with an obscured ray, not to be con-
tent till it had possessed as its very own the full orb of heavenly
truth, the entire Revelation of Jesus Christ as presented to view in
the Theology of the Church, or as imparted to the world through


the protected Voice of an infallible Interpreter. One thing is
inevitable —men cannot bide on the slope, on the incline ; they must
and will, eventually, if they follow the laws of logic—a thing not
always done as a matter of fact—either finished by becoming Materia-
lists without God or Christ in the world; or by becoming Catholics
with the full Revelation of our this principal that, if
half a loaf is better than no bread, a whole loaf is better than half
a loaf. If it is worth while holding fragments of religious truth,
it is certainly worth while embracing all religious truth. The
Hidden Spring of the Supernatural is as much the basis of the
whole of Revelation, as of a portion of it; the Hidden Spring of
Materialism is as much the principle of the denial of the whole of
Revelation as of one isolated truth. If God is the Authority, we
must be Catholics; if man, we must be Materialists. If there be
any one doubting here to-night let him make his choice : and let
that choice be, to cling to his last end, to God, to Christ, under the
protecting influence of the Catholic Church.
‘ Hail, Son of God, Saviour of men ! Thy name
Shall be the copious matter of my Song
Henceforth, and never shall my harp Thy praise
Forget, nor from Thy Father’s praise disjoin !’


SYDNEY:
H. T. DUNN AND CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
QUEEN’S CHAMBERS, queen’s PLACE.
1891


FINN BROS. & CO.'S
LIST OF BOOKS FOR THE PEOPLE.
THE CHRISTIAN FATHER.—What he should be, and what he
should do. Together with a collection of prayers suitable to his condition.
From the German of Rev. W. Cramer, by Rev. L. A. Lambert. With an in-
troduction by Right Rev. S. V. Ryan, L).D., C.M., Bishop af Buffalo. Paper
Is, cloth 2s, maroquette Is 6d.
THE CHRISTIAN MOTHER.—The education of her children and
her prayer. Translated from the original of Rev. W. Cramer, by a Father of
the Society of Jesus. With an introduction by His Eminence Cardinal
Gibbons, Archbishop of Baltimore. Paper Is, maroquette Is 6d, cloth 2s.
A SURE WAY TO A HAPPY MARRIAGE—A book of
instructions for those betrothed and for married people. Translated from the
German by Rev. Edward I. Taylor, with a letter of approbation by Right
Rev. Thomas A. Becker, Bishop of Wilmington. Paper Is, maroquette Is fid,
cloth 2s 6d.
CATHOLIC WORSHIP.—The Sacraments, Ceremonies and Festivals
of the Church explained in questions and answers. Translated from the
German of Rev. 0. Gisler, by Rev. Richard Brennan, LL.D. Paper 6d,
cloth Is.
STORIES FOR FIRST COMMUNICANTS—For the time
before and after First Communion. Drawn from the best authorities by
Rev. J. A. Keller, D.D. Translated by Frances M. Kemp. Cloth 2s,
maroquette Is 6d.
THE MOST HOLY ROSARY in thirty-one meditations, prayers
and examples. With prayers at Mass, devotions for Confession and Com-
munion, and other prayers. Translated from the German of Rev. W. Kramer,
by Rev. Eugene Grimm, C.S.R. Cloth 2s, maroquette Is 6d.
A NOVENA IN HONOUR OF THE HOLY FACE OF OUR
LORD—Adapted from the French of the Abbe Janvier by the Sisters of the
Divine Compassion. With an introductory notice by Right Rev. Mgr.
Preston, D. D. Paper 6d, maroquette Is.
THE GOLDEN PRAYER.—Short meditations on the Lord’s prayer
for every day in the week, with other meditations on prayer for every day in
the month. From the French of the Abbe Dirquesne by A.S.B. Paper 6d,
maroquette Is.
THE MIRACULOUS POWER OF THE MEMORARE,
illustrated by examples. From the French of a Marist Father, by Miss Ella
McMahon. Paper fid, maroquette Is.
THE WTLL OF GOD.—From the French by M.A.M. To which is
added an easy method of attending Holy Mass with profit, by Blessed Leonard
of Port Maurice. Paper 6d, maroquette Is.
THE PRACTICE OF HUMILITY—By His Holiness Pope
Leo XIII, from the Italian by Rev. J. F. X. O’Conor, S. J. Paper fid,
maroquette Is.


CATHOLIC BELIEF ... 0 9
THE FAITH OF OUR FATHERS by Cardinal Gibbons ..2 0
Tactics of Infidels by Father Lambert ... ... ... ... 10
Notes on Ingersoll by Father Lambert ... ... .. ... 0 6
Cobbett’s History of the “ Reformation ” ... ... ... ... 0 0
What Catholics have done for Science ... ... ... ... 4 0
The Lily of Israel, or Life of the Blessed Virgin ... ... ... 10
Visits to the Blessed Sacrament (Ligouri) ... ... ... ... 10
Glories of Mary (Ligouri) ... ... ... ... ... 10
Instructions on th§ Commandments (Ligouri) ... ... ... 1 0
Life of St. Alphonsus Ligouri .. ... ... ... ... 10
Life of Our Lord .. ... ... . . ... ... 10
Life of Father Faber ... ... ... ... ... . ... 0 6
Life of St. Fhilip Neri ... ... ... ... .. ... 10
Life of Pope Leo XIII. ... .. ... ... ... ... 7 6
Life of St. Aloysius ,... ... ... ... ... ... 5 0
Life of St. Stanislaus ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 0
Life of St. Thomas of Aquin (Dr. Vaughan) ... ... ... 6 6
Life and Letters of St. Francis Xavier (2 Vols.) ... ... ... 10 6
Life of St. John the Baptiste ... ... ... ... ... 2 6
Life of St. Vincent de Paul ... ... ... ... ... 3 0
Life of the Cure d’Ars . ... ... ... . ... ... 4 0
Life of Blessed Sir Thos. More ... ... ... ... ... 16
Life of Father Matthew ... ... .. ... .. ... 10
Life of St. Ignatius of Loyola ... ... .. ... ... 20
Life and Spirit of St. Francis de Sales ... ... ... ... 3 0
Lessons from Our Lady’s Life ... ... ... ... ... 1 6
Persecutions of the Irish Catholics, by His Eminence Cardinal Moran 3 6
Lecture on the Rights and Duties of Labour, by His Eminence'
Cardinal Moran ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 6
Encyclical Letter of His Holiness Pope Leo XIII, on the Condition of
Labour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 3
What sort of Man was Martin Luther (Anderdon) ... ... ... 0 3
Luther’s Word and the Word of God (Anderdon) ... ,.. ... 0 3
Luther at table, elegant extracts from his talk (Anderdon) ... ... 0 3
The Catholic Young Man of the present day ... Paper 6d, cloth 1 0
The Imitation of Christ (A’Kempis) ... ... ... 9d and 1 0
Devotions for Country Missions ... ... ... ... ... 0 6
Frequent Communion (Boone) ... ... ... ... . 0 6
Popular Delusions and Objections to Catholic Faith and Practice
(Dodsworth) ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Roman Missal for the use of the Laity (Roan) ... ... ... 5 0
Sweet Thoughts of Jesus and Mary ... ... ... ... 1 6
Happiness of Heaven ... ... ... .. ... ... 1 0
Choice of a State of Life.. ... ... ... .. ... 3 0
Foot of the Cross (Faber) ... ... ... ... ... 6 0
Mary Magnifying God ... ' ... ... ... ... ... 2 6
Parochial Hymn Book ... .. ... ... ... ... 16
Exhortation to Frequent Communion (Porter) ... ... ... 0 6
Way of Salvation ... ... ... .. ... ... 1 0
The Dove of the Tabernacle (Kinnane) ... ... ... ... 16
Lamb of God ... ... ... ... .. ... ... 16
The Angel of the Altar ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 6
Mary Immaculate (Kinnane) ... .. ... ... ... 1 6
St. Joseph (Kinnane) .. .. .. ... ... ... 16
St.*Patrick (Kinnane) ... . ... ... ... ... 2 0
The Clock of the Passion ... ... ... ... ... 0 9


Think well out ... ... ... .. . ... 0 9
St. Augustine’s Confessions ... ... .... .• j q
How to live Piously ... ... ... 10
Catechism of Perseverance ... ... ... ...
Catholic Christian Instructed .. ... ... f ... 10
Gobinet’s Instructions for Youth ... ... ... * ... 16
TALES.
Diary of a Sister of Mercy ... ... A . 3 q
Bracton—a Tale of ’98 .. ... ... 26
Tales for the Many ... ... ... 10
Castle and the Manor ... ... ... ... .. 3 6
Aroer—the Story of a Vocation ... ... ... ... 4 q
Flora—the Roman Martyr (2 Vols.) ... ... ... ... 8 0
A Stormy Life (Fullerton) ... ... ’.. 6 0
Constance Sherwood (Fullerton) .. ... ... ... ... 6 0
Mrs. Gerald’s Niece (Fullerton) .. ... ... ... ... 6 0
Ellen Middleton (Fullerton) ... ... ... ... 6 0
M ild Birds of Killeevy ... ... ... ... ... 3 6
Soeur Eugenie ... ... ... ... ... • ..30
Stoneleighs of Stoneleigh ... ... ... 5 0
Fabiola (Cardinal Wiseman) ... ... .. 3 6
20
The Armourer of Solingen or Wrongfully Accused ... ... .. 3 6
Philip’s Restitution .. ... ... ... 3 6
Chased by Wolves .. ... ... ... 2 6
The Jolly Harper Man and his good Fortune ... ... 2 6
Idols, or the Secret of the Rue Chausse6 d’Antin ... ... ... 3 6
As good as gold... ...' ... ... ... 2 0
Miss Peggy O’Dillon, or the Irish Critic ... ... .. ... 10
Irish Fairy Tales ... ... ■ ... ... 2 0
The Shan Van Vocht—-A Story of the United Irishmen by j.
Murphy ... ... .. ... ...' Is and 2 6
The Wild Rose of Lough Gill ... ... ... ... Is and 2 6
Moy O’Brien ... ... ... ... ... 2 0
For the Old Land, by Kick ham ... .. ... ... 2 0
The last - Monarch of Tara .. ... ... 2 0
Ill-won Peerages (M. L. O’Byrne) ... ... .. ’’ 2 0
Leixlip Castle—a Romance of the Penal Days (O’Byrne) ... . ... 2 0
Who fired the first shot, or Ned Rusheen ... ... ... 2 0
Tales at Is, Is 6d, 2s, 2s 6d and 3s—a large assortment
WORKS BY CARDINAL NEWMAN.
Apologia pro vita sua ... ,. ... ... ... 3 6
Callista ... ... ... ... ... 3 6
Difficulties of Anglicans (2 Vols.)... ... ... ... each 3 6
Discussions and Arguments ... .. ... ... 3 6
Doctrine of Justification.. ... ... ... ... 3 q
Dream of Gerontius ... .... ... ... 0 6
Essay on Assent ... ... ... . 36
Essay on the development of Christian Doctrine ... ... ... 3 6
Essays, Critical and Historical ... ' ... ... ... ..’ 35
Annotated Translation of Athanasius (2 Vols.) .. ... each 7 6


The Arians of the Fourth Century ... ... ... ... 3 6
Church of the Fathers ... ... ... ... ... .. 4 0
Idea of a University ... ... ... ... ... ... 36
Essay on Miracles ... ... ... ... ... 36
Verses on various occasions .. ... ... ... ... 3 6
Loss and Gain—the Story of a Convert ... .. ... ... 36
WORKS BY CARDINAL MANNING.
Confidence in God .. ... ... ... ... 1 0
Grounds of Faith ... ... ... ... ... ... \ 0
Glories of the Sacred Heart ... ... ... ... ... 6 0
Internal Mission qf the Holy Ghost ... ... ... ... 80
Love of Jesus to Penitents ... ... ... ... ... 10
Sin and its consequences... ... ... ... ... ... 6 0
The eternal Priesthood ... .. „. ... ... ... 2 6
Higher Education, or Inaugural Address delivered at the opening of
St. John’s College, Sydney, by the late I)r. Vaughan, O.S.B. ... 1 0
First Advent Conference—The Church of Christ Indefectible (Dr.
Vaughan, O.S.B.) ... ... ... ... ... o 6
Third Advent Conference—Is the Protestant Church the Church of
Christ (Dr. YYiughan, O.S.B.) ... ... ... ... 0 6
Latest Books and Periodicals received by every Mail, from England,
Ireland, America, and the Continent.
Rosary Beads, Holy Pictures (framed and unframed), Crucifixes, Medals,
Wax Candles, Sanctuary Oil, Floats, etc., etc.
Send for Lists—Any Article not in stock procured at the shortest
notice.
LIST OF NEWSPAPERS AND PERIODICALS.
Ave Maria ... ... ... ... (post free) 15s per annum
American Catholic Quarterly Review ... ,, 22s ,,
Catholic World (American)... ... ... ,, 18s ,,
Dublin Review (Quarterly) ... ... ... ,, 25s ,,
Irish Ecclesiastical Record ... .. ... ,, 17s
Messenger of the Sacred Heart (Melbourne) ... ,, 3s ”
Annals of Our Lady of the Sacred Heart ... ,, 3s ,,
London Tablet .. .. ... ... „ 34s 8d „
London Weekly Register ... ... ... ,, 26s ,,
Irish Monthly (Dublin) ... ... ' ... ,, 10s ,’
American Ecclesiastical Review (Monthly) ... ,, 16s ,,
La Civilta Catholica (Italian) ... ... ,, 22s ,,
Dublin Freeman ... ... ... ... ,, 21s 8d ,’
,, Nation ... ... ... ... ,, 17s 4d ’’
United Ireland ... ... ... .. t) 17s 4d
Irish Catholic ... ... ' ... .. )( 17s 4d
Catholic Times (Liverpool) ... ... ... 17s 4d
Shamrock... ... ” 17s 4d ”
Universe (London).. ... ... ... M 17s 4d ,,
Review of Reviews (by W. T. Stead) ... ,, 10s ,,
The Lamp (Catholic Magazine) ... ... ,, 11s half-yearly
Any Newspaper or Periodical required, published in any part of the
world, we shall be glad to procure on receipt of subscription in advance.




