

HOBART TOWN CHORAL SOCIETY




RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
HOBART TOWN CHORAL SOCIETY,
ESTABLISHED AT HOBART TOWN,
January, 1843.


RULES AND REGULATIONS
OP THE
HOBART TOWN CHORAL
SOCIETY,
ESTABLISHED AT HOBART TOWN,
JANUARY 1843.
%oiart CToion, D. SLanlr:
?*nrr»D at the advehtisee office, elizabeth-*tsbbt,
1844.


LIST OF OFFICE-BEARERS.
PRESIDENT.
THE RIGHT REV. FRANCIS RUSSELL NIXON, d.d ,
LORD BISHOP OF TASMANIA.
VICE PRESIDENTS,
REV. W. BEDFORD, d.d., & J. HONE, ESQ.
TREASURER,
Me. JOHN MARSHALL.
SECRETARY,
Mr. JOHN C. HALL.
DIRECTOR,
Mr, RICHARD CURTIS.
CONDUCTOR,
Mr. A. PHILIP DULY.
LEADER,
Mr. WILLIAM RUSSELL.
LIBRARIAN,
Mr. HENRY ELLIOTT.
COLLECTOR,
Mr. WILLIAM HOLDSHIP.
AUDITORS,
Messrs. J. HALL & J. A. THOMSON.
TRUSTEES,
W»i. WATCHORN & Wm. CARTER, Esqs.
COMMITTEE,
Mr. CRESWELL, Mr. MILWARD,
_ DYNE, M’GREGOR,
DEGRAVES. REIC HEN BERG,
HARBOTTLE. VAUTIN.


RULES, &c.
OBJECTS OE THE SOCIETY.
I. This Society has been established for the purpose of
cultivating the study and practice of Music, and for
imparting a knowledge of the Science to the Children of
its Members.
MEANS OE OBTAINING THE OBJECT.
11. The Hobart Town Choral Society shall be supported
by Annual Subscriptions and by Voluntary Contributions.
SOCIETY HOW CONSTITUTED.
111. The Society shall consist of those who are now on
the Society’s Books as Members, and of those who may
hereafter be admitted agreeably to these Rules and Regu-
lations.


OFFICERS OF THE SOCIETY.
IV. That the Officers of the Society shall consist of one
President, two Vice-Presidents, a Treasurer, Secretary,
Director, Conductor, Leader, Librarian, two Auditors,
two Trustees, and eight Committee-men. All these
Officers must be Members of the Institution, and are to
he elected annually.
V. The Committee of Management shall consist of the
before-mentioned Officers, to whom the government of the
Society shall be confided.
ADMISSION OF MEMBERS, CONTRIBU-
TIONS, &c.
VI. Every Member must contribute one Guinea annually
to the funds of the Society—Payment to be made in
January of each year.* A Donation of the value of ten
Pounds in Music, Instruments, or Money, shall constitute
the Donor a Member for life.
VII. Candidates for admission are to be nominated by
two Members of Committee, and at their subsequent
Meeting the propriety of his or her admission will be
settled by a majority of the Committee then present. No
new Member to enjoy any of the privileges of the Society
until his Subscription be paid.
VIII. On a Member paying his Subscription the Secre-
tary shall give him a Copy of the Rules and Regulations,
• Any Person joining the Society after the 30th July to be liable for the
payment of ten Shillings and sixpence only as his subscription for that year


for which he shall, in addition to his subscription, pay one
Shilling, and a Card which will entitle him to every privi-
lege of the Society during the period for which he has
subscribed.
IX. No Member will be admitted to the Society’s Hall,
or to any General or other Meeting, unless he produces
his Card which is not transferable.
X. Country Members and Members unable to attend
from illness, or any other cause, are allowed to vote by
proxy. Ladies are eligible as Members, and to attend
and vote, either personally or by proxy—but all proxies
must be in writing, signed and dated,
RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE.
XI. All Monies received on account of the Society shall
be handed to the Committee, and by them to the Treasurer.
All Monies received by the Treasurer on account of the
Society shall be paid into the Bank of Van Diemen’s Land
when the same shall amount to £lO to the credit of the
Society.
XII. No Money shall be paid out of the funds of the
Society but by order of the Committee of Management,
such order to be made in writing, signed by the Chairman,
and countersigned by the Secretary.
GENERAL ANNUAL MEETINGS.
XIII. That a General Meeting of the Subscribers shall
be held annually on the first Tuesday in January, or on


such other day as the Committee may appoint, on which
occasion the Chair shall be taken by the President or a
Vice-President; or should neither the President or a Vice-
President be present, then by such other Member of the
Society as the Members present may elect.
XIV. That thereupon the Annual Report of the Com-
mittee of Management shall be read, together with the
Treasurer’s audited Account for the current Year, and the
Officers for the ensuing Year shall be elected.
XV. That the Chairman shall have a deliberative and
also (on an equality arising) a casting vote.
XVI. That the Meeting shall also take into consideration
and decide upon all matters referred by the Committee of
Management for direction and advice, including the pro-
priety of altering any existing Rules, or of adding to them,
and the making of others, or of so re-modelling the Society
as to secure Regulations suitable to the then condition
thereof.
SPECIAL GENERAL MEETINGS.
XVII. That on a requisition in writing from any three
Members of Committee or ten Members of the Society to the
Secretary, stating distinctly therein the occasion thereof,
a special meeting of the Members at large shall be con-
vened, when the same mode of procuring a Chairman, and
of voting, shall be observed as on the occasion of a General
Annual Meeting being held ; but no other business shall
be submitted for consideration than that for which the
Special Meeting may have been appointed or called ; and
when called under a Requisition, a copy thereof shall be


inserted in an advertisement, or forwarded to every Mem-
ber at least two clear days before such Special Meeting is
to be holden.
COMMITTEE OE MANAGEMENT.
XVIII. The Committee of Management shall have the
care, superintendence, and control of the Society.
XIX. No business shall be transacted in the Committee
unless five of its Members are present.
XX. The Committee shall meet regularly at the Society's
Hall, or at such other place as may be appointed, on the
first and third Tuesday in every Month, at half-past
six o’clock in the Evening.
XXI. The President shall take the Chair at all Meetings
at which he may be present, in his absence one of the
Vice-Presidents shall take the Chair, or in their absence
the Committee shall appoint a Chairman for the occasion.
XXII. All questions in the Committee shall be decided
by a show of hands, unless a ballot be demanded by two
Members. The Chairman in all cases to have a delibera-
tive as well as a casting vote.
XXIII. The President, Vice-Presidents, or five of the
Committee, may, at any time, by a requisition signed with
their names and addressed to the Secretary, call a Special
M eeting of the Committee—the requisition to state the
occasion of the Meeting.


XXIV. The Committee shall have the power of dividing
themselves into Sub-Committees for despatch of business
—but no such business shall be considered finally settled
until reported on and approved by the Managing Com-
mittee.
XXV. Every Sub-Committee shall keep minutes of
their transactions in the order in which they are brought
before them.
XXVI. The Committee shall cause to be kept a Book
in which shall be entered fair and accurate minutes of
their transactions, and of all receipts and payments on
account of the Society.
XXVII. The Committee shall cause the accounts of the
Society to be made up to the first day of January in each
year, and shall lay them, together with the Minute Book,
Books of Account, and all Orders, Bills, Receipts, and
every Document and Voucher relating thereto, before the
Auditors, so as to enable them thoroughly to investigate
and state the Accounts.
XXVIII. The Committee shall apply so much of the
Income or Revenue of the Society as may be necessary in
payment of Rent, Salaries, Current and Incidental Ex-
penses, and in the purchase of Music, Books, Instruments,
and whatever else may be required for the use of the
Society.
XXIX. The Committee of Management have power to
expel any Member who may misconduct himself, but the
person so expelled shall have a right of appeal to the first
General Meeting of the Society thereafter.


XXX. That if any of the Office-Bearers or the fixed
number of the Committee, should be reduced by death,
resignation, or absence from the Committee for six months,
the vacancy shall in any and every such event be supplied
by an appointment at the next Meeting for the residue of
the current Year.
XXXI. That the Committee shall have power to frame
and establish such Bye-Laws (not abrogating or repug-
nant to any general or fundamental rule or principle of the
Society) as they may think necessary for its regulation or
advancement, and shall be at liberty to originate as part of
the general objects of the Society, a Music School, and to
frame and establish Rules for the support, regulation, and
advancement thereof, such Bye-laws and Rules to be laid
before the next General Meeting for sanction and confir-
mation, and which, when so sanctioned and confirmed,
shall become part of, and be incorporated with, the Gene-
ral Rules of the Society.
XXXII. The Committee to have power to change the
nights for practice, rehearsal, &c., due notice of such
changes being given to all the Members.
TREASURER.
XXXIV. That the Treasurer shall receive from the
Secretary and Subscribers to the Society, and from all
other persons contributing to the support or advancement
of the same, the periodical or other subscriptions or dona-
tions given or subscribed for the use thereof, and, as
received, enter the different amounts, the times of pay-


merit, and the names of the Donors and Subscribers in a
Book to be kept for that exclusive purpose, and pay the
same into the Bank of Van Diemen’s Land to the credit of
the Society, and thereout by cheques, made payable to the
order of the payees, discharge such sums as the Committee
of Management may, by writing, under the hand of the
Chairman of their Meeting, and countersigned by the
Secretary, direct; keeping a regular account of the pay-
ments so made in the same book, and drawing out there-
from an account of the receipts and payments, and deliver-
ing or transmitting to the Auditors, for the purposes of the
Annual Audit, the like account, duly vouched and balanced
to the day before the General Annual Meeting of the
Members inclusive, and, as Treasurer, signing every such
account in testimony of the accuracy thereof.
SECRETARY.
XXXV. This Officer shall personally attend every
Meeting, as well of the Members generally, as of the
Committee of Management, and the Sub-Committees
thereof, and also the Annual Audit , and on such occasions
take correct minutes of the proceedings, fairly entering
the same forthwith in the minute book, and preserving the
rough minutes in a separate book for future reference, and
producing such books, with all correspondence, bills,
accounts, and memorandums at the subsequent meetings
respectively ; and entering in suitable books the name and
residence of every Member of the Society, with the amount
of subscription or donation; and also carefully preserve
the Treasurer’s audited and current accounts, with the
above-mentioned books and rough minutes, together with


every other minute or account book, original list, paper,
voucher, and memorandum belonging to, or connected
with, the Society, or the concerns thereof ) and, when
requested, exhibit the same to the President, Vice-Presi-
dents, Members of the Committee of Management, Trus-
tees, Treasurer, and Auditors, respectively,; and shall
likewise duly convene all Meetings, in such a manner as
may be best calculated to ensure an attendance,
DIRECTOR.
XXXVI. The Director shall have the selection of all
Music for practice, rehearsal, and public nights, and shall
give the time to the Conductor,
CONDUCTOR.
XXXVII. The Conductor shall be the only one allowed
to beat the time—and in case of the absence of the Leader
it shall be his duty to appoint one for the occasion.
LEADER.
XXXVIII. The Leader shall see that the Instruments
are correctly in tune, and shall give such general
instructions to the Performers as he may consider necessary
to give effect to the views of the Director,
LIBRARIAN.
XXXIX. The Librarian has the immediate and respon-
sible charge of the Music and Chattel Property of the


Society, of which he will keep an inventory. Performers
requiring any book for private practice must apply to this
Officer, stating the nature, and by what name the said
Book is called; and he is not on any account to grant such
loan unless satisfied that the same will be duly returned oa
the next Practice Night by seven o’clock. He will, for
this purpose, enter in a Book, kept for that purpose, the
name of the party borrowing, and the description of the
property borrowed, with the date, and, on its return, duly
give the party credit for the same; without which the bor-
rower, in case of loss will be charged the full value. And
the Librarian neglecting to enforce this rule shall become
answerable for the amount of the property missing.
AUDITORS.
XL. The Auditors shall, through the Secretary, be in
communication with the Treasurer, so as to procure a
Meeting between themselves and that Officer, attended by
the Secretary, during the day previous to that on which
the General Annual Meeting may have been appointed to
be held, at which time the Treasurer having severally pro-
duced to the Auditors their Books, Accounts, and
Vouchers, and afforded all other requisite information,
and the Auditors having satisfactorily ascertained the
true state of the receipts and payments, the Secretary shall
make out a regular account, debtor and creditor, between
the Treasurer and the Society showing the balance thereof
to the thirtieth day of December in each year, -which
account shall be signed by the Treasurer and Auditors,
and countersigned by, and left with, the Secretary, for
presentation by him to the Chairman of the General
Annual Meeting,


TRUSTEES.
XLI. That all the Funds and Property of the Society
shall be vested in the Trustees on behalf of the Members
jointly and severally.
COLLECTOR.
XLII. This Officer shall be appointed by the Committee
—his duties will be to collect the Annual and other Sub-
scriptions to the Society, and to pay the same to the
Committee or the Treasurer, and to attend the Committee
Meetings on the third Tuesday in each Month.
PRACTICE MEETINGS.
XLIIT. The Practice Meetings will take place every
Tuesday Evening at the Society’s Hall at seven o’clock
from April to October ; and at eight o’clock from Novem-
ber to March inclusive. Members generally with their
Families (except Boys above fifteen years of age) will be
admitted on the first Tuesday in each month, but on the
other Nights of Practice none but Performers will be
admitted. The Public nights will be held quarterly in
January, April, July, and October.
XLIV. No paid Officer of the Society shall be allowed
to vote.


LIST OF MEMBERS FOR 1844
The Lord Bishop op Tas-
mania.
Rev. W. Bedford, D. D
Rev. J. P. Gell.
Rev. J. J. Therrt.
J. Hone, Esq.
A. F. Kemp, Esq.
R. Kerr, Esq.
W. Watchorn Esq.
E. S. P. Bedford, Esq.
John Abbott, Esq.
W. Carter, Esq.
Mr. Allen.
~ J. Aldridge.
„ C. Abbott.
~ Blyth.
„ H. Barrett.
~ F. Barrett.
~ D. Barclay.
„ Beamont,
„ R. Burn.
~ J. K. Buscomue,
~ Boot.
„ T. Brown.
Creswell.
~ Curtis.
„ Cleburne.
„ Cowle.
„ S. Crisp.
„ T. Capon.
„ H. J. Chapman.
„ Clinch.
~ Creswell, jun.
~ Curtis, jun.
~ Duly.
„ B. Duterreau.
~ Donnelan.
„ Dossiter.
„ H. Degraves.
„ Doolan.
„ Dyne.
~ J. Dixon.
J. Duncan.
„ Edwards.
Mr. Elliott.
„ D. Fisher.
~ Freeman.
„ Gilbert.
„ Gatehouse.
~ T Giblin.
„ Harbottle.
„ D. Heckscher.
~ J. Hall.
„ J. C. Hall.
„ C. W. Hall.
~ Insley.
„ T. Johnson.
„ J. Johnson.
„ C. Lovett.
„ J. Livingston.
„ D. Lewis.
„ Lindsay.
„ H. Murray.
~ J. Milward.
„ J. M’Greqor.
„ Martin.
„ Marshall.
~ Maddox.
„ M’Kaig.
„ W. A. Mackay
„ J. M’Loughlin.
„ R. Nichol.
1 „ T. Nicholson.
! ~ L. Nathan.
! „ O’Meaghhr.
| ~ Pycroft.
\ ~ Phillips.
„ L Pearson.
| „ E. Ross.
| ~ Rothwell.
„ Robe.
~ VV, Robertson.
| ~ Reichenjserg.
| „ Singer.
„ C. J. Simmons.
| ~ G. J. Smith.
„ Satllard.
i „ J. A. Thomson.


Mr, Vautin.
„ G. C. Wilson.
„ W, Williamson.
„ R. Wynne.
„ J. Wilson.
„ J. Wilkinson.
„ R. Westbrook.
„ C. Williams.
~ J. C. Walker.
Mr. Wilson.
~ J. Wright.
„ T. Young.
Mrs. Nixon.
Me', Elliott.
Mrs. J. Cook.
Mrs. A. Fraser.




"Mercury' NOTES 20/2/35
Composer of "Maritana.”
Mr. J. Moore Robinson, in reply to a
query made by Mr. E. J. Rogers, throws
light on the movements of William
Vincent Wallace In Australia, but
doubts some of the popular assumptions
as to the place where that composer
wrote “part of the opera.” Mr. Robin-
son writes: “Wallace, accompanied by
his wife and child, arrived at Hobart
on the barque Rachel on October 31,
1835, on his way to Sydney, and stayed
here until January 2, 1836. He then
left for Sydney on board the Layton.
While here he gave a concert, the pro-
gramme of which was published (Miss
Wayn informs me) in the ‘Courier 5 of
December 4. Associated with him at
the concert were Mrs. Logan (organist
at St. David’s), Mrs. Chester, and the
band of the 21st Regiment (R.N.B.
Fusiliers). According to the ‘Courier*
of July 25, 1846, selections from ‘Mari-
tana’ were given in Hobart that month,
and the statement was made by the
paper that ‘a part’ of the opera was
composed ‘in Tasmania.’ In Sydney he
gave a series of concerts for which he
received £25 a night, and while in that
city he offered to revive the defunct
Philharmonic Society. There is no re-
cord that I am aware of that part of
‘Maritana’ was composed at New Nor-
folk, or that Wallace ever actually visit-
ed that centre. It is, of course, prob-
able that he did, for it was popular in
those days. But it would be difficult
to prove the two popularly accepted
statements. There are so many fables
about Tasmania that I almost fancy
our old friend Aesop must have lived
here. ‘Maritana’ was published in
1845, and produced at Drury Lane the
same year. For years no opera had
created a greater sensation.”


