

WHAT IS AHEAD
OF THE COUNTRY
NEWSPAPER?
'Seri




WHAT IS AHEAD OF THE
COUNTRY NEWSPAPER?
An Address delivered to the 46th Annual Conference
of the N.S.W. Country Press Association, held in Sydney
on October 23, 1945,
by
E. C. SOMMERLAD, C.8.E., M.L.C.
Retiring Secretary of the Association.
J
•—' HAVE set myself the task of answering the question, “What is
Ahead of the Country Newspaper?’’ That, of course, is a question
every proprietor has always asked himself; the newspaper is his industry,
and he naturally likes to feel there is a secure future ahead for it.
At the present time, however, the matter of the prospect in front of
provincial papers is charged with special significance. Time was, and not
so many years past, when the proprietor of the local paper was the un-
challenged purveyor of news in his area; he alone received the press tele-
grams which were the sole means for the conveyance of news of the outside
world to his centre. If he was an enterprising proprietor he saw to it that,
consistent with the financial limits the resources of his home town imposed,
his subscribers were reasonably provided with the important news of the
day. If, on the other hand, he traded on his exclusiveness and failed to
discharge his responsibilities to his community, his paper was classed,
contemptuously, as a “rag,” but beyond that expression of disgust, the
disgruntled local citizen could do little about it. The newspaper man
carried all the guns.
In recent years all this has altered, however—particularly under the
tremendous technical impetus of the war. The country newspaper now
has competitors, and very strong competitors at that. Some of them are
new; others have taken advantage of the newer conditions now obtaining,
particularly in the matter of transmission and transport.
In this survey of prospects ahead, I purpose confining myself mainly
to the question of news and advertising competition. War-time problems,
which for the past five or six years have involved so much in work and
worry—such as man-power, newsprint supply, and restrictions of one kind
or another —will automatically adjust themselves in due course. The worst
is over so far as they are concerned. Already considerable relief has been
given, and more is in sight. I am, therefore, concerning myself with the
position which will present itself when normal conditions return, and com-
petitors of country newspapers have free play to exercise their ingenuity
as seems best to them.


THE TWOFOLD CHALLENGE
The challenge to the traditional supremacy of provisional papers in
their areas comes from two sources:
(1) Intensified metropolitan competition.
(2) The development of radio and associated facilities.
Metropolitan newspapers have always existed as theoretical competitors
with their smaller contemporaries in the country. People dislike stale
news, however, and as a general rule it was accepted that the effective
influence of the metropolitan journal did not extend seriously beyond, say,
one hundred miles from place of publication. This meant that where local
papers gave reasonable service in the matter of general news, most local
readers were content.
Here I should like to pay a very sincere tribute to the district dailies
which, within the last thirty years or so, have arisen in the larger country
centres and have obtained circulations over a wide territory in their portion
of the State. The fuller news-services which the district dailies have pro-
vided, at considerable expense to themselves, have resulted in a better-
informed hinterland, with the consequent broadening of the provincial
outlook on national questions. It it fitting that we should recognise what
has been done by the district dailies of Australia in raising the standard
of provincial journalism, and in contributing to a more intelligent exercise
of the privilege of enlightened citizenship. From now on, however, much
more will be demanded of provincial papers, particularly the dailies, if they
are to cope adequately with the new infiltration of their areas from outside.
METROPOLITAN PRESS DEVELOPMENTS
We are clearly on the verge of big developments in the metropolitan
newspaper industry. With the return, in due course, of unlimited news-
print supplies, larger city papers will be published, and it is not beyond
the bounds of possibility that new journals will make their appearance,
especially in the Sunday field. These papers, in order to hold what they
already have, and to extend their influence and build up the circulations on
which their advertising rates are based, will enter into the most aggressive
competition one with the other, and incidentally will invade the rural field
to an extent never previously contemplated. In particular, they will make
use of modern methods of delivery, in order to overtake the time lag, which
in the past has been one of the main obstacles to reader acceptance of
metropolitan journals in country areas.
Largely due to war-time acceleration, air transport has become an
integral part of country life. It is no longer a novelty for the aeroplane
to be seen over the country town, and there is not one centre in the country
districts of Australia that has not turned out its due quota of competent
pilots. In addition, there are ample iriachines that can be adapted for
civil transport work, and undeniably there are thousands of skilled airmen
willing and anxious to fly them. Already complete plans are announced
for the partitioning of Australia into operational zones, from which would
radiate aerial services to the utmost extremities of the continent.
PARACHUTE DELIVERIES
In New South Wales, forty towns now have workable aerodromes, and
it can be assumed that all centres with worthwhile populations will equip
themselves with this necessary adjunct of modern life. There is no isolation
any more, and what the motor-car began a generation ago, the aeroplane
will now complete. Apart from this, however, the perfecting during the
war of the system of parachute delivery will render accessible any country
area, irrespective of whether it possesses an aerodrome or not. How effective
the dropping by parachute delivery can be was amply demonstrated in
many of the battlefields of the war, and there can be no doubt that this
will be the method adopted for the delivery of metropolitan newspapers in
country areas, as soon as conditions make such a course possible. Within


a matter Of hours any part of the State will be reached; the paper bundles
will be dropped, and the local newsagent will do the rest.
It is obvious that this prompt delivery of city newspapers, with their
full news-service and many supporting features, will make a definite impact
upon the country district. While it may be true that the competition will
be felt most strongly in the daily field, it is beyond question that all papers
will be affected, particularly in the matter of advertising revenue. I can
already foresee the diagrams and coverage maps which enterprising adver-
tising salesmen in metropolitan newspaper offices will produce, in order to
establish their case for wide country coverage.
THE IMPACT OF RADIO
The second great competitor of country newspapers is radio.
Press interests in Australia have never under-estimated the significance
of broadcasting. In general, they have reacted in one of two ways—either
they have bought into the business themselves, or they have endeavoured
to restrict its competition. Quite a number of far-sighted newspapers, in
the early and experimental days of broadcasting, secured radio licences, or
obtained substantial interests in broadcasting companies, and in this way
co-ordinated the radio with their own press activities. This, as world
experience has shown, can be a very effective partnership, and those large
press organs which looked on the new medium with rather superior disdain,
are, in many cases, now lamenting their inactivity in the matter.
In other cases papers decided to fight, and news-services were only
made available to radio stations with the clear stipulation that there must
be a certain specified gap between the issue of the paper and the time of
the broadcast. However, progress cannot be held back in that way, and
this form of self-defence ultimately broke down. For many years now,
news-broadcasts have been prompt and immediate, with the growing pos-
sibility of direct and exclusive cable and news-gathering services being
established by radio interests for their own purpose.
POPULARITY OF NEWS SESSIONS
There can be no doubt as to the popularity of news sessions. As far
back as 1938, a widespread American survey revealed that news broadcasts
ranked third, even against programmes of the most outstanding entertain-
ment value. In the survey, listeners said they got their news more quickly
and concisely than through the papers, and mainly without bias, particu-
larly where the radio was outside of government influence. The war, of
course, greatly stimulated listening-in, owing to the extreme importance of
world events. One immediate outcome was a tremendous increase in the
number of radio-receiving sets. There are now over 230,000 radio sets in
New South Wales, outside the metropolitan area. That works out at about
one to every six people. Figures reveal that over the whole State 15.57 of
the entire population now have receiving-sets, and the number is increasing
daily. Country districts are served by twenty-eight commercial stations,
in addition to five stations under the control of the Australian Broadcasting
Commission. It is obvious, therefore, that the radio cover in New South
Wales is very intensive indeed, and is rapidly extending.
PEAK COUNTRY CIRCULATIONS $
In the fact of these facts, the remarkable thing is that the broadcasting
of news has had no effect whatever on the circulations of country papers —
unless it has been to increase them. All provincial papers, large and small,
report growing circulations, and it can be stated beyond any fear of con-
tradiction that more people are reading country papers to-day than ever
before in the history of Australia.
The plain fact is that broadcasting of news does not reduce reader
interest in newspapers. All the evidence, both here and abroad, is that it
actually tends to increase it. In the nature of things, radio news-services
are brief and without background. They are little more than an intriguing


index of news, merely whetting the appetite for more. Apart from that,
it is a peculiarity of human nature that no matter how fully a subject or
item of news may be broadcast, listeners will want to read it afterwards,
in order to be able to study it more fully at their leisure.
EFFECT OF RADIO ADVERTISING
The effect on newspaper advertising revenues, however, is a far dif-
ferent matter. I have made a rough calculation of the approximate
revenue of commercial broadcasting stations in New South Wales, outside
the metropolitan area, and have set down the figure at £250,000 per annum,
of which probably three-quarters comes from national advertisers. It is
obvious that the extraction of so large a sum out of the general advertis-
ing pool must have a serious effect on the normal income of country
papers, although research shows that advertising revenue has been main-
tained amazingly in recent years throughout most country centres. How
far this reflects war-time boom conditions remains to be seen, but there
can be no possible doubt that broadcasting is a very serious contender
for a considerable proportion of the business which would have gone to
the country paper.
WHAT OF TELEVISION?
So far I have referred mainly to the broadcasting of news, which I
do not regard as any serious menace to provincial newspapers enterprising
enough to maintain adequate news-services of their own. A more likely
threat to their integrity as news purveyors, however, can be expected
from adaptations of radio to other uses. Among these adaptations is
television, and glowing forecasts have recently been published which
suggest that effective television will be a possibility in Australian homes
before many months have passed. For my own part, lam by no means
so optimistic. It has to be remembered that there are a number of
physical factors strongly against any general or rapid development of
television.
The first is the element of cost. An authoritative estimate given me
last week by an expert just arrived from the United States, is to the effect
that a worthwhile television programme would involve the employment
of almost fifty technicians, and would cost something like 30,000 dollars
per hour. If anything like this figure is reached, it is obvious that
television must remain in the luxury class for a long while to come.
Again, scientific development in regard to television is so rapid that
both transmitters and receiving sets are virtually built for obsolescence.
In other words, the costly equipment which television involves has been
hardly constructed before it is superseded by something later and more
efficient. Another physical factor is that, unlike the sky-wave of the
radio, television follows an optical path. That means that for the present,
at any rate, it can only be picked up in a straight line from point of
delivery. Even if the terrain is level, and there are no physical obstruc-
tions, the natural curve of the earth will cut down the televised area to
a degree that will prevent anything in the way of a national service from
any individual point.
In order to meet this difficulty, at least to some extent, television
stations are being erected on points of high altitude, but in even in Great
Britain, where the science is most advanced of any country, the effective
area does not exceed beyond thirty to forty miles. In the nature of
things, many of the difficulties at present besetting television will be
solved by scientists, but on present evidence it would appear that visual
broadcasting of events is more likely to become a competitor of moving
pictures than it is of newspapers. From my experience I feel confident
in asserting that whatever comes of research in television, film interests
will be very well able to take care of themselves. Naturally, I do not
discount the extreme value and importance of television, but for purposes


of a survey dealing with the post-war prospects of provincial newspapers
in New South Wales, I do not think it need be taken into serious account
at the present time as a potential competitor.
THIE RADIO NEWSPAPER
Of more immediate interest is facsimile transmission, which may be
regarded as a first cousin to television, but without many of its limita-
tions. In 1939 I had the opportunity of seeing facsimile transmission in
operation in New York, both at the distributing and the receiving end.
I saw double column copy fed into a transmitter and picked up by re-
ceivers which were part of a radio chain stretching right across the
United States. The matter transmitted was reproduced faithfully on rolls
of sensitised paper fitted into a small cabinet which attaches to an ordin-
ary radio receiving-set. By means of a time-switch, which can be set to
any specified hour, transmission takes place during the night. It is a
fairly slow process, but I understand developments since I saw the plant
in operation six years ago have resulted not only in speeding up the rate
of transmission, but also in permitting the use of sheets larger than
double column. The essential point, however, is that the householder is
able to go to his radio set when he rises in the morning, and find there a
reproduction of a radio newspaper containing news, editorials, pictures,
advertisements, and everything else, complete. Even as far back as 1939,
facsimile sets were on sale in departmental stores in New York, at prices
as low as 50 dollars.
During the war, facsimile transmission has been devoted very largely
to military purposes, and it can be assumed that under the pressure of
war necessity many improvements have been made which will in due
course be incorporated into plant used in civil life. How far these de-
velopments will be along the line of improving the size and capacity of
radio newspapers I am, at the moment, not in a position te say, but
there can be no doubt of the significance of the process as a means of
providing a newspaper service in the far outback centres of Australia.
Establishment cost, of course, may be a factor, but when I see a chain
of a dozen or more stations stretching across a continent, with power up
to 50,000 watts, I feel that here is a competitor upon which provincial
papers should certainly keep a close watch.
A number of manufacturers in the United States are now turning
out facsimile plants, amongst them being Western Union, which, of course,
is one of the big telegraphic organisations of America. This company is
now adapting the transmitter for the despatch of telegrams, particularly
from one-man offices where an automatic device greatly simplifies opera-
tion. The machines are also in great demand for inter-office and inter-
factory communication, for which purpose they are peculiarly suitable.
Units of the Western Union equipment are already in Sydney, and it can
be taken for granted that they will become a familiar feature of civil
life in the not distant future.
PAPER RADIOED 3,000 MILES
To show how the principle of facsimile transmission can be adapted
to newspaper purposes, we have only to consider what was done during
the historic U.N.C.1.0. Conference held in San Francisco, at which Aus-
tralia was fully represented. One day in May this paragraph appeared in
the metropolitan press in Australia, and because of its special significance,
I quote it in full:
“ ‘The New York Times’ during the San Francisco Conference is
achieving something unique in newspaper history—its 2 a.m. edition
is available in San Francisco, about 3,000 miles away, on the morning
of issue.
“Its main pages are sent across the continent by wire and re-
printed by facsimile process in San Francisco.


“The pages are transmitted by Associated Press wirephoto ser-
vice, each page requiring two plates. The wirephoto plant for the
transmission was specially made, and is being developed to carry a
full page to a plate.
“The issue in San Francisco, which is available within a few
hours of the printing of the original in New York, is of four full-
sized pages.”
Nothing was said about the cost of this transmission, which was
bound to be very great, but what it demonstrates is that a metropolitan
paper, issuing, say, in Sydney, can be printed in half a dozen provincial
centres, practically simultaneously, by an adaptation of broadcasting.
When that can be done, it is obvious a revolutionary principle has been
introduced into the whole business of running country newspapers.
WHAT IS THE ANSWER?
Up to the moment I have confined myself to setting out some of the
threats which will endanger newspaper interests in the post-war era, and
to which they must perforce find an effective answer. The real query is,
“What Is That Answer?”
In reply, I list a few of the things to which I think country papers
will need to address themselves, with all the zeal and enterprise of which
they are capable. Those things I mention in this order:
(1) Country papers must see to it that their news-services are
adequate and up-to-date, and that they are transmitted from the
source to the country office, with the utmost speed possible. News
must come hot from the crucible of events if it is to hold its own
with competitors less handicapped by tardy reproduction pro-
cesses.
(2) Where possible, the papers must illustrate their news by means
of personality blocks and other topical pictures. Along with this
must go technical improvement; there can be no excuse for
badly-printed papers which negative the good work of the edi-
torial department—especially when equipment is available that
will permit of satisfactory and pleasing reproduction.
(3) A good case can be made out for quicker and better postal
facilities. Papers mean much to the communities in which they
are published, as the war has amply demonstrated. If they are
to spend money in order to provide up-to-date equipment, it is
not too much to expect collateral co-operation from the services
they employ to distribute the product of their enterprise.
(4) To maintain, at its maximum, the advertising revenue without
which papers cannot live, every endeavour should be made to see
that the merits of the particular coverage area of the country
journal are made known in the place in which publicity appro-
priations are determined. The fullest use should be made of all
promotional agencies, chief of which, necessarily, are the organi-
sations established by the papers themselves, to safeguard their
interests.
HOME NEWS IS PARAMOUNT
(5) Above everything else, country papers must develop to the utmost
their domestic news resources. These represent an asset of in-
calculable value. This is the news in which the local public is
directly interested, and it represents something which none can
take away—not the metropolitan journal, however impressive in
size or make-up, nor the radio, in whatever guise it presents
itself. Country journalism is distinguished for its intimate con-
tact with readers, for its friendliness, and for its attention to
home-town affairs. It writes in a personal way of the average
man’s every-day experiences. It mirrors the life of the corn-


munity and provides a running day-to-day chronicle of the his-
tory of the territory in which it is published. The news it
contains may appear small against the background of world
events; nevertheless, it is the authentic currency of the rural
areas, the friendly interplay of human activities of which country
life is essentially compact.
(6) Finally, the country papers can build themselves impregnably
into district esteem by their championing of country needs. The
radio has no editorial voice; the metropolitan paper cannot, in
the nature of things, articulate the domestic needs of individual
areas. It may, in fact, as it has often done in the past, actually
alienate sympathy and support by the nature of its editorial
voice, which is most likely to be attuned to the requirements of
the more populous area from which it issues.
VOICELESS PAPERS
I am always deeply pained when I see a country paper, however
small, without an editorial. To me, such a paper is like a man without a
head, and I cannot help thinking “here is a paper immobilising itself and
voluntarily surrendering one of the most effective weapons in its armoury.”
It is not enough for a paper to be a mere recorder of what happens, or a
follower where others are leading. The virile and enterprising paper leads
rather than follows, and its editor, if he exercises his traditional pre-
rogatives aright, can be the most powerful man in his district. He is its
spokesman to the outside world. Recently I saw this fine tribute paid,
in an American publication, to the country editor and to the services
rendered by his paper:
“Every year, every local paper gives from five hundred to five
thousand lines for the benefit of the community in which it is
located. No other agency can, or will, do this. The editor, in pro-
portion to his means, does more for his town than any other man.
To-day, editors do more work for less pay than any men on earth.”
SUPREME VALUE OF COUNTRY NEWSPAPERS
It remains only to say a word in appreciation of the services which
the provincial paper renders to the wider community at large. The country
journal can well be regarded as part of the administrative machinery of
the State, without which the working of the democratic system of govern-
ment would be a matter of difficulty. An informed public opinion is the
very foundation of democracy.
How great was the value set upon the special services which the
country paper alone can render was well shown by the Commonwealth
Government when, in the early years of the war, it made the arrangement
for a composite bulk advertising rate which took in every provincial
press organ in Australia. In no other way could the Government be sure
it was reaching all of the people all of the time. How sound this assess-
ment of publicity values was is confirmed by the fact that there were
very few cases where provincial papers, under stress of war conditions,
were threatened with extinction, and where local citizens did not band
together to keep the journal circulating. Small though most of these
papers were, they are part of the great newspaper fraternity serving the
community, and their survival was a matter of importance to others
besides the editor himself.
It is a plain statement of fact to say that if newspapers were to be
taken out of our lives, social disruptions would ensue, greater than those
which would attend the withdrawal of any other agency of communication.
PROFESSOR’S STRIKING TRIBUTE
I conclude by quoting a striking tribute recently paid by Professor
John H. Casey, Professor of Journalism at the University of Oklahoma,
who in a recent publication said this:


“Without its newspaper, the small-town American community
would be like a school without a teacher, or a church without a
pastor. In the United States the country newspaper determines the
outcome of more elections, asserts a greater influence for constructive
community progress, is read longer by more members of the family,
and constitutes, with its aggregate millions of circulations and quad-
rupled millions of readers, a better advertising medium than any
other group of newspapers or periodical publications.
“When properly conducted, it cultivates so intensely its home news
field, that city dailies, farm journals, and general magazines circulat-
ing in the territory become only secondary influences.
“Through service to the community, the country newspaper will
not merely survive—it will continue to flourish as the most represen-
tative, the most distinctive and the most wholesome type of journalism
America has produced.”'
And what goes for America goes for Australia as well. There can
be no shadow of doubt as to the place of the provincial journals in the
general scheme of things. It is for them, when their craft is in danger,
to see that the industry is as eflicient as human skill and district re-
sources can make it.




