

The
Australian
Party
UNITED
WHITE
FREE
PROSPEROUS
WHAT IT
STANDS
FOR


What the Party Stands for
THE ideals and aims of the Australian Party have their roots
in the political, economic, and general conditions of the
Commonwealth. It was formed because the circumstances of
Australia made another party necessary. We are passing
through troublous times; trade is depressed, the prices of our
staple products have fallen; our exports have decreased; the
exchanges are heavily against us; the banks are restricting
credit; the number of unemployed men is greater than ever
before, and a brooding uneasiness, which in some quarters has
degenerated into fear of disaster, hangs over the community.
The people look for light and guidance.
Where are they to look for them? Certainly not from
the National Party under whose regime this devil’s brood of
troubles has been hatched and nurtured, nor from the Country
Party—their fellow sinners—with its narrow outlook, its
sectional appeal, and its barren record.
Labor is in office and is making an honest attempt to
grapple with the grave and complex problems which confront
the people of the Commonwealth. Every true lover of Aus-
traljfi must devoutly hope that it will lead us out of the
* AN ALTERNATIVE NEEDED..
But suppose it does not —suppose it is forced from its
course by the extremists —what is going to happen? To
whom are the people to look for that guidance which is so
imperatively needed at this juncture? Is there to be no
alternative to the Reds but the Reactionaries? Some other
,9 Ler native to Nationalism there must be, for wise, just and
capable government is absolutely essential to the present wel-
fare and future prosperity of Australia.
It is because we are firmly convinced that the times call
for a party national in its outlook, Australian in sentiment,
standing for the whole people, for progress, for democracy,
for the Empire, and for wise, firm and just government free
from the control of any section or clique that the Australian
Party has been formed.
What the people of Australia want, what they must have
if they are to grapple effectively with the great difficulties
that confront them, is just and firm government on lines com-
patible with Australian ideals. It matters very little who
governs the country as long as it is governed with wisdom and
justice.


AUSTRALIAN! IDEALS.
Every country has its ideals; we have ours, and these are
fast rooted in the traditions of our race and geographic, econ-
omic, and social circumstances of Australia— a nation, pro-
gressive, and self-reliant, within the British Commonwealth
of Nations. The White Australia policy, the Australian stand-
ard of living, wages and conditions of labour, preference to
soldiers, and all that is implied in this policy—upon these
things there can be no surrender and no compromise. There
are other things, too, of immense importance upon which the
people of Australia will insist. They are a democracy; they
believe in progress, but they set their faces resolutely against
the alieai doctrines preached by the Reds, or by the Pinks, the
agents or dupes of the Reds. And, as the result of the last
Federal elections proved conclusively, they will have none of
the Reactionaries, either. The policy they want is one which
puts Australia and its ideals first.
AGAINST MACHINE POLITICS.
How are they to get it? Certainly not through
machine politics, which tend to place control of parties
in the hands of organisations outside Parliament, and
put ,a premium on weakness and injustice. Clashing
interests create a conflict of rights, or at all events of
claims, which the government is urged by one or other of the
warring sections to recognise by tipping the scales in its favor.
And if, as may easily happen where governments are depend-
ent upon the support of a party machine, it does that which
those in control desire rather than that which justice demands,
the passions of the opposing sections are inflamed, and the
community generally loses faith in the government, and awaits
only an opportunity to sweep it away, when, if no other al-
ternative offers, one sectional government makes way for its
rival and the vicious circle is complete.
AUSTRALIAN PARTY NOT PARTISAN.
The Australian Party is not partisan. The maintenance of
industrial peace —without which a return to prosperity is im-
possible—is at best no easy task, and it can hardly be hoped
for from governments leaning upon sectional support, con-
trolled by the party machine. The Bruce-Page Government
talked endlessly about industrial peace, but did nothing to
ensure it. It posed as impartial, but the workers felt in their
bones that it was a partisan government. In every conflict it
held the worker to be in the wrong —it never championed his
cause, never lent him a helping hand. Dudng its regime the
law flew on the of light to enforce penalties against the(
worker for breaches of the industrial cocfe, against the
rich employer it cradled on leaden feet. ft*-*-*.


The Australian Party believes in industrial peace, bill it
is a cardinal point of its creed that peace must resi upon con-
ditions not only just to the employer, but also just to the
worker. ' The Party stands for Australian standards and
conditions. The employer must have his fair share of profit.
The worker, decent wages and conditions of labour, and a fair
share of the good things which modern civilisation pours forth
in such overflowing abundance.
IT STANDS FOR ALL THE PEOPLE.
The Australian Party stands for the whole people and
not for a section. Sectional government is bad government,
Lt is also foolish government, because there is no way by
which the interests of any section can be permanently advanced
except by a policy in the benefits of which the whole com-
munity shares. are all citizens of Australia, and for rich
and poor alike the only policy that will help us is one that
makes for the well-being of the whole community.
PROBLEMS WITH WHICH WE ARE FACED.
Some of the difficulties which face us to-day arise from
causes over which we have little or no control e.g., falling
wool prices, light wheat crops. Others, e.g., the exchange
position with its attendant evils of restricted credit, crippled
enterprise, collapse of the share market, and unemployment,
are directly attributable to unwise and inept government. The
problems may be grouped roughly under two heads—indus-
trial and financial—and the greatest of these is'the industrial
problem.
FINANCE.
Vet, since government depends upon finance so completely
that it has been said that government is finance, it is obvious
that the well-being of the country depends upon a sound
financial policy. Unhappily, the financial policy of the Bruce-
Page of reckless extravagance, and the
acute depression from which the country is suffering is
directly attributable to the manner in which the late govern-
ment ignored every sound principle of trading and finance.
The basic principles of sound national finance are these: —
A nation must live within its means, borrow only for repro-
ductive works, and make its exports pay for its imports with a
balance over to pay interest on its oversea debts, y
During the'six year period 1917/18 to 1922/23 we did
this. The value of oar exports exceeded that of our imports
by £60,800,000.
The record of the Bruce-Page Government violates every
one of these principles. Compressed into a few lines here it
is:—


During the six years and seven months February, 1923,
to April, 1930
The value of imports exceeded that of
exports by . £ 63,000,000
Excluding bullion and specie, imports
exceeded exports by . . £ 92,000,000
Expenditure 1923-29 from Revenue
increased by £l 30,000,000
Taxation 1923-29 increased by ... . £ 86,000,000
Surplus of £7,500,000 was converted
into deficit of £ 3,400,000
Despite the appalling increase in
taxation the Commonwealth Debt was
increased by £ 8,000,000
And the oversea indebtedness of
States and Commonwealth increased
b y £162,769,000
These figures speak for themselves, and help to explain
why it is there is depression in Australia to-day. £92,000,000
worth of goods imported more than we were able to pay for
with our exports and so bought with borrowed money!
No wonder unemployment is rampant and our credits in Lon-
don exhausted! Foreign goods coming into Australia and
our workmen walking the streets!, TKe wonder is that instead
of being merely depressed, we are not utterly crushed.
The Australian Party stands for sane finance; for reduced
taxation; for prudent expenditure; for cessation of public bor-
rowing except for renewal of loans and reproductive works
that will provide interest and sinking fund on the capital cost.
And because it is convinced that there is something radically
wrong with the present system of credit, which cripples private
enterprise on the one hand, and chokes the consuming power
of the people on the other, it strongly supports a Central
Reserve Bank, with wide powers, under non-political control.
THE INDUSTRIAL PROBLEM.
To the great majority of the people of Australia the
industrial question is the only one in which they are vitally
interested, for to industry the worker looks for employment;
from it he derives the wage upon which he and his family
are dependent for their livelihood. When industries flourish,
credit is easy, employment plentiful, trade brisk, and the
whole community shares in the general prosperity. At present
unemployment has reached the highest point in our history.
In one State no less than 1 8 per cent, of the adult male workers
are idle! And over the whole Commonwealth the number
of unemployed is 1 5 per cent.


ENCOURAGEMENT OF INDUSTRY—PRIMARY AND
SECONDARY.
The Australian Party does not believe in quack remedies.
It does not seek to treat symptoms, but to get at the root of
the disease, and where possible, remove it. Industrial unrest
is a world problem which arises in the main out of modern
methods of production and finance. Every attempt to find a
solution must proceed along right lines. Talk about reducing
the cost of production by people whose one idea of doing this
is to reduce wages is utterly futile. The worst possible way of
relieving unemployment and restoring trade prosperity is to
reduce the consuming powers of the people, upoui which
prosperity and opportunities for employment depend.
The first duty of a government is to encourage Australian
industries, primary and secondary. The Australian Party
believes in helping the man on the land to help himself by
improving and cheapening transport, by stabilising primary
products, by schemes for co-operative and general marketing,
and by rural credits. The only way of promoting land settle-
ment is to make life on the land profitable. Because it
believes that the Wheat Pool, by stabilising the industry, will
help us to do this, the Australian Party strongly supports the
Pooling Scheme.
AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURES.
The Australian Party stands very definitely for the encour-
agement of secondary industries. Upon this point some plain
speaking is necessary. Australia is out of its swaddling
clothes. We are a nation; our people are virile, energetic,
and resourceful. We have a huge country and'a small popu-
lation. Talk about bringing more people to this country is
and until we are able to find remunerative em-
ployment for our own citizens. During the last quarter of a
century the population has increased by nearly three millions,
and the vast bulk of these have been absorbed by the ever-
growing secondary industries. The surest inducement to the
right kind of people in Britain to come and make their homes
with us is to create conditions that will ensure employment at
good wages. And there is only one way we can do this—by
a bold unwavering policy of encouragement of Australian
industries.
The Australian Party believes in Australia and in the
capacity and genius of the Australian people. Its aim is to
cultivate a robust spirit of Australian national sentiment, and
it believes that the best possible way of doing this is to make
Ausralia a land in which every man who is worth his salt
can find employment at decent wages. Talk about patriotism
goes down ill with hungry men; the country that cannot find
a job for men who want it is not likely to enshrine itself in
their hearts. Usf '/TuC&toti x . ’/>. v >


ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION.
In Australia the system of compulsory arbitration has been
in force for over a quarter of a century in the Commonwealth
and the States. The defects of the system, operating as it
does within two conflicting jurisdictions, are obvious. Dual
control is invariably bad, and in this case has been responsible
for very many and serious evils. But they are not inherent
in the system of Arbitration, but arise through the constitutional
limitations imposed upon the industrial powers of the Com-
monwealh. Compulsory arbitration as a principle has justi-
fied itself. At the worst it is far preferable to direct action,
e.g., strikes and lockouts.
The Australian Party stands definitely for Arbitration, but
is convinced that the present machinery ought to be scrapped;
that the dual control of industrial matters now existing should
be abolished; that hull industrial powers should be given to
the Commonwealth rthat a Federal Tribunal should fix a
standard basic wage and uniform hours throughout Aust
leaving all other matters to be dealt with by local tribunals
attached to each industry. But until the Constitution js
amended none of these things is possible. <4si
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION.
We must have peace in industry, but there is no hope of
peace until the Constitution is amended.*** The National Par-
liament must have power to deal with all national matters.
The great problems of the age in which we live have their roots
in trade and industry. They are national problems and can
only be dealt with effectively by the National
the Parliament of the has no power to deal
with theritf^^lfs* 1 helplessness. is* pitiableT*- ItTias no power to
m?ke an industrial face of the greatest industrial
upheaval it is absolutely powerless to raise a finger to protect
the
powerless to deal with the effects of that tariff upon manu-
facturer, workman, or unscrupulous or
inefficient manufacturer takes advantage of tariff protection to
exploit the consumer, all that the Federal Government can do
is to penalise the decent and efficient manufacturer by remov-
ing or lowering the duty. UASfr *~i
Commerce is essentially matter. It must be
treated as a lt cannot be dealt with in water-tight
compartments. But the Constitution divides the commerce
power between States and Commonwealth, and so makes
effective control of commerce impossible. And although nine-
tenths of the enterprises of Australia are carried on by Com-
panies, the Federal Parliament cannot even make a general
Company f


STATE RIGHTS v. PEOPLE’S RIGHTS.
The Constitution must be amended. There must be a
redistribution of powers. The Commonwealth Parliament
must be clothed with full authority over all national mailers,
and when this is done the way will be paved for some very
necessary reforms and economies. Australia is over-governed;
we spend far too much money on useless ceremonious trap-
pings—relics of a vanished past. Six millions of people have
seven Parliaments. When the people of Australia were asked
to create the Commonwealth they were told that there would
be economies in the States that would be an effective set-off
against the cost of Federation. They believed that the estab-
lishment of the National Parliament would mean reduced
expenditure on the machinery of State Governments, but they
have been bitterly disappointed. The costs of government
have greatly increased, and the Stages, instead of adjusting
themselves to their altered circumstances, are chiefly concerned
in maintaining the tinselled pretence of State Sovereignty;
with them, so-called State Rights are everything, the rights of
the people nothing. When the people, groaning under intol-
erable burdens, demand that the Constitution should be
amended so that their interests may be conserved, their ears are
deafened with talk about State rights, as though these were
divinely ordained— but there are no State Rights, there are
only the rights of the people who are electors of the States,
and who are also electors of the Commonwealth. It is their
interests which ought to be considered. So-called State
Rights must make way for the people’s rights.
THE WINGS OF STATE LEGISLATURES MUST BE
CLIPPED.
And after this redistribution of powers the wings of the
State Legislatures must be clipped; the numbers of members
in the State Assembles considerably reduced; the Legislative
Councils abolished; and along with them the State Governors
and Agents General, whose duties can be performed by the
Chief Justices of the States and the High Commissioner
respectively.
These reforms which are long overdue will benefit the
community in two ways; they will effect substantial reductions
in expenditure and will ensure more efficient State Legislative
machinery.
The position in Australia to-day demands that every man
shall put his shoulder to the wheel. Parliaments should not
waste time and money wrangling about Party Politics, but
concentrate in a non-party spirit upon the great questions which
vitally affect the well-being of the people.
THE AUSTRALIAN PARTY
Head Office: sth. Floor, 32 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
FEDERAL CAPITAL PRESS, CANBERRA
