

United
Protestant Association
of Australia
(QUEENSLAND BRANCH )
CONSTITUTION, RULES
AND
BY-LAWS
‘ Be just and fear not;
Let all the ends thou aim’st at
Be thy country’s, thy God’s and Truth’s."
( Shakespeare).
PRICE, 3d.


Altering and superseding all previous Constitutions,
Rules and By-laws. To become operative on and after
Ist July, 1938.
OO
Created to preserve for posterity the three principles
of Protestantism, truth, justice and freedom as taught by
Jesus Christ, that, with Christianity, form the foundation of
the greatest Empire of liberty-loving people that History
can recall.
"UNITED—WE STAND FOR THEIR
PRESERVATION."
The object and spirit of the Administrative Plan
outlined in this Constitution is to provide equal oppor-
tunities to every member. Sub-branch, Sub-division,
Division and State (as far as is practicable) for repre-
sentation on all governing administrative bodies and
Committees within the Organisation and within the State
and Commonwealth.


CONSTITUTION
United Protestant Association
of Australia
(QUEENSLAND BRANCH).
QUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP.
Members shall consist only of bona fide Protestants who, being
loyal to God, King and Country,
(a) Will undertake to protect, uphold and advance the principles
of Protestantism.
(b) Will carry out their duties as members and abide by the
Constitution, Rules, Regulations, Resolutions, and Objects
of the Association for the time being in force.
OBJECTS.
1. To combat disloyalty towards, or disintegration of, the British
Throne, Constitution, and Empire by any religious or other organis-
ation, person or persons.
2. To combat duress or undue influence by any religious or other
organisation, person or persons in the Administrative, Political,
Commercial, Industrial and Social affairs and interests of our State,
Commonwealth and Empire.
3. To protect and uphold Democracy; advance British J ustice
and Protestantism, with its liberties, freedom of thought and
expression, throughout the State and Empire.


4. To protect and secure the equitable and rightful place of
Protestants in the Administrative, Political, Forensic, Commercial,
Industrial, and Social affairs and interests of our State and Empire ;
to promote the national development of Australia and to inculcate the
most desirable culture and national character in our citizens.
5. To educate, enlighten and acquaint the people of Australia
with what Protestantism is, and what it stands for, and to promote
the unity of all Protestant Churches.
6. To equip the people with knowledge of the practices adopted
by the forces operating against Protestantism, British Justice, and the
welfare of the British Empire.
7. To form a Branch in each State of the Commonwealth of
Australia which shall adopt the title and the qualifications of members
and the Objects of this Association, and shall co-operate in all possible
respects with and between the Branches in all States.
8. To promote and form Juvenile Branches throughout the
States of the Commonwealth and so to prepare Juvenile members
to do all things that will equip them to take their places in this
Association.
9. . To form or co-operate with Protestant Women’s Organisations
whose principal objects are similar to those of this Association, and
to co-operate with other Protestant Organisations when necessary
or advisable.
10. To form corporate bodies or groups to undertake or operate
or participate in any scheme of National Insurance or the like that
may be of interest or benefit to our members.
11. To protect, uphold and advance the rights of Protestants
and to assist them in all respects throughout the British Empire.
MEMBERSHIP.
12. Membership shall be open to all bona fide Protestants of
either sex over the age of fn«<«* nn _rrr on the payment of a minimum
annual subscription of one shilling (•-) or such additional amount as 1
may from time to time be determined. Members may subscribe any
additional amount to that above-mentioned as their annual sub-
scription. Such subscriptions shall be due and payable on the Ist
July in each and every year.
The duties of members shall be :
(a) To aid in the achievement of the Objects of the Association
as stated or implied in the Constitution.


(b) To attend meetings.
(c) To assist in enrolling new members.
(d) To refrain from divulging the Association’s business.
(e) To supply any information, ideas or assistance which may
be of use to the Association.
(/) To pay duly their subscriptions, levies or fines.
{g) To sign and complete any nomination form as requested
either prior to or subsequent to becoming a member.
(A) To act decorously and to respect the Chairman’s rulings at
all meetings and to do everything possible to create and
foster exemplary conduct.
(i) To respect the wishes and views of, and co-operate with,
fellow members in all possible respects.
13. POLITICAL.
(а) The Association shall not ally itself with any Political Party
neither shall the Association create or become a Political Party, but it
reserves the right to discuss, and to take any action it may consider
necessary in respect of any actual or contemplated activities of any
person, political candidate, party or organisation, in so far as they or
any of them may affect the aims and objects of this Association ;
(б) This provision must not be considered operative against
individual members of the Association, who, in the event of any party
stating as its basic platform objects as outlined in our Constitution,
desire to work with such party ;
(c) The Association reserves the right to satisfy itself as to the bona
fides of any party or person and to decide what party or person may be
approved as worthy of support by the members of the Association,
should members for the guidance of their conscience desire such decision
or information.
COMMONWEALTH COUNCIL.
14. A Commonwealth Council of 18 members may be created,
and, in addition thereto, a Commonwealth President may be appointed,
to deal with matters of interest to the Association as a whole. Each
State wherein the movement is effectively operating shall be represented
on the Council by quotas from time to time to be decided in conference
between the States.' State representatives thereto shall be nominated
and elected at an Annual State Conference. Until all States qualify
for representation, those States effectively operating may each appoint
three members to act as a provisional Commonwealth Council until
all the States shall become qualified for representation and shall meet
in conference as agreed.


STATE OF QUEENSLAND.
15. The United Protestant Association of Australia in Queens-
land shall be known as " United Protestant Association of Australia
(Queensland Branch).”
MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION.
16. The Branch of the Association within the State of Queens-
land shall consist of and be managed and supervised and controlled
by
(1) State Executive.
(2) Divisional Councils and Executives.
(3) Sub-branches and Sub-divisional Committees.
(4) Such Committees as are elsewhere provided.
GEOGRAPHIC PLAN.
17. The State of Queensland shall be divided into four divisions
which shall be known as State Divisions and respectively as No. 1
Southern, No. 2 Northern, No. 3 Central, and No. 4 South Western.
Such Divisions shall be further divided into an aggregate of 62 Sub-
divisions according to the plan or specification marked " A ” elsewhere
provided.
Note. —For the purpose of identification each Sub-division is
identical geographically with that of an existing (1938) State Electoral
Division.
STATE EXECUTIVE.
18. A State Executive shall be appointed, which, subject to
the Rules and Regulations herein contained, shall be the supreme
body of the Association in the State. Such State Executive shall
consist of 20 members, in addition to the State President. The four
Divisions in Queensland shall be represented thereon by the following
quota of members :
No. 1 Southern Division, having Brisbane as headquarters—
-10 members.
No. 2 Northern Division, having Townsville as headquarters
—4 members.
No. 3 Central Division, having Rockhampton as headquarters
■—2 members.
No. 4 South Western Division, having Toowoomba as head-
quarters—4 members.
19. The State Executive is empowered, subject to the rights and
powers of any Trustee or Trustees duly appointed, to control the
finances, assets, and business affairs of the Association within the State


and of all Divisional Executives, Divisional Councils, Sub-divisional
Executives, Sub-branches, Committees and members throughout the
State and to interpret and give decisions on any Rule pending variation
or amendment of such Rule.
DIVISIONAL COUNCIL.
Sub-branch Delegates Constitute Divisional Council.
20. A Divisional Council shall be created in each State Division
and shall consist of financial members of the Association who have
been duly elected by their respective Sub-branches as the represent-
atives of such Sub-branch to such Divisional Council. Each Sub-
branch within the Division shall be entitled to appoint one member
to the Divisional Council. Each Divisional Council within the
State shall meet at Divisional headquarters or as otherwise may be
agreed upon in the first month of each quarter of each year. Such
meetings shall be deemed ordinary meetings. Such Divisional Council
shall carry out the Objects of the Association and shall attend to the
domestic affairs and matters of interest in the Division and to such
other matters as are from time to time allotted. Only duly appointed
delegates from Sub-branches and the Presiding Officer shall have power
to vote at Divisional Council meetings.
Divisional Council : Duty of Members.
21. It shall be the duty of delegates assembled in meetings of
the Divisional Council to express, as far as possible, the views of their
Sub-branches on matters of policy and on questions of major
importance ; to carry out the instructions of their respective Sub-
branches ; to report and convey recommendations between their
respective Sub-branches and the Divisional Council; and to perform
other duties which may from time to time be allotted.
DIVISIONAL EXECUTIVE.
Divisional Council Elects Divisional Executive.
22. In each Division an annual meeting of the Divisional Council
shall be held at the Divisional headquarters in the month of August
in each year for the purpose of electing, from and in such Division,
members of the Association to constitute a Divisional Executive,
which shall consist of such officers as are set forth in Rules 62-64, and
for such purposes and business as are elsewhere provided.
Duties of Divisional Executive.
23. It shall be the duty of the Divisional Executive to meet
fortnightly at the headquarters within the division and to conduct
the business and domestic affairs of the Division between meetings of


the Divisional Council. Each member elected to the Divisional
Executive shall be prepared to accept the directorship and responsi-
bility of any one of the ten Committees provided hereinafter.
Powers of Divisional Executive.
24. The Divisional Executive shall, in the execution of its duties,
act in accordance with requests or instructions from the State Executive,
and shall attend to the payment of moneys and delivery of assets
to the State Executive or Trustees of the Association. It shall appoint,
subject to ratification by the Divisional Council, members of the
Association to vacant positions on the Divisional Executive and
the State Executive, and on the Divisional Executive Committees
(unlsss the Directors of such Committees hereinafter mentioned
have exercised their privilege so to do) during the year between
meetings of the Divisional Council or State Executive, as the case
may be.
SUB-BRANCHES.
Creation of Sub-branches.
25. Sub-branches shall be created throughout the State of
Queensland which shall adopt the title, objects and qualifications of
members of this Association and shall adopt the Constitution, Rules,
Regulations and Resolutions herein contained or for the time being
in force.
How Formed.
26. Sub-branches may be formed in any Sub-division where
not less than 15 members or intending members are assembled.
New Sub-branches may be formed by existing Sub-divisional Com-
mittees or by officially appointed Organisers, but approval for the
creation of any Sub-branch shall be first obtained from the Divisional
Executive concerned. A Sub-branch shall be attached to the
Sub-division wherein it is formed.
Registration of Sub-branches.
27. It shall be the duty of every Sub-branch immediately after
formation to apply to the State Executive through its Divisional
Executive for recognition; and upon registration by the State
Executive, such Sub-branch shall be recognised as a duly formed and
operative Sub-branch of the Association. Should the State
Executive be satisfied that such Sub-branch has been properly created
and is acting or considered likely to act in the best interests of the
movement, such registration shall not be arbitrarily or capriciously
withheld.
Appoint Own Officers.
28. All Sub-branches shall appoint their own officers who shall
conduct their business properly and in the best interests of the
Association.


Duties, etc.
29. It shall be the duty of a Sub-branch to carry out the Objects
of the Association and to co-operate with and assist the Divisional
Council, Divisional Executive and State Executive in the execution
thereof.
Keep Proper Records.
30. Each Sub-branch shall keep proper books and records of its
activities and financial transactions, including Minute Book, Cash
Book, and such other books as are deemed necessary.
Ordinary Meetings.
31. Sub-branches shall meet once a month or at more frequent
intervals as agreed, and Sub-branch Executives shall meet fortnightly,
or as arranged.
Must Qive Undertaking to Abide by Constitution.
32. Before exercising the functions of or using the name of a
Sub-branch of the Association under this Constitution, every Sub-
branch shall give to the State Executive an undertaking to abide
by the Constitution ; and the State Executive, if satisfied that the
Sub-branch has been properly created, may ratify the approval of the
Divisional Executive and register the Sub-branch. Sub-branches
shall respect the decision of their Sub-divisional Committee, abide
by the decision of Divisional Councils, and at all times abide by
the decision of the State Executive.
Handle Own Finances.
33. Sub-branches may handle their own finances, but these,
together with all books, papers, documents, writings, property, cash and
other assets, at all times shall belong to and be vested in the Association
or Trustees thereof. They shall make a monthly payment of at least
50% of their membership subscriptions and donations to the State
Executive or to Trustees of the Association. Such payments of Sub-
branches shall be made to the State Executive or Trustees through
their respective Divisional Executive or as otherwise directed.
No Payment over £s—nor Pledge Credit.
34. No Sub-branch shall incur any liability beyond the extent
of £5 or pledge the credit of the Association without the written
sanction of its Divisional Executive first had and obtained.
Returns to Divisional Headquarters.
35. Each Sub-branch shall forward to Divisional Headquarters
by the first day of the month following that which it concerns a copy of
each adopted Committee report for presentation to the Director of the
respective Committee attached to the Divisional or State Executive.
The Sub-branches shall acquaint the Divisional Executive regularly


by the first day of the month following that which it concerns a list of the
names, addresses and descriptions of their members. The first of
such reports shall show members already enlisted, subsequent reports
shall show the total number previously forwarded, followed by
particulars of members retiring and of new members enrolled since last
report.
Approach Divisional Headquarters with Urgent Matters.
36. In cases of extreme urgency on matters of an extraordinary
nature, Sub-branch and other officials may communicate directly with
the Divisional Secretary, Chairman or President, preceding information
which will be subsequently set out in a report.
Copies of Financial Returns to Divisional Headquarters.
37. Every Sub-branch shall, within 30 days from the end of each
quarter, forward to Divisional Headquarters a quarterly statement
of receipts and expenditure duly audited, and shall, before the first day
of August in each year, forward to Divisional Headquarters an audited
statement of receipts and expenditure and Balance Sheet covering the
previous year's transactions to 30th J une, and a copy of the Auditor’s
report.
Branch Secretary Responsible for Despatch of Reports, etc.
38. Sub-branch Secretaries shall be responsible for the prompt
despatch to the Divisional or State Secretary by the first day of the
month following that which is concerned of all reports as elsewhere
stated, including financial reports and those of various Committees and
resolutions other than routine resolutions, and of payments of money.
The annual audit report to 30th June in each year must be
despatched by the first day of August in each year.
Summary Sub-branch Returns to be sent to State Executive.
39. Divisional Executives shall forward to the State Executive,
as soon as possible after the first day of August in each year, a summary
of all Sub-branch annual statements of receipts and expenditure and
Balance Sheets and similar information in connection with Divisional
Headquarters’ accounts.
Can Form Ladies’ Committee.
40. Sub-branches are empowered to form Ladies’ Committees
to co-operate with other Committees or for any other purpose the
Sub-branch may desire, but such Committees must not assume any
of the powers or functions of other Committees or of the Sub-branch.
Appoint Auditor.
41. Every Sub-branch shall appoint at least one member as
Auditor. Such officer shall be appointed at annual meetings, and any
vacancy may be filled as and when the necessity occurs. He shall


present to the Sub-branch Quarterly and Annual Statements and
Balance Sheets and any intermediate reports or statements required,
and shall have free access to books and other property at any time in
the execution of his duties.
42. Divisional Executives shall appoint qualified persons to
audit Sub-branch books of account, if necessary, and Sub-branch
officers shall make the books and assets of the Sub-branch available
for such purpose.
Sub-branch may be Deregistered or Disbanded.
43. Any Sub-branch of the Association may, by the State
Executive, be refused recognition, deregistered, or disbanded, or
dissociated from the Association, should such Sub-branch be reasonably
believed to be inactive or acting in any manner which, in the opinion
of the State Executive, may be, or may be calculated to be, in violation
of this Constitution. Thereafter, the Sub-branch or members thereof
shall not be permitted to use the name or Constitution of this Asso-
ciation or to work as a Sub-branch of the Association.
Deregistered Sub-branch hands over Assets, etc.
44. Any Sub-branch deregistered or dissociated as above-
mentioned, and any member or past member thereof shall be bound
forthwith to hand over to the Association or to any person thereby
appointed or to the Trustees of the Association, all cash, assets, books
or other property belonging to the Association or the Sub-branch,
as the case may be, or in the hands of the Sub-branch or its officers
or any other persons.
SUB-DIVISIONAL COMMITTEES.
Provide Members to Sub-Divisional Committees.
45. Each Sub-branch shall provide members to constitute a
Sub-divisional Committee and shall provide and appoint one of its
members of the Sub-divisional Committee as its delegate to the
Divisional Council within its section of the State.
Sub-branch’s Quota to Sub-divisional Committee.
46. A Sub-divisional Committee shall consist of not more than
three members from each Sub-branch formed in the Sub-division.
Duties, etc., Sub-divisional Committee.
47. The Sub-divisional Committee shall meet fortnightly, or as
agreed. The initial meeting of any Sub-divisional Committee shall
not be validly constituted unless each and every Sub-branch
within the Sub-division has had reasonable opportunity to appoint its
representatives and such representatives have been duly notified of such
initial meeting. The principal duties of the Committee shall be to


attend to the domestic affairs of the respective Sub-divisions which
the members represent. It shall appoint a Chairman from its number,
together with an Honorary Secretary whose duty it shall be to
co-operate with Divisional Headquarters and to report thereto any or
all matters that may affect the Sub-division in particular or the Associa-
tion in general. The Sub-divisional Committee shall execute such
duties as are or may elsewhere be provided for from time to time,
and members shall report to and from their respective Sub-branches
matters of interest. It shall control any joint Committees in its
Sub-division.
COMMITTEES.
48. The activities and objects of the Association shall be effected
by the creation and proper working of the undermentioned Committees
whose duties are prescribed in the book of duties provided. The fol-
lowing Committees shall therefore be appointed in each Divisional
Executive and in each Sub-branch.
Administrative
Employment
Entertainment
Finance
J uvenile
Membership
Political
Publicity
Religious
Vigilance
Divisional Executive’s Committees.
49. In the case of a Divisional Executive each member elected
thereto shall be bound to accept the directorship and responsibility
of any one of the above mentioned Committees that shall be allotted
to him or her by the Divisional Chairman or, in the case of the Southern
Division, by the State President. Such director shall then be respon-
sible for the proper working of his or her respective Committee and
for the presentation of written reports of activities at the fortnightly
meeting of the Divisional Executive. Such director shall have
access to all Sub-branch Committee reports received at headquarters in
connection with similar Committee activities in the Sub-branches.
Each Divisional Executive member who is a Director of a Committee
shall endeavour to see that the relative Committee in all Sub-branches
within the Division is carrying out its functions and forwarding reports
to Headquarters. If any Divisional Executive officer declines to
accept or, after acceptance, does not satisfactorily execute such duties


as are laid down in the book of duties or as elsewhere duly provided for
from time to time, the Divisional Chairman or President may appoint
a Committee to carry on the duties of such Divisional Executive
officer and to report fully thereon to such Divisional Chairman or
President until such Divisional Executive officer’s position is dealt
with or is declared vacant and refilled by proper authority. The State
or Divisional Executive or Divisional Council is empowered to ask for
the retirement from office of any Executive member, or to expel him
from or refuse his admittance to any meeting, provided such action
is taken in good faith and, in the opinion of the Executive or Council,
is in the best interests of the Association.
50. If a member absents himself from three consecutive Executive
or Divisional Council meetings, or if any director or convenor of any
Committee, either on any Executive or in any Sub-branch, fails to
submit a written report of his Committee’s activities for three con-
secutive meetings, his position may be declared vacant and action
suitable to such member’s default may be taken unless a satisfactory
explanation shall be given and accepted.
51. The allocation of the above-mentioned 10 directorships or any
part thereof shall be the prerogative of the State President, Divisional
Chairman or Sub-branch President, as the case may be, and shall
take place at the first meeting of the Divisional Executive or Sub-
branch Executive after the election.
52. In case of a Divisional Executive immediately the director-
ships have been allotted each director of a Committee shall proceed to
select at least four, but not more than seven, members, preferably,
but not necessarily, from the Divisional Council, and in the case of
the Divisional Executive each director (except that of the Vigilance
Committee) shall submit his selection at the ensuing meeting of the
Divisional Council. The selection of Committee-men from the
Divisional Executive is not permissible except in the case of the
Administrative and Finance Committees which may include members
of the Divisional Executive.
53. It shall be the duty of Directors of Committees, both the
Divisional Executive and of the Sub-branches, to prepare written and
signed reports in duplicate and lodge a copy thereof with the Divisional
or Sub-branch Secretaries. Such reports shall be first submitted to the
Divisional Executive or Sub-branch Executive, as the case may be, and
a precis of all Committee reports shall be presented at ensuing meetings
of the Divisional Council or Sub-branch. If necessary, full reports
may be tabled at such meetings.


SUB-BRANCH COMMITTEES.
54. In the case of Sub-branches, Committees as set out in
paragraph 48 shall be appointed to carry out the duties of such Com-
mittees within their Sub-branch. On the question of selection of
Sub-branch Committees, the following alternative methods are available.
Rules 50 and 51 shall be applicable to Sub-branches.
Method (A)—
A Sub-branch may appoint, in addition to the Sub-branch
President, an Executive Committee of ten persons who will under-
take to carry out the duties and responsibilities of any of the
said Committees. The allocation of the respective directorships
shall be made by the Sub-branch President at the ensuing meeting
of the Sub-branch Executive. Such director of a Committee
shall then be given the opportunity of selecting such other
members of the Sub-branch as he may choose to act with him as
the Committee of his department, or he may carry out the duties
single handed. The director of each Committee shall be respon-
sible for the preparation and submission monthly of reports to
the Sub-branch and shall be liable also to provide a copy of any
such adopted report to the Sub-branch Secretary who shall
despatch the same to the director of the relative Committee on
the Divisional Executive.
Method (B)
Each Sub-branch may elect three members, if possible, to
each of ten Committees herein provided for, except in the case
of the Political Committee which shall consist of four members.
Each Committee shall prepare in duplicate, for presentation to
Sub-branch meetings, a monthly report of activities, whether
actual or contemplated. Copies of adopted reports are to be
despatched to Headquarters.
MEETINGS.
Annual Conference.
55. The Annual Conference of the State Executive shall be held
in Brisbane, or elsewhere as arranged. The Conference shall review
past operations of the movement, and shall deal with such other
matters of interest as may be deemed by the Executive to be advisable
or necessary and, subject to the Constitution, shall lay down the
policy and course of State wide activities for the ensuing year. The
date and place of the Conference shall be determined by a resolution


of the State Executive and, subject to the discretion of the State
Executive, after all Sub-branch and other annual meetings have taken
place. Twenty-one days’ notice of the date and place of such Conference
shall be given. At this Conference, power shall be given to the State
Executive to appoint any of its members Vice-Presidents of the
Association, but such appointment or appointments shall not entitle
the recipient or recipients to exercise any of the powers or functions
of the State President unless so requested by the State Executive.
At this Conference a complete summary of the receipts and expenditure
of all Sub-branches in the State shall be presented by the State
Treasurer, State President, or Secretary. This assembly may ratify
or disaffirm any appointment by the Southern Divisional Council
of the State President. Provided that notice of any motion to dis-
affirm such appointment shall have been given to every delegate not
later than 7 days before the date fixed for the Annual Conference,
and if such motion is carried, the Conference may fill any vacancy
occasioned by such action from other persons who have been duly
nominated for the office under Clause 74 hereof, and if no other persons
ave been so nominated then some other member of the Conference
may be appointed.
MEETINGS.
Annual and Otherwise.
Election of Officers (Sub-branches).
56. All Sub-branches throughout the State shall hold, in July
of each year, their annual meetings for presentation of Annual Reports,
Accounts, and Statements of Receipts and Expenditure. At these
meetings all officers of the Sub-branch shall retire and the election
of all officers for the ensuing year shall take place. In the case of
Sub-branches, 'nominations for any office may be lodged with the
Sub-branch Secretary in writing or may be made verbally, without
notice, at such annual meeting. The officers to be elected shall include
Sub-branch President, Vice-President, Secretary, Auditor, Delegates
to Sub-divisional Committee (one of whom shall also be appointed as
a delegate and one as deputy delegate to the Divisional Council),
and the Executive Committee of ten members, inclusive of Treasurer.
The last mentioned ten officers shall act as directors of the various
Committees as laid down in Rule No. 48, and Rule 69 shall be applicable
to Sub-branch officers. (See Rule 54, where optional methods of
formation are provided). The Sub-branch President, Vice-Presidents
and Secretary, together with the ten Executive officers, shall constitute
the Sub-branch Executive Committee. If any person not present
is nominated for any such office his consent in writing must be pro-
duced. The Sub-branch Executive Committee shall meet as and when
arranged after due notice has been given.


Secretary ot Sub-branch to forward Information to Divisional
Headquarters.
57. The Secretary of each Sub-branch shall, on or before the
first day of August in each year, forward to Divisional Headquarters
the details of appointments of officers and addresses of appointees, to-
gether with a copy of audited Revenue and Expenditure and Accounts
and Statements as adopted by the Sub-branch at its annual meeting.
The Divisional Headquarters in turn shall promptly supply the State
Executive with copies or a summary of all such information.
Sub-branch Delegates to Divisional Council must Present
Credentials.
58. Sub-branches shall appoint one delegate as its representative
to constitute the Divisional Council as provided by Rules 20 and 47,
and shall appoint a deputy delegate to attend Divisional Council
meetings when necessary in place of a Sub-branch delegate. Such
delegates must present their credentials at annual and other meetings,
under the hand of their Sub-branch President or Secretary, showing
that such delegate has been duly elected as representative of the
specified Sub-branch to the Divisional Council.
All Members Shall Have Equal Opportunity of Election.
59. The method of election of all officers shall at all times be
such that each and every candidate shall have an equal chance of
election ; and that each member, delegate or representative entitled
to vote shall be given due notice of such election of officers; and equal
opportunity and value in voting shall be afforded to all members,
excepting that, in the case of presiding officers, such officer shall have
a casting, as well as a deliberative, vote.
Notification of Meetings.
60. Annual and ordinary meetings may be convened by announce-
ment in the Daily Press, or otherwise as considered reasonable by the
Executive Committee of the Sub-branch, but at least fourteen days’
notice of the annual meeting shall be given.
Notice of Meetings ; Divisional Council.
61. All Sub-branches and delegates shall be given at least seven
days’ written notice of ordinary meetings and fourteen days’ notice
of annual meetings. Such notice shall state time, place, and nature of
known business to be dealt with.


ELECTION OF DIVISIONAL AND STATE
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS.
Officers to be Elected : Southern Division.
62. At the first annual meeting of the Divisional Council in No. 1
Division the officers to be elected to the Divisional Executive shall
include State President, and Ten Executive Officers, inclusive of
Treasurer (the latter may act as both State and Southern Divisional
Treasurer). At this meeting there shall also be elected Vice-Presidents,
Divisional Registrar, Divisional Chairman (if necessary) and Auditors.
62a. A Provisional Divisional Executive may be appointed
by the Divisional Council until the next August annual meeting, and
failing such appointment in any Division, the State Executive may
make such appointment.
The Southern Division Quota to State Executive.
63. The ten Executive Officers elected as above to the Southern
Divisional Executive shall automatically become the Southern
Division’s quota for that year to the State Executive, and only the
ten such members and the State President shall have power to vote at
State Executive meetings on behalf of the Southern Division.
Officers to be Elected : North, Central, and South-Western
Division.
64. At the first annual meeting of the Divisional Council in Nos.
2,3, and 4 Divisions, the officers to be elected to the Divisional
Executive shall include Divisional Chairman, Deputy Divisional Chair-
man, ten Divisional Executive officers (inclusive of Treasurer), a
Divisional Secretary (Honorary). Divisional Registrar, if necessary,
and Divisional Auditor.
65. At this meeting, immediately after the above officers have
been elected, the Divisional Council shall nominate and elect from the
above-mentioned Executive officers its quota of members from such
Division to the State Executive.
Annual Meeting of Divisional Councils.
66. At every annual meeting after the first annual meeting of
the Divisional Councils, which shall be held at respective headquarters
in August of each year, all officers of the State Executive shall retire
and five of the ten Divisional Executive officers shall retire by rotation
annually, but all such retiring officers are eligible for re-election.
In the case of such retiring officers Clause 67 hereof shall not apply. At
the above meeting the election of officers for the ensuing year shall
take place.


Nominations.
67. Nominations for all officers to the Divisional Executive
shall be made by and from financial members of the Association within
the Division concerned, and shall be given in writing with the consent
of persons nominated, and shall be in the hands of the Divisional
Chairman or Secretary seven clear days before the date of such annual
meeting.
68. The officers (see Rules 62-64) elected, except Auditors,
shall be ex officio members of the Divisional Executive concerned and
shall attend meetings of the Divisional Council, but, unless holding office
as a Sub-branch Delegate thereto, shall not have power to vote at
Divisional Council meetings.
69. It shall be competent for any member nominated as one of
the ten Executive officers to be nominated also for any other office
or vice versa (except Auditor) and to hold more than one office.
70. It shall be the duty of the ten Executive officers mentioned
herein to accept the responsibility and directorship of any one of the
ten Committees herein provided.
Presentation of Annual Statements.
71. At the annual meeting of the Divisional Council an audited
Annual Statement to 30th June of that year of Receipts and Expendi-
ture concerning the accounts of the Divisional Executive and a com-
bined Statement of Receipts and Expenditure of all Sub-branches in
the Division, in addition to all reports, shall be presented and dealt
with. Any other business that may be considered advisable may be
brought forward at the discretion of the presiding officer at each
annual meeting.
Directorship of Committee not necessarily allocated at Annual
Meeting.
72. The formation of Committees for the ensuing year need
not necessarily take place at the annual meeting of the Divisional
Council, but may be postponed until the Divisional Chairman has
allotted the directorship of the ten Committees amongst the ten
Divisional Executive members. This Rule shall not be construed to
permit undue delay in the formation of such Committees.
Election of State President.
73. The State President shall be elected by members of the
Southern Divisional Council at their annual meeting, subject to rati-
fication by State Executive at Annual Conference. The State President
shall retire at the annual meeting of the Southern Divisional Council,
but is eligible for re-election.


74. Nominations for the office of State President shall be made
by any Sub-branch or member of the Association in the State and such
nomination, together with the nominee’s consent to act, shall be in
the hands of the State or Southern Divisional Secretary before the
first day of August in each year. In the event of no nomination being
duly received, the Southern Divisional Council may nominate and
elect a State President at the annual meeting thereof.
75. The State President may tender his resignation to the State
Executive, which is empowered to fill the vacancy of any such office
between annual meetings ‘of the Southern Divisional Council in the
manner prescribed in the proviso to Clause 55 hereof.
Ordinary Meetings of State Executive.
76. The ordinary meetings of the State Executive shall be held
in Brisbane once every three months, or as otherwise agreed. The
State President, if available, shall preside at all meetings of the State
Executive.
77. Twenty-one days’ written notice of such meetings, stating
the known business to be dealt with, shall be given to all members
entitled to attend.
78. Members of the State Executive (other than representatives
of the Southern Division) may vote by post, such vote to be received
before such meeting, upon any matter to be dealt with at such meetings.
Southern Division Executive Meetings.
79. When the Southern Divisional Executive members are called
together, the notice of meeting shall clearly state whether such meeting
is a State Executive or Divisional Executive meeting, and, if the
former, all State Executive members in other Divisions shall be notified,
excepting in cases of extreme urgency and where such notice is not
practicable, or where only routine business is to be dealt with. In the
•latter case, reports of meeting shall be forwarded to any Division not
represented thereat.
80. All massed. Sub-branch, Divisional and Executive meetings
shall be opened with Prayer and closed with the National Anthem,
or with any verse or verses thereof, as the Presiding Officer directs.
OTHER MEETINGS.
Special Meetings : Voluntary and Otherwise.
81. Special meetings of the State Executive, Divisional Council,
Divisional Executive, Sub-divisional Committee and Sub-branches
may be called by the authority concerned by giving at least seven days’
notice thereof to all members entitled to attend and stating the business
to be dealt with, and shall be called from time to time by a written


request signed by one-third of the financial members duly entitled to
constitute such body, by serving such request upon the Secretary,
President, or other officer or officers responsible for ordinarily
calling such meetings. In the case of the Sub-branches, ten members
thereof may demand a special meeting. All such meetings shall be
convened without delay, and within twenty-one days of lodgment
of such notice or request. Members entitled to attend shall be given
seven days' notice and the reason for calling such meeting. At all such
meetings only the business stated and contingent business arising
therefrom shall be discussed. The State Executive may call, or order
to be called, a special meeting of the State Executive, any Divisional
Executive, any Divisional Council, any Sub-divisional Committee or
any Sub-branch at any time that circumstances may warrant such a
course, by stating the business to be discussed and by giving at least
seven days’ notice of time and place to members who are entitled to
attend.
Massed Meetings.
82. Massed meetings of the Association may be held from time
to time. At such meetings addresses or items of entertainment may
be provided. Resolutions, as indicated in Rule 88, carried at such
meetings shall be recommendations to the Divisional Council, Divisional
Executive or State Executive, provided that such recommendations
shall have been carried by a two-thirds majority of those assembled
at such meetings.
Who Presides at Meetings.
83. The State President, Sub-branch President, Divisional
Chairman, or, in their absence, a Vice-President or Deputy Chairman
of the respective presidential office shall, if possible, preside at all
meetings, but not necessarily at Committee meetings. At all meetings
of the Association ranging from Executive to Committee meetings,
ordinary rules of debate and conduct shall be exercised in so far as
such are consistent with the Standing Orders and By-laws of the
Association, which shall take precedence. In the event of any
Executive officer’s position becoming vacant, such vacancy shall be
filled at the first possible ordinary meeting.
MEMBERSHIP.
PART 2.
Members to become attached to Sub-branch in their Division.
84. All members shall, as far as is reasonably practicable, become
members of a Sub-branch within the Sub-division in which they reside.
Should members become attached to any Sub-branch outside their
Sub-division they should apply for free transfer to a Sub-branch within
their sub-division.


Members can Vote at One Sub-branch Only.
85. A member of any Sub-branch may become a member of any
other Sub-branch, but shall not be entitled to move or to vote upon
any motion at any meeting of such other Sub-branch.
May Admit Non-members.
86. Any Sub-branch or Divisional Council or State Executive
is empowered to admit to its meetings intending members or other
persons who are desirous of assisting the Association in any way.
The purpose and duration of such person’s attendance shall not be
such as, in the opinion of the Chairman, will retard or embarrass
the true and proper conduct of the business of the meeting or in any
way violate the Constitution of the Association. Such intending
members or other persons will not be permitted to vote on any motion
or amendment placed before the meeting.
Life Members.
87. The Divisional Councils of the Association are empowered
to recommend to the State Executive the appointment of life members
of the Association either for services rendered or for the payment of a
fee to be decided on. In the event of any such member acting in
such a manner as, in the opinion of the Divisional Council, is calculated
to injure, interfere with, or disrupt either the members or the Consti-
tution, or the Objects or the Rules or Regulations of the Association,
such membership may, upon recommendation by Divisional Council
to State Executive, be terminated by the State Executive whose decision
shall be accepted as final. Any member accepting life membership
of the Association clearly does so on such basis as is stated or implied
in this Rule. Such life member shall be permitted to attend any
meetings of the Association and may vote on any matter discussed
thereat except meetings of the State Executive, Divisional Council and
Commonwealth Council.
All Members Shall Have the Right to Attend Mass Meetings.
88. All members shall have the right to attend mass meetings
of the Association and to vote on any motion which may be submitted
by the Divisional Council or the Divisional and/or State Executive.
Members so assembled may, at the discretion of the Chairman, move or
submit any. motion with or without debate, as the presiding officer
directs, and carry resolutions as recommendations either to the
Divisional or to the State Executive or to both. Such resolutions must
be carried by two-thirds of those present at such meetings.
Members must produce evidence of bona fides to gain
admittance to Meetings.
89. Before admittance to any meeting of the Association every
member shall produce his receipt or badge of membership (or both if
requested) or be duly vouched for by a member present who produces


his own receipt or badge of membership, or in some other satisfactory-
way produces sufficient evidence that he or she is a bona fide member
of the Association.
90. Every member joining the Association does so on the express
condition that he or she shall abide by and observe duly all Rules and
terms of this Constitution.
Unfinancial Members Forfeit Rights.
91. Any member or representative being three months in arrears
with his or her subscription, contribution, levy, fine or due, shall be
considered unfinancial and shall forfeit the rights and privileges of
membership, unless otherwise decided by the Sub-branch or the State
or Divisional Executive.
Members may Resign or be Transferred.
92. Any member may resign from the Association by giving one
calendar month’s notice to his or her respective Sub-branch of his or
her intention so to do, and provided such a member is not then liable
for any subscription or payment of moneys or delivery of any other
cash or property to or belonging to the Association’s Trustees or to
any other Sub-branch of the Association or the Association. If such
member has fulfilled the conditions and conduct expected of members
as herein affirmed he or she shall be entitled, if so required by him or
her in writing, to a signed clearance in simple form or transfer to the
Branch in any other State Branch or to a Sub-branch within the State,
but no refund of any subscription or other due shall be made to such
member.
Expulsion of Members.
93. Any member of the Association or of a Sub-branch of the
Association who, in the opinion of the Sub-branch, has acted contrary
to the Objects, Rules or any other part of this Constitution, either
expressed or properly implied, or is in arrears three months with any
subscription levy or fine, may be expelled or suspended by the Sub-
branch from the Association or may be refused admittance to any
meetings of the Association. Any such member so expelled or refused
admittance to the Association meetings shall have the right to appeal
to the Divisional or State Executive against any such act or decision
of or by the Sub-branch and to appear before the Divisional or State
Executive to explain his or her action or case by giving one month’s
notice in writing of his or her intention so to do. Such intimation
shall be addressed to the Divisional or State Executive, and shall set out,
in writing, the grounds of such appeal. The Divisional or State
Executive’s decision shall be final.


94. This Rule shall not preclude the right of any Sub-branch
to expel or refuse admittance to any member or person pending the
hearing of any matter being dealt with by the authorities above-
mentioned.
Replacement of Delegatee, etc.
95. Any Divisional Executive, or Divisional Council may, on
motion passed after notice of intention so to do, instruct any Sub-
branch to recall and replace any delegate or representative or member
to any Divisional Council, Divisional or State Executive or Sub-
divisional Committee whose behaviour is considered to be contrary
to the spirit and purpose of the movement or the best interests
of the Association. Any such member or representative may
appeal against any such decision or action to the State Executive
whose decision shall in all cases be accepted as final.
GENERAL.
Candidate for Parliament, etc., to Vacate Office.
96. Any member of the Association holding any office in any
Sub-branch, Divisional Council, Divisional Executive or State
Executive who becomes a candidate for election to any Municipal or
Parliamentary representation shall forthwith relinquish such office.
After any such election any such member shall be eligible to resume
his office. No organiser. Leader or Campaign Director of any Political
Party shall be permitted to hold any office in the Association.
Alterations to Constitution.
97. The Constitution, Rules or Regulations of this Association
may be rescinded, varied or added to from time to time upon due
notice of such alterations being given in writing one clear calendar
month before a meeting called for the purpose. Such alterations
shall be effected as the State Executive may decide by either a referen-
dum of Sub-branches or a referendum of members within the Sub-
branches throughout the State.
98. REFERENDA.
(a) Referendum of Sub-branchee.
A referendum of Sub-branches shall be a referendum of all the
Sub-branches properly registered, formed and operating within the
State. The vote of each Sub-branch shall be decided by its members
present at a meeting callad for the purpose, of which due notice of
date, place and object shall be given to the members of such Sub-
branches. No alteration shall take place unless such decision is carried
by two-thirds of the Sub-branches voting. Each Sub-branch shall be
entitled to one effective vote as a Sub-branch. Should any Sub-branch


for any reason refuse or neglect to hold such meeting or to participate
in the referendum, such action will not invalidate the decision made
by the remainder of the Sub-branches.
(b) Referendum of Members.
A referendum of members shall be conducted by notification
to every Sub-branch which, in turn, shall notify, in the usual or other
approved manner, every financial member of such Sub-branch of the
time and place of such meeting and of the question or questions there
to be decided. Each member present shall be entitled to one vote,
and the total number of votes for or against the question shall be
recorded and the information notified within seven days of the decision
to the State Executive or any appointed Divisional Returning Officer.
The question shall be decided for or against by a total aggregate of
two-thirds of the individual votes recorded throughout the State as
specified. Should any Sub-branch or members for any reason refuse
or neglect to hold such meeting or participate in the referendum,
such action will not invalidate the decision made by the remainder of
the Sub-branches or members. Any duly qualified voter may record,
by post, his vote in an approved form addressed to the Secretary of
his Sub-branch or to the duly appointed Returning Officer.
Government of Women’s Auxiliary.
99. Should Women’s Associations or Auxiliary Branches or
Juvenile Branches be formed, the State Executive shall draw up or
approve of the Rules for the government of such branches. The
principal objects of any such organisation shall be consistent with
those of this Association.
Sub-branch Restriction on Matters of Publicity.
100. No Sub-branch, Committee or member shall, without
permission of the Divisional or State Executive first had and obtained,
print or publish in any way whatsoever any matter dealing with any
subject that may in any way injure, disrupt, or be inconsistent with
the aims and objects and Constitution of this Association. The name
of the Association shall in no case be used in any manner without the
written consent of the State or Divisional Executive first had and
obtained. This provision expressly covers matters of policy, publicity
and propaganda of or for the Association in general, but shall not
preclude any Sub-branch from arranging for its own printing for local
routine purposes.
Sub-divisional Committee may handle Disputes.
101. Sub-divisional Committees may deal with any dispute of
a domestic nature arising in their Sub-division, subject to the right of
appeal against such decision to the Divisional Executive and/or State


Executive. This provision shall not preclude the Divisional Executive
from dealing in the first place with any such dispute if it considers
such action is advisable.
Book of Duties (Printed Separately).
102. All members, Sub-branches, Executive Committees, Sub-
Divisional Committees, Divisional Councils, State Executive, Annual
Conferences and Officers of the Association shall be guided by and act
within their respective duties as set forth in the book of duties. The
book of duties, whether printed separately or incorporated herein
shall at all times be deemed part of the Constitution and Rules of the
Association as if they had been inserted herein. Any of such duties
may be added to or deleted from time to time by resolution of the
State Executive.
Copies of Book of Constitution may be sold to Members.
103. The price of the book of Constitution and Rules shall be
threepence for each copy, but this provision shall not preclude any
member or intending member from free access to the contents of the
book kept by the Secretary at any time they so desire. The book of
duties shall not be made available to members generally. Sub-branch
officials shall be entitled, without charge, to two copies of the book of
duties and six copies of the book of Constitution and Rules. Any
Committee or officer of any Executive shall be entitled to make a copy
of the part of the book of duties prescribing his particular duties.
Appoint Trustees.
104. Unless and until the Association in Queensland shall become
and be a body corporate under the laws of the State of Queensland,
the State Executive may appoint from year to year two or more
Trustees to take care of and administer the Association’s funds and
assets throughout the State. The duties of such Trustees shall be
primarily to exercise reasonable and businesslike administration in
respect to receipt and expenditure of the Association’s funds and assets
and to make recommendations consistent with their office. They may
accumulate or distribute funds and assets on the recommendation of
the State Executive providing that nothing herein contained shall
prevent the incorporation as aforesaid of the Association.
105. All cash, assets, goods, chattels, books, papers, printed
matter and all other property of any description, the property of, or
believed to be the property of, the Association, and all cash collected or
other property for the time being held by any Sub-branch, or any
officers, or members, shall be and shall be regarded as the property of the
Association as a whole and may be vested in such Trustees of the
Association as may be approved and appointed by the State Executive.


106. Nothing in this Constitution shall preclude any Trustees
appointed by the State Executive from permitting Sub-branches or
the State or Divisional Executive from receiving and making payments
of cash, goods or property, and utilising part or parts of such assets
for the purpose of conducting or administering their section of the
Association’s affairs in the ordinary course of business. The Associa-
tion or such Trustees may at any time demand and recover payment
or possession of any such funds or assets as the State Executive may
direct.
107. The duty of Auditors appointed by the Divisional Council
shall be to audit the accounts of the Divisional Executive and to present
to the annual meeting of the Divisional Council an annual statement,
duly audited, of Revenue and Expenditure and Balance Sheet, with a
report, and to present any intermediate statement and report or other
matter as required. Such Auditors, in the execution of their duties,
shall have free access to books and other property concerned at any
time.
Funds for conduct of Divisional Executive and Council Business.
108. The State Executive shall provide Divisional Executives
or Divisional Councils with funds for the conduct of their Divisional
affairs by permitting Divisional Executives to retain a percentage
(to be fixed from time to thus by the State Executive) of moneys
collected for the State Executive from Sub-branches in their division.
109. A State fund of the Association shall be opened by the State
Executive at Head Office into which revenue received for the State
Executive shall be paid and from which shall be paid all commitments
and other expenses which have benefited the State as a whole, or such
other sums as the State Executive shall decide.
110. In each Division a Divisional fund of the Association shall
be opened and operated upon for the purpose of receipt and payment
of all moneys concerning such division.
STANDING ORDERS AT MEETINGS.
Receiving of Reports and Correspondence.
11l (a). In dealing with the correspondence and reports, every
letter and report, after having been read, shall, unless a motion to the
contrary be submitted, be taken as formally " Received,” and every
letter and report shall be dealt with, if possible, immediately after the
contents have been made known to the meeting.


Entertain only one Amendment at a Time.
(b) Only one amendment shall be entertained at one time. If the
amendment be carried it shall become the substantive motion and the
debate may proceed, the original motion lapsing; and there will then
be no necessity to put the original motion to the meeting. Whether
the amendment is carried or not, other amendments may be received
one by one to be decided in like manner until the subject is finally
disposed of. In the case of all amendments being lost, the presiding
officer shall put the motion to the vote.
Members must not propose more than one Amendment and
may speak once only to a Motion or Amendment.
(c) No member shall propose more than one amendment upon a
motion, and no member shall speak more than once upon the same
motion or amendment, except the mover of the motion who shall be
entitled to reply, and, thereafter, all discussion shall cease, and the
question shall be put. Any member seconding a motion or amendment,
without remark, shall be held not to have spoken thereon.
Motion to Conclude Debate.
(d) A motion : " That the debate be now concluded,” may be
moved, without remarks, by any member who has not previously
spoken, at any stage of a debate, except when a member is speaking,
and, if such motion is seconded, it shall be put immediately to the
meeting without discussion. If such motion is lost, the debate shall
continue as if such motion had not been moved. If carried, then the
amendment immediately under discussion, or if no amendment has been
moved thereon, then the motion shall be put to the meeting forthwith
without further discussion.
If the amendment be carried it shall then become a substantive
motion and the debate shall proceed as in Standing Order “ c.” If
the amendment be lost, other amendments, one by one, of which notice
has been given previously, may be received and dealt with in like
manner provided in Standing Order “ c ” until the question is finally
disposed of. The motion; " That the debate be now concluded,”
may be moved any number of times during a debate.
Disagreement with Chairman’s Ruling.
(e) When a motion is moved and seconded : " That the Chair-
man’s ruling be disagreed with,” the debate on the original question
then before the chair shall be suspended, and the question whether the
Chairman’s ruling be disagreed with shall be put by the Chairman, and
decided without debate; after which the debate on the original
question shall be proceeded with as if it had not been suspended.


Method of Debate.
(/) Debate—A motion or an amendment having been moved
and seconded, debate may ensue ; but not more than two speakers'
other than the mover and seconder, shall follow successively on the
same side of the question. Two speakers having so spoken and there
then being no speakers supporting the opposite view, the question shall
be put forthwith.
Explanation.
(g) Any member, with the consent of the Presiding Officer, may
offer an explanation of any particular expression used by him, but
must confine himself strictly to such explanation.
Members must not leave Meeting during Vote.
(A) No member shall enter or leave the meeting whilst a vote
or decision is being taken ; and all members shall vote, but no member
may vote on matters in which he may be financially interested.
Address Presiding Officer.
(«) On all questions and during all discussions, the member
speaking shall address the meeting through the Presiding Officer
and shall be standing, unless the Presiding Officer gives permission
to be seated.
Point of Order.
{ j) In all cases where a point of order is raised the member
raising it shall state his point of order clearly and distinctly, and, if
a member be speaking, such member shall take his seat until the point
of order is decided. The Presiding Officer shall decide the matter
promptly, and not allow a discussion.
Violation of Standing Orders Penalty.
(A) Any member violating any of these Standing Orders may be
cautioned by the Chairman. A member repeating the offence or con-
tinuing to be disorderly after having been called to order by the Chair-
man may be suspended for the balance of the meeting or asked to leave.
Any member refusing to retract any offensive expression after having
been directed to do so by the Chairman, shall be fined five shillings,
and shall be debarred from taking part in any discussion until such
retraction be duly made and such fine be paid.
Notice of Motion.
(/) Any member, on giving notice to move a resolution at any
subsequent meeting, shall read such resolution aloud and hand to
the Chairman forthwith a copy of such resolution, together with his
name.


(»i) No motion entered on the notice paper for consideration at
any meeting shall be moved except by the member giving such notice,
or by some other member who has been authorised by the mover of
the motion in writing to act on his behalf.
Suspension of Standing Orders.
(«) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Standing
Orders, the Chairman may, on a vote of two-thirds of the members
present at any meeting, suspend any or all of the Standing Orders
provided that the object of such suspension is not to rescind any
resolution previously adopted.
Forms and Usages of Parliament.
(o) In all cases not herein or otherwise provided for, resort
shall be had to the rules, forms and usages of Parliamentary debate,
which shall be followed so far as they are applicable to the Association.
Method of Voting.
' ( p ) Voting on all matters may be taken either on the voices, or
by a show of hands, division or secret ballot as the Presiding Officer
may determine or, notwithstanding such determination, in such manner
as the meeting by resolution may decide.
Time Limit.
(q) The Presiding Officer may place a time limit on members
when speaking to a motion or addressing the meeting, but extension
of time may be granted by resolution of the meeting.
Casting Vote and Quorum.
(r) The Presiding Officer at any meeting shall have a casting
vote in addition to a deliberative vote. At all meetings of the Associa-
tion one-third of those entitled to attend and vote shall constitute a
quorum. In the case of Sub-branches, 15 financial members, or when
matters of major importance are being dealt with, 10 per centum of the
financial members duly enrolled, whichever is the greater, shall con-
stitute a quorum.
Discuss Matters of Interest.
(s) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the
Presiding Officer may permit any member to introduce or raise for
discussion any matter of interest to the Association.
ORDER OF BUSINESS.
112. (1) Unless otherwise arranged, meetings shall commence
at 8 p.m. punctually.
(2) Record of attendances.


(3) Apologies.
Welcoming new or visiting members or other persons.
Condolences.
(4) The Secretary shall read the minutes of the previous
meeting which shall be put for confirmation. No discussion shall
be allowed at this stage except as to the correctness of the minutes.
(5) Correspondence inwards and outwards, receiving and
confirmation thereof.
(6) Business arising out of minutes.
(7) Matters of which previous notice has been given.
(8) Passing accounts for payment.
(9) Committee and other reports.
(10) General business.
PLAN “ A.”
COUNTRY SECTION—
Headquarters Division Sub-Division
Townsville Northern 12
Rockhampton Central 9
Toowoomba South West 10
31
METROPOLITAN SECTION—
Brisbane Southern 31
STATE TOTAL 62
The Sub-Divisions are :
Northern Division Central Division
No. 1. Carpentaria No. 13. Gregory
2. Cook 14. Barcoo
3. Cairns 15. Normanby
4. The Tableland 16. Keppel
5. Herbert 17. Rockhampton
6. Kennedy 18. Fitzroy
7. Townsville 19. Port Curtis
8. Mindingburra 20. Bundaberg
9. Charters Towers 21. Isis
10. Bowen
11. Mackay
12. Marani
Total 12 Total 9


South Western Division No. 41. Bremer
No. 22. Warrego 42. Maryborough
23. Maranoa 43. Toowong
24. Dalby 44. Ithaca
25. Carnarvon 45. Kelvin Grove
26. Warwick 46. Enoggera
27. Cunningham 47. Nundah
28. Nanango 48. Windsor
29. Aubigny 49. Hamilton
30. East Toowoomba 50. Fortitude Valley
31. Toowoomba 51. Merthyr
Total 10 52. Brisbane
53. Kurilpa
Southern Division 54. South Brisbane
No. 32. Gympie 55. Sandgate
33. Wide Bay 56. Bulimba
34. Cooroora 57. Buranda
35. Stanley 58. Logan
36. Murrumba 59. Maree
37. West Moreton 60. Baroona
38. Fassifern 61. Oxley
39. Albert 62. Wynnum
40. Ipswich Total ' ....31
Aggregate Total 62 Sub-divisions
DEFINITIONS.
Subscription : Subscription shall mean any sum decreed or
stated from time to time to be due and payable by any member or
intending member, the payment of which sura along with the other
qualifications required entitles persons to be or to become members
of this Association.
Member : A member shall mean any qualified person who is
a financial member or officer of the United Protestant Association of
Australia within the State of Queensland and complies with the
constitution in all respects.
Payments : Payments shall include members’ subscriptions,
donations, contributions, fines, levies or other dues.
“ Association,” ” Movement,” or “ Organisation ” shall
mean the United Protestant Association of Australia, and in Queensland
shall mean the Queensland Branch.


Mass Meetings : A mass meeting shall mean a general assembly
of members and other persons held in any part or parts of the State
under the direction of the Divisional Executive or Council of the
division doncerned where addresses and lectures or entertainments
are given on any subject of interest, notification of which may be made
through the members and/or at Sub-branch meetings or otherwise.
Country Divisions and Country Divisional Councils and
Executives shall mean the Divisions, Councils and Executives known
as Northern, Central, South Western, respectively, in the areas indicated
on the plan so marked.
Metropolitan Division shall mean the Southern Divsiion as
indicated on the plan of that Division.
Sub-Divisional Branch or Sub-Branch shall mean and include
any Sub-divisional or Sub-branch of this Association duly formed and
carrying out its functions within any State Division or Division con-
sistent with the constitution.
Branch shall mean a Branch formed in and for the whole of any
State of the Commonwealth of Australia in accordance with Clause
7 of this Constitution.
Headquarters : Divisional Headquarters shall mean, in the case
of Northern Division, Townsville; Central Division, Rockhampton ;
South Western Division, Toowoomba; and Southern Division, Brisbane.
Head Office : Head Office shall mean the State head office, and,
in the case of Queensland, the Brisbane office of the United Protestant
Association of Australia.
Constitution, Rules, Regulations shall mean the constitution.
Rules, Regulations of the United Protestant Association of Australia,
inclusive of the " Book of Duties,” resolutions concerning such Book
of Duties, or any accepted change or variation therein.
Allotted means allotted in accordance with the Constitution and
the Rules thereunder.


INDEX
CONSTITUTION
Page
Qualifications for Membership 1
Objects .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 and 2
Membership .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 and 3
Political .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Commonwealth Council .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
State of Queensland .... .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Management and Supervision .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Geographic Plan .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
State Executive .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Divisional Council—
Sub-branch Delegates Constitute Divisional Council .. .. .. 5
Divisional Council: Duty of Members 5
Divisional Executive —
Divisional Council Elects Divisional Executive .. .. .. .. 5
Duties of Divisional Executive .. .. .. .. ... 5 and 6
Powers of Divisional Executive .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Sub-branches —
Creation of Sub-branches .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
How Formed .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Registration of Sub-branches .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Appoint own Officers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Duties .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Keep Proper Records .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Ordinary Meetings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Must Give Undertaking to Abide by Constitution 7
Handle Own Finances .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
No Payment over £s—nor Pledge Credit .. .. .. .. .. 7
Returns to Divisional Headquarters .. .. .. .. .. 7
Approach Divisional Headquarters With Urgent Matters .. .. 8
Copies of Financial Returns to Divisional Headquarters .. .. .. 8
Branch Secretary Responsible for Despatch of Reports, etc. .. .. 8
Summary Sub-branch Returns to be sent to State Executive .. 8
Can Form Ladies' Committee .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
Appoint Auditor .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
Sub-branch may be Deregistered or Disbanded .. .. .. 9
Deregistered Sub-branch hand over Assets .. .. .. .. 9
Sub-Divisional Committees —
Provide Members to Sub-divisional Committee .. .. .. .. 9
Sub-branch's Quota to Sub-divisional Committee .. .. .. 9
Duties, etc., Sub-divisional Committee .. .. .. .. .. 9
Committees —
Divisional Executive's Committees .. .. .. . • ..10 and 11
Sub-branch Committees .. .. .. .. .. .. • • .. 12
Meetings—
Annual Conference 12
Meetings—
Annual and Otherwise
Election of Officers (Sub-branches) .. .. .. .. .. 13
Secretary of Sub-branch to forward information to Divisional
Headquarters • • }4
Sub-branch Delegates to Divisional Council must Present Credentials 14
All members shall have equal opportunity of Election ' .. .. 14
Notification of Meetings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Notice of Meetings: Divisional Council .. .. .. .. .. 14
Election of Divisional and State Executive Officers .. .. .. .. 16
Officers to be Elected: Southern Division .. .. .. .. 15
The Southern Division Quota to State Executive .. .. .. 15
Officers to be Elected: North, Central and South-Western Division .. 16
Annual Meeting of Divisional Councils 15
Nominations .. .. .. .. .. .. •. • • • • 16
Presentation of Annual Statement .. .. .. •• •• .. 16
Directorship of Committee not necessarily allocated at Annual Meeting 16
Election of State President .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 16
Ordinary Meetings of State Executive .. .. .. .. •• 17


Page
Other Meetings—
Special Meetings: Voluntary and Otherwise 3 7
Massed Meetings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
Who Presides at Meetings 18
Membership—
Part 2
Members to become attached to Sub-branch in their Division .. 18
Members can Vote at One Sub-Branch Only .. .. .. .. 19
May admit Non-members 10
Life Members .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
All Members shall have the right to attend Mass Meetings .. .. 19
Members must produce evidence of bona fidet to gain admittance ..
to Meetings 19
Unflnancial Members Forfeit Rights • .. .. .. .. 20
Members may Resign or be Transferred 20
Expulsion of Members 20
Replacement of Delegates, etc 21
General—
Candidate for Parliament, etc., to Vacate Office 21
Alterations to Constitution .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 21
Referenda —
Referendum of Sub-branches 21
Referendum of Members .. .. .. .. .. .. 22
Government of Women's Auxiliary .. .. .. .. .. 22
Sub-branch Restriction on Matters of Publicity 22
Sub-divisional Committee may handle Disputes .. .. .. .. 22
Book of Duties (Printed Separately) 23
Copies of Book of Constitution may be sold to members .. .. 23
Appoint Trustees .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 23
Funds for conduct of Divisional Executive and Council Business .. 24
Standing Orders at Meetings—
Receiving of Reports and Correspondence.. .. .. .. .. 24
Entertain only one Amendment at a time .. .. .. .. 25
Members must not propose more than one Amendment and may
speak once only to a Motion or Amendment .. .. .. 25
Motion to Conclude Debate .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
Disagreement with Chairman’s Ruling 25
Method of Debate .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Explanation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Members must not leave Meeting during vote .. .. .. .. 26
Address Presiding Officer .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Point of Order 26
Violation of Standing Orders Penalty 26
Notice of Motion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Suspension of Standing Orders 27
Forms and usages of Parliament 27
Method of Voting .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. ~ 27
Time Limit 27
Casting Vote and Quorum 27
Discuss Matters of Interest .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Order of Business .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Plan ” A ” .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28 and 29
Definitions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 29
Subscription 29
Member 29
Payments 29
“ Association,” Movement,” or ” Organisation ” .. .. .. 29
Mass Meetings SO
Country Divisions and Country Divisional Councils and
Executives .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
Metropolitan Division 30
Sub-Divisional Branch or Sub-Branch .. .. .. .. .. 30
Branch .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
Headquarters 30
Head Office .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 30
Constitution, Rules, Regulations .. .. .. .. ~ .. 30
Allotted 30


Divide and rule, a capital motto I
Unite and lead, a better one.
A young nation negligent, an old nation
necessitous.


" Be Britain still to Britain true
Atnang oursels united.
For never but by British hands
Maun British wrangs be righted."
{Burns).
Wholly let up and Printed in Australia lor United Protestant Association (Queensland
Branch), by H. POLE & CO.. PTY. LIMITED. Elisabeth Street, Brisbane.
