

“Koree”
(Greeting).
A Christmas
Greeting.
Being a Collection of SHORT STORIES and POEMS
BY
R. B., E. S., Grace, and Eldred Parry.
Price : Ninepence.
P. Clark, Printer and Stationer, 3 Rowe Street, Sydney.


“KOREE”
(GREETINGS).
DEDICATION:
Dedicated with sincere feeling to my dear sister VALERIE,
whose earnest encouragement has lent additional
interest to this work 1 have 'undertaken.
-GRACE PARRY.
CHRISTMAS, 1908.
Price - - - NINEPENCE.
SYDNEY:
F. Clark, Printer and Stationer, 5 Rowe Street, Sydney. Telephone 2815.
1908.


INDEX.
Pack.
An Appeal - - - - - - 34
Burra Bra: Middle Harbour - - - - - 20
Christmas Bells -------- 37
Christmas Ode -------- 24
Drought Stricken - - - - ’ - - - 35
Give and it shall be given unto you - - - - 9
In Life or Death ------- 18
Just in Time - - - - - - - 10
Marjorie’s Birthday ------- 3
Ode to Canterbury ------- 8
Ode to Parramatta ------- 25
Sunset on the River ------- 9
The Misanthrope’s Bride - - - - - - 27
The Silk Dress - - - 10.
The Somnambulist - - - - - - - 15
The Work that lies nearest to hand 36


Marjorie’s Birthday.
“Marjorie, my child, go and see if your father is in sight;
it’s past five o’clock already, and he promised you this morning
he would be home in time for your party,”
“Very well, mother,” she answered, with a rather weary
little smile, as she thought of her father’s pie-crust promise
of the morning. And yet, in spite-of his great failings, Mar-
jorie loved him dearly. She was an only child, and this was
her eleventh birthday. He had had, until lately, a very pros-
perous little grocery of his own. Pie was a very smart business
man, but ho had taken to drink, and his affairs had gone to
rack and ruin, and his creditors had foreclosed upon him. It
was a great blow, and effectually sobered him for a while; and
then he had been fortunate enough to obtain a situation as
grocer’s assistant in a neighbouring business; but for some
weeks now he had been drinking heavily. She had begged him
not to disappoint her about her birthday. She tied her bonnet
on and set off at a brisk pace for her father. It was a mile
distant to the shop where he was employed, but-she knew she
should fin'd him much nearer home than that, for the hotel was
not more than half as far as the shop. It was rapidly growing
dark, but she pushed forward and reached the hotel. It was
all brilliantly lit up, and even Marjorie’s childish mind could
not fail to understand that to many a weary, dispirited man, the
temptation to get out of the cold into that brightly-lit place
was very great.
She stepped timidly up to the door and peered in, and
was just turning away, feeling glad that her father was not
inside the place, when she was startled by hearing two men with
their voices angrily raised engaged in quarrel, and she could
distinguish his voice as one, although it was thick with drink.
KOREE.


Yes, John Moreton had never ouee thought of his promise
since the morning. Promises are easily made, but, alas! just as
easily broken. The truth was that he had yielded to the
temptation in the morning, and as - a result arrived at the shop
fully half an hour late, and considerably worse for drink. He
was, of course, peremptorily dismissed. Mr. Matthews, his
master, was not oy any means a severe man, but his endurance
had been taxed beyond its limit this time. John Moreton had
spent the remainder of the day in that hotel.
“Don’t you taunt me with losing my billet, or I’ll throw
you out into the gutter, ’ ’ she heard him say.
The man to whom he spoke made some other insulting
remark, and the next minute the frightened child saw them
struggling violently with each other.
She rushed in and caught her father’s arm, but he shook
her off angrily.
‘ ‘ Gome home, father, ’ ’ she cried, with the tears rolling down
her cheeks.
It was the first time she had ever been inside this place
of sin, and she was horrified with the smell of the drink and the
drunken, leering faces of those around her. Her mind revolted
at the idea of her father being one with these wretched creatures.
At length he listened to her entreaties, arid, reeling from side to
side, followed her.
It was an intensely cold night; the snow was falling heavily,
but Marjorie thought only of getting her father home. She
knew it would be a difficult task, but she must do it. They had'
got about half-way, when he refused to go another step, and
threw himself down on the snow-covered ground. They were
within a quarter of a mile of home, but although they were
as near as that, she knew he would only get so drowsy that it
would be impossible to wake him.
She shook him again and again,' but all to no purpose. At
last she thought of running home and telling her mother, but
after going a few steps that dreadful drowsiness stole over her.
She tried hard to fight against it, but at last her little strength
gave way and she sarik down senseless to the ground.
In the meantime poor Mrs. Moreton was almost distracted.
She had waited at home for an hour, fearing
to leave the house in case her husband should return
and want his tea in her absence; but when the snowstorm came
on she could bear it no longer. At first she had not thought of
his breaking his promise. She would .not have sent Marjorie
to the hotel, but would have gone herself.
Hastily throAving her shaAvl round her head and shoulders,
she set off for the village. Fortunately there was but the one
road to the hotel, and after Avalking for about a quarter of a


mile she gave a violent start, for she saw a dark object lying
in the snow. She stooped over, and found that it was little
Marjorie—alive or dead, she could not tell. In an agony of
mind she felt her little pulse and found that it was beating
feebly. With a sigh of relief she decided what to do. She must
call in a doctor’s help, but she could not leave her at home
alone, and it was fully two miles to the doctor’s house.
There was a cottage just a little distance from where they
now were, and she went as quickly as she could to this house
to get assistance. She gave a little scream, as she suddenly fell
almost over something. She partially roused the sleeper. She
saw that it was her husband, and she guessed the double cause
of his stupor.
‘‘Come, John, rouse up; you’lLget your death if you don’t.”
“Where is Maggie?” he asked.
“She is lying almost dead in the snow,” she answered,
with a choking sob. lam going for help. I want you to watch
her for a few minutes.”
He stumbled across to where the little one lay. In a very
little time Mrs. Moreton got her neighbour to ride for the
physician, and then with all possible speed she and her husband
carried the little one home.
She was put into her little bed, and it was not long before
the doctor arrived. He shook his head gravely when he saw
the child.
“You have just done what is right, Mrs, Moreton, but
I am afraid the little one will have a bad time, and will need
every attention.”
As they were speaking, Marjorie opened her dreamy blue
eyes. There was a puzzled expression on her little face at the
sight of the doctor.
“Where is my father?” she asked, in a faint voice.
“He is all right, # dear. Now, you must drink this, dear.’’
he said, holding a cup of hot milk to her lips. “Do you feel a
little better?”
“Yes, thank you.”
After a few words of direction to the mother, he said good-
bye to the little patient, and promised to come and see her again
on the morrow.
They had to pass through the dining-room to reach the
front door. “Will you have a cup of tea, doctor?” she asked,
“No, thank you; I must not wait.”
He could not help noticing, even in the cursory glance
which he was able to give as he passed through the little dining-
room, how nicely the table was set.
“It was my little girl’s birthday to-day, and she had set
her heart on her father’s coming home in better time than ■ ”


She did not finish her sentence, but, in spite of herself, her
frame was shaken by a violent sob.
“Come, Mrs. Moreton, cheer up; it’s a long lane that has no
turning”; and, with a kindly shake of the hand, he was gone.
“Ah, yes!” he thought to himself, “there’s a skeleton in
that cupboard, at any rate,”
He had taken interest in the little family ever since they
had come to the place, some months before. Only that very
evening he had seen the little girl go to meet her father, but he
remembered now he had not seen them return.
The Rev. Mr. Lonsdale had been continually asking him to
help him in founding a Temperance Society in the village, for
the sake of the weaker ones, but he had always refused, saying
that he was sure the glass he took never interfered with anyone
else; but noAv he saw his mistake. He would from that time out
refrain from taking it. He had seen the evil effects of it enough
in his professional career.
These thoughts would present themselves as he drove home.
He could not rest that night without calling to see his friend
and assure him of his support. The clergyman was delighted
beyond measure at his friend’s decision, and it was agreed that
the clergyman should call and see Mr. Moreton for one on the
following evening.
Next evening, therefore, Mr. Lonsdale called to see them,
but the father was not at home. The poor mother was keeping
watch beside the little sufferer’s bedside.
Good evening, Mr. Lonsdale,” she said, as she held out her
hand.
“Good evening, Mrs. Moreton,” he said, in a cheery voice.
“I hope little Marjorie is better. And how is your husband?”
At the mention of his name she burst into tears.
“He is drinking again, sir, and I fear, from what my darling
says in her babbling, that he has lost his situation. Would you
like to see Marjorie, Mr. Lonsdale?”
“Yes. I should.”
Accordingly, she led him to the bedside. She was still
wandering, and every now and again she would shudder and
repeat almost word for word the altercation between her father
and that other man. At the request of the mother the clergy-
man prayed earnestly, and she felt considerably comforted.
“Thank you, Mr. Lonsdale; you have done me good. We
get very callous sometimes, and almost lose trust, but He will
never leave or forsake us.”
“No, He is the Friend that sticketh closer than a brother,”
The clergyman rose to go. He held out his hand to Mrs.
Moreton, and promised to come again.


The first person he encountered as he stepped into the
street was Mr, Moreton. He touched his hat to Mr. Lonsdale,
who was pleased to see that his parishioner was quite sober.
“I am coming to see little Marjorie again, to-morrow even-
ing, and I should like to have a chat with you. May I have
that pleasure, Mr. Moreton?”
“Certainly, sir; but I am afraid you will not find it much
of a pleasure.”
'When he called the following evening he could see that
Marjorie was much better; indeed, the doctor called while he
was still there, and confirmed his opinion. Her mind seemed
more composed, and she did not wander much at all. The doc-
tor added his entreaties to the clergyman’s, and as a result Mr.
Moreton promised faithfully to" join the Temperance Society
the following week, and, God helping him, he would be a better
man.
Both men gripped him warmly by the hand. It was a hard
fight for John Moreton, Day by day the horrid craving would
assert itself, but the sight of the little white-faced sufferer who
lay for days hovering between life and death always restrained
him. She could not bear him out of her sight. He would sit
for hours holding the little thin hand.
The doctor was pleased with his little patient, however, and
one day he came and pronounced her out of danger.
“Would it be too sotm to tell her of her father’s good reso-
lution?” Mrs. Moreton whispered.
“No; you may tell her now; she is quite strong enough to
hear good news like that.”
It did not have any bad effect upon Marjorie, but she
grew rapidly stronger as a result of this good news.
One day they were surprised to receive a visit from Mr.
Matthews, the grocer. He found his ex-employee seated with
his little girl upon his knees. He came in, and, after shaking
hands with them, accepted the proffered chair from Mrs.
Moreton.
“Moreton, I have called to tell you how glad I am to see
you as one of the members of our new Temperance Society.
lam going to join next meeting, myself. I never had as trust-
worthy a help as you when you were sober. I want you again
as soon as your little girl can spare you. You have had a very
anxious time with her, but, thank God, she is on a fair road to
a rapid recovery. Will you accept the place again, John?” he
said, kindly,
“Oh, thank you, sir, I shall be delighted. I don’t deserve
such consideration from you.”
Mr. Matthews never had reason to regret his action in
taking John Moreton on again. In about a month’s time from


her illness Marjorie insisted on keeping up her birthday again,
and the doctor and Mr. Lonsdale and Mr. Matthews all accepted
the invitation to be present. Marjorie decided it was the very
happiest birthday she had ever had.
GRACE PARRY.
Ode to Canterbury.
(Written on Green-wattle Hill.)
See where it lies beside the emerald tide,
First Austral river stirred by English oar,
Where lay the “Endeavour’ ’ by the flowery shore,
And up aloft floated old England’s pride.
And how their wave-worn eyes were blest,
As up the silent stream they pressed,
Where odours filled each flowery gale
Along the banks of the Thessalian* vale,
Where birds of purfled plumage built their nest.
See in the East the star of day,
Above the sparkling of the bay,
Behind yon convent old;
And a white sail moves where the billows hie—
And whiter the clouds that sail the sky.
Behind the headlands bold
There lies the ivied church, at rest,
Named of the saint the Gentiles blest;
The blue hills clear beyond.
Things of the past sit on each wall,
As echoes from yon quarries tall
That built thy walls, respond;
And as I gaze, with longing fond,
I see beyond the Future’s wall,
Fair streets and towers, white-walled, expand;
Deep in our hearts thy columns stand;
We will not let thee fall.
Arise, for now the star of day
Pales in the broad sun’s risen glow;
These labours to the Past we owe—
The wheel of Fortune turns this way;
Still thou art strong, although thy locks are grey;
Glory must yet be theirs whose children work and pray!
ELDRED PARRY.
* Tempe.


Sunset on the River.
Our waterside neighbours who had not the privilege of observ-
ing Thursday night’s sunset, as seen on the Parramatta, missed
a sight in the western sky which for simple splendour, if ever
equalled, has surely never been surpassed. The writer has
seen enchanting sunsets under Mediterranean skies, but never
like that. The sun at its setting was of richest crimson, and
the water up towards Mortlake assumed a similar' tint. To me
and my fftllow-passengers on the modest little ferryboat
it seemed that we were gliding through a scarlet lake in fairy-
land. As the sun dipped behind the western hills the ruddy
hue gave place to a rich and glowing amber, which in turn
faded into lighter and paler tints, until the water was finally
metamorphosed into a homely grey. I forgot to mention that,
as if to enhance the beauty of the scene, a few minutes after
sundown a mass of golden stratus clouds floated above the
western horizon, and they seemed to impart by their softer
lustre a milder yet scarcely less charming tinge to the surface
of the river. Later on, a brief space, the enchanting vision
which had for a time so delighted us gradually disappeared
from view, and the sober shades of evening once more enveloped
all the river.
R. B. PARRY, Sen.
“Give and it shall be given unto you ; good measure
pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over.”—Luke vi. 38.
There’s a pleasant little story, that was told me long ago,
Of a bright and happy schoolboy, just the one w T e’d love to
know.
He had won his father’s favour, and his heart w r as glad and
light,
While a bright half-crown for guerdon lay shining in his sight.
Silent, and sad, and weary, a lad came down the street
With the pinched wan look of hunger, and tired shoeless feet;
And leaning on the gateway of a little cottage near,
In sorrow’s deep depression his eye let fall a tear.
Oh, tell me why you sorrow? a kindly voice rang out,
Why do you mourn so sadly; what is your grief about ?
"I’m tired, weak and hungry, I have sought for work in vain;
But no one cares to help me; I must struggle on again.”


“I could get some work to-morrow in a town four miles away,
But I’m too weak to walk there, and the fare I cannot pay.”
I could give him this, thought Albert, for God will send me
more, .
“He lendeth to our Father, who giveth to the poor.”
I can spare my father’s present for one so weak and sad,
And his bright half-crown he offered to the wondering grateful
lad.
If no return had reached him he surely had his meed,
In heartfelt thanks and blessnig for his noble thought and deed.
But a promise has been given by Him whose word is true,
That if you give to others, He ’ll surely give to you.
So at the supper table the father asked his son
How he had spent his present—what sport he’d had, or fun ?
“I only lent it, father, to a poor sad boy in need,
Whose weary look of sorrow would make your kind heart bleed.
I know I’ve only lent it, for God will pay me back,
He’ll surely keep his promise, His heart is never slack.”
‘ ‘ Oh, boy! ’ ’ exclaimed his father, ‘ ‘ here, take this coin from me,
I don’t think God will pay you; so I must, you see.”
Bright shone the boy’s fair features, and ins looks were full
of glee,
“Father,” he said, “I told you God would pay back to me.”
i
There’s a lesson we might borrow, if we’d trust our Father’s
word,
And joy to feel in giving, “We’re lending to the Lord.”
Then give, and pay with interest, He’ll give you back again,
None e’er believed His promise or trusted Him in vain.
Mrs. E. S. PARRY.
The Silk Dress.
“Yes, I’ll buy her a silk dress; you see if I don’t.”
The speaker was a poor, wretchedly clad young man of
about twenty-five years. He was merely thinking aloud. He
was the typical Domain prowler in appearance; but of the hum
dreds who had eagerly listened to the eloquent appeal, perhaps
none had been more impressed than Cyril Barkley.
Mr. Murphy’s suggestion that every man should buy a silk
dress for his wife should not be thrown away on him, at any
rate. He thought, as the lecturer had said, that it must be a
vastly different feeling to buy a dress for some one dear to you,


than for the publicans’ and brewers' wives. He,had tried that
long enough, and, by the look of things, had not found it pro-
fitable.
The wind was whistling from off the water, and the cold
June air seemed to search out every tatter in his shabby clothes;
but he did not care for that. He had listened not only to the
Temperance message, but at that meeting he had heard the
sweet familiar passage from the Bible, and, by God’s help, he
would try to keep his newly-formed resolution.
He had been brought up religiously, and until he had mixed
with young men of his own age, who were not total abstainers,
he had kept all right. He was a great athlete, and always held
a foremost place in his rowing club. This was all very well;
but although possessed of great physical strength, unfortunately
he had not the same amount of moral courage.
At the banquets and festivities of any kind in connection
with the rowing club, after having once given way, his com-
panions found no difficulty in persuading him to drink. He
had no mother’s kind influence to keep him in the narrow path.
Oh, I wish from the bottom of my heart, that this wretched
liquor might be banished from our fair young land, with all
its bright prospects before it; and, oh! that young men might
not introduce it into our banquets.
It has been scientifically demonstrated again and again
that athletes of every sort are far better when away from its
pernicious influence.
He was only a moderate drinker when he married pretty
Myra Kendall five years before, and he had drifted down and
down until now he found himself a helpless wreck, deserted
by everyone except the poor little faithful wife, in the wretched,
sparsely furnished home in Woolloomooloo.
For months past now he had given up all thoughts of
obtaining any kind of employment; indeed, the few pence he
made by holding horses kept him in such a muddled condition,
that he was fit for nothing.-
Night after night he stumbled home to the fading wife,
who, week in and week out, from morn to night, worked her
fingers almost to the bone to keep a home above their heads.
He retraced his steps homewards, and reached it in a much
quicker time than he usually did. As he drew near, he could
hear his wife’s clear young voice singing that hymn, “I need
Thee every hour.” He waited outside on the verandah and
listened to the end of it.
He made up his mind that he was sure he needed Jesus
every hour. He would avail himself of that wonderful invita-
tion, “Call upon Me in the day of trouble, and I will answer”;
and he felt sure that God would help him.


He gently tapped at the door, and was admitted.
“He is sober to-night, that is strange,” she thought to
herself, for although it was Sunday, he had often managed on
that day to obtain it from the back door of the public house;
for, alas! the Sunday closing is not observed as it should be.
“You’re home early, aren’t you, Cyril?” she said.
“Yes, I think I am, Myra. Aren : t you pleased to see me?”
“Yes, of course I am,” she said, warmly.
He looked round at the shabby little home, and then at
the worn dress of his wife; and then he wondered if there were
many women in the world who would so heartily say they were
glad to welcome home the man who had taken them from a
comfortable home into such poverty and misery.
The frugal meal was very soon laid, and it seemed quite
enjoyable, although it was so simple.
Mrs. Barkley had thought of going to church, but it was
so seldom he was home on Sunday evenings she hardly liked
to go out and leave him. He might find the solitude unbearable,
and go out to the hotel again, so she had resolved to stay at home
instead; and, indeed, she must have' felt amply rewarded for
her sacrifice.
Her husband busied himself in mending the fire, as it was
still bitterly cold, and drew his chair up to the fireside, and
prepared to stay in for the evening. If y9u like, you can read
a bit, Myra.
Not one word of what was read was lost on him; indeed,
he drank it all in. At length the evening drew to a close, but
Myra dared not hope that anything but the bitter cold had kept
Cyril home; but she would pray for a blessing to be added to
the reading of God’s Holy Word.
Cyril had made up his mind not to tell his wife of his
good resolution, but to let her find it out herself.
He awoke bright and early in the morning, and after asking
for guidance, and then partaking of his breakfast, - he tidied
himself as well as he could, and left the house.
As he went past the hotel, several of his mates tried to
coax him to come and have a glass with them, but he shook his
head. ‘‘ No thank you, ’’ he said; I’ve wasted too much time and
money in there already.”
The landlord overheard him, and thinking to himself he
could not afford to loose so good a customer, came out, and
calling Barkley to him, offered him a glass of his very choicest
wine. He held it almost in Barkley’s face, and said, “This is
the best I have; come, don’t lose so good a chance.”
It was almost too big a temptation for a naturally yielding
nature; but the words, “Wine is a mocker,” flashed through
his mind.


“No,T don’t want the stuff, it has mocked me long enough,”
he said.
With a scowling face the publican retired, “I know I shall
see you back again in a few days, you ragamuffin,” he said.
“We shall see all about that,” said Cyril to himself; “not
if I can help it. I have Myra’s silk dress to think about; I
wonder if I shall be long out.of work? I’m afraid it’s very
hard to get, though I know I’m not a bad workman.”
Truth to tell, he had been the foreman of a large engineering
business, and his master had recognised his skill and worth.
The master was a Christian man, and had borne with him
as long as he could, but at last had been obliged to dismiss him,
as Cyril had become, by continual drinking, practically useless
to him.
I wonder now. if Mr. Sheridan would take me on again?
I know I don’t deserve it at his hands. However, I’ll go and
ask him; he can but refuse; I brought it on myself. I can’t
grumble if he does.
He hastily made his way to the works. The other workmen
had not arrived yet, but he found Mr. Sheridan there.
He felt ashamed at first; the publican had reminded him of
his rags, and then Mr. Sheridan knew it was all his own fault.
Involuntarily, Mr. Sheridan, who was in a brown study,
started at the sudden appearance of this ragged man; indeed,
he hardly recognised him at first.
‘‘Good morning, sir,” said Cyril; “I know I don’t deserve
any consideration from you. but I have come to ask you if you
will take me on again; I shall try to please you.”
‘‘Have you given up your drinking ways, Barkley? I
cannot take you on unless you have.”
‘‘l never intend to drink intoxicants again, God helping
me, sir; indeed, I should like to become a Good Templar, and
sign the pledge.”
‘ I have a pledge card; you had better sign it now, and I
should advise you to join the Lodge as well, it will help you.”
With a trembling hand, caused by drinking, he signed the
pledge card.
‘‘Now, if you can keep to this, I will take you on again. I
shall be glad to have you back. I have never put anyone in your
place; I have superintended the work myself. You can com-
mence work to-morrow morning. I will give you the old rate
of wages, £4 a week, and I had better give you a couple of them
now to get a decent outfit. ’ ’
He shook Cyril warmly by the hand.
‘‘Thank you, sir; I can never repay your kindness.”
‘‘Yes you can.”
‘‘How, sir?”


‘* By giving me the great pleasure of proposing you as
a member of my Lodge.”-
“Very well, sir; you may do that at your next meeting.”
Cyril Barkley made his way home with a heart a great
deal more like feathers than lead. He made his purchases and
wended his way homewards, taking a different road, to avoid
meeting the other workmen.
He found his wife busy at the machine; she did not notice
him come in at first, and he walked over and kissed her.
Her face was wet with tears; she had felt her heart sink
when she had seen him go off again so early to the public-house,
as she thought. She was a sanguine woman, and she had built
so much on last night.
She was doubly delighted to notice that his breath was still
free of that horrid smell of drink.
He dressed himself in his new clothes the following morning,
and went to work.
He got on famously all that week, and received the two
pounds balance of his wages.
It was very hard work to pass the hotel with that money
in his pocket, especially as some of the others went in. But
he conquered.
He proudly handed his wife the whole amount when he
went in.
There was a glow of pleasure on his face, and indeed she
thought how bright and handsome he looked.
“What is this?” she said, with surprise.
“My wages, madam,” he said, laughing.
“Do you mean to say you have left off drinking, and are
in work, Cyril? It’s too good to be true.”
“It is true, all the same, little woman,” he said, stooping
and kissing her tenderly. “I knew you would be pleased,”
“Pleased! I should say I am; I have prayed for this for
so long, and now that God has heard my prayer, I know not how
to show my gratitude.”
“I have signed the pledge,” said he, “and Mr. Sheridan
has proposed me as a member of his Lodge, and next week I
join. You ought to join with.me; I should feel so much more
at home with my little wife alongside of me.”
It is some little time since Mr. and Mrs. Barkley joined the
Lodge, but it has no more energetic workers.
Mr. Sheridan has taken a trip to England, as he says he
could not leave the business in more capable hands than those of
his reformed foreman.
The Barkleys no longer live in Woolloomooloo, but in a
pretty little villa in Mosman’s Bay.


They are often to be seen walking out on Sunday afternoon,
and they look so happy; indeed, you would scarcely recognise
them.
There is a certain amount of dignity about Cyril in his well-
fitting navy-blue suit, and Mrs. Barkley has lost that care-worn
look. Her cheeks have grown quite round and rosy, and she
is not attired in a worn and faded dress now, but in a brand new
silk dress, the pride of Cyril’s heart.
GRACE PARRY.
The Somnambulist.
(TRANSLATED).
The moon was gazing in my window-pane,
Its rays were clearer than translucent glass;
And gazing deep within its light again,
My swooning eyes beheld a spirit pass.
I know not how, but I had left the bed,
For she had called me with a beckoning hand,
Down thro’ forgotten paths the figure led—
We reached a stream, and forded thro’ to land.
And words came sweetly from those lips of love,
In love’s dear clasp were joined our burning hands,
The language was the speech of those above—
Seeds whose fair flowers shall bloom in other lands.
The Spring was on the world, and by the flowers,
Like Iris’ hues to dying vision borne;
We knew that rain had fallen thro’ the hours—
The strange moon showed them like the sun at morn,
’Twas early morn, and we were moving on
Through lonely lanes and rainbow-flowering trees,
Within those glorious eyes the white rays shone
Like pearls that‘slumber deep in crystal seas.
Less fair became the scene, the hand grew cold,
Within the eyes I saw the star of day,
And I awoke within a church-yard old,
Standing beside the grave where lay.
ELDRED PARRY,


Just in Time.
PRIZE STORY.
Christmas was drawing near; all the shop windows in the
village were looking their best, with muscatels, almonds, cur-
rants, raisins, and crystallised fruits, nuts, loaf sugar,
etc., with here and there a sprig of holly, with its lovely scarlet
berries and dark green leaves.
To-morrow was Christmas Eve, and all were looking for-
ward eagerly for the happy time at hand.
All, did I say?
Ah, no! Sorrow sat brooding heavily on poor old
George Wakefield and his wife,. as they talked
of the morrow, and the heavy trial awaiting them, for
times had been very hard with them for the last four or five
years: Fever had stricken him and laid him low; for some
months his little garden crop, missing his care, failed, and then
when strength and vigour had returned, and he felt he must
strive with might and main to recover from the weight of debt
that oppressed them, the dear old master for whom he had
worked so many years, and who had put so many good oppor-
tunities in his way, died suddenly; and, as his will had never
been attested, the estate passed to the next of kin.
The new squire proved a very hard-hearted, grasping man,\
who cared not one jot who sank, so that he might swim; so he
determined to work the farm with young hands who would
require less pay.
Wakefield, with two or three other faithful servants, was
dismissed, and had to look for fresh employment.
Creech, the village where they lived, was a very slow place,
and it was hard to make headway against so many drawbacks.
He strove very hard, turned his little freehold into a nursery
garden, and probably would have succeeded if his creditors
had been a little more patient with him. Unfortunately, one
of them was of a cold, unpitying nature, like the squire, and
he had determined to foreclose on poor # Wakefield for the
small sum of thirty pounds, and to-morrow all their little home
would be taken from them, their furniture sold, and they, in
their old age, would have to begin life afresh.
“Ah, dear wife,” said Wakefield, “I sometimes feel as if
God has deserted us, and that nothing but trouble is left for
us. ’ ’


“Don’t! don’t say that, dear George,” said his wife, with
tear-dimmed eyes; “He has said, ‘I will never leave thee nor
forsake .thee. ’ Only trust Him, and I believe He will bring
us safely through. It is always ‘darkest just before day.’ Ah,
if our dear Harry w§re only safe home again he might be able
to help us a little. ’ ’
Harry was their only son, who, failing to see any opening in
Creech, had gone to sea, and although he came back safely after
the first two or three voyages, had been away two years, and
they had never heard from him in all that weary time.
It is needless to say the poor old couple slept little that
night. Morning came, and with it the. auctioneer.
Sadly poor Wakefield and his wife watched the preparations
for the sale. Their dear little home broken up; all the trea-
sures which they had gathered round them in a lifetime, soon
to be the property of others!
Already the sale had begun; the auctioneer, with his ham-
mer uplifted, was calling for bids.
Our poor old friends, unable to bear the sight, were looking
sadly through the doorway at the pretty garden, with its fox-
gloves, hollyhocks, and wall-flowers; when, suddenly the wife
grasped Wakefield by the arm. “Look, look!” she said;
I knew our God would not desert us; and in another moment
she rushed forward to be caught in the arms of a tall, hand-
some sailor, her own long-lost son.
“Father, mother! Dear, dear parents, I have just come in
time to save you; they told me in the village of the troubles
that have come on you, and I thank God I am able to free you
from them and keep you all the rest of your lives; for I will
never leave you again; and God has blessed me so much that
I have more than enough to pay your debts and keep you in
comfort. ”
‘ ‘ Stop the sale! ” he cried; I will discharge those debts and
redeem the home for my dear ones, to whom I owe so much, ’ ’
Gladly the assembled villagers greeted the manly sailor, and
the auctioneer, having received a full discharge of the debts,,
departed, well pleased that all had ended so happily.
And, now, words would fail me were I to try to picture
the scene when our three friends were left to themselves,
Wakefield, while he thanked God for the mercy He had
shewn them, told Harry of his mother’s noble trust in God.
adding: “I don’t think I shall ever doubt Him again, He has
been far better to me than I have deserved.”
“Dear father,” said Harry, “could you know, as you will
in time, half the troubles He has brought me through, you
would agree with me that ‘ The Lord God is a Sun and Shield! ’
‘No good thing • will He withhold from them that w r alk
uprightly.’ ”


Oh, what a joyful Christmas was theirs! Their home re-
stored to them; their debts all paid; and, greatest joy of all,
their long-lost son returned, nevermore to leave them.
Well might they say, as they thought of God’s gift to us
(the Saviour, Whose birth we commemorate each Christmas
Day): “Shall He not with Him freely give us all things?”
Mrs. R. B. PARRY, Sen,
In Life or Death.
FOUNDED ON FACT.
CHAPTER I.
The night was clear and bright, the Southern Cross flamed
o’erhead; like the Jewelled Sword “Exealibur” sparkled above
the blue waters of the lake. Billabong Station was one of the
finest in Australia. The homestead itself was a characteristic
Colonial House, a long and rambling weatherboard structure,
with a verandah running round on three sides. It was covered
with convolvulus, and a garden gay with summer flowers
stretched away eastwards.
The evening was warm, and Mr, Fletcher and his daughter
Una were seated in easy chairs on the verandah. It would be
hard to see a fairer picture than she made, attired in a soft blue
and white muslin, her brown hair tastefully arranged and falling
into rebellious ripples here and there; her pale, creamy com-
plexion, her perfect features, and a set of pearls in the mouth,
which was ever dimpling into smiles and communicating its
message of mirth to the blue eyes.
The light from the French window fell full on them as they
sat. Every now and again she reached up her little white hand, on
which an engagement ring sparkled, and played with her father ’a
curling grey hair. They were all-in-alb to each other, these two
—she was his one ewe lamb. He gazed down at her fondly:
“Where is Maxwell to-night, Una, my love? Not tired of you
already is he ? ” he said mischievously.
A blush spread over her usually pale face; ‘ ‘ Not yet, father,
I hope, but if he is, I ’ve always got you to take care of me. ’ ’
CHAPTER 11.
THE ATTACK.
There was the click of the gate, and Una sat with an ex-
pectant look on her young face.
“Maxwell will be here in a min ■


But the sentence was never finished, for, instead of Maxwell
Munro, a party of desperate men had ridden up, and Captain
Moonbeam, who held the bush in terror for miles round, led
his gang of desperadoes right up to within a few yards of Mr.
Fletcher and his daughter.
“We have come to stick the place up, Fletcher, and if you
hand up everything quietly, so much the better for you.”
For a minute Mr. Fletcher was dumbfounded, and Una sat
motionless as a statue.
The men’s quarters were a good half-mile away, but nothing
daunted, Una would have run for assistance.
“No, my love, do not leave me,” her father whispered;
‘ ‘ money is nothing compared with life. ’ ’
“We will offer no resistance,” he said, addressing Moon-
beam, “but I see nothing gallant in attacking an old man and
his little girl.”
“First of all, shell out your pockets,” Moonbeam said,
dismounting, while a sullen, scowling-faced lot stood with their
guns pointed grimly; and after Mr. Fletcher had, without re-
sistance, allowed the bushranger to ransack his pockets and take
his property thus ruthlessly from him, he was seized and dragged
off before his daughter’s eyes, and tied to a large tree,
“Now, my girl, it’s your turn.”
“I wonder you’re not ashamed of yourself, Captain Moon-
beam; what harm has my poor father ever done you or anyone
else? And look at him.”
‘ ‘ Come, girl, we have no time to waste, ’ ’ said one, roughly;
and poor old Mr. Fletcher, who was gagged, had to remain in
his painful position and see his dear one treated thus. Her
purse, her brooch, her engagement ring, bracelets, all ruthlessly
tom from her, while the rest of the party were proceeding to
enter the house by this time. Her little gold watch, which was
quite a triumph of the jeweller’s art, though not discovered at
first, was now pounced upon eagerly by Moonbeam.
“Ah, you would keep this back from me! And why?
might I ask?
“Because my lover gave it to me,” she said, simply.
The almost child-like answer touched even this villain’s
heart.
“Take it back, then; I’ll let you keep that.”
“Thank you,” she said, quietly, the tears springing to her
eyes.
‘ ‘ Come, now, you must be treated the same as your father. ’ ’
But, as Mr. Fletcher was standing in his painful position,
he offered up a prayer for his dear one.


A few minutes later, just as Moonbeam was leading her oif
to a neighbouring tree, there was a sound of horses’ hoofs, and
some twenty-five or thirty burly men, mounted on horses, came
spurring up.
It was not long before Una recognised Maxwell Munro as
leader of the party.
He had some business to transact with one of the hands- at
Billabong; as he came along he had seen the bushrangers gal-
loping in the direction of the homestead, and had taken advan-
tage of the suspicion and gathered all Mr. Fletcher’s men to-
gether. Every man of them was armed, and seeing the blaze
of light in the house, Maxwell dismounted from his spirited horse.
He led the way into the homestead; the marauders were just in
the thick of their work.
Boiling with indignation, he called upon them to surrender,
and, as cowards driven to bay, they did not offer much re-
sistance.
All this time Maxwell was in an agony of suspense. Where
were his loved one and her father? In vain he searched every
nook and cranny of the house, but all of a sudden his blood ran
cold with fear, for a piercing shriek rang out above the din
of the present occupants of the house; and then, what was that ?
The sound of galloping hoofs ?
Quick 'as thought, Maxwell, who alone had recognised the
voice, rushed from the house, and sprang upon the fleetest steed
there, and, riding as even Mazeppa, rode out into the night, with
the one overwhelming terror burning in upon his brain.
But if he rode fast he had to contend with quite as powerful
a rival, but, in the dim light of night, he grasped the situation
at a glance. He possessed one great advantage over his adver-
sary: He rode singly, while, to his horror and amazement,
Moonbeam’s horse carried a fairer burden, even the girl Maxwell
adored.
On, on, they sped! Now Max felt his heart sink, as with
a whirl they dashed almost out of sight, up the steep, rocky
bush track; but spurring with fresh energy, as he thought of the
fate of his loved one; if she remained in the power of this
villainous law-breaker he would again bring them within sight.
At last, to his inexpressible joy, he noted the bushranger’s
horse slackening his speed a little, and unmistakably limping.
He must surely have put his hoof into a hole or trodden on a
sharp stone! With a cry of joy Maxwell dashed forward.
“Yes, you have the advantage, Munro, but you’ve not got
her yet”! And he spurred his charger’s foamy and blood-
bespattered sides yet again. He dashed off right down to the
river’s brink, which ran high and swollen with the recent
floods.


CHAPTER 111.
THE PURSUIT.
Driven to desperation, Moonbeam turned and faced his
pursuer.
“Now then,” he said, “what is it you want of me? This
lady has consented to become my wife, and is under my pro-
tection ; she never cared for a milk-sop like you; ask her yourself
whether I speak the truth or no. She dare not deny it. ”
“You are saying what is utterly untrue”! she cried, hys-
terically ; ‘ ‘ Mr. Munro knows different. ’ ’
In the midst of this parleying the. report of a gun rang
out on the still night air, and Max Munro’s arm fell limp and
powerless by his side.
“There!” cried his assailant; “take her from me now if you
dare”; and he sprang off at as quick a pace as his lame horse
could go. But, nothing daunted by his agony, Munro followed
him right down to where the river was fordable.
It was a perilous undertaking, but desperate men do not
mind a spice of danger.
The bushranger ventured across, but his faithful charger’s
work was done; he sank down into the flooded water, precipi-
tating the man and the maiden into the boiling tide.
CHAPTER IV,
THE RESCUE.
In an agony of mind, Maxwell tore off his coat, not heeding
his injured arm, and dashed in after them. He knew it was
next to an impossibility to save her, thus handicapped, but he
would do it or perish in the attempt.
Moonbeam, tired and stiff as he was, managed to scramble
out, and quick as thought, he jumped on to Munro’s horse
and galloped off.
Bravely, Max-struck out with his woimded arm, although
every movement gave him agony; and at last, just as she was
sinking, he grasped her round the waist.
“Cling to me, Una, and try and swim a little if you can,”
he whispered.
At last, by dint of much effort on both sides, they reached the
bank and managed to scramble out effectually.
Overcome by all that she had gone through, she cast one
grateful glance upon her salvhtor, and then lost consciousness.
Maxwell, afraid to leave her lest she might again fall into
the hands of the bushrangers, knew not what to do; there
was no house within at least a mile.


At last he heard the clatter of horses ’ hoofs. He was just go-
ing to give the familiar Australian ‘ ‘ coo-ee, ’ ’ and then he thought
to himself, these may not be friends after all, but perhaps more
of the gang; so he resolved upon silence.
But they were seen by the rescue party, and headed by Mr.
Fletcher, they rode up.
“Come, come, my brave lad; tell me about my little girl,”
he questioned eagerly.
She was still unconscious, pillowed on Maxwell’s coat.
“She has lost consciousness, Mr. Fletcher, and not much
wpnder; she has had an awful time.”
“Where is your horse, Munro?”
‘ ‘ Moonbeam has him, sir. ’’’
“Come, Mr, Munro,” said Hanks, the manager of the
station; “you take my horse; it’s a mercy you’ve not both been
killed. Here, let me help you mount,” he continued, gripping
him by the arm; but unfortunately for Maxwell, it was the
wounded one.
He winced and fainted right off. For the first time they
noted that it hung limp and powerlessly by his side.
“I believe his poor arm is broken,” said Hanks, thinking
of the pain he had unconsciously given.
In a few minutes Maxwell came to himself.
“I am so sorry I hurt your arm, Munro, old fellow,” he
said, as he bent over him, but I understand surgery, so come,
get on my horse, and we’ll get back as fast as we can to the
homestead.” Accordingly, they made all haste to do so.
Arrived there, Hanks lost no time in baring his arm.
“Do you think the bullet’s still there, Hanks? The pain
is awful.”
“I am afraid it is, so you must be prepared for pain;
I shall have to probe it. ’ ’
At last, with much difficulty, the bullet was extracted.
Once during the operation Max swooned.
“I shall set it now, Munro; it has splintered the bone a
little.”
This being done, Hanks said: “If you will stay here for a
while I shall run down to my own cottage and bring Mr. Fletch-
er’s housekeeper up. She ran down to my wife as soon as she
realised the situation. It’s a great pity the poor old lady’s so
deaf; she never heard a thing. It was nearly all over before she
knew, ’ ’
“I shan’t be long,*old fellow. My word, not many could
stand that. You are a man, Munro,” he said, grasping his
hand.
“ I ’ll never forget your kindness, Hanks, ’ ’ the other re-
joined.


Hanks returned in a very short time, accompanied by Mrs.
Bell, the housekeeper, who, after a little fuss, conducted them
to a spare bedroom.
“I think I ought to go home, Mr. Hanks,” Munro said,
weakly.
‘‘You’ll not think of such a thing, sir; Mr. Fletcher would
never forgive me if I were to allow you to do that; you are
booked for a week here at least. That arm will need my atten-
tion pretty closely. You are my patient and you must obey
orders.”
So, with the assistance of the other, Munro went to bed,
though not to sleep, for the excitement of the evening had almost
completely banished that.
“Did they catch any of those fellows?” he asked presently.
“Yes, about half a dozen of them; they are safely in the
hands of the police by this. ’ ’
“That’s a blessing; I couldn’t help Moonbeam getting away
from me. ’ ’
‘‘ Of course not. What more could you do with that arm I
As it is, I can’t understand how you saved Miss Fletcher ?’ ’
‘ ‘ God nerved me. I could not have done it under ordinary
circumstances. It was so tantalising to me: There was that
villain within easy gunshot of me all that time, and I dared not
fire at him as Miss Fletcher was seated in front of him on the
same horse. ’ ’
“Gracious me!” Hanks interrupted; “what a dastard Moon-
beam must be. Fletcher ought to insist on your accepting some
valuable keepsake,” he said, with a mischievous gleam in his
eyes (knowing the other’s wealth).
“ As to that, ’ ’ said Max, ‘ ‘ if he give me the keepsake I want
I shall be athousand times repaid,”
‘ ‘ Oh, is that how matters stand ?’ ’ said Hanks, feigning
surprise.
“Why, you must have been blind,” said Max, “not to
know that much.”
At last the remainder of the party arrived home,
CHAPTER V.
HALCYON DAYS.
Una was still very much upset.
Mrs. Bell took her under her care and marched her off to
her bedroom.
“Where is Mr. Munro?” were the first words she said,
“He is in the spare bedroom, Miss Una.”
‘ ‘ Let me go and see him, Mrs. Bell, to thank him for saving
my life.”


“No, not till the morning; go to sleep now, like a good
girl, ’ ’ said the kind-hearted soul, who had been a second mother
to this poor motherless girl.
“You ought to feel very proud of him, dear—rich, hand-
some, and best of all, so brave; and he nearly worships you. ’ ’
* ‘ How do you know ?’ ’ said Una, blushing.
“Well, think of his saving you despite that dreadful arm;
I know all about it from Mr. Hanks.”
“It is awfully bad?” said Una, “Isn’t he noble? Don’t
go out yet, Mrs. Bell; I shall keep fancying that dreadful man
has me again. I should have killed myself rather than fall
into his clutches.”
‘ ‘ Hush, darling, don’t talk wildly; go to sleep. ’ ’
Those were happy days for our young couple; they had
faced death together, and it seemed to draw them closer to each
other.
Just about this time there came the news that in a hand
to hand encounter Moonbeam had been shot by a police officer.
And as soon as his arm was on the mend, the large drawing-
room at Billabong Station, was the scene of a very pretty
wedding. In the eulogistic speeches at the breakfast, Maxwell
Munro was greatly praised for his conspicuous bravery, and a
watch, suitably inscribed, was given him by the neighbouring
squatters, for the gallant way in which he had been the means
of routing the bushranger’s gang.
Wentworth Station was filled by as happy a young couple
as could well be found in the length and breadth of Australia,
Having faced death they were better prepared to go through
life together. As a special favour to his son-in-law,
Mr. Fletcher has parted with Hanks, who took over the manage-
ment of Wentworth at a still higher salary than that at which
he formerly managed Billabong.
GRACE PARRY.
Christmas. Ode.
Once more o ’er earth the angelic voices ring;
Hear how their melody,
Mixed with the swell o’ the
Music of spheres, tells the birth of the King.
Once more in those blue skies
Over the Magi wise
Glitters the star that was born with the Lord;
Shepherds of Lebanon,
The day’s long labour done,
Watch o’er the white flocks asleep on the sward.


Pear not, be not afraid,
Peace to the ranks arrayed,
Peace to the bleeding blade,
Peace to the axe—
Not of fields gory—
Is this the story,
In term pax.
0 Saviour, when shall we
Thy matchless glory see?
As lightning gild the skies,
Then shall each fallen tree,
Springing to life in Thee,
Up from the clods of earth with leaves eternal rise.
ELDRED PARRY,
Ode to Parramatta.
PRIZE POEM.
How sweetly echo on the hills afar
The chimes melodious from yon double spire
In the deep twilight, and the evening star
Moves glitteringly above the dead sun’s pyre.
The river glides below the hills—
The fruitful hills where orchards bloom,
The locust’s voice the clear air fills,
The lamps begin to light the gloom.
How like our England is the scene,
He flows where oaks are growing green;
And Sherwood here recalls the wood
Brave little John and laughing Robin Hood.
And thus the pioneers
Arrived o’er leagues of wandering foam,
Must here have seen of their dear home 1
. An image in their tears.
Their graves below us lie with memories dear,
Their children’s children tread in joy or fear
The road their fathers trod
Below the orb of God,


Ways thro’ the future of thy fame I see,
The shadows of an ancient past milst flee;
Arise, for Fortune’s finger shows
The fertile earth, the teeming mart.
With act on act a purpose grows,
And firmer roots within the heart;
Harvests unheard of on those hills shall rise,
While “Argus” watches on \yith all his hundred eyes.
ELDRED PARRY.
Burra Bra: Middle Harbour.
Oh, rapt were the glances and bright the delight
As we gazed on the vision that gleamed on our sight;
Each bay and each inlet with loveliness shone
Like the dreams of our slumber that fly with the dawn.
Yes, a dream of enchantment where fairies might tread,
So soft was the scene which with beauty was spread,
And Oberon,* too, of those fairy-land dreams.
Appeared to our view ’mid those silvery gleams.
A bright little sprite, with a kindly intent,
Whose aid to poor mortals seemed readily lent,
When Fate seemed to mock on the opposite strand,
His ready help reached them and brought them to land.
From Mosman’s bold heights stretched out to our view,
Sydney’s wonderful harbour of deep cobalt blue,
While far o’er its waters the feathery spray
From the huge white-horse breakers gleamed bright in
the day.
Between the great headlands, so grand in their might,
Fair ships, with their burdens, passed out from our sight,
Deep laden with stores from our wealth-yielding strand;
God speed them, we breathe, and bring safely to land
Clontarf, with its silvery beaches, shone bright,
Balmoral’s soft sheltered scenes gleamed in the light,
Pearl Bay, in its beauty, sequestered and fair,
What pen could paint fitly a vision so rare ?
But round us are closing the shadows of night,
And fair Middle Harbour recedes from our sight;
Yet still in our hearts shall its memory dwell,
Fair Eden of beauty, farewell, oh, farewell!
Mrs. R. B, PARRY, Sen.
* A little steamer helping the disabled punt,


The Misanthrope's Bride.
CHAPTER I.—CHRISTMAS EVE.
“What a lot of fuss and nonsense they are making over
Christmas this year!” grunted Geoffrey Gamble, or “Grumpy
Geoff, ’’ as the youngsters more familiarly, called him. He was
looking into the gaily-dressed windows as he spoke, which were
bedecked with imitation snow and holly berries.
Yes, the blessed season promised to be very bright; and to
judge by the smiling happy faces of those around him, “Peace
on earth, goodwill toward men” seemed to be the order of the
day. .
But it found no echoing chord in Geoffrey’s heart, for
although it was Christmas Eve, that seemed to make him
gloomier than ever. He turned homewards with a snarl, every-
thing seemed to jar on him. He cared for no one, and conse-
quently no one loved him: he was a miserly misanthrope.
He reached his home after a few minutes’ walk. It had
once been the scene of many a bright Christmas party, but that
was many years ago now.
The whole place seemed to wear a look of neglect, which
certainly was veyy forbidding. It was a palatial residence, but
the garden had been allowed to run to ruin, the dusty blinds
hung by one comer in many instances, and the curtains were
askew, having been pushed aside to admit the light.
The yelp of a couple of hungry hounds was the only notes
of welcome which greeted him as he entered the gate. What
good they were doing tied up I do not know. They were not
much wanted for defence, for I question very much whether
anyone dare to enter the gates of Hyacinth Hall, but perhaps it
was safer to keep them tied up, for if perchance anyone should
have plucked up sufficient courage to enter the gates, they might
have tempted the hungry creatures, for hunger knows no bounds.
Geoffrey Gamble was the last scion of a noble house. He
was a man of thirty-five, and a confirmed bachelor, fortunately
for the ladies!
He felt a vague feeling of unrest this evening,' and in spite
of his efforts his mind would wander back to those glad times
when everything had been tinged with roseate hue.
One Christmas in particular shone out bright above all
others. It was ten years ago, and he had just come home from
Oxford, laden with honours, and he was the centre of attraction
that evening. But, ah! how different everything was now.
Father and Mother both gone, and his friends, where were they?
Certainly it was his own fault, for he had estranged all of them
by his misanthropic ways.


One golden-haired lassie seemed to pass before his eyes with
her radiantly beautiful face. She seemed to be looking at him
with accusing eyes just as she had done on the night of that
Christmas party when she was only .a young girl of sixteen.
She had seen him bid another girl good-bye and kiss her.
She was jealous and grew distant, and he, idiot as he
called himself ever since, was too proud, too lofty to explain
the circumstances. He believed from what he had heard since
she had almost broken her heart over it, and with a great effort
he pulled himself together.
“What an ass I am, I’ll go to bed!” and extinguishing the
dying embers of the fire, he retired to rest.
CHAPTER II.—YULE TIDE.
Christmas morn had dawned, and the sound of merry voices
right beneath his bedroom window, actually within his private*
grounds, as he told himself. What were they going to do,
he wondered dreamily, and then all at once, the stillness of
that blessed morning was broken by the sweetest sounds that
ever Geoffrey Gamble had heard. A full rich band struck up the
most widely sung, much loved Christmas hymn: .
‘ ‘ Christians, awake, salute the happy morn,
Whereon the Saviour of mankind was born,
Rise to adore the mystery of love,
Which hosts of angels chanted from above;
With them the joyful tidings first begun,
Of God Incarnate, of the Virgin’s son.”
A choir of voices had taken up the strain, and with his
eyes bedimmed with tears, he listened to every word of the
blest old hymn until the concluding lines:
“Saved by His love, incessant shall we sing,
Eternal praise to Heav ’n’s Almighty King. ”
Hardened cynic, bitter misanthrope, the words struck him
with tremendous force. The scales fell from his eyes. He
would accept the salvation held before him, and try to retrieve
in the future his bitter past.
Hastily donning his worn dressing gown and slippers, he
made his way out of the great hall door round into the side
garden beneath his window, to where the band of musicians
stood.
How bright and happy they looked, and instead of its jarring
as it would have done only a few hours before, it had quite a
different effect, for it found an echoing chord within his heart,
and sent a thrill of pleasure through his veins. But surely,
after all, it was a dream, for there, the foremost figure in the


group, stood Hope Beresford, with the same angelic face, but
if anything, more softened, and despite her twenty-six years,
more perfectly beautiful than ever.
Her nurse’s garb suited her to perfection, the graceful cloak,
the small bonnet, with its dainty, white strings and flowing gos-
samer seemed to rest lovingly and gently upon her curly golden
hair.
Before he knew what he was doing, he found himself shaking
hands.
“How are you, Miss Beresford? It’s years since w'e met.
You are looking well though. lam so glad to see you. ”
She gave him a shy smile, which made his heart beat, thump,
thump within his ribs.
“Dear me, how happy you all look!” he said. “A merry
Christmas to you; your music has delighted me, done me more
good than anything else ever did. How much am I indebted
to you for it ? lam sorry 1 have nothing of Christmas cheer to
offer you, as I did not intend to keep the day. 1 never do, but
you have made me alter my plans. Yesterday 1 was a miser and
a misanthrope; to-day I hope I am anything but that. My
heart is brimming over with peace and goodwill toward men
and gratitude to God, For what are you collecting?”
“For the Benevolent Home for young children, waifs, and
strays,” said Dr, Madden, who acted as spokesman, (It was he
Avho had suggested this visit to Hyacinth Hall, for he knew
Geoffrey Gamble well, having been at Oxford with him.)
“With the money we have made we are giving the little ones
a really good Christmas dinner; we have never raised the funds
in this way before, but so far we have met with fairly good
success, though we have not so much as we want.”
“Excuse me one minute then, ladies and gentlemen,” and
he hastily re-entered his house.
He came back in a few minutes, almost taking their breaths
away by handing Dr. Madden a cheque for £SO.
“There you are, Madden,” he said, “tell me honestly, is
that enough, because there is more where that came from if it
is not.”
“I should rather say it was, Geoffrey, old fellow. I don’t
think we should allow you to give so much, ’ ’
“What nonsense, George!” He seemed reluctant to let
them go. “Friends,” he said, “although I’ve not been able
to shew you any hospitality, I shall be delighted if you will
accept an invitation to dinner with me on New Year’s Day.
Will you?” he asked eagerly.
“Gladly, thank you,” they said.


“Shall we see you at church this morning, Mr, Gamble?”
asked Miss Beresford, who was the matron of this charitable
institution.
He started at the mention of church,
“I don’t think I have been to church, Miss Beresford, for
ten years, but I feel as though I should love to go this morning—
yes, I shall be there.”
“We should be very pleased if you would come over and
have dinner with us, and say a few words to the children. We
have invited several people, and the curate has promised to come
and speak.”
“Thank you; I should like to avail myself of your kind
invitation. ’ ’
Then they sang “Auld Lang Syne,” and wished him good-
bye and a happy Christmas.
He stood and watched them out of sight. How happy he
felt. He relit his fire and made a hasty breakfast, after which
he went through his wardrobe, and after rummaging for nearly
an hour, he found a suitable outfit. This he brushed most
vigorously, and selected an immense necktie to cover his unironed
shirt front.
“What a stingy creature!” he thought to himself; “the
idea of cheating the laundresses out of their work. Oh, well,
I shall try and live very differently now, and do some good
with the wealth with which I am entrusted.”
Having completed his toilet, he locked up the house, and set
out for church.
You would not have recognised him as the man who had
snarled at the thought of Christmas only yesterday.
In point of fact, he was a very handsome man, tall and
broad-shouldered, though rather spare, wavy black hair, clear-cut
features, thoughtful grey eyes, and a firm, determined mouth.
It did his heart good, those happy-faced children; the beau-
tiful story of Bethlehem, ever new and forceful, and those
beautiful hymns and anthems. He wanted to hear that one
again, which, under God, had been the means of his salvation.
He was not disappointed, for the concluding hymn the pastor
announced was “Christians, Awake.” Never was it sung more
heartily than on this Christmas morning, and the addition of
a rich baritone voice was appreciated by the clergymen and
choristers.
Once during the collection his eyes met Hope Beresford’s.
She was sitting in the midst of the little ones from the Bene-
volent Home, who seemed to almost worship her; and she made
him feel very happy by giving him a radiant smile.


After the service the minister came round with the curate,
and was introduced to him. After shaking hands, they asked
him if he would join the choir. At first he hesitated, but sub-
sequently capitulated.
He felt ten years younger that day, and thoroughly enjoyed
the pleasure of these poor mites. How they enjoyed their
Christmas dinner! He thought of that verse, “Inasmuch as yc
have done it unto the least of these, ye did it unto Me.”
Then in the evening they gathered round the fire and sang
their little hymns. After that, best fun of all, there was the
‘Christmas tree. Then they were marshalled off to bed, not
before they had been promised a great treat; Mr. Gamble having
addressed them in a few chosen words, concluded by inviting
all present to a seaside picnic on New Year’s Eve. They clapped
joyfully at this great announcement.
CHAPTER lII.—THE OLD YEAR OUT.
Geoffrey Gamble had never spent such a happy Christmas
in his life. His heart was full of gratitude to God for his
redemption and his love toward his fellow men.
His eyes met Hope’s as he shook hands with her, and he
said: “You won’t forget New Year’s Eve?”
“No; nor New year’s Night, Mr. Gamble. We shall re-
member. ’• ’
A smile of genuine pleasure flitted across his face. She
remembered then.
“I shall never forget this Yule tide. You are doing a
noble work among these little ones, Miss Beresford. God bless
you!” And, raising his hat, he departed.
“I am so glad we went to Hyacinth Hall,” she murmured
to herself.
She stood in the doorway and watched his retreating figure.
“Yes, so am I, Hope,” said a laughing voice at her side.
“Isn’t he generous?” ,
Hope gave a little start, and turned round to see a merry
faced nurse at her side.
“Yes, he is very generous,” she said, “those poor little
things are so happy. They told me when I went in to turn
out their lights that this had been their happiest Christmas,
and they are looking forward to New Year’s Eve; and so am 1,
aren’t you?”
“Yes, Hope, I am. Wasn’t it nice of him to ask the
curate ? I think he took a fancy to him. He is such an earnest
Christian and eloquent preacher, ’ ’


“Yes, I am glad that Mr. Dixon is coming,” said Hope,
musingly; then she added, laughing: “Of course he’ll come.
I think he’d go to a picnic at the North Pole if he thought it
likely that you would be there, Amy. ’ ’
Oh, now, Hope, that’s too bad of you. You jump at con-
clusions. A poor, pious young curate has a right to study
physiognomy if he has an inclination to d 0,50.”
“He will understand one type of face to perfection, that’s
certain,” said Hope; “but he is very nice. I don’t wonder
you like him, dear. ’ ’
New Year’s Eve came quickly round, though to the children
it seemed very slow.
Two immense drags, each drawn by four white horses,
drew up in front of the Waifs’ Home. Mr. Gamble alighted
from one, and made his way to the door. The children were got
safely on board first, and then the ladies were helped in.
It was a sunshiny day for New Year’s Eve, and to judge
by their joyous shouts as they raced up and down the beach,
the children were enjoying themselves thoroughly.
The grown-up people quite forgot they were grown-up, and
the curate, and the doctor, and Mr. Gamble all laid themselves
out to amuse the children, starting races for them.
Their excitement knew no bounds, especially when Mr.
Gamble presented the prizes to the winners, and the other gentle-
men gave consolation prizes.
At last it was tea time, and after that the packing up,
though that did not take the four ladies long.
The first drag load was got safely off, and just as the second
was all ready to start, one of the little ones discovered, with a
pitiful face, that one of its shoes was lost.
“We’ll go and look on the beach for it, if you think you
lost it there, dear, ’ ’ said Hope.
Mr. Gamble offered to assist in the hunt, and the three
of them started off. Look where they would they could not find
it. At last Geoffrey found it in the sand.
‘ ‘ Here .you are, little one; let me put it on for you. ’ ’ This
done, he said: “Now, you run back as fast as you can. We are
coming. ’ ’
‘ ‘ Thank you so much for this day’s enjoyment, Mr. Gamble.
My little charges have never spent such a day yet. The weather
is so beautiful for this time of year.”
“Have you enjoyed yourself, Hope?’-’ he asked, with a
look in his eyes that made a bright blush suffuse her fair cheek,
“Of course I have; splendidly.”
“Then, Hope, I am quite repaid for what I have done.
Hope, dear, dear Hope,” he cried, “let me live to always please
you. I love you far better than my own life. You have my


happiness at stake,* I know I have not been worthy of one so
noble, but I have never, and never will think of anybody beside. ’ ’
“Then,” she said, the tears springing up in her eyes,
“I misjudge you.”
“Yes;” and I was too proud to set matters right. She
was only my cousin, and we always kissed each other. You
eared for me once, Hope, tell me that you will try and revive
the old feeling. Speak, dearest.”
“Geoffrey, I shall not find that difficult to do, for I have
always loved you. I could have married, but no one could ever
take your place.”
He stooped and kissed her.
“Come, dearest, now we are happy, indeed, but we must
not delay them any longer. This is only the first instalment of
our happiness.”
So they quickened their pace, and Geoffrey handed Hope
into the vehicle before long. She made room for him by her
side.
By five o’clock the children were all comfortably back,
looking considerably brighter for their outing.
CHAPTER LAST.—THE NEW YEAR IN.
New Year’s afternoon came at last. Great preparations
had been going on at Hyacinth Hall for the past week. You
would scarcely have recognised it. The garden was being done
up beautifully by a professional gardener who was to be installed
permanently. The windows had all been altered, fresh blinds
and curtains. Indeed, with Mr. Gamble’s help, the two bright-
faced country girls whom he had engaged, had brought order
out of chaos; and now the eventful evening had come.
A savoury smell of roast turkey pervaded the air,
Mr, Gamble received his visitors heartily. He carved at
the table. The dining-hall was a blaze of light, and the best
silver, generations old, adorned the table. The servants de-
clared there was no finer collection to be seen in England.
Geoffrey’s admiration of Nurse Hope was undisguised, and
it was small wonder, for her lilac satin evening dress suited her
exactly.
A most enjoyable evening was spent, and when the clock
chimed out half-past ten they could not believe it was that time.
“And now, sir,” Dr. Madden said, “before we go we must
heartily thank you for all your kindness.”
He gave Geoffrey a familiar slap on the back and said:
“Geoffrey, old fellow, you should have been asked to be best
man at one wedding, am I not to be asked a second time ? Why


shouldn’t our two little nurses have one wedding day?”
“I am sure lam quite willing; are you, Hope? Hyacinth
Hall lacks one thing, and I must rob the Benevolent Home to
supply it. Will you be its mistress, Hope? The Home shall not
suffer, we’ll see to that.”
“Yes; I shall be most happy,” she said, blushing.
There were congratulations all round. It was fixed that a
month from that date a double wedding should take place.
And so it did.
A more beautiful bride in her glistening white satin could
not have been found than “the misanthrope’s bride.”
-GRACE PARRY.
An Appeal.
To whom canst thou a neighbour be?
To those whose needs claim help from thee,
Hungry and homeless but for those,
Whose loving hearts can feel their woes.
The Christmas season drawing near
With welcome gifts and glowing cheer
To us looms bright; but what to him,
The child of want, whose joys are dim.
Not much we ask—a trifling gift
Some saddened hearts from grief may lift:
Help them the Christmas joys to share,
Through kindly thought and generous care.
He, who of old his kind would bless,
Sought out some plan of helpfulness,
Would plant a tree whose grateful shade
Would oft the weary traveller aid;
Or in a dry and thirsty land.
Would with a strong and willing hand
Deep from the earth rich storehouse bring
The cooling draught from hidden spring.
Springs in the desert! Such may be
The gifts with pitying love from thee:
Oh! who would grudge such joy to give
To those who in sad darkness live?
Stewards of all that we possess,
Our wealth is given to aid and bless
The suffering poor by woe distressed,
The struggling worth by want oppressed.


If rich thy store, then rich should be
The offerings given in love by thee.
Oh! surely will the promise stand,
“God will reward the bounteous hand.”
Or, if less plenteous be thy share,
Give of the little thou canst spare.
The widow’s gift in Jesu’s sight
Outshone the wealthier donor’s might.
Remembering then God’s love which gave
His only Son a world to save;
Let this thy grateful offering be.
In memory of His love to thee.
-Mrs. PARRY.
Drought Stricken.
The sun looked down with angry glare on a sorrow-stricken
scene,
And the longing eye in vain looked round for the verdure that
had been,
And the cattle drooped, for the thirsty land no sustenance could
yield,
And the shepherds watched their flocks go down to death on a
barren field.
And want and sorrow on every hand were felt, for no grain
could grow,
And the stricken ones in vain looked round for succour in their
wOe;
But food was scarce in many a home where want was unknown
before,
And kindly hearts that had helped in need, for a time could
help no more.
The scorching winds a while were stayed, and cooling breezes
blew;
The settlers’ hearts again were cheered, and hope was raised
anew,
Glad were their hearts, their slumbers light; bright dreams of
plenty came—
Dreams of a verdure-covered land, where beauty smiled again.


Mom came. Alas! the clouds had gone; no moisture ’dewed the
ground;
Ah! Where the promise of the night? Where, where can help
be found?
Only from Him Whose gracious hand gives every needful gift,
Whose eye beholds the smallest need: to Him our hearts we’ll
lift.
Father of Mercies, hear our prayer; Oh! send the gentle showers;
Let peace and plenty smile again, to glad these hearts of ours.
So shall our thanks to Thee be given; so joy shall fill the air;
And grateful songs to Thee arise, for all Thy gracious care.
Mrs, R, B. PARRY, Sen.
The Work that Lies Nearest
to Hand.
(FOUNDED ON THE BRITANNIA MINE INCIDENT).
From an almost worked-out diggings some miners took their way,
To a field of brighter promise, where golden treasures lay;
But alas! their toil was fruitless, as they worked for the precious
ore,
For the rocky ground had little to increase their scanty store.
Still on they toiled and laboured, till the mullock strewed the
ground:
And now from the distant city an expert must he found—
He came, but the quartz was worthless, and sadly the men stood
near,
As their dreams of plenty vanished and the hopes they held
so dear.
But his practised eyes soon rested on the piles of dusky soil,
“That’s better than gold,” he murmured, “to pay you for all
your toil—
That rubbish so ruthlessly scattered is tin of the richest kind.
My friends, in those heaps neglected the longed-for wealth you ’ll
find.”


Great smelting works were started, and men who had toiled in
vain,
Now found their work rewarded with yields of wondrous gain.
Now let me read a lesson to you who so.often say
You would love to have a mission to sufferers far away.
Say, does not the work lie near you ? —yes, even at your door.
There’s something to do for Jesus in helping His suffering poor—
Like those miners, you look for treasure, and mourn that you
find it not,
While in fullest, richest measure, it lies in that very spot.
Canterbury. —]
E. S. PARRY.
Christmas Bells.
Loud let the joy-bells ring,
Loud let our voices sing;
All praise to Him be given,
The Sovereign Lord of Heaven:
Praise for His precious gift to men—
Let thankful voices sing again;
Jesus our King has come to reign,
Let every creature say Amen.
E. S. PARRY (Mrs. R. B. Parry, Sen.).


MURRAYBROS
Importers
of
PROPRIETARY, LIMITED,
PARRAMATTA.
Pianos, Organs, etc.
PHONOGRAPHS AND RECORDS. SEWING MACHINES.
Furniture
LATEST DESIGNS.
Linoleums
NEWEST PATTERNS.
Carpets Mats.
For CASH or on OUR EASY PAYMENT SYSTEM.


TEACHERS OF PIANO.
ORGAN, SINGING, and HAR/AONY.
Holding Highest Certificates of—
\
Royal Academy of Music (London)
R.oyal College of Music (London)
Sydney College of Music
Australian Musical Association
Also Advanced Senior Honours
Senior Honours
Intermediate Honours, L.C.M.
Pupils Prepared for all Examinations.
Pupils have gained Medals in Eisteddfod & College
Examinations, and have gained Honours and Licentiate
and Associate Diplomas.
ADDRESS “ RIVER VIEW,’'
Church Street, Ryde.


W. HILLARD.
RETAIL AND FAMILY BUTCHER,
George and Crinan Streets,
CANTERBURY.
